THEGEORGIAN ERA:MEMOIRSOF THE MOST EMINENT PERSONS, WHO HAVEFLOURISHED IN GREAT BRITAIN,FROM THE ACCESSION OF GEORGE THE FIRST TO THEDEMISE OF GEORGE THE FOURTH.IN FOUR VOLUMES.VOLUME II.MILITARY AND NAVAL COMMANDERS;JUDGES AND BARRISTERS;PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS.LONDON:VIZETELLY, Cranston AND CO. FLEET STREET.MDCCCXXXIII.London:VIZETELLY, Ransom *ND CO.PIUNTBRS,FLEET 8TBBET.CONTENTS.iiIE iPace*army.Fnpe4S84/9Albemarle, Arnold Roost, Earl of . .Albemarle, George, Earl of.Albemarle, William Annie, Earl ofCornwallis, MarquessCraig, James Henry , .Dalrymple, Sir Hew Whitefield . .Dunham, Sir James StewartDorchester, LordArgyle and Greenwich, Duke ofDraper, Sir WilliamFacets, WilliamFitzgerald, Lord EdwardGage, ThomasGallway, Earl of.Gardiner, ColonelBurgoyne, Lieutenant-generalGrey, EarlCampbell, Sir Alexander, BaronetCampbell, Sir NeilHarcourt, Earl ofCarrol, Sir William ParkerHastings, Marquess of.Catbcart, EarlChatham, Earl ofHeathfield, Lord.Clinton, Sir HenryHill, LordHislop, Sir ThomasHodgson, StudholmCole Sir Galbraith LowryJohnson, Sir WilliamCONTENTS.Long, Richard, Ballard 486Ligonier, Francis 463Llgonier, Earl 45Londonderry, Marquess of 144Lowe, Sir Hudson 490Lumley, Sir William 483Lynedocb, Lord 476Maccartney, General 30Mackay, Robert 482Maitland, Sir Thomas 477Malcolm, Sir John 141Marlborough, Charles, Duke of. . 50Marlborough, John, Duke of 9M'Carthy, Sir Charles 496Medows, Sir William 86Melville, Robert 464Montague, Edward 473Monckton, Robert 70Money, John 97Montressor, Sir Henry Tucker 103Moore, Sir John. 106Mulgrave, Earl of 472Munro, Sir Thomas, Baronet 477Murray, Sir George 113Ochterlony, Sir David 102Oglethorpe, General 43Orkney, Earl of 461Oswald, Sir John 484Pack, Sir DenisPeterborough, Earl ofPonsonby, Francis CavendishPrevost, Sir George, BaronetRoss, RobertSack ville, ViscountSbipp, JohnSomerset, LordSpencer, Sir Brent.Stair, Earl ofStaunton, FrancisStewart, Sir William 488Stuart, Sir John 106Tarleton, Barrastre 470Torres, Sir Henry. 494To wished. Marquess 72Crawley, Lord 463Vassal!, Lieutenant-colonel 486Villettess, William Anne 471Vivian, Sir Richard Hussy, Bart. 492Wade, Marshal 34Wall,Joseph 466Webb, Lieutenant-general 31Wellington, Duke of 114Whitelocke, John 475Wills, Sir Charles 461Wilson, Sir Robert Thomas. 148Wolfe, General 78THE NAVY.Arbuthnot, Harriot 179Ball, Sir Alexander 516Barbara, Lord 504Harrington, Samuel 198Beau clerk, Lord Melius 529Beauclerk, Lord Aubrey 499Berkeley, George Cranfield 513Berkeley, Earl of 163Berry, Sir Edward 253Bertie, Albemarle 515Blckerton, Richard 500Black wood, Sir Henry 261Boscawen, Edward 176Bridport, Viscount 197Brisbane, Sir Charles 243Broke, Sir Philip Bowes Vere 266Byng, John 166Carew, Sir Benjamin Hallowed 231Calder, Sir Robert 206Christian, Sir Hugh Cloudy 507Cochrane, Sir Alexander Inglis 222Cochrane, Lord 247Cockburn, George 523Codrington, Sir Edward 242Coffin, Sir Isaac 519Collingwood, Lord. 21 1Colpoys, Sir John 512Cornish, Sir Samuel J80Cornwallis, William 205Cotton, Sir Charles 510Curtis, Sir Roger 215De Courcy, the Honourable Michael 514Digby, Honourable Robert 502Douglass, Charles 506Douglass, Sir James 499Drury, William O'Brien 520CONTENTS.PageDuckworth, Sir John Thomas 209Duncan, Viscount 199Elliott, John 505Exmouth, Viscount 218Faulkner, Robert 621Foley, Sir Thomas 526Freeman, William Peers Williams 508Gambler, Lord 517Gardiner, Lord 509Graves, Lord 195Hardy, Sir Thomas Waterman . . 260Hawke.Lord 171Heywood, Peter 531Hood, Viscount 188Hood, Sir Samuel 233Holmes, Charles 498Hope, Sir William Johnstonee 528Hosier, Francis 497Hoste, Sir William 262Hotham, Sir Henry 2fi7Howe, Earl 193Hughes, Sir Edward 184Jennings, Sir John 151Johnstonee, George 185Keats, Sir Richard Goodwin 510Keith, Viscount 207Kempenfelt, Richard 163Repel, Viscount 190Kingsmill, Sir Robert Brice 506Knowles, Sir Charles Henry, Bart. 516Knowles, Sir Charles 169Leake, Sir John 149Leeds, Duke of 497Lestock, Richard 161Lockhart Ross, Sir John 501Louis, Sir Thomas, Baronet 524Mackellar, John 241Maitland, Frederick Lewis 268Malcolm, Sir Pulteney 255Manby, Thomas 531Martin n, Sir Thomas Byam 252Mathews, Thomas 157Maxwell, Sir Murray 264Milne, Sir David 525Montagu, George 511Morris, Sir James Nicol 526Mount Edgecumbe, Earl of 501Eagle, Sir Edmund 517Nealee, Sir Harry Bernard 251Nelson, ViscountNorris, Sir JohnNorthesk, Earl ofOgle, Sir Chaloner, SeniorOgle, Sir ChalonerOnslow, Richard.Orford, Earl ofOtway, Robert WalterPalliser, Sir HughParker, RichardParker, Sir Hyde, the ElderParker, Sir Hyde, the Younger .Parker, Sir PeterParker, Sir PeterPasley, Sir ThomasPocock, Sir GeorgePopham, Sir Home RiggsPurvis, John Child ,Radstock, LordRoddam, RobertRodney, LordRowley, Sir CharlesRowley, Sir JosiahRowley, Sir JoshuaRussell, Thomas Macnamara ,Saumarez, Sir JamesSaunders, Sir Charles ,Schomberg, Sir AlexanderSeymour, Sir MichaelShouldham, Molineauz ,Smith, Sir William Sydney.Stopford, Sir RobertS thracian, Sir RichardSt. Vincent, EarlThompson, Sir Thomas Boulder ,Thornborough, Sir EdwardWarrington, Viscount ,Trollope, Sir Henry ,Tro bridge, Sir ThomasTyler, Sir CharlesVernon, EdwardWager, Sir CharlesWalker, JamesWarren, Sir John BoreasWarren, Sir PeterWatson, Charles ,Wood, Sir James AthosYorke, Sir Joseph SydneyPageCONTENTS.JURISPRUDENCE.Adam, William 542Adolphus, John 650Alvanley, Lord MlAshburton, Lord 289A von more, Lord 538Harrington, Baines 537Harrington, Sir Jonah 337Bayley, Sir John 549Bancroft, Edward 536Blackstone, Sir William 286Brougham, Henry 352Buller, Sir Francis 303Burgh, Walter Hussy 540Camden, Earl 283Carleton, Viscount 540Chambers, Sir Robert 297Clare, Earl of 304Clonmell, Earl of 539Corner, Earl 276Cui-ran, John Pilot 306Dallas, Sir Robert 543Penman, Thomas 343East, Sir Edward Hyde 648Eldon, Lord 318Ellenborough, Lord 316Erskine, Henry 542Erskine, Lord 313Evans, Sir William David 547Eyre, James. 537Feare, Charles 643Foster, Sir Michael 535Varro w, Sir William 322Gibbs, Sir Vickary 318Gifford.Lord 350Glenbervie, Lord 540Grant, Sir William 328G ran they, Lord 285Hailes, Lord 538Harcourt, Viscount 533Hardingee, George 300Hardwicke, Lord 278Hargrave, Francis 298Hart, Sir Anthony 550Hill, George 288Hullock, Sir John 548PageJackson, Candle. 548Jeffrey, Francis 345Jekyll, Joseph 305Kenyon, Lord 292King, Lord 534Kil warden, Viscount 538Lawrence, French 646Lawrence, SirSoulden 547Leach, Sir John 34)Lens, John 543Clifford, Viscount 536Lushington, Stephen 359Lyndhurst, Lord 340Macclesfield, Earl of 274Macdonald, Sir Archibald, Baronet 542Mackintosh, Sir James 331Carnally, Leonard 545Manners, Lord 323Mansfield, Sir James 298Mansfield, Earl 279Midleton, Viscount 533Montague, Basil 551Mordent, Lord 535Nichols, Sir John 323Nolan, Michael 550Norbury, Earl of 301O'Connell, Daniel 347Onslow, Arthur 330Phillips, Charles 553Pigott, Sir Arthur 544Powder, Francis 547Plumer, Sir Thomas 545Puller, Sir Christopher 551Rae, Sir David 287Raymond, Lord 535Redesdale, Lord 303Reeves, John 30]Robinson, Sir Christopher 549Romilly , Sir Samuel 324Rosslyn, Earl 291Runnington, Charles 544Scarlettt, Sir James 327Shad well, Sir Launcelot 552Simeon, Sir John, Baronet 549Somers, Lord 273CONTENTS.PageCALPageWetherell, Sir CharlesSugden, Sir Edward BurtenshawTalbot LordWilmot, Sir John Hartley536643641Wood, Sir George .Tindal, Sir Nicholas Conyngham . .MediaWynford, Lord338SCIENCE.Duncan, DanielEllison, JohnFalconer, WilliamFoote, JesseFothergill, AnthonyFothergill, JohnGarthshore, Maxwell399Goo ch, RobertGood, John MasonGregory, JamesHeighten, JohnHalford, Sir HenryHall, RobertHawes, WilliamHaygarth, JohnCarpue, Joseph ConstantineHeberden, WilliamHewson, William .Hey, WilliamCheselden, WilliamHome, Sir EverardHulme, NathanielHunter, JohnHunter, WilliamHumani, JohnJackson, RobertJames, RobertCroft Sir RichardEbb, Sir RichardCruikshank, William CumberlandJohnstonee, James ..Turin, JamesKnightonon, Sir WilliamDuncan, Andrew, Senior.Leake, John. . . 5696 CONTENTS.Pie455.PteRutherford DanielLobo TheophilusSaunders WilliamScott, Helena584565Shaw, Sir Peter555Smellie WilliamSmith Hugh. . 566Monro, Alexander, the YoungerTwins, DanielWall Martin676Wall John .583Nicholls FrankWells William CharlesWhytt Robert891Willan Robert >Woodville WilliamWright WilliamTHE ARMY.THE ARMY.JOHN CHURCHILL, DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH.JOHN CHURCHILL was born atAsh, in Devonshire, on the 24th ofJune, 1650. He was descended fromthe Councils of Poitou, who came overwith William the Conqueror; and hismore immediate ancestors were sufferers,for their loyalty, in the civilwars. He was educated, partly by hisfather, Sir Winston Churchill, author ofDivi Britannica, partly by a neighbouringclergyman of strict protestant principlesand exemplary life, and, finally,at the school of St. Paul's, in London ;where the plates in a work by Vegetationthe art of war, attracted his earlynotice and admiration. Sir WinstonChurchill being clerk of the greencloth, found means to obtain for hisson, and Arabella his daughter, an introductionto court; the former beingappointed pace of honour to the Dukeof York, while the latter, after havingfor some time acted as an attendanton the person of the duchess, becamemistress to the duke, by whom she hadseveral children, one of whom was thefamous Duke of Berwick.Young Churchill's passion for a militarylife was so kindled by the sightof reviews, which he was constantlywitnessing, that when the Duke ofYork inquired what profession he preferred,he entreated, on his knees, forapair of colours in the guards, whichhe appears to have procured ; and, atthe age of sixteen, quitted a voluptuouscourt to make his first essay in armsat Tangier, in Africa, then belongingto the British crown. His employmenton this service has, however, beenattributed to jealousy : the singularbeauty of his person having, as someassert, attracted more than proper admirationfrom the Duchess of York;and, according to others, from theking's mistress, the Duchess of Cleveland,who presented him with 5,000 ;but not, as it appears, until after hisfirst departure from court. It has,again, been surmised, with some shewof probability, that the gratification ofhis own passion for the army was procuredat the expense of his sister'spurity.He was soon recalled from Africa,made a captain of grenadiers, and, in1672, accompanied the English auxiliaries,despatched under the Duke ofMonmouth to assist the French,headed by Turenne and Conte, againstthe Dutch. Throughout the war, hevolunteered his services on every occasionof danger. At the siege of Nime-gen, Turenne having laid a wager,that " the handsome Englishman," asChurchill was then termed by thateminent commander, would retake anddefend a post with a small number ofmen, which another officer had abandoned,though supported by a strongdetachment, he cheerfully undertookthe service, and won the wager by hisadmirable gallantry. In the followingyear, he saved the life of Monmouthat the siege of Maestricht ; and afterhaving excited universal admiration byhis intrepidity, and received the thanksof the French king at the head of thearmy, he returned to England, fraughtwith valuable military experience, in1677.He was now made a lieutenant-colonel,as well as master of the robes,and gentleman of the bed-chamber tothe Duke of York ; and, in the followingyear, secretly married Sarah Jennings,the companion of Princess Anne.This lady, to a beautiful form andTHE ARMY.features, added a powerful intellect andinsatiable ambition. The match wasdisinterested on either side ; he hadrefused a wealthier bride selected byhis parents, and she had rejected thesuit of the Earl of Lindsey. Churchillhad, by this time, acquired a large shareof royal confidence and favour. Heattended the Duke of York to theNetherlands and Scotland, and waswrecked with him in Yarmouth roads,in 1682: on this occasion, the dukedisplayed his great regard for Churchill,by insisting that the latter should havea place in the only boat they possessed,while many persons of quality wereleft to perish.By the interest of his royal masterhe soon afterwards procured a Scotchpeerage, and a colonelcy in the guards ;and, on the duke's accession to thethrone, was sent as ambassador tonotify that event to the French court.While in Paris, on receiving intelligenceof the arbitrary conduct of thenew monarch, he avowed to LordGallway, in a letter, that if his majestyshould attempt to change the religionand constitution of the state, he wouldquit his service. On his return, hewas created a British peer, by the titleof Baron Churchill, of Partridge, Hearts.During Monmouth's insurrection, hebecame major-general ; and, by hisvigilance and skilful manoeuvres, compensatedfor the deficiency and ignoranceof Lord Faversham, the com-mander-in-chief : he saved the armyfrom a surprise on the eve of battle ;and was mainly instrumental in obtainingthe victory of Sedgemoor, onthe following day.During the remainder of the reign,he acted with more prudence than gratitude.Either from interested views,or, as his advocates assert, from a conscientiousregard for the due supportof the protestant faith, he graduallyestranged himself from his sovereign,and at length entered into a correspondencewith the Prince of Orange.It seems, however, that previously todeserting James, which he did whenthat monarch was in his utmost need,and transferring his allegiance toWilliam of Nassau, he had given thebigotted king much wholesome but ineffectualcounsel. James, during a conciliatoryprogress through the kingdom,having touched several persons whowere afflicted with the evil, in Winchestercathedral, asked Churchill, atdinner, what his subjects said aboutit " Truly," was the reply, " theydo not approve it; and it is the generalopinion that your majesty is pavingthe way for the introduction of popery."His wife, it is said, prevailed uponthe Princess Anne to postpone her ownright of succession in favour of her sister; and their united efforts, on behalfof the new sovereigns, were deemedto have been of such importance, thatChurchill, on the accession of Williamand Mary, in 1689, was created Earlof Marlborough, and appointed com-mander-in-chief of the British forcesattached to the army of the Prince ofWalden, in the Low Countries. Ashort campaign ensued ; during which,Marlborough, in the prince's opinion,manifested greater military talents inasingle battle, than generals of longerexperience had shewn in many years.He was soon afterwards sent to Ireland,where he reduced Cork and Kindlewith great promptitude and skill.William treated him with muchhonour and gratitude for his exertions ;but no sooner did it appear, that thenew monarch's tenure of the thronewas so insecure, that a probability existedof the exiled family being recalled,than Marlborough entered intoa correspondence with the deposedmonarch, and, promising to atone forpast infidelity by unswerving attachmentfor the future, obtained a pardonfor himself and his connexions, inthe event of a counter-revolution.A groundless charge, founded onforged letters, was soon after broughtagainst the earl, whose committal to theTower ensued. He, however, speedilyobtained his release, but was dismissedfrom all his employments, in consequence,it has been supposed, of his correspondencewith James having beendiscovered during the investigation.But his treachery rendered him only atemporary alien from court, to which theevident value of his services graduallyeffected his restoration ; and on thedeath of Queen Mary, whom Marlboroughand his wife had offended, bytaking part with the Princess Anne inaquarrel between the royal sisters, hewas appointed governor to the youngDUKE OF MARLBOROUGH.Duke of Gloucester, with this brief andflattering instruction from the king :Teach him to be like yourself, andhe will not want accomplishments."He now entirely regained his previoushigh consideration at court, andwas consulted on the most importantoccasions, by William ; who, it is said,he mainly contributed to dissuade fromabandoning a crown, which was to himlittle better than a chaplet of thorns.When Philip the Fifth mounted thethrone of Spain, Marlborough was intrustedwith the command of the forcesin the Netherlands ; and, at the sametime, invested with powers to negotiatea grand alliance. While actingin this double capacity, he displayedmuch talent as a diplomatist ; and gavethe king, on various occasions, suchsound and statesman-like counsel, thathe was recommended by the flyingmonarch to his successor, as the manmost able to serve her in the cabinetas well as in the field.On the accession of Anne, Marlboroughreceived the insignia of theGarter, and was appointed captain-generalof the forces at home andabroad, and ambassador extraordinaryto the states general. In May, 1702,he embarked from Margate for thetheatre of war, after tearing himselfaway from the countess with the romanticregret of a new-married bridegroom.On his arrival in Holland, hewas constituted generalissimo, with anallowance of 10,000 a year, in preferenceto many royal and princelycompetitors, and quickly projected anextensive plan for the ensuing campaign.But he was not at liberty tocarry his gigantic schemes into execution; being thwarted by the jealousiesof his defeated rivals, hampered by thedissensions of the allies, and shackledby the ignorance of the Dutch fielddeputies. In spite of these drawbacks,his achievements were brilliant. Venloo,Stevenswaert, and Ruremond, surrendered; and the capture of Liege, whichBoufflers attempted in vain to prevent,terminated the campaign.The earl then departed from Maestrichtfor the Hague; and, embarkingon the Meuse, would have been takenprisoner by a French partisan, had nothis servant, Gell, slipped into his hand,unperceived, an old French passport,formerly granted to General Churchill,the earl's brother, when he quitted thearmy from ill health. This artificehappily succeeded: and thus, by theaddress of a servant, was averted a losswhich might have materially affectedthe liberties of Europe. His arrival atthe Hague was welcomed with intensedelight, and the pensionary, Heinous,conveyed to him the thanks of thestates in an eloquent oration. On returningto England he was elevatedto a dukedom, received the thanks ofboth houses of parliament, and thehouse of commons voted him a pensionof 5,000 a year. The popularity heenjoyed at this time was, however,much embittered by the death of hiseldest son, Lord Blandford, who fell avictim to the small pox, in his seventeenthyear, while pursuing his studiesat Cambridge.In 1703, he returned to the LowCountries, and military operations weresoon recommenced. Having takenBonn,the duke determined on pushing intothe heart of Brabant and West Flanders.The French avoiding a battle,he endeavoured to make them retirebehind their lines, and then to get possessionof Antwerp and Ostend. Thisobject was defeated by the cupidity ofthe Dutch generals, who invaded thecountry of Was, to levy contributions,in opposition to the orders of Marlborough,and to the total ruin of hisplans. The campaign closed, greatly tohis dissatisfaction, with the reduction ofHuy, Limburg, and Guelder; and hewas at once so much disgusted withhis coadjutors, and so apprehensive thatthe English ministers were about toconfine the war to defensive operationsonly, that he solicited the queen's permissionto resign : but on Harley andSt. John being admitted to her councils,and at her majesty's urgent entreaty,he consented to retain his command.Austria was, at this time, seriouslymenaced by the Elector of Bavaria,the French armies on the Rhine, andthe Hungarian rebels. Marlborough,to avoid the impending evil, concerted,with Prince Eugene of Savoy, a giganticplan of operations. Their first objectwas to seize on Donawerth, which wasprotected by a strong body of the elector'stroops, who had fortified themselveson the height of Schellenberg.THE ARMY.After a inarch of fourteen miles, Marlboroughattacked .the enemy's position.The Bavarians received their assailantswith a destructive fire ; and, rushingfrom their works, furiously charged abattalion of English guards, who receivedthe onset unmoved as rocks,and a dreadful carnage ensued. Atlength, the enemy gave way ; and thebridge over the Danube breaking downfrom the weight of the fugitives, theflood completed the havock which thebayonet had begun. This victory, purchasedat a heavy loss, was pregnantwith the most favourable consequences :it destroyed the favourite Bavarianregiment, the loss of which called tearsinto the eyes of the elector; it hastenedthe evacuation of Donawerth; and almostinduced the court of Stuttgart todetach itself from the French alliance :for this latter purpose, the preliminariesof a treaty had been actually agreed on,when the elector hearing that MarshalMallard was approaching to his assistancewith thirty-five thousand of thebest troops of France, abruptly terminatedthe negotiation.Marlborough was now joined byPrince Eugene with ten thousand men,and discovering that the Bavarians andFrench were marking out a camp nearBlenheim, resolved upon attackingthem, although superior in numbers tohis own forces, before they could fortifythe new position. The battle ofHochstet, or Blenheim, accordinglytook place on the 13th of August,1704. During the preceding night,Marlborough had passed a considerabletime in prayer, and received the sacrament.In the morning, when histroops were drawn up in array, thechaplains performed divine service atthe head of their respective regiments ;and after Marlborough had narrowlyescaped destruction from a cannon ball,while riding along the line, the onsettook place. After a desperate resistance,and the loss of forty thousandmen, notwithstanding the cowardice ofthe imperial troops under Eugene, theenemy were completely routed, with aloss on the part of the allies of onlytwelve thousand killed and wounded.Marshal Mallard, who was taken prisoneron this occasion, complimentedthe duke on having discomfited thebest troops in the world. " I hope,"was the reply, " you will except thosewho have beaten them."Marlborough wrote to his wife, apprisingher of his success, on the backof a tavern bill ; and the queen, glitteringwith jewels, accompanied by theduchess, in a very plain garb, soonafterwards went to St. Paul's, for thepurpose of returning solemn thanks forthe victory. The Emperor of Germany,and the King of the Romans,honoured the duke with letters of complimentsand thanks; but to these hereturned no answer. He could nothave replied without noticing the misconductof the imperial troops, and herather chose to outrage etiquette thanto wound the feelings of the PrinceEugene. Though dreadfully emaciatedby fatigue, he now performed ajourney of eight hundred miles, in themost inclement season of the year, tothe King of Prussia, from whom heobtained a reinforcement of troops, bywhich Savoy was saved. Leaving Bavariasubjugated, and Trees, Landau,and Traerbach, occupied by the allies,he returned to England, in December,apparently in a state of incipient consumption.His fellow countrymengreeted his arrival with every demonstrationof triumph and joy : he receivedthe thanks of both houses ofparliament ; the city entertained himwith a splendid feast ; the colours takenfrom the enemy were paraded, to thedelight of an admiring populace, fromone extremity of London to the other ;the manor of Woodstock, and hundredof Wotton, were settled upon him andhis heirs for ever, and a splendid mansionwas ordered to be constructed onsome part of the estate, as a monumentof national gratitude ; medals in honourof the hero of Blenheim were struck,and Addison wrote a poem, entitledThe Campaign, to celebrate his achievements.Marlborough bore his honourswith meekness. Evelyn relates, thathaving met him at Godolphin's, theduke took his hand, "as formerly hewas used to do, without any alterationof his good nature."On the 31st of March, 1705, he embarkedagain for the continent ; andon his arrival at the Hague, found himselfat the head of little more thanforty thousand men, while Villars wasopposed to him with fifty-five thousand.DUKE OF Marlborough.At an interview with Prince Louis ofBaden, it was arranged that his highnessshould march, with a large detachment,towards the Saar, while Marlboroughundertook the siege of Saar-louis;but either from treachery, orenvy of the duke's military reputation,the prince failed to perform his engagement,and Marlborough, after writingthe following apology to Villars, deemedit expedient to decamp. " Do me thejustice to believe, that my retreat isentirely owing to the failure of thePrince of Baden; but that my esteemfor you is still greater than my resentmentof his conduct." Weakly supportedby the Austrian court, and crippledin his movements by the Dutchrecalling thirty battalions from the armyfor the protection of Liege, he wroteto his wife, begging her to hasten thecompletion of Blenheim, for he thoughthe should never more stir from hisown house. His enemies at home, andhe had not a few, exulted in his difficulties,and calumniated his reputation.An opportunity for active exertion atlength occurred, and the prospect ofsuccess raised his spirits to their formerlevel. Huy being recovered, and theFrench having withdrawn from Liegeinto their lines, he resumed his favouriteplan of making an irruptioninto Brabant, and so deceived theFrench by his movements, that whilethey were expecting an attack on oneparticular point, he carried the postsof Hempen and Helix, which weresupposed to be sufficiently secure, aswell on account of their distance asstrength ; and would, but for the misconductof the Dutch, have broughtthe enemy to an engagement, of thesuccessful result of which he appearsto have been almost certain. So severelymortified did he feel on thisoccasion, that he is said to have exclaimed," I am at this moment tenyears older than I was four days ago."He wrote to the states, pointing outthe advantages he had lost through theignorance of others, and how impossibleit was for him to act, unless freedfrom the control and disastrous interferenceof those whom they employed.This letter was surreptitiously printed,and enlisted the popular feeling, bothin England and Holland, on the sideof Marlborough. The queen wrote todeplore the irksomeness of his situation; Eugene consoled him in the languageof disinterested friendship ; andthe Dutch, terrified at his threat ofrelinquishing the command, in somemeasure appeased him by recallingSlangenberg, one of their most obnoxiousgenerals.After demolishing the French lines,and securing winter quarters in Brabant,Marlborough exchanged the field forthe cabinet, and repairing to the courtsof Vienna, Berlin, and Hanover, arrangedthe means and measures forthe ensuing campaign. He was everywherereceived with the extraordinaryrespect due to his character, and wascreated a prince of the empire ; withwhich title, the principality of Mindedwas settled upon him and his heirsmale for ever. He was loth to receivethis German dignity, but deferred tothe advice of his friends, who consideredit would give him additional influence,in a country where titles wereconsidered so honourable and important.About this time, a clergymanin England was sentenced to the pilloryfor a libel upon him; but, by the interpositionof the duchess, the sentencewas not carried into execution. Marlborough,upon this, observed, " I shouldhave been very uneasy if the law hadnot found the man guilty; but muchmore uneasy if, on my account, hehad suffered the degrading punishmentto which he was condemned."He now desired to carry the warinto Italy, in conjunction with PrinceEugene ; but several of the alliedpowers objected to the plan, and theDutch and English governments feltalarmed at the idea of his removing toso great a distance. By a movementupon Namur, he at length provokedthe enemy to risk an engagement ; andon the 12th of May, 1706, was foughtthe memorable battle of Ramillies, inwhich the Elector of Bavaria andMarshal Viceroy were routed withdreadful slaughter. The victoriousallies pursued the fugitives above fiveleagues from the field; they took theenemy's baggage and artillery, aboutone hundred and twenty colours, orstandards, six hundred officers, sixthousand private soldiers, and killed orwounded about eight thousand more.During the battle, the duke met withTHE ARMY.a narrow escape. He was rallyingsome broken squadrons, in order torenew the charge, when he was recognisedby the French dragoons, and inleaping a ditch to escape them, wasthrown from his charger, and severelybruised : a body of infantry came seasonablyto his relief, or he must haveeither been killed or taken prisoner.Colonel Bingfield, his equerry, alightedto give him his horse ; and, while holdingthe stirrup for the duke to remount,had his head struck off by acannon ball.The benefits of the victory were immediateand important: Louvain andMechlin opened their gates to theconqueror, and the states of Brabantproclaimed the Archduke Charles.Oudenarde, that had foiled William, atthe bead of sixty thousand men ; Antwerp,and Ostend, which had held outagainst the skilful Spinosa for threeyears ; Menin, though fortified withworks upon the system of Vauban,and strongly garrisoned ; Henderson,which had resisted Louis, besides Alost,Pierre, Ghent, Bruges, and Damme,were successively surrendered to theallies. The capture of Hath followed,and that of Mons would have closedthe brilliant campaign, but for the economyof the Dutch, by which the dukewas compelled to order his men intowinter quarters. On his return to England,he was welcomed with nationalexultation : he received the thanks ofboth houses of parliament ; and his title,with the previous grants of land andmoney, was confirmed to his daughters,and their heirs male and female forever.In April, 1707, he was sent on anembassy to Charles XII. of Sweden,whom the allies suspected of designshostile to their interest. The adroitflattery of the duke (who told Charlesthat he should think it a great happiness,if his affairs would allow him, tolearn, under so great a general as hismajesty, what he wanted to know inthe art of war) soothed the bellicoseSwede, and extracted from him a declaration,that he would take no stepsto the prejudice of the grand alliance.During the campaign of this year, thepernicious controul of the Dutch deputiesexercised so withering an influenceon Marlborough, that he acquired noadvantage over the enemy, who werenow commanded by Vendome. But,though the duke achieved no victory,he sustained no defeat.In the campaign of 1708, variousmovements took place, which, eventually,brought on the battle of Oude-garde. The allies, under the Dukeof Marlborough and Prince Eugene,crossed the Scheldt without opposition,and, at seven in the evening, botharmies were engaged through the wholeextent of the lines. The dragoons andhousehold troops of France fought withdesperate, but unavailing courage. Theword for retreat was given, and nightalone rescued the enemy from completedestruction. They lost ten piecesof cannon, and more than an hundredstandards and colours. Their killed,wounded, and prisoners amounted tofourteen thousand men, while the totalloss of the allies did not exceed a fourthof that number. Marlborough nowresolved to follow up the victory bypenetrating into the heart of France;but Eugene, considering the designimpracticable, until Lille, which Marlboroughhad proposed to mask, wasactually taken, that place was investedby Eugene on one side, and by thePrince of Orange on the other; whileMarlborough encamped at Belching, tocover the siege.Burgundy and Vendome havingformed a junction with the Duke ofBerwick, and advanced to the relief ofthe town, the duke marched out of hislines to give them battle; and had notthe deputies interposed their restrainingauthority, the French, on the testimonyof Berwick himself, must have receivedan inevitable defeat. Meanwhile, theElector of Bavaria, with fifteen thousandmen, attempted to surprise Brussels,but the allied generals, apprised ofhis intention, crossed the Scheldt, withoutloss, by a series of masterly movements,never surpassed in modern strategy; and the elector, alarmed at theirapproach, precipitately retreated, leavinghis cannon and wounded behind.Lille having, at length, surrendered,after the assailants had lost fourteenthousand men in besieging it, Marlboroughinvested Ghent, which capitulatedbefore the batteries were open ;and Bruges was immediately afterwardsabandoned by the enemy.DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH.The distresses of the French beganto shake the mind of the once haughty,but now humbled Louis, and he sentthe Marquess de Tory to Marlborough,with an offer of two millions of livres,and even double that sum, if the dukewould procure a peace on advantageousterms. Marlborough, took no notice ofthe proffered bribe, although desirousof bringing the war to a conclusion. T heextravagant demands of the allies, however,soon interrupted all pacific negotiations,and both parties made greatpreparations for renewing the war withan increase of alacrity and vigour. TheFrench, driven by famine to swell thearmy of their monarch, were now commandedby Villars, styled by Voltaire,lucky, braggart, and brave. But thechange of their general did not alterthe fortune of the war: Tournay, inspite of an attempt of Villars to relieveit, surrendered, after a sanguinary siegeof two months. Part of the allies thenentered the French lines, and interposedbetween Mons, which it wasintended to besiege, and the Frencharmy. These manoeuvres brought ona general engagement at Malplaquet,the most deliberate, solemn, andwell-ordered battle fought during thewhole war." It took place on thellth of September, 1709. Villars beingwounded and carried from the field, hisplace was supplied, with great ability,by Boufflers ; and the French, thoughthey lost the day, maintained theirhonour. The combatants were equallymatched in point of numbers, but, owingto the rash impetuosity of the Princeof Orange, the allies lost twenty thousandmen, while the French, thoughthey retreated, lost only fourteen thousand.Marlborough confessed, himself,that it was a murderous victory ; andhis enemies at home took advantage ofthe carnage, to censure his prodigalexpenditure of human life; which chargehis noble disposition would not sufferhim to repel, because his own justificationwould have inculpated the Princeof Orange. The allies, subsequently,took Mons, and covered the great townsin Brabant and Flanders.On his return to England, the dukewas received with his accustomedhonours, but he found that his influencehad materially abated. Thearrogance of the duchess had graduallylost her the queen's affection ; a moresupple favourite arose in the person ofMrs. Bashan, and, at length, a positivebreach took place between the duchessand her majesty; whose aversion wasconfirmed by an impolitic requestwhich the duke made for a patent constitutinghim captain-general for life;with a view, no doubt, to strengthenhimself against his enemies at court,who daily became more numerous,malignant, and powerful. An absoluterefusal, conveyed in an ungraciousmanner, was an appropriate answerto so unconstitutional an application.Marlborough now beheld, with acuteregret, his long-enjoyed power fastdeserting him, and called himselfwhite paper, upon which the ministersmight write directions."Early in 1710, he returned to theseat of war ; after passing the enemy'slines at Pont de Vending, he took Douay,and terminated the campaign by capturingAire and St. Venant.The Whigs had. by this time, beendismissed, and a set of men hostile toMarlborough were at the head ofaffairs. Contrary to general expectation,he did not resign his command ;but, although he knew his proceedingswould be most severely scrutinized bythe new administration, he ventured tocommence another campaign, in whichhe lost the assistance of the brave andintelligent Eugene, who was recalledby the emperor with nearly all thetroops under his command. TheFrench had now formed a series oflines, defended by redoubts and otherworks, extending from Namur to thecoast of Picardy, near Montreuil ; andso confident was Villars of the impregnablestrength of these defences,that he vauntingly called them thene plus ultra of Marlborough. Theduke, however, penetrated them withoutthe loss of a- man ; and Villars,severely chagrined, endeavoured toprovoke him to an engagement. TheDutch deputies, now that a battlewould be hazardous and unadvisable,strongly urged Marlborough to accepttheir opponent's challenge ; which,however, the duke declined, and immediatelyproceeded to the siege ofBrouchain. This place he compelledto surrender in a short time, althoughVillars was almost in sight of it with aTHE ARMY.force superior to his own. Marlborough,it is said, so highly respected thevirtues of Fenelon, that, at this time,he not only spared the diocese of thatvenerable prelate, but sent a body oftroops to escort the wagons in safety,which were conveying grain to therelief of its distressed inhabitants. Hewrote several letters to the archbishop,and in one of them said, that if hewas sorry he had not taken Camera,it was not for the sake of the conquest,so much as to have enjoyed the pleasureof having seen, and conversed with sogood and so great a man.The Tories were now exceedinglyanxious for peace, but, fearful thatMarlborough might defeat their viewsby striking some decisive blow, theydetermined, at all events, as he wouldnot resign, to procure his disgrace anddismissal. To effect this object, theyboldly accused him of peculation in theexpenditure of money committed to histrust as commander-in-chief. He deniedthe charge, and affirmed that hehad received no more than the usualperquisites, and that the sums whichhe was accused of appropriating to himselfwere expended in secret services,and in procuring information, withoutwhich the war could not have beencarried on. Commissioners, mere instrumentsin the hands of the ministry,were appointed to investigate his accounts,on whose report he was dismissedfrom all his employments,that the matter might undergo animpartial examination." His conductwas made the subject of discussion inthe house of lords, where the majorityvoted that his practices had been unwarrantableand illegal ; and the queenordered the attorney-general to prosecutehim for sums which he had deductedfrom the public money by virtueof her own warrant. His enemieshaving achieved his disgrace, droppedthe investigation, their sole object inbringing forward the charge of peculationagainst him being thus fully attained.He now became an object of execrationamong those of whom he had oncebeen the idol ; and the odium withwhich the people regarded him wasartfully aggravated by his politicalenemies. Karl Poulet, in the houseof lords, while pronouncing an eulogiumon Ormond, thus alluded to the fallenMarlborough : " He (Ormond) doesnot resemble a certain general, wholed his troops to the slaughter, to causea great number of officers to be knockedon the head in a battle, or against stonewalls,in order to fill his pockets bydisposing of their commissions !" Theduke immediately afterwards sent amessage to the earl, " inviting him totake the air in the country ;" butPoulet, struck with cowardice, betrayeda distress of mind which led toa discovery of the challenge ; informationof which being conveyed to thequeen, she commanded Marlboroughto proceed no farther in the matter.Fresh insults being daily heapedupon him, he determined on avoidinga continuance of the mortificationswhich he had some time endured, byquitting the country. Before his departure,he sent his friend Cadogan50,000 to invest in the Dutch funds,as a-means of subsistence for the future,should any political convulsion deprivehim of his property in England ; and,after making a fruitless application forthe governorship of the Spanish Netherlands,which had previously, onmore than one occasion, been offeredto him, he embarked for Ostend;where, notwithstanding his politicaldisgrace, he was received by the Dutchwith the same veneration and attachmentthey had displayed towardshim when flushed with conquest andat the zenith of his power. He firsttook up his abode at Aix-la-chapelle;but, not deeming himself secure inthat place, he removed to Maestricht,where he was joined by the duchess ;they then proceeded together to Franck-fort,and finally fixed their residencein Antwerp. Though divested of allpublic duties, he kept up a correspondencewith the court of Hanover,and the friends of the protestant succession; with whom, he concerted measuresto defeat any attempt that mightbe made by the partisans of the Stuart,on the death of Anne.In 1714, he set out on his return forEngland, and before he landed atDover, intelligence reached him of thequeen's demise. George the Firstrestored him to the chief military command; but much coolness subsistedbetween them, because, as it is said,DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH.the duke had not communicated to himthe plan of that campaign, in whichBrabant and Flanders had been recovered: it is, however, probable, thatthe want of confidence with whichhe was treated by the new monarch,arose from a suspicion, that the dukehad never entirely ceased to correspondamicably with the exiled family. Butthe king, it appears, expressly desiredhim not to relinquish his employments,which he seems to have had some ideaof doing, after he had been afflicted withtwo paralytic strokes, in 1716. Fromthe effects of these 'he so far recovered,that no trace of them was perceptibleexcept an occasional indistinctness inhis articulation ; and the opinion whichhas prevailed, that he dwindled intomental imbecility, is unfounded. Indeed,it seems to rest upon no betterauthority, (if we except Johnson's line,E'en tears of dotage flow 'd from Marlborough eyes)than the anecdote told of him by Dr.Reid ; who, in support of a proposition,that paralytic dotage frequently marksthe conclusion of a mind signalized bymental exercise and splendour," statesthat Marlborough observed to someperson, who appeared to be admiringhis portrait, " Yes, that was a greatman !" This, however, proves nothing,but that Marlborough, when on thethreshold of the tomb, had still thesense and good feeling to make apertinent, solemn, and, (contrasted withthe usual vanity of age,) a modestobservation. Lord Sackville, who rememberedhaving seen the duke in hisdecline, described him to Wraxall asbeing in a state of" caducity," having aservant on each side to support him,but still retaining the vestiges of a mostgraceful figure. As he passed throughthe crowd (who cheered him) to enterhis carriage, the tears ran down hischeeks ; but, decidedly, rather frombodily than mental debility ; for, in thesame paragraph it is positively stated,that " the duke by no means fell intoirrecoverable or settled dotage, butmanifested at times a strong understanding,until within a very shortperiod of his decease ; occasionally attendingthe privy-council, and sometimesspeaking on points of publicbusiness with his former capacity."He also occasionally attended thehouse of lords, and voted in favour ofthe prosecution against the Earl ofOxford. He was one of the fortunatespeculators in the South Sea scheme ;having sold his stock, by the advice ofthe duchess, at so auspicious a moment,that he realized a profit upon it of100,000. At Bath, whither he wentin 1721, for the benefit of his health,he was received with all the respect,honour, and acclamation, to which hehad been accustomed in the meridianof his career. In the ensuing spring,he was seized with another attack ofparalysis, and became fully sensibleof his approaching death. His lasthours were spent in commending hissoul to God. Prayers having beenread to him when he appeared to bealmost insensible, the duchess askedif he had heard them : " Yes," repliedhe, " and I joined in them." His deathtook place on the 16th of June, 1722.His remains, after the burial servicehad been read over them in Westminsterabbey, were deposited in amagnificent mausoleum at Blenheim,designed and executed by Rysbrach.His titles and estates'descended to hiseldest daughter, the Countess of Godolphin; and, on her death, without issuemale, they devolved on the Earl ofSunderland, as son and heir of Anne,his second daughter. His two otherdaughters were married to the Dukesof Bridgewater and Montagu : they allinherited the beauty of their parents,and were distinguished for their virtuesand propriety of conduct.In person, the Duke of Marlboroughwas above the middle size ; his featureswere manly and handsome, and hisform symmetrical. Although robust,he was constantly subject to head-acheand fevers. His portrait has beenpainted by Sir Godfrey Kneller, St.Amour, Vanderwerff, King, Clustersand Dahl; and beautifully engravedby Houbraken, Simon, andVertue. The Bodleian library containshis bust, sculptured by Rysbrach.His character, as a general, appearsto have bee n without a flaw. Althoughthwarted continually by the narrow-mindedjealousy of his colleagues, theignorant and unseasonable interferenceof the Dutch deputies, the conflicting objectspursued by the combined powers,and the annoyances and detractions ofTHE ARMY.domestic faction, he acquired a seriesof most splendid victories over experiencedgenerals, and highly disciplinedtroops, who, in number, frequentlyexceeded his own. His braverywas repeatedly proved ; of his meritsas a tactician, the most eminent amonghis contemporaries, whether friends orfoes, entertained the highest admiration.No predominant quality appearsto have been attributed to him ; hewas, on the contrary, described aspossessing the chief excellence of everydistinguished soldier of his age. Boling-broketermed him the greatest general,as well as the greatest statesman, thatthis or any other country ever produced; and the Earl of Peterborough,his enemy, said of him, " He was sogreat a man, that I have forgotten hisfaults." Prince Vaudemont, on beingasked by King William what he thoughtof the English generals, replied, " Kirkhas fire Lanier, thought Mackay,skill and Colchester, bravery ; butthere is something inexpressible in theEarl of Marlborough." The Due deLesdiguieres observed of him, " I haveseen the man who is equal to Turennein conduct, to Condé in courage, andto Luxembourg in success." Buonapartefelt so much impressed with asense of his merits, that he ordereda work to be written descriptive of theFlemish campaigns, as a valuable textbookof military instruction ; and said toBarry O'Meara, that, to find an equalto Wellington, in the annals of thiscountry, it was necessary to go backto Marlborough.An officer, from ocular experience,describes his camp as resembling aquiet and well-governed city: cursingand swearing were seldom heardamong the officers ; a drunkard was theobject of scorn ; and his troops, manyof whom were the refuse and dregs ofthe nation, became, at the close of oneor two campaigns, civil, sensible, andcleanly. A sincere observer of religiousduties himself, he enforced their performancethroughout his camp ; divineservice was regularly performed ; prayerswere offered up before a battle; andthanksgiving followed close upon victory.His humanity extended itselfeven to his enemies ; and he felt delightedwhenever he could mitigate themiseries of war by an act of mercyor benevolence. A French officer, onthe point of marriage, having beentaken prisoner, and sent to England,the duke obtained leave for him toreturn to his country and bride elect.Exceedingly affable and easy of access,his soldiers looked up to Corporal John(as he was familiarly termed) withconfidence and affection. His memorywas enshrined in their hearts, and theveteran who had served under himcherished an attachment for all whobore his name, or belonged to hisfamily. A Chelsea pensioner, at anelection for Windsor, in 1737, wasthreatened with the loss of his pension,if he did not vote for Lord Vere. Hisanswer was, " I will venture starving,rather than it shall be said that I votedagainst the Duke of Marlborough'sgrandson, after having followed hisgrandfather so many hundred leagues."The duchess, who relates this anecdote,adds, with her characteristic ardour,I do not know whether they havetaken away his pension, but I hopethey will ; for I have sent him word, ifthey do take it away, I will settle thesame upon him for his life."The duke was master of a self-possessionthat never forsook him inthe most imminent danger ; and hisequanimity of temper was never ruffledby the frequent annoyances, seriousor trifling, which he was doomed toencounter. Accompanied by LordCadogan, he was one day reconnoitringthe army in Flanders, when a heavyrain came on, and they both calledfor their cloaks. Cadogan's servantbrought his master's in a moment ; butthe duke's attendant was so sluggish,that his grace was drenched to theskin. On being mildly reproved forhis delay, the man answered surlily,I came as fast as I could." Theeduke said nothing further to him, but,turning to Lord Cadogan, observedcalmly, " I would not have that fellow'stemper for a thousand pounds."The strong union which subsistedbetween Marlborough and PrinceEugene, has been often and deservedlyeulogized. They were both devoid ofjealousy, and each strove to exceed theother only in adding to their mutualreputation, and promoting the welfareof their common cause. A similarnobility of spirit which promptedDUKE OF MARLBOROUGH.Marlborough to make no reply to theemperor's letter, after the battle ofBlenheim, in which Eugene's troopshad behaved like poltroons, influencedthe latter, when, in answer to the complimentpaid him by Harley, (who hadrisen to eminence on the wreck ofMarlborough's greatness,) that he wasthe greatest general of his age, he said,If it be so, I owe it to your lordship."They rarely differed; yet the prince,on one occasion, is said to have sentMarlborough a challenge, which theduke declined : and when time broughtthe matter of dispute to light, it appearedclearly that Eugene was wrong.William the Third said that Marlboroughpossessed the warmest heart,with the coolest head of any man hehad ever known. He was an ablestatesman, and a most consummate diplomatist: it is related of him, by Noble,that he discovered the intentions of theKing of Prussia, by observing the mapsupon his table ; and won his confidence,by declining to dine with him througha pretended modesty. But his moralcharacter, as a politician, was trulyodious. His intrigues were invariablyunder the influence of self-interest. Nosooner was his first, his chief benefactor,the founder of his fortunes, the manwho had actually saved his life whenshipwrecked, in danger of being oustedfrom his hereditary dominions, than hecurried favour with the apparent successorto the crown, and deserted theerring but unfortunate monarch in hisdeepest distress. Though favoured andrewarded for his exertions to bring inWilliam of Nassau, he scrupled not,as soon as the new possessor of thethrone appeared to sit somewhat insecurely,although he still "held officeunder, and openly supported him,clandestinely to intrigue with the deposedsovereign, and implore pardonfor his treachery in the event of acounter-revolution. During the latterpart of Queen Anne's reign, he took adecided part in favour of the Electorof Hanover; yet it is asserted that, toguard against possibilities, he still continuedhis secret correspondence withthe Stuart.The avarice of Marlborough has obtainedthe notoriety, though, perhaps,it wants the truth, of a proverb. Heappears to have been thrifty rather thansordid. On one occasion, while lookingover some papers, he met with agreen purse containing some money,which he viewed with apparent satisfaction,and said to Cadogan, who waspresent, " Observe these pieces, theydeserve to be observed, there are justforty of them ; 'tis the very first sum Iever got in my life, and I have kept itunbroken from that time to this day."He has been accused of having blamedhis servant for lighting four candles inhis tent, when Prince Eugene wascoming to hold a secret conference withhim ; and, it is said, that, while inFlanders, with a view to save the expenseof a table, when an officer cameto him on business, he would say, " Ihave not time to talk of it now ; I'llcome and dine with you tomorrow."This anecdote, which is told by one ofhis enemies, is rendered somewhatdoubtful by the assertion of another ofthem, that, after he had become a princeof the empire, the duke affected eatingalone.While at Bath, towards the close ofhis life, he frequently indulged in his favouritegame of whist ; and, after playingone evening a long time with DeanJones, he left off, the winner of sixpence,which the dean, having nosilver, did not immediately pay. Theduke, it is said, after having madeseveral ineffectual applications for " hiswinnings," at last prevailed on thedean to change a guinea, and hand himthe sixpence; because, as he said, hewanted it to pay for a chair : it is added,however, that he put the sixpence inhis pocket and walked home. While,on the one hand, no proofs are recordedthat his parsimony renderedhim callous to distress, yet, on theother, it is just to admit, that no act ofgenerosity is by any writer attributedto him, except his gift of fifty poundsper annum to Gell, who had saved himfrom being taken prisoner in Flanders.His domestic character was trulyadmirable. Although brought up in amost profligate court, and exposed tounusual temptations, on account of hisgreat personal beauty, his bitterestenemies never accused him of the leasttaint of libertinism. To his wife andchildren, he was fondly attached: inhis letters to the former, written amidthe bustle of a camp, and which, ofTHE ARMY.course, were not intended for the publiceye, he addresses her in the mostaffectionate terms, and declares that hewould rather live with her in a cottage,than without her in a palace.His manners were easy, unassuming,and so graceful, as to have elicitedpraise from the fastidious Chesterfield.Evelyn describes him as " well-spoken,affable, and supporting his want of acquiredknowledge by keeping goodcompany." He certainly must havebeen very deficient in " acquiredknowledge," if the following story relatedof him be true : In a conversationwith Bishop Burnet, he committedsuch gross anachronisms, thatthe amazed bishop exclaimed, " Where,may I ask, did your grace meet withallthis?" The duke, equally surprisedat Burnet's ignorance, replied,Why, don't you remember ? it is inthe only English history of those timesthat I have ever read in Shakspeare'splays."His conversation, though not veryinstructive, was cheerful and pointed,free from ill-nature, and occasionallyenlivened with quiet humour. Thecritic, Dennis, who had reflected severelyon the French, in his tragedyof Liberty Asserted, entertaining anabsurd fear that, at the peace ofUtrecht, he should be delivered up asasacrifice to the resentment of Louisthe Fourteenth, waited upon Marlboroughto beg his assistance in avertingso dreadful a calamity. The dukeheard him with gravity, and, in reply,stated, that he had no interest with theparty then in office ; but, to console thepoor poet, added, " I have taken nocare to get myself excepted in thearticles of peace, and yet I cannothelp thinking, that I have done theFrench almost as much damage as Mr.Dennis."The duchess survived her husbandtwenty-two years, and lived to see thecompletion of Blenheim, for which theduke had set apart an annual sum byhis will. Lord Coningsby and theDuke of Somerset both made her offersof marriage; but she replied, with anoble spirit, " Were I even thirty, insteador threescore, I would not permitthe emperor of the world to succeed inthat heart which has been devoted toJohn, Duke of Marlborough !" Withouther, the duke would scarcely have attainedso exalted a station. No manever had a more zealous political helpmate: she was, however, better adaptedto obtain power than to secure it. Successrendered her haughty ; it inflamedher temper into ungovernable violence ;and she accelerated, by her arrogance,the fall of Marlborough, as much as byher ambitious spirit she had contributedto his rise.Her susceptibility to passion, and hervirulent animosity to those who presumedto thwart her, appear to havebeen frequently conspicuous. On resigningher employments about thequeen's person, in 1711, she threwdown the golden key of her office,bade the duke take it up and carry itto the queen, against whom she inveighedwith great heat, and called oneof her daughters " a fool" for still entertaininga regard for her majesty.During the duke's last illness, Dr.Mead, who attended him, having givensome advice that displeased her, she issaid to have sworn at him bitterly, andattempted to tear off his perriwig.Lord Crimson, who had written aplay, of the demerits of which he becameso sensible, that, after its publication,he attempted to buy up allthe copies for the purpose of burningthem, having opposed the interest whichshe had espoused at an election, theduchess, who had kept a copy of hisbad comedy, caused a new edition of itto be printed, to which was prefixed, inridicule of his having attempted a taskfor which he was so little adapted, anelephant dancing on a rope, as a frontispiece.Auditor Harley, while proceedingswere pending against his brother, theEarl of Oxford, waited upon theduchess with a letter, formerly writtenby the duke, which clearly establishedthe fact of his correspondence with thePretender. After reading its contents,Harley said that it should certainlybe made public, unless the proceedingsagainst his brother were relinquished.The duchess heard him with courtesy,but, watching her opportunity, atlength, seized the letter, and threw itinto the fire. Her exultation was, however,but brief. " Madam," said Harley,you have burnt a worthless copy : Iknew your grace too well to ventureEARL OF Galway.here with the original, which is quitesafe in another place."The following appears to be anotherversion of the same story: Before hisintended trial, the Earl of Oxford senthis son, with Sergeant Coins, to askthe duke a question or two as to hishandwriting. Marlborough inquired ifOxford had any letters of his. " Yes,"was the reply," all that you havewritten to him since the revolution."Upon hearing this, the duke walkedabout the room, violently agitated, andeven threw off his wig with passion.It is added that Marlborough's fear ofhaving his correspondence exposed, wasthe true reason why the proceedingsagainst Oxford were suspended.In the height of her resentmentagainst Anne, the duchess, after strippingit of its diamond ornaments, gavea portrait of the queen, with which shehad been presented by her majesty,to one Mrs. Higgins," says Swift,an intriguing old woman, biddingher to make the best of it. Lord Treasurer(the Earl of Oxford) sent to Mrs.Higgins for this picture, and gave her100 for it." In the dean's opinion,it was worth about a fifth of that sum ;but the earl, no doubt, gladly paid sohigh a price for it to evince his ownloyalty, and to expose to the queen withhow much insulting contempt her majesty'spresent had been treated by theduchess. She has been repeatedlyaccused of avarice, but no particular circumstancesare adduced by her enemiesin support of the charge. The fact, that,at the time of her death, (which tookplace in 1744,) she was immensely rich,is no evidence of her penuriousness.Benevolence might be triumphantly attributedto her, from the authenticatedstatement, that, " during her life time,she distributed 300,000 in charities,"if, unfortunately for her fame in thisparticular, it were not added, " and inpresents to her family." It does notappear what part of this enormous sumwas devoted to the relief of distress : itmight have been small, and the residue,whatever may have been its amount,was, in all probability, parted withrather through pride, ambition, ornatural affection, than mere generosity.She gave Hooke 5,000 for drawingup an account of her own conduct, butleft only 500 a-piece to Glover andMallet to write a life of the duke. Tothis bequest, the singular conditionwas annexed that not a s ingle line ofverse should be inserted in the work.Her hatred of poetry is said to havearisen from the bitter censure whichPope has bestowed upon her under theappellation of Atossa, and which sheattempted, but in vain, to prevail uponhim to suppress. Glover declinedtaking any share in the duke's proposedbiography, in which Mallet hadmade but little progress when he died.HENRY ROUVIGNY, EARL OF Galway.AlENRY, son of the Marquess deRouvigny, a protestant French nobleman,was born abroad, in or about theyear 1650, and, with his father, tookrefuge in this country from the religiouspersecutions in France, in 1685. Atthe time of the revolution he tenderedhis services to King William, who feltreluctant to accept them, lest 'sFrench property should beconfiscated. Henry, however, heedlessof his inheritance, accompanied themonarch to Ireland, and behaved withgreat gallantry at the battle of theBoyne, where his brother was killed.At Aghrim he held an important command,and charged the rebels in flankwith irresistible impetuosity. For theseservices he was created an Irish earl.In 1696 he went to Turin, in the ostensiblecapacity of envoy and general;but, in reality, as a spy upon the Dukeof Savoy, who soon after withdrewfrom the existing confederacy, andGallway returned to England.In 16*99 he was appointed one of thelords justices in Ireland, and conductedhimself in that high office with satisfactionto the people, and with benefitto the crown. In 1701 he was removedTHE ARMY.for being a Frenchman," and deprived,by an act of parliament, of nearly fortythousand acres of land, in Ireland, ofwhich he had received a grant from theking, when appointed a lord justice.William was deeply hurt with the proceedingsof parliament on this occasion,and wrote a letter to the earl, declaratoryof his esteem, and of his intentionto make him a recompense for the deprivationhe had suffered. During thesame year the earl was employed inFlanders.In 1704 he became generalissimo ofthe British army in Spain and Portugal ;and, in September, 1705, by his advice,the confederate army invested Badajoz,of which he had expected to havespeedily made himself master, but wasdisappointed by the obstinate resistanceof the besieged. In one attackhis arm was broken by a cannon ball,but he continued to give orders for twohours afterwards. The wounded limbwas subsequently amputated, and theconsequences of the operation, addedto the severe chagrin which he felt atthe failure of his design, rendered hisrecovery, for some time, hopeless. Hewas, however, gradually restored tohealth, but not until the enemy hadthrown in reinforcements, and the confederateshad abandoned the siege.In 1706, after capturing CiudadRodrigo and Alcantara, he enteredMadrid without opposition, from which,however, he soon retired, to effect ajunction with King Charles, who f insteadof acting against the enemy, hadfoolishly lingered at Barcelona. Inthe following year, the earl served assecond in command of the army underthe Marquess cas Minas. The Dukeof Berwick, who was at the head of theFrench, having mustered a force considerablysuperior to that of the confederates,felt eager to entrap them intoa battle. In order to achieve his object,two renegade Hugonots were instructedto throw themselves in the way of hisantagonists, and, on being taken, togive such false information as mightinduce Das Minas to hazard an engagement.This plan succeeded, and thedisastrous battle of Almanza, fought onthe 14th of April, 1707, was the consequence.The English and Dutch, onthis occasion, though fatigued by atoilsome march, under the oppressiveheat of the meridian sun, broke throughthe enemy twice ; but the Portuguesecavalry gave way, and left the flanksof their allies open and unprotected.Gallway charged in person, but receivedtwo severe wounds, which, for sometime,incapacitated him from givingorders. The Marquess cas Minas wasrun through the arm ; his concubinefought and fell by his side. Most ofthe principal officers were wounded ;three thousand of the confederates werekilled on the spot; ten thousand morewere made prisoners ; and the whole oftheir artillery, colours, and standardswere taken by the enemy, whose entireloss did not exceed two thousand men.Gallway retreated at the head of a bodyof dragoons, and was joined at Alciraby the broken remains of his army.The English fleet having fortunatelyarrived, he obtained provisions andstores, and endeavoured, with incrediblediligence and activity, to put the countryin a strong posture of defence. Afteranother engagement at Casa, in whichthe earl displayed much gallantry, andhad a horse shot under him, both armieswithdrew into winter quarters.His military career terminated withthis unsuccessful campaign, which subsequentlybecame, at the instigation ofPeterborough, a subject of parliamentaryinquiry, not so much with a viewto the earl's personal disgrace, as forthe purpose of annoying Marlboroughand the Whig party, by whom Gallwaywas patronised. The duke warmly exertedhimself to defend his friend, whowas indirectly censured by the passingof a vote of thanks to Peterborough.On the accession of George the First,Lord Gallway again became one of thelords justices" of Ireland; but he continuedin office only a short time, andprobably died soon afterwards ; as, atthe latter part of the reign of QueenAnne, he nat rejected a diplomaticemployment, on account of his infirmities,and as nothing further concerninghim appears to be recorded.A memorialist of the times in whichthe Earl of Gallway flourished describeshim as being " one of the finest gentlemenin the army, with a head fitted forthe cabinet as well as the camp ; verymodest, vigilant, and sincere; and aman of honour and honesty, withoutpride or affectation." Swift, who hatedLORD CARPENTER.a Whig, wrote underneath the abovecharacter, " It is all directly otherwisehe is a deceitful, hypocritical, factiousknave, a damnable hypocrite, of noreligion." He also accused Gallway oftyrannical conduct to the Earl of Kildare; but his aspersions were writtentoo much in the rancorous spirit ofpartisanship to merit attention ; andthey are decidedly contradicted, in themost important point, that of religion,by Bishop Burnet. Mission attributesto the earl much kind considerationfor those unfortunate refugees, who,like himself, had abandoned Franceto avoid persecution ; of these he is saidto have been the head, the friend, theadvocate, the support, and the protector.His military achievements werefar from brilliant; in gallantry he hadno superior! but his prudence appearsto be somewhat doubtful ; and a mostunfavourable opinion might, perhaps,be pronounced on his capacity as ageneral, if the signal defeat at Almanzawere not, in a great measure, attributableto the cowardice of the Portuguese.GEORGE, LORD CARPENTER.GEORGE CARPENTER, the descendantof an ancient family in Herefordshire,and the son of a loyalistgentleman, who fought at the battle ofNaseby, was born at Pitchers Occur,in the above county, on the 10th ofFebruary, 1657. After receiving a classicaleducation at a private grammarschool in the country, he went to London,and procured the appointment of pageto the Earl of Montagu, whom he accompaniedin his embassy to the courtof France, in 1671. Upon his return,the next year, he entered the guards. !Soon after he became quarter-master !to the Earl of Peterborough's regiment jof horse; and obtained the rank oflieutenant-colonel, in 1685. In 1693,he married the widowed daughter of :the good Lord Claremont," and bythe sale of part of her jointure, pur jchased, in 1701, the colonelcy of theking's own regiment of dragoons.In 1705, he was advanced to therank of brigadier-general, and servedin Spain under the Earl of Gallway. !At the battle of Almanza, in 1707, hecommanded the rear, and succeeded in !preserving great part of the baggage, 'and many of the wounded soldiers. In1710, being then a major-general, he jwas wounded as he charged the enemy iat Almanac. and received the thanksof King Charles, afterwards Emperor ofGermany, for his gallantry and skill.In the same year he served withGeneral Stanhope, in Brihuega, when |that place was invested by Philip ofSpain and the Duke de Vendome,to whom it eventually surrendered.During the siege, a musket ball brokepart of his jaw bone, beat out all histeeth on one side, and lodged itself inthe root of his tongue, where it remaineda year before it was extracted.In 1714, he was nominated one ofthe court-martial appointed to inquireinto the state of the army, and to settlethe seniority of the several regiments,and the ranks and claims of the officers ;he was also constituted a member ofthe new board of general officers ; andin 1715, went into parliament as memberfor Christchurch, in Hants. Hewas shortly afterwards appointed envoyto the court of Vienna, and retained hisseat in the house of commons, notwithstandinga motion was made todeprive him of it, in consequence ofhis accepting a diplomatic office. Hewas on the eve of departure for Germany,when Forster having raised thePretender's standard, Carpenter wassent into the north to act against therebels, whom he prevented from seizingNewcastle, and then pursued them,with three regiments, to Preston, whichhe found, on his arrival, had been attacked,but without success, by GeneralWills. The addition of his forcesrendered the royal army, (of whichCarpenter, as superior officer, assumedthe chief command,) an over-match forthe rebels ; whose supplies being cutTHE ARMY.off, and all chance of their escape prevented,they speedily surrendered atdiscretion. It appears that some half-smotheredquarrel, which originated inSpain, broke out afresh, during thesiege, between Carpenter and Wills ;who, however, deferred the settlementof the affair until the common dangerwas passed, when Carpenter sent achallenge to Wills, but a hostile meetingbetween them was prevented by theDukes of Marlborough and Montagu.In 1716 he was appointed com-mander-in-chief of all the forces inScotland, and governor of Port Mason .In 1719 he was created an Irish peer,by the title of Baron Carpenter ofKillaghy; and in 1722, after a severecontest, was returned member for Westminster.During this election, it issaid that he prevailed upon fourbutchers to vote for him, by letting ithem ride in his carriage, while he him jself walked at the horses' heads. He jsupported the character of an honourableand upright senator, and was aconstant attendant in the house untilthe infirmities of age, and the consequencesof a severe fall, rendered himincapable of attending to public affairs.His death took place on the 10th ofFebruary, 1731, and his remains wereinterred at Owselbury, near Winchester,where a monument records hisachievements. He left one son, whosucceeded to his honours and estate ;the next heir to which was createdEarl of Tyrconnel, in 1761. The thirdsuccessor to the earldom entered theRussian army, as a volunteer, and diedof excessive fatigue, in 1812, at VillainLithuania, where Kutusoff erected amonument to his memory.By his prudence, integrity, and evennessof temper, during the Spanishwar, General Carpenter not only gainedthe affections of his countrymen, butthe esteem and regard of the allies,and of the emperor himself. He is saidto have displayed great skill as quarein providing forthe subsistence of the troops ; and thereappears to be no violation of truth inhis epitaph, by which it is stated, thathe served, in various parts of Europe,with honour and reputation ; was neverabsent from his post ; and was as remarkablefor his great humanity, as forhis courage and presence of mind inthe most imminent danger.CHARLES Mordant, EARL OF PETERBOROUGH.CHARLES Mordant, son of theprofligate Viscount Mordaunt, was bornin 1658, and succeeded his father intitleand estate in 1675. In his youthhe served under Admirals Warringtonand Marlborough, against Algiers, anddistinguished himself at Tangier, inAfrica, when that place was besiegedby the Moors. Averse to the arbitraryproceedings of James, he strenuouslyopposed the repeal of the test act, andforeseeing that some great politicalchange would speedily occur, opened acommunication with the Prince ofOrange. He soon after went over toHolland, and, accompanying Williamto England, was sworn in of the privy-council,appointed lord of the bedchamber,and lord commissioner of thetreasury; and, a few days before thecoronation, was created Earl of Monmouth.This title he is reported tohave solicited in order to prevent thechildren of the Duke of Monmouth, forwhom he had always professed thehighest regard, from being restored totheir unfortunate father's rank.He served in Flanders throughoutthe campaign of 1692, and enjoyed thefull confidence of William, until his naturalgiddiness, in running from partyto party, deprived him of the royalfavour. In 1697, he disgraced himselfby an attempt to suborn Sir John Fenwickto accuse the Duke of Shrewsburyand Lord Orford of a design to restoreKing James ; he also, by the assistanceof Dr. D'Avenant, wrote a book againstthe duke, to which he affixed the nameof Smith. His intrigues being discovered,he was committed a prisoner tothe Tower ; the peers ordered the workEARL OF PETERBOROUGH.in question to be burnt by the hands ofthe common hangman ; and the houseof commons voted his conduct a scandalousdesign to create differences betweenthe king and his majesty's bestfriends. In the same year he succeededhis uncle, who had been a veryabandoned character, as Earl of Peterborough.On the accession of Queen Anne, hewas appointed captain-general of theplantations in America, and governorof Jamaica; but Marlborough, returningfrom Holland before the commissionhad passed the seals, represented togovernment the impropriety of committingso important a trust to one ofsuch a fiery and uncertain temper, andthe appointment was, consequently,revoked. Incensed by this disappointment,the earl acted in opposition togovernment, until he was constitutedgeneral and commander-ins chief of theforces sent to the assistance of Charlesthe Third of Spain, and joint admiralof the fleet with Sir Cloudesley Shovel.He sailed from England, in May, 1705,and, arriving at his destination, publisheda manifesto, in the Spanish language,which had such an effect uponthe inhabitants, that they crowded tohis standard, and acknowledged Charlesthe Third as their lawful sovereign.His first exploit was the siege of Barcelona,which surrendered, after a vigorousattack ; and, in a few days, King Charlesmade his entrance in triumph. Pendingthe arrangements for its capitulation,the governor complained to the earl,that some soldiers, who had climbedover the walls, were committing themost barbarous excesses against theinhabitants. " They must be the troopsof the Prince of Hesse," replied Peterborough; " allow me to enter the citywith my English forces, I will save itfrom ruin, and afterwards return to mypresent situation." The governor acceptedthis offer; and Peterborough,after expelling the Germans, restoringtheir plunder to its owners, rescuingthe Duchess of Populi from two brutalruffians, and conducting her in safetyto her husband, returned, as he hadpromised, to his former station.He next marched to the relief of SanMathew, a place of great consequence,which was then invested by six thousandmen, under the Conte de las Torres,whom, by means of false intelligence,Peterborough induced to abandon thesiege. He afterwards relieved Barcelona,when greatly distressed by theenemy ; and, with ten thousand men,drove the Duke of Anjou, at the headof twenty-five thousand French, out ofSpain ; gained possession of Catalonia,Valencia, Arragon, and Majorca, withpart of Murcia and Castile, and enabledLord Gallway to advance to Madridwithout the slightest opposition. Forthese services he was declared a generalin Spain, by Charles, and wasappointed, by Queen Anne, ambassadorextraordinary to adjust all matters ofstate and traffic between the two kingdoms.Charles, however, soon afterwardstransmitted to England somecharges against the earl, who was, consequently,recalled ; but, on his conductbeing investigated by the peers, theythought proper to vote him their thanksin the most solemn manner, for his zealandservices.In 1710, he was employed in embassiesto Vienna and several of theItalian courts. While thus diplomaticallyengaged, he travelled with suchspeed that the British ministers used tosay they wrote at, rather than to him.From the rapidity of his movements,and the number of his missions tocrowned heads, he is said to have seenmore postillions and princes than anyman in Europe. While at Turin, it isstated, on the testimony of an eyewitness,that he walked about his room,dictating, to as many amanuenses, nineletters at once, on different subjects,and addressed to different persons.On his return to England he wasmade colonel of the royal regiment ofhorse guards, general of marines, andlord-lieutenant and custos rotulorum ofthe county of Northampton. In 1713,he received the insignia of the Garter,and was sent ambassador to Sicily,and other Italian powers. In 1714, hewas appointed governor of Minorca ;and in the reigns of George the Firstand Second, was general of the marineforces in Great Britain.On the death of his first wife, a MissFraser, in 1720, he married the celebratedand beautiful singer, AnastasiaRobinson, whom he had previously,but unsuccessfully, attempted to seduce.Before he was united to her, it isTHE ARMY.related, that at an opera rehearsal, heseverely caned Senesino, a musicalperformer, who had given her someoffence. Although much attached toher, his pride would not allow him toacknowledge her as his wife, and she,consequently, declined to reside underhis roof, until the period of his lastillness, when he consented to receiveher publicly by her legitimate title.In the latter part of his life he ceasedto figure as an important person, and,from his retirement in the country,railed at the decline of public virtue,and the mercenary spirit of the age.Having long suffered under a painfulcomplaint, he was, at length, compelledto undergo a lithotomical operation atBristol. The surgeon, as usual, wishedto have him bound, but after muchwarm discussion on the subject, theearl positively declared, it should neverbe said, that a Mordaunt was seen tiedhand and foot. He then desired to beplaced in a posture most advantageousfor the operation, in which he remained,without flinching, until it was over.Three weeks after he arrived at BevisMount, where he received the countess,who is said to have behaved towardshim with much tenderness. Althoughhis sufferings were great, he receivedand conversed with crowds of persons,who came from Southampton to visithim. His recovery appearing morethan doubtful, he began to dwell uponsubjects of a solemn nature ; but suchwas the restlessness of his spirit, thatalthough assured of his incapacity tobear the fatigues of a voyage, hedetermined on embarking, with thecountess, for Lisbon ; the climate ofwhich, he faintly hoped would restorehim to health. He, however, diedduring the passage, on the 25th ofOctober, 1745. His remains werebrought to England, and buried atSurvey, in Bedfordshire. He had twosons by his first wife, neither of whomsurvived him. They were both depraved,and appear to have partakenof that slight taint of insanity, withwhich their father, as well as his immediatepredecessors in the title, wereevidently afflicted.The earl was of a tall and gracefulfigure, and had strikingly the look ofa nobleman, although so thin thatSwift called him a skeleton. Even hispeculiarities, says Walpole, were becomingin him, as he had a natural easethat immediately adopted and savedthem from the air of affectation. A fineportrait of him was painted by Kneller.In politics he had no fixed principles,having changed sides as often as theVicar of Bray. His romantic couragehas procured him a lofty reputation asacommander, to which he does notappear to have been justly entitled.Active, enterprising, and Quixotic, hedelighted in difficulties, and never, saysone of his panegyrists, employed ahundred men on any expedition, withoutaccompanying them himself. Hefrequently arrived at great ends byinadequate means ; and professed thosequalities which, as a partisan, wouldhave rendered him almost without anequal. But he displayed none of thecalm judgment and severe prudencenecessary for the command of a largearmy. It is true that, while in Spain,he was, on the whole, successful ; butthe most brilliant of his exploits have,with great felicity of expression, beendesignated as " happy severities."His conduct at Barcelona was trulychivalrous ; and he did all in his powerto cultivate a high feeling of honouramong his troops ; any aggressionagainst whom, on the other hand, hepunished, whenever it was possible,with conspicuous rigour. On one occasion,he hung a Spaniard, who hadkilled a British officer, at the knockerof his own door. Though frugal of thepublic purse, he liberally expended hisown money for the benefit of histroops j and when, through the trickeryof some Spanish functionaries, he hadbeen despoiled of his baggage, worthabout 8,000, he refused to accept anyprivate compensation for the loss, butinsisted on being furnished with cornsufficient to maintain his forces forseveral months.His love of glory and military renownwas tarnished by an affectation of vulgarpopularity, which he endeavouredto gain by frequenting coffee-houses,and public places. He was once mistakenby the mob for the Duke ofMarlborough, at a time when his gracewas very unpopular, but saved himselffrom rough usage, with which he wasthreatened, by the following pithy address:"Gentlemen, I can convinceEARL OF PETERBOROUGH.you, by two reasons, that I am not theduke ; in the first place, I have onlyfive guineas in my pocket ; and, in thesecond, (throwing his purse to the multitudeas he spoke) they are heartilyat your service."The brilliancy of his exploits abroadwas oddly contrasted with some of theeccentricities of his conduct at home.On one occasion, he leaped out of hiscarriage for the purpose of driving,sword in hand, a dancing master, cladin pearl coloured stockings, who wascarefully crossing a dirty street, intothe mud. Cookery was as much hishobby as war. It appears to have beenfar from unusual for him to assist atthe preparation of a feast over whichhe was about to preside ; and when atBath, he was occasionally seen aboutthe streets, in his blue ribbon and star,carrying a chicken in his hand, and acabbage, perhaps, under each arm.He was intimate with Swift, Gay,Dryden, Pope, and most other wits andauthors of the age in which he lived.To Pope, who was his frequent guestand companion, he presented, on hisdeath-bed, a valuable watch, which hadbeen given to him by the king of Sicily.He wrote a severe copy of versesagainst the Duchess of Marlborough,whom he alternately flattered and reviled.He also composed his own memoirs,which, however, after his death,were committed, by the countess, to theflames ; and expressed an intention, if helived, " to give that rascal, Burnet, thelie in half his history :" for this purposehe had marked both of the volumes, inseveral parts of the margin, and carriedthem with him to Lisbon. His letterswere once extolled as models of anelegant epistolary style, but the publicationof his correspondence with theCountess of Suffolk has much diminishedhis previous reputation as awriter. He is said to have been anexquisite penman, and to have punctuatedand spelt much more accuratelythan the greater part of hisliterary contemporaries.His enmity," says Horace Walpole,to the Duke of Marlborough, and hisfriendship with Pope, will preserve hisname, when his genius, too romanticto have laid a solid foundation for fame,and his politics, too disinterested forhis age and country, shall be equallyforgotten." Bishop" Burnet, with greattruth, calls him " a man of much heat,many notions, full of discourse, braveand generous with little true judgment,and no virtue." He was loose inhis manners, and remarkably sensual.While in Spain, he set no bounds tothe gratification of his desires, and oncepointed some artillery against a convent,in which a beautiful woman ofrank had taken refuge, so that by terrifyingher to come forth, he mightobtain a view of her admirable person.He was vain, passionate, and inconstant;a mocker of Christianity, andhad, according to his own voluntaryconfession, committed three capitalcrimes before he was of the age oftwenty. He once went to hear Pennpreach, "because," as he said, "twashis way to be civil to all religions."During a visit to Fenelon, at Camera,the virtues of that amiable man appearto have made some impression on him,so that, as he states, " he was obliged toget away from the delicious creature asfast as he could, lest he should becomepious." While Voltaire was in Englandthe earl employed him to write a book,and furnished him with money to paythe printer during its progress throughthe press. Voltaire, however, appropriatedthe money to his own uses. Atthis time he was a visitor at Peterboroughhouse. Parsons' green, wherethe printer, being unable to go on forwant of supplies, called one evening,in order to obtain an advance. Meetingthe earl in the grounds, he proceededto state the cause of his visit; on hearingwhich, Peterborough, perceiving Voltaireat a short distance, rushed towardshim, sword in hand, in such aparoxysm of rage, that the philosopherof Ferney, it is said, with great difficulty,and by speed alone, saved himselffrom destruction.THE ARMY.WILLIAM, EARL CADOGAN.WILLIAM CADOGAN, the son ofHenry Cadogan, an Irish counsellor, bya daughter of Sir Hardness Waller, andthe grandson of William Cadogan, whosubdued the Irish insurgents, Neiland O'Rowe, was, probably, born inDublin, but at what period appears uncertain.He is said to have entered thearmy when very young, and servedwith honour under King William, inIreland, where he particularly distinguishedhimself at the battle of theBoyne. In 1701, having accompaniedthe Earl of Marlborough to Holland,he was made quarter-master-general ofthe army ; and in 1703, was promoted tothe colonelcy of the second regiment ofhorse. He gallantly assisted at the attackon Schellenberg, in 1704, where hereceived several shots in his clothes,and was slightly wounded in the thigh ;he was also engaged in the battle ofBlenheim, at which his conduct andcourage procured him the rank ofbrigadier-general.On the forcing of the French linesnear Piedmont, in 1705, he charged theenemy at the head of his regiment,defeated the Bavarian guards, drovethem through two battalions of theirown foot, and captured four of theirstandards. In 1706, he was despatchedby Marlborough to receive the surrenderof Antwerp, when the garrison,consisting of six French and six Spanishregiments, capitulated on honourableterms. In the same year, Marlboroughhaving fixed his camp at Belching, beforeMenin, Cadogan made a general forage,within a mile of Tournay, with sixthousand foot, and eight hundred horse;during which, as he was posting twoadvanced squadrons near that town, hehad the misfortune to be taken prisoner;but in a few days obtained permissionto return to the camp of the allies uponhis parole ; and within a week after hiscapture, was exchanged for the BaronPalavicini, a major-general in theFrench service, who had been takenat the battle of Ramillies. He was soonafterwards promoted to the rank ofmajor-general of the forces; and in1707, went to Brussels, as plenipotentiaryof the Queen of Great Britain, tonegotiate an exchange of prisoners.During the same year he became memberfor the borough of Woodstock,which he continued to represent untilcalled to the peerage, in 1716.Resuming his command in the alliedarmy, he bore a conspicuous part inthe battle of Oudenarde, at which hecrossed the Scheldt, attacked and carriedthe village of Heynem, and tookthree out of seven battalions that wereopposed to him. He assisted in bringingsupplies from Ostend to the Dukeof Marlborough, during the celebratedsiege of Lille; and shared in the mostdifficult enterprises throughout the war.In 1709, on the eve of the battle ofTanners, Cadogan, then a lieutenant-general,being despatched to receivesome proposals from Marshal Villars,took an opportunity to examine theentrenchments of the enemy ; and directedan artillery officer, who accompaniedhim, to notice where he droppedhis glove, and on that spot, in the courseof the night, to plant his guns : theofficer succeeded in carrying this commandinto effect, and by enfilading theenemy's lines on the following morning,materially contributed to the successof the allied forces. At the siege ofMons, which shortly afterwards ensued,Cadogan received a dangerous woundin the neck, while animating sometroops in the trenches, who were attackinga ravelin. On the disgrace ofMarlborough, in 1711, he resigned hisemployments; but acted again, in thefollowing campaign, under Ormond.He, however, received his previouscommander and friend with every markof gratitude and esteem, when the duke,driven by party violence from England,landed at Ostend in the course of thesame year.His decided attachment to the Whigsprocured him, on the accession of Georgethe First, the appointments of masterof the robes, colonel of the second regimentof foot guards, and envoy extraordinaryand plenipotentiary to theEARL CADOGAN.States General. In 1715, he becamegovernor of the Isle of Wight, and alsoassisted in quelling the rebellion inScotland. In the following year, hewas invested with the insignia of theorder of St. Andrew, and, created apeer, by the title of Baron Cadogan, ofReading. Soon after he had taken hisseat in the house of lords he was sentto the Hague, to assist in negotiating thetreaty of defensive alliance betweenGreat Britain, France, and the States*General ; and proceeding to Utrecht,returned to England with the king,who had been on a political visit to thecontinent.In 1717, he was sworn of the privy-council,constituted general of all hismajesty's infantry ; appointed ambassadorextraordinary to conclude thenegotiation at the Hague ; and, on hisreturn to England, was elevated to anearldom. In 1718, he again visited theHague, in a diplomatic capacity, andafter a protracted discussion, concludedand signed the treaty of quadruple alliancein June, 1720.On the death of Marlborough, in1722, he was made general and com-mander-in-chief of the forces, master-generalof the ordnance, and colonel ofthe first regiment of foot guards. Atthe duke's funeral, he is accused ofhaving appeared indecorously dressed,and of having displayed, by his looksand gestures, the satisfaction which hefelt at his succession to the appointmentsof his friend and former commander.This imputation on his feelings, his decency,and common sense, is, however,scarcely to be credited. He had alwaysevinced the warmest affection for Marlborough,and it is difficult to believe thathe was base enough to rejoice at theduke's death ; or even if he were so,that he could, sillily and disgustingly,betray exultation at his funeral.Nothing further worthy of remarkoccurred in the public career of Cadogan,except that he was appointed one ofthe lords justices, on the king's departurefor the continent, in 1723. Inthe latter part of his life he was involvedin litigation with the Duchess of Marlborough; by whom he was chargedwith having attempted to appropriateto his own use, part of a large sum ofmoney which the duke had placed inhis hands, for the purpose of beinginvested in the Dutch funds. Cadoganhad, however, it appears, honestly, butnot legally, disposed of the money inthe purchase of Austrian securities ; thelatter, being at the time, apparentlypreferable to the Dutch : but they afterwardsbecame so much depreciated,that Cadogan, on being compelled toreturn the sum (with which the dukehad intrusted him for a specific purpose,which he did not carry into effect)could not realise what he had paid forthem by a considerable amount, ofwhich he, consequently, became theloser.His death took place on the 17th ofJuly, 1726. By his wife, who survivedhim, a daughter of William Hunter,counsellor of the court of Holland, heleft two children, one of whom wasmarried to the Duke of Portland, andthe other to Count Bentinck. Hisearldom became extinct; but the baronydevolved on his brother, who marriedthe daughter and co-heiress of Sir HansSloane, by whom he had a son, whowas created an earl, in the year 1800.Colonel Henry Cadogan, a son of thesecond earl, was mortally wounded atthe battle of Victoria, in 1813. Feelingconscious that he could not survive, herequested to be removed to an eminence,where he could have a view ofthe battle; his wishes being compliedwith, he placed his head against a tree,and earnestly contemplated the combatuntil death closed his eyes.The life of Earl Cadogan was spentprincipally in active warfare. He wasMarlborough's favourite general, andshared in all the duke's most famousexploits. During the war in Germanyand the Netherlands, he marked outalmost every camp occupied by theallies, and discharged his duty, in thisrespect, with such skill, that they werenever surprised. Of his bravery, not adoubt can exist : his talent in militaryaffairs, as a subordinate, was great;but he never had an opportunity, ofproving that he possessed sufficientprudence and comprehensiveness ofmind for successfully commanding anarmy.In politics, he was a staunch Whig,and an uniform supporter of the protestantsuccession : but his temper appearsto have been too rash for a diplomatist,and his ideas too military for aTHE ARMY.statesman. Lord Walpole, who wasassociated with him in an embassy, assertsthat he was impetuous, impatientof opposition, lavish in his promisesto remove a present difficulty, and inclinedto think that the pen and thesword were to be wielded with the samefierceness. In allusion to his violence,the Dutch pensionary, Heinous, used tosay emphatically, that Cadogan was anexcellent general of the army, meaning,by implication, that he was an indifferentnegotiator. He needlessly irritatedthe Dutch republican party, byhis imprudent zeal in publicly promotingthe election of the Prince ofOrange to the stadtholdership of Groningen; and highly exasperated theAmsterdam magistrates, by threatening,in his convivial moments, to compelthem to follow the example of thatprovince. On Atterbury's committalto the Tower, somebody asked, in thedrawing-room at St. James's, whatought to be done to the bishop: " Flinghim to the lions !" was Cadogan's fierceand disgraceful reply. Atterbury soonheard of this expression, and shortlyafterwards, in a letter to Pope, at theclose of a brief but satirical effusion,termed the earl, " a bold, bad, blundering,blustering, bloody booby 1"GENERAL MACCARTNEY.GEORGE MACCARTNEY, the sonof a merchant, was born at Belfast, inIreland. His education was commencedin his native country, andcompleted in France. He entered thearmy as a volunteer in the Scotchguards, and, in process of time, becamelieutenant-colonel of that corps. In1704, he received a commission fromQueen Anne to raise a regiment, withwhich he went to Flanders in the followingyear ; and, in 1706, accompaniedLord Rivers in an expedition to thecoast of France; on the failure ofwhich, he proceeded, with that nobleman,to Spain. At the battle of Al-mannahe commanded the rear of theretreat of a few regiments, and retiredinto fastnesses ; but was, at length,compelled to surrender. In 1708, hewas designed to command a secret expeditionto Canada, and was furtherpromised that, on his return, he shouldbe made governor of Jamaica ; but hisconduct, in a drunken fit, towards anold woman, exposed him to an indictment; in consequence of which,although Chief Justice Holt declaredit to be a vexatious prosecution, he wasdeprived of all his military employments.He then joined the army inFlanders, as a volunteer ; and, havingdistinguished himself at the battle ofBaronies, was restored, in 1710, to hisregiment.At the siege of Douay, he served as ageneral officer and an engineer ; andon the breaking out of the rebellion, in1715, he was employed by George theFirst, to bring over six thousand Dutchtroops to this country. He had, previously,on the 15th of November, 1712,acted as one of the seconds in thesanguinary duel between Lord Mohunand the Duke of Hamilton. Themeeting took place in Hyde park, andthe seconds fought as well as the principals.The Duke of Hamilton ranLord Mohun through the body, andbore him to the earth ; but LordMohun, at the same moment, shortenedhis sword, and mortally woundedhis opponent. It was, however, asserted,that Maccartney having disabledColonel Hamilton, the duke'ssecond, ran up to the principals, and,while they were grappling with eachother, treacherously stabbed the duke.Both Mohun and his antagonist diedon the same day of their wounds.Government offered ^500, and thewidowed Duchess of Hamilton 300,for the apprehension of Maccartney,on whose escape to the continent, theScotch peers voted an address to thethrone, praying that her majestywould, if possible, prevail on anyforeign power, in whose territories heshould seek shelter, to deliver him uptojustice. He, at length, voluntarilysurrendered ; and, his trial took placein the court of king's bench, on theLieutenant-general WEBB.13th of June, 1716; when ColonelHamilton, who had been previouslytried and acquitted, swore, it is said,that Maccartney had given the duke amortal wound. This accusation, however,appearing to be false, Hamiltonwas compelled to sell his commissionin the guards, and Maccartney was acquittedof murder, but being foundguilty of manslaughter, " was burnt,"it is said, " with a cold iron, to preventan appeal." In the following month, heobtained the colonelcy of the twenty-firstregiment of foot. Of his furthercareer no particulars appear to havebeen recorded. His death took placein 1730.Maccartney was brave and accomplished,but dissolute and extravagant.The part he took in the Hamilton duelwas the most important transaction ofhis life, which, although it arose out ofa private quarrel, as the combatants differedin politics, was agitated with allthe virulence of party spirit. Hamilton,a late writer, has, apparently withoutthe least foundation, charged the Dukeof Marlborough with having instigatedMohun to challenge his opponent ; andMaccartney, by other authors, hasbeen accused of administering wine tohis principal, to raise his droopingspirits; but Mohun, a professed duellist,wanted no instigation to engage in aduel with a man from whom he hadreceived either a fancied or real insult ;nor did he need the stimulant of wineto carry him through it. Dean Swiftterms Maccartney a bravo, who dependedfor support on Lord Mohun,and asserts that he had made an offerto murder a certain person, who wasunder William the Third's displeasure,but that the king " disdained themotion, and abhorred the proposerever after." Swift also asserts thatthe Duke of Hamilton was murderedby that villain Maccartney, an IrishScott" But Lord Chesterfield, onthe contrary, says, and apparentlywith justice, " Nothing is falser thanthat Maccartney murdered DukeHamilton; for though he was capableof the vilest actions, he was guiltless ofthat, as I myself can testify, who wasat his trial. This lie was invented toinflame the Scotch nation against theWhigs."Lieutenant-general WEBB.No particulars appear to have beenrecorded relative to the early part ofthe life of Lieutenant-general JohnRichmond Webb ; who, however, isentitled to rather a distinguished placein the military annals of Great Britain.He served, with great credit, at Oude-garde and Malplaquet, and was oneof the generals who put Picardy undercontribution. In September, 1708, heperformed an exploit, which has deservedlyperpetuated his name. Beingdetached, in that month, at the head oftwelve battalions, to support a convoyof ammunition, then on its way to theDuke of Marlborough, who was besiegingLille, his troops were attackedby very superior numbers, under CountDe La Motte, in the defile of Wynen-dale, and vigorously cannonaded fornearly two hours. Webb, however,had so skilfully posted some ambuscades,and acted with such judgmentand bravery, that the enemy were repulsedwith the loss of three thousandof their men. During the contest, theconvoy escaped ; and arriving safely atthe camp of Marlborough, enabled thelatter successfully to prosecute the siege ;which, had this important supply ofammunition been intercepted, he wouldhave been compelled to raise.The victory of Wynendale having,probably by some mistake, been attributed,in the gazette, to Lord Cadogan,who had come up, with some squadronsof horse, at the close of the action,Webb, then a major-general, was sodisgusted, that he quitted the army,and published a narrative of the affair,all the glory of which, he very properlyclaimed. The Tories unjustlyascribed the error, in the announcementof the battle, to the malice ofMarlborough ; who, it appears, had anticipatedthat Webb would have beenTHE ARMY.defeated: and the house of commonsobliquely censured the duke, by votingtheir thanks to his victorious subordinate,who was also rewarded for hisvalour, with the order of Generosity,b y the King of Pres-ia.In 1710, when the Tories came intopower, Webb was appointed a and governor of the Isleof Wight ; but, on an invasion by thePretender being apprehended, in 1715,he was dismissed the service. He representedLudgershall in parliament,from 1707 until 1713, when he was returnedfor Newport, in the Isle ofWight ; but, in 1715, he was againelected for Ludgershall, and continuedto sit for it up to the period of hisdeath, which took place in 1724. Heis described, in the returns to the writs,as residing at Biddesden, in the countyof Wilts.General Webb was, unfortunately,addicted to the Thrasonic propensity ;the grand circumstance of his life, thebattle of Wynendale, subsequently toits occurrence, formed the sole topic ofhis discourse. On one occasion, whilerelating the particulars of the contest,for, perhaps, the twentieth time, tothe Duke of Argyle, he observed, ata certain point of his narrative, ' HereI received four wounds " " I wish,dear general," interrupted the duke,that you had received one more, andthat it had been in your tongue; forthen, every body else would have talkedof your action."RICHARD TEMPLE, VISCOUNT COBHAM.RlCHARD, the son of Sir RlCHARDTemple, who had distinguished himselfin many public employments of hightrust, at home and abroad, began hispublic career by entering parliamentfor the town of Buckingham, in 1694.In the first year of Queen Anne'sreign, he was appointed colonel of aregiment of foot, and served with distinctionas a volunteer at the sieges ofVenloo and Ruremond. He subsequentlyassisted at the siege of Lille;on the surrender of which, he was sentexpress, by the Duke of Marlborough,with despatches to the queen. In1705, he was elected a knight of theshire for Bucks; and, in 1710, havingpreviously attained the rank of ,he procured the commandof the fourth regiment of dragoons; which, however, was afterwardstaken from him, and given to GeneralEvans.On the accession of George the First,he was created a peer, by the tide ofBaron Cobham, in Kent ; and five daysafter, declared envoy extraordinaryand plenipotentiary to the Emperor ofGermany. In 1716, he was appointedconstable of Windsor castle; in 1718,he was raised to the rank of viscount;and afterwards became colonel of thefirst regiment of dragoon guards,lord-lieutenant and custos rotulorumof Bucks, a privy-counsellor, and governorof the Isle of Jersey.In September, 1719, he sailed fromSt. Helens as commander-in-chief ofan expedition against the town of Vigo,of which he took possession on the 1stof the following month. The garrisonretired into the castle, but surrenderedon the 10th, after having made soslight a resistance that the besiegerslost only two officers and three or fourmen. In the citadel was found an immensequantity of warlike stores, collected,it is said, with a view of makinga descent on some part of GreatBritain. Two days afterwards, LordCobham took Pome Vera, which containedfour thousand stand of arms, andthree hundred barrels of gunpowder.Early in November, he remarkedwith his troops, and returned to England.In 1733, he was dismissed from allhis employments for voting against theexcise scheme, and acted conspicuouslywith the opposition, until Sir RobertWalpole's overthrow in 1742, when hewas re-appointed to his military commands,with the additional rank offield-marshal. His last public employmentappears to have been as one of thelords justices, during the king's visitto Hanover, in 1745. He died on theLORD Blarney.15th of September, 1749; and, leavingno issue, was succeeded, in title andestate, by his sister, the wife of RichardGrenville, Esq. of Wotton.Lord Cobham was an intrepid andactive officer, but owes the perpetuationof his name not so much to hismilitary exploits, as to the poetical adulationwith which he was honouredby Pope, and his embellishment of themansion and gardens of Stowe ; wherehis widow, a daughter of EdmundHalsey, Esq. some time member forSouthwark, erected a lofty pillar to hismemory. His morality is more thanquestionable. It is said that he reprovedobscene discourse, not so muchas a sin in the utterer, but as an insultto himself; and infamously attemptedto instil principles of infidelity into theminds of young Gilbert West, andGeorge, afterwards Lord Lyttelton.WILLIAM, LORD Blarney.WILLIAM Blarney was bornin 1672, at Mount Blakeney, in Ireland,and when very young, distinguishedhimself by successfully defendinghis paternal domain against theattacks of a set of insurgents termedRapparees, so called from their using aweapon shaped like a rake or rape,and who sought to obtain possession ofthe estates, of which Mount Blakeneywas one, that had been forfeited bytheir ancestors. In the beginning ofthe reign of Queen Anne he served inFlanders, and was made an ensign atthe siege of Venloo. He graduallyobtained notice, by his strict adherenceto discipline, and his great theoreticskill in military affairs. He taught hisfellow officers, by whom he was muchbeloved, the art of war by means ofmodels, of which he possessed a greatnumber ; and was, it is said, the firstwho exercised a corps by beat of drum.He acted as adjutant as often as he waspermitted ; and, on one occasion, superintendeda series of manoeuvres, bythe whole allied army, in the presenceof some German princes and foreignofficers of distinction. After passingmany years in neglect, though not inobscurity, he at length obtained, by theinterest of the Duke of Richmond, thecommand of a regiment, with which heserved at the fatal attack on Cartagena,which, as it appears, had his advicebeen adopted, would not have beenundertaken.In 1745, he defended Stirling castleagainst the rebels ; but, during thesiege, acted with such apparent forbearance,that his loyalty was doubted.He suffered the insurgents to raise theirworks without the least molestation ;and his subordinates were actuallyabout to put him under arrest, whenhe suddenly ordered the guns on thebatteries to be loaded with bags of bullets,instead of balls, and directed thatthey should not be discharged, untilthe enemy had advanced within a fewpaces of the battlements. Whole ranksof the Highlanders were, consequently,destroyed, and the siege was almostimmediately raised.In the decline of life, he acted forseveral years as lieutenant-governor ofMinorca, which, at the head of an inefficientgarrison, he defended against theFrench, in 1756, with so much braveryand talent, that, on being compelled tocapitulate, he was allowed to marchout with all the honours of war, andobtained a conveyance to Gibraltar.Throughout the siege, which lastedseventy days, Blakeney, althougheighty-two years of age, never undressedhimself, or went into a bed.On his return to England, the veteran'sconduct was severely censured bysome time-serving pamphleteers ; butthe king evinced the satisfaction whichhe felt at his gallant, though unsuccessfuldefence of the island, by creatinghim a knight of the Bath, and raisinghim to the Irish peerage, by the titleof Baron Blakeney. In 1759, the citizensof Dublin set up a statue of him,executed by Van Not, in the centre ofthe Mall. At the time of his death,which took place on the 20th of September,1761, he was a lieutenant-generalin the army, and colonel of theTHE ARMY.Enniskillen regiment of foot. He wasburied, with great funeral pomp, inWestminster abbey.Lord Blakeney appears to have beentruly brave, generous, and estimable.His conduct in private life was somewhateccentric. His manners weregrave, but not repulsive ; his discoursechiefly turned on historical subjects.He never dined with his subordinates ;but frequently joined them in a taverncarousal. His favourite beverage waspunch ; an immoderate use of which, onone occasion, brought on him an alarmingparalytic attack. In dancing, heis said to have been a proficient, andoften displayed his skill in a jig or arigadoon, even when old, and notwithstandinghe invariably wore broad-toedGerman shoes, an inch thick in thesole. He was of the middle stature,but strong and muscular. His facewas large, and his walk stiff, exceptduring his transient fits of passion,when all his gestures were violent andrapid. Of money he was so singularlycareless, that he suffered the rents ofMount Blakeney, for seven years, tobe received and spent by his elderbrother ; who, at the end of that period,filed a bill in chancery against thegeneral, for 3,000. Blakeney, on receivingintimation of the proceedings,instead of putting in an answer, waitedon his opponent's solicitor, whom heso fully convinced of the injustice ofthe claim set up by his brother, thatthe lawyer refused to go on with thesuit, nor could the plaintiff meet withany one base enough to prosecute it.The general, subsequently, gave thewhole income of his estate to anotherand more deserving brother, MajorBlakeney ; contenting himself with hispay, and revenue as lieutenant-governorof Minorca, 6,000 of which hehad, .however, the misfortune to loseby the failure of a London agent.MARSHAL WADE.GEORGE WADE was born in Its,and entered the army in 1690. In 1704,he was made adjutant-general, with abrevet of colonel, and became a major-generalin 1709. Being afterwards appointedcommander-in-chief of theforces in Scotland, he laudably employedthe troops over whom he wasplaced, in cutting roads through theHighlands. He was occupied for tenyears in the superintendence of thisundertaking, the effects of which wereeminently beneficial. Several gentlemenmade ways from their own residencesto the main road ; forty stonebridges were built ; and in districtswhere scarcely any habitations but turf-hutscould previously have been found,substantial houses for the accommodationof travellers were erected at shortdistances from each other. The soldiers,many of whom were husbandmen,taught the Highlanders an improvedmethod of tilling their ground ; severaluseful arts were introduced, towhich the peasantry had hitherto beenstrangers ; and the English drovers,who had rarely ventured to attend thefairs beyond the borders, now penetrated,to purchase cattle, into the heartof the country. Wade, on account ofhis long and arduous services as a road-maker,was termed, by the humoristof the day, the greatest highwaymanin existence ; and a classical wag facetiouslyproposed that the following linefrom Horace should be inscribed on histomb:Non indecorous pulvere iordidus.In Chambers' book of Scotland, oneof the marshal's roads is described asbeing sixteen miles in length, withonly four turnings ; and these, it is remarked,were occasioned, not by eminences,but by the necessity of crossingrivers. " Wade," continues the author,seems to have communicated his ownstiff, erect, and formal character, to hisroads, but above all to this particularone, which is as straight as his personasundeviating as his mind, and as indifferentto steep braes, as he himselfwas to difficulties in the execution of hisduty. But, perhaps, of all persons whomay be little disposed to lift up theirMARSHAL WADE.hands and bless General Wade, theantiquary will be the least; for themarshal, with that persevering straightforwardness,for which he was so remarkable,has gone smack through agrand Roman camp at Cock, andobliterated the whole of one of its sides,though he might have easily avoidedthe same, by turning a few yards out ofhis way."In 1715, he went into parliament, asmember for Hindon ; and, in 1722, wasreturned for Bath, which city he thenceforthrepresented during the remainderof his life. In 1744, he became commanderof the British and Hanoverianattached to the allied army in theNetherlands ; but soon resigned hispost, apparently in disgust. In the followingyear, he was placed at the headof a body of troops, destined to actagainst the rebels in the north, but lingeredinactively at Newcastle, as it issaid, on account of the inclemency ofthe season, and the sickness whichprevailed among his men, who hadrecently endured great fatigues in Flanders.His officers appear, however, tohave been much annoyed at their enforcedindolence, and a paper wasdropped in his way, containing the followingapt quotation from Shakspeare'sKing John :Shall a beardless boy,A covered, silken wanton, brave our fields,And flesh his spirit in a warlike soil,Mocking the air with colours idly spread.And find 110 check ? Let us, my liege, to arms !Wade, however, still remained atNewcastle, and the sum total of hisservices, during the campaign, was aloyal proclamation. But his inactivityappears, in the opinion of government,to have been blameless ; for, at the timeof his death, which took place aboutthree years afterwards, (on the 14th ofMarch, 1748,) he was a privy-counsellor ;governor of forts William, Augustus,and George ; colonel of the third regimentof dragoon guards ; lieutenant-generalof the ordnance, and a field-marshal.A monument, by Roubiliac,was also erected to his memory inWestminster abbey. He was nevermarried, but left a natural daughter.It would, perhaps, be rash, with sofew materials, to form any positiveopinion on his character. Applausecan scarcely be denied to him for hissuccessful exertions, while commander-in-chief,to improve the state of theHighlands. Although his conduct in1745 has not been quite satisfactorilyexplained, no impeachment appears toexist against his loyalty, or militaryskill ; and it is but fair to presume, perhaps,that he had displayed zeal as wellas talent while in command, from thegreat distinction with which he wastreated, up to the day of his death, bygovernment. He was accused of having,under the influence of fear, desiredpermission to remain at Newcastle,instead of going farther into the north ;but this charge appears to be groundless,for he proved, on many occasions,that he was not deficient in courage,and particularly while serving, at anearly period of his career, in the islandof Minorca ; where, at the head of thegrenadiers, he most gallantly stormed aredoubt.Although a notorious gambler, he issaid to have been " a worthy man,where women were not concerned." Onone occasion, while at a gaming table,having suddenly missed a superb snuffbox,which he had just before handedround to the company, he swore thatno one should leave the room until itwas restored. A search commenced,to which all present submitted, exceptashabby-looking officer at his righthand, who, with great humility, hadpreviously solicited the honour of venturinga few shillings against him.Not all the powers on earth," saidthis refractory individual, " shall subjectme to a search, while I have life tooppose it. I declare, on the honour of asoldier, that I know nothing of the box :follow me into the next room and I willdefend that honour, or perish." Wade,in thrusting his hand down for hissword, felt the box in a fob, on his leftside, where he had usually deposited it,and immediately expressed his sorrowfor having exposed the poor officer tounmerited suspicion. " I ask yourpardon, sir," said he, " and hope to findit granted, by your breakfasting withme to morrow." The officer acceptedthis invitation, and, the next day, thusexplained to the marshal his reason forrefusing to be searched : " Being uponhalf-pay, and friendless, I am obligedto husband my scanty means; I had,THE ARMY.yesterday, very little appetite; and as Icould not eat what I had paid for, norafford to lose it, the leg and wing of afowl, with a crust of bread, I wrappedup in paper, and put in my pocket ; thethought of which being found upon mebefore all the company, was infinitelymore dreaded by me than fighting allthe room round. " Enough, enough !"exclaimed Wade ; " let us dine witheach other tomorrow ; and I will preventyour being subjected to such anunpleasant occurrence for the future."On the following day, they again met,when the marshal, who had amassed animmense fortune, presented him witha captain's commission, and sufficientcash for his outfit.JOHN DALRYMPLE, EARL OF STAIR.JOHN, eldest son of the first Earl ofStair, by Elizabeth, heiress of Sir JohnSundays, was born on the 20th of July,1673. He received his education, firstat home, and, finally, at the universityof Edinburgh, where he was much distinguishedby his acquirements. Hisfather had originally destined him forthe legal profession, but finding, as hestated, that the young man had toomuch blunt honesty for a courtier, andwould never make his fortune by flatteringthe folly or administering to thevices of the great, he suffered him togratify his strong inclination to enterthe army ; for, said the earl, to a soldierdissimulation is not necessary, and plainhonest truth not dangerous.Having entered the Scotch guards,he proceeded to Flanders, for thepurpose of studying fortification andgunnery under Cohort. He soon acquiredthe notice and esteem of William,Prince of Orange, whom, after the revolutionof 1688, he accompanied toIreland; and served with great credit,as one of the life-guards, at the battleof the Boyne. In 1692, he was madecolonel of a Scotch regiment of foot,with which he fought at the battle ofSteenkirk ; and, having subsequentlybehaved with much gallantry and skill,as a volunteer, under Marlborough,he was presented, in 1702, with thecolonelcy of the Royal North Britishdragoons. At the assault on Peer, aftermaintaining a most perilous post, formany hours, with great composure, hewas the first to enter the breach, andkilled a grenadier who had personallyattacked him. At the sieges of Venlooand Liege, he was among the foremostof the assailants who scaled the walls ;and, at the latter, shot a French officer,who was just in the act of cutting downthe Prince of Hesse Cassel, afterwardsKing of Sweden. He subsequentlybecame aid-decamp to Marlborough ;and Prince Eugene, on being introducedto him, in 1704, confidently predictedhis future greatness.At the siege of Schellenberg, in thesame year, while in the trenches, severalballs entered his clothes, but withoutinjuring him ; and soon after the battleof Hockstet, at which he had behavedwith his customary valour, he was rewardedwith the colonelcy of the ScotchGreys. At the battle of Ramillieshe commanded a brigade, and duringthe enemy's retreat, his regiment is saidto have committed such dreadful havockamong the French, that, " touched withthe sight of the slain, he stemmedthe fury of the soldiers, and orderedquarter to be given." On his return toEngland, he became one of the commissionersfor effecting the union withScotland ; and on the death of his father,was elected one of the sixteen representativepeers of that kingdom in theBritish parliament. He was a staunchadvocate, in the house of lords, of theDuke of Marlborough, whom he accompaniedon his visit to Hanover, andthere acquired the notice and regardof the elector, afterwards George theFirst.In 1708, he acted as aid-decamp atthe battle of Oudenarde, and, in orderto prevent further mischief, gallantlyexposed himself to the fire of twobodies of the allied troops, who hadmistaken each other for enemies. Beingdespatched with news of the victoryto Queen Anne, her majesty honouredEARL OF STAIR.him with a most gracious reception;and Prince George, her husband, complimentedhim by declaring that he wasfit to represent the queen at any courtin Europe. After a short stay in England,during which he was re-electeda representative peer of Scotland, hereturned to the seat of war with severalyoung noblemen and gentlemen, whoaccompanied him as volunteers. Heassisted at the siege of Lille; and at thehead of only a hundred men, attackedand carried Haut-pont, the garrison ofwhich amounted to double the numberof his own force. After acquiringfurther distinction as a soldier, at Ghentand Bruges, he was raised, on the 1stof January, 1709, to the rank of major-generalin the army.He now revisited England, but soonafterwards joined the allies again, andassisted at the siege of Tournay andthe battle of Mons. During the attackon Andre, he mounted the breachat the head of only ten followers, andcaptured a fort without the loss of oneof them. At the close of the campaign,he received the thanks of bothhouses of parliament ; was made a ; and despatched, asenvoy extraordinary, to Augustus, Kingof Poland. He made a most splendidentry into Warsaw, which, however, hesoon afterwards quitted to join the Dukeof Marlborough, before Douay ; wherehe was invested with the order of theThistle, by a special commission, andwas directed to return, as plenipotentiaryof her Britannic majesty, to thecourt of Warsaw.The Polish monarch, who was absurdlyvain of his bodily strength, oneday, in a pretended fit of abstraction,at the earl s table, doubled up a silverplate by mere manual exertion ; and,at another time, doubtless with a viewto astonish Lord Stair, broke a swordblade from its handle, by some peculiarmode of flourishing it ; observing, at thesame time, that he had never met witha weapon which he could not use in asimilar manner. The earl, however,produced a H highland broadsword, whichresisted the king's utmost efforts. " TheScotch sword has defied me," said hismajesty ; " and, therefore, I will strikea medal in honour of its master." Accordingly,he shortly afterwards presenteda medal to Lord Stair, bearingon one side the arms of Poland, and,on the other, a naked figure brandishinga drawn sword, with the legend,Vis tandem inequality." The earl remainedfor a period of four years atWarsaw, during which he lived soprofusely, that, on being suddenly recalled,he was unable to discharge hisdebts, although they amounted only to1,500; and his plate and carriageswould have been publicly sold to defraythem, had not a lieutenant in hisregiment advanced him the necessaryamountThe Tories having now succeededto office, Lord Stair was stripped of allhis employments, and lived in retirement,until the return of the Whigs topower, on the accession of George theFirst, when he was appointed a lord ofthe bedchamber, member of the privy-council,and commander-in-chief of theforces in Scotland. In the followingyear, 1715, he was again elected one ofthe Scotch representative peers, andappointed ambassador to the Frenchking, with instructions " to behave asheshould see fit." After peremptorilyinsisting on the demolition of theharbour of Dunkirk, pursuant to thetreaty of Utrecht, he devoted his wholeattention to the discovery of the Pretender'spolitical intrigues. For thispurpose, he frequented the coffeehousesin disguise, and, mixing withthe Jacobites, occasionally obtainedfrom them information of importance.He also dexterously extracted fromthe ambassadors of other powers theirviews with regard to the intentions ofthe exiled prince ; and, by courteouslylosing his money to some of the principalladies about the court, learntfrom one of them, the Duchess deVillars, that another attempt would, inashort time, be made " in favour ofthe poor fugitive." Following up hissuccess, he courted the intimacy of theprinces of the blood, to whom he madehandsome presents, and, at length, engagedin his pay one of the lords ofthe council, by whose treachery he obtainedimmediate intelligence of allthat passed in the French cabinet.After the death of Louis, he continuedthe same crafty measures, and astonishedthe Duke of Orleans, whowas then regent, with the accurateinformation he possessed of all theTHE ARMY.proceedings meditated by the court ofVersailles in support of the Pretender;who, by the earl's firmness and diplomatictact, was, at length, compelledto quit France.Shortly afterwards, suspecting thatCount Gillenburgh had, with the regent'sknowledge, negotiated an arrangementbetween the Jacobites andtwo of the northern courts, by whichthe former had agreed to advance alarge sum of money to assist the latterin an intended attempt on behalf of theChevalier, Lord Stair endeavoured toengage the affections of the CountessGillenburgh, in order to obtain fromher the particulars of the transactionin which her husband was engaged.Finding her proof against his gallantry,he next attempted his old measure ofingratiating himself into her confidenceby losing money to her at cards. Thisscheme also proving abortive, he contrivedto become her partner at whist,and, apparently by accident, involvedher in a series of losses, which he paidas the game proceeded, so that, whenthe party broke up, she was severalthousands in debt to him. Herhusband being avaricious, though rich,she was glad to satisfy the earl's pecuniaryclaims on her honour, by impartingto him the secret he so ardentlydesired, and of which he was no soonerin possession, than he ordered a chaise,and proceeded, without a single attendant,to Versailles.The French chancellor, meeting himon the road, offered him his carriage ;which, however, the earl declined, observingthat he wanted no equipagewhen diverting himself as Lord Stair.On reaching the palace, he was informedthat a visit from the Britishambassador had not been expected.But Lord Stair," replied he, " is not,of course, debarred." He then hurriedon to the apartment of the regent;who, observing his approach, retiredto an inner room ; whither, however,the earl boldly followed him, and onentering his presence, roundly accusedhim of having taken a part in the Jacobites'intrigues with the northern courts.Finding the earl acquainted with thewhole transaction, the regent endeavouredto make a merit of exposingthe overtures which, he said, had beenmade to him on the subject, adding,Nothing, though ever so secretlytransacted, can be hid from so pryingan ambassador ; and, through poverty,one half of the French nation havebecome spies on the other."The earl was soon afterwards recalled,but retained his seat in theprivy-council, and, shortly after theaccession of George the Second, wasappointed to the post of lord high admiralof 'Scotland ; from which he wasdismissed, in 1733, for opposing Walpole'sexcise scheme. The queen, it issaid, on this occasion, asked him whyhe had thwarted the minister's views.I wished your royal family better,"replied the earl, " than to supportsuch a project." He continued inactiveopposition to government untilthe summer of the following year,when, after protesting against the minister'sinterference at elections, heretired to his estate in Scotland, andoccupied himself wholly in agriculturalpursuits.Emerging from his seclusion, in 1741,when his party returned to power, hewas appointed, early in the followingyear, field-marshal of the forces, andambassador extraordinary to the StatesGeneral. While abroad, he succeededin detaching Austria and Spain fromthe proposed league with Franceagainst England. He subsequentlycommanded the army destined to supportthe Queen of Hungary ; and, onone occasion, while reconnoitring theposition occupied by Marshal Noailles,received a shot in his hat. Georgethe Second, at length, joined theBritish troops, and the battle of Det-tingewas soon afterwards fought, inwhich the French were completelydefeated. During the contest, theregiment of Blues, which he had despatchedto support the right wing,having been repulsed by the Frenchartillery, Lord Stair rode after them,and conducted them to a second attack,in which, being rather shortsighted,he was on the brink of dashingforward alone into the midst of theenemy, when a trooper seized thebridle of his horse, and, by pointingout his error, saved him from certaincapture or death.The king having opposed his planof future operations against the enemy,and brought forward another, of whichEARL OF STAIR.Stair did not approve, a coolness ensuedbetween them ; and the earl, atlength, asked permission " to returnto his plough ;" which being granted,he hastened back to England, andimmediately attached himself to theparty of the heir-apparent ; but, on thebreaking out of the rebellion in Scotland,he zealously tendered his servicesto government; and, it is said,materially assisted the Duke of Cumberland,with his advice, in the campaignwhich ended at Culloden. Afterhaving, for some time, commanded theforces in the south of Britain, and obtainedhis election again as one of theScotch representative peers, he terminatedhis public career, by warmly andeloquently protesting against the unmercifulcourse adopted by governmentagainst the unfortunate adherents ofthe Pretender. His death took placeon the 7th of May, 1747, and his remainswere interred in the familyvault at Kirklistown, " with very littlepomp," it is said, " but universalmourning."In person, Lord Stair was tall, graceful,and majestic; he had blue eyes,fair hair, and handsome features. Theexpression of his countenance was prepossessing,and his manners were exceedinglyagreeable. He is describedas having been the most perfect gentlemanin Europe. The French king oncepurposely subjected his consummategood-breeding to a severe ordeal : beinginvited to accompany his majesty onan excursion, the monarch desired himto enter the royal carriage first, andStair, without a moment's hesitation,silently obeyed. " The world is right,"observed his majesty, " in the characterit gives Lord Stair for being pre-eminentlypolite ; any other man wouldhave troubled me with ceremony andexcuses."On proper occasions, the earl supportedhis dignity as an ambassadorwith an unexampled nicety of etiquette.One day, the Duke of Orleans, whileregent, arriving at his door in a statecarriage, and with a splendid retinue,the earl advanced to meet him ; but,perceiving that the duke remainedwith one foot on the ground, and theother on the lower step of the coach, heabruptly drew back, and inquired ifthe regent had come to visit the Britishambassador, or to see Lord Stair. " Ifthe latter," continued he, " I shalldeem it an honour to receive him atthe door of his carriage : but, if theformer, I should think myself unworthyof the trust reposed in me by my sovereign,if I went another step furtherthan I have done." On receiving thismessage, the duke re-entered his carriage;and, after stating that he didnot wish to see the earl again at court,indignantly drove off. Lord Stair,however, afterwards obtained such influenceover him, that, on being askedhow he intended to act with regardto the troubles in the north, the regentreplied, " Just as the British ambassadorpleases."At a diplomatic dinner party, whileLord Stair was in Holland, De Ville,the French plenipotentiary, a man ofvivacity, and fond of punning, proposed,as a toast, in allusion to the device andmotto of Louis the Fifteenth, " Therising sun, my master !" Baron Reis-bach,ambassador from the empressqueen, next drank to his royal mistress,as " the moon ;" and lastly, Lord Stairquaffed a bumper to William the Third,by the title of" Joshua, the son of Nun,who made both the sun and moon standstill."Either from commiseration, or naturalpoliteness, he treated the exiledJacobites, while he resided in France,with great courtesy ; and frequently,on meeting the coach of the queen ofJames the Second, in the streets, healighted from his own, and remainedon foot until that of the royal exilehad passed. On one occasion, he dismisseda young officer, who was attachedto the embassy, and even causedhim to be deprived of his commission,for reviling her name, and grosslyabusing her family. " She was onceQueen of England," said the earl,and certainly ought to be spoken ofwith decency, in a country whereshe is so nearly related to the reigningmonarch."In private life, his conduct appearsto have been deserving of considerablepraise. He was a constant attendanton public worship, and though warmlyattached to presbyterian doctrines, invariablytreated the religious opinionsof others with respect. His veracitywas unimpeachable ; his demeanourTHE ARMY.condescending; and his generosity atleast equal to his means. It is related ofhim, that having been visited, while sufferingunder some severe complaint, athis residence, by a physician from Edinburgh,whose morbid delicacy would,as he knew, prevent him from acceptinga fee in the usual manner, the earlrequested him to carry a note to a gentlemanat Edinburgh ; the contents ofwhich, as the physician, on presentingit, learnt, to his astonishment, were asfollows: " Sir, pay the bearer thirtyguineas, which is but a small complimentfor his care of me. STAIR."As a commander and a diplomatist,he was certainly one of the greatestmen of his age. To extraordinaryvalour, and a high degree of skill inthe field, he added such acuteness,vigilance, and political wisdom, in thecabinet, as few men, either in ancientor modern times, can justly be said tohave possessed. His zeal was quiteequal to his ability: he was not onlylavish of his official emoluments, butprofuse in the expenditure of his privateincome for the benefit of his country.With him, the end sanctified themeans ; and he was, consequently, farfrom fastidious as to the expedientswhich he adopted, for obtaining intelligenceof such projects as were, fromtime to time, meditated, by open orsecret enemies to the British government.He contrived to become acquaintedwith every intrigue of theFrench court, which, on many occasions,he completely awed by his mysteriousknowledge of its most waryproceedings ; and, by means of hisemissaries, kept so constant a watchon the motions of the Pretender, thathe was accused, it need scarcely besaid, most unjustly, of an intention toassassinate him. Great Britain owedmuch to his exertions as a general ; butmore to his conduct as a negotiator :on the gratitude of the house of Brunswick,he had the strongest possibleclaim; for it may safely be said, thathis dignified firmness, his unweariedwatchfulness, his political forecast, andintense attachment to a protestant succession,tended materially to establishthe new monarch on the throne towhich he had been elevated. He borea leading share in effecting severalimportant and advantageous treaties ;counteracted, in many respects, thedesigns of Bolingbroke, Ormond, andothers of the exiled Jacobites ; eitherquashed or neutralized the attemptsof foreign courts to assist the Chevalier;and though opposed to nearly all themost crafty politicians of the day, rarely,if ever, suffered a diplomatic discomfiture.JOHN CAMPBELL, DUKE OF ARGYLEAND GREENWICH.JOHN CAMPBELL, the Duke ofArgyle commemorated by the authorof Waverley, grandson of Archibald,Marquess of Argyle, who was beheadedfor abetting Monmouth's rebellion, andson of the first Duke of Argyle, whotook an active part in promoting therevolution, was born on the 10th ofOctober, 1678. It is reported, that atthe very hour of the day on which hisgrandfather was executed, he fell outof a three-pair of stairs window, withoutbeing hurt. At the age of fifteenhe had made considerable progress inclassical learning, and in some branchesof philosophy ; and, being encouragedby his father in the bias he evincedtowards a military life, he soon afterwardsentered the army. In 1694, heobtained the command of a regimentof foot, and served on the continentwith much courage and ability, underWilliam the Third. In 1703, he succeededto his father's honours andestate, and was soon after sworn in ofthe privy-council, appointed captainof the Scotch horse-guards, and oneof the extraordinary lords of session.He was also made a knight of theThistle, on the revival of that order in1704.In 1705, he was nominated, by thequeen, lord high commissioner to theScottish parliament ; and employed hisDUKE OF ARGYLE.powerful influence in preparing theway for the union between the twokingdoms. On his return to Englandhe was created an English peer, by thetitles of Baron of Chatham and Earlof Greenwich. In the following year,he acted as brigadier-general, at thebattle of Ramillies, and distinguishedhimself by his gallant and able conductat the siege of Ostend, and the attackon Menin. Returning soon afterwardsto Scotland, although he declined actingas one of the commissioners forsettling the union, he rendered himselfunpopular among his own countrymenby his strong advocacy of that obnoxiousmeasure.In 1708, he led the British infantryat Oudenarde, and, with unyieldingcourage, maintained his post againstsuperior numbers. He also served atthe sieges of Lille, Ghent, and Tour-nay; and, at the battle of Malplaquet,being then a lieutenant-general, performedextraordinary feats of valour,and escaped unwounded, although severalmusket balls penetrated his clothes,hat, and perriwig. At the siege ofMons he joined an attacking corps,at the moment it was shrinking fromthe onset ; and rushing, open-breastedamong the men, exclaimed, " You see,brothers, I have no concealed armour ;I am equally exposed with you : I requirenone to go where I shall refuseto venture !" This brief, but spiritedappeal, so animated the soldiers, thatthe assault was successful.On the trial of Sacheverell, he pronouncedthat political divine guilty,but voted against the ministry, on thesubsequent motions relative to his suspensionand disqualification. In 1710,he was installed a knight of the Garter ;and, during the parliamentary debatesrelative to the war in Spain, joined in thefactious condemnation, by the Tories,of the preceding Whig ministry. In1711, he was appointed ambassador toCharles of Spain, and commander-in-chiefof the British forces in that kingdom.On his arrival at Barcelona, hefound affairs at the lowest ebb ; and,having in vain solicited supplies fromhome, was compelled to raise moneyon his own credit, towards the subsistenceof the troops. After sufferingfor some time from a violent fever, hequitted Spain, having, from want ofopportunity, accomplished no enterpriseworthy of notice; and, on hisway to England, touched at Minorca,of which he had been made governor.In 1712, the queen appointed himgeneral and commander-in-chief of allthe land forces in Scotland, and captainof the foot company in Edinburghcastle. He soon, however, opposed theministry with undisguised violence:voting against the bill by which a generalresumption of lands, granted sincethe revolution, was intended to bemade ; maintaining that the protestantsuccession was in danger from the thenadministration ; and disapproving of thepeace of Utrecht. He also remonstratedwith the queen on the proposedextension of the malt tax to Scotland,and supported the motion for leave tobring in a bill for the dissolution of theunion. Being deprived of all his employmentsunder the crown, in consequenceof this conduct, he continued inopposition until the close of the reign.When Queen Anne was at the point ofdeath, he attended the privy-council,without a summons, and, by his suddenand prompt appearance, added strength,at a doubtful moment, to the interestsof the house of Hanover. On her majesty'sdemise, he was nominated oneof the lords justices of the kingdom,until the arrival of George the First ;on whose accession, he was not onlyrestored to his former offices, but, inaddition, became attached to the householdof the Prince of Wales.Having assumed the command of theroyal forces in Scotland, during therebellion in 1715, he encountered theinsurgents, commanded by the Earlof Mar, at Dumblaine. His personalcourage, on this occasion, animated histroops to great efforts, and, although hecould not be said to have gained a victory,the rebels, with numbers threetimes greater than his own, sustained acheck, which, in their situation, wasequivalent to a defeat. Argyle, however,was suspected to be acting a verylukewarm part, by ministers ; who, consequently,despatched General Cadoganto supersede him in the chief command.In April, 1716, he supported the billfor septennial parliaments; but, soonafter, resigned all his places, and arrayedhimself in the ranks of opposition.In 1717, he spoke against theTHE ARMY.mutiny bill, and declared, "that astanding army, in the time of peace,was ever fatal, either to the prince orthe nation." He did not, however,long remain at variance with ministers ;being made lord steward of the household,and created Duke of Greenwich,in February, 1718. In 1722, he opposedthe bill for securing the freedomof election ; and supported the resolutionfor expunging the reasons, containedin the protests of some peers, fortheir votes in favour of the bill. Hevindicated the suspension of the habeascorpus act, and the bill of pains andpenalties against Bishop Atterbury ;and, in 1724, defended the mutiny bill,which had formerly met with his unqualifiedcondemnation. Resigning hispost of lord high steward, he was constitutedmaster-general of the ordnance,and appointed colonel of the king'sown regiment of horse, and governorof Portsmouth. He now spoke againstthe bill for disabling pensioners frombeing returned to parliament ; ridiculedan attempt that was made to preventthe influence of the crown in the electionof the sixteen Scottish peers ; opposedLord Bathurst's motion for anaddress to the king, praying him todischarge the Hessian troops in thepay of government; strenuously resistedany reduction of the army ; and,with the versatility of a political Proteus,affirmed " that a standing armynever had, in any country, the chiefhand in destroying the liberties of thestate."In 1735, he was advanced to therank of field-marshal; in 1737, he defendedthe magistrates of Edinburgh,in the parliamentary debates relativeto the Porters mob, and once morebecame an opponent to the administration.He was, consequently, dismissedfrom all his places, and acted with bitterhostility against Sir Robert Walpole,until, on the downfal of that minister,he was restored to his former employments.In less than a month,however, he withdrew himself, withhis usual caprice, from all connexionwith the new-formed cabinet, and resignedoffice, for the last time. Aboutthis period, his enemies devised, it issaid, a scheme for his ruin, which wasto have been founded on a letter,addressed to him in the name of thePretender; but the crafty politician defeatedtheir views, by forthwith communicatingthe forgery to government.A paralytic disorder, under which hehad long suffered, now began to makerapid inroads upon his constitution, andterminated his existence on the 3rd ofSeptember, 1743. He was buried inWestminster abbey, where a monument,by Roubiliac, was erected to hismemory, some years after his decease,through the liberality of Sir HenryFermer, who left, by will, 500 for thepurpose. He died without male heirs,and was succeeded by his brother, theEarl of Hay. By his first wife, theniece of a lord mayor of London, he hadno issue ; but, by his second wife, MissWarburton, a lady of a Cheshire family,he had several daughters, who all marriedinto noble families.The Duke of Argyle possessed manyqualities. Histhe field of battle gathered strengthdiscordant qualities.bravery infrom repulse, and he rushed to thecharge with a contagious gallantry thatspread itself among all around him.He displayed much of his natural impetuosityin the senate, tempered, however,with a subtle plausibility : directinghis combined energies to one mainobject, namely, his own aggrandizement.To accomplish this, he becameall things to all men. Interestwas the pivot upon which the whole ofhis actions turned, and a disgracefulversatility marked every step of hispolitical career. No man, out of office,declaimed more plausibly on the libertyof the subject no man, in office,maintained the prerogative with greaterhardihood; and, however base or inconsistentwas the part he acted, hesupported it with unabashed effrontery.He was meanly ambitious of emolumentsas a politician, and contemptiblymercenary as a patron ; his pride knewno restraint but what interest imposed ;while his bold, yet insinuating manner,choice and energetic copiousness of language,graceful person, and appearanceof candour and honest conviction, renderedhis most specious argumentssuccessful; delighted such as he hadalready deluded ; and confirmed theconfidence of those whom he was aboutto betray. Thomson characterised hisoratory as combining the charm of youthand the force of manhood, with theGENERAL OGLE THORPE.depth of age ; and Pope has thus apostrophizedhim :Argyle, the state's whole thunder born to wield,And shake alike the senate and the field !When asked what course should betakenas to the request made by Marlborough,(whom he abhorred,) to begeneral for life, and whether any dangerwere to be apprehended from a refusal,he daringly answered, that the queenneed not be alarmed, for he would undertake,whenever she commanded, toseize upon Marlborough, at the head ofhis troops, and bring him away eitherdead or alive. Marlborough, indignantat his constant enmity, said, in a letterto the duchess, " I cannot have a worseopinion of anybody than I have of theDuke of Argyle."He discharged his domestic duties inamost exemplary manner; cherishedthe decayed servants of his family, intheir old age ; and was looked up to byhis countrymen in England, as theirhead and protector. The strictest economywas enforced in his householdarrangements, and his tradesmen werepunctually paid every month. Hemaintained the dignity of rank, withoutwasteful ostentation ; and, thoughsomewhat tainted by avarice, his conductin private life was, upon thewhole, decidedly admirable.GENERAL OGLETHORPE.JAMES EDWARD, the son of sirTheophilus Oglethorpe, was born atWestminster, as it would appear fromsome authorities, in 1683, and fromothers, in 1698. After studying for ashort time in Corpus Christii college,Oxford, he obtained a commission inthe guards, and became aid-decampto the Earl of Peterborough, and afterwards,on the recommendation of Marlborough,secretary and aid-decampto Prince Eugene, under whom heacted at the famous siege of Belgrade.While on the continent, a prince ofWittenberg, with whom he was attable, took up a glass of wine, and fil-tippeda portion of its contents into hisface. " That's a good joke, my prince,"said young Oglethorpe, smiling ; " butwe do it much better in England." Sosaying, he dashed a glass full of wineat his serene highness; who, thoughdoubtless, severely annoyed, enduredthe spirited retaliation with apparentgood humour.Returning to England about 1722,Oglethorpe became member of parliamentfor Haslemere ; and, in 1729,having found a friend suffering mostbarbarous treatment in the Fleet, hecalled the attention of the house ofcommons to the fact, and was appointedchairman of a committee to examineinto the state of prisons ; in which, asit appeared by the evidence adduced,cruelties of the most revolting descriptionhad long been practised. At thisperiod, some charitable individual bequeathed,to Oglethorpe and others, alarge sum of money, in trust, to procurethe discharge of poor debtors ; andOglethorpe soon afterwards obtainedthe royal consent, and a grant of|610,000 from government, with a veryliberal public subscription, to found acolony of the liberated insolvent atGeorgia ; whither he proceeded, about1733, at the head of a body of settlers.As governor of the new colony, he wasexposed to numberless difficulties andvexations ; but persevered with greatardour in the scheme, and expendedlarge sums out of his private fortune,with a view to ensure its success. Returningto England, in 1734, he waschosen a deputy-governor of the Africancompany ; and, in the following wear,he sailed again for Georgia, with Johnand Charles Wesley, who proceededthither in the pious hope of diffusingChristianity among the Indians, someof whose chiefs had been brought overand presented to the king, by Oglethorpe.He soon revisited England ;and, in 1736, embarked once more forhis settlement, with a regiment for itsdefence, every man in which was allowedto carry over a helpmate. Discontentand disorder soon prevailedamong the corps; a mutiny at lengthTHE ARMY.broke out, and one of the soldiers attemptedto stab Oglethorpe, who, however,parried the thrust ; and, in anotherinstant, an officer, who was at hand,passed his sword through the insurgent'sbody. Another fellow fired at him fromso short a distance, that the powdersinged his face and attire ; but the ballluckily passed over his shoulder.Oglethorpe quelled the mutiny, butwas soon assailed by other troubles.On the rupture taking place with thecatholic king, his infant colony wasassailed by the Spaniards, whose fortof St Augustin, Oglethorpe had in vainattempted to capture. He repulsed theenemy, but soon afterwards abandonedthe settlement; where, in return forhis large outlay and benevolent exertions,he had met with nothing butvexation, abuse, and ingratitude. Onhis arrival in England, his chagrin wasincreased by the conduct of an individualnamed Cook, who, althoughOglethorpe had treated him with greatkindness, and raised him to the rankof lieutenant-colonel in the colony,brought forward no less than nineteenserious charges against his benefactor;which were, however, so utterly destituteof foundation, that the accuserwas indignantly dismissed from theservice.During the rebellion in 1745, he wasplaced, with the rank of major-general,at the head of four companies of cavalry,called The Royal Hunters, whichhad been raised, at the expense ofsome loyal individuals, to act againstthe insurgents. A march of one hundredmiles brought them to Preston,a few hours after it had been abandonedby the rebels; and Oglethorpewas accused of having lingered disloyallyon the road. His conduct oncemore became the subject of a public inquiry,and he was again honourably,and, as it seems, deservedly acquitted.It is said, that being now much embarrassedin his circumstances, he practisedphysic, at Brussels, for his support,until, through the influence of hisScotch friends, he was placed uponhalf-pay as a general in the army.In 1750, he actively promoted theherring fishery ; in 1752, he resignedthe charter of the Georgian colony togovernment; and, in 1754, having losthis election for Haslemere, althoughhe had been its representative since1722, Oglethorpe retired to a seat inEssex, of which he had luckily becomepossessed, by his marriage with theheiress of Sir Nathan Wright. Heamused his declining years by thesociety and correspondence of literaryand learned men, and retained thefull possession of his bodily and mentalfaculties to the last week of his longlife. His death took place on the 30thof June, 1785.Of a warm and susceptible imagination,Oglethorpe possessed more feelingthan judgment, and betrayed arestless Quixotism in all his undertakings.Had the strength of his mindequalled the benevolence of his heart,he would have succeeded better. Thewant of common sense was his mostfatal error : it frustrated his best intentions,rendered all his plans abortive,and exposed him to derision, ingratitude,and neglect.Although exceedingly hospitable, hewas personally abstemious. He delightedin intellectual conversation, yet,notwithstanding the extensive knowledgeof men and manners which hehad acquired, he was not eminent asatalker." Johnson, who, as well asGoldsmith, was frequently his guest,used to observe, that he never finishedwhat he had to say ; and, it may beadded, he never completed what hewished to perform. He has sufferedas much from injudicious praise as unmeritedcensure. Zachary Williamsdeclared, that children yet unbornwould lisp his name with gratitude ;and Wanton termed him, very absurdly,a great hero and a great legislator."He was, in fact, a man of tolerableability and much enthusiasm, who succeededin neither of his blamelessschemes, except that of spending his oldage in comparative affluence, and amidcongenial society. Thomson and Popehave both eulogized him ; and Johnsononce offered to write his life, if thegeneral would afford him the necessarymaterials. He was an author himself,having published a pamphlet, againstthe impressment of seamen, entitledThe Sailors' Advocate, for which Sharpobliged him with a sarcastic preface.In person he was tall and thin ; andhis voice was so shrill, that when speakingin the house of commons, he wasEarl LIGONIER.distinctly heard by persons in the lobby.As he would never avow his real age,a report was circulated, to annoy him,that, in his youth, he had shot snipesin the fields where Bond street hadbeen subsequently built.JOHN, EARL LIGONIER.JOHN LIGONIER, second son ofMonseuquet, a gentleman of a nobleHuguenot family, was born in France,in the year 1687. He received hiseducation in England ; and, having astrong predilection for a military life,acted, when only fifteen years of age,as a volunteer, at the storming of Liege,on which occasion, he was one of thetwo first who mounted the breach : hiscompanion, a volunteer, of the noblefamily of Wentworth, was killed by hisside. In 1703, having purchased thecommand of a company in Lord North'sregiment, he fought at the battles ofSchellenburgh and Blenheim; in thelatter of which, every captain in theregiment was slain except himself. In1706, he obtained the rank of majorof brigade, for his daring exploits atthe siege of Menin. At Ramillies,Oudenarde, and Wynendale, he gainedadditional laurels ; and at Malplaquet,twenty-two shots went through hisclothes without wounding him. In1719, he assisted, as colonel and adju-tant-general, at the attack made byLord Cobham on Vigo ; and, after thecapture of Ponte Vera, reduced FortMarin, at the head of only a hundredgrenadiers, although it containedtwenty pieces of cannon, and a garrisonof two hundred men.During the war which commencedin 1739, Ligonier repeatedly distinguishedhimself. After the battle ofDettingen, in which his regiment hadseverely suffered, he received the honourof knighthood, under the royal standard.At Fontenoy, where he commandedthe infantry, he reluctantlycomplied with the Duke of Cumberland'sorders to retreat, and before heleft the field, sent to the enemy's commander,Marshal Saxe, requesting thatthe dead might be treated with honour,and the wounded with humanity.In 1746, he was appointed to thechief command of the forces in Flanders.At Roucoux, after sustaining animpetuous onset, he effected so masterlya retreat, as to excite the admirationof his opponent. At the battleof Laffeldt, in 1747, he rescued theallied army from destruction, and enabledit to withdraw in good order, bycharging the whole line of Frenchcavalry at the head of the British dragoons.His horse having been killed,he fell into the enemy's hands ; but hisparole was immediately accepted, andMarshal Saxe observed, on introducinghim to the French king, " Sir, I presentto your majesty a man, who, byone glorious action, has disconcerted allmy projects." The monarch, who hadwitnessed the action from an eminence,warmly applauded the gallantry ofLigonier, who was soon after exchanged,and resumed his command.In 1748, though still in Flanders, andwithout having made any applicationto the electors, he became member ofparliament for Bath. During the sameyear he was appointed lieutenant-generalof the ordnance ; in 1750, governorof the island of Guernsey ; and in 1752,governor of Plymouth. In 1757, hebecame an Irish peer, by the title ofViscount Ligonier of Enniskillen ; in1763, an English baron ; and threeyears afterwards, an English earl. Atthe time of his decease, which occurredon the 28th of April, 1770, he was field-marshalof the royal forces, a privy-counsellor,colonel of the first regimentof the foot-guards, K. C. B. and F. R. S.Soon after his death, a monument waserected in Westminster abbey, recordingthe various actions in which he hadborne a distinguished part.Lord Ligonier acquired renownthroughout Europe, for the intrepiditywhich he displayed against his owncountrymen. His abilities, as a general,were quite equal to his courage. InTHE ARMY.the midst of difficulties he was neverwithout resources ; and his talents werealways most conspicuous when exertedto avoid an impending disaster, or toalleviate the consequences of a defeat.In private life, as in his public career,he frequently carried his point bysome peculiar expedient. A militaryvisitor, from whose troublesome presenceit was exceedingly difficult, byany of the usual hints, to obtain relief,Ligonier, on one occasion, dismissedin a moment, by beginning, with hisfingers, to beat a retreat on the wainscot.COLONEL GARDINER.JAMES, the second son of CaptainPatrick Gardiner, was born at carried,in Linlithgowshire, on the 10thof January, 1688. When fourteen yearsof age, he entered the army as ensignof a Scotch regiment in the Dutchservice. At the battle of Ramillies,he was one of those who composed theforlorn hope appointed to dislodge theFrench from a churchyard. On thisoccasion, he planted his colours onan advanced ground, and, while encouraginghis men, received a shot inthe mouth, which passed through hisneck, without knocking out a tooth, ortouching the fore part of his tongue.He remained on the field until the nextmorning, when a Cordelier mistakinghim for a Frenchman, carried him toan adjoining convent, where he washospitably entertained and cured of hiswound. He bore a share in almostevery action fought by the Duke ofMarlborough, in Flanders ; and, at thesiege of Preston, in Lancashire, signalizedhimself by setting fire to thebarricade of the rebels, in the face oftheir whole army, at the head of onlytwelve men, eight of whom were killedduring the exploit He was afterwardsappointed master of the horse to theEarl of Stair, whom he accompanied toParis ; where, fascinated by the temptationsto which he was exposed, hegave himself up wholly to pleasure andsensuality.A strange circumstance, however,which befel him in 1719, although itwas attended with no immediate effect,eventually changed the entire tenour ofhis conduct After spending a sabbathevening in gaiety, he retired to hischamber at eleven o'clock, when hisparty broke up ; and, having an assignationwith a married woman at twelve,he resolved to beguile away the interveninghour with a book. The work onwhich he chanced first to lay his hand,was entitled The Christian Soldier, orHeaven taken by Storm : and he beganto peruse it, under an idea that its contentswould be amusingly absurd. Suddenlyhe thought he saw an unusualblaze of light fall upon the book, whichhe attributed to some accident that hadoccurred to the candle ; but, on lookingup, he believed that there was beforehim, as it were suspended in the air, avisible representation of our Saviour onthe cross, surrounded with a glory ;and he was impressed, at the sametime, with the idea that he heardwords to this effect, " Oh ! sinner, didI suffer this for thee, and are these thyreturns ?" A faintness then came overhim, and he fell into a chair, wherehe remained senseless, for a considerabletime. This incident, had sopowerful an effect upon his mind, thatat length he became as remarkable forsanctity of life, as he had previouslybeen notorious for debauchery and dissipation.Religion, however, did notrender him inattentive to his professionalduties ; he was a strict disciplinarian,and watched over his meninthe double capacity of a military aswell as a spiritual director.In 1743, he was appointed colonelof Bland's dragoons, and commandedthat regiment at the battle of Prestonpans,in 1745. The day before theengagement took place, though muchenfeebled by illness, he harangued hismen in the most animating manner;and, on perceiving some timidity manifestedby them, exclaimed, " I cannotinfluence the conduct of others as Icould wish, but I have one life to sacrificeto my country's safety, and ICOLONEL GARDINER.shall not spare it." He continued allnight under arms, wrapped up in hiscloak, and sheltered by a rick of barley.At three in the morning he called hisfour domestic servants to him, and addressingthem in a pathetic tone ofChristian exhortation, bade them farewell,as if for ever. " There is greatreason to believe," says Doddridge, hisspiritual friend and biographer, " thathe spent the little remainder of thetime, which could not be much abovean hour, in those devout exercises ofthe soul, which had been so long habitualto him, and to which so manycircumstances did then concur to callhim."Early in the battle, which commencedbefore sunrise and continued only afew minutes, he received a bullet in hisleft breast, and soon afterwards anotherin his right thigh. He still, however,though pressed to retreat, fought on,and some of the enemy, it is said, fellby his hand. Deserted by his regiment,which he had in vain attempted to rally,he placed himself at the head of a partyof foot, whom he had been ordered tosupport, and who were bravely fightingnear him, but without a commander.On riding towards them, he exclaimed,Fire on my lads, and fear nothing !"These words were scarcely uttered,when a Highlander wounded him soseverely in the right arm, with a scythe,that the sword dropped from his hand.While still entangled with his assailant'sweapon, other insurgents came up anddragged him from his horse; and oneof these, the moment he fell, struckhim a mortal blow, either with a broadswordor a Lochaber axe, on the back ofthe head. He caught his hat as itdropped, with his left hand, and wavedit to his servant as a signal to retreat,exclaiming, with his last breath, " Takecare of yourself!"Although the young Pretender, ingoing over the field, after the battle, issaid to have gently raised this bravesoldier's head, and to have exclaimed,Poor Gardiner ! would to God I couldrestore thy life!" yet, it is asserted, thatthe rebels treated his body with greatindignity, and stripped his house, whichadjoined the scene of contest, of everyarticle it contained. He was interredin the burial ground of Tenant, hisparish church, at which he had been aconstant attendant. By his wife, adaughter of the Earl of Buchan, hehad eleven children, but only five survivedhim. His father died of fatigueat the battle of Hochstet ; his maternaluncle was killed at Steenkirk ; and hiseldest brother, when only sixteen yearsold, fell at the siege of Nainur.In person, Colonel Gardiner wasstrongly built, and well-proportioned;in stature, unusually tall; and in theexpression of his countenance, intellectualand dignified. In calm heroism,he has never been excelled. He oncerefused a challenge ; but, so highly washe esteemed for courage, without anyimputation on his character as a soldier.I fear sinning," said he, on this occasion," though you know I do not fearfighting!" The energy he displayed,notwithstanding his bodily infirmities,on the day preceding the fight, at ,his pious exhortation to hisdomestics, his devotion before the battle,and his calm, unflinching bravery, duringthe contest, have thrown a romanticcharm around his memory, by whichit will, doubtless, be long and deservedlyembalmed. In conversation he wascheerful, and eminently persuasive ; indisposition,exceedingly charitable; and,in religious principles, though a strictdissenter, amiably tolerant to thosewho most materially differed from himin doctrinal points. The circumstancewhich led to his conversion from lewdnessand impiety to enthusiastic devotion,may be easily explained withoutthe intervention of supernatural agency.He had passed the evening amid theexcitation of gay, and-perhaps, dissolutesociety ; he was about to transgressone of those holy ordinances, anobedience to which, the book that fellinto his hands most probably enjoined ;he had previously, at times, sufferedmost bitterly from the compunctionsof conscience ; and, not long before, hadbeen thrown from his horse with suchviolence, that his brain, perhaps, wasslightly affected by the fall : these circumstances,acting on so susceptible animagination as Gardiner appears to havepossessed, doubtless, produced that delusionof the senses, to which the happyamelioration of his conduct has beenprincipally attributed.THE ARMY.SIR JOHN COPE.OF the early part of Sir John Cope'scareer, no particulars appear to havebeen preserved. In 1742, he was oneof the generals appointed to commandthe troops despatched to the assistanceof the Queen of Hungary. In 1745,he acted as commander-in-chief of theforces in Scotland, and obtained aninglorious notoriety by the disastersof his campaign against the rebels.After a variety of movements, for manyof which Cope has been much condemned,the king's forces encounteredthe insurgents at the village of Prestonpans,on the 21st of September, 1745.At break of day the engagement commenced.The English horse, panic-struckby the impetuous onset of theHighlanders, and the peculiarity oftheir mode of attack, fled in confusion,leaving the artillery wholly unprotected.The infantry behaved withrather more courage and steadiness, andCope attempted to rally the fugitives,at the end of the village, but in vain :the defeat became general, and Copehimself, putting, as it is said, a whitecockade in his hat, passed unsuspectedamong the enemy, and escaped.He was now removed from his command,and, shortly afterwards, a boardof general officers investigated his conduct,which, much to the surprise ofthe public, was pronounced to havebeen perfectly blameless. In 1751, hewas placed on the staff in Ireland,where he died, on the 28th of May,1760; at which time he was a knightof the Bath, a lieutenant-general, andcolonel of the seventh regiment ofdragoons.Cope was not destitute of courage,but apparently possessed little or noskill as a commander. His name waslong a by-word for contempt, and hisdefeat became the subject of numberlesssongs, English and Scotch. Someof these still exist, and to the inspiringtune of one of them, " Hey, JohnnyCope, are ye walking yet," a Scotchregiment marched exultingly to thecharge, at the celebrated attack on theFrench army, made by the troops underLord Hill, at Arroyo Molino.Major-general HAWLEY.OF the early part of this officer's lifebut little is known. He was one of thegenerals appointed to command thesubsidiary forces sent to the aid of theQueen of Hungary, in 1742. Duringthe rebellion of 1745, he was placed atthe head of a body of troops in Scotland;with which, early in January,1746, he determined to relieve Stirling,then besieged by the insurgents. As apreliminary movement, he sent MajorGeneral Husks to dislodge Kilmarnockfrom Falkirk, whence the latter retreatedon Husks's approach. A planwas now laid down for attacking theroyal forces in their camp. Hawleybecame acquainted with his opponents'design, but took no precautionary measures,being fully convinced that theywould never attempt to carry it intoeffect. The consequence was, thatCharles Edward's troops arrived withina short distance of the position occupiedby the royalists, near Falkirk,before Hawley was aware of their approach.He had often boasted thattwo regiments of horse would be quitesufficient to ride over the whole Highlandarmy : his own dragoons, however,on being attacked by the rebels,galloped from the field in a mostdastardly manner ; and the whole ofthe royal forces fled at the first onset.Though censured and despised bythe public for his conduct at the battleof Falkirk, Hawley was still treatedwith great cordiality by George theSecond and the Duke of Cumberland :EARL OF ALBEMARLE.of the latter he was always a favourite ;most probably on account of his strictmaintenance of discipline, for which hewas called, in the army, The ChiefJustice. It is related, that an earlycopy of a memorial, published in 1753,respecting the heir-apparent's education,having been sent to Hawley, someperson maliciously observed, that theauthor had acted most judiciously, if hewished to have the work propagated; for,as the general could not read, he must,of necessity, communicate it to others.He died possessed of considerableproperty, in or about the year 1759,leaving rather a curious will, of whichthe following are extracts : " As Ibegan the world with nothing, and asall I have is of my own acquiring, I candispose of it as I please. I direct andorder that (as there's now a peace, andI may die the common way) my carcassmay be put any where 'tis equalto me ; but I will have no more expense,or ridiculous show, than if apoor soldier (who is as good a man)were to be buried from the hospital.The priest, I conclude, will have hisfee ; let the puppy take it. Pay thecarpenter for the carcass-box. I giveto my sister 5,000. As to any otherrelations, I have none who want ; andas I never was married, 1 have no heirs.I have, therefore, long since, taken itinto my head to adopt one son andheir, after the manner of the Romans,who I hereafter name, &c. &c." " Ihave written all this," he adds, " withmy own hand ; and this I did, because Ihate all priests of all professions, andhave the worst opinion of all membersof the law."WILLIAM ANNE KEPPEL, EARL OF ALBEMARLE.JL HIS distinguished general, only sonof the first Earl of Albemarle, a Dutchmanof noble lineage, who, for his eminentservices, had been raised to theearldom, by King William, was bornat Whitehall, on the 5th of June, 1702,and was partly named after his godmother,Queen Anne. He receivedhis education in Holland ; and, on hisreturn to England, in 1717, becamecaptain of the first regiment of foot-guards,with the rank of lieutenant-colonel.In 1718, he succeeded to hisfather's title and estates; and, in 1722,being then at his family seat, in Guelderland,had the honour of entertainingthe Bishop of Munster.In 1725, he was created a knightcompanion of the Bath, and, in March,1727, nominated aid-decamp to theking. In 1731, he obtained the commandof the ninth regiment of foot,then at Gibraltar ; and, two years afterwards,that of the third troop of horse-guards.He was appointed governor ofVirginia, on the 2(5th of December,1737 ; a brigadier-general, on the 2ndof July, 1739 ; a major-general, on the20th of February, 1741; and secondin command, of the British forces inthe Netherlands, under field-marshalStair, on the 14th of April, 1742. Inthe following year he became a lieutand displayed great gallantryat the battle of Dettingen. In1744, he served with Marshal Wade;and, in 1745, fought and was woundedat the battle of Fontenoy. In 1746, hecommanded the right wing of the royalarmy, at the battle of Culloden ; andwas soon afterwards appointed generaland commander-in-chief of his majesty'sforces in Scotland.In 1747, he commanded the Britishinfantry, at Vail, and continued toserve under the Duke of Cumberlanduntil the termination of hostilities, whenhe proceeded to the French court asBritish ambassador and plenipotentiary.On the 12th of July, 1750, he was installed,by proxy, a knight of the Garter;in the following year, he became groomof the stole, and a member of the privy-council; and acted as one of the lordsjustices of the kingdom, during theking's visit to Hanover, in 1752. Onthe 22nd of December, 1754, he diedsuddenly at Paris ; whither he had beendespatched to demand the liberation ofsome British subjects, who had beenunwarrantably detained by the Frenchgovernment. His remains were broughtTHE ARMY.over to England, and privately interredat South Audley street chapel, nearGrosvenor square. He appears to havebeen held in great estimation by Georgethe Second, (to whom, as well before asafter his accession, he was a lord of thebedchamber,) for integrity, courage,and talent.By his wife, Anne, daughter ofCharles, the first Duke of Richmond,to whom he was united in 1723, he hadeight sons and seven daughters.CHARLES SPENCER, DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH.THIS nobleman was born on the 22ndof November, 1706. In 1729, he succeededhis elder brother in the earldomof Sunderland ; and, in 1733, becameDuke of Marlborough, as heir to hismother, the daughter and co-heiress ofJohn Churchill, the first duke. In1740, he was made captain and colonelof the second troop of horse-guards, andwas soon after installed a knight of theGarter. In 1743, he accompanied theking to Germany ; and, at the battle ofDettingen, where he commanded thebrigade of foot-guards, he particularlydistinguished himself.Disgusted by the political animositieswhich soon afterwards prevailed,he resigned his regiment; yet, in 1745,he was one of the first to raise a militaryforce, for the support of governmentagainst the insurgent Jacobites.He subsequently became a lieutenant-general,steward of the king's household,member of the privy-council, and alord justice during the king's absence onthe continent In 1755, he was keeper ofthe privy seal; and, in 1757, president ofthe board of general officers, convenedto inquire into the conduct of the commanderof the troops in the unsuccessfulexpedition against Rochford.On the 29th of November, 1757, theduke received a letter, from an unknownhand, signed Felon, which containedthe following extraordinary passages:"It has employed my invention,for some time, to find out a methodof destroying another, without exposingmy own life : this I have accomplished,and defy the law. Now for the applicationof it : I am desperate, and mustbe provided for. You have it in yourpower it is my business to make ityour inclination, to serve me ; whichyou must comply with, by procuringme a genteel support; otherwise, mylife, or your own, will be at a periodbefore this session of parliament isover. I have more motives than onefor singling you out first upon this occasion; and I give you this fair warning,because the means I shall makeuse of are too fatal to be eluded by thepower of physic. If you think this ofany consequence, you will not fail tomeet the author on Sunday next, at tenin the morning, (or on Monday, if theweather should prove rainy on Sunday)near the first tree beyond the stile, inthe foot-walk to Kensington."The duke punctually attended thisappointment, and within about twentyyards of the tree mentioned in the letter,he saw a man, whom he thus addressed :I believe you have something to sayto me." " No," replied the man, " Idon't know you." " I am the Duke ofMarlborough," said his grace; "nowthat you know me, I imagine you havesomething to say." The man brieflyanswered that he had not, and theduke, who was on horseback, then rodeaway. It appears, that, on this occasion,he wore his star, carried pistols inhis holsters, and had posted a friend atsome distance from the appointed placeof meeting. Two or three days afterwards,he received a second letter,signed F., in which the writer acknowledgedthe duke's punctuality, andadded, " it was owing to you that itanswered no purpose. The pageantryof being armed, and the ensign of yourorder, were useless, and too conspicuous.You needed no attendant ; theplace not being calculated for mischief,nor was there any intended. If youwalk in the west aisle of Westminsterabbey, towards eleven o'clock, on Sundaynext, your sagacity will point outDUKE OF MARLBOROUGH.the person, whom you will address, byasking his company, to take a turn ortwo with you."On the following Sunday, the dukeaccordingly went to Westminster abbey,about the appointed hour, and after hehad been there a few minutes, saw thesame person whom he had met in thepark, looking at the monuments. " Iasked him," observes the duke, in hisaccount of the transaction, " if he hadany thing to say to, or any commands forme.He replied, ' No, my lord, I havenot." I said, ' Surely you have.' Hesaid, 'No, my lord.' He walked upand down one side of the aisle, and Ithe other, to give him a little moretime ; but he did not speak. I thenwent out at the great door, and left himin the abbey. There were two or threepeople placed in disguise, ready, if Ihad given them the signal, to havetaken him up."Soon afterwards, the duke received athird letter from his mysterious correspondent,who, after stating his convictionthat the duke had had a companionwith him in the abbey, proceededthus : " You will see me againsoon ; as it were, by accident, and mayeasily find where I go to, in consequenceof which, by being sent to, Ishall wait on your grace, but expect tobe quite alone, and to converse inwhispers." " The family of the Bloods,"added he, " is not extinct, though theyare not in my scheme." Subsequently,a fourth letter was sent to theduke, in which the writer stated, thatthe son of one Barnard, a surveyor, inAbingdon buildings, was acquaintedwith some secrets that nearly concernedhis grace's safety. In consequenceof this, the duke sent a messageto young Mr. Barnard, requestinghim to call at Marlborough house.Barnard replied, that he would wait onhis grace, at half past ten o'clock inthe morning of the following Friday.He faithfully kept his appointment ;and immediately, on entering theduke's room, his grace knew him, ashestates, to be the same person towhom he had spoken in the park andthe abbey. The duke then mentionedthe various threatening letters he hadreceived ; of which Barnard denied allprevious knowledge.He was, however, soon afterwardsapprehended, and, on his trial, whichtook place at the Old Bailey, in May,1758, all the preceding circumstanceswere given in evidence against him.For his defence, he called several witnesses,who gave him an excellent character.They also proved that he wasin a very respectable station in life,above pecuniary wants, and the presumptivesuccessor to his father's business,which was very extensive. Hehad, as it appeared, accurately relatedto many individuals, the particulars ofhis interviews with the duke, whoseconduct he had designated as being excessivelyodd. It was proved, that,when the prosecutor saw him in thepark, he was on his way to Kensington ;whither his father had sent him with amessage to a person named Calicut, towhom, as well as to his uncle, withwhom he dined, he related the circumstanceof his having been accosted bythe duke.In order to account for the singularcoincidence, of his being in the abbeyat the precise hour appointed for ameeting there, by the second letter tothe duke, a brewer, named Greenwood,was called, of whose evidence, the followingis an abridgment : " I breakfastedat the prisoner's father's, on theSunday in question, and, with greatdifficulty, prevailed on young Barnardto dress himself, and walk with me tothe park. When we reached Henry theEighth's chapel, I took him by thesleeve, and said, ' Barnard, you shall gothrough the abbey.' After we hadlooked for some time at the monuments,I saw the Duke of Marlborough, andhaving been previously informed of whathad taken place between my companionand his grace, in the park, and noticingthe particular behaviour of the duke, Iobserved to Barnard, ' He certainly hassomething to say to you; I will go intothe choir, but do you walk up and down,and possibly he will speak.' Soon after,I saw the duke and the prisoner conversingtogether, and as soon as hisgrace departed, I returned to Barnard,who told me what had passed." Onthis and the previous evidence Barnardwas acquitted.The duke never discovered the mysteriousdisturber of his peace ; whoseobject, as an historian suggests, was,perhaps, nothing more than to gratifyTHE ARMY.a petulance and peculiarity of humour,by alarming the duke, exciting thecuriosity of the public, puzzling themultitude, and giving rise to a thousandridiculous conjectures.In 1758, the British government resolvedto attack the French on theirown soil, and the Duke of Marlboroughwas constituted commander-in-chief ofthe land forces destined for that service.His troops disembarked on the 5th ofJune, in Canaille bay, two leaguesdistant from St. Maloes, against whichthey marched, in two columns ; butdiscovering, on their approach, the impossibilityof carrying it by a coup-de-main,they contented themselves withsetting fire to the shipping, and suchmagazines as they found accessible ; indefence of which, although they wereunder the cannon of the town, theenemy did not fire a single shot. Nodescent was ever attended with less licentiousnessin the invaders, or withless injury to the poor inhabitants ofthe country invaded. A small storehousewas spared, because it could notbe set on fire without endangering thewhole district; and the French houses,which their inhabitants had abandoned,were left untouched.Having remarked his troops withoutopposition, the duke proceeded toreconnoitre the town of Granville,on the coast of Normandy ; but, learningthat a large body ot the enemy'sforces had encamped in the neighbourhood,he directed his course towardsCherbourg, and had alreadymade some preparations to attack thatplace, when a hard gale setting in towardsthe shore, the transports ranfoul of each other, and it was deemedimprudent to hazard an attempt atlanding. Provisions having, by thistime, become scarce, and much sicknessprevailing among the troops, theduke thought proper to return to St.Helen's, where he arrived on the 29thof June.Although the success of the armamenthad fallen far short of publicexpectation, the duke, soon after hisreturn, was appointed commander-in-chiefof all the British forces intendedto serve in Germany, under PrinceFerdinand of Brunswick. He did not,however, live long enough to distinguishhimself on the plains of Minded, hisdeath occurring on the 28th of October,1758, at Munster,in Westphalia ; whencehis remains were conveyed to England,and interred at Blenheim. By his wife,a daughter of Lord Trevor, he leftseveral children ; the eldest of whomsucceeded to his title and estate. Atthe time of his decease he was lord-lieutenantof Bucks and Oxfordshire,master of the ordnance, colonel of theroyal regiment of artillery, general offoot, ranger of Whitney forest, a governorof the charter house, a privy-counsellor,LL. D. and F. R. S.Never," says one of his contemporaries,speaking of the duke, " didthe nation lose, in one man, a tempermore candid and benevolent, mannersmore amiable and open, a more primitiveintegrity, a more exalted generosity,a more warm and feeling heart."Smollett describes him as having beena nobleman, who, although he did notinherit all the military genius of hisgrandfather, yet far excelled him in theamiable and social qualities of theheart, who was brave beyond all question,generous to profusion, and good-naturedto excess. " It is surprising,"observes the same historian, " that thedeath of the duke was never attributedto the secret practices of the incendiarycorrespondent, who had given him tounderstand, that his vengeance, thoughslow, would not be the less certain."SIR WILLIAM JOHNSON.\lHIS officer was born in Ireland, 1 should adopt, at length, entered theabout the year 1715. Early in life hewent to America, with his uncle, SirPeter Warren ; and, after hesitatingfor some time as to what profession hearmy ; in which he gradually rose tothe rank of major-general. In 1755,he was placed at the head of an expeditionagainst Crown Point; which,SIR WILLIAM JOHNSON.however, he did not succeed in capturing,although he obtained a brilliantvictory over the French, under GeneralDieskau, whom he took prisoner. Parliamenttestified its approbation ofJohnson's conduct on this occasion, byvoting him 5,000. In 1759, he commandedthe provincials of New York,and acted under Prideaux, at the siegeof Niagara, until that general waskilled in the trenches by the burstingof a cohort, when Johnson took thechief command. With a view to relievethe place, a body of regular troops,provincials and savages, amounting toone thousand seven hundred men, attackedthe British, with great impetuosity,on the morning of the 24th ofJuly. Johnson, however, having receivedinformation of their approach,made a most skilful disposition of partof his troops to receive them on theirroute ; posting the residue in such amanner as to secure his trenches fromany attempt that might be made bythe garrison. The engagement commencedabout nine o'clock, and beforeten, the French were completely routed.During the battle, and the subsequentpursuit, which was kept up for morethan five miles, seventeen of theenemy's officers were taken, includingtheir first and second in command.The garrison of Niagara, who hadwitnessed the defeat of their friends,surrendered in the course of the day ;and Johnson, in addition to the storesin the fort, recovered about 8,000 inspecie, which had been buried by theFrench in a neighbouring island.He now devoted his attention to theestablishment of a more permanent andextensive communion, than had previouslyexisted, between the British andthe Indians; and effected several advantageoustreaties with the Senecas,and other tribes. In June, 1760, heinduced one thousand of the Iroquois tojoin General Amherst, oswego; and,subsequently, encouraged the coloniststo intermarry with the aboriginal inhabitants.He was, at length, chosencolonel of the Six Nations, as well assuperintendent of Indian affairs for thenorthern parts of America ; and, settlingon the banks of the Mohawk river, hesoon became well acquainted with themanners and language of the Indians ;relative to which he sent an interestingcommunication to the Royal Society, inNovember, 1772. He died about twoyears afterwards, leaving a son, whosucceeded to the baronetage.Brave, energetic, and enterprising,Johnson was particularly well qualifiedfor the services on which he was employed.He is described as havingpossessed such a genius for acquiringpopularity among all kinds of men,that the regular troops respected, theprovincials loved, and the Indians almostadored him. It is added, that hewas a man of perfect integrity, and employedhis talents solely*' for the benefitof his country. The victory which heobtained over Dieskau, although it didnot lead to the result that had beenexpected, infused confidence into theBritish, who appear to have been greatlydisheartened by the recent defeat, bythe French and Indians, of GeneralBraddock's forces, near Fort duQueene. The capture of Niagaraeffectually broke off, according to theAnnual Register of the period, " thatcommunication so much talked of, andso much dreaded, between Canada andLouisiana; and, by this stroke, one ofthe capital political designs of theFrench, which gave occasion to thewar, was defeated in its direct and immediateobject."GEORGE, VISCOUNT SACKVILLE.THIS nobleman, third son of the firstDuke of Dorset, was born in 1716, andchristened after his godfather, Georgethe First He commenced his educationat Westminster school, and concludedit at Trinity college, Dublin,where he took an honorary degree.After passing some time at Paris, withhis father, he entered the army ; and,joining the British forces in Flanders,was present at the battles of Fontenoyand Dettingen ; in the former of whichTHE ARMY.he received a ball in his breast; and,within a month after the latter tookplace, was made aid-decamp to theking. He had previously obtained thelieutenant-colonelcy' of the twenty-eighthregiment of foot, and had beenelected member of parliament forDover.In 1745, he acted under the Dukeof Cumberland against the Scotch insurgents; and, afterwards, served inGermany with his royal highness ;who, in 1748, employed him to effecta negotiation with Marshal Saxe. Onthe 1st of November, 1749, he was promotedto the colonelcy of the twelfthregiment of dragoons ; and, in the followingJanuary, obtained the commandof the king's horse carbineers inIreland ; of which kingdom he wasappointed secretary of state, in 1751.He became a major-general in 1755 jcolonel of the second regiment of dragoonguards, and lieutenant-generalof the ordnance, in 1757; and, soonafterwards, a lieutenant-general in thearmy, and one of the members ofthe privy-council. For some time, hecommanded a division of the armyencamped near Chatham ; and, whilethere, on being solicited to permitWhitfield to address the soldiers, replied," Tell the gentleman from me,that he may preach anything he pleasesto them, that is not against the articlesof war."In June, 1758, he served in the expeditionagainst the coast of France;and, in the following October, succeededthe Duke of Marlborough, ascommander of the British forces inthe army of Prince Ferdinand. Atthe battle of Minded, which took placeon the 1st of August, 1759, he was atthe head of all the British and Germanhorse. The enemy being throwninto disorder, by the allied infantry,Prince Ferdinand, the commander-in-chief,despatched an aid-decamp withorders for Lord George Sackville toadvance. " But," says an historian ofthe war, " the orders were not sufficientlyprecise, or they were not sufficientlyunderstood by the Englishcommander ; so that there was some'delay in waiting for an explanation :the critical minute passed away ; theBritish cavalry lost their share in theglory of the action ; and the Frenchretreated in some order." Had LordGeorge obeyed the command of PrinceFerdinand, the enemy, it was supposed,would have been left withoutan army in Germany ; but, being unmolestedin their flight by the cavalryof the allies, they had an opportunityof regaining their former advantageouspost.In the general orders issued byPrince Ferdinand, on the followingday, he stated, that if the Marquessof Granny, Lord George Sackville'ssubordinate, had been at the head of thecavalry, he felt persuaded the successof the day would have been more completeand brilliant ; and, in a very emphaticand pointed manner, required,that the generals of the army should,upon all occasions, punctually, andwithout delay, act in obedience to suchorders as might be brought to them byhis aid-de-camps. In consequence ofthe severe insinuations thus thrown outagainst him, Lord George immediatelyrequested leave to return to England.On his arrival in London, he was deprivedof all his military employments;upbraided by the public with cowardice; and, on the 26th of January,in the following year, declared, by acourt-martial, which he had solicited,guilty of a disobedience to orders, and,therefore, unfit to remain in his majesty'sservice. The king confirmedthis sentence, and soon after struck outhis name from the list of privy-counsellors.In 1761, he was returned to parliamentfor East Instead, in Sussex, aswell as for Hythe, in Kent; but tookhis seat for the latter. In 1765, he obtainedthe joint vice-treasurership ofIreland ; which, however, he resignedin the following year. In 1768, hewas again elected for East Instead ;and continued to represent that place,until his elevation to the peerage. In1770, an act of parliament was passed,enabling him to take the name of Germaine,in accordance with the will ofhis aunt, Lady Elizabeth Germaine,the friend and correspondent of Popeand Swift, who had left him a largefortune.On the accession of George theThird, he was restored to favour ; and,in 1775, obtained the office of firstlord of trade and plantations, which heViscount SACKVILLE.resigned in 1779 ; and that of secretaryof state for the colonies, which heretained up to the conclusion of thedisastrous American war. All therigorous measures adopted against thecolonists, met with his most zealoussupport ; he sternly opposed every attemptthat was made to effect a terminationof hostilities ; and, at length,became so unpopular, that, dreadingthe indignation of the people, duringthe riots in 1780, he barricaded hishouse ; upon which, however, no attackwas made.On receiving intelligence of the surrenderof the British army at Yorktown, he got into a hackney coach, and,after taking up Lord Stormont and thelord chancellor, at their respective residences,proceeded with them, in thesame humble vehicle, to Lord North.The premier received the disastrousnews which they brought, according toLord George's account, " as he wouldhave taken a ball in his breast,"throwing up his arms, pacing wildlyup and down the room, and exclaiming,many times, with deep emotion,O God ! it is all over !"Lord George soon afterwards resignedhis office ; and, at an interviewwith the king, who expressed his inclination,in some manner, to rewardhim for his services, solicited the honourof being created a peer. The kingconsented to do so ; and Lord Georgethen requested to be made a viscount ;because, as he submitted, if he werecalled to the house of lords merely asabaron, his secretary, his lawyer, andhis father's page, would all take precedenceof him : the first, at that time,being Lord Walsingham ; the second,Lord Loughborough ; and the third,Lord Amherst ; who, as Sackville stated,had often rode on the braces of thecoach, in which his father, whenviceroy, was conveyed to the Irishhouse of lords.The king, soon afterwards, created himViscount Sackville ; but, before he tookhis seat, the Marquess of Carmarthenmoved an address to the crown, that,as Lord George Germaine was stillunder sentence of a court-martial, heought not to be raised to the peerage.This motion was lost ; and another, tothe same effect, which was broughtforward on the day when the newviscount took his seat, met with a similarfate. Lord Sackville did not longenjoy his elevation ; his death occurringon the 26th of April, 1785 ; atwhich time he was a privy-counsellor,one of the keepers of Phoenix park,near Dublin, and clerk of the councilin Ireland. By his wife, Diana, thedaughter of John Pembroke, Esq. hehad two sons and three daughters.He was tall, robust, and active : theexpression of his features was intellectual; but his acquirements were farfrom extensive. In public, he washaughty and reserved ; in private, quitethe reverse. " No man," says Wraxall,who saw him at table, or in his ,would have suspected, fromhis deportment or conversation, thatthe responsibility of the American warreposed principally on his shoulders."Though clear, as well as rapid, in business,according to the same author, hisstyle, even in official despatches, wasfrequently careless. He displayed considerablepowers of eloquence, but wasso irritable, that the opposition oftenobtained from him precocious informationof ministers' intentions, by artfullyexciting his feelings during the heat ofdebate.His conduct at the battle of Min-denhas occasioned some controversy.Wraxall endeavours to make it appearthat he was a hero ; and other writershint that his disobedience of Ferdinand'sorders was, perhaps, intentional ; because,at that time, he happened to be onbad terms with the prince : but theywho thus attempt to vindicate himagainst the charge of cowardice, blackenhis reputation more than the most virulentof his enemies have done, by attributingto him a detestable and traitorousdereliction of his duty, on account of aprivate misunderstanding. The firstEarl Grey, according to Perceval Stockdale,acquitted Lord Sackville of theleast misconduct at the battle of Min-den; and a writer in the Annual Register,published in 1763, pities him,as a commander of admirable talents,"who, by the error or misfortune of amoment, lost an opportunity that wouldhave ranked him for ever among theMarlborough and Brunswick !" On acalm investigation of his conduct, itdoes not, however, appear that he possessedmuch military talent; but, onTHE ARMY.the other hand, although deservedlydismissed from the service for his disobedience,it is not at all probable,judging from his behaviour at Fontenoy,Dettingen, Cherbourg, and in a duel,which he fought with Governor John-stone,that his culpable neglect of PrinceFerdinand's orders, to pursue a retreatingenemy, arose from cowardice.During the investigation of his conduct,it is said, that he absurdly exhibitedthe coat he had worn at Fontenoy,(which appeared to have been penetratedby several bullets,) as a proof ofhis habitual bravery.His conduct, while colonial secretary,was rash and impolitic, but so consonantto the views of George theThird, that he became a great favouriteat court. Among many other proofsof his influence, it is stated, that, athis solicitation, Dr. Eliot, whom theking disliked, was created a baronet.Well, my lord," observed his majesty,on this occasion, " since you desire it,the doctor shall be a baronet; but heshan't be my physician, though, for allthat." " No, replied Lord George,he shall be my physician, and yourmajesty's baronet.He was suspected of having writtenthe letters of Junius, and a work hasrecently been published, in which hissupposed authorship of those celebratedcompositions is gravely and elaboratelyinvestigated. It throws, however, butlittle additional light on the subject;and, certainly, by no means provesthat Sackville and Junius were identical.Although, in political opinions,they, on many subjects, agreed, yet,the abilities of Sackville were decidedlyunequal to the production ofthe worst of the letters. His mind wascomparatively uncultivated; his readinglimited ; and, although Stockdaleventures to term him an elegant classic,other writers, who knew him better,state, that he had " but little acquaintancewith Horace, Tacitus, or Cicero;"and that, during his retreat at Drayton,where he had a fine library, he rarelyopened a book. The productions ofJunius were beautifully polished: butSackville's style, according to his apologist,Wraxall, (who describes him aspassing little time either at his desk orinhis closet) was negligent and unstudied." I should be proud," saidhe, on one occasion, to a friend, " tobe capable of writing as Junius hasdone: but there are many passages inhis letters I should be very sorry tohave written." It is also worthy ofespecial notice, that Junius broadlyimputes to him a gross deficiency ofpersonal courage; a fact, which should,perhaps, be deemed quite conclusiveagainst Sackville's supposed authorshipof the letters.Jeffrey, LORD AMHERST.Jeffrey, the son of Jeffrey Amherst,of Riverhead, in Kent, was bornon the 29th of January, 1717, and, atan early age, became page to the Dukeof Dorset, while lord-lieutenant of Ireland.He entered the army in 1731 ;and, proceeding to Germany, acted asaid-decamp to Lord Ligonier, at thebattles of Dettingen, Fontenoy, andRoucoux, and served in the same capacityto the Duke of Cumberland, atLaffeldtand Hastened. He became amajor-general, and colonel of the fifteenthregiment of foot, in 1756 ; and,in 1758, was appointed to the chiefcommand of the land forces, amountingto fourteen thousand men, in the expeditionagainst Louisburg ; in sight ofwhich, the fleet, consisting of onehundred and fifty one sail, under theconduct of Boscawen, in which they hadembarked, arrived on the 2nd of June,in that year. Several days elapsed beforea landing could be effected, in consequenceof the prodigious surf; but, atlength, on the 8th of June, although theweather was still terrifically boisterous,and the enemy had protected the coastby numerous batteries, a division of thetroops, supported by several frigates,moved towards the shore, under thecommand of Wolfe, who subsequentlyfell on the heights above Quebec. Manyof the boats were destroyed or oversetI, ORD AMHERST.by the enemy's fire, and a number ofthe men were drowned ; but the residue,inspirited by their gallant leader, effecteda landing, and, with little loss,dislodged the French from their posts.A few days afterwards, the main bodyof the troops having landed in theinterim, a light-house, that commandedseveral men of war in the harbour, andsome batteries on the other side of it,which had severely harassed the Britishin their approaches, was gallantlystormed ; and, on the 26th of July, alodgment having been effected in thecovered way, the garrison, amounting tonearly six thousand men, surrenderedthemselves as prisoners of war. St.John's, and some other of the enemy'sneighbouring stations, followed theexample of Louisburg; which, previouslyto its capture, had afforded a capitalharbour for the French privateers ; anexcellent station for carrying on the codfishery ; and a convenient post for thetemporary reception of such reinforcementsas were sent out to act againstthe British in Canada.Amherst was soon afterwards appointedcommander-in-chief of theforces in America, and vigorous operationsagainst the French were speedilycommenced. Wolfe attacked Quebec,and Prideaux, the fort of Niagara ; bothof which, the original commanders beingkilled, eventually surrendered to theirrespective successors, Townshend andJohnson ; while Amherst himself, at thehead of about twelve thousand regularsand provincials, marched against CrownPoint and Ticonderago. The Frenchabandoned the former to the Britishtroops, on the 26th of July, and thelatter, on the 4th of August, 1759. Bygreat exertions, Amherst now obtaineda naval superiority on Lake Champlain ;and, Fort Nevis being carried, the enemyshortly afterwards evacuated Isle auxNoix. Amherst then conducted hisforces against Montreal, " the secondplace in Canada for extent, building,traffic, and strength ;" in sight of whichthey arrived, after a dangerous andfatiguing voyage, on the same day withtwo other bodies of troops, the oneunder Murray, and the other underHaviland, which had been ordered toapproach from remote stations, and combinewith the army commanded byAmherst, in its investment. The garrisonperceiving that they were about to besurrounded by a superior force, capitulatedwithout delay ; and thus the wholeof Canada fell into the possession of theBritish.In 1762, pending the negotiations foratreaty of peace, the French fitted outan expedition against Newfoundland,which captured, without difficulty, St.John's, and some other forts. Intelligenceof this unexpected event had nosooner reached England, than an armamentwas despatched to retake the island; which, however, had, in the meantime,surrendered to a detachment ofAmherst's forces, under the commandof his brother, and a small squadronunder that of Lord Melville.As a reward for his important services,Amherst received the thanks ofthe house of commons, and the insigniaof the Bath. He returned to Englandin 1763 ; and, in 1770, obtained thegovernment of Guernsey. Two yearsafterwards, he was appointed a memberof the privy-council, colonel in thehorse-guards, and lieutenant-general ofthe ordnance. He also officiated, forsome time, a.3 commander-in-chief ofthe British forces ; and in 1776, wasraised to the peerage, by the title ofBaron Amherst, of Holmesdale,in Kent.On the dismissal of Lord North, heceased to act as commander-in-chief,and was deprived of his post in theordnance : but, after having received asecond patent of peerage, as BaronAmherst, of Montreal, with reversionto his nephew, he was again appointed,in 1793, to the chief command of theforces, which he resigned to the Dukeof York, in 1795 ; on which occasion, hewas offered an earldom, and the rankof field-marshal ; both of which he declined,but accepted the latter, on itsbeing again tendered to him, in 1796.His death took place on the 3rd ofAugust, in the following year, at Montreal,near Riverhead j and his remainswere interred, on the 10th of the samemonth, at Sevenoaks.He died without issue, but wastwice married : first, to Jane, onlydaughter of Thomas Davison, Esq., ofHampton ; and, secondly, to Elizabeth,eldest daughter of the HonourableGeorge Carey, a son of Lucius Henry,fifth Viscount Falkland. In additionto his other employments, he acted, forTHE ARMY.some time, as gold stick in waiting toGeorge the Third.Like Wolfe, Amherst was selectedby Chatham, to aid in the execution ofthat eminent statesman's great militarydesigns ; and his success proved thatthe minister had formed a just estimateof his courage and ability. The serviceswhich he rendered to Great Britain inAmerica, fully entitled him to thehonours with which he was afterwardsrewarded. He is described as havingbeen " a thorough good soldier ;" cautious,but enterprising ; temperate andcollected in the greatest difficulties ;strict in the enforcement of discipline,yet averse to mere military parade, andparticularly kind to the men under hiscommand. He erected a column, nearhis residence at Riverhead, commemoratingthe escape of himself and histwo brothers, Lieutenant-general andAdmiral Amherst, from the perils ofwar; and recording those successes ofthe British forces in Canada, to whichhe had materially contributed, by hisbravery and skill.He is said to have looked upon theatrocities committed by his Indian auxiliarieswith the utmost abhorrence ;and when, on the surrender of FortNevis, the savages expressed theirdispleasure at being prevented fromputting the whole garrison to death, hethus addressed Sir William Johnson,who had informed him of the fact: " Ibelieve I have sufficient force for theservice I am going on without theirassistance ; I wish to preserve theirfriendship, but will not purchase it atthe expense of countenancing so horridabarbarity !" " If," added he, " theywish to quit the army, let them takecare not to commit any act of crueltyon their way home ; for, if they do, Iwill most certainly chastise them."GEORGE AUGUSTUS Elliott, LORD Hatfield.THIS gallant commander, the eighthand youngest son of Sir Gilbert Elliott,a poor Scotch baronet, was born aboutthe year 1718, in the parish of Hob-kirk,in the county of Roxburgh. Havingacquired the rudiments of education,under a domestic tutor, he was sentto the university of Ley den; whence,being destined for the profession ofarms, he was removed, at an early age,to the Ecole Royale, at La Fere, inPicardy, where he studied militarytactics with much assiduity andsuccess.After serving, for a short time, as avolunteer in the Prussian army, he returnedto England ; and, when onlyseventeen, joined the twenty-third regimentof foot. In 1736, he went intothe engineer corps ; and, at length, waspresented by his uncle, Colonel Elliott,with the adjutant of the second troopof horse grenadiers ; with whom, soonafter his appointment, he embarked forGermany, and fought at the battle ofDettingen, in which he received awound. In 1756, having passed throughthe subordinate gradations of rank, hewas raised to the colonelcy of his corps,and appointed aid-decamp to Georgethe Second. In 1758, he served, asbrigadier-general, in the expeditionagainst the coast of France. In thefollowing year he quitted the horsegrenadiers, for the purpose of disciplininga regiment raised by himself,and which was subsequently distinguishedby the name of Eliott's LightHorse. With this corps he proceededto Germany; where, in 1761, he wasraised, for his services, to the rank oflieutenant-general. In the followingyear, he acted as second in command inthe arduous, protracted, but, eventually,successful attack on Havannah; and,at the termination of the war, in 1763,his regiment was reviewed by the king,who, in token of his approbation ofits conduct, directed it to be called theKing's Royal Regiment of Light Dragoons.In 1775, General Eliott acted, forashort time, as commander-in-chief ofthe forces in Ireland; and, in the followingyear, he was appointed governorof Gibraltar, his subsequent defence ofwhich, in the language of one of hiscontemporaries, was, perhaps, the mostLORD Hatfield.honourable to the valour of this country,of all the glorious achievements inwar that have immortalized the Britishname.On the 16th of July, 1779, the portwas blockaded by an enemy's squadron,and on the 26th of the same month, alarge body of Spanish troops began toencamp on the plain below St. Rich,within three miles of the garrison.Eliott foreseeing a scarcity of provisions,now ordered all the horses in Gibraltar,(except those belonging to field andstaff officers,) whose owners could notproduce one thousand pounds of fodderfor each, to be turned out ; and. toset his subordinates a good example,as it is stated, he ordered one of hisown chargers to be shot. Towards themiddle of August, the blockade becamemore severe ; and some probability appearedof the garrison being eventuallyforced to surrender by famine. Onlyforty head of cattle at length remainedin the place ; and, at the close of theyear, provisions were so dreadfullyscarce, that mutton fetched three shillingsand sixpence per pound ; ducks,from fourteen to eighteen shillings acouple ; and other articles of food a proportionateprice. At this time, the governor,who was habitually abstemious,seldom eating anything but vegetables,simple puddings, and water, endeavouredto ascertain the smallest quantityof food, on which a man couldexist, and actually lived for above aweek on only four ounces of rice perday. But this small portion of nutriment,as Drinkwater, the intelligenthistorian of the siege, justly remarks,would be far from sufficient for a manin active employment, and in such aclimate as that of Gibraltar.The distress of the garrison rapidlyincreased: at length, milk and waterwas sold at one shilling and threepenceper pint ; an egg cost sixpence ;a small cabbage, eighteen pence ; and abunch of the outer leaves, fivepence.Thistles and dandelions, were, for sometime,the sole food of numbers : and,notwithstanding the accidental captureof a polacre, laden with barley, whichhad been driven under the guns of thefortress, a surrender, at no distant period,appeared inevitable ; when, fortunately,in the beginning of 1780, SirGeorge Rodney's squadron arrived witha supply of men, money, ammunition,and provisions.In the following September, chainsof small cruisers were stationed acrossthe bay, and at every side of the rock,so that, the trifling assistance which hadoccasionally been received from thecoast of Barbary, was completely cutoff.The stores were again almost exhaustedj and the scurvy had alreadymade dreadful ravages among thetroops, when a dogger, laden withoranges and lemons, from Malaga, gotnear the rock, during a fog, and GeneralEliott immediately purchased hercargo ; by a judicious use of which,the most fatal consequences wereaverted ; many of the soldiers, whowere previously seen tottering oncrutches to their posts, and others, whohad been deemed irrecoverable, experiencingsuch salutary effects fromeating the fruit, as to be able, within afew days, efficiently to discharge theirmilitary duties.In April, 1781, the garrison wasseasonably relieved by the arrival ofthe fleet under Admiral Derby. On thesame day, the enemy on the land sideopened a fire upon the fortress, fromone hundred and fourteen pieces ofartillery. During the cannonade, whichappears to have been very effective,although many of the enemy's shellsfell blind, in consequence of a quantityof sand having fraudulently been mixedwith the powder, several of the merchants'stores in the town were unfortunatelyburst open, by the enemy'sshells; and the troops, seizing on theliquors which they contained, becameso horribly intoxicated, that many ofthem died, and the survivors, regardlessof punishment, committed the mostdaring and wanton excesses. " Amongother instances of their caprice andextravagance," says Drinkwater, " Irecollect that of roasting a pig at a firemade of cinnamon." By the adoptionof rigorous measures, subordinationwas, however, soon restored.On the 23rd of May, the Spanish gunand mortar-boats made a most formidableattack on the fortress, againstwhich the batteries on the land sidecontinued to play, until nearly the endof November, when a sally againstthem was made from the garrison,the success of which far exceededTHE ARMY.Eliott's most sanguine expectations.The enemy, panic-struck, at so daringand unexpected an assault, gave wayon all sides, and their stupendousworks, which had been erected at anexpense of three millions sterling, wereset on fire in several places, and speedilyconsumed.The Spanish government being,however, resolved, if possible, no matterat what sacrifice, to reduce thefortress, soon recommenced operations.The Due de Crimson, who had recentlycaptured Fort St. Philip, in Minorca,was placed in command of thebesieging forces; and, by the ensuingautumn, new batteries were erected,mounting, in the whole, two hundredpieces of cannon, and which were protectedby forty thousand me*, whoseoperations were destined to be secondedfrom the bay, by a combined Frenchand Spanish armament, consisting offorty-seven sail of the line, ten batteringships, (deemed indestructible, and carryingtwo hundred and twelve guns,)several frigates, and a vast number ofxebeques, cutters, bomb-ketches, &c.The garrison, including marines,amounted to no more than seven thousandmen ; but they beheld the mightypreparations of the foe, without betrayingthe least symptom of despondencyor alarm. Their confidence in theskill of the governor was unlimited;they had, recently, ascertained, by experiment,the efficacy of red-hot shot,and had some reason to expect theearly arrival of a British squadron totheir assistance. On one occasion,something being seen to wave on adistant flag-staff, from which the approachof a fleet from England hadpreviously been announced, the troopsbroke out into a tumult of joy, believingthat the naval succour which theyexpected was in sight : but, in a fewmoments, it appeared, that the supposedsignal had merely been thenapping of the wings of a large eagle,that had alighted on the staff. Althoughdisappointed, the men looked upon theappearance of the bird, in such a situation,as a most inspiriting omen.On the morning after the arrivalof the combined armament in the bay,the ten battering ships wore down towithin twelve hundred yards of thefortress. As soon as the first of themhad dropped anchor, the garrison commencedtiring, and the cannonade, onboth sides, soon became terrific. Theenemy's land-batteries ably secondedthe attack of the ships, " from the topsof which," it is said, " the heaviest shellsrebounded, while the thirty-two poundshot seemed incapable of making any visibleimpression upon their hulls." Theefficacy even of red-hot shot againstthem, appeared to be, for some time,doubtful ; but, towards the evening,symptoms of confusion and distress becamevisible on board ; and, during thenight, nearly the whole of them werediscovered to be on fire. General Eliott,with a humanity equal to his courage,now directed his attention towards thepitiable situation of the crews, of whom,between three and four hundred wererescued from certain destruction, bythe gun-boats, which, during the contest,had been most ably commandedby the intrepid Curtis. In the followingmonth, Lord Howe arrived witha British squadron off the fortress : thecombined fleet, which, since its signalrepulse, had been inactive, immediatelyretired, and the siege, from theland side, was soon afterwards terminatedby a treaty of peace.General Eliott now received thethanks of both houses of parliament,for his eminent services, together witha pension of 1,500 per annum, andthe insignia of the Bath. He retainedhis command until 1787, when, on hisarrival in England, he was raised to thepeerage, by the title of Baron Heath-fieldand Gibraltar. On the 6th ofJuly, 1790, while preparing to set outfrom Aix-la-chapelle, for the scene ofhis former exploits, where he felt exceedinglyanxious to end his days, hewas attacked by a paralytic stroke,which proved fatal. His remains werebrought to England, and interred atHeathfield, in Sussex. A monumentwas erected to his memory, in Westminsterabbey, at the public expense ;and the corporation of London decoratedthe walls of the common-councilchamber with a fine picture, by SirJoshua Reynolds, of the siege of Gibraltar,in which the figure of its abledefender occupies the most conspicuousplace.By his wife, Anne, daughter of SirFrancis Drake, of Devonshire, he hadMARSHAL CONWAY.one son, Francis Augustus, on whosedeath, in 1813, the title became extinct ;and one daughter, who married JohnDrayton Fuller, Esq., of Sussex.Lord Heathfield appears to have possessed,in an exalted degree, most, ifnot all, of the qualities necessary toconstitute a great commander. As amilitary exploit, his memorable defenceof Gibraltar has, perhaps, rarely, ifever, been excelled. He was an abletac titian, and a strict, though not asevere disciplinarian ; at once bold andcautious; neither too much exaltedby success, nor in the least dismayedby defeat ; but, under every circumstance,equally brave, calm, and energetic.He had many trifling eccentricities,the most singular of which,considering his character in other respects,was an extraordinary fondnessfor cats : numbers of these animals,young and old, it is said, gambolledabout him, even when he was mostactively engaged on the bastions ofGibraltar.MARSHAL CONWAY.HENRY SEYMOUR CONWAY,the second son of the first Lord Conway,and next brother of the first Marquessof Hertford, was born in 1720.He travelled through France, with hiscousin, Horace Walpole, and the poet,Gray, in 1739; and, in the followingyear, obtained the appointment of in the first regiment offoot-guards, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel.In 1741, he was returned tothe Irish parliament, for the county ofAntrim ; during the same year he tookhis seat for Higham Ferrets, in theBritish house of commons, and representedsix different close boroughs inthe six succeeding parliaments. Heperformed great feats of valour at Fonswhere he was engaged with twogrenadiers at once, both of whom hecut down. He also served as aid-decampto the Duke of Cumberland, atthe battle of Culloden ; and, subsequently,obtained the command of theforty-eighth regiment of foot. In 1757,he was employed as second in commandof the land forces, in the fruitlessexpedition against Rochefort, which headvised Sir John Mordaunt, the com-mander-in-chief to attack; but as hedeclined to take the entire responsibilityof the enterprise upon himself, Mordauntdid not think proper to attempt it. In1759, he was sent to Slays, to settle anexchange of prisoners with the French.On the accession of George the Third,he was continued in the post of groomof the bedchamber, to which he hadbeen appointed at the latter part of thepreceding reign; and, in 1761, beingthen a lieutenant-general, he commandedthe British forces in Germany,under Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick,during the Marquess of Granny's absence; but, voting against the ministry,in 1764, on the question of generalwarrants, he was dismissed from all hismilitary commands. The Duke ofDevonshire, to whom he had beensecretary, for a short time, when hisgrace was viceroy of Ireland, died aboutthis time, and, admiring his sacrifice ofinterest to honesty, bequeathed him alegacy of 5,000.On the formation of the Rockinghamministry, he was sworn in a memberof the privy-council, and appointed,jointly with the Duke of Grafton, tothe office of secretary of state, which heheld until 1768. When the Marquessof Granny was dismissed from all hisemployments, the king proposed toplace Conway, then lieutenant-generalof the ordnance, at the head of thatdepartment ; but the latter replied, thathaving lived in friendship with LordGranny, he would not profit by hisspoils ; as, however, he thought hecould do some essential service in theordnance, he would, if his majestythought fit, do the business of the officewithout being elevated to the master-generalship.This offer was acceptedby the king, who, in 1772, made Conwaya general in the army, and governorof Jersey, where he acquired somuch esteem, that when the inhabitantsdiscovered a Druids' altar, in theTHE ARMY.mountain of St. Helter, they presentedit to him, with a poetical inscription,expressive of their gratitude for hismild and paternal governmentIn 1774, he made a tour on the continent,during which he was receivedwith distinguished notice at the Frenchand Prussian courts. In 1782, he becamecommander-in-chief of the forces,and brought forward a motion, in parliament,for an address to the king, prayingthat his majesty would terminatethe American war, which, however,was lost by one vote ; but, on movingthe address a second time, during thesame year, he carried it against LordNorth, by a majority of nineteen.Resigning his military command inthe following year, he retired to hisseat, near Henley-upon-Thames, wherehe died suddenly, from cramp in thestomach, on the 9th of July, 1795.By his wife, the Dowager Countess ofAylesbury, he left an only child, whowas married to the Honourable DawsonDarner, eldest son of the first Earlof Dorchester. At the time of hisdeath he was the oldest general officerin the army, and premier field-marshalof Great Britain.In his military capacity he obtainedmuch reputation. As a statesman, hewas conscientious, though not veryefficient. Burke, however, has pronounceda glowing eulogy on his attemptto procure a cessation of hostilitieswith America. " All England,"said the orator, " all America, joined inhis applause. Nor did he seem insensibleto the love and admiration of hisfellow citizens. Hope elevated, andjoy brightened his crest. I stood nearhim, and ' his face,' to use the expressionof the scripture of the first martyr,his face was as if it had been theface of an angel.' I do not know whatothers feel ; but if I had stood in thatsituation, I never would have exchangedit for all that kings, in theirprofusion, could bestow."He is said to have disarmed the politicalasperity of his opponents, by thefascinating amenity of his manners, andthe blameless tenour of his life. Hecultivated polite literature, and wasthe reputed author of some pamphletson public affairs, as well as a play,partly taken from the French, entitled,False Appearances, which did not meetwith much success. He was an admirerof the fine arts ; and the bridge over theThames, near his residence, at Henley,owes, it is supposed, many of its beautiesto his refined and accurate taste.In that neighbourhood he planted, withhis own hand, a cutting from the poplar,brought from Lombardy, by theEarl of Rochford, which became thefirst tree of its species ever reared tithis country. He procured a patent forthe invention of an oven, by whichlime might, as he stated, be most advantageouslyburned in breweries anddistilleries.SIR WILLIAM DRAPER.WlLLIAM, the son of Ingle Draper,an officer of the customs, was bornat Bristol, in 1721. He acquired therudiments of education at the cathedralgrammar school of his native city ;whence he proceeded to Eton, and,subsequently, prosecuted his studies atKing's college, Cambridge, of which hebecame a fellow. After having proceededto the degree of B. A. in 1744,and to that of M. A. in 1749, he quittedthe university, and, joining the Britishtroops in the East Indies, signalizedhimself, in 1758, at the capture of FortSt. George, subsequently called Madras.He returned to England, with the rankof colonel, in 1760; soon afterwards,he was made governor of Yarmouth ;and, in the following year, he acted asbrigadier-general in the expeditionagainst Belleisle.In August, 1762, he embarked, atthe head of about two thousand threehundred men, on board a squadron,commanded by Admiral Cornish, againstManilla; in sight of which the armamentarrived on the 23rd of the followingmonth. Precautions had been takento prevent the Spaniards from receivingintelligence of its approach ; so that, onSIR WILLIAM DRAPER.anchoring in Manilla bay, the Britishcommanders found the enemy unpreparedto make any formidable resistance.A landing was effected withoutmuch difficulty; and, after repulsingpart of the garrison in a sally, the Britishcarried the city by storm, on the 6th ofOctober. The captors agreed, in lieuof plunder, to accept bills on Madridfor one million sterling, which, however,never were honoured, the Spanishgovernment peremptorily refusing toabide by the treaty.On his return to England, Draper,then a member of the house of commons,strongly urged ministers to insiston payment of the ransom, of which hewas personally entitled to 25,000 ; andwrote a pamphlet, in refutation of theobjections set up by the court of Madridagainst the claim ; but his complaintssoon ceased ; his silence, as 1 many suspected,having been purchased by government,with a red ribbon, and thecolonelcy of the sixteenth foot.Some time afterwards, on his attemptingto vindicate Granny from theaspersions of Junius, the latter, in areply, after stating that, on his returnto Europe, Draper had remonstrated,threatened, and. even appealed to thepublic, in print, on behalf of that gallantarmy, by whose bravery at Manillahis own fortune had been established,asked him the following questions :By what accident did it happen, thatin the midst of all this bustle, and allthese clamours for justice to your injuredtroops, the name of the Manillaransom was buried in a profound,and, since that time, an uninterruptedsilence ? Did the ministers suggestany motive to you strong enough totempt a man of honour to desert andbetray the cause of his fellow-soldiers ?Was it that blushing ribbon, which isnow the perpetual ornament of yourperson? Or, was it that regiment,which you afterwards (a thing unprecedentedamong soldiers) sold to ColonelGisborne ? Or, was it that government,the full pay of which you arecontented to hold with the half-pay ofan Irish colonel?"Draper, in reply, asserted, that hehad recently, with Admiral Cornish,presented a memorial to Lord Shellin behalf of his injured companions;and that ministers had beencompelled, temporarily, to submit tothe breach of faith committed by theSpaniards, with regard to the ransom,on account of the critical situation ofthe country. " His majesty," continuedSir William, " was pleased togive me my government for my servicesat Madras. I had my first regimentin 1757. Upon my return fromManilla, his majesty, by Lord Egmont,informed me, that I should havethe first vacant red ribbon, as a rewardfor my services, in an enterprise whichI had planned and executed. TheDuke of Bedford and Mr. Grenville confirmedthose assurances many monthsbefore the Spaniards had protested theransom bills. To accommodate LordClive, then going upon a most importantservice to Bengal, I waived my claim tothe vacancy which then happened. Asthere was no other until the Duke ofGrafton and Lord Rockingham werejoint ministers, I was then honouredwith the order; and it is, surely, no smallhonour to me, that in such a successionof ministers, they were all pleased tothink that I had deserved it: in myfavour they were all united. Upon thereduction of the seventy-ninth regiment,which had served so gloriously inthe East Indies, his majesty, unsolicitedby me, gave me the sixteenth of foot asan equivalent. My motives for retiringafterwards are foreign to the purpose :let it suffice, that his majesty was pleasedto approve of them. They are such asno man can think indecent, who knowsthe shocks that repeated vicissitudes ofheat and cold, of dangerous and sicklyclimates will give to the best constitutions,in a pretty long course of service.I resigned my regiment to ColonelGisborne, a very good officer, for hishalf-pay, 200 Irish annuities ; so that,according to Junius, I have been bribedto say nothing more of the Manilla ransom,and to sacrifice those brave men,by the strange avarice of accepting380 per annum, and giving up 800!"Junius then insisted, that, in exchangefor his regiment, Draper hadnot only taken Colonel Gisborne's half-pay,but an annuity of 200 for thejoint lives of himself and his wife. " Be -fore you were appointed to the sixteenthregiment," added he, " yourcomplaints were a distress to government;from that moment you wereTHE ARM V.silent. The conclusion is inevitable.You insinuate to us, that your ill stateof health obliged you to quit the service.The retirement necessary to repaira broken constitution would havebeen as good a reason for not accepting,as for resigning the command of aregiment." The concealed writer thenproceeded to ask if Sir William Draperdid not, on receiving his half-pay, takea solemn oath, or sign a declaration,upon his honour, that he did not actuallyhold any place of profit, civil ormilitary, under his majesty. " Thecharge," said Junius, in conclusion,which the question plainly conveysagainst you, is of so shocking a complexion,that I sincerely wish you maybeable to answer it well, not merelyfor the colour of your reputation, butfor your own peace of mind."To repel this insinuation, Draperstated, that he did not either take anoath, or declare, upon honour, that hehad no place of profit, civil or military,when he received his half-pay as anIrish colonel. " My most gracioussovereign," added he, "gives it me as apension ; he was pleased to think I deservedit. The annuity of 200 Irish,and the equivalent for the half-pay,together produce no more than 380per annum, clear of fees and perquisitesof office. I receive 167 frommy government of Yarmouth : Total,547 per annum. My conscience ismuch at ease in these particulars ; myfriends need not blush for me."The correspondence was terminated,for a time, by another letter fromJunius, in which he stated, that Draperhad cleared himself from a crime, at theexpense of the highest indiscretion,and called upon the latter to justify hisdeclaration, wherein he had chargedhis sovereign with having acted illegally.The halter pay," said he, " both inEngland and Ireland is appropriatedby parliament, and if it be given topersons who, like you, are incapable ofholding it, it is a breach of the law."What sense," added Junius, " mustgovernment have had of your services,when the rewards they have given youonly serve to disgrace you !"On a republication of the letters ofJunius, the controversy, if so it maybetermed, was renewed by Draper,who flatly denied the imputations ofhis antagonist, which the latter asplainly repeated. Sir William also defendedthe Duke of Bedford againstthe accusations of Junius; and, as it issupposed, under the signature of modest,animadverted upon his observationsrelative to the rescue, by a partyof soldiers, of General Anselm, fromsome bailiffs who had arrested him.For some time, Sir William Draperwas indefatigable in his exertions,which, however, it is scarcely necessaryto observe, were fruitless, to discoverthe author of the letters. Soon afterthey had been published collectively,he is reported to have said, at theTennis Court, " That although Juniushad treated him with extreme severity,he now looked upon him as a veryhonest fellow; that he freely forgavehim for the bitterness of his censures;and that there was no man with whomhe would more gladly drink a bottle ofold Burgundy."About the year 1770, he proceededto America; and, being then a widower,married a daughter of De Lance', chiefjustice of New York, by whom hehad a daughter, in 1773. Having becomea lieutenant-general, in May,1779, he was appointed lieutenant-governorof Minorca; on the surrender ofwhich, in 1782, he exhibited twenty-ninecharges against General Murray,his superior in command; for which,although Murray received a reprimandon account of two of them, his accuserwas ordered to make an apology. Inthe following year he printed some observationson Murray's defence, andretired to Bath, where he died on the8th of January, 1787. His remainswere interred in the abbey church, andChristopher Anstey, author of the NewBath Guide, wrote a Latin inscriptionfor his monument.However ably he may have vindicatedhimself against some of the chargesbrought against him by Junius, thecessation of his clamours relative to theManilla ransom, on obtaining the sixteenthfoot, and the insignia of the Bath,was certainly suspicious. He does notappear to have been destitute of bravery,skill, or any of the qualities necessaryfor a commander. Junius speaks ofhis having received an academical education,and suggests that, in attemptingto extenuate the Marquess of Granny,MARQUESS OF Granny.he was not quite indifferent to the displayof his own literary qualifications.He evidently possessed respectablepowers as a writer, but erred egregiously,in entering into a contest withso mighty an antagonist as Junius.His defence of the marquess was wellmeant, and undertaken, perhaps, " withallthe unpremeditated gallantry of asoldier ;" but it proved most unfortunatein its consequences; provoking, as itdid, a reiteration of many of thosecharges which he endeavoured to repel,and a most severe attack upon himself.Granny, the commander-in-chief, hadbeen assailed with several other men inoffice, but as Junius pertinently remarked,through the amicable assistanceof Sir William Draper, he became theprincipal figure of a piece in which hemight have otherwise passed withoutparticular notice or distinction.JOHN MANNERS, MARQUESS OF Granny.JOHN, the eldest son of the thirdDuke of Rutland, was born on the 2ndof January, 1721. He was educated atEton, and at Trinity College, Cambridge.After having travelled for sometimeon the continent with Dr. Ewer,subsequently Bishop of LandafF, heentered the army, and raised a regimentduring the rebellion of 1 745. In1759, at which period he had obtainedthe colonelcy ot the blues, he was sentout, with the rank of lieutenant-general,as second in command of the Britishand Hanoverian horse, serving withPrince Ferdinand of Brunswick, inGermany. At the battle of Minded,his troops took no part in the contest,owing to the conduct of Lord GeorgeSackville, his superior officer; who, afew days afterwards, in consequence ofan indirect reflection upon his behaviour,contained in Prince Ferdinand'sgeneral orders, returned toEngland ; and Granny succeeded to hiscommand. In the same year he wasappointed lieutenant-general of theordnance, and nominated first plenipotentiaryto invest Prince Ferdinandwith the insignia of the Garter. Hedistinguished himself in most of thesubsequent manoeuvres and actions ofthe allied forces, particularly at thebattle of Harbour; he led the cavalryseveral times to the charge with impetuouscourage, and, according to PrinceFerdinand's despatches, " contributedextremely to the success of the day."In 1763, having previously beensworn in of the privy-council, he wasconstituted master-general of the ordnance; in 1764, lord-lieutenant andcustos rotulorum of the county ofDerby; and in 1766, commander-in-chiefof the forces in Great Britain.He sat for Graham, in three parliaments,and was subsequently returnedfor Cambridgeshire, which he representeduntil his death. In 1770, he madea public recantation, in the house ofcommons, of an opinion which he hadformerly given on the Middlesex election; and stated that he should alwayslament his vote on that occasion, as thegreatest misfortune of his life. Heshortly after resigned all his employments,and retired to Scarborough,where, being suddenly seized with thegout in the stomach, he died on the19th of October, 1770, and was buriedat Beresford. He left several children,by his wife, a daughter of the Duke ofSomerset, the eldest of whom succeededto the dukedom of Rutland, and diedlord-lieutenant of Ireland, in 1787 ;and the second, Lord Robert Manners,was mortally wounded in an engagementwith the French, in 1782.The high reputation of the Marquessof Granny considerably exceeds hisactual merits. It is true, that those wholoved him least, made no question of hiscourage ; but so far was he from meritingthe title of a great military commander,which has generally been accorded tohim, that he never even had an opportunityof distinguishing himself, exceptas a subordinate. Horace Walpole, whoadmits his possession of many goodqualities, describes him as a man of nocapacity, whose ductile disposition andlove of drinking recommended him toPrince Ferdinand. His great popularityTHE ARMY.is more easily accounted for than hisposthumous renown. The daring conductwhich he displayed in the field,was, doubtless, compared, much to hisadvantage, with the behaviour of hispredecessor, Lord George Sackville ;and he won golden opinions, from thosewho served under his command, by thegenerosity of his disposition, and thejoyous heartiness of his manners. Heprocured provisions for his men, andkept an open table for his officers whenthey were in bad quarters. The sickand wounded among the former, andthose among the latter, whose incomewas unequal to their rank or necessities,in him, it is said, found a never-failingresource ; and whatever, it is added,could be done to animate the soldiery,to make them cheerful in the service, toalleviate the hardships of war, wasexerted beyond what could be thoughtpossible in the limits of a private fortune.His benevolence, in fact, wasnot bounded by his legitimate means ;an enormous load of debt being theconsequence of the profuse liberality inwhich he indulged. The unsuspiciousopenness of his character has beenhighly eulogized ; but while it endearedhim to his friends, it proved of greatdetriment to the public service, exposinghim, as it did, when employed abroad,to the most barefaced peculations on thepart of the German contractors. On thewhole, after giving him full credit forhis gallantry and zeal, it is impossibleto come to any other conclusion, thanthat he has obtained, in popular estimation,a higher rank among the greatmilitary commanders of this country,than he deserved.Junius severely remarks, that he wasas brave as a total absence of all feelingor reflection could make him ; butwhatever may have been the quality ofhis courage, no doubt can exist that itrendered him eminently useful to hiscommander-in-chief, and the cause ofthe allies. " Towards the end of thewar," as one of his contemporaries relates,when the army was so situated, thatif a rising ground on the left had beentaken possession of by the French, itmight have been attended with the worstresults, and when the generals destinedto lead a corps to occupy it, declared theservice impracticable, Lord Granny arosefrom a sick bed, in the middle of thenight, assumed the command of thetroops, marched, with a fever upon him,in an inclement season, took possessionof the post, and secured the army."His conduct, as commander-in-chief,was severely attacked, in one of theletters of Junius. " If," said the anonymouswriter, " it be generosity to accumulatein his own person and family anumber of lucrative employments,to provide, at the public expense, forevery creature that bears the name ofManners, and, neglecting the meritand services of the rest of the army,to heap promotions on his favorites anddependants, the present commander-in-chiefis the most generous man alive."And again, " if the discipline of thearmy be in any degree preserved, whatthanks are due to a man whose cares,notoriously confined to filling up vacancies,have degraded the office of com-mander-in-chief into a broker of commissions?" Of this the marquess himselftook no notice, but shortly afterwards,Sir William Draper addressed aletter to the printer of the Public Advertiser,in his lordship's defence, which,however, had the unfortunate effect ofdrawing Junius forward to say morethan he had originally intended. Heinsisted that the army had been grosslyneglected ; and though he now acquittedthe marquess of the baseness of sellingcommissions, again asserted, that hismilitary cares had never extendedbeyond the disposal of vacancies; addingthat, in his distribution of them,he had consulted nothing but parliamentaryinterest, or the gratification ofhis immediate dependants. " Withoutdisputing Lord Granny's courage," observedthe anonymous writer, in thissecond attack, which was addressed toSir William Draper, " we are yet tolearn in what article of military knowledge,nature has been so very liberalto his mind. If you have served withhim, you ought to have pointed outsome instances of able disposition andwell-concerted enterprise, which mightfairly be attributed to his capacity as ageneral. You say that he has acquirednothing but honour in the field. Is theordnance nothing ? Are the Blues nothing?Is the command of the army,with all the patronage annexed to it,nothing? Where he got these nothingsI know not ; but you, at least, ought toTHOMAS GAGE.have told us where he deserved them."After one or two other letters hadbeen published by each party on thesubject, " it was signified," as Juniusbelieved, " to Sir William Draper, at therequest of Lord Granny, that he shoulddesist from writing in his lordship'sdefence." This observation formed partof a note to a collection of the letterspublished after Lord Granny's decease,which, it is added, " was lamented byJunius. He (the marquess) undoubtedly,owed some compensations to the public,and he seemed determined to acquithimself of them. In private life, he wasunquestionably that good man, who, forthe interest of the country, ought tohave been a great one. Bonum virumfacile divers : magnum licenser. Ispeak of him now without partiality :I never spoke of him with resentment.His mistakes in public conduct did notarise either from want of sentiment orjudgment; but, in general, to the difficultyof saying ' No,' to the bad peoplewho surrounded him."THOMAS GAGE.THOMAS, second son of the firstViscount Gage, was born about theyear 1721, and entered the army at anearly age. After having served undervarious distinguished commanders, withconsiderable credit, he became a ; and, in April, 1774,succeeded Mr. Hutchinson, as governorof Massachusetts Bay. In the followingmonth, pursuant to orders from thesecretary for the colonies, he proceeded,with four regiments, to Boston,where alarming riots had recently takenplace, on account of the duty imposedupon tea. Contrary to his expectations,he was remarkably well received, notwithstandingthe unpopular enactment,by which the port was closed againsttrading vessels, had been put in forcepreviously to his arrival.On the 24th of June, he issued a proclamationagainst the Solemn Leagueand Covenant, which he termed atraitorous and hostile combination ; andcharged the magistrates to apprehendall such persons as should aid or abetit. On the 4th of August, he issuedanother proclamation, recommendingthe encouragement of virtue and theprevention of vice; which, according toGordon, the author of A History of theRevolution, gave great offence, on accountof his having classed hypocrisyamong the immoralities. On the 15thof the same month, he chose the newcouncil for Massachusetts Bay ; and,on the 23rd, forbade town meetings tobe held, except by special leave.In September, the people committedsome riotous acts, in consequence of hishaving seized the powder magazines, atCambridge, and other places. On the18th of March, 1775, he obtained possessionof a large quantity of musket-cartridgeswhich had been collected bythe provincials; and, on the 19th oafApril, sent a detachment, from Boston,to destroy the cannon and ammunitionat Concord. On their return from thisservice, his troops were fired upon, atLexington, by the provincials, and askirmish ensued, in which several menwere killed and wounded. This triflingaffair may be considered as the commencementof the American war : itwas followed, on the 5th of May, by aresolution of the provincial congress,assembled at Watertown, not to obeyGeneral Gage as their governor. Onthe 25th of the same month, he receiveda reinforcement, under GeneralsHowe, Clinton, and Burgoyne, " whowere so assured," says Gordon, " therewould be no occasion to draw the swordin support of ministerial measures, thatthey had prepared to amuse themselvesin fishing, and other diversions." Prior,however, to their arrival, active operationshad commenced ; the Americans,under Allen and Arnold, having seizedupon Ticonderago, and some otherplaces indifferently garrisoned.On the 12th of June, General Gageissued a proclamation establishing martiallaw, and offering pardon to all whowould avail themselves of it, except thecelebrated Samuel Adams and JohnHancock. On the 16th, a body ofTHE ARMY.Americans received orders to take possessionof Bunker's Hill, for the purposeof preventing the British from penetratingto the interior of the country ;but, by some mistake, they proceededto Breed's Hill, where, after havingthrown up entrenchments during thenight, they were attacked, on the morningof the 17th, by the British, who,to conceal their approach, set fire toCharleston, but, it is said, on accountof a sudden change of wind, they derivedno advantage from the smoke.The Americans reserved their fire untiltheir antagonists had approached withinten or twelve rods of the redoubt,when, most of them being excellentmarksmen, they did such terrific execution,that the British troops soonretreated in great disorder. In a secondattempt the latter were again repulsed ;but on being brought up a third timeto the attack, some cannon having, inthe interim, been so planted as to rakethe inside of the enemy's breast-workfrom end to end, they drove their opponentsfrom the post. Instead, however,of following up their success by amovement upon Cambridge, the headquartersof the Americans, about twomiles distant, as it was expected theywould have done, that place not beingin a state of defence, they proceededno further than Bunker's Hill, wherethey threw up some works for theirsecurity, white their antagonists didthe same on an opposite eminence. Theloss of the British in this affair was upwardsof one thousand ; and that of theAmericans, as Gordon states, only fourhundred and fifty-three. Among these,was Major-general Warren, whosedeath, the author just quoted observes,was thought cheaply purchased, at thesacrifice of five hundred men.The Americans, with great alacrity,now secured the most exposed parts oftheir lines with strong redoubts, andthe British soon found themselves completelyshut up in Boston, withoutprovisions enough for their subsistence,several thousands of the inhabitantssuffering, at the same time, accordingto Gordon, from " want of bread, andevery necessary of life."On the 10th of October, Gage resignedhis command to Sir William Howe, anddeparted for England. At the time ofhis death, which took place on the 2ndof April, 1788, he was a general in thearmy, and colonel of the second regimentof foot. By his wife, Margaret,daughter of Peter Kemble, Esq., presidentof the council of New Jersey,he had six sons and five daughters.His talents for command are said tohave been respectable; and had hisforce been more efficient in number,and properly supplied, he might, perhaps,have followed up his defeat otthe Americans, at Bunker's Hill, bysome more brilliant achievement.WILLIAM VISCOUNT HOWE.WILLIAM, son of the second ViscountHowe, and younger brother ofthe celebrated admiral, Richard, EarlHowe, after having passed some time atEton, became a cornet, in the Duke ofCumberland's regiment of dragoons ;and, during the seven years' war, distinguishedhimself in America, particularlyunder General Wolfe, at Quebec.In 1764, he obtained the command ofthe fourth regiment of foot; in 1772,he became a major-general; and, in1775, having previously been appointedcolonel of the Welsh Fusileers, commandedone division of the army underGeneral Gage, at the battle of Bunker'sHill, fought immediately after. Onthe departure of General Gage forEngland, he assumed the chief commandof the British forces in America ;and evacuating Boston, which wasthen besieged by Washington, proceededto Halifax, whence he proceeded,in August, 1776, to Long Island,where, on the 27th of that month, hedefeated the American general, Sullivan; two thousand of whose troopswere either killed or wounded, and upwardsof one thousand made prisoners,besides himself and twelve other fieldofficers; although the British returnsamounted to only three hundred andfifty men killed and wounded. On theloth of September, he took possessionVISCOUNT HOWE.of New York ; and, on the 28th of thesame month, defeated General Washington,at White Plains. He soon afterretired into winter quarters, and whilethe enemy were preparing for an activecampaign, passed his time, as it is alleged,in culpable indolence.On the 12th of June, 1777, he attempted,by a stratagem, to bringWashington to an engagement, butwithout success. On the 7th of thefollowing month, he was made a major-general,and received a red riband forhis previous services. Shortly afterwards,he encountered and defeated theAmericans, on the heights of BrandyWine ; he next took possession ofPhiladelphia, and closed the campaignby repulsing the enemy in an attackwhich they made on his encampment,at German Town. He passed thewinter, it is said, as he had the precedingone, " in more ease than diligence;"and shortly after he hadopened the next campaign, was supersededin his command by Sir HenryClinton. " The British officers," saysGordon, in his History of the AmericanRevolution, " to express their esteemfor Sir William Howe, prepared a magnificententertainment, with which tograce his departure for Great Britain.It consisted of a variety of parts, onland and water; was called the mischance;and was given on Monday,the 18th of May, 1778. It was, indeed,magnificent ; began at four in the afternoon,and ended at four the nextmorning. There was a grand andbeautiful exhibition of fire-works; towardsthe conclusion of which, a triumphalarch appeared gloriously illuminated,with Fame blowing from hertrumpet, in letters of light ; Thylaurels shall never fade.' "On a parliamentary investigation ofhis conduct, which took place in 1779,it appeared that in the opinion of SirCharles Grey, Lord Cornwallis, andother military men, he had done allthat could be expected, considering thepaucity of his force, which, according tothe evidence taken, was totally inadequateto the subjugation of the colonies.In 1782, he was made lieutenant-generalof the ordnance ; in 1786, colonelof the nineteenth dragoons ; and shortlyafterwards, a full general. In 1795, hebecame governor of Berwick; in 1799,he succeeded to the Irish viscountyof his distinguished brother, AdmiralHowe; in 1804, he resigned his officeof lieutenant-general of the ordnance ;and died without issue, on the 12th ofJuly, 1814; at which time, he was aprivy-counsellor and governor of Plymouth.He had represented Nottinghamin several parliaments ; but doesnot appear to have taken any conspicuouspart in political affairs.Although this officer had obtainedthe applause of his superiors, while atthe head of a regiment, as well as ofa division, it is quite clear that hehad neither acquired experience norevinced ability enough to warrant hisappointment to so important a command,as that to which he was injudiciouslyraised. With his comparativelyinefficient force, government expectedhim not merely to beat his indefatigableand well-supported antagonist,but completely to subdue the revoltedcolonies ; which, notwithstanding hisoccasional successes, were in a situationto defy a general of more genius, withmuch greater means. Of his intrepidity,he had, before he succeededGeneral Gage, given sufficient proof.While serving under Wolfe, with whomhe seems to have been a favourite, heledthe body, as Basset states, whichfirst seized the heights of Abraham;and at Bunker's Hill, his conduct meritedand obtained considerable eulogy ;but in diligence, energy, and militarytalent, as a commander, he was farinferior to the great Washington. Hemight, perhaps, have been more enterprisingas a general, had he not alsobeen appointed to act as one of thecommissioners for effecting a reconciliationwith the colonies. His employmentin this capacity is, with sometruth, said to have been inconsistentwith his duties as commander-in-chief ;and it was insinuated, that instead ofprosecuting hostilities with proper zealandactivity, he had gone to the utmostverge of his instructions, to effect anamicable arrangement with the Americans.This, however, it is proper tostate, he solemnly denies, in a narrativeof his proceedings ; protesting that hehad, in conjunction with his brother,carried on the war, with as muchvigour as the force in their hands wouldpermit.THE ARMY.ROBERT MONCKTON.ROBERT MONCKTON, the secondson of Viscount Gallway, entered thearmy at an early age ; and, after havingseen considerable service, obtained, in1755, the rank of lieutenant-colonel,and the governorship of Nova Scotia,in which employment he renderedhimself conspicuous, by his successesagainst the French and their Indianallies. In 1759, he was appointed colonelof the seventeenth foot, and employed,with the rank of brigadier-general, assecond in command of the forces sentout against Quebec. On the death ofWolfe, in the celebrated battle withMontcalm, the chief command devolvedupon Monckton ; by whom it hadscarcely been assumed, when he wasshot through the lungs by a ball,which, two days after the victory, wascut out from under the blade bone ofhis shoulder. He shortly afterwardsbecame a major-general ; and, towardsthe close of the year 1761, was appointedto the chief command of theland forces sent out, on board AdmiralRodney's squadron, against Martini ;off which the armament arrived on the7th of January, 1762.After having effected a landing, withoutloss, at Cas Navire, the troops,assisted by a body of seamen, attackedand took a strongly fortified eminence,called Morne Tartenson; from which, toadopt the language of General Monck-ton'sdespatches, " the enemy retired,in the greatest confusion, to the townof Fort Royal, and to Morne Gamier,(a still higher hill than Morne Tor-benson,and separated from it by adeep ravine, covered with a very thickbrush, and a rivulet at the bottom,)from whence they thought they werenever to be dislodged, both from itsnatural strength, and the works andbatteries they had on it." Three daysafter, " the enemy, under cover of theirbatteries, and with the greatest part oftheir force, had the temerity," continuedMonckton, " to attack the twocorps of light infantry, and BrigadierHaviland's brigade, in the posts theyoccupied ; but were received with suchsteadiness, that they were immediatelyrepulsed ; and such was the ardour ofthe troops, that they passed the ravinewith the enemy, seized their batteries,and took post there." Possession ofMorne Gamier having thus been unexpectedlyobtained, its guns were atonce turned against the citadel ; whichcapitulated on the 4th of February,and in a few days the whole islandwas reduced.The surrender of Martini," saysthe author of A History of the War,which was the seat of the superiorgovernment, the principal mart of trade,and the centre of all the French forcein the Caribbees, naturally drew onthat of all the dependent islands. Granada,a fertile island, and possessedof some good harbours, was given upwithout opposition; St. Lucia and St.Vincent, the right to which had so longbeen objects of contention betweenthe two nations, followed its example ;and the English were now sole andundisturbed possessors of all the Caribbees."At the time of his death, which occurredon the 21st of May, 1782, GeneralMonckton was governor of Portsmouth,and colonel of the seventeenthregiment of foot. During the early partof his career, he had displayed considerablegallantry; his conduct in theexpedition against Quebec, is said tohave elicited the applause of Wolfe ;and his conquest of Martini, in conjunctionwith Rodney, may, on accountof " the almost insurmountable difficulties,"according to the despatchesof the latter, " which the troops hadto struggle with, and the surprisingstrength of the country, improved byall that art could add," be deemed abrilliant achievement He was, it issaid, much beloved in the army, particularlyby the subalterns : while atMartini, he kept an open table, offorty covers, principally for their entertainment,and severely reprimanded hisaide-de-camp when he found a vacantplace at the table. He also, in orderto make up for the loss they sustained,LORD DORCHESTER.by being deprived of forage-money,ordered a number of negroes to besold for their benefit ; and, on beinginformed that the proceed would notamount to what had been expected,supplied the deficiency, by a liberalcontribution of ,500 from his privatepurse.GUY CARLETON, LORD DORCHESTER.GUY CARLETON was born at Strayin Ireland, in the year 1722, and,at an early age, entered the guards,in which he continued until 1748, whenhe became lieutenant-colonel of theseventy second regiment. In 1758, heserved under Amherst, at the siege ofLouisburg ; in the following year underWolfe, at that of Quebec; and, subsequently,under Hodgson, at that ofBelleisle, where he acted as brigadier-general.In each of these expeditionshis bravery and skill procured him theflattering notice of his superior officers ;and, in February, 1762, he was promotedto the rank of colonel in the army.Shortly afterwards, he embarked in theexpedition against Havannah, wherehe displayed great spirit, and receiveda wound, at the successful storming ofa Spanish redoubt, on the Moro Hill.On the recal of Murray, he becamelieutenant-governor, and, ultimately,governor of Quebec. In 1772, he wasmade a major-general in the army, andcolonel of the forty-seventh regimentof foot Previously to the passing ofthe Quebec bill he was examined, atthe bar of the house of commons, as tothe expediency of the proposed measure,which, it is said, had been suggestedby himself. Returning to hisgovernment, he endeavoured to retakeTiconderago and Crown Point, (recentlysurprised and captured by theAmericans) but the paucity of his forcesrendered the design abortive. He wasnot only defeated, but found great difficultyin making his escape to Quebec;where, being now almost destitute ofregular troops, and in expectation of anattack from the enemy, he judiciouslytrained the inhabitants to the use ofarms, and put the place into so effectivea state of defence, that the Americans,on attempting, soon afterwards, to carryit by storm, were repulsed.Having received a reinforcementfrom England, he soon after marchedagainst the enemy; drove them fromthe province, and prepared to act stillmore decidedly on the offensive. Toforward his views, he engaged someof the Indian tribes to act with theBritish ; but their savage enormities,when not under his personal restraint,made him, ultimately, regret that hehad ever solicited their aid. As soonas his arrangements were completed,he advanced with his army towardsthe lakes, where he attacked and totallydefeated the American flotilla,under the command of Arnold. Hewas soon afterwards superseded inhis command, partly in compliance, itis supposed, with his own desire, andreceived a red riband for his exploits.While at home, he acted as one ofthe commissioners of public accounts ;and so high did he rank in the estimationof government, that, in 1781, hewas appointed to the chief command ofthe forces in America. His conduct inthis important office, which he retaineduntil the termination of hostilities, appearsto have been disinterested, conciliatory,and, in all respects, judicious.In 1790, he was promoted to thecolonelcy of the fifteenth dragoons, and,having previously been created BaronDorchester, for several years acted asgovernor of all the British possessions,except Newfoundland, in North America.The close of his life was passedin retirement. He died in 1808, andwas succeeded in his title and estateby his eldest son, Thomas, a generalin the army.As a soldier, Lord Dorchester appearsto have deservedly obtained ahigh reputation for courage and skill.Misfortune animated him to redoubledexertion ; he always made the utmostof his resources; and had the valuablequality of adapting small means to theachievement of great results.72 THE ARMY.GEORGE, MARQUESS TOWNSHEND.GEORGE, the fourth Viscount and firstMarquess Townshend, was born on the28th of February, 1723, and named afterhis godfather, George the First. Afterhaving distinguished himself at thebattles of Dettingen, Fontenoy, Culloden,and Lafleldt, he was employed,in 1759, being then a brigadier-general,as third in command of the expeditionagainst Quebec. In the decisive battlefought on the heights above the town, hewas actively engaged at the head of theleft wing, until informed that the chiefcommand had devolved on him ; Wolfebeing killed, and Monckton severelywounded. The French had alreadygiven way, and Townshend, on repairingto the centre, found that part of hisforces had been thrown into disorderby their eagerness to pursue the retreatingenemy. At this critical moment,a French corps of two hundredmen, who had not been engaged, appearedin the rear of the British.Townshend immediately checked theardour of his troops, and, forming a newline, prepared for another engagement :but, on his advancing towards themwith two battalions, the French thoughtproper to retire.On the day after the battle, whichtook place on the 13th of September,Townshend began to employ his troopsin redoubling their-camp, in making aroad up the precipice for cannon, andin cutting off all communication betweenQuebec and the surroundingcountry. On the 17th, at noon, thegarrison proposed to surrender, andearly the next morning, capitulatedon honourable terms ; the inhabitantsbeing guaranteed the free exercise oftheir religion, and a full possession oftheir civil rights, until a general peaceshould decide their future condition.Townshend was subsequently engagedat Fellinghausen, and served acampaign in Portugal, under Count dela Lippe Buckbourg. From 1747, untilhis accession to the peerage, on thedeath of his father, in 1764, he representedhis native county, Norfolk, inparliament, of which he was a particularlyactive and distinguished member.In 1767, he obtained the vicegerencyof Ireland, in which, however, he wassuperseded by Lord Harcourt, who, itis said, on arriving at the castle, aboutthree o'clock in the morning, found hispredecessor carousing with a few jovialcompanions, " Well, my lord," saidTownshend, after congratulating hissuccessor, " though you did come uponus very unexpectedly, you must do usthe justice to admit that you have notfound us napping." In 1772, he waspromoted from the post of lieutenant-generalof the ordnance, to the head ofthat department ; and, in 1787, theking raised him to a marquisate. Atthe time of his death, which occurredon the 14th of September, 1807, he wasa field-marshal, colonel of the secondregiment of dragoon-guards, governorof Jersey, lord-lieutenant of Norfolk,high-steward of Tamworth, Yarmouth,and Norwich, and D. C. L. He hadbeen twice married : first, to a daughterof the Earl of Northampton ; and secondly,to a daughter of Sir WilliamMontgomery, by both of whom he hadchildren.The Marquess Townshend, althoughhe performed no brilliant exploits, appearsto have been inferior to few of hiscontemporaries in courage and militaryskill. As an orator he was powerful,especially in humorous sarcasm. At onetime he attached himself to the party ofthe Duke of Cumberland, which, however,he soon quitted for that of thePrince of Wales ; and retiring, temporarily,from the army, gratified hisspleen, and amused his friends, byridiculing the duke in caricatures ;which, although gross, are representedto have been particularly clever. Soonafter his secession from military employment,one of the duke's militaryspies is said to have thus accosted him,at a review : " How is it that youhonour us with your presence to-day ?I suppose you are merely a spectator."And why," replied Townshend, " maynot one come here as a Spectator, sir,as well as a Taller?"EARL OF ALBEMARLE.GEORGE KEPPEL, EARL OF ALBEMARLE.GEORGE, eldest son of William-anneRepel, second Earl of Albemarle,was born on the 8th of April,1724 ; and after receiving a suitable education,entered the army. On the 17thof April, 1743, he became captain-lieutenantin the second regiment of foot-guards,with the rank of a lieutenant-colonelof infantry; and obtained thecommand of a company in the sameregiment, with the rank of colonel, onthe 4th of June, 1745. He served asaid-decamp to the Duke of Cumberland,at Fpntenoy; and, as a subordinate,contributed to the victory at Culloden; with intelligence of which hewas despatched, express, to the king ;who received him most graciously, madehim a handsome present, and appointedhim his aid-decamp. In the sameyear, he was chosen member for Chichester,which he continued to representuntil called up to the house ofpeers, on the death of his father.About this time he was appointedlord of the bedchamber to the Duke ofCumberland ; and, on the 1st of November,1749, obtained the command ofthe twentieth regiment of foot. In 1754,he succeeded to his father's earldomand estate, and was soon after appointedcolonel of the third regiment of dragoons.He became a major-generalon the 1st of February, 1756 ; a on the 1st of April,1759 ; and a privy-counsellor, as well asgovernor of the island of Jersey, earlyin 1761.On the 5th of March, 1762, he embarkedon board Admiral Pocock'sfleet, as commander-in-chief of the landforces, amounting to ten thousand men,destined for the reduction of Havannah ;in sight of which they arrived early inJune, and soon effected a landing withoutdifficulty. One division of theforces, under Eliott, afterwards celebratedfor his defence of Gibraltar, encampedon the south-east of the harbour,for the purpose of covering the siege,while another, under Repel, was employedin attacking fort Moro, whichcommanded the town as well as theentrance to the bason. " The hardships,"says a writer, in 1763, " which the Englisharmy sustained in carrying on thesiege are almost inexpressible ; the earthwas everywhere so thin, that it was withgreat difficulty they could cover themselvesin their approaches. There wasno spring or river near them : it wasnecessary to bring water from a greatdistance; and so precarious and scantywas the supply, that they were compelledto have recourse to water fromthe ships. Roads for communicationwere to be cut through thick woods,and the artillery was to be dragged,for a vast way, over a rough rocky shore.Several dropped down dead with heat,thirst, and fatigue. But such was the resolutionof our people, such the happyand perfect unanimity which subsistedbetween the land and sea services, thatno difficulties, no hardships, slackened,for a moment, the operations againstthis strong, important and well-defendedplace."Batteries were, at length, erectedagainst the Moro ; and the besiegedwere repulsed with some loss, in a sally :but the fort successfully resisted thecombined efforts of the army and apart of the fleet, on the 1st of July;and though the firing was kept up,for several days afterwards, with unremittingvigour from the batteries, nomaterial advantage was obtained. Aportion of the works erected by thebesiegers, which had cost six hundredmen seventeen days' labour, unfortunatelycaught fire, and, being made ofwood, was consumed in a few minutes.Disease, by disabling nearly one half ofthe forces, doubled the fatigue of thosewho continued efficient, and the wantof provisions and water was felt dailywith increased severity ; still, the steadinessof the commanders, it is said, infusedlife and activity into their troops,and roused them to incredible exertions.A vigorous sally was made from thetown, with a view to relieve the Moro,in which, however, the enemy were repulsedwith a loss of four hundred oftheir men. At length, the guns of theTHE ARM Y.fort having been silenced, the assailantseffected a lodgment in the covered way :but, " just at the seeming accomplishmentof their work, an immense ditchyawned before them, for the greaterpart cut in the solid rock, eighty feetdeep and forty feet wide." Fortunately,a thin ridge had been left for the purposeof covering it towards the sea ; acrossthis the miners passed, and soon blewup enough of the wall to fill part ofthe ditch, effecting, at the same time,a considerable breach, by which thetroops entered, and, after a spiritedstruggle, became masters of the fort.This important event took place onthe 30th of July : only two days before,a reinforcement of British troops hadarrived from New York ; and, with theirassistance, not only was the fire of thefort directed against the town, but, inorder to command its entire easternside, a line of batteries, mounting forty-threepieces of cannon and twelvemortars, was erected on the hill of theSavannas. Preparations were alsomade for attacking the city from thewest. Another reinforcement from NorthAmerica soon afterwards arrived, andLord Albemarle proposed, as his positionnow rendered the force he commandedirresistible, that, to save a further effusionof blood, the Spaniards should capitulate.The governor, however, repliedthat he would defend the place tothe last extremity, and a vigorous cannonadingon both sides immediatelycommenced ; but it had not continuedabove six hours when flags of truce appearedfrom every quarter of the town ;and on the 14th of August, the Britishforces took possession of Havannah,with a territory of one hundred andeighty miles westward of the harbour,nine ships of the line, four frigates, animmense quantity of stores, nearly fourhundred pieces of ordnance, and threemillions sterling in money and merchandize.Lord Albemarle returned to Englandin February, 1763; in December, 1764,he was invested with the insignia of theBath; and, in July, 1771, with those ofthe Garter. His death took place onthe 13th of October, 1772, and his remainswere interred at Quidcnham,Suffolk. By his wife, Anne, thedaughter of Sir John Miller, of Chichester,Baronet, he had a son, WilliamCharles, who succeeded to the earldom.In his parliamentary career, the earl(whose political opinions were exceedinglyliberal) distinguished himself byhis opposition to, and protests against,the royal marriage act, and the rescindingof the East India dividends ;also, by solemnly pledging himself,in 1770, with forty-seven other peers,against any future infringement on therights of the people at elections. Hedisplayed great prudence, talent, andindomitable resolution as a commander.The conquest of Havannah, which heachieved in spite of difficulties that appearedto be almost insurmountable,was, according to one of the earl's contemporaries," a military advantage of thehighest class ; it was equal to the greatestnaval victory, by its effect on the enemy'smarine ; and, in the plunder, itequalled the produce of a national subsidy."His conduct as a conqueror is,however, represented as having beensomewhat harsh ; he exiled the bishopto Florida, chiefly for instituting clergymento benefices without his permission ;and exacted contributions from the merchants,which, government refusing toreceive, or even to support him in anyactions that might be instituted fortheir recovery, he was compelled to refund.ROBERT, LORD CLIVE.Robert, the second son of RichardClive, a lawyer, was born in Shropshire,on the 24th of February, 1725.He was sent, first, to a school at Stock,in Cheshire; thence, to another atMarket Drayton ; thirdly, to MerchantTailors' ; and, finally, to a private academy,at Hemel Tempted. In hisboyhood and youth, he appears to havedisplayed a daring, turbulent disposition,and an unconquerable aversionto study. In 1743, he obtained anLORD CLIVE.appointment as writer to the East IndiaCompany ; and. in the following year,proceeded to Madras ; where he appliedhimself with some diligence to the acquirementof Latin, but still evinced ahaughty recklessness of spirit, whichfrequently exposed him to censure anddisgrace. On one occasion, he wascompelled, by the governor, to apologize,for some contumelious behaviourto a secretary ; who, to shew, perhaps,that the offence was entirely forgotten,invited the young cadet to his table.No, sir," replied Clive, " I was notcommanded to dine with you."In 1746, Madras surrendered to theFrench ; but circumstances soon occurredwhich justified the English, it issaid, in breaking their parole ; and Clive,disguised as a Moor, escaped to St.David's. At this place, he gave a strongproof of his inflexible resolution. Twoensigns having been detected in a combinationto cheat Clive and some otherpersons, at a card party, the losers, forsome time, objected to hand over thestakes ; but at length, all of them werebullied into compliance, with the exceptionof Clive, who, persisting in hisrefusal, was challenged by one of thegamblers. He cheerfully gave his antagonista meeting; at which it wasagreed that both parties should dischargetogether. Clive, accordingly,fired on the signal being given ; but thereprobate ensign, treacherously reservedhis shot, and quitting his ground, presentedthe pistol to Clive's head, andcommanded him to ask for his life.After some hesitation, Clive complied ;but the ensign still threatened to blowout his brains, if he did not immediatelyrecant what he had said at the cardtable, and promise to pay his share ofthe loss. " Fire, and be d d, then !"said Clive ; " I said you cheated, I sayso still, and I never will pay you." Theensign called him a madman, and threwaway his pistol. When subsequentlycomplimented for his behaviour on thisoccasion, Clive said, " The man hasgiven me my life, and I have no right,in future, to mention his behaviour atthe card table ; but I never will payhim, or keep him company."Disgusted with the inactivity of thecivil service, Clive, in 1747, obtainedan ensigncy, and distinguished himselfat the siege of Pondicherry. An officerhaving, about this time, cast some reflectionson his courage, Clive demandedan explanation ; but, in return, receiveda blow on the ear. The officer refusedto accept a challenge, and on patientlysubmitting to the insult of havingClive's cane laid on his head, was dismissedthe service. At Devi Cotah,a fort of the Rajah of Tanjore, Clive,then a lieutenant, obtained permission(though it was not his turn) to lead theforlorn hope, of which, only three individualsbesides himself, escaped withlife, and the reduction of the fort wasin a great measure attributed to hisvalour.At the close of the war, he was admittedto the same rank in the civilservice that he would have attainedhad he not abandoned it ; and, throughthe friendship of Major Lawrence, whohad commanded at Devi Cotah, he receivedthe lucrative appointment ofcommissary-general. The fatigues hehad suffered brought on a nervousfever ; which, however, his strong constitutionenabled him to overcome ;and when war broke out again, in1751, he proceeded, with the rank ofcaptain, to the attack of Ascot. Thegarrison, panic-struck with an accountthey had received of the British armybeing seen marching with great unconcern,through a violent storm of thunderand lightning, surrendered the fortwithout resistance. By his humanity,and honourable treatment of their property,he conciliated the natives, andgained from them important intelligenceof the enemy's designs.The French attempted to retake thefort. It was a mile in circumference :the works were in ruin ; two breaches,(one thirty yards in extent,) were madein the wall ; the garrison was reducedfrom five hundred to two hundred men ;three Serjeants, and his lieutenant, werekilled by the side of Clive; who, however,at the end of seven weeks, compelledthe French to abandon the siege ;and, on receiving a reinforcement,gallantly engaged, and totally defeatedthem. After assisting to raise the siegeof Trichinopoly, he returned to England,in 1753 ; when, as an acknowledgmentof his meritorious services,an elegant diamond-hilted sword, ofthe value of 700, was voted to himby the East India Company ; which,THE ARMY.however, he would not accept, until asimilar honour had been conferred onhis friend, Major Lawrence, on whomhe subsequently settled 500 a year.Being appointed governor of FortSt. David's, he soon embarked againfor India; and, in conjunction withAdmiral Watson, took the strongholdof the pirate Anglia. He increased hisreputation, in 1756, at the capture ofCalcutta; and, in the following year,attacked the Nabob of Bengal, withonly seven hundred Europeans, andcompelled him to enter into a treatythat was highly advantageous to thecompany. He soon afterwards took theFrench settlement of Chandenagore,notwithstanding the interposition ofSurajah Dowlah ; who, threatening tore-enact the atrocities of which he hadbeen guilty at Calcutta, where he hadsuffocated many of his prisoners in thenotorious black hole, and evincing, inother respects, a virulent animosityagainst the British, Clive, feeling thatthe company's power in India couldnever be secure, until this barbarouspotentate was rendered harmless, eitherby force or stratagem, determined ondeposing him. With this view, heopened a communication with MeerJaffier, one of the nabob's officers, whohaving been deeply offended by hismaster, cheerfully agreed to assist indethroning the nabob, with whose dignitiesit was agreed, that he should, inreturn for his services, be invested. AGentoo merchant, named Omichund,was employed to conduct the correspondence: his recompense had alreadybeen stipulated; but, when the negotiationwas so far advanced, that Watts,the British resident at the nabob'scapital, who had borne a share in it, aswell as Meer Jaffier, were completely inhis power, the rapacious traitor insistedon an enormous additional sum beingeffectually secured to him. He, however,had to deal with a man, who, insuch a transaction, felt no scruples atdefeating villany by fraud. Clive causedtwo treaties to be drawn up betweenMeer Jaffier and the English agents,in one of which the exorbitant demandof Omichund was guaranteed, while,in the other, it was totally omitted.The former only being shown toOmichund, he duly performed the partthat was allotted to him in this iniquitousscheme, which being discountenancedby Admiral Watson, his signature tothe fictitious treaty, was, it is said,forged.Meanwhile, the nabob having obtainedinformation of the plot, frustratedit, for a time, by compelling Meer Jaffierto swear fidelity to him, and join hisarmy against the British. Clive, beingignorant of this proceeding, marchedtowards the nabob's capital, expecting,hourly, to be joined by the traitor. Thebattle of Plassey ensued; in which,partly by Clive's skill, and the braveryof his troops, but materially on accountof the terror with which the enemyregarded the British, and principally,perhaps, through the villany of MeerJaffier, the nabob's enormous army wasrouted with great slaughter, and hispower effectually crushed.Meer Jaffier now became nabob, andpresented Clive with 210,000, for originating,and carrying into effect, theconspiracy against Surajah Dowlah.The merchant Omichund, then confidentlyapplied for his expected reward,but was informed that he had nothingto receive, the treaty which he hadseen having been framed expressly tocheat him. This information drove himmad, and he continued in a state ofidiocy up to the day of his death, whichtook place about eighteen months afterwards.Clive suppressed two rebellionsagainst the new nabob, but artfullymade terms with a third competitorfor Surajah Dowlah's dignity, with aview to prevent his own puppet, MeerJaffier, from growing too independentof the British.For his valuable services to the company,Clive was appointed governorof Calcutta ; and, after having forcedthe great mogul's son to raise the siegeof Patna, attacked and defeated a Dutchforce, which had reached Bengal, forthe purpose, as it was alleged, of reinforcingthe garrisons of (he Dutchcompany in India; but, as Clive suspected,by the invitation of the nabob,to emancipate him from the yoke ofthe English. On this occasion, theDutch were so utterly discomfited,that they agreed to defray the expensesof the contest; and the attackwas no less honourable to the disinterestedness,than to the acuteness, ofClive ; for he had, but a short time before,LORD CLIVE.remitted to Europe two-thirds of hisfortune through the Dutch company ;England being, at that time, and evenwhen the action took place, at peacewith Holland.The Emperor of Delhi now conferredupon him the dignity of omrah ; MeerJaffier granted him a revenue of28,000 per annum ; and, on his returnto England, he was created BaronClive, of Plassey, in Ireland, and returnedto parliament as member forShrewsbury, which place he representedduring the remainder of hislife. The public were too much dazzledwith his success to investigate themeans by which it had been produced ;and, for a considerable period, fewmen enjoyed more popularity thanthe hero of Plassey."He was offered, but refused, on accountof ill health, the chief commandin the American war : in July, 1764,he, however, accepted the governor-generalshipof India, whither he immediatelyproceeded. Before his arrival,Meer Jaffier had been deposedand again restored ; and the Nabob ofOde, having succoured Possum DalyKhan, the temporary possessor of hisdignity, had also been defeated by theBritish forces under Major Adams ; sothat Lord Clive had merely to settlethe terms of an arrangement, which hedid, materially to the company's advantage.On returning to England, in 1769,he was made a knight of the Bath ;but he did not enjoy his honours andriches in peace. A charge, supportedby the minister, was brought forwardin the house of commons against him,in 1773, for having, in the acquisitionof his wealth, abused the powers withwhich he had been intrusted. Withthe assistance of Wedderburne, hemade a capital defence, which he concludedin the following terms : " If theresolution proposed should receive theassent of the house, I shall have nothingleft that I can call my own, except mypaternal income of 500 a year, whichhas been in the family for ages past.But upon this I am content to live;and, perhaps, I shall find more realcontent of mind and happiness, than inthe trembling affluence of an unsettledfortune. But to be called, after sixteenyears have elapsed, to account for myconduct in this manner ; and, after anuninterrupted enjoyment of my property,to be questioned, and consideredas obtaining it unwarrantably, is hardindeed, and a treatment of which Ishould not think the British senatecapable. Yet, if this should be the case,I have a conscious innocence withinme, that tells me my conduct is irreproachable.Francis, non elected:they may take from me what I have ;they may, as they think, make me poor ;but I will be happy. Before I sit down,I have one request to make to thehouse ; that, when they come to decideupon my honour, they will not forgettheir own." The accusation against himwas neither refuted nor declared to begroundless ; the house having concludedthe debate on the subject, with a votethat Lord Clive had rendered great andmeritorious services to his country.His constitution had never recoveredfrom the effects of the nervous fever,produced by fatigue during the earlypart of his military career ; and hishealth being now completely broken,and his high spirit irritated by the proceedingsagainst him in parliament, hebecame morbidly depressed ; and, atlength, on the 22nd of November,1774, put an end to his existence. Hewas, at that time, lord-lieutenant andcustos rotulorum of the counties ofSalop and Montgomery, doctor of laws,and fellow of the royal society. Byhis wife, a sister of Dr. Maskelyne, astronomerroyal, he had three daughtersand two sons.As a father, a husband, and a friend,the conduct of Lord Clive is said tohave been irreproachable. His mannerswere reserved among strangers ;but, with his intimates, he was lively,frank, and agreeable. He seldom spokein the house of commons, although itis clear, from his few speeches, that hepossessed considerable powers of eloquence.In person, he was ratherabove the middle size ; and his brow,naturally heavy on account of a fulnessabove the eyelid, is described as havingimparted a sullen and disagreeable expressionto his countenance.As a soldier, his intrepidity has rarelyben equalled ; and his skill as a commander,was, evidently, on a par withhis courage. He raised himself to eminenceby talents, on which he reliedTHE ARMY.implicitly to support it. He nevercalled but one council of war, (on theeve of the battle of Pliassey,) and thenacted in direct opposition to its advice.Utterly careless of life, his presenceof mind never forsook him ; and hisenergy invariably rose in proportion tothe difficulty and distress of his situation.The East India Company neverhad a more zealous, gifted, and efficientcommander. He found its power dreadfullydepressed, its forts in the handsof the enemy, its revenues diminished,and its very existence threatened withdestruction ; he left it in peaceful possessionof immense revenues, and dominantover fifteen millions of people.Nor was this all : for he contributedmaterially to the annihilation of itsrivals, the French and Dutch, and laidthe foundation of future victories, andfurther acquirements of territory, riches,and influence. He seems to have beenactuated by one strong leading principle,the aggrandizement of the company; to which, even the advancementof his own fortunes was evidentlysecondary. His plot with Meer Jaffier,against the Nabob Surajah Dowlah, notwithstandingthe previous atrocities ofthe latter, and however advantageousit may have been to the company andhimself, was grossly unjustifiable ; histrick upon Omichund, though successful,was mean and contemptible ; and hisacceptance of Meer Jaffier's enormousdonation, was, under the circumstances,derogatory to the character of a soldierand a man of honour. To his credit,it is stated, that he was a liberal supporterof benevolent institutions, andpresented, to the invalids of the EastIndia Company, the immense sum of70,000.GENERAL WOLFE.JAMES, the son of Lieutenant-generalEdward Wolfe, was born at Western,in Kent, in 1726. He enteredvery early into the army, and devotedhimself, with ardour, not only to theacquisition of professional, but of generalknowledge. During a visit to aprofessor, at the university of Glasgow,he felt so mortified at finding the conversationturn on subjects with whichhe was totally unacquainted, that, onthe following day, he waited again onthe professor, and earnestly besoughtthe latter to put him in the way ofacquiring that information, of which hehad found himself so deficient. Hisdesire being complied with, he forthwithentered upon a course of studyprescribed by the professor, which hecontinued to pursue with extraordinaryzeal during the residue of his stayat Glasgow, where his regiment wasthen quartered.In the German war, during whichhe obtained the lieutenancy of thetwentieth regiment of foot, then commandedby Kingsley, he acquired greatreputation for his courage and militaryskill, particularly at the battle ofLaflfeldt, although it took place whenhe was not above twenty years of age.In 1757, he accompanied the ingloriousexpedition against Rochefort as quareand vainly recommendedan attempt at landing. Pitt,afterwards Earl of Chatham, who wasthen premier, felt much dissatisfied atthe conduct of those who had beenintrusted with the chief command onthis occasion ; Wolfe, on the contrary,was applauded and promoted ; and,after he had acquired an increase ofreputation as a soldier, at the captureof Louisburg, he was judiciously placed,with the rank of major-general, at thehead of the forces destined to act againstQuebec.He accordingly embarked, with abouteight thousand men, on board the fleet,commanded by Admiral Saunders, andarrived, at the latter end of June, 1759,in the river St. Lawrence. Montcalm,an experienced French general, at thehead of ten thousand men, having postedhimself in a strong situation, on whatwas deemed the only accessible side ofQuebec, Wolfe, by a variety of manoeuvres,attempted to decoy him intoan engagement : but Montcalm resolvedto risk nothing; wisely relying on theGENERAL WOLFE.natural strength of the country, and hisnumerous troops of the wary natives,which were so posted, that to surprisehim appeared impossible. At length,Wolfe determined on attacking theFrench in their entrenchments ; but,notwithstanding his prudence and skill,the attempt was altogether unsuccessful,and he brought off his troops with somedifficulty, after they had suffered a considerableloss.The failure of some operations thathe subsequently attempted, the rapidadvance of the season, the inflexibleresolution of Montcalm to act only onthe defensive, produced a most seriouseffect on his spirits; and his constitution,naturally delicate, became materiallyimpaired by anxiety and fatigue.But, having partially recovered, herenewed his attempts, to bring Montcalmto an engagement, with increasedenergy. After amusing and deceivingthe enemy by several feints, he embarkedwith his forces about one inthe morning of the 13th of September,1759, and drifted with the tide, unobservedby the enemy's sentinels, whowere posted along the shore, with a viewto gain the heights at the back of thetown ; but, unfortunately, the currentcarried the boats beyond the spot wherehe had intended to land ; and whenthe troops were put on shore, they founda steep hill in front of them, havingonly one path, which was so narrow,that not even two men could ascend itabreast.Even the path," says an historian ofthe war, " was entrenched, and a captain'sguard defended it; but these difficultiesdid not abate the hopes of thegeneral, nor the ardour of the troops.The light infantry, under Colonel Howe,taking hold of stumps and boughs oftrees, pulled themselves up, dislodgedthe guards, and cleared the path ; then,all the troops, surmounting every obstacle,gained the top of the hill ; and,as fast as they ascended, formed themselves,so that they were all in order ofbattle by daybreak. Montcalm, whenhe heard that the English had ascendedthe hill, and were formed on the highground at the back of the town, scarcelycredited the intelligence, and still believedit to be a feint to induce him toabandon that strong post, which hadbeen the object of all the real attemptsthat had been made since the beginningof the campaign. But he was soon,and, fatally for him, undeceived. Hesaw clearly, that the English fleet wasin such a situation, that the upper andlower town of Quebec might be at onceattacked, and that nothing but a battlecould possibly save it."Quitting his entrenchments, Montcalmrapidly crossed the river St.Charles, and formed his troops oppositethe British, with admirable skill. Inpursuance of the orders issued byWolfe, his men reserved their fire untilthe French had approached withinforty yards of them. Their first discharge,consequently, produced greathavock in the enemy's lines : " but,"says the author before quoted, "justat the moment when the fortune of thefield began to declare itself, GeneralWolfe, in whom every thing seemedincluded, fell." He first received a ballin the wrist, but silently tied a handkerchiefabout the wound, and againcheered his troops to the attack : soonafterwards, another struck him in theabdomen ; of which, however, he saidnothing, but continued to exert himselfas before : in a few moments, athird took place in his breast ; and hethen suffered himself, though somewhatreluctantly, to be carried behindthe ranks.Notwithstanding his wounds, he stillappeared acutely solicitous as to theevent of the battle, and requested an attendantto take him to a spot where hemight have a nearer view of the field ;but, on being carried thither, the nearapproach of death had so dimmed hissight, that he could not distinctly perceivewhat was going forward. He,therefore, applied for information to anofficer who stood near him ; and thelatter, to the expiring hero's intensedelight, acquainted him that the Frenchlines seemed to be broken. In a fewminutes, a cry of " They run ! Theyrun!" was heard. "Who run?" inquiredWolfe, with trembling eagerness.On being told, in reply, thatthe French ran, and were utterlyrouted, he said, in a faint, but composedtone, " Thank God ! I die contented!" and immediately expired.The remains of the gallant general,who had thus expired at the momentof victory, were deposited in a vaultTHE ARMY.at Greenwich, which had, but a fewmonths before, received those of hisfather. A monument was erected tohis memory at Western, and another,at the public expense, in Westminsterabbey. He was never married,but had, it is said, been betrothedto a lady, with whom his nuptialswould have been solemnized, had itbeen his fortune to have returned fromthe scene of his glory. It is related,that the people of the village wherehis widowed mother resided, forbore,with admirable good feeling, to joinin the illumination with which thepublic in general celebrated his victory.The career of Wolfe was brief, butsplendid. It has been truly said ofhim, that, " indebted to family orconnexions, unsupported by intrigueor faction, he had accomplished thewhole business of life at a time whenothers are only beginning to appear."His powers were great, and his confidencein them daring, but still notrash. He was brave in the most unqualifiedacceptation of the term ; hiszeal for the service enabled him to bearup for a long time against excessivefatigue, notwithstanding the weaknessof his constitution; and an intenseanxiety not to discourage his troops ata critical moment, rendered him heedlessto the anguish which his woundsmust have occasioned him. Thoughyoung, he was an adept in militarytactics j and those operations by whichhe eventually forced the experiencedMontcalm to quit his entrenchments,have, as it appears, with propriety, beentermed " so many master-pieces in theart of war."SIR EYRE Comte.EYRE, the son of Children Conte,D. D. was born in Ireland, in 1726. Atan early age he entered the army, andserved against the rebels, in 1745.Having embarked for the East Indies,in 1754, he was present at the bombardmentof Calcutta ; of which, on its surrender,he landed and took possession,but was almost immediately superseded,as its governor, by his superior officer,Colonel Clive. He subsequently assistedat the captures of Hughes andChandenagore ; and, at the battle ofPlassey, materially contributed to thesuccess of the British, by his valour andconduct. When the French general,Tally, threatened to besiege Trichinopoly,Coote, then a colonel, hastilycollected his forces, with which, in threedays, he reduced Whitewash ; and, onTally attempting to retake it, completelyrouted, and drove him for refugeto Pondicherry, which the Britishsoon afterwards invested. Apparentlyby some mistake, Major Monson wasappointed to supersede Coote in theconduct of the siege ; but that officer,having soon after received a severewound, Coote resumed his command,and subdued the garrison.On returning to England, in 1762, hewas presented, by the court of directors,with a diamond-hilted sword, worth700 ; and also received the thanks ofthe house of commons, for his importantservices. In 1770, he went to Madras,as commander-in-chief of the company'sforces ; but, having had a dispute withthe governor, he soon came back, overland,to England. In 1771, he wasmade a knight of the Bath, colonel of theseventh regiment of foot, and governorof fort St. George.In 1780, he became a member of thesupreme council, and commander-in-chiefof the British forces at Bengal.Hyderr Ally having invaded the Carnatic,Sir Eyre Coote sailed, with a strongbody of troops, and a supply of money,to the coast of Coromandel ; whereafterhaving made an unsuccessful attackupon the fortified pagoda of Childhe was attacked, in 1780, atPorto Novo. by Hyderr Ally, at thehead of one hundred and fifty thousandmen ; whom, however, although theBritish army was in a wretched condition,and vastly inferior to the enemyin numbers, Coote, by his consummatemilitary skill, utterly defeated, withEARL GREY.prodigious slaughter. From a want ofsupplies, the British were incapable offollowing up their splendid success ;and Coote, overwhelmed with chagrin,and shattered in health, proceeded, inthe hope of repairing his exhaustedenergies, to Calcutta ; whence, in 1783,although then almost in a dying state,he embarked to put himself at the headof the army in Madras. During thevoyage, he was chased, for several days,by French cruisers, and the anxiety ofhis mind, while thus situated, so completelywore out his emaciated frame,that he died on the 26th of April, 1783,two or three days only after he hadlanded. His body was conveyed toEngland, and interred at Lockwood, inHants; and a monument was erectedto his memory in Westminster abbey.Having left no issue, his brother, theDean of Kilfenora, inherited the wholeof his immense property.The exploits of Sir Eyre Coote,doubtless, contributed much towardsthe security of the British empire inIndia. His character has been thusvividly depicted by Wilks, the historianof Mysore, but with a pencilrather too flattering in some of itstouches. " Nature had given to himall that Nature can confer in the formationof a soldier ; and the regular studyof every branch of his profession, andexperience in most of them, had formedan accomplished officer. A bodily frameof unusual vigour and activity, andmental energy, always awake, were restrainedfrom excessive action, by apatience and temper which never allowedthe spirit of enterprise to outmarchthe dictates of prudence. Daringvalour and cool reflection strove for themastery in the composition of this greatman. The conception and execution ofhis designs equally commanded theconfidence of his officers ; and, a master,at once, of human nature and of thescience of war, his rigid discipline wastempered with an unaffected kindness,and consideration for the wants, andeven the prejudices, of those whom hecommanded, which won the affectionsof European soldiers, and rendered himthe idol of the native troops." Nosepoy, it is said, who had served underhim, ever entered the Exchange, atMadras, without making an obeisance tothe portrait of Coote, which decoratedone of the walls.In common with many other commanders,he has been accused of amassinga fortune in the East Indies, bymeans which were rather disreputableto the character of a soldier; but ithas not been satisfactorily shewn, thathis wealth was, in any respect, dishonourablygained. His temper, naturallyhasty, became, towards the closeof his career, aggravated into a state ofdreadful irritability, by the disappointmentshe experienced with regard tosupplies while in the Carnatic ; on returningfrom whence, he appears tohave displayed a pitiable testiness towardsthe civil governor, Lord Maccart-ney, who observes of him, in a letter to afriend : " I court him like a mistress,and humour him like a child ; butwith all this, I have a most sincere regardfor him, and honour him highly ;but I am truly grieved to see a man ofhis military reputation, at his time oflife, made miserable by those whoought to make him happy ; and, from agreat public character, worked into thelittle instrument of private malignityand disappointed avarice."CHARLES, EARL GREY.CHARLES GREY, the first earl of j a field-officer. He commanded thethat name, was born in 1729, and entered,as a subaltern, in Kingsley's regiment,then serving on the continent,at the age of nineteen. In 1755, heobtained leave to raise an independentcompany ; and, on the 21st of January,1761, was promoted to the rank ofninety-eighth regiment at the capture ofBelleisle : during the peace that ensuedhe became a colonel, and aid-decampto the king. On the breaking out ofthe American war, he was sent toBoston, under Earl Howe, who appointedhim to a separate command,THE ARMY.with the local rank of major-general.He was soon afterwards detachedagainst an American force, underWayne, whom he surprised in thenight, and drove from his position, withgreat slaughter, entirely at the point ofthe bayonet ; the British soldiers, in thisdifficult but successful enterprise, inwhich they only lost eight men, having,in order to prevent the alarm which asingle shot would occasion, taken theflints from their muskets. In theautumn of 1778, he was engaged inthe destruction of the shipping, stores,and magazines, at Bedford and Martha'sVineyard ; on his return from whence,he surprised and nearly destroyed aregiment of American light dragoons,who were stationed in a barn, nearTaapan. For these, and other importantservices in America, he waspromoted to the rank of lieutenant-general.Returning to England, at the terminationof the war, he became amember of the house of commons, and,hi 1783, was invested with the order ofthe Bath. In 1787, on resigning thecommand of the twenty-eighth regimentof foot, he obtained the colonelcyof the eighth light dragoons; which,two years afterwards, he exchanged forthe seventh dragoon guards. In 1793,he was appointed to conduct a smallbody of troops into Maritime Flanders,and succeeded in securing the possessionof NewportHe was next employed, with thelocal rank of general, as comma n der-mischiefof the forces destined to attackthe French West India islands, andproceeded with a fleet, under Earl St.Vincent, against Martinique, early in1794. Three separate landings wereeffected, and, in a few weeks, the islandwas captured. St. Lucie soon afterwardssurrendered to the British troops ; who,on the 21st of April, after having metwith a vigorous resistance, obtainedpossession of Guadaloupe, which, however,was speedily retaken by a Frencharmament that had eluded the Englishfleet. Sir Charles Grey, who had embarkedfor England when he receivedintelligence of this event, immediatelyreturned, and again attacked the island,but without success. As a reward forhis services, he obtained, on his arrivalin this country, the governorship ofGuernsey. In 1795, he became colonelof the twentieth light dragoons, and,in the following year, he was made ageneral in the army.During the mutiny at the Nore, in1797, he was selected to direct a meditatedattack on the fleet from the worksat Sheerness ; which, however, fortunately,did not take place. In 1799,he succeeded General Lascelles in thecolonelcy of the third dragoon guards ;and, towards the close of the war, hecommanded in the southern districts.In 1801, he was raised to the peerage,by the title of Baron Grey de Hawick,in Northumberland ; and, in 1806, hebecame an earl. His death occurredon the 14th of November, 1807, atFellowmen, near Fenwick.Earl Grey was evidently an ablecommander, and fully merited the confidencereposed in him by the public,and the honours with which he wasrewarded by his sovereign. By hiswife, Elizabeth, daughter of GeorgeGrey, Esq. of Southwark, in the countyof Durham, whom he married in 1762,he had several children ; the eldest ofwhom, who succeeded to his earldom,has eminently distinguished himself asastatesman.Lieutenant-general BURGOYNE.JOHN BURGOYNE, the natural sonof Lord Single, entered the army atan early age; and, while quarteredwith his regiment at Preston, marriedLady Charlotte Stanley, whose father,the Earl of Derby, was so incensed atthe match, that he threatened utterly todiscard her; but a reconciliation atlength took place, and the earl allowedher 300 a year during his life, and,by his will, bequeathed her a legacy of25,000. The influence of the familyto which Burgoyne had thus becomeallied, tended materially to accelerateLieutenant-general BURGOYNE.Iris professional advance. In 1762, heacted as brigadier-general of the Britishforces which were sent out for the defenceof Portugal against France andSpain. An advanced body of theenemy's troops being stationed atValencia de Alcantara, a town situateon the frontiers, where it was supposedthey had collected a quantity of warlikestores, Burgoyne was despatchedwith orders, if possible, to surprise andstorm the place. In this important enterprise,he was completely successful :one of the best regiments in the Spanishservice was destroyed, and twenty of theenemy's officers were taken, besidesthe general who was to have commandedin the meditated invasion ofPortugal. Soon afterwards, whileposted near a camp at Villa Vela,composed of a considerable body of theFrench and Spanish cavalry, perceiving,it is said, " that they kept no verysoldierly guard," he detached ColonelLee, with a small force, to fall upontheir rear during the night ; Burgoynehimself, at the same time, made a feintattack upon another quarter, whichprevented them from being relieved byany of their adjacent posts. The wholeoperation appears to have been conductedwith considerable skill ; numbersof the enemy being slaughtered,and the remainder completely dispersed,with but a trifling loss on thepart of the British. This advantage,obtained at a critical moment, compelledthe Spaniards to fall back ontheir own frontiers, and terminated thecampaign.In 1775, Burgoyne was appointedto a command in America ; whence hereturned in the following year, andheld a long conference with the kingon colonial affairs. Resuming his post,in 1777, he addressed a proclamationto the native Indians, in which he invitedthem to his standard, but deprecatedwith due severity the cruelpractice of scalping. The pompous turgidityof style in which this addresswas couched, excited the ridicule of theAmericans, and procured for GeneralBurgoyne the soubriquet of ChronHis first operationswere successful : he dislodged theenemy from Ticonderago and MountIndependence, and took one hundredand twenty-eight pieces of cannon, alltheir armed vessels and batteries, aswell as a considerable part of theirbaggage, ammunition, provisions, andmilitary stores. But his subsequentcareer was truly disastrous : his troopssuffered much from bad roads, inclementweather, and a scarcity of provisions; the Indians, who had previouslyassisted him, deserted ; and theAmericans, under General Gates, surroundedhim with a superior force, towhich, although victorious in two engagements,he was, at length, compelledto capitulate, at Saratoga, withthe whole of his army. This event,which rendered him equally odious toministers and the people, was, forsome time, the leading topic of thepress; and numberless lampoons appeared,in which the general's conductwas most severely satirised. The punstersof the day, taking advantage ofthe American general's name, amusedthemselves unmercifully at Burgoyne'sexpense ; but of all their effusions,which, for the most part, were virulentrather than pointed, the following harmlessepigram, poor as it is, appears tohave been one of the best :Burgoyne, unconscious of impending fa to,Could cut bis way thro' woods, but not thro' Gala.Returning to this country on hisparole, in May, 1778, the opposition,fearing that he would take part withministers, and accuse those politicians,who were violently adverse to theAmerican war, of having contributed,by their speeches in parliament, if not,as it is added, by other modes of encouragement,to the success of theenemy at Saratoga, Fox was despatchedto meet him on his road to town, forthe purpose of inducing him to attributehis disaster to the misconduct of thosein office. A long interview accordinglytook place between them at Hounslow ;and Fox is said to have achieved hisobject by insisting, that ministers couldnot support the general without inculpatingthemselves ; that the kingwas strongly prejudiced against him;that the party in power would not beable to retain office for more thantwelve months ; and by promising Burgoynethe protection of his partyagainst government, and honourableemployment whenever the oppositionshould return to power.THE ARMY.On his arrival in London, the predictionof Fox was so far verified, thatthe king refused to see him ; and heinvain solicited a court-martial. Anunsuccessful attempt was soon afterwardsmade by some of his friends toobtain a parliamentary investigation ofhis conduct. On this occasion, ministerstook advantage of some disturbancein the gallery, which was excessivelycrowded, to move that strangers shouldwithdraw. Burgoyne, who was memberfor Preston, strongly objected tosuch a proceeding, as it might, perhaps,defeat the object of his friends j who, aswell as himself, were desirous of exposingevery particular, bearing on hiscapitulation at Saratoga, to the people.The motion was, however, carried ; andthe order for excluding strangers was sorigidly enforced, that the speaker senthis own son out of the house ; butGarrick, by consent of all parties, obtainedpermission to remain 1The surrender of Burgoyne wasbrought in different shapes under thenotice of parliament, on many subsequentoccasions; but the general nevercould obtain the inquiry which he mostardently and pertinaciously sought toprocure. In 1779, he was dismissedthe service, for refusing to return toAmerica, pursuant to the terms of hisconvention ; by which, in this particular,it seems, he did not think himselfbound in honour to abide. Three yearsafterwards, he was, however, restoredto his rank in the army, appointedcommander-in-chief in Ireland, andsworn in of the privy-council of thatkingdom. He died suddenly, of a fitof the gout, at his house in Hertfordstreet, on the 4th of August, 1792; andhis remains were interred in the cloistersof Westminster abbey.It would, perhaps, be rash to pronouncea positive opinion on the meritsof Burgoyne, as a commander. Heboldly courted a scrutiny into the causeswhich led to his surrender at Saratoga,which ministers refused, because, as ithas been insinuated, such a proceedingmight expose the absurd imprudenceand inefficiency of their own measureswith regard to the American war.Prior to the capitulation, his militarycareer, as well in America as Portugal,had been rather brilliant : his misfortunewas precisely similar to thatwhich befel Cornwallis ; but, unlike thelatter, Burgoyne was not allowed an opportunityof redeeming his reputation.In parliament, he was a frequentand fluent, but neither a sound nor animpressive speaker. While in employment,he appears to have been a staunchadvocate for the American war ; which,however, he severely reprobated, fromthe time that he ceased to hold a command.At the present day, he is betterknown as a dramatist than as a senatoror a military man. His comic opera,entitled The Lord of the Manor, partlytaken from the French, has become astock-piece; and a noble and fastidiouscritic describes his comedy of TheHeiress, as being the most genteel production,of its class, in the English language.Both works undoubtedly possessconsiderable merit. Besides somefugitive pieces, and two or three pamphletsin defence of his public conduct,he was also the author of Richard Coeurde Lion, a musical romance ; and TheMaid of the Oaks, an occasional vaudeville,composed, and performed at theOaks, in honour of Lord Derby's marriagewith Lady Elizabeth Hamilton.By Junius he is described (it doesnot appear whether truly or otherwise)as sitting down, for the remainder of hislife, infamous, and contented with themoney received from the Duke ofGrafton, for the sale of a patent placein the customs; as drawing a regularand splendid subsistence from play ; astaking his stand at a gaming table, andwatching, with the soberest attention,for a fair opportunity of engaging adrunken young nobleman at piquet.SIR RALPH ABERCROMBY.RALPH ABERCROMBY, the de I in Clackmannanshire, in 1738. He re-ascendant of an old and respectable | civet his education at a neighbouringScottish family, was born at Tullibody, j school, and, at the age of eighteen,SIR RALPH ABERCKOMBY.obtained a cornetcy in the dragoonguards. Having ascended through theintermediate gradations of rank, hewas appointed colonel of the regiment in 1781, and promotedto the rank of major-general in1787.On the commencement of the warwith France, in 1792, he acted againstthe enemy in Holland with the localrank of lieutenant-colonel. In theaffair on the heights of Cateau, hecommanded the advanced guard : hereceived a wound at Nimeguen; and,during the retreat of the British army,conducted the march of the guardsfrom Deventer to Oldenfaal. In 1795,he was invested with the red ribbon,and succeeded Sir Charles Grey ascommander-in-chief of the Britishforces in the West Indies; where hetook Demerara and Essequibo, and theislands of Grenada, St. Lucie, St. Vincent,and Trinidad. On his return, hewas placed at the head of the forcesin Ireland, a station which he soonabandoned for the chief command inScotland. In 1799, he served underthe Duke of York, in Holland ; and,notwithstanding the disasters of thecampaign, obtained such an increaseof reputation, as to be intrusted withthe command of an army of seventeenthousand men, destined to act againstthe French forces in Egypt.He landed his troops, in spite of amost desperate resistance, at Aboukir,on the 8th of March, 1801 : on the13th, he defeated the enemy at Alexandria;and, on the 21st, obtained asecond victory, which decided the fateof the campaign, but, unfortunately, atthe loss of his own valuable life. TheFrench, it appears, having, on this occasion,attempted to surprise the Britishforces during the night, Abercromby,on the alarm being given, mounted hishorse, and rode towards the right wingof his army, which was already engaged.In the course of his progress,he had despatched the whole of hisaid-de-camps, with orders, to differentbrigades; and, while alone, he was attackedby a party of French dragoons,thrown from his horse, and woundedin the thigh. He, however, contrivedto disarm his immediate assailant, who,in an instant after, was bayoneted byan English soldier. At first, he didnot seem to be aware of his wound;but complained of a contusion in thebreast, which he had probably receivedfrom the hilt of his antagonist's sword,during their scuffle. Although he soonbegan to suffer great agony, he refusedto quit the field, and behaved withextraordinary fortitude and calmnessthroughout the battle : during whichhe several times narrowly escaped destructionfrom the enemy's artillery.At ten o'clock in the morning, theBritish had completely routed their antagonists; and their brave commanderwas then carried, faint and exhausted,to Lord Keith's ship ; on board ofwhich, after having submitted to anineffectual operation, he expired on theevening of the 28th. His body wasburied under the castle of St. Elms,at Malta : parliament voted him a monumentin St. Paul's cathedral, and hiswidow was created a baroness, with apension of 2,000 per annum. He leftfour sons, one of whom was a barrister,and another a major-general in thearmy.The death of Abercromby was equalin glory to that of Wolfe or Epaminondas." His memory," says Hutchinson,who succeeded him in command,will be recorded in the annals of hiscountry, will be sacred to every Britishsoldier, and embalmed in the recollectionof a grateful posterity." Heroicpatience, calm valour, modesty, andmildness, were the prominent featuresof his character. He enforced discipline,yet conciliated affection. Tohim, " the pomp and circumstance "of war afforded. but little delight; andso revolting was carnage to his humaneand amiable spirit, that when congratulatedon his successes, he exclaimed,These victories make me melancholy !"THE ARMY.SIR WILLIAM Meadows.WILLIAM Meadows was born onthe 31st of December, 1738; and, havingentered the army in 1756, actedas aid-decamp to Lord Ancram, onthe coast of France, and served inGermany, under Prince Ferdinand andthe Marquess of Granny. In 1765, herepaired with his regiment to America,and was appointed to command thefirst brigade of grenadiers. Throughoutthe campaign, and particularly atBrandy wine, where he was wounded,he signalized himself equally by hiscourage and skill. From America hewas despatched to assist General Grantin an attack upon the island of St. Lucie,which, from its commodious harbour,had been of great service to the Frenchduring the war. His brigade havinglanded at the Cul de Sac, carried theVigil, a most important post, and repulsedthe French troops under Counttesting, who attempted to relievethe island, with prodigious slaughter.Medows received a severe wound inthe right arm on this occasion, but refusedto quit the field. Observing thatpart of his troops had been thrown intodisorder by the desperate attack of theFrench, he waved his sword in his lefthand, and, pointing to the standard, exclaimed," Soldiers, as long as you havea bayonet left to point against yourenemies, defend these colours."The expedition was completely successful,and Medows obtained the colonelcyof the eighty-ninth regiment, asareward for his services. In 1791, hewas despatched, with Commodore John-stone,with orders to attack the Cape ofGood Hope, if they should, on theirarrival, deem the enterprise practicable ;their alternative being a voyage to theEast Indies with a part of the troops.A difference of opinion arising betweenthe two commanders, as to the probableissue of an attempt on the Cape,Medows, who considered that it wouldbe altogether hopeless, having receivedintelligence of the defeat of theBritish army in India, by HyderAlly,proceeded under convoy of part of thesquadron, to Madras. On his arrival,he was nominated governor of thatpresidency, and commander of theforces, with the rank of major-general.He instantly proceeded to organize thetroops ; and, by his alacrity, so revivedtheir courage, that Tippoo Sultaun, thesuccessor of Hyderr, wrote him a pacificletter ; to which the general replied inthe following terms: "I receivedyours, and understand its contents.Vou are a great prince, and, but foryour cruelty to your prisoners, I shouldadd, an enlightened one. The English,equally incapable of offering an insultas of submitting to one, have alwayslooked upon war as declared from themoment you attacked their ally, theKing of Travancore. God does notalways give the race to the swift, northe battle to the strong ; but, generally,success to those whose cause is just.On this we depend."After having gained several advantagesover the enemy, he joined LordCornwallis, who had taken the commandof the army. At the siege ofBangalore, Lieutenant Ayres, of thethirty-eighth regiment, having madehis way through a small aperture inthe walls, Medows, who was present,exclaimed, " Well done, little gentleman!And now, Whiskers," continuedhe, addressing the grenadiers, " try ifyou can follow and support him."Bangalore having surrendered, he wassent to attack the almost inaccessiblefortress of Nunnydroog. Just beforethe assault took place, a report prevailedthat there was a mine near thebreach. " If there be a mine," saidMedows, " it is a mine of gold !"This pleasantry restored the confidenceof his men, who, soon afterwards,gallantly carried the fort.In 1792, he commanded the rightwing of the army, which, under Cornwallis,invested Seringapatam. It isrelated that, at this period, his sensitivespirit was severely wounded by anaccident which prevented him fromarriving, as soon as he had been expected,to the relief of the commander-mischief'sdivision, when severelyMARQUESS CORNWALLIS.pressed by the enemy. No blame, however,appears to have been attachedto him on this occasion ; and he continuedto display his usual gallantry,until the war was terminated by anadvantageous treaty with Tippoo Said,when Medows returned to England.On his arrival, he was made a general,governor of the isle of Wight, a knightof the Bath, and received the freedomof the city of London. He, subsequently,became governor of Hull, aprivy-counsellor, and commander ofthe forces in Ireland ; but resigned thelatter employment some time beforehis death, which took place at Bath, onthe 14th of November, 1813.Sir William Medows possessed greatPresence of mind, bravery, and professionalskill. Like Cornwallis, henobly abandoned his share of theprize-money at Seringapatam to thearmy. By his cheerful, generous, andgallant disposition, he was particularlywell adapted for a military life. Althoughvery humane, war, to him, wasapparently an amusing pastime: hewas invariably cheerful during an engagement; and his troops, by whomhe was much beloved, are said, on morethan one occasion, to have mountedthe breach, laughing at their general'slast joke. His hilarity scarcely everdeserted him : one day, while on areconnoitring party, he observed atwenty-four pound shot strike theground, on his right, in such a direction,that, had he proceeded, it would,in all probability, have destroyed him ;he, therefore, stopped his horse, and,as the ball dashed across the road infront of him, gracefully took off hishat, and said, " I beg, sir, that youwill continue your promenade ; I nevertake precedence of any gentleman ofyour family."CHARLES, MARQUESS CORNWALLIS.CHARLES, the eldest son of the fifthLord and first Earl Cornwallis, wasborn on the 31st of December, 1738.He commenced his education at Eton,and completed it at St. John's college,Cambridge. Little is recorded of hisearly years, except that having, whileintoxicated, told Rugby, secretary tothe Earl of Sandwich, in the pit ofthe opera-house, that his noble employerwas a pickpocket, he was compelledto atone for his offence, by makingan apology in Hyde park the nextmorning.Inheriting the martial propensity ofhis royalist ancestors, he entered thearmy j and, at the age of twenty, obtaineda captaincy. He attended theMarquess of Granny, as aid-decamp,during the German campaign in 1761 ;and, on the death of his father, in thefollowing year, took his seat in thehouse of lords, having previously beenmember for Eye, in two successiveparliaments. In 1765, he became alord of the bedchamber, and aid-decampto the king, with the rank ofcolonel of foot. In 1770, he, and threeother young peers, having protested,with Lord Camden, against the taxationof America, Mansfield, the chiefjustice, is said to have sneeringly observed," Poor Camden could only getfour boys to join him !"Although he had opposed the measuresof government, with regard tothe disaffected colonies, yet, when hostilitiescommenced, he did not scrupleto accept of active employment againstthe Americans. In 1777, he displayedmuch gallantry at the battle of Brandywine, and at the siege of Charleston.Having been appointed to the commandof South Carolina, he defeated GeneralGates with an inferior force ; first atCamden, and again guildford j where,however, the British, although victorious,suffered severely. Emboldenedby success, he now attempted the invasionof Virginia ; but, being eitherdeserted by his usual prudence andgood fortune, or out-generally byWashington, he was compelled to surrender,with the whole of his army,amounting to four thousand men. Heendeavoured to throw the blame of hisTHE ARMY.capture on Sir Henry Clinton ; who,however, repelled the imputation, and apamphlet war ensued, which considerablyprolonged the memory of theiringlorious surrender.In 1782, Lord Cornwallis was removedfrom the governorship of theTower of London, which he had heldsince 1770 ; but resumed it in 1784,and retained it for the remainder ofhis life. His failure in America hadnot impaired his reputation ; and, in1786, having been previously honouredwith the order of the Garter, he wassent to Calcutta, in the double capacityof governor-general and commander-inches.War being declared againstthe Sultan of Mysore, who had attackedthe Rajah of Travancore, anallyof the English, Cornwallis, afteran indecisive campaign, in 1790, invadedMysore in the following year, and penetratedto Seringapatam ; but wasprevented from investing it by thefloods of Cavern. In 1792, offensiveoperations were resumed ; and, Seringapatambeing attacked, Tippoo Said,dreading utter ruin, consented to cedea portion of his territories, to pay downa considerable sum of money, to promisea still larger contribution at asubsequent period, and to place two ofhis sons under the governor-general'scare, as hostages for the fulfillment ofthe treaty. On this occasion, Cornwallisabandoned his share of prize-money tothe troops.The war being thus successfully terminated,Lord Cornwallis returned toEngland ; and, in requital of his eminentservices, was made a privy-counsellor,created a marquess, and appointedmaster-general of the ordnance. In1798, he became lord-lieutenant of Ireland; where, by his policy and vigour,he subdued the insurrection, defeatedthe French, who had been landed tosupport the rebels, and restored comparativetranquillity. Soon after theexpiration of his vicegerency, he wassent to France, as plenipotentiary forGreat Britain, in which capacity hesigned the treaty of Amiens. In 1804,he succeeded the Marquess Wellesleyas governor-general of India. On hisarrival at Calcutta, he proceeded, bywater, to take the command in theupper provinces. The confinement ofthe boat, the want of exercise, and theheat of the weather, had a most seriouseffect on his health. Feeling, soonafter he had landed, that his dissolutionwas at hand, he prepared some valuableinstructions for his successor ; andthe last hours of his life were passedin taking measures to lessen the difficultieswhich his decease would produce.He expired at Ghazepoore, inBenares, on the 5th of October, 1805.A statue of Cornwallis, displaying,with much accuracy, the benevolentcharacter of his countenance, and thedignity of his figure, had been erectedat Madras during his life; and, afterhis decease, subscriptions for anotherwere entered into, by the inhabitantsof Bombay ; while those of Calcutta honouredhis memory with a mausoleum;and the house of commons voted hima monument in St. Paul's cathedral.By his wife, Jemima, the daughter ofJames Jones, Esq., whose death is saidto have been accelerated through hislong absence in America, he left a son,who succeeded to the marquisate.Lord Cornwallis was not endowedwith any brilliancy of talent He hadto contend with no difficulties on hisentrance into life : high birth procuredhim a military station, which his connexionsenabled him to retain, after hehad committed an error, or, at least,met with a mischance, that would haveutterly ruined a less influential commander.Although ambitious, he appearsto have possessed but little ardour.He manifested no extraordinary spiritof enterprise ; he hazarded no untriedmanoeuvres ; and yet few of his contemporariespassed through life with morepersonal credit, or public advantage.He had the wisdom never to deputeto others what he could perform himself.His perseverance, alacrity, andcaution, procured him success as a general; while his strong common senserendered him eminent as a governor. Healways evinced a most anxious desireto promote the welfare of those whowere placed under his administration :Ireland and Hindostan still veneratehis memory. His honour was unimpeachable,his manners devoid of ostentation,and his private characteraltogether amiable.Napoleon Buonaparte, in his conversationswith Barry O'Meara, declaredthat Lord Cornwallis, by his integrity,SIR DAVID DUNDAS.fidelity, frankness, and the nobility ofhis sentiments, was the first who hadimpressed upon him a favourableopinion of Englishmen. " I do not believe,"said the ex-emperor, " that hewas a man of first-rate abilities ; but hehad talent, great probity, sincerity, andnever broke his word. Somethinghaving prevented him from attendingat the Hotel de Dieu, to sign the treatyof Amiens, pursuant to appointment,he sent word to the French ministersthat they might consider it completed,and that he would, certainly, executeit the next morning. During the night,he received instructions to object tosome of the articles ; disregarding which,he signed the treaty as it stood, observingthat his government, if dissatisfied,might refuse to ratify it; but that havingonce pledged his word, he felt houndto abide by it. ' There was a manof honour !' added Napoleon, ' a trueEnglishman.' "SIR DAVID DUNDAS.THIS officer, a native of Edinburgh,and the son of a merchant, is said tohave been originally destined for themedical profession, which, however, hethought fit to abandon ; and, afterhaving been two years a student at theWoolwich military academy, was sent,in 1752, to assist in a survey of hisnative country, then in progress underthe direction of his uncle, ColonelWatson. In 1754, he became lieutenantfire-worker in a regiment ofartillery ; practitioner engineer, in 1755 ;and, in the following year, lieutenant inthe fifty-sixth regiment of foot. In1758, after having been employed asquarter-master-general on the expeditionsto Cherbourg, St. Malo, and St.Cas, on the French coast, he was appointedassistant to the allied army, under PrinceFerdinand of Brunswick, in Germany ;acting, at the same time, as engineerand lieutenant of infantry. In thenext year, he was promoted to a captaincyin the fifteenth light dragoons ;on which occasion he resigned all hisother employments, and returned toEngland.In 1760, he revisited Germany, wherehe served as aide-de-camp to Major-generalEliott, at the battles of War-burgh,Closer-Camp, Fellinghausenand Eimbeck ; the advance from Westphalia,and the sieges of Weel andCassel. In 1762, he participated in thereduction of Havannah ; and, after thepeace of 1763, proceeded to France, inorder to improve himself in militaryknowledge. In 1770, he became majorof the fifteenth dragoons, by purchase;and, in 1774, went to Flanders to attendthe French and Austrian militaryexercises. On the breaking out of thewar between Great Britain and hercolonies, it is said, he was anxious tohave obtained employment in America ;but, having purchased the lieutenant-colonelof the twelfth light dragoons,he was sent with that regiment toIreland, where, in 1778, he becamequarter-master-general. In 1781, hewas made colonel, by brevet; and, inthe following year, lieutenant-colonelof the second regiment of horse. In1785, for his further improvement inmilitary tactics, he attended the Prussianexercises at Berlin and Magdeburg ;and, in 1787, again visited Germany,for the same purpose.In 1788, he was made adjutant-generalin Ireland ; and, soon after, publishedhis Principles of Military Movements,on which the general regulationsof 1792 were founded. In 1790, heattained the rank of major-general ; inthe following year, he obtained thecolonelcy of the twenty-second regimentof foot ; and, resigning his ,was placed on theIrish staff, which he quitted, in 1792.In 1793, he was sent to the island ofJersey, for the purpose of ascertainingthe practicability of an attempt on St.Malo, which however, did not takeplace. He then proceeded on a missionto the Duke of York, in Flanders;whence he departed, in October of thesame year, for the purpose of acting assecond in command at Toulon, underTHE A K M Y ,General O'Hara, to whose post he succeededon the 30th of the followingmonth, when that officer fell into thehands of the enemy. In December,after having destroyed the docks andarsenal, he was compelled to evacuateToulon, whence he proceeded to theIsle of Elba.In January, 1793, he made a descenton Corsica, and took the town of SanFiorenzo. Shortly afterwards, hejoined the British army, in Flanders;and distinguished himself, at the headof a brigade of cavalry, at the battle ofTournay. He also commanded, afterthe Duke of York had returned toEngland, in two successful actions,fought near Geldermalsen ; and, on theevacuation of Holland, in January,1795, took charge of the right wing ofthe British army. He was next employed,for a short time, on the riverEms, in East Friesland ; and, in themonth of April, on the departure ofGeneral Harcourt, assumed the commandof twenty-four squadrons ofBritish cavalry, and the emigrant corps,amounting to about ten thousand men.In the following December, he becamecolonel of the seventh light dragoons ;and, in 1796, conducted the embarkationof the whole of the British cavalry onthe Elbe and Weser.During the last-mentioned year, hebecame quarter-master-general of thearmy on the home staff; composed hiscavalry regulations of exercise andmovement; and superintended the exercisesand instructions of the infantryand cavalry in the corps at Weymouthand in Windsor forest, under the king'sown inspection. In 1797, he was appointedgovernor of Vanguard fort ; and,in 1799, proceeded to Holland, as ,with the Duke of York,under whom he commanded the centrecolumn at the two battles of Bergen.In 1801, he became colonel of theNorth-british dragoons, and succeededSir Ralph Abercromby, as governor ofFort St. George. In 1802, he attainedthe rank of general ; and, in 1803, resignedhis quarter-master-generalshipof the army, on being nominated to thechief command of the southern districts,including Kent and Sussex ; which, however,he was compelled, by ill health, toresign, in 1805; having, in the interim,been installed a knight grand cross of theBath , and appointed governor of Chelseahospital. In 1809, he became a memberof the privy-council, colonel of theninety-fifth rifle brigade, and succeeded,on the resignation of the Duke of York,to the important office of commander-in-chief,which he held until 1811. In1813, he obtained the colonelcy of thefirst or king's regiment of dragoonguards, but thenceforth took little sharein military affairs during the remainderof his life, which terminated on the18th of February, 1820.Although by no means deficient inthe other endowments necessary toconstitute a superior military officer, thereputation of Sir David Dundas restsprincipally, on his great abilities as atactician. He was much respected bythe army, and highly esteemed in privatelife.SIR HENRY CLINTON.THIS celebrated commander, thegrandson of Francis, sixth Earl of Lincoln,and son of George, second son ofthat nobleman, who died, in 1761, governorof Newfoundland, and senioradmiral of the white, was born aboutthe year 1738. After having received aliberal education, he entered the army,and served for some time in Hanover.He became a captain in the first regimentof guards in 1758, and, in 1775,obtained the rank of major-general,having, in the interim, distinguishedhimself by his skill and intrepidityduring the early part of the Americanwar. He participated in the battle ofBunker's Hill; commanded the troopswho carried the enemy's entrenchmentsat the taking of Boston ; and, after havingassisted at the attack on New York,bore a share in the capture of LongIsland, of which he was appointed commandant;but held it only for a shortperiod, being compelled by the AmericanSIR HENRY CLINTON.general, Gates, to capitulate, having,however, previously carried Fort Montgomeryat the point of the bayonet.In 1777, he was made a knight ofthe Bath ; and, in January, 1778, com-mander-in-chief of the British forces inAmerica. On the 8th of May he arrivedat Philadelphia, whence, on the approachof General Washington, about the middleof June, in obedience to orders whichhad previously arrived from England,he commenced his retreat to New York.At Monmouth Comb House, he engaged,and compelled the Americans, part ofwhom were commanded by La Fayette,to retreat, with considerable loss: onthe 30th of June he arrived in the neighbourhoodof Sandy Hook, to whichplace, he conducted his troops, by meansof a bridge of boats, on the 5th of July,a few days previously to the arrival ofDetesting's squadron off the coast ofVirginia; and, shortly after, the forcesunder his command arrived in safety atNew York.In 1779, he became colonel of theseventh or king's own regiment, and,in the course of the year, undertook anexpedition against the enemy, in thepro-vince of New Jersey; where, according toFrench writers, his troops behaved withgreat barbarity. He also, in conjunctionwith General Prevost, who commandedin East Florida, concerted and carriedinto effect an invasion of Georgia, whichproved completely successful. A victorywas obtained over the Americans atSavannah, in consequence of which thecapital of the province, with a quantityof stores, ammunition, and shipping,fell into the hands of the British. Someminor advantages were subsequentlyobtained, and, on the whole, the loss ofthe enemy during this expedition is saidto have been prodigious. In January,1780, he arrived with a body of troopsin South Carolina, and shortly afterwardsinvested Charleston, which surrenderedon the llth of the followingMay. For his services on this occasionhe was honoured with the thanks ofparliament. He subsequently capturedWest Point and Stoney Point; and meditatedan attack on the French forceson Rhode Island, which, however, theapproach of Washington compelled himto abandon.Shortly afterwards, he seduced GeneralArnold to deliver up an American fort,with the command of which the latterhad been intrusted, and employed emissariesto go among the American troops,and guarantee them full payment of allarrears of pay due to them by congress,on condition of their deserting. He isalso said to have offered protection tothe American forces stationed at MorrisTown, when they revolted, in January,1781; f but, they speedily returned totheir duty, and the British emissarieswere delivered up to the congress. Afterhaving made an ineffectual attempt tosuccour Lord Cornwallis, who, with thewhole of his troops, was compelled tocapitulate, he commenced preparations,in 1782, for attacking the French settlementsin the Antilles, but was supersededin his command before he couldcarry the project into effect.On his return to England, a pamphletwar took place between him and Cornwallis,as to the surrender of the latter,the entire blame of which, each partyattributed to the other. In 1784, hepublished a letter in defence of his conduct,which had been censured by Sted-man,in his Observations on the Historyof the War with America. He subsequentlyobtained the governorship ofLimerick, and, in 1793, that of Gibraltar,in possession of which he died on the23rd of December, 1795. He had forsome time been a member of parliament;first, for Newark, and afterwards forLaunceston.The merits of Sir Henry Clinton, as acommander, have been variously estimated; and, as is usually the case, thetruth seems to lie intermediate betweenthe panegyric of his friends and thecensure of his enemies. That he wasendowed with bravery, and possesseda considerable share of military skill,cannot, in fairness, be denied; buthe was decidedly unequal to the greatdifficulties of his situation; and unfit tocontend against so lofty a genius asWashington, supported by a people resolvedon obtaining their independence,and fighting on their native soil. Hisfailure to achieve success under suchcircumstances, is no great disgrace ; forit is doubtful, if any cotemporary commanderin the British service could,with no greater force than that underhis command, have brought the strugglein which he was engaged to a triumphantissue on the part of theTHE ARMY.mother country. His attempts to tamperwith the American troops were undignified,but, it is said, in some measureexcusable, on account of the peculiarnature of the contest. To animadvertupon him for the alleged barbaritiesof Ins troops in New Jersey, wouldscarcely be just, as no unexceptionableauthority appears to have been adducedin support of the accusation madeagainst him on this point by the FrenchGERARD, VISCOUNT LAKE.GERARD LAKE was born on the27th of July, 1744 ; and, obtaining anensigncy, in the first regiment of footguards, when only fourteen years ofage, he went, in 1/60, with the secondbattalion of that corps, to Germany,where he served throughout the war.On one occasion, when the allied armywas surprised by the unexpected appearanceof a body of French troops,and the men were giving way, EnsignLake, who carried the colours of hisregiment, made a vigorous stand witha few troops, and maintained his ground,until the others rallied, and came totheir relief. For some time, he actedas aide-de-camp to General Pearson ;and, having returned to England, wasattached, in 1776, to the household ofthe Prince of Wales. In 1781, he proceededto America ; and, joining thebrigade of guards, under Lord Cornwallis,distinguished himself, at thesiege of York Town, by storming oneof the enemy's batteries ; for whichhe received the thanks of the com-mander-in-chief.In 1793, on war breaking out withFrance, he disembarked, at the headof the first brigade of guards, at ;and, by his seasonable arrival,prevented Williamstadt from fallinginto the hands of the enemy. Hewas present at the siege of Valenciennes,and bore a conspicuous partin most of the actions fought duringthe remainder of the campaign. In1798, he was employed, in Ireland,against the rebels : at Vinegar Hill,where they were defeated, with greatloss, he headed the attack, and had ahorse killed under him. Humbert, thecommander of a body of French forces,then acting with the insurgents, gaineda slight advantage over him at Castle-bar; but Lake, reinforced by freshtroops, after a severe and fatiguingpursuit, came up with the French againat Ballinamuck ; where, after an-hour'sconflict, the latter surrendered at discretion.By his prompt execution of the vigorousmeasures of the lord-lieutenant,he was greatly instrumental in restoringtranquillity to the disturbed districts; and returned to England, withan increase of reputation for prudence,humanity, and courage.Being appointed commander-in-chiefof the Bntish forces in India, and secondmember of the supreme councilat Bengal, he went to Calcutta, in 1801;and, after having greatly improved theBengal army, proceeded to organizethe native cavalry, which, by dint ofunwearied exertion, he rendered a mostefficient force. The Earl of warrington,then governor-general, havingformed some extensive plans for theexpulsion of the French from India,Lake, with a view to the execution, inpart, of the earl's design, was despatched,at the head of a small but well-appointedarmy, against General Perron ;after dislodging whom, from a strongposition at Cool, he took the fort ofAlyghur, which, had it been regularlybesieged, might have held out for sixweeks ; but its immediate capture beingnecessary, to prevent a junction of theenemy's forces, Lake had attackedand carried it, after a gallant resistance,by an immediate assault. Proceedingthence in pursuit of the French andMahratta forces, he came up with themon the plain of Delhi ; and, althoughhis troops were dreadfully fatigued bymarching twenty-three miles under aburning sun, they achieved a brilliantvictory over the enemy, against whomLake led the attack, at the head of theseventy-sixth regiment. On enteringDelhi, he was received with boundlessLORD LAKE.delight by the blind and aged EmperorShah Alum, who had long been heldin a state of captivity, by the Frenchand their allies.Having provided for the unfortunatemonarch's future safety, and securedhis capital, Lake proceeded to investAgra, the key of Hindostan, of which,although garrisoned with five thousandmen, he obtained possession in eightdays. Perron, who had hung uponhis rear during the siege, he soon afterwardsattacked ; and, after a spiritedconflict, totally defeated, near the villageof Lassawarree. At one time,during this engagement, his troopswavered ; but, stimulated by the gallantryof their general, who headedevery charge, and had a horse killedunder him, they renewed the contestwith irresistible impetuosity. For theseeminent services, he received the thanksof both houses of parliament, and wascreated a peer, in 1804, by the title ofBaron Lake, of Delhi and Lassawarreein India, and of Aston Clinton, in thecounty of Buckingham.By a combination of disastrous circumstances,the British arms shortlyafterwards suffered a temporary reverse; but the skill and energy of Lakesoon changed the aspect of affairs ; and,after obtaining a succession of splendidadvantages, he compelled the enemyto accept a peace, on terms highly advantageousto the company's interests.On his return to England, in 1807, hewas created a viscount. Early in thefollowing year, he became suddenlyindisposed, while attending the court-martialon General Whitelock, andshortly afterwards expired. Parliamentvoted a pension of 2,000 per annumto his son, and the two next successorsto the title. This grant, doubtless,proved exceedingly acceptable ; forLake's embarrassments had so absorbedhis pay and prize money, that he wasonly enabled to give his daughters theslender portion of .1,500 each. At thetime of his death, which took place onthe 20th of February, 1808, he was ageneral in the army ; colonel of thesixtieth regiment of foot ; governor ofPlymouth ; and receiver-general to theduchy of Cornwall.The services rendered by Lake tothe British empire in India, were ofthe utmost value and importance. Asageneral, his merit was quite equal tohis success. In personal gallantry, hehad no superior: always the first toencounter danger, he hazarded the lifeof no man under his command somuch as he did his own. No perilscould intimidate, no difficulties coulddishearten, no circumstances whatevercould confuse him : even in the heatof battle, he was invariably collected.All his plans were laid down with consummateskill, and executed with coolintrepidity ; misfortune never renderedhim desponding or desperate ; successnever lulled him into careless security ;on the contrary, in every event ofhis life, he appears to have displayeda calm energy, which nothing couldruffle, and an indefatigable vigilancethat effectually protected him fromsurprise.GEORGE, LORD HARRIS.GEORGE HARRIS, the son of acurate, at Boasted, in Kent, was bornon the 18th of March, 1746, and receivedhis education at Westminsterschool. In 1759, he procured a cadetship,through the interest of LordGeorge Sackville, his father's class-fellow,at Cambridge. His commissionsas lieutenant and captain were purchasedby his excellent mother, who,although having six other children, hadcontrived to save sufficient for thepurpose, out of her own limited income: Harris, however, by prudenceand economy, enabled himself to setapart a large portion of his pay, and, inacomparatively short period, amassedthe sum of 1,500, out of which, hemost gratefully and honourably liquidatedthe debt. Having joined the fifthregiment of foot, at Bedford, he had theisatisfaction of rescuing a brother officeri from being drowned in the river Ouse,but at the imminent hazard of his ownTHE ARMY.life. In 1768, he went abroad, to studytactics and acquire a knowledge of theFrench tongue. In 1774, he embarkedwith his regiment for America. AtLexington, he covered the retreat withgreat skill ; and, at the battle of Bunker'sHill, received a wound on the head,which, it was supposed, would havebeen fatal ; but the regimental surgeontrepanned him with such success, that,in six weeks, he became sufficientlywell to quit his bed.Having re-established his health by avisit to England, he rejoined his regiment,in America, in 1776, and waspresent at all the actions of the ensuingcampaign. In the attack on Iron Hill, hewas shot through the leg; but, notwithstandingthe severity of his wound, hemounted a horse, and went in pursuitof the enemy. On the evacuation ofPhiladelphia, Harris, who, by this time,was a major, left America, with a melancholypresentiment of the unfortunatetermination of the war. In 1778, hecommanded the battalion of grenadiers,at the landing of the British troops, onthe island of St. Lucia ; and displayedthe greatest gallantry and coolness in repulsingthe attacks of Count Detesting.During his stay at Vigil, it fell to hislot again to save the life of a brotherofficer, Brigade Major Ross, who hadimprudently attempted to swim in thesurf. In 1779, while on his voyage toEngland, under a neutral flag, he wascaptured by a French privateer, andput on shore near St. Mule; but,through the kindness of the CountD'Ossun, then commandant of thatplace, he obtained permission to returnto England on his parol; and, landingat Dover, had the satisfaction of learningthat officers taken on board neutralvessels, were not to be considered asprisoners of war.At length, by the interest of hisfriends, the Duke of Northumberland,Lord Percy, and Sir William Medows,he was appointed lieutenant-colonel ofthe fifth regiment. Being ordered toIreland, he embarked with his wife andchild, at Portsmouth, but narrowly escapedshipwreck during the voyage.The vessel in which he sailed, wasdriven ashore in a violent storm, whichraged so furiously, that for several hoursno relief could be procured from thecoast. In this dreadful situation thecrew mutinied. A boat, at length, cameoff to their assistance, but she could notbe brought along-side, so great a dangerexisted of her being dashed to piecesagainst the ship. Nor was she largeenough to carry more than a very fewpersons, in addition to those who hadworked her from the shore. Underthese circumstances, Harris determinedthat an exclusive preference should begiven to the women and children ; allof whom, he caused to be slung fromthe yard-arm into the boat. He subsequentlyquelled the mutiny ; and, principallythrough his intrepidity, coolness,and exertions, the ship, the crew, andpassengers were saved.In 1788, he sailed for Bombay, asone of General Medows' suite, and,soon after his arrival at that place, wasappointed military auditor-general. Forhis conduct in this situation, he receivedthe thanks of the court of directors,although they removed him from it, onaccount of his not belonging to thecompany's service. In 1790, he joinedthe army of Trichinopoly, as secretaryto his friend, Sir William Medows,whom he attended throughout the campaign; and was present at the stormingparties of Bangalore, Nundydroog, andSeverndroog. In 1791, when LordCornwallis invested Seringapatam, Harrisevinced his usual judgment in thecommand of the second line of the army.On the termination of the war, beingexceedingly anxious to see his family,he sacrificed some apparently splendidprospects in Bengal, and embarked forEngland, where he arrived, in timeto soothe, by his presence, the lasthours of his affectionate and venerablemother.Accompanied by Mrs. Harris and hereldest daughter, he again sailed forIndia, in 1794; and, landing at Calcutta,became commandant of Fort William,where he remained until 1797, whenhe was called to Madras, as commander-in-chief,with the rank of lieutenant-general.In this capacity he becameinvolved in a dispute with the governor,who wished to engross the militarypatronage. Harris, however, would notsubmit to an undue assumption of hisown privileges, and forwarded a representationof the facts to the directors,who decreed that all military recommendationsto the Madras government,LOUD HARRIS.should, for the future, be made exclusivelyby the commander-in-chief. .In 1798, he succeeded Lord Hobart,as governor of Madras, and was selected,by the Marquess Wellesley, to conductthe war against Tippoo Sultaun. Theforces under his command exceededfifty thousand men, and with these headvanced to the siege of Seringapatam,in 1799. The walls having been destroyedby the fire of the English batteries,the troops moved from thetrenches in the heat of the day, andcrossed the rocky bed of the Cavern,under an extremely heavy fire. Thefort was strong, both in its natural position,and the stupendous works bywhich it was surrounded : but no resistancecould check the impetuosityof the assailants, who ascended theramparts in spite of every obstacle.Tippoo, who had fought like a commonsoldier, was found, with much difficulty,buried beneath a heap of slain ; hissons, on receiving an assurance ofsafety, surrendered themselves to thevictors; and the British standard wastriumphantly raised on the walls ofSeringapatam. For this brilliant exploit,Harris received the thanks of bothhouses of parliament, and of the courtof directors. He was also promoted tothe colonelcy of the seventy-third regiment,and offered an Irish title, which,however, he declined.In 1815, he was created Baron Harris,of Seringapatam and Mysore, in India,and of Belmont, in Kent He had, forsome years previously, resided at hiscountry seat, where he passed the remainderof bis life. At the time of hisdecease, which took place in May, 1829,he was a knight grand cross of theBath, a general in the army, andgovernor of Dumbarton castle.The character of Lord Harris wasdecidedly admirable : wherever he went,he gained friends; and whatever he did,was marked with spirit and propriety.A well sustained and unfailing energypervaded all his actions; and he proceededonwards, steadily and surely inhis path, until he attained the highesthonours of his profession. His incessantvigilance, unwearied zeal, and promptitudeof action, his respectful, yet firmdemeanour, and spotless integrity, obtainedfor him the favourable notice ofhis superiors; while, by his cool intrepidity,and personal exposure, he inspiredthose under his command withconfidence and courage. He was alwayseconomical, yet never parsimonious : heeven lent his own share of prize moneyto the government of Madras, then muchin want of cash, at a very considerableloss to himself. The profits arisingfrom the Bazaar fund during the campaign,he presented to different charitableinstitutions, and munificentlyassisted an asylum for the male childrenof European soldiers. But, thoughliberal in his charity, he died possessedof great wealth. To each of his grandchildrenhe left a ring, in order thatthey should, " at odd times, bring theirgrandfather to memory, and recollectthat, under Providence, he imputed hisrise from nothing to his affluent fortune,to his economy, and willing privationfrom self-indulgence through a longlife."SIR HEW Whitefield DALRYMPLE.THIS officer was born on the 3rd ofDecember, 1 750, in Scotland, and becamean ensign of the thirty-firstfoot, in 1763.In 1779, he was knighted; in 1790, heobtained a colonelcy, and served withthe grenadier battalion of guards, duringthe Duke of York's campaign, in 1793.In 1794, he was made a major-general,and was placed, in the following year,on the staff, in the northern district.He became lieutenant-governor ofGuernsey, in 1796; and, in 1801, ageneral in the army. During the nextyear, having resigned his post atGuernsey, he returned to the staff inthe north ; whence he was removed, in1806, to the government of Gibraltar,where he remained until the 7th ofAugust, 1808, when he was placed incommand of the British army in Portugal,as it was emphatically stated, "forthe present," and on account of " theTHE ARMY.zeal and judgment which had markedthe whole of his conduct under the lateimportant events which had takenplace in Spain."He reached head-quarters on the dayafter the battle of Vimiera, in whichthe French, under Junott, had beendefeated by the British. Before hisarrival, Sir Arthur Wellesley, the previouscommander-in-chief, was supersededby Sir Harry Bernard, who hadbeen at the head of the forces butafew hours, when General Dalrympledisplaced him. Wellesley, who knewthe country, and had won the battle,wished to follow it up, by a harassingpursuit, and such manoeuvres as wouldprevent the French from reachingLisbon. Bernard, however, deemed itmore prudent to wait for Sir JohnMoore's reinforcement, before any furtherhostile measures were adopted ;and Junott, consequently, retired atleisure; but, instead of marching toLisbon, he thought proper, being indread of the junction of his conquerorswith the forces under Sir John Moore,to propose an armistice, to which Dalrymple,by the advice of Wellesley andBernard, consentedThe famous convention of Cintrafollowed, by which it was agreed thatthe French should evacuate Portugal,with their arms and baggage ; that theyshould be furnished, by England, withthe means of conveyance to some portbetween Rochefort and L'L'Orient; andthat they should be at liberty to serveagain, on their arrival in France. Itwas also arranged, that the Russianfleet should be held, not as a prize, butindeposit; and that the ships, as wellas their crews, should be sent to Russia,at the expense of England, within sixmonths after the conclusion of a peacebetween the two nations. These werethe terms of the notorious convention ;which, however, was concluded atTorres Vedras, thirty miles distant fromCintra, " with which place," says Napier,its provisions had not the slightestconnexion, political, military, or local."Byron has gravely, but erroneously,stated, that the treaty was signed inthe Marquess of Mariana's house, atCintra, where Matthews, in his amusingDiary of an Invalid, affects to have discoveredspots of the ink, spilled byJunott on the occasion.The announcement of the conventionto the people of England, produced ageneral feeling of indignant abhorrence.The London journalists were unanimousin their reprehension; many ofthe country editors surrounded thetreaty, in their columns, with broadmourning lines ; and others headed theirnotice of the event with representationsof three generals suspended on gibbets.The nation was clamorous for the inflictionof punishment on those whohad participated in the transaction ;which, at length, became the subject ofa judicial investigation ; and the partiesmost implicated in the measure returnedto England. Four members ofthe board of inquiry approved, whilethree disapproved of the convention,which received the censure of parliament,and excited his majesty's severedispleasure. Sir Hew Dalrymple wasconsequently deprived of his command,and retired into private life with theexecrations of the public.His disgrace was, however, brief: in1812, after having previously been appointedto the colonelcy of the fifty-seventh,he was made a general inthe army; in 1814, he was created abaronet, the charge of his patent beingmade an item of the public accounts ;and in 1818, he was appointed governorof Blackness castle. He died, in theeightieth year of his age, on the 9th ofApril, 1830. By his wife, the youngestdaughter of General Leighton, he hadfour children, three daughters and a son.For his share in the convention ofCintra, Sir Hew Dalrymple appears tohave incurred much more obloquy thanhe deserved. At the time it was proposed,French troops were in possessionof every part of Portugal, except thespot occupied by the British forces :Junott had taken up a strong position,from which, if it became necessary,he had the means of safely retiring toanother in front of Lisbon. This advantageon his part, is to be attributed,perhaps, entirely to the frustration ofSir Arthur Wellesley's plan of pursuingthe French after the victory atVimiera, by the disastrous prudence ofSir Harry Bernard. When Dalrympletook the command, it was too late tocarry that plan into execution : had itbeen adopted, Junott, in all probability,would not have been in a situation toJOHN MONEY.propose such terms as those on whichthe convention was based ; but, underhis comparatively advantageous circumstances,and these are not to beascribed either to negligence or want ofskill on the part of Dalrymple, it isdoubtful whether the treaty ought,on calm consideration, to be deemed soinjudicious or disgraceful as it has beenrepresented. Even if it merited severecensure, that censure should have fallenon others rather on Dalrymple. Hereached the army when Junott hadbeen allowed to avoid what shouldhave been the consequences of his defeat.He knew nothing of the country,or the real state of his antagonist, butfrom the report of his predecessors incommand; with whose full concurrencehe concluded a treaty, the entire odiumof which he was unjustly doomed tobear. " All the responsibility," he observes," was placed on me, and all thedirection in others."JOHN MONEY.THIS officer was born at Norwich,about the year 1752 ; and, having enteredthe army at an early age, servedas a volunteer in Eliott's light dragoons,at the battle of Felinghausen. In 1762,he became cornet of the sixth dragoons ;and, in 1770, captain in the ninth foot,of which, in 1790, he was made lieutby brevet; having, in theinterim, distinguished himself at theaffair of Trois RiviSres, and other engagementsbetween the British forcesand the Americans, in one-of which hewas taken prisoner.Shortly after his last-mentioned promotion,he joined the patriots in theNetherlands against Austria, and forsome time commanded a body of theirforces, with the rank of major-general.Their attempt proving unsuccessful, hereturned to England, and proposed toraise a force of three or four thousandmen, from the wreck of their army, forthe British service, but his offer wasdeclined; because, it is said, LordCorn-wallis, then commander-in-chief inIndia, had desired that no more foreignersmight be sent out to him ; theHanoverian under his command beingunfit for service.In 1792, the subject of our noticepresented a memorial to the king,earnestly recommending the establishmentof a corps of riflemen ; and, onthe 6th of April, in the next year, headdressed a letter to Lord Amherst,then commander-in-chief, in which,after stating that he had just returnedfrom serving in the French army, asMareschal de Camp, and had declinedthe rank of lieutenant-general, in theBrabant service, he endeavoured, butwithout effect, to procure a commandin the army then raising to join PrinceCoburg. He is said to have vainlysolicited employment in various subsequentexpeditions; and on the returnof the British troops sent to the Helter,under the Duke of York, whose failurehe had confidently predicted, he proposedto raise a regiment of riflemenat his own expense, but his offer wasrejected. He now published A Treatiseon the Necessity of having Sharpshootersin the British Service ; and, the wantof such troops having been sensibly feltby the forces in Holland, two regimentsof them were shortly after organized.His next publication, of which onlyforty copies were printed, was A MilitaryDescription of the County of Kent ; inwhich he censured the camp that hadbeen formed at Brighton, and contendedthat, before the troops therestationed could have an opportunity ofintercepting it, an invading force mightreach London. He had the satisfactionof seeing his ideas on this subjectadopted; and, at the Duke of York'srequest, he subsequently drew up accountsof the military positions in variousother parts of the kingdom, by which,he appears to have materially increasedhis reputation. On the 21st of August,1795, he was made full colonel ; and,on the 18th of June, 1798, major-general.In the next year, he addressedan important letter to theRight Honourable William Bingham,on a re-organization of the BritishTHE ARMY.army, in which he shewed the value ofirregulars, as sharp-shooters, in an enclosedcountry. About the same period,he addressed another letter to Mr.Bingham, in which he strongly censuredthe practice of flogging ; for which,he proposed to substitute, in cases ofdesertion, the milder but more efficientpunishment of branding on the shoulder.He also published An Address to thePeople of Norfolk and Suffolk, onthe threatened invasion, which producedsuch an effect, it is said, that,shortly after, three companies of riflemenwere raised in Norwich, twelvebattalions of volunteers in Norfolk, andalmost as many in Suffolk. In additionto these productions, he wrotea treatise on the use of Martellotowers ; another on that of portableguns, for the protection of the coast ;and, An Account of the RevolutionaryWar of 1792, in which he censuredthe conduct of Dumourier, althoughthat celebrated general had, it appears,offered him the command of the armyof Brabant.On the 30th of October, 1805, he wasmade a lieutenant-general ; and, on the4th of June, a full general. On the returnof the Bourbons to France, he receiveda cross of St. Louis, as a tokenof gratitude from the restored monarch;having, as it is related, in his Historyof the Revolution, risen from his bed,on the night of the 9th of August, 1792,and proceeded to the Tuileries, forthe purpose of assisting to protect Louisthe Sixteenth, whom, as his aide-de-camphad informed him, the mob of St.Antoine were preparing to massacre.It appears that while he was in Paris,about that turbulent period, he regularlytransmitted accounts of every importantevent that occurred, to GeneralRainsford, and that his letters were invariablyforwarded, through Lord Granville,to George the Third, whom, inone of them, he seems to have grievouslyoffended, by observing that ministerswould be either madmen orfools, to engage, under existing circumstances,in a contest with France.At the time of his death, which tookplace at his estate, called Crown Point,near Norwich, in the month of April,1817, General Money was colonel ofthe East Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry.He was eminently instrumental in establishingthe rifle corps; but doubtsexist as to his qualifications for command,and it is clear that he neverenjoyed the confidence of government.He appears, however, to have possessedconsiderable talent as a military man ;and in animal courage he had but fewequals. On one occasion, during a violentthunder-storm, which deterred anotherperson who had previously agreed toaccompany him on an aromatic excursion,he entered the car alone,uttering a brutal defiance to the elements,and ascended. After havingbeen carried a distance of thirty miles,the gas in the balloon, by some accident,rapidly escaped, and it fell intothe sea. Money, however, though uptohis neck in water, clung to its wreckuntil rescued by the crew of a vessel,who luckily discovered his periloussituation.The cause of the sudden death ofBroughton, the celebrated pugilist,which had previously been hidden inmystery, was fully revealed, on an inspectionof General Money's papers.It appears that Broughton having falleninto difficulties, had resorted to highwayrobbery, and, unfortunately forhimself, stopped the general. " I knowyou, Broughton," said Money, " andwill not be plundered. Go about yourbusiness; and I will never discoveryou." Broughton, however, insisted onhaving the general's purse. " Well, ifyou will, you must," said Money, producinga pistol, and instantly lodgingits contents in Broughton's body;There," added he, " now go home,Broughton, and keep your own secret;I'll never discover you." The pugilistsoon died of his wound; and it was notuntil after General Money's decease,that the secret transpired.MARQUESS OF HASTINGS.<J9FRANCIS RAWDON, MARQUESS OF HASTINGS.THIS nobleman, son of Earl Moira,was born on the 7th of December, 1754.Having completed his education at Oxford,where he took an honorary degree,he made a tour on the continent ; and,in 1771, entered the army, for whichhe had entertained a strong predilectionfrom his boyhood, as ensign of thefifteenth regiment of foot In 1773, heembarked, as lieutenant of the fifth regimentof foot, for America ; and, at thebattle of Bunker's Hill, while commandingthe grenadiers, received twoshots in his cap.In 1775, he obtained a captaincy inthe sixty-third, and was soon afterappointed aide-de-camp to Sir HenryClinton. He subsequently distinguishedhimself at the battles of Brooklyn andWhite Plains ; and, in 1776, was nominatedadjutant-general of the Britishforces in America, with the rank oflieutenant-colonel. He then servedwith credit in the hazardous retreat ofthe British, from Philadelphia to NewYork; and, about the same time,raised a company, chiefly from theAmerican ranks, which he called thevolunteers of Ireland. One of thesebeing caught in the act of going over tothe Americans, he ordered the man tobe tried by his own comrades, whosentenced him to immediate execution.This example prevented the recurrenceof the evil.At the battle of Monmouth, LordRawdon so distinguished himself, thathe was intrusted with a small army toproceed to South Carolina, to keep theAmericans in check until he should bereinforced by Lord Cornwallis. Thoughthe number of the enemy trebled thatof his own men, he disposed of themso advantageously, that he was enabledto keep the American army in checkfor forty-eight hours; and, indeed, atonetime, might have commenced theattack with a probability of victory.He, however, waited the coming up ofLord Cornwallis, and in the battle ofCamden, on the 16th of August, 1780,led a division. In February, 1781, hedrove Generals Sumpter and Morrisonfrom the disputed district of Provence ;and, in the following April, attackedby surprise, and after a bloody contest,completely routed a very superior armyto his own, encamped by GeneralGreen, near the hill of Hobkirk.After this victory he conducted theretreat, when the English forces evacuatedthe province; and after continuingto harass General Green for some time,without effect, he proceeded to Charles-town;where he arrived about the timeof the execution of the American colonel,Haynes, who, after having voluntarilysworn allegiance to the British,was found guilty of having tempteda corps to desert to the army of theenemy. Lord Rawdon, though he endeavouredto save him, incurred a degreeof undeserved odium, it beingsupposed that he had acquiesced in theseverity of the government. His healthhad now become impaired by the climate,but he still persevered in his duty,sometimes giving his orders from a cart,which, on account of weakness, he usedas a conveyance. Gradually growingworse, he embarked for his nativecountry, and, on his passage, was takenprisoner by the Glorieux, in which hewas conveyed to Brest, but soon returnedto England on an exchange ofprisoners.On the 5th of March, 1783, he wascreated a peer by the title of BaronRawdon, and appointed the king'saide-de-camp. In October, 1789, hesucceeded to the title of his uncle, theEarl of Huntingdon, when he assumedthe name and arms of Hastings. Henow became intimate with George theFourth, (then Prince of Wales,) andacted as second to the Duke of York,in his duel with Colonel Lennox. Heshortly afterwards moved an amendmenton the regency question, in favourof the Prince of Wales ; and, in 1793,succeeded to the title of Earl Moira,being, about the same time, raisedto the rank of major-general. Hewrote the address presented to theking, by the grand lodge of freemasons,and afterwards proceeded witha body of troops to join the Duke ofYork in the Netherlands. He arrivedTHE ARMY.at Ostend, on the 30th of June, 1794,and by bespeaking quarters for twenty-fivethousand men, though he hadbut ten thousand, completely outgeneralledthe celebrated French commander,Pichegru, who was in theneighbourhood, with an army doublein number to that of Moira. He advancedrapidly on Bruges, and so effectuallychecked the French forces,that he covered the retreat of the mainbody of the British, and joined theDuke of York's division.Having successfully performed theobject of his mission, he returned toEngland, and held a nominal commandat Southampton, until the summer of1795, when he was appointed to heada body of troops designed to make adescent on the coast of Britain. Henot only refused the acceptance of pay,but expended 30,000 from his privatepurse for the public benefit on thisoccasion ; and soon afterwards, declinedaccepting the command of a regiment,on the ground that it might be conferredon older and more deserving officers.He vigorously opposed the measuresof the Tory government, and in 1791,conferred (though no result followed)with some members of the house ofcommons, on the subject of forming acabinet, exclusive of the friends ofMessrs. Pitt and Fox. In 1803, he wasappointed commander-in-chief in Scotland,and in October of the same year,attained the rank of general. On the12th of July, 1804, he married FloraMuir Campbell, the bride being givenaway by the Prince of Wales ; and in1806, was made master-general of theordnance, but held the office only untilthe Tories again obtained the ascendancy.He took an active part inthe prince's behalf during the investigationof the conduct of the Princess ofWales ; and in 1808, succeeded, by thedeath of his mother, to her ancientEnglish baronies.In June, 1811, he was elected governorof the Charter House, by thePrince of Wales ; on whom the choicedevolved, in consequence of the equalityof votes obtained by the Archbishop ofYork and Lord Narrowly, who werecandidates. In June, 1812, after theassassination of Mr. Perceval, LordMoira was intrusted, by the Prince ofWales, with the formation of a ministry,but he could not succeed, owing to therefusal of Lords Grey and Grenville toco-operate, unless the cabinet had theappointment of the officers of the royalhousehold. It is said that he had fullpower to concede this point to thosewhom he had selected for his colleagues,but that, on the prince declaring himselfready to part with all his domesticofficers, Lord Moira replied, "Then youshall not part with one of them." 1 his"conduct gave great satisfaction to hisroyal patron, who conferred on himthe order of the Garter, and the of British India ;which he held for nine years : duringwhich period he was created ViscountLondon, Earl of Rawdon, and Marquessof Hastings ; and twice receivedthe thanks of the directors and court ofproprietors of the East India House,and of the two houses of parliament.His health, it is said, being affected bythe climate, and his great exertions,he requested to be recalled from hisgovernment, and, in 1822, returned toEngland. Too generous to have amassedwealth, his circumstances again madeemployment desirable, and on the 22ndof March, 1824, he was nominatedgovernor and commander-in-chief ofMalta; but after a short stay, he wascompelled, by ill-health, to leave hisgovernment, and he died on the 22ndof November, 1826, on board the Revenge,then lying in the bay of Baiae.Some weeks before his death, anunfortunate fall from his horse producedvery distressing effects on ahernia, from which he had long suffered.Among his papers were founddirections, that his right hand might beamputated, preserved fill the death ofthe marchioness, and then buried withher in her coffin.In manners he was courteous, yetdignified ; and in disposition so profuse,that although born to a princely fortune,and after having filled several lucrativeoffices, he died poor. As a militarycommander, he displayed considerableskill, and the most exalted intrepidity.While governor-general of India, hebrought several measures of great magnitudeto a successful issue ; and duringhis parliamentary career, frequentlydistinguished himself by the zeal andeloquence with which he advocatedliberality and toleration.SIR DAVID BAIRD.SIR DAVID BAIRD.DAVID, the fifth son of William Baird,Esq., of Newbyth, was born about theyear 1755, and, in 1772, became an ensignin the second foot. In 1778, heobtained the grenadier company of aregiment raised by Lord Macleod, which,about two years after, was nearly cutto pieces by the troops of Hyderr Ali.On this occasion, Baird, after havingbeen wounded in four places, fell intothe hands of the enemy, and remainedfor three years and a half a prisoner.On obtaining his release, he joined hisregiment at Ascot, whence, in 1787, heproceeded, on leave of absence, to England.In 1791, he returned to India,as lieutenant-colonel of his corps, whichhad previously become the seventy-first,and commanded a brigade of sepoy,under Lord Cornwallis, at the siege ofSeringapatam. In 1793, he was intrustedwith a brigade of Europeans, atthe siege of Pondicherry ; and, in 1797,served as brigadier-general at the Capeof Good Hope ; whence, in the followingyear, he was removed, with the rank ofmajor-general, to the staff in India.Early in 1799, he joined the army formingat Vellore. On the 4th of April, hewas despatched to scour a tope, whereit was suspected an advanced guard ofthe enemy had been posted. Thissupposition proved, however, to havebeen erroneous ; and Baird led hisbrigade in what he imagined to be theroad back to head quarters. He hadnot proceeded far, when Lieutenant-colonelLangton perceived, from theposition of the Great Bear it being aclear night, that they were evidentlymarching to the north, right towardsthe enemy's forces. Baird, on beingapprised of this fact, said that heknew well enough what he was aboutwithout consulting the stars, and wenton. Soon after, he suddenly came uptoone of Tippoo's out-posts ; after dispersingwhich, he consulted a pocketcompass, and finding that Langtonwas right, hastily retraced his steps,and succeeded iij reaching the Britishcamp. On the 4th of May, he led thestorming party at Seringapatam so gallantly,that he was presented with thestate sword of Tippoo Said.In 1800, he was removed to theBengal staff, and, in' 1801, became colonelof the fifty-fourth, and joined theforces in Egypt, shortly after the surrenderof Alexandria. In the nextyear he conducted a body of troopsacross the desert to India; where, in1803, being then on the Madras staff,he commanded a large division of thearmy, forming for an attack on theMahrattass, until Major-general Wellesleywas placed at its head, when Bairdsolicited leave to return to England.On his voyage home, the vessel inwhich he had embarked, after havingbeen captured by a French privateer,was retaken, while sailing into Corunna.In 1803, he obtained permission fromhis sovereign to wear the Turkish orderof the Crescent, and, in 1804, receivedthe honour of knighthood. Shortlyafter, he became a knight companionof the Bath. In 1805, he was made alieutenant-general; and, in the nextyear, commanded the expedition whichdefeated the Dutch army at the Capeof Good Hope, and entirely subjugatedthe colony. In 1807, he led a division,under Lord Cathcart, at the siege ofCopenhagen, where he was slightlywounded. In 1808, he embarked witha considerable reinforcement for SirJohn Moore, in Spain, under whom heledthe first division at the battle ofCorunna, where he had his arm shattered.On the death of Moore, heassumed the chief command, and soonafter his arrival in England, was createda baronet. He also received the thanksof parliament for his services, an honourwhich he had thrice before obtained.He became a full general in 1814;and subsequently, for some time, heldthe chief command in Ireland ; he wasalso made governor, in succession, ofKindle, Fort George, and Inverness.At the time of his death, which occurredon the 18th of August, 1829, he wasjustly considered one of the most intrepid,skilful, and experienced officersin the British service.THE ARMY.SIR DAVID OCHTERLONY.THIS officer, was born on the 12th ofFebruary, 1758, and went, at the age ofeighteen, as a cadet, to India. Earlyin 1778, he became an ensign on theBengal establishment ; and, on the 17thof September, in the same year, lieutenantof the twenty-fourth native infantry,which went, in 1781, with otherregiments, to strengthen Madras againstthe army of Hyderr Ali. He distinguishedhimself during the arduouscampaign that ensued, until woundedand taken prisoner at the siege ofCuddalore.On obtaining his liberty he was madejudge-advocate-general to one divisionof the army. He became a captain onthe 7th of January, 1796 ; a major on the21st of April, 1800; and, on the 18th ofMarch, 1803, lieutenant-colonel of thetwelfth native infantry, with which heserved under Lord Lake, at the takingof some forts in the Dooaub. He alsoacted as deputy-adjutant-general to thearmy employed to disconcert the Mahrattaconfederacy, and was present atthe battles of Allyghur and Delhi.In 1804, he received the warm thanksof the governor-general and the com-mander-in-chief, for his skill andbravery in repulsing, with a very inferiorforce, the insurgents who hadattempted to retake the city of Delhi,where he was then employed as re-sident-envoy. Soon after he receivedthe command of the fortress of Allahabad,and in 1809, that of the troopsassembled to awe the Seeks on thenorth-west frontier.On the 4th of January, 1812, he waspromoted to the rank of colonel ; and,on the 4th of June, 1814, to that ofmajor-general. On the breaking outof the war with the Rajah of Nepaul,he marched with a division of the army,to attack the enemy's troops underMar Sing, in the west, and though hehad to contend with a country of greatdifficulty, and a native leader remarkablefor his energy and resources, hedrove him from post to post, and atlength obliged him to surrender in thealmost inaccessible fortress of Mallow.After this achievement, the rajah refusingto ratify a treaty agreed to byhis deputies on the 2nd of September,1815, Ochterlony again took the field,and, after having effected the passageof the Great Saul Forest, without theloss of a man, and turned the celebratedCheeringhantee pass, totally defeatedthe enemy, in a desperate action, .on theheights of Muckwanpore. For thisvictory, by which the rajah was compelledto ratify the treaty, Ochterlonywas made a knight companion of theBath ; created a baronet ; voted 1,000per annum, by the East India Company; and honoured with the thanks ofparliament.During the Pondering and Mahrattawar, he commanded the fifth division ofthe army, until employed to settle thedistracted province of Rajpootana, foreffecting which, he was invested withlarge discretionary powers. In 1817, heconcluded a treaty with Ameer Khan,and gained over various petty chiefs tothe British interests. In April, 1818, hewas appointed resident, with commandof the troops, at Rajpootana ; and, inthe following month of December, hewas again nominated to the residentshipof Delhi, with Tempore annexed, andthe command of the third division ofthe grand army. In 1822, he was intrustedwith the superintendence of theaffairs of central India, as resident andpolitical agent in Malwa and Raj-montana.Towards the close of the year 1824,on account of the political dissensions inthe state of Tempore, he was compelledto take the field, but soon broughtabout an amicable adjustment of differences.In June, 1825, he resignedhis employment, with the intention ofproceeding, by way of Calcutta, toEngland ; but died at Meerut, on the15th of the following month, leaving ahigh reputation for ability, both as amilitary commander and a diplomatistSIR HENRY TUCKER Confessor.SIR HENRY TUCKER Confessor.THIS distinguished officer was bornin 1760, and became second lieutenantof the twenty-fifth foot, in September,1779; lieutenant of the one hundredand fourth in March, 1783 ; and, onthe 4th of the ensuing April, was appointedcaptain of the same regiment.He removed, in 1787, to the eighteenthfoot, with which he served, as aide-de-camp,to Sir William Pitt, at Gibraltar.He received the brevet of major, on the5th of March, 1794 j and the majorityof the eighteenth, on the 13th of Mayfollowing. In 1795, he succeeded to thelieutenant-colonelcy of the eighteenthfoot ; and, on the 12th of March, 1796,removed to the Royal Angle-Corsicancorps, with whom he highly distinguishedhimself in their native island ;and, on its evacuation, induced thewhole regiment to embark with himfor Elba, of which he was appointedcommandant, having previously actedin a similar capacity at Calvi; at thesiege of which, as well as at that ofBastia, he had been present.In 1796, being then under the ordersof Lieutenant-colonel Weiss, he tookPiombino; whence he was detached,with five hundred men, to attackCampiglia, where the British arrived,after wading nearly three miles throughan inundation. Having despatched alight company to intercept the enemy'spickets, he' was enabled, after exchanginga few shots with the outposts,to enter the town at midnight, with aconfidential servant, unperceived ; and,in person, arrested a French orderly,going to the garrison of Castiglione,with despatches from the commandantof Campiglia, announcing the landingof the British at Piombino. An entrancebeing effected without difficultyby the Royal Irish Grenadiers, theysoon compelled the French to surrenderj and the commandant havingescaped from his quarters, by droppingover the wall, left his supper behind,which was partaken of by the Englishofficers. The object of the expeditionbeing accomplished, the troop s returnedto Elba ; and Montressor, being subsequentlyon a military tour throughItaly, was cut off from the British army,which had left the Mediterranean, andhe regained it, after some difficulty,by a Tuscan passport, through Genoa,Switzerland, and Germany.In 1801, he commanded the eighteenth,or Royal Irish, when the armylanded in Egypt, where he was presentat all the memorable actions ; and atthat of the 13th of March, his regimentwas remarkable for the regularity ofits firing. After the surrender ofRosetta, he was appointed its commander; and, in that character, refusedto account to Lord Keith for any part ofthe prizes captured in the town, on theground that no seaman had been employedin taking it, and that the armyhad not been allowed their share insome money taken on board a Frenchfrigate. His determination was, however,overruled, by an order from LordHutchinson, and he was compelled toallow the naval force a participation inthe prizes. Returning with nis regimentto Malta, he was appointed to thecommand of Porto Ferrajo, which heheld until 1802, when a peace wasconcluded.On the renewal of war in 1803, heoffered to repair to the interior ofCorsica, and incite a revolt against theFrench; but his services were requiredto organize one thousand five hundredrecruits, which were added to theRoyal Irish. On the 25th of September,he received the brevet of colonel ; inJuly, 1804, he was appointed brigadier-general; and, shortly after, obtainedthe command of a brigade of Kentishvolunteers. On the prospect of an invasionhaving ceased, the Royal Irishwere ordered abroad, and he offered toaccompany them again as their .He was, however, appointedbrigadier-general in the Windwardand Leeward Islands, and was^ub-sequently nominated to the commandof a brigade, forming part of an armydespatched, under Sir Eyre Coote, toretake Jamaica. The place, however,was found to be still in possession ofTHE ARMY.the English, and Montressor, while onhis passage thither as one of the generalofficers on the staff intended tobe established in that quarter, was capturedby the L'L'Orient squadron, andlanded at the island of St. Jago. Onhis release, he returned to Jamaica,where he was appointed to the commandof the western district, where heconduced, by his liberality, greatly tothe health and comfort of his men, andconsiderably relieved the sick by thesalutary regulations he enforced in thehospitals. On the Th of July, 1806,he sailed on a mission to Honduras ;and, having made a survey of theeastern coast, transmitted it to England,with a report relative to the conditionand value of the settlement. He returned,in November, to Jamaica; and,soon after, embarked for England.On his arrival, he was appointed tothe Sussex district, from which he removedto the Western and Kentish insuccession. Being subsequently orderedto inspect a light corps for actual service,he recommended to them the planof using an additional running ball inthe rifle. In 1808, he was nominated tocommand a brigade ordered to Portugal ;but he did not embark, owing to theraging of the ophthalmia in that country.In 1809, he headed a brigade in the expeditionintended for the Scheldt ; and,soon after, succeeded General Picton,at Flushing; where, finding the hospitalsfilled with sick, he advised SirEyre Coote to employ natives on theworks, and many of the army weresaved by the adoption of his proposition.He was himself taken ill in ashort time, and returned to England.In 1810, he became a major-general,and was ordered to inspect the localmilitia of North Wales and Shropshire.He was next appointed to the Irishstaff and the command of the westerndistrict; whence he removed, in 1811,to Limerick, and afterwards organizeda brigade for Portugal ; which, however,on preparing to embark, received ordersto remain at home, in consequence ofthe disturbed state of Ireland. In 1812,he was ordered on the Sicilian staff tocommand the Messina district ; and,in 1814, sailed with seven thousandmen for Leghorn, with which, on the20th of March, he drove the enemyacross the Maria river. Having left acorps of observation at Pisa, to watchGeneral Murat's motions, he pursuedthe enemy so rapidly, as to compelthem to leave their field-pieces andpowder behind them, and drove themthrough the town of Spezia, of whichhe gained possession. Having refreshedhis troops, he pushed on to Fort St.Maria, which he attacked without effect,and then gave orders that it should beregularly besieged. On the 7th ofApril, he returned to Spezia, and advancingtowards Genoa, drove theenemy from the strong positions ofMonte Fascia, and took up a post atQuinto. On the 13th, a general actionensued, and the enemy were driven tothe gates of Genoa; on the surrenderof which, he embarked for Corsica,where he had been invited to take thechief command ; and on his passagethither, he was solicited, and consented,to assume that of Carrara. On theabdication of Buonaparte, he returnedto England, having previously becomea lieutenant-general ; and, on the 21stof March, 1820, he was made a knightcompanion of the Bath, as a reward forhis numerous and difficult, but lessbrilliant than useful, military services.He appears, from many of his employments,to have been regarded as athorough disciplinarian ; and, fromothers, to have enjoyed a high reputationfor courage and skill. His attentionto the sick at Montego Bay, and,subsequently, at Flushing, deservedlyrendered him an object of praise ; andit appears evident that his general demeanourto those under his commandwas eminently conciliatory, from thesingular fact of the Corsican regiment,when about to be disbanded, havingvolunteered, notwithstanding their prejudicesagainst quitting their nativeisland, to embark with him on foreignservice.SIR JOHN STUART.SIR JOHN STUART.THIS eminent officer was born in1761, and in January, 1779, obtained anensigncy in the third regiment of foot-guards,with which he soon afterwardsserved, under Lord Cornwallis, inAmerica, where he received a dangerouswound. On the commencement ofhostilities with France, in 1793, he wassent to Holland, where he graduallyrose to the rank of brevet-colonel. In1796, he was employed as brigadier-general,with the British forces in Portugal; whence, in 1 798, he accompanied thesuccessful expedition against Minorca,where he obtained the command ofa corps, which was subsequently calledthe Queen's German Regiment. Withthis he proceeded, in 1800, to Egypt,where, during the battle on the plainsof Alexandria, he so highly distinguishedhimself, that his services werespecially mentioned in the generalorders of his commander-in-chief.At the close of the campaign he returnedto England, whence he wasimmediately despatched, in a politicalcapacity, to Constantinople. After havingeffected the object of his mission,he proceeded to take the command ofpart of the British troops in Alexandria,where his judicious conduct during thewar between the Turks and Mamelukeprocured him the approbation of hisown government, and the order ofthe Crescent from the Grand Seignior.In 1802, he became a major-general,and, in 1804, during the alarm of aninvasion, commanded a brigade onthe coast of Kent. In 1805, he accompaniedthe expedition, under SirJ. Craig, to the Mediterranean; and,on the return of that officer to England,through ill-health, assumed the chiefcommand of the British troops in Sicily ;which island being threatened with anattack by General Reigned, he boldlyinvaded Calabria, and, on the 4th ofJuly, 1806, achieved a splendid victoryat Maidaa. His forces, on this occasion,amounted to about four thousand men ;they were opposed by nine thousand ofthe enemy; of whom, they are said tohave killed or wounded nearly twothirds. " Every fort along the coast,"it is added; "all the stores, ammunition,and artillery, prepared for the attackupon Sicily, became the prey of thevictors ; and, what might, perhaps, beconsidered of still more consequencethan these advantages, an indelible impressionwas left in the country of thesuperior bravery and discipline of theBritish troops."For this memorable exploit, GeneralStuart obtained the order of the Bath,and a gold medal from his sovereign ;the title and feudal honours of Count ofMaidaa, with other distinctions, from theSicilian king; the thanks of bothhouses of parliament, and the freedomof the city of London. Soon after hisreturn to England he was made a ,and in 1808, he resumedthe chief command in Sicily. In1809, he prevented Murat from takingpart in the war against Austria ; and adivision of his force, under Brigadier-generalOswald, expelled the Frenchfrom the Ionian Islands. In 1810,Murat, who had made very formidablepreparations for an attack on Sicily,after various unsuccessful attempts, atlength succeeded, about the end of September,in landing a body of four thousandtroops on the coast ; which, however,on the following morning, wereattacked by a division of the Britishforces, assisted by the Sicilian peasantry,and, after a short contest, driven backto their boats, with great loss.Shortly after this event, the com-mander-in-chief obtained permissionto resign his command, and returnedto England. He had previously beenmade colonel of the twentieth foot ;and he was now attached to the home-staff.He subsequently became of Grenada, and aknight grand cross of the Bath. Hislast employment was the chief commandof the Western District, in possession ofwhich he died, at Clifton, near Bristol,on the 1st of April, 1815, with the highreputation of having been one of themost gallant, talented, enterprising, andsuccessful officers in the British service.THE ARMY.SIR JOHN MOORE.THIS gallant soldier, the eldest sonof Dr. Moore, author of "Zeluco," wasborn on the 13th of November, 1761,at Glasgow, where he received the rudimentsof learning. His educationwas completed on the continent, whither,in 1773, he accompanied hisfather, who was then in the Duke ofHamilton's suite as medical attendant.He entered the army, as ensign of thefifty-first foot, in 1776 ; soon afterwards,he accompanied the eighty-second,as lieutenant, to Nova Scotia ;where he was posted throughout theremainder of the American war, andsaw scarcely any active service, exceptduring an expedition, to oppose thelanding of the enemy at Penobscot,at which place his party narrowly escapedbeing cut off by a superior force.At the peace, in 1783, he was reduced,with his regiment; and, soonafter, he went into parliament for adistrict of Scotch burghs, (Lanark,Linlithgow and Peebles,) through thepatronage of the Duke of Hamilton,who obtained for him, in 1787 or 1788,a majority in the sixtieth. He speedilyexchanged into his old regiment, thefifty-first, of which, in 1790, he becamelieutenant-colonel by purchase.In 1795, he distinguished himself inCorsica, particularly at the siege ofCalvi ; where, though severely woundedby the bursting of a shell, he enteredthe Moselle fort, at the head of thegrenadiers, in such gallant style, thatGeneral Stuart, who had witnessed hisconduct, rushed forward, and embracedhim with enthusiasm. After its capture,he was, for a short time, adjutant-generalof the island; but returned toEngland at the close of the year. Henext served, as brigadier-general, underSir Ralph Abercromby, in the WestIndies. In the expedition against St.Lucia, he displayed such gallantry atthe capture of Morne Fortuneee, thatAbercromby eulogized it as having beenthe admiration of the whole army. Theisland being subdued, Moore was appointedits governor, and soon succeededin putting down several bandsof armed negroes, which, after the surrender,had kept up a kind of Guerillawarfare against his troops.Several officers having died, or becomedisabled by sickness, and manyothers having obtained leave of absenceto procure a change of air, there remainedscarcely enough to do the dutyof the garrison, and Moore was consequentlyobliged to issue orders, thatno one, except in the last necessity,should quit the island. Shortly afterwards,he was attacked with the yellowfever, and on being told, if he did notgo on board ship, his life would be indanger, he referred the medical menwho attended him to his own orders ;and stated, that he was resolved, at allhazards, to remain at his post ; norcould they, until he had become insensible,carry the measure, so necessaryfor his safety, into effect.Being attacked a second time withthe fever, he returned to England, inthe summer of 1797, with Sir RalphAbercromby, under whom he soonafterwards served in Ireland ; wherehe assisted against the rebels at NewRoss, defeated them near Wexford,and obtained the rank of major-general.He was next employed in the disastrouscampaign of 1799, in Holland ;whence he returned, severely woundedin the face and thigh. He had also,previously, about the time when AdmiralMitchell entered the Texel, receivedsome injury in the hand, froma ball, which, had not its directionbeen fortunately turned, by strikingagainst the spy-glass which he held,would, doubtless, have entered hisbody.Early in 1800, he was sent, stillunder the command of his friend,Abercromby, to Egypt. The Frenchattacked the first division of the troopsthat landed, with great courage andeffect; but Moore, following with thereserve, rushed up an eminence, onwhich the enemy were posted, and,at the point of the bayonet, compelledthem to retire. For this exploit, whichBuonaparte termed a master-piece ofSIR JOHN MOORE.generalship, Moore was much anddeservedly eulogized. At the battleof Aboukir, he behaved with hisusual gallantry ; and though severelywounded in the leg, refused to quit thefield until the defeat of the enemy wasannounced. For his services, on theseand other occasions during the Egyptiancampaign, he was rewarded, on hisreturn to Europe, with the order of theBath.At the peace of Amiens, he wasplaced on the home-staff, and, on therenewal of hostilities, stationed at Sand-gate,in Kent; where he put in practicea plan he had previously conceived,and which has since been generallyadopted, of qualifying regiments to acteither as light troops, or in the usualway ; rendering his own regiment, inthis particular, a pattern corps. Hewas next employed, as lieutenant-general,and second in command, underGeneral Fox, of the forces in the Mediterranean.He succeeded the latterofficer in 1807; and, early in the followingyear, was sent, at the head oftenthousand men, to aid the King ofSweden ; with whom, however, he hadsome personal difference, and was consequentlyplaced under arrest ; on extricatinghimself from which, he returned,with his troops, to England.He was, shortly afterwards, sent tothe peninsula, to act under GeneralsDalrymple and Bernard. This subordinaterank, as he had already on twooccasions been employed as com-mander-in-chief, was deemed an infringementof military etiquette ; butMoore, though rather hurt, on receivinghis orders, observed, that whileable, he could never refuse to serve hiscountry; and that, if the king commandedhim to act as an ensign, heshould certainly obey. He reached thehead quarters of the British army, soonafter the convention of Cintra ; his superiorsin command were successivelyrecalled; and, at length, he assumedthe chief command.The most important period of hislife now commenced ; it was brief, brilliant,and disastrous. Our limits precludethe possibility of giving a detailedaccount of those movementswhich ended in the battle of Corunna;a rapid sketch of them can alone beafforded. Moore, it appears, advancedinto Spain, under an assurance thatsixty or seventy thousand Spaniardswould cover his entry: but he penetratedto Salamanca, without even aSpanish piquet to protect his front.Frere, the English minister at Madrid,however, urged him to move towardsthe capital ; but, hearing that the corpsunder Castanets had been defeated, sothat his own was the only army in thepeninsula opposed to the French, andagainst which, the whole force of thelatter might, therefore, be concentrated,Moore determined on a retreat. His retrogrademovement had scarcely commenced,when Frere having informedhim, that the cause of patriotism wasin a most prosperous state at Madrid,(although Napoleon had, on the daypreceding the date of the letter, takenpossession of the capital without a blow,)Moore formed a junction, with a reinforcementsent out under Baird, andadvanced to attack Soult, at Saldanha.The two armies were already on theeve of a contest, when intelligencereached the commander-in-chief, thatnot only had Soult received large reinforcements,but that Napoleon, at thehead of a formidable body of troops,had left Madrid, with an intention ofgetting to the rear of the British forces.Moore, consequently, again retreated.The enemy pursued him closely ; and,though the troops under Lord Paget repulsedthem at Sahagun, the situationof the British soon became almost desperate.Their line of march lay througha desolate country; the winter had setin with much severity ; rain, sleet, andsnow, rendered the roads almost impassable; provisions were dreadfullyscarce; the bullion, with which Moorehad been provided, was abandoned, becausehe had no means of conveyingit; the baggage of his men was destroyed; their clothes were in tatters ;their feet blistered by long marches,and cut for want of shoes ; the peasantsafforded him no assistance; and,to complete the distress of his situation,the troops, at length, became insubordinate,and committed so manyserious excesses, that he found it necessary,on more than one occasion, tohave recourse to capital punishment,for the purpose of obtaining even a partialcompliance with military discipline.Still the courage of the British wasTHE ARMY.unsubdued; and, though retreating inmuch disorder, the enemy's advancedguard never approached them withoutbeing repulsed. Moore himself, beingconstantly with the rear of his troops,was invariably present whenever ashot was fired, or the French camein sight.At length, the British reached thehills behind Corunna; where, on accountof the transports destined toreceive them not having yet arrived,they remained for three days. On the14th of January, 1809, the sick, cavalry,and part of the artillery, were embarked: on the following day, theenemy slightly attacked their outposts;and, on the 16th, a general engagementtook place. The British, in thisbattle, amounted to little more than athird of the enemy's number ; theywere greatly reduced in strength bya fatiguing retreat, during which theyhad experienced the most dreadfulprivations ; yet they encountered theFrench with an intrepidity that hasnever been surpassed. Their rightwing was first attacked, but withoutsuccess ; the enemy then attempted totake them in flank, but Moore chargedand repulsed them, at the head ofthe forty-second, exclaiming, as headvanced, " Highlanders, rememberEgypt !" Soon afterwards, a cannonballshattered his left shoulder, andbeat him to the ground. Some of hisattendants immediately attempted tounbuckle the sword from his woundedside ; but he resisted their well-meantendeavours, observing, that he had ratherhis weapon should go out of thefield with him.The battle continued until dusk,when the enemy gave way at allpoints, and the British embarked withoutmolestation. Moore was carried toCorunna ; where, on hearing of thevictory, he exclaimed, " I hope thepeople of England will do me justice;I hope my country will be satisfied!"Shortly before his death, which tookplace on the same evening, he observedto Colonel Anderson : " You know, sir,that I always wished to die in thismanner." A grave was hastily dug forhim, at midnight, by his troops, in abastion of the citadel ; where, in the true,but poetical language of his monodist,No useleM coffin inclosed hit breast,Nor in sheet, or in shroud they wound him ;Mr lay like a warrior taking his mt.With tail martial cloak around him.Sir John Moore died unmarried. Inperson, he was tall and graceful; andhis features, until worn by service,were particularly handsome. He possessedstrong natural eloquence, greatconversational powers, and that smartnessof reply which often passes forwit. As a soldier, his conduct procuredhim the admiration and respect of someof his most distinguished contemporaries.Pitt solicited his friendship, and wasoften guided by his advice on militarysubjects : Fox told him, when his appointmentto the chief command inIndia was suggested, " that he couldnot give his assent, in the state inwhich Europe then was, to send tosuch a distance, a general in whom hehad such entire confidence :" Napoleonsaid, that " his talents and firmnessalone saved the British army fromdestruction ; he was a brave soldier,an excellent officer, and a man oftalent ; he made a few mistakes, whichwere, probably, inseparable from thedifficulties with which he was surrounded,and caused, perhaps, by hisinformation having misled him :" Wellingtondeclared, that he " saw but oneerror in Sir John Moore's campaign:"and Soult described him, as " takingevery advantage that the countryafforded, to oppose an active andvigorous resistance."Within a fortnight after his death,a high eulogium was passed on hisconduct, in general orders to the army.A monument was erected to his memoryin St. Paul's, and another atGlasgow. On the spot where he fellacommemoration stone was placed, bySoult, to testify the high respect withwhich he was regarded by his enemies ;and a pillar was afterwards raised atElvira, according to the terms of itsinscription, " by the gratitude of Spain,to the glory of the English general,Moore, and his valiant countrymen, inmemory of the action of the 16th ofJanuary, 1809."MARQUESS OF Anglesey.HENRY WILLIAM PAGET, MARQUESS OF Anglesey.HENRY WILLIAM, eldest son ofthe Earl of Uxbridge, was born on the17th of May, 1768; and received hiseducation at Westminster School, andChristchurch, Oxford. In 1793, he wasappointed to the command of a regiment,which he had raised at his ownexpense, among his father's tenantry, inStaffordshire ; in the following year heserved under the Duke of York, inFlanders ; and again, in the expeditionto Holland, in 1799.On the 10th of December, 1808, beingthen a major-general, he joined SirJohn Moore, in the peninsula; andshortly after, at the head of only fourhundred men, routed a detachment ofthe French army, amounting to ninehundred, of whom, he made two hundredprisoners. At Malaga, he againdefeated the enemy, with an inferiorforce ; and at Benevento, in the presence,it is said, of Napoleon, repulsedthe French advanced guard, took GeneralLefebre, and so successfullycovered the retreat of the English, thatthey were not molested again up totheir arrival at Corunna. At the battlefought near that place, on the 16th ofJanuary, 1809, Lord 1'aget, when therifle corps were about retreating, broughtup the reserve to strengthen the rightwing, and attacked the enemy sovigorously, that the British remainedmasters of the field, and embarked, a fewhours afterwards, without opposition.Shortly after his return from the continent,a verdict was obtained againstLord Paget, with 20,000 damages, inan action for criminal conversation withLady Charlotte Wellesley, a daughterof the Earl of Cadogan, and wife of theHonourable Henry Wellesley, brotherto the hero of the peninsula. It iscreditable to his lordship, that on thetrial of the cause, he instructed hiscounsel to abstain from all observationstending to justify his conduct ; and alsoto declare that he was not solicitousabout the mitigation of damages, if itcould be supposed that any sum a jurymight give, would really compensatethe plaintiff for the deep wrongs he hadsustained.At this period he was a married man,having been united to a daughter of theEarl of Jersey, in 1795, by whom hehad eight children. Lady Paget subsequentlyobtained a dissolution of themarriage according to the laws of Scotland; and was united to the Duke ofArgyle, in 1819. A fortnight after thetrial, a hostile meeting took place betweenLord Paget and Captain Cadogan,Lady Wellesley's brother, but his lordshiphaving stated, on the ground, thatnothing could ever induce him to addto the injuries he had already done thefamily, by firing at the brother of LadyCharlotte Wellesley," the seconds wereof opinion that the affair could not proceedfurther, and the parties separated.Lord Paget and Lady Charlotte subsequentlybecame man and wife, andhad a family.From 1806 to 1812, he had representedMelbourne Port ; but, in the latteryear, on the death of his father, hesucceeded to the earldom of Uxbridge,and took his seat in the house of peers.In the spring of 1815, he commandedthe troops assembled in London to quellthe corn bill riots; and soon after thereturn of Napoleon from Elba, he wasplaced at the head of the British cavalryin Flanders.At the battle of Waterloo, he behavedwith astonishing gallantry. Onone occasion, being in the rear of histroops, he rode back alone, towards aregiment of cuirassiers, which he perceivedforming for a charge, on the roadbehind him. Although, on gallopingoff, he had waved his hat for his mento attack, no one had followed him, exceptColonel Kelly, of the horse-guards.This gallant officer remained with him,for more than a minute, close in front ofthe French, who, with great humanity,refrained from despatching them. TheBritish cavalry, excited at length by thedaring behaviour of their commander,came on to the charge. They hadnever before engaged the cuirassiers,for whom, on account of " the armour,"worn by the latter, they appear to havedeemed themselves an unequal match,but the result of this encounter provedTHE ARMY.that their apprehensions were groundless.The French, unable to withstandthe shock of their attack, fell back inconfusion, " and then," to use an expressionof one of the guards, " theBritish had only to ride with them andwork away."After having already charged on twooccasions, Lord Uxbridge headed a terrificattack on nine thousand of theenemy, of whom three thousand weretaken prisoners, and nearly the wholeof the residue slain. The battle hadnearly closed, when a ball from a fieldpiece struck him on the leg, whichwas subsequently amputated, and depositedin a garden at the village ofWaterloo.Five days after the battle, the earlwas created Marquess of Anglesea: healso obtained, for his eminent services,grand crosses of the Bath, and theGuelphicic order ; various honours fromforeign princes ; and eventually becamea knight of the Garter. In passingthrough Lichfield, on his return toEngland, the corporation of that citypresented him with a splendid sword ;and, some time afterwards, a noble columnwas erected in North Wales tocommemorate his achievements, by theinhabitants of the principality.During the queen's trial he becameunpopular with the mob, on account ofthe support which he gave to the bill ofpains and penalties. On one occasion,he was surrounded by the populace,who insisted on his shouting, " Thequeen for ever !" After much resistance,he at length reluctantly cried, " Thequeen ! the queen ! And," added he,may all your wives be like her!"In April, 1827, during the premiershipof Canning, he was made master-generalof the ordnance ; and in February,1828, the Wellington cabinetintrusted him with the vicegerency ofIreland. A few years before, he had,in parliament, hinted at the feasibilityof quelling the disturbances there, bysending hussars, to gallop sword inhand through the country ; and it wasfeared that his conduct, as lord-lieutenant,would be arbitrary and conciliating.The reverse, however, wasthe fact ; he attached himself to no party,and, regarding in his administrationneither persons nor politics, acquired,perhaps, more popularity than any ofhis predecessors. In December, 1828,Dr. Curtis, the Roman catholic primateof Ireland, having transmitted him acopy of a letter recently written to thatprelate, by the Duke of Wellington,the marquess returned an answer, inwhich he avowed opinions with regardto catholic emancipation, differing materiallyfrom those expressed in hisgrace's communication to the primate.Immediately afterwards, it was officiallyannounced that the marquess had ceasedto be lord-lieutenant, and he took hisdeparture from Dublin, on the 19th ofJanuary, 1829, amid the strongest expressionsof public regret. The shopswere closed, as if a national calamityhad occurred, and he was escorted tothe place of embarkation by thousandsof all classes. On his return to England,he took an early opportunity of declaringin the house of lords, thatemancipation was the only panacea forIreland ; and subsequently, when therelief bill was in progress, he said,Suppose this bill passed next week,and that war should be declared theday after, there would not be the leastdifficulty in raising fifty thousand able-bodiedmen, in the yourself six weeks,in Ireland, ready to march to anypoint in which their services mightbe required. The passing of this billwould be worth more to the Britishempire than one hundred thousandmen."After the measure had been carried,he entered into a vindication of his conductwhile viceroy, and in justificationof his letter to the catholic primate,which," said he, " having given greatoffence to his majesty, led, as I havebeen told, to my recal." His removalwas, apparently, a necessary sacrifice tothe expediency of the moment, governmentnot being then fully prepared, orperhaps, not full)' determined, to bringforward the catholic claims as a ministerialmeasure ; and his conduct whilein office was so satisfactory, that hisrestoration to the vicegerency speedilyfollowed his removal.The career of the Marquess of Angleseahas been so chivalrous and romantic,as almost to dazzle the soberbiographer. While lord-lieutenant ofIreland, he was enthusiastically beloved;in the field he has been a " preuxchevalier," decidedly " sans peur, but,VISCOUNT BERESFORD.Illin private life, not altogether " sansreproche." With one glaring exception,which some maudlin enemies tomorality and social virtue have fruitlesslyendeavoured to palliate, (althoughthe marquess himself, during the discussionof his offence, displayed suchmanliness and common sense, as todisclaim any attempt at its extenuation,)his conduct as a man appears to beabove censure. Many of his advocateshave attributed his extraordinary courage,to a recklessness produced by remorsefor his previous intercourse withLady Charlotte Wellesley; at the sametime, imputing to him more prudencewith regard to personal hazard, afterhe had become the father of a secondfamily. But on reviewing his conduct, itdoes not appear that, under any circumstances,he ever " bated one jot" of thedaring gallantry which he had displayedat the earliest period of his militarycareer. It may even be asserted that,as he advanced in life, if experiencetaught him to expose his troops less,the necessity of affording them a brilliantexample of courage, induced himto peril his own* person more. Evenat the last 'battle in which he fought,if it were possible to blame him, itwould be for extravagant heroism. Inbravery, he has never been surpassed jhis courage appears to have been asmuch a mental as an animal quality;and this is the highest praise that canbe given to a soldier, except the attributeof consummate skill. Therewas reason in his apparent rashness;and he exposed his life, on numerousoccasions, to imminent hazard, not somuch through recklessness, or to gratifya propensity, as from principle and conviction.WILLIAM CAN BERESFORD, VISCOUNT BERESFORD.THIS nobleman, natural son of thefirst Marquess of Waterford, and brotherto Admiral Beresford, entered thearmy in 1785, as ensign in the sixthfoot, with which he served in NovaScotia, until 1790. While there, beingout with a shooting 'party, a covey ofpartridges rose, at which he desiredEnsign Molyneux, who was present,to fire: the ensign complied, when,unfortunately, a shot from his pieceentered Beresford's eye, and entirelydeprived it of sight.Three years after, being then captainof the sixty-ninth foot, he accompaniedthe expedition to Toulon; on thefinal evacuation of which, he went toCorsica, and was present at the takingof St. Fiorenzo, Bastia, and Calvi. In1795, he sailed, with Sir Ralph Aber-crosby,for the West Indies, as of the eighty-eighth, buthis regiment put back, and was drafted.In 1799, he was despatched to the EastIndies; whence he proceeded, at thehead of a brigade of Sir David Baird'sarmy, by the Red Sea, to Egypt ; and,in 1800, he received the brevet ofcolonel.On returning home, he was sent toIreland, where he served against thefew remaining rebels who still held out.While on this service, a yeomanrycorps, which he had been solicited toinspect, instead of receiving him withpresented arms, were, on his reachingthem, most complacently standing atease. Their captain, who, only a fewdays before, had boasted of the disciplineof his troops, in vain vociferatedthe word of command ; and Beresfordhad already intimated his determinationto report them as grossly ignorant, orinsubordinate, when, it is said, a serjeantstepped from the ranks, and thusaddressed him : " Plase your honour,don't think the corps doesn't know itsexercise as well as any souldiers in theland ; but the truth is, the min and thecaptain, of late, hasn't been on speakingterms !"In 1805, he shared in the conquest ofthe Cape of Good Hope, whence he wassent, with the rank of brigadier-general,at the head of a small detachment,against Buenos Ayres, which he took;but, after obtaining some other successes,he was compelled to surrender,by a force greatly exceeding his own.He remained a prisoner for six months ;THE ARMY.when, as the articles of capitulation hadbeen broken by the enemy, he consideredhimself justified in bearinghis parole, and escaped. Returning toEngland, in 1807, he was immediatelymade colonel of the eighty-eighth regiment,and sent, with the temporaryrank of major-general, in Command ofthe land part of the expedition againstMadeira ; of which, on its capture, hewas appointed governor.Early in 1808, he obtained the rankof major-general ; and, having joinedthe British army in Portugal, duringthe summer of that year, was employedas a commissioner, to adjust the termsof the notorious convention of Cintra.He then accompanied Sir John Mooreinto Spain, and was present during theretreat to, and at the battle of, Corunna,where he covered the embarkation ofthe troops. In March, 1809, he returnedto the seat of war, having beenappointed marshal and generalissimoof the Portuguese army. When theFrench attacked the north of Portugal,he commanded twelve thousand menonthe Upper Douro, which he crossedin sight of the division under GeneralPoison, whom he drove back, and, combininghis Portuguese troops with theBritish under Lord Wellington, vigorouslypursued the retreating enemy.During the remainder of the peninsularwar, he was repeatedly engaged.At Albuera, he defeated Soult, with theloss, however, of seven thousand of hisown troops. The French suffered stillmore severely ; the havock committedamong their officers being so great, thatthe troops, in many cases, were destituteof commanders; and to this circumstance,their final retreat was, by theprisoners, chiefly ascribed. At oneperiod of the battle, the French wereon the brink of victory : the peninsulartroops had given way ; and a body ofBritish, which advanced to their support,had lost a great number of men,an entire brigade of artillery, and eightstand of colours; but, at this criticalmoment, some British, who had justcome up, and a Portuguese brigade,which had frequently repulsed theenemy, were sent forward by Beresford; and the attack was renewed, withsuch success, that three of the eightstand of colours, and all the capturedguns, except one howitzer, were retaken,and the French compelled toretire, in this, as in other parts of thefield. The marshal behaved with thegreatest heroism throughout the action,exposing himself dauntlessly, not onlywherever his presence, as a commander,was required, but in the hottest of thefight, for the purpose of animating thepeninsular troops, by a splendid exampleof gallantry on the part of theirleader. He, individually, encountereda Polish lancer, whom he grappled bythe throat, and, by muscular strength,hurled to the ground. The Pole, whenon the point of making a blow at themarshal, was shot by a Spaniard, andBeresford kept the horse of his antagonistas a trophy.In 1810, he became representative ofhis native county, Waterford, in parliament.During the campaigns in thepeninsula, of 1812 and 1813, being thena lieutenant-general, he acted as secondin command. Early in 1814, he contributedmuch to the victory of Orthes ;took possession of Bourdeaux, when theinhabitants declared in favour of theBourbons ; and afterwards bore a distinguishedpart in the battle of Toulouse.In the course of the same year, (1814,)he was raised to the peerage, by thetitle of Baron Beresford, with a parliamentarygrant of 2,000 per annum,for himself, and the two next inheritorsof the title. The city of London alsopresented him with a valuable sword ;and, in July, 1815, he received thepersonal congratulations of the PrinceRegent on his successes.He was afterwards employed, by thePortuguese government, at Rio Janeiro ;where, in 1817, he repressed a conspiracy.On his return to Europe, hewas not permitted to land at Lisbon,being, as it was supposed, the bearer oforders hostile to freedom. In 1822, hebecame lieutenant-general of the ordnancedepartment ; and, in the followingyear, he was created a viscount, andmade colonel of the sixteenth foot. In1825, he became a general in the army ;and, in 1828, master-general of theordnance. He has also received, for hisservices, grand crosses of the Bath, andof the Guelphicic order, of the Tower andSword, of St. Ferdinand and of Merit,of St. Hermenegilde, and of St. Fernando; the title of Marquess of CampoMajor, and Duke of Elves, from Spain ;SIR GEORGE MURRAY.that of Cond6di Francis, from Portugal; the governorship of Jersey ; anda cross and seven clasps for the followingbattles and sieges: Corunna,Busaco, Albuera, Badajoz, Salamanca,Vittoria, Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nice,Orthes, and Toulouse.In politics, Lord Beresford is a Tory.His career, as a military man, has beenremarkably splendid. His talent forcommand, and personal valour, werenot merely conspicuous on a few occasions,but throughout a series ofbrilliant engagements; but his fame,perhaps, will principally rest on hissuccessful re-organization of the peninsulartroops, whom, by uncommon skilland great exertions, he, at length, renderedsufficiently firm and disciplined,to cope with their veteran antagonists.SIR GEORGE MURRAY.THIS gallant officer, born in Scotland,about the year 1761, entered the armyin April, 1779, as ensign in the seventy-firstfoot, from which he removed tothe thirty-fourth; and in June, 1790,to the third guards. He served in thecampaign of 1793, in Flanders ; and, inJanuary, 1794, was promoted to a lieutenancy,with the rank of captain. Hereturned to England in April, andhaving rejoined the army in Flanders,in the summer of the same year, waspresent in the retreat through Hollandand Germany. In the summer of 1795,he sailed, as aide-de-camp to Major-generalAlexander Campbell, on thestaff of Lord Moira's army, with theexpedition intended for Quiberon ; and,in the autumn, went to the WestIndies, under Sir Ralph Abercromby ;but returned in February, 1796, on accountof ill health, to England.In 1797 and 1798, he again served asaide-de-camp to Major-general Campbell,on the staff of England and Ireland; and having, on the 5th of August,1799, obtained a company in the thirdguards, with the rank of lieutenant -colonel, he was employed on the staffof the quarter-master-general's department,in the expedition to Holland,where he was wounded in the actionnear the Helder. In the autumn of1800, he sailed for the Mediterranean,and was sent upon a mission to Jaffa.In 1801, he was employed in the expeditionto Egypt, where he was presentat the landing, and in the battles whichfollowed. In 1802, he was appointedadjutant-general in the West Indies ; in1803, assistant quarter-master-generalat the Horse Guards ; in 1804, deputyquarter-master-general in Ireland; in1805, he served in the expedition toHanover, under Lieutenant-generalDon ; and afterwards, under LieutLord Cathcart.In 1806, he returned to his staff situationin Ireland ; in 1807, he was placedat the head of the 'sdepartment, in the expeditionto Stralsund and Copenhagen ; in thespring of 1808, he acted as in the expedition toSweden, under Lieutenant-general SirJohn Moore; and, in the autumn ofthat year, in the same capacity in Portugal.He was present at the battle ofVizier, the affairs at Lugo and VillaFranca, and at the memorable battle ofCorunna. On the 9th of March, 1809,he received the brevet rank of colonel,and was appointed in Portugal and Spain, underLord Wellington. He assisted in allthe operations, till the termination ofhostilities in the peninsula, when hewas appointed quarter-master-generalin Ireland, and was soon after nominatedto the same situation in America.On the 1st of January, 1812, he receivedthe rank of major-general ; on the9th of August, 1813, he was appointedcolonel of the sixtieth regiment ; and,subsequently, lieutenant-governor ofEdinburgh Castle. In December, 1814,he was appointed on the staff of thearmy in Canada as ,with the local rank of ; being, in the sameyear, raised to the dignity of a knightgrand cross of the military order ofthe Bath, and of the Guelphicic orders ;knight commander of the PortugueselitTHE ARMY.order of the Tower and Sword ; andknight of the Austrian order of Leopold.The colonelcy of the seventy-second footwas given him in 1817; and, in 1819,he exchanged the governorship of EdinburghCastle for that of the MilitaryCollege.On the 14th of June, 1820, thehonorary degree of D. C. L. was conferredupon him, in the theatre of theUniversity of Oxford ; on the 9th ofSeptember, 1823, he was gazettedcolonel of the forty-second foot ; andin January, 1824, he was admitted afellow of the Royal Society. On thefollowing Cth of March, he was gazettedlieutenant-general of the ordnance department; and, during the same year,he was returned to parliament forPerthshire. In July, 1826, he wasagain elected a member of the houseof commons; and on the 21st of June,1828, he was gazetted secretary of statefor the colonial department, with a seatin the cabinet. On the 17th of Septemberof the same year, he becameone of the commissioners for the affairsof India ; and on the following 28th ofOctober, was elected a fellow of theMedico-Botanical Society.On the 24th of September, 1829, hewas gazetted as governor of Fort George;on the 17th of February, 1830, he wasagain gazetted secretary of state for thecolonies ; and, on the following 23rd,opposed Lord John Russell's motionfor transferring the elective franchise ofcorrupt boroughs to Birmingham andManchester. His political principlesare opposed to those of the liberalparty, and his intellectual acquirementsare very considerable. His militaryfame, though for no particular service,is deservedly of a very high order.ARTHUR WELLESLEY, DUKE OF WELLINGTON.THE HONOURABLE ARTHURWELLESLEY, fourth son of the Earlof Warrington, was born at DenganCastle, the seat of his ancestors, inIreland, on the 1st of May, 1769, thesame year that gave birth to Napoleon,a circumstance on which Louisthe Eighteenth remarked, " La Providencenous devait bien cette compensation."Being deprived of his fatherat an early age, young Wellesley becamethe chief care of his mother, bywhom he was sent to Eton ; and,after remaining there a short time, wasremoved to the military academy ofAngers, in France. At this schoolhe studied the principles of militaryscience, and, in 1787, received his firstcommission as an ensign of the forty-firstfoot. In 1788, he exchanged intothe twelfth, and in 1792, into the eighteenthlight dragoons, and thus enjoyedthe advantage of obtaining an earlyacquaintance with the field duties ofboth cavalry and infantry. In the Aprilof 1793, he was promoted to a majorityin the thirty-third regiment;and,shortlyafterwards, obtained the lieutenant-colonelof the same corps, whichwas purchased for him by his brother,the present Marquess Wellesley. " Ayoung man, in the command of a fineregiment," says Major Sherer, one ofthe duke's biographers, " he sailed uponhis first service from the cove of Cork,in the month of May, 1794."Having landed at Ostend, the evacuationof which had been just determinedon by Lord Moira, Lieutenant-colonelWellesley accompanied that noblemanto join the camp of the Duke of Yorkbefore Antwerp. " It was here," saysthe authority above cited, "that the futurehero of England first saw an armyin the field. It was at this moment,and upon this theatre of war, wherethere was no sound but of reverses,and no prospect but one dreary withexpected disappointments, that the conquerorin so many battles made hisfirst essay in arms. "Notwithstanding, however, the discouragingsituation in which he wasplaced, and the few opportunities hefound for distinction, he omitted, innone that occurred, to take advantageof, and improve them. His regimentwas concerned in every affair with theFrench republican forces; and on theriver Needle, at the village of Boxtel,DUKE OF WELLINGTON.and in a hot skirmish in the Wall, hewas conspicuous for his prudence andvalour. Though his conduct on theabove occasions was not officially noticed,it won the admiration of thosewho were present, and, in particular,of General David Dundas, by whom hewas selected to cover, with the brigadeto which his regiment was then attached,the memorable retreat from Holland.This was a trying service, performedduring a hard frost, through a desertand hostile country, amidst rigoursand hardships sufficient to disheartenthe most experienced general; yet itwas concluded by Lieutenant-colonelWellesley in a manner which few couldhave equalled and none surpassed.On his return to England, he wasordered to join an expedition thenfitting out for the West Indies, andsailed with the fleet early in 1795.Being, however, repelled by adversewinds, he put back to land ; " andthus," says Major Sherer, " a star,which might have set early in the westin obscurity, and perhaps death, arosein the east with life and brightness."Accordingly, on the appointment of hisbrother to the governor-generalship ofIndia, the subject of our memoir sailedwith him in 1797, having, in the Maypreviously, been promoted to the rankof colonel. During his voyage to India,he occupied much of his time in readingmilitary books, and was generally to befound in his cabin, thus quietly layingthe foundation of his renown.On the arrival of Colonel Wellesleyin the east, war being declared againstTippoo Sultaun, he was appointed to acommand in the army of the Carnatic,and commenced his campaign with aforce of eleven battalions. The firstaction in which he was engaged, tookplace at Malaveily, where, at the headof his own regiment, the thirty-third,he greatly contributed to the victoryobtained by the British troops underthe command of General Harris. Hisnext services were at the siege ofSeringapatam, before which he foundhimself encamped in the beginning ofApril, 1799. On the 4th of May, thetown was taken by storm ; but he hadno share in the attack, having beenintrusted with the charge of the reserve.He was, however, appointedcommandant of the captured city, and,in that capacity, directed the funeral ofTippoo, which' he superintended withthe utmost delicacy and judgment. Hewas also nominated one of the commissionersfor disposing of the conqueredterritories ; his particular dutybeing to remove from the country thefamilies of Hyderr All and the latesultan, which he performed with greatjudgment and the most consideratehumanity. Whilst acting as commandantof Seringapatam, he had manyduties to enact totally unconnected withmilitary service ; but he accomplishedthem all in a manner that gained himmuch influence and respect " It isremembered," asserts our previous authority," that he early prepared apaper upon the state of the coinage inMysore, in which it was shown that hehad studied the subject, and was not lessable to project a measure of finance inthe closet than to guide a column inthe field. To this hour, indeed, thememory of all these services, and moreparticularly of those which he renderedto the terrified and desolate natives inthe moment of our triumph and theirdistress, is cherished by the aged inhabitantsof Seringapatam with a gratefulfeeling, with which we are unwillingto disconnect the after successes ofColonel Wellesley's life." His next servicewas in putting an end to the careerof an adventurer, named DhoondiahWaugh; who, at the head of five thousandhorse, threatened the tranquillityof Mysore ; but he and his followerswere completely routed by ColonelWellesley, who, in one resolute charge,decided the fate of this lawless horde.In December, 1800, he was about toquit the government of Seringapatam,to accompany the army into Egypt ;but new dangers threatening the Mysorecountry, he was remanded, andgazetted to the local rank of a brigadier-generalin India. The British arms were,shortly afterwards, put in motion againstthe Mahrattass, who, headed by Holkar,a rebel of fierce courage and great militarytalent, and assisted by Frenchintrigue, had nearly succeeded in subvertingthe Anglo-Indian government.Having been appointed to the rank ofmajor-general in the spring of 1802,Colonel Wellesley again took the field;and, on the 20th of April, 1803, put toflight a body of the Mahrattass at Poona,11GTHE A II MY,which town they had threatened todestroy. The subject of our memoirnow received a specific authority toconclude peace, or to engage in hostilities,as his judgment and knowledgeof the objects of governmentmight suggest. Accordingly, on therefusal of Scindia, an ally of Holkar, towithdraw his troops from the frontierof the Nizam, Major-general Wellesleymarched immediately against him,and captured the town or petal ofAhmednuggur, a fortress which securedthe communication with Poona, affordeda safe depot, and was the centreand the capital of a district yieldingsix hundred and thirty-four thousandrupees. This happened on the 12th ofAugust; and, before the end of thefollowing month, he had followed uphis success by the complete dispersionof the Mahratta army, which amountedto fifty thousand, and had given battlenear the village of Assay and the riverJuan. In this affair, our officer hadhis horse shot under him ; and " never,"says Dr. Southey, " was any victorygained under so many disadvantages.Superior arms and discipline have oftenprevailed against as great a numericaldifference; but it would be describingthe least part of this day's glory to saythat the number of the enemy wereas ten to one : they had disciplinedtroops in the field, under Europeanofficers, who more than doubled theBritish force ; they had a hundredpieces of cannon, which were servedwith perfect skill, and which the British,without the aid of artillery, twice wonwith the bayonet."In consequence of these and subsequentsuccesses, a treaty of peace wasconcluded between the British governmentand Scindia; and GeneralWellesley departed from India in theheight of a fame and popularity whichone of his eulogists calls " glory enoughfor a single life." In Calcutta, a monumentwas erected to commemorate hisvictory at Assay ; he was presented,by the inhabitants of the city, witha sword ; his own officers markedtheir admiration of his conduct bygiving him a golden vase ; and, inEngland, he was made a knight companionof the Bath, and obtained thethanks of the British parliament. Theinhabitants of Seringapatam declared,in an address of gratitude, that theyhad reposed, for five years, under theshadow of his protection ; and imploredthe God of all nations to hear theirconstant prayers for his health, hisglory, and his happiness.In 1805, Sir Arthur Wellesley returnedto England, with his brother,and, in the November of the sameyear, embarked for Hanover, in commandof a brigade under Lord Athwart; but the army, after having landedon the continent, speedily remarked,in consequence of the battle of Austerlitz.In 1806, he became colonelof his regiment, by the death of theMarquess Cornwallis ; and, soon after,he took his seat in the house of commonsas member for Newport, in the Isleof Wight He had previously sat in theIrish parliament, where he spoke andvoted in favour of catholic emancipation; but won little distinction, at thattime, as a senator, being noted more forhis candour than his eloquence. In theyear last mentioned, he married the HonourableCatherine Pakenham, daughterof the Earl of Longford, to whom he hadbeen engaged before his departure forIndia; and who, it is said, having lost,by illness, much of her personal beauty,offered to relieve him from his contract.He, however, declared himself desirousof fulfilling his engagement, and theywere accordingly wedded ; though, aftera few years, the marriage ceased to beahappy one. The only remark we shallmake upon it is, that it produced SirArthur two sons. Not long after hisunion, he took advantage of his experiencein Indian affairs, to expose to governmentthe absurdity of a project thencontemplated for the employment ofnegro troops in the East Indies, and ofsepoy in the West; but which, in consequenceof the remonstrance of SirArthur, was abandoned. In 1807, heaccompanied the Duke of Richmond toIreland, as chief secretary ; and, by virtueof that office, was sworn in , on the 8thof April, a member of the British privycouncil. He made himself unpopular inDublin, by the introduction of a new police,which was objected to, on account ofits expense, by the inhabitants. Duringhis official residence in Ireland, he advocatedcatholic emancipation as a measurenot of right, but necessity ; thoughhe once afterwards went so far as toDUKE OF WELLINGTON.say, that " every man, without distinctionof religion, ought to be calledupon to do service to the state, whenhe was particularly qualified to thatservice." He next accompanied LordCathcart to Copenhagen, where he wasappointed, conjointly with Sir HomePoplin and Colonel Murray, to fix theterms of the capitulation; and for hisservices on the occasion he receivedthe thanks of the house of commons,an honour which he personally acknowledgedin his place in parliament. In1808, he supported a bill for enforcingthe residence of Irish clergy on theirbenefices.In the April of the same year, hewas promoted to the rank of ; and shortly afterwards,on the determination of the Britishgovernment to send succours to Spainand Portugal to repel the French invasion,he was sent to the latter countrywith the command of nine thousandmen, and arrived at Corunna on the 20thof July. On landing, he immediatelyheld a conference with the Junta ofAlicia, by whom he was informed ofthe battle of Rio Sect; and that theFrench being, in consequence, mastersof the course of the Douro, wereenabled to cut off" the communicationwith the country to the south and eastof that river. Sir Arthur then madeinquiries respecting the quantity ofFrench troops in Portugal, and askedthe wishes of the junta as to the employmentof his own army ; but theydeclined the use of it in their province,recommending him to march ittowards Oporto, where, they asserted,Junott was in arms. He accordinglyproceeded to that city, where he arrivedon the 24th, and found that hehad been grossly deceived, both! as tothe number and position of the Spanish,Portuguese, and French troops. Theonly effective force that could cooperatewith him, consisted of fivethousand Portuguese, posted on theMondegogo, whither he gave orders forthe British fleet to sail, and proceededto Lisbon to consult with Sir CharlesCotton, relative to the descent at themouth of the Tagus ; a project which theEnglish ministry were anxious shouldbe carried into execution. Sir Arthur,however, considering such a plan injudiciousand impracticable, resolvednot to act upon it, and returned to thefleet at the Mondegogo, where he determinedto disembark his troops, andto commence the campaign accordingto his own views, which, however, werein some measure interrupted by themortifying intelligence he received onthe 30th, of the command being vestedin Sir Hew Dalrymple, and of thesailing of Sir John Moore's troops.The disembarkation of the British,under Sir Arthur, commenced on the 1stand terminated on the 5th of August,near the little fort of Figueiras. Hewas here joined by the corps of GeneralSpencer ; with whom, after having hada conference with General Freire, thePortuguese commander-in-chief, whoadvised him to proceed to Feria, he tookthe road to that place, and was therejoined by the Portuguese force, consistingof six thousand men. By occupyingFeria, he had prevented thejunction of the two French generals,Poison and Laborde ; the latter ofwhom was now at Rolica, or Roleia,and with whom he was preparing toengage, when the Spanish general,either through his own fears, or atthe secret instigation of the junta ofOporto, refused to enter the field,unless a stipulation was made tosupply his troops with British storesduring the campaign. Sir Arthur,neither able nor willing to comply withthis extraordinary demand, warmly remonstratedwith Freire respecting hisconduct, and appealed, but in vain,either to his honour or patriotism, toinduce him to alter his determination.He, however, obtained a thousandPortuguese infantry, with a small portionof cavalry and light troops, on anundertaking to feed them ; and havingreceived a promise from the Portuguesegeneral to keep in the rear of theBritish, he, with his force, thus unexpectedlyreduced, marched against Laborde.This general he encounteredat the village above mentioned on the17th, with an army considerably superiorin amount to that of the enemy,the strength of whose position, however,fully compensated for their numericaldeficiency. The attack commencedalmost simultaneously on theright and left wings, under GeneralsFane and Hill, and with such success,that Laborde was forced from his posi-THE ARMY.tion to the heights of Zambugeira;whence, after a severe contest, in whichthe French general was wounded, andthe colonels of two British regimentsslain, he was dislodged, and forced tomake a rapid retreat. " This day,"says Major Sherer, " should be longand honourably remembered by everyBritish soldier; for it was the firstaction of the memorable war in thepeninsula, in which British forces encounteredthe legions of Buonaparte."On the 19th, General Wellesley removedto Vimiera, where he was joinedby Generals Anstruther and Ackland,and had now, under his command,sixteen thousand effective men, andeighteen pieces of artillery. With thisforce he had proposed making an attackon Junott, according to a plan which hesent to Sir Harry Bernard ; but SirHarry not approving of it, Sir Arthurreturned to the camp in disappointment." His purpose," says Southey,in his History of the Peninsular War,had been to push his advanced toMara, and halt the main body aboutfour or five miles from that place ; thusturning the enemy's position at TorresVedras." He did not form this planhastily or unadvisedly, having in hishands, at the moment, the maps andpapers of Sir Charles Stuart, who hadfully surveyed this part of the country,and pronounced it to be the groundupon which, in case of serious invasion,Portugal must be saved or lost. Hisrepresentations, however, were unattendedto; "an inauspicious spirit ofcaution prevailed," says the author justquoted ; and it was " at this criticalperiod of the campaign," observes ColonelNapier, " that the ministerial arrangements,which provided three com-commander-in-chief, began to work."A day of glory, however, was nearerto our general than he, at the moment,expected. At midnight he wasawakened by an officer, who announcedthe approach of Junott, with fourteenthousand men, and stated him to bewithin a league of the camp. On the21st, Junott advanced upon Vimiera,where a sanguinary conflict took placebetween the French and the British,which terminated in favour of thelatter, who, headed by General Wellesley,forced the enemy to flight. Thegeneral wished to pursue his success,by pushing on through Torres Vedras, toMontechique, for the purpose of interceptingall access to Lisbon ; but SirHarry Bernard, who was unwilling toperil the certain and solid advantagesjust gained, upon the doubtful chanceof a more complete triumph, againthwarted his intentions, and directeda halt. This was a source of bitterdisappointment to Wellesley, who issaid to have remarked on the occasion,to one of his officers, that " they mightthink about dinner, for there was nothingto do." To another, he is reportedto have observed, " We havenothing to do but to go and shootred-legged partridges," the game withwhich that country abounds. In thisaction, the enemy lost about threethousand killed and wounded, thirteenpieces of artillery, and twenty-threeammunition waggons ; whilst the loss ofthe English was little more than sevenhundred killed, wounded, and missing.Among the prisoners taken was GeneralBrennier, who having been rescuedfrom death by a Highlander, whorefused the offer of his watch andpurse, exclaimed to Colonel Pack,"What sort of man is this? he hasdone me the greatest service, and yetrefuses to take the only reward whichI can at present offer him !" To whichthe colonel replied, " We are Britishsoldiers, sir, and not plunderers."A council of war was now held bythe French, in consequence of theirrecent defeat, and a flag of truce was inconsequencesent to propose a conventionfor the evacuation of Portugal.Sir Hew Dalrymple, who was nowarrived, and made the third commander-in-chiefof the British army, in thecourse of twenty-four hours, sent forSir Harry Bernard, and Sir ArthurWellesley, for information and assistance.The latter, whose plans had beencompletely defeated by the refusal ofSir Harry to follow up the victory atVimiera, gave it as his opinion, that theposition of the French still remainedso powerful in Portugal, that it wouldbe advantageous to allow them, uponalmost any terms, to evacuate thatcountry. He urged, as an additionalreason, that the British troops wouldescape the delay of regular sieges inPortugal, and thus be enabled to marchinto Spain with greater force, and in aDUKE OF WELLINGTON.shorter period of time. An armistice wasaccordingly drawn up, and after muchdiscussion and difference of opinionbetween Sir Arthur and the two othergenerals, concluded upon certain terms,the chief articles of which were, that theFrench army should evacuate Portugalat the expense of the English government;that no Portuguese should beheldaccountable for his political conduct;and that all articles of dubiousimport should be interpreted favourablyto the French.The military advantages of the convention,which the subject of our memoirhad principally in view, were notoverrated ; " but some political errors,"says Southey, " were committed inframing it ; and the British generalsdid not assume that moral tone whichthe occasion justified, and which thesoundest policy required." Sir Arthur,however, did not wholly fail in theadoption of that " moral tone," herealluded to, in the framing of the convention,as it was at his express desirethat an article was introduced, thoughultimately struck out, " for making theFrench generals " disgorge the churchplate which they had stolen." On theterms of the convention, the ratificationof which it should be observed, tookplace at Torres Vedras, and not atCintra, nothing could exceed the popularoutcry against Sir Arthur and hiscoadjutors. They were execrated inthe public streets, at public meetings,and in newspapers, London and provincial,some of which went so far asto head their pages with a representationof three gibbets, with a generalsuspended from each. Under thesecircumstances, a formal investigationof the matter was directed by the Kingof England, and the subject of ourmemoir, together with Sir Harry Bur-hardand Sir Hew Dalrymple, were recalledfor the purpose of undergoingexamination. The inquiry terminatedby his majesty's avowal of his disapprobationat many parts of the treaty,though he approved it on the whole;and Wellesley escaped much of thepopular indignation, by declaring, inparliament, that, on signing it, he didnot consider himself responsible for itscontents, but had avowed himself, at thetime, dissatisfied with many of its provisions.Among other squibs of theday, on the occasion, the followingappeared in one of the public journals :Sir Arthur, and Sir Harry,Sir Harry, and Sir Hew:Sir Arthur is a valiant knight,But as for t'other two ;Why, cock-doodle, cock-a-doodte,Cock-doodle doo."For his conduct at Vimiera, Sir Arthurreceived the thanks of both housesof parliament, and the epithet " Immortal,"was applied, by Lord the enthusiasm of the moment,to his victory. Previously to his againquitting England, Sir Arthur was calledupon by Mr. Whitbread to explainthe circumstance of his having, whileserving in Spain, retained the office,and received the salary, of chief secretaryof I ireland ; to which he only repliedby observing, that the Irish governmenthad felt no inconvenience fromhis absence.In the spring of 1809, he returned toPortugal, and was received at Lisbonwith the greatest enthusiasm. Thevery sight of him is said to have animatedall ranks with hope and joy ; theregency nominated him the marshal-generalof their army ; the soldiersgazed upon him with confidence ; andthe people followed him wherever heappeared with shouts and vives. At thetime of his advance towards Spain, thatcountry was a scene of the greatest confusionand distraction ; the French weregradually adding to their conquests,and nothing but the prompt and decisivemeasures which Wellesley nowcommenced taking, could have turnedthe unpromising aspect of affairs. Hisfirst step was directed against the celebratedMarshal Soult, in order, if possible,to drive him at once out of Portugal,before he could effect an union with themore formidable Victor, upon whom,now at the head of thirty thousandmen, he meditated a subsequent attack.Quitting Lisbon towards the end ofApril, Sir Arthur arrived at Coimbra onthe 5th of May ; and, a few days afterwards,set out for Oporto, which Soultwas preparing to evacuate. The passageof the Douro was warmly disputedby the French ; who were, however, atlength defeated, on the llth of May,with a loss of five hundred killed andwounded, and a quantity of ammunition,whilst that of the English amountedTHE ARMY.only to one hundred and twenty. Napoleon,on hearing of this action, is saidimmediately to have pronounced Wellesleya great general. " On the 12thwas effected the capture of Oporto,when," says Major Sherer, " the Britishhead-quarters were established inthe very house which Marshal Soulthad occupied; and a dinner, in preparationfor him, was served up at thetable of Sir Arthur. On the followingday, he made arrangements for followingthe enemy, but gave up the pursuitat Montague, whilst Soult crossed thefrontier at Alliariz, and retreated toOrense.The subject of our memoir has beenblamed for not pursuing the enemy furtheron this occasion, it being argued,says Colonel Napier, " that an enemyonce surprised, should never be allowedto recover ; and that Soult should havebeen followed up, even while a singleregiment was left to pursue." But SirArthur had as good reasons for actingaccording to his own judgment as thosewhich were advanced against it : partof his army was still on the left bankof the Douro ; those who had crossedwere already worn out with fatigue ;and, in addition to this, the recklessand rapid flight of the enemy renderedpursuit of them fruitless, if not impracticable." If," said he, " an army throwsaway all its cannon, equipments, andbaggage, (as the French did on thisoccasion,) and every thing that canstrengthen it and enable it to act togetheras a body ; and if it abandons allthose who are entitled to its protection,but add to its weight and impede itsprogress ; it must obviously be able tomarch through roads where it cannotbe overtaken by an enemy who has notmade the same sacrifices."Sir Arthur now prepared for operationsagainst Victor ; and, about themiddle of June, arrived at Arranges,whence, after being detained some daysby a want of supplies, and by the sicknessof his troops, he commenced hismarch into Spain at the end of themonth; and, on the 12th of July, hereached Placentia, where a conferencetook place with Cuesta, the Spanishgeneral, by which it was agreed thatthe British and Spanish armies shouldproceed to attack Victor on the 18th.No action, however, occurred until themorning of the 27th, when a contesttook place at Salinas, in which theBritish, being suddenly surprised, lostabout eight hundred men, and SirArthur narrowly escaped being madeprisoner. " Had he been taken at thatmoment," says Southey, " how differentlywould the latter days of Buonapartehave closed ! and how different, atthis hour, would have been the conditionof England, of Europe, and of theworld!"On the morning of the 28th, a partialaction ensued, but about eleven, a pauseon both sides taking place, the woundedwere removed to the rear; and it is notunworthy of mention, says the authoritylast cited, that at a brook, which ranbetween the two armies, soldiers of bothwent down to drink, shook hands acrossit, and assisted each other in carryingoff the wounded of either side. Hostilitiesbeing resumed, the memorablebattle of Talavera followed. TheFrench force, under the superintendenceof Joseph Buonaparte in person,was commanded by Victor and MarshalJordan, and the general attack commencedabout noon, with an impetuosityon both sides which for some time renderedthe issue doubtful. The Frenchreceived the first repulse, but subsequently,forming themselves into twosolid squares, protected by a deep ravine,which the allied troops did not perceiveuntil close upon it ; they wereenabled, at the same time, to check therash assaults of their adversaries, and todeal out upon them terrible destructionfrom their artillery and musketry, whichwere now heard without a moment'sinterruption, like the roll of a drum.Undismayed, however, either by thedisadvantages of their position or the fireof the enemy, the English cavalry rodefuriously down the hollow, where menand horses fell over each other in suchdreadful confusion, that Colonel Parentson coming up to the brink of theravine with his Hanoverian hussars,declined to advance, saying, in brokenEnglish, as he reined up his horse, " Iwill not kill my young mens." In thisin-judicious and unfortunate charge, abouttwo-thirds of the assailants were killedand wounded, but the desperate couragewith which our troops had rushedupon almost certain destruction, somewhatchecked the confidence, if not theDUKE OF WELLINGTON.impetuosity, of the enemy. During theaction at the ravine the English centrewas attacked, and the French were beatoff; but the brigade of guards advancingtoo eagerly in pursuit, they were suddenlyattacked, both front and flank onthe French batteries, and also, not onlyby the enemy's supporting columns anddragoons, but by the men who hadturned again, after having recoveredfrom their repulse. " In a few minutes,"says Southey, " all their mountedofficers were killed, with more thanfive hundred men, and at that momentthe fate of the day appeared worse thandoubtful." Sir Arthur witnessed thisdisaster ; he saw that the centre of theBritish line was broken, and that uponhis immediate dispositions in this criticalmoment, depended the fate of the day.At this juncture he ordered a battalionof the forty eighth to advance to thesupport of the guards. The chargewas successful ; the discomfited troopsrallied, and the battle was restored.The French," says Colonel Napier,relaxed their efforts by degrees : thefire of the English grew hotter; andtheir loud and confident shouts, sureaugury of success, were heard alongthe whole line." Towards the terminationof this action, in which theFrench lost seventeen guns and nearten thousand killed and wounded, andthe allies about seven thousand, ahorrible circumstance occurred ; thedry grass and shrubs taking fire, avolume of flames passed with rapidityacross a part of the field, and scorchedto death many of the wounded as theylay struggling among the dead anddying. The inequality of the twoarmies greatly enhances the victorygained at Talavera; the British forceonly amounting to eighteen thousandthree hundred, whilst that of the Frenchwas not less than forty thousand. Howlittle available a great part of theSpanish force was to Sir Arthur, maybeconceived from the fact that theirgeneral, Cuesta, ordered a division tobe decimated for their cowardice ; andit was only to the humane remonstrancesof the former that this murderousresolution was only partiallycarried into effect.As the commander-in-chief of hisvictorious army, Sir Arthur added considerablyto his laurels by their triumph ;but as it was the triumph rather ofindividual valour than military science,the chief merit of the day belongs to theofficers and soldiers generally, but forwhose firmness and intrepidity, the successfulgeneral must, on this occasion,have been the discomfited leader.Whatever share, however, he mayhave had in securing the victory, hecannot be too highly spoken of forhis conduct after it, for his solicitudeabout the wounded, and his reluctanceto quit the scene of his success until hehad provided for them proper care andattention. For his victory at Talavera,he was appointed a captain-general inthe Spanish service, and presented withsix Andalusian horses in the name ofKing Ferdinand ; and at home, he wasrewarded with an annuity of 2000,and raised to the peerage by the titlesof Baron Douro of Wellesley, and ViscountWellington, of Talavera, and ofWellington in the county of Somerset.The central junta of Spain, in presentinghim with the horses and therank of captain-general, the pay attachedto which he generously declined,assured him that " this tributewas of small value in comparison withthe services which he had rendered inSpain, and still less in proportion tothe wishes of those who offered it:but, for hearts like his, the satisfactionresulting from great achievements wastheir best recompense; nor was it inthe power of man to bestow any rewardwhich could equal the glory of beingone of the principal deliverers of a greatand generous people, of listening to theirblessings, and of deserving their gratitude."Notwithstanding, however, his recentvictory, Lord Wellington found hissituation one of great difficulty andanxiety ; the obstinacy of the Spanishgeneral, Cuesta, almost neutralized theeffect of an union with his troops, whilstthose of the British, on whom lay thechief weight of the campaign, weresuffering from sickness for want ofproper supplies. His lordship accordinglydetermined on returning to thefrontier of Portugal, and on the 18thof August, wrote to the Marquess ofWellesley, who had arrived at Cadi,announcing his intention, and requestinghim to inform government thereof.Since the 22nd of last month," said1'22THE ARMY.Lord Wellington, " the horses havenot received their regular deliveries ofbarley, and the infantry not ten days'bread. I have no doubt, the governmenthave given orders that we shouldbe provided as we ought to be, butorders are not sufficient. To carry onthe contest to any purpose, the labourand service of every man, and of everybeast in the country should be employedin the support of the armies; and theseshould be so classed and arranged, as notonly to secure obedience to the ordersof the government, but regularity andefficiency in the performance of the service.Magazines might then be formedwith ease, and transported whereverthe armies should be stationed. But aswe are now situated, fifty thousandmen are collected upon a spot whichcannot afford subsistence for ten thousand;and there are no means of sendingto a distance to make good thedeficiency: the junta have issued orders,which for want of arrangements, thereare no persons to obey; and the armywould perish here, if I were to remain,before the supplies could arrive." Whilstat Merit, he received a despatch fromhis brother, stating that he had proposeda plan to the junta, for the future supplyof provisions, and suggesting that theBritish array should endeavour to coverAndalusia, by taking, in conjunctionwith the Spanish army, a defensivepost behind the Guadiana. "It would,however, be vain," says the marquessto Wellington, " to urge these considerationsbeyond the extent in whichthey may be approved by your judgment.It will be sufficient for me toreceive an early intimation of youropinion, and to be enabled to state itdistinctly to this government, whichlooks to your decision on the presentoccasion as the final determination ofits fate, and of the existence of theSpanish nation. That decision I ampersuaded will be founded on the sameprinciples of wisdom, justice, and publicspirit, which have already obtained therespect, esteem, and confidence of theSpanish nation."On the receipt of this despatch, Wellingtonconsented to remain for a timewithin the Spanish territory; but madeup his mind to co-operate with the undisciplinedlevies of Spain no longer.He was now in the province of Estremadura;and upon his march fromJaraicejo to Badajoz, in the course ofwhich the army was attacked with intermittentfever, and lost, during theautumn, about nine hundred men permonth. On his arrival at Badajoz, hestationed his army in a very judiciousposition, part being within the Portuguesefrontier, and part on the Spanishterritory; so that both the flank andthe rear of the French were menacedif they advanced towards Andalusia.His retreat to the Portuguese frontierwas ill-relished by the central junta,who, in order to conceal the true reason,asserted that he had withdrawn himselfat the very moment when the Frenchmight have been driven to the Pyrenees.To prove themselves in earnest, theyfollowed up this declaration by sendingan army against Madrid, in expressopposition to the opinion of Lord Wellington,who warned the Spanish ministersthat this enterprise would terminatein the defeat of their troops, and refusedhis co-operation, which, without havingconsulted him, they had fully countedupon. It was about this time that hewent to Lisbon, and gave orders for theconstruction of the famous lines ofTorres Vedras ; and, on the 2nd ofNovember, 1809, he was, by a royaldecree of the July preceding, appointedmarshal-general of the forces of Portugal.The notion of the lines of TorresVedras is said to have been derivedfrom the documents, before alluded to,of Sir Charles Stuart ; but " it was LordWellington," observes Colonel Napier,who first conceived the design ofturning those vast mountains into onestupendous and impregnable citadel,wherein to deposit the independence ofthe whole peninsula." Of the lines, itwill be sufficient to observe, that theyconsisted of entrenchments, inundations,and redoubts, which secured more thanfive hundred square miles of mountainouscountry lying between tetanusand the ocean.The confidence with which LordWellington entered upon the defenceof Portugal was not damped by thespeeches which were continued to bemade against him in the British parliament." It was mournful and alarming,"observed one speaker, " to hearthat Lord Wellington had said he coulddefend Portugal with fifty thousandDUKE OF WELLINGTON.men, provided thirty thousand wereBritish ; for, if the French were inearnest in their designs, before threemonths Lord Wellington and his armywould be in England." Another saidthat the sacrifice of the whole Britisharmy would be insufficient to securethe kingdom of Portugal : and a thirddeclared that " this attempt to defendPortugal was the climax of error ; thatwe should be allowed to retain Portugalunder our present system just so longas Buonaparte thought proper."To these remarks, however, Wellingtonpaid but little regard, and beingsupported by the ministry, obtainedthe necessary supplies for the Portuguesetroops, and continued, with firmnessand activity, to prosecute the planof his campaign. After the defeat ofthe Spaniards, in their attempt uponMadrid, he had established his headquartersat Vizeu, and his advancedivision lay in front of Almeida, andparole as far as Ciudad Rodrigo,against which the enemy made variousbut indecisive demonstrations. In February,1810, our commander againvisited Lisbon, and, after examining hislines with care, upon which ten thousandlabourers were at work, he returnedto his quarters in high healthand spirits. Meanwhile the enemymade sundry efforts to tempt him tobetray his dispositions or disconnect hisdivisions; but he had posted them toosecurely to fear the disturbance of themin that state of the campaign.During this period, says MajorSherer, Lord Wellington was muchand closely occupied in his bureau.There he worked alone with simplicity,and with the common secrecy of reserve,but without the slightest ostentation ;no solemn mystery ; no pomp of concealment; and never one look of importance.He commanded the corps ofHill with as much minute attention tothe very detail of its movements, as ifit had been under his own eye, thoughit operated far away from him in thesouth. In this manner he directedevery movement throughout the land,north as well as south ; looking uponevery road, and every stream, andevery strong sierra, from the still observatoryof his mind ; while, as hebent over his maps and plans, he consideredthe correspondence and reportssubmitted to him. He answered allimportant communications with his ownhand, and conveyed his instructions withthat minute clearness which precludedthe possibility of being misunderstood.In the meantime, the French troopswere daily receiving reinforcements,and in the month of May, three corpsd'armee were united under the commandof Massena, with the title of thearmy of Portugal. The British troopseffective in the field did not amountto twenty-two thousand combatants,whilst those of the Portuguese wereabout thirty-one thousand, many regimentsof which were not yet sufficientlytrained to act with the army, and remainedtherefore in garrison. To meetthis united force, says our previous authority," a host of more than seventy-thousandexperienced and intrepid soldierswere marshalled beneath theeagles of Napoleon, and stood ready inarray, awaiting only the signal to advance; but Wellington lay among thehills, and the British lion was in theway."The first action with which the invasionof Portugal opened, took placeon the banks of the Coa, in which adivision of the British, under GeneralCrawfurd, was repulsed by MarshalNey, with great loss. Lord Wellingtonforesaw what would be the result ofsuch a contest, and had given orders toGeneral Crawfurd, to pass the Coawithout fighting, which he had himselfcautiously refrained from, in consequenceof the superiority of the enemy'snumbers, and of his unwillingness toabandon the advantageous situationthen held by the allied armies. In themean time, Ciudad Rodrigo had beentaken by Massena, whilst Wellington,doubtful of the former's subsequentviews, kept an intent watch on hismotions, and gradually withdrew thegreater part of his own'infantry behindthe Mondegogo. About this time, he tookthe precaution of issuing a proclamation,commanding the inhabitants of all thatportion of the country which the militarymeans at his disposal were notableto protect, to evacuate their homes,to remove their goods, to drive awaytheir cattle, and to destroy all storesand provisions for which they had notransports. This was followed up bya declaration to the magistrates andTHE ARMY.authorities, that if they remained toreceive the invaders after such a proclamation,they would be consideredtraitors, and punished accordingly.The next movement of the enemywas directed against Almeida, a fortressgarrisoned by four thousand Portuguese,under the command of ColonelCox; which, after a brave resistance,surrendered to Massena. The fall ofthis place defeated many of the hopesand plans of Wellington, who, with theintention of supporting its defence, hadre-crossed the Mondegogo. He now oncemore withdrew to his former position ;and having fixed his cavalry at Celerity,placed posts at Guard and Trances,and established the head-quarters atGovea. At this most anxious andtrying period, says our latest authority,the firmness of Lord Wellington wasthe rock upon which all the best andthe most honourable hopes of the armywere built. It was very generally suspected,continues Major Sherer, thathe was but feebly supported by ministersat home ; it was known that recentchanges in the government of Portugalrendered it less zealous and efficientthan heretofore. Defeat, discomfiture,flight to our ships, and abandonment ofour allies, were the daily prophecies ofcertain English newspapers, and werereprinted by Napoleon's press to reconcileFrance to the war. Several mischievousand desponding letters werealso written from the army, which hadsuch an effect, that Lord Wellingtonreproved these ignorant and indiscreetletter-writers in a general order, whichwas worded with such forbearance anddignity, and conveyed so keen a sarcasmon the offenders, as very effectuallyreclaimed most of them from their perversefolly.It was now the middle of September,and Massena was marching in threecolumns on Viseu, whilst Wellingtonstill kept retiring along the left bank ofthe Mondegogo, strengthening both hisnumbers and position, as the enemygradually advanced. Having ascertainedthe direction of the enemy'smarch to be towards Portuguese Estremadura,he immediately occupied theheights of Busaco, where, by his ownadmirable combinations, and the rapidand well regulated movements of theofficers under him, the whole army was,in a short time, concentrated in a battleposition. No spot could be more favourableor judicious than that herefixed upon; the allied army being stationedon a commanding eminence,where to act on the defensive, wasalmost sufficient to obtain a victory,whilst the troops were so disposed, asto leave only just such a number visibleas would serve to allure and deceive atoo confident adversary. On being toldthat his position was too strong forMassena to think of assailing, Wellingtonexclaimed, " But if he does, I shallbeat him." Early in the morning ofthe 27th of September the attackcommenced on the part of the French,under Render and Ney, whose troopsfought their way up the heights with anintrepidity equally vain and astonishing;the order to charge was given, and theassailants, at the point of the bayonet,were hurried down the mountain sidewith fearful slaughter. A similar resultattended other attempts made by theenemy, who, unable to gain a footingon the ridge of rocks, where the opposingarmy received them, fled in all directions,leaving the line of their retreatstrewed with the dead and the disabled.In this engagement the Frenchhad near five thousand killed andwounded, whilst the loss of the allies didnot exceed one thousand five hundred.After this victory, Lord Wellingtonevacuated the position of Busaco, andretreated to the banks of the Tagusand Torres Vedras, and suffered Mas-sentto take possession of Coimbrawithout a struggle. The French generalhaving removed to Santarem, acity on a hill near the Tagus, ourcommander resolved to attack this post,which he hoped to find only defendedby a rear guard. In this, however, hewas mistaken : the hostile troops werenumerous, and, from their situation,every way prepared to offer a successfulresistance. He accordingly withdrewhis forces, and established his headquartersat Artaxo, after which thearmies on both sides remained, for aseason, inactive.Such was the situation of affairs inPortugal at the close of the year 1810,when, although no decisive victory hadbeen obtained over the French, theyhad, nevertheless, been foiled in someof their principal movements, and hadDUKE OF WELLINGTON.failed in their boast of placing theeagles of Napoleon upon the tower ofLisbon. But the success of the Britisharms was still looked upon as hopeless,by many in England, and there waslittle alteration in the language of theopposition party; one of whom said,it would be just as rational for theFrench to strive to cope with us by seaas for us to enter the lists with them byland." Neither, however, did theseill-omened presages, nor the jealousyand the intrigues of the local governmentin Portugal, discourage or disconcertthe subject of our memoir.Having, says Colonel Napier, repliedwith conscious superiority to hisown government, he, with a fiercenessrendered necessary by the crisis, turnedupon the Spanish patriarch and hiscoadjutors. " The King of Englandand the Prince Regent of Portugal had,"he said, " intrusted him with the conductof the military operations, and hewould not suffer any person to interfere.He knew what to do, and he would notalter his plans to meet the senselesssuggestions of the Regency." Withthis feeling, he continued his operations,evincing the same confidence inhis plans and resources as he haddone in the preceding spring, at whichtime he is said to have written to afriend in England " I suppose thepeople at home think me in a scrape :I do not think so myself; but, if 1 am,I'll get out of it."On the 5th of March, 1811, the Frenchevacuated Santarem, which was occupiedby the allied armies next day ; anda pursuit of the enemy was shortly afterwardscommenced. Massena, however,managed his retreat in so masterlya manner, that Wellington found itdifficult to embarrass him. At length,the former made a halt at Pombal, butleft the town in the night, and thusescaped the attack of the latter, whohad brought up his troops, with all possibleexpedition, in front of his adversary.In two days afterwards, he cameinto action with Ney, at Retina, andforced him to retire by the bridge andford of that place. He then pushed onfor Condeixa, to prevent, if possible, thepassage of the Mondegogo, by Massena ;and such was the rapidity of the Britishin effecting this movement, thatMassena was very nearly taken, andhad to scramble over the mountains atnight, to regain his head-quarters atPonte Robert. The corps of Renderwas, in a few days afterwards, repulsedwith great slaughter, at Sabugal, in anaction, described by Wellington, as oneof the most glorious that British troopswere ever engaged in ; and, on the 5thof April, the French quitted Portugaland entered Spain, with an army reducedfrom seventy to forty thousandmen.On the 3rd and 5th of May, the battleof Fuentes de Honor took place, whichterminated in the further repulse ofMassena, after a bloody action, in whichthe English and French soldiers met inthe main street of the village, at thevery bayonet's point. Wellington nowmarched to meet Soult, who was inmotion for Estremadura ; and, shortlyafterwards, had the gratification of hearingthat Massena had so far despairedof success as to resign the command ofthe army of Portugal to Marshal Mar-mont.Soult having been repulsed byBeresford, at Albuera, our general madean attack upon Badajoz ; but, afterlosing five hundred men in a vain attemptto scale the walls, he thought itprudent to raise the siege. He nowturned his attention to Ciudad Rodrigo ;and, having established his head-quartersat Fuente Guinaldo, he sent hisbattering train and stores from theTagus to the Douro, and watched for afavourable opportunity of advancingagainst Rodrigo. In the meantime, theFrench had received reinforcements;and, on the morning of the 26th ofSeptember, thirty-five thousand of theenemy, under the command of Mar-mont,stood almost within gunshot ofthe troops of Wellington, who was insuch a situation that he could only allowtwo divisions for his front, having beenprevented retiring to a stronger positionin consequence of the non-arrival ofGeneral Crawfurd, who, through somemistake, had not been able to join him.At this moment, it is related, that aSpanish general, observing the serenityof Wellington, observed to him, " Why,here you are, with a couple of weakdivisions, in front of the whole Frencharmy, and you seem quite at your ease;why, it is enough to put any man in afever." " I have done, according to thevery best of my judgment, all that canTHE ARMY.be done," said Wellington; "thereforeI care not either for the enemy in frontor for any thing which they may sayat home." Here, says Major Sherer,was the golden secret of his calm, unalterabledemeanour. Duties were his.and he did them : events were not his,and to the great Disposer of all he leftthem. He could not and would notabandon his light division, withoutsuch a struggle as might and must haveensued, had the French attacked. TheFrench marshal, however, amused himselfwith manoeuvring his troops ; andour general, taking advantage of thedelay, crossed the Agueda ; joined thearmy ; entered, on the following evening,his selected position on the CornerSabugal ; and after having offeredbattle, which was declined by Marmot,though he had augmented his army tosixty thousand, fixed his head-quarters,for a season, at Grenada.On the 6th of January, 1812, in thefollowing year, Wellington preparedto commence his long-meditated attackon Ciudad Rodrigo ; and, on the nightof the 9th, the first parallel was established,and the batteries traced out.About four nights afterwards, the conventof Santa Cruz was escaladed andcaptured; and, on the 14th, the fortifiedconvent of San Francisco sharedthe same fate, by which a lodgmentwas made in the suburbs. By theafternoon of the 19th, two breachesbeing established, one of a hundred, andthe other of thirty feet, Wellingtonwrote the orders for the assault, whichwas begun by the brigade under GeneralM'Kinnon, who, at the cost of hislife, forced the larger breach. Aboutthe same time, the lesser breach wasalso carried : the attack became general;and, after nine officers, amongwhom was General Crawfurd, andtwo hundred and seventeen men hadbeen slain, and eighty-four officersand one thousand men wounded, CiudadRodrigo was taken. This was avictory equally productive of glory toWellington and his brave soldiers, andof advantage to the allies, who gainedby it one of the enemy's strongestpoints of defence, supplied with threehundred pieces of cannon, a batteringtrain complete, an armoury of smallarms, a well-filled arsenal, and militarystores of all descriptions. It was asplendid achievement, and both disappointedand surprised Marmont ; who,in his despatch, announcing the shortnessand success of the siege, added,There is something so incomprehensiblein this, that I allow myself noobservation." The taking of CiudadRodrigo was, indeed, a master-piece ofgeneralship ; but it was such generalshipas Wellington had all along evincedthat of fighting only under two circumstances,when compelled to do so, orwhen almost secure of victory. On thearrival of the news in England, he wasmade an earl, and received the thanksof parliament, which voted him an additionalincome of 2000 per annum ;whilst, in Spain, his services were rewardedby the title of Duke of CiudadRodrigo, with the rank of a grandee ofSpain of the first class.The fortunate subject of our memoirnow turned his thoughts to Badajoz,the preliminaries for besieging whichwere most carefully arranged with thecommanding engineer, on the 26th ofJanuary. By the 15th of March, apontoon bridge was laid down over theGuadiana, and also a flying bridge,formed by two large Spanish boats ; but,on the 22nd, the former was swept awayby the rising of the river, in consequenceof the continued rains, whichalso filled up the trenches, and so impededthe progress of the works, thatsome fear was entertained it wouldbecome necessary to raise the siege.By the night of the 25th, however, sixbatteries being completed and armed,two of them bore upon Fort Picturing;which, under the direction of the com-mander-in-chief, was shortly afterwardsassaulted and taken by General Kempt.On the 6th of April, three practicablebreaches having been made, Lord Wellingtongave orders for the assault,which commenced at ten o'clock atnight. The columns destined to stormthe ramparts, now marched forward indarkness and silence ; but the momentthey had reached the ditch, a suddenlight broke forth, and, rapidly spreadingalong the walls, at once revealed toeach other the assailants and defenders.At the same instant, a line of levelledmuskets from the latter, accompaniedby the roar of the ready cannon, andthe lurid glare of countless fireballs,vomited forth a deadly fire, and workedDUKE OF WELLINGTON.unceasing havoc on the foe beneath.Undismayed, however, the besiegersadvanced, crowding in numbers to theditch; when, suddenly, an immensequantity of fougasses, shells, and othercombustibles, which had been placed bythe enemy, were fired, and explodedwith an appalling effect. The destructionwas terrific, yet there was no pausein the attack ; and, even at the mainbreach, long after it was found to beimpracticable, the brave men would notretire, but clustered near the traversesin the ditch, where they met confusedand bloody deaths. " Never," saysColonel Jones, " probably never sincethe discovery of gunpowder, were menmore seriously exposed to its action.Shells, hand-grenades, every kind ofburning composition, and missiles ofevery hellish variety, were hurled intothe ditch. The roll of musketry wasincessant ; and the night was now lightwith the most dazzling fires, and nowblack with utter darkness." Thebreaches were now abandoned as impracticable,and an escalade in two distantpoints was commenced with a furyand determination that were irresistible; and Badajoz was taken, after aslaughter, which it is repulsive to readof, and must have been horrible to witness.The details of the carnage thattook place are too disgusting to relate ;but some idea may be formed of thesacrifice of human life at the capture ofthis place, from the fact that fifty-nineofficers and seven hundred and forty-fourmen were killed on the night ofthe assault, and that five thousand wasthe number of killed and woundedduring the siege. To complete thescene of horror, the victors, on enteringthe town, committed debaucheries andexcesses which required the greatestexertions of their commander to restrain;and it was not until he had made somesevere examples, that the wild rapacityof his inflamed and elated troops beganto abate. The victory, however, was amost important one, and not only inducedSoult to retire, but Napoleon topause in his intentions, for a moment :France," he said, in a communicationto the English government, " shallrenounce all idea of extending her dominionsbeyond the Pyrenees. Thepresent dynasty shall be declared independent,and Spain shall be governedby a national constitution of her cortes."But the emperor did not long continuein this rind.Lord Wellington next advanced towardsSalamanca, and directed hisefforts against the fortified convents inthe neighbourhood of that place. Hehad already, with hot shot, burned theconvent of St. Vincent ; and, havingopened a breach in the gorge of thefort Gajetano, the commandant hoistedthe white flag, but demanded threehours' delay before they surrendered.The British general would grant onlyfive minutes ; and no submission beingmade at the expiration of that time, thebatteries were re-opened, and the fortwas taken at the bayonet's point. Theworks raised for the defence of Salamancawere now disarmed and destroyed; on hearing of which, Marmontretired upon the Douro, across whichhis rear guard was driven, in great confusion,by the allies; and the hostilearmies were now encamped on eachside of the river. No movement wasmade by either for several days, till atlength, Marmont having concentratedhis whole force, passed the river ; and,by a forced march of forty miles, was,early on the morning of the 18th ofJuly, in presence of the two Britishdivisions, on the Trabancos. " By thisgreat exertion," says Major Sherer,the communication of Marmont withMadrid, from whence he expected tobe joined by the army of the centre,was perfectly opened, and the twohostile divisions before him were placedin some danger. This advantage theFrench marshal lost no time in seekingto improve. His cavalry, supported byinfantry and artillery, instantly engagedthe British horse ; who, being outnumbered,soon began to lose ground in aconflict manifestly unequal. In thedistance, the whole French army wasadvancing. The situation of the lightand fourth divisions was very critical.Already was the enemy menacing theirline of retreat, and pressing upon bothflanks ; when Wellington, quickly advancinga support of cavalry and horseartillery to check the progress of theFrench, extricated these troops fromtheir difficulty, and directed their retreatupon the heights of Animal, intheir rear." This movement was executedwith perfect order, and withTHE ARMY.small loss, although in the presence ofan enemy who pursued so closely as toopen upon them from forty pieces ofartillery as they passed the Arenato join the army now embattled on theheights of Animal. Towards the closeof the day, Raiment made an attemptto turn the British left, and to gain theposition which commanded the Salamancaroad; but he was repulsed byGeneral Cole. About the same time,Lord Wellington, with his staff, wasclosely pressed by a body of Frenchcavalry ; and, it is said, but for thespeed of his horse, he would have beentaken. On the 20th, the two armies,amounting together to ninety thousandcombatants, marched, for several hourstogether, within half cannon shot ofeach other; but no attack took place.On the following day, Wellington tookup his position in the plain of Dos Ara-piles,whilst the enemy occupied theheights of La Pena, and held the villageof Valparaiso de Aria. TheFrench general now grew impatient forbattle, and made too hasty an attemptto cut off his opponent's line of communicationwith Rodrigo. Wellington,who received the intelligence of thismovement whilst at dinner, rose sohastily as to overturn the table, andexclaiming that Marmont's good geniushad forsaken him, made immediate dispositionsfor the attack. A generalaction shortly ensued, and on the 22ndof June, the allied armies added totheir victories that of Salamanca; bywhich they obtained possession of twoeagles, eleven pieces of artillery, andseven thousand prisoners. After thebattle, in which Marmont had beenwounded, the enemy retreated to Valladolid; but evacuated this place at theapproach of Wellington, who pushed ontoMadrid, and having forced the garrisonto surrender, entered the Spanishcapital on the 13th of August, amid theloud vives of exulting crowds. " Theentire population," says Major Sherer,poured out into the streets and squares;every tongue was loosened ; on all sideswere heard the accents of joy; laurelsand flowers decorated the gay scene.Tapestry and carpets were hung fromthe balconies; holiday greetings weregiven ; and the holiday smiles of men,women, and children, repaid the armyfor all its toils. But Wellington wasmore especially the object of their praiseand honour; wherever he appeared,cries rent the air of ' Long live theDuke of Ciudad Rodrigo !' ' Long liveWellington 1' and green boughs, andflowers, and shawls, were strewn beforehis horse's feet."Notwithstanding the occupation ofMadrid by Lord Wellington, and thetemporary retreat of the French, he didnot derive that benefit from his rapidadvance on which he had calculated.The wants of the army were pressing,and the citizens of Madrid were unableto supply them ; his troops were reducedto a number that required considerablereinforcements; the Spanisharmy of Gallican had been just beatenby General Clause, the successor ofMarmont ; and, in addition to the corpsof Soult, in Grenada, one hundredthousand French soldiers were in thefield, whose united force, brought, atthis time, against the small division ofthe British general, must inevitablyhave cut off his communication withPortugal, and have rendered his furtherprogress against the enemy, at least,for a time, impracticable and hopeless.Under these circumstances, he resolvedto attempt the reduction of Burgos, avery important post to the enemy ; and,on the 19th of September, a large horn-work,on a hill called St. Michael, wasstormed and taken by the allies. Onthe 22nd, at midnight, an unsuccessfulattempt was made to carry the outer, orscarp wall, by escalade ; but, on the29th, a breach having been made bythe explosion of a mine, a regiment ofBritish troops effected a lodgment.They were, however, repulsed ; thelodgment was recovered, and the breachrepaired ; and the besieged followed uptheir success by making a sally, andgaining possession of the trenches.Another effort was made on the part ofthe allies ; but, after a siege of thirtydays, in which two thousand of the assailantsperished, and which only failedfor want of the necessary means ofattack, Burgos was abandoned. Duringthis arduous siege, says Major Sherer,Lord Wellington's personal superintendenceof all the operations was constantand vigilant. The arrangementsfor every assault were written in hisown hand, as he sat upon the ground,observing the point of attack ; and heDUKE OF WELLINGTON.was so much and so often exposed tofire, that his escape is remarkable. Onthe night of the 29th of September, hewas in such imminent personal danger,on his return from a close observationof the attack, that a field which he hadto cross was literally ploughed up bygrape and musketry as he passed down.The siege was abandoned on the nightof the 21st of October; when, althoughit was moonlight, and the two bridgesover which the troops had to pass, werewithin close musket-shot of the enemy,the allies effected their passage acrossthem, with scarcely any loss. The subsequentretreat of the army, however,was attended with great difficulty anddistress ; continual rain, deep and miryroads, and a want of sufficient food,being among the daily hardships whichthe troops had to encounter. Underthese circumstances, many irregularitiesand excesses were committed bythe men in the course of their march,many of whom took to marauding forthe purpose of obtaining food, whilstothers, from exhaustion or indifference,lagged behind, and fell into the handsof the enemy. Lord Wellington, onhis arrival at head-quarters, wrote aletter, severely censuring the commandersof the different brigades and regimentsfor not having maintained betterdiscipline; but his address gave greatoffence ; and the general reproach it containedwas certainly, under all the circumstances,uncalled for and vexatious.Our general now once more took uphis position on the frontier of Portugal ;his previous services having been rewarded,in England, with the title ofMarquess, and a grant of 100,000voted to him by parliament In December,he visited Cadizz for the purposeof communicating, in person, withthe Spanish government, by which hewas received with every token of respectand admiration. A deputation fromthe cortes waited upon him, and he wasthen introduced to their whole body,who greeted him with loud acclamations,and addressed him in a speechwhich he replied to in the Spanishlanguage. At the same time, he wasdeclared generalissimo of the Spanishforces, and was promised, for the nextcampaign, the co-operation of fiftythousand troops. On his return tothe army, he made a short stay atLisbon, where he experienced a mostgratifying reception. The city was illuminatedfor three nights, in honourof him ; he was entertained at the palacewith great sumptuousness ; andwhen he appeared in the theatre ofSan Carlos, the audience greeted himwith the most vehement and enthusiasticapplause. About this period,the Prince Regent of Portugal conferredon him the title of Duke ofVittoria; and, in January, 1813, hewas made colonel of the royal horseguards (blue) ; an appointment whichso gratified him, that, on announcingit at his own table, he is said to haveexclaimed " I am the luckiest fellowin the world ! I must have been bornunder some extraordinary planet!"In the following May, he openedthe campaign by leading a division ofthe allied army towards Salamanca,whilst he directed another to cross theDouro, and proceed to join him uponthe Tories above Alba, in the provinceof Tra-los Monies, where the centreand right of the army were united onthe 25th. In a few days afterwards,the line of the Douro was turned ; inconsequenceof which, the defensiveworks of the enemy became entirelyuseless, and the whole of the alliedarmy was united on the right bank ofthat river on the 3rd of June. On theday following, Wellington, by marchingto Ampuida, compelled the French toevacuate Valladolid, and retire to Burgos,whither he pursued them, and soonforced them to abandon the place. Bythe foregoing movement, the enemywere driven behind the Bro, whichriver the allied army passed a few daysafterwards without opposition. On the19th, Lord Wellington drove a Frenchcorps of observation from a strong positionbehind the river Sagas; and, onthe 20th, he collected all his division,and reconnoitred the enemy, who werenow encamped at Vittoria, to the numberof seventy thousand combatants,under the nominal command of JosephBuonaparte in person. .The alliedtroops consisted of about seventy fivethousand men; and, on the 21st ofJune, these two powerful armies werebrought into action. The allies weredivided into three corps, the rightbeing commanded by Sir Rowland Hill,the left by Sir Thomas Graham, and theTHE ARMY.centre by Wellington himself. Theattack was commenced by the Spaniards,under the command of Munllo, andthe seventy-first regiment, headed bythe Honourable Colonel Cadogan, bywhose united efforts the heights ofPuebla were won ; and the village ofSubijana de Lava was shortly afterwardscarried by the brigade of ColonelCallaghan. The whole of the hostilearmies soon became hotly engaged, andthe result was a splendid victory on thepart of the allies, who beat the Frenchat all points, and forced them to retreatin such confusion that they were neveronce able to rally after the first repulse.In consequence of the sudden andrapid flight of the enemy, not more thanone thousand prisoners were taken ; butthey left behind them a field whichproved a rich prize to the victors, whofound themselves in possession of onehundred and fifty pieces of artillery,the military chest, and more than threethousand carriages, waggons, and cars,laden with stores, treasure, and plunder.In addition to this, the soldiers dividedamongst themselves the contentsof more than two hundred coachesbelonging to the court, the generals,and private individuals in theFrench interest. In these coacheswere many Spaniards of high rank ;who, with their wives and children,alighted from their carriages in terror,and fled on foot, with the broken columnsof the soldiery. By the able andvigorous operations which followed thebattle of Vittoria, Lord Wellington obtainedpossession of the passes of SanEstevan, Donna Maria, Saga, andKoncevalles; and a portion of the alliedarmy were advanced far enough to lookupon the plains of southern France.Thus, in forty-five days from the openingof the campaign, had the subjectof our memoir conducted his troops fourhundred miles without check ; defeatedthe combined forces of the enemy in apitched battle, and forced Joseph Buonaparteto fly, in haste and consternation,from the country of which he hadusurped the sovereignty.For these services, Lord Wellington,on the arrival of his despatches in England,received the thanks of both housesof parliament, and was promoted tothe rank of field-marshal. His staffwas sent to him, accompanied by aletter from the Prince Regent, writtenwith his royal highness's own hand, andwhich contained, among other expressionsof admiration, the following passage: " I feel I have nothing left tosay but devoutly to offer up my prayersof gratitude to Providence that it has,in its omnipotent bounty, blessed mycountry and myself with such a general.You have sent me, among the trophiesof your unrivalled fame, the staff of aFrench marshal : I send you, in return,that of England. The British armywill hail it with enthusiasm." Thevictory of Vittoria was also a subject ofrejoicing to the whole nation ; and illuminationsand bonfires in almost everytown and village in England, testifiedthe joy with which its inhabitants receivedthe tidings of the success of theirrenowned general.In the mean time, the news of thedefeat of the French had been receivedby Napoleon with mortification andanger ; and he once more sent Soultinto Spain, to take command of theimperial troops, under the title of"lieutenant of the emperor." Wellingtoncontinued his operations withvigour ; he gave orders for the blockadeof Pampeluna, and then turned hisattention to the siege of St. Sebastian ;the attack of which fortress he left tothe direction of Sir Thomas Graham.In the first assault, the besiegers weredriven back with great loss ; intelligenceof which being conveyed to Wellington,and also of the enemy's advance intothe valley of the Pyrenees, in rapidmarch for Pampeluna, he calmly exclaimed," Then we must do the bestwe can to stop them." A succession ofcombats now took place between theallies and the French, which continuedfrom about the middle to the end ofJuly. " Let the account of our successesbe dated from Vittoria, and thebirth-day of his imperial majesty becelebrated in that city," had been thelanguage of Soult to his troops on the24th of that month ; but the close of itbrought only defeat and disaster, andhe was now on his march from thePyrenees, after having, on the 29th, losteight thousand men in a sanguinarybattle which had just taken place uponthose steep and barren mountains.On the 19th of August, preparationswere made for renewing the siege ofDUKE OF WELLINGTON.St. Sebastian : and, on the last day ofthe month, Lord Wellington gave ordersfor the commencement of theassault. After the usual horrible butunavoidable slaughter had made thewalls slippery with blood, the assailantscarried the breaches ; and, rushing intothe town, began the work of debaucheryand plunder, amidst the fire of the retreatinggarrison, the flames of a partialconflagration, and a tremendous stormof thunder, lightning, and rain, whichadded fearfully to the horrors of theassault. An attempt was now made,by Soult, for the relief of St. Sebastian;it was unsuccessful ; and, to add to themortification of the enemy, they wererepulsed by the Spaniards, againstwhom their attack had been chiefly directed.On the 9th of September, thecastle of St. Sebastian was taken, aftera bombardment of eight days ; a modeof attack which Lord Wellington, outof consideration to the inhabitants, haddeclined adopting for the reduction ofthe city.Lord Wellington's next object wasthe taking of Pampeluna ; but previousto his making the attempt, he drove theenemy from their station at Vera, onthe right of the Bidassoa, by which hegained possession of four hundred prisoners,three pieces of cannon, and amost commanding position for the leftwing of his army. This action wasfollowed by the surrender of Pamperwhich took place on the 31st ofOctober, after a blockade of fourmonths ; and the victorious commanderof the allied armies now prepared tolead his troops into France. His address,upon this occasion, was framedin a spirit of moderation and generositywhich cannot be too much commended." Officers and soldiers mustrecollect," said he, " that their nationsare at war with France solely becausethe ruler of the French nation will notsuffer them to be at peace, and is desirousof forcing them to submit to hisyoke." And, after remarking upon theconduct of the French soldiers in Spainand Portugal, and the sufferings resultingto themselves from their great irregularitiesand cruelties towards theunfortunate inhabitants of those countries,he added, " to avenge this conductupon the peaceable inhabitants ofFrance, would be unmanly, and unworthyof the nations to whom thecommander of the forces now addresseshimself." At this time, the Frenchheld a very strong position near St. Jeande Lus, which Soult deemed almostimpregnable, in consequence of thestrength of its fortifications both bynature and art. He was, however,manoeuvred out of it by the skill andbravery of his adversaries, who drovehim from the field with a loss of twothousand five hundred killed andwounded, one thousand five hundredprisoners, and fifty guns. The enemynow retreated to Bayonne, whitherthey were pursued by Wellington ; inconsequenceof whose masterly operations,Soult was forced to retire from thecity, and leave it to the protection ofthe garrison. The allies having crossedthe Ardour, the town was immediatelyinvested; and, at the same time, Wellingtonmarched towards Orthes, wherehe encountered the French, on the 27thof January, 1814. He was again successful; the enemy fled on all sides, with aloss of six thousand in killed, wounded,and taken ; and the subject of ourmemoir himself received a slight woundfrom a spent ball, which prevented himfrom joining in the pursuit. In consequenceof this victory, the allies gainedpossession of Bordeaux, where thepeople declared in favour of the Bourbons; and Soult, driven to Toulouse,awaited the advance of the British general,who was already preparing tocross the Garonne. Whilst efforts weremaking to lay down a bridge across theriver, an officer expressed his apprehensionthat this might not be practicabletill the river had fallen ; to whichWellington is said to have replied, " Ifit will not do one way, we must tryanother; for I never, in my life, gaveup any thing I once undertook." Thebattle of Toulouse now followed, thelast, and one of the most bloody strugglesin which the hostile armies wereengaged during the peninsular war.It terminated in favour of the allies,who entered Toulouse on the 13th ofApril, where they were received withshouts of welcome, by the inhabitants,who, from the tops of the walls, andthe roofs of the houses, had anxiouslywatched the progress of the battle. Thecity had been evacuated by Soult theday preceding, although he had madeTHE ARMY.busy preparations for its defence, andhad even gone so far as to say, hewould bury himself beneath its ruinsrather than surrender it to the possessionof his adversaries. The loss oflife at the battle of Toulouse was considerableon both sides : a sacrificewhich, it is mournful to reflect, mighthave been prevented, had the news ofNapoleon's abdication arrived at anearlier period. Soult now formally recognizedthe provisional government ofFrance ; and Wellington, at the headof his victorious troops, marched toParis, where he was received by theallied sovereigns, and the statesmen andgenerals then at the court of Louis theEighteenth, with every mark of considerationand regard. On quitting Paris,be proceeded to Madrid, where Ferdinandconfirmed all the honours that hadbeen bestowed upon him by the cortes,and appointed him captain-general ofSpain. His services were rewarded, athome, by a dukedom, and a grant of300,000, for the purchase of an estate,and such further sum as would makeuphis income 17,000 per annrtm.In June, the Duke of Wellingtonlanded at Dover, under a salute fromthe batteries ; and, on his entering thestreets of London, he was recognizedby the populace, and enthusiasticallycheered. On the 28th, he took his seatin the house of lords in his field-marshal'suniform ; on which occasion, thegreater part of the peers attended,dressed in their full robes, and the lordchancellor addressed him, in the nameof the house, thanking him for thegreat, signal, and eminent serviceswhich he had so repeatedly renderedtherein to his majesty and to the public."It was also remarked by the chancellor,that the duke, in taking his seat, had hadthe singular honour of hearing read, atthe same lime, his successive patents ofbaron, earl, marquess, and duke. Henext received the congratulations ofthe house of commons, by deputation ;and attended in person to returnthanks, on the 1st of July. His entrancewas greeted with the most enthusiasticcheers by the members, whoall uncovered, rose to receive him, andlistened to his address with deep attentionand interest. " It is not," said thespeaker, in reply to the duke, " thegrandeur of military success which hasalone fixed our admiration or commandedour applause; it has been thatgenerous and lofty spirit which inspiredyour troops with unbounded confidence,and taught them to know that the dayof battle was always a day of victory :that moral courage and enduring fortitude,which, in perilous times, whengloom and doubt had beset ordinaryminds, stood, nevertheless, unshaken ;and that ascendancy of character which,uniting the energies of jealous and rivalnations, enabled you to wield at will thefate and fortunes of mighty empires."On the 5th of July, he was nominatedambassador extraordinary to the courtof France; and, on the occasion of thegeneral thanksgiving at St. Paul's Cathedral,on the 7th, bore the sword ofstate before the Prince Regent, whom heaccompanied in the state carriage. Heperformed the same office, subsequently,on the prorogation of parliament, andabout the same time received a serviceof plate worth .100,000 from the Portuguesegovernment. On the 9th ofJuly, the duke was entertained, at agrand banquet, by the corporation ofLondon, who presented him with thefreedom of the city, in a gold box, andwith a magnificent sword ; on receivingwhich, he declared he would use it in theservice of his king and country, wheneverhe should be again called upon to takeup arms. In addition to these honourspaid to him at home, the honorarydegree of L.L.D. had been conferredon him by the University of Oxford,previously to his return to England.On the 8th of August, 1814, he leftLondon for Paris, where he arrived onthe 23rd, having, in his way, visitedthe Netherlands, and examined thefrontier fortresses upon that line, incompany with the Prince of Orange.In the French capital he was receivedin the most flattering manner by Louisthe Eighteenth; and during his sojournthere, his inattention to dressprocured him, among the wits, thename of Vilain-ton. In the beginningof 1815, he quitted Paris toattend the congress at Vienna, asthe plenipotentiary for Great Britain ;news arrived, whilst he was there, ofBuonaparte's escape from Elba; andit is said, by Sir Walter Scott, thatlaughter was the first effect produced onthe congress by the intimation of thisDUKE OF WELLINGTON.event; a fact which he accounts for bysaying that " the astonishing as wellas the sublime, approaches to theridiculous." The allied powers nowtook up arms for the overthrow of Buonaparte; and the Duke of Wellington,having arrived at Brussels early inApril, was appointed field-marshal ofthe United Netherlands, the force underhim amounting to eighty thousand, ofwhich about thirty-eight thousand wereEnglish. The Prussians were already inFlanders, under the command of Blucher;and the troops of Italy, Russia,and Austria, were also rapidly approachingthe frontiers of France. Meantime,Napoleon, having been received withthe greatest enthusiasm in his capital,had got together no less than threehundred and seventy-five thousand menunder arms, by the 1st of June ; and,on the 14th, he appeared on the Belgianfrontier, with his army concentratedinto three divisions, amounting to onehundred and thirty thousand fightingmen, with a field artillery of threehundred and fifty pieces. He had theutmost confidence in his troops; andsaying, as he threw himself into hiscarriage to proceed to join them, " I gotomeasure myself against Wellington,"set out from Paris in the full convictionof shortly returning to it as Emperor ofFrance, and conqueror of Europe.Soldiers," said Napoleon, in his lastaddress to his army, " this is the anniversaryof Marengo, and of Friesland,which twice decided the fate of Europe.Then, as after the battles of Austerlitzand Wagram, we were too generous.We trusted to the oaths and protestationsof princes, whom we left upontheir thrones. Now, however, coalescedamong themselves, they conspire againstour independence, and the most sacredrights of France. They have begunthe most unjust of aggressions. Are notthey and we the same still ? Soldiers Iat Jena, against these same Prussians,now so arrogant, you were as one tothree; and, at Montmirail, one to six.Let those among you that have beenprisoners in England, describe theirpontoons (the hulks), and tell the miseriesthey there endured. A momentof prosperity has blinded these senselessprinces united against us. Theoppression and humiliation of Franceare beyond their power. If theyenter France, they will there find agrave !"Nothing could be more calculatedthan this address to inflame the passionsand animate the courage of those towhom it was addressed. Impatient forbattle, the French troops advanced rapidlyto the Belgic territory; and, onthe 15th of June, a body of them metthe Prussian outposts, at a short distancefrom the Sambre, and forced them torecross it with great loss. This successwas followed up by the taking of Charleroi; whilst a second body of theFrench, advancing to Gosseiles, to interceptthe Prussians who had evacuatedthe former town, were so electrifiedby the presence of Buonaparte, that,without waiting to fire a shot, theyrushed furiously on their adversaries,and drove them from all their positions.Intelligence of this repulse reached theDuke of Wellington, at Brussels, onthe night of the 15th, whilst he was ata ball, given by the Duchess of Richmond.Without leaving the scene offestivity, where most of the Britishofficers were also present, he gave ordersfor the route of march ; and, atmidnight, the whole city was suddenlyawakened by the beat of the drum,and the sound of the trumpet summoningthe troops to assemble.By eight o'clock in the morning ofthe 16th, all the regiments had quittedBrussels, and were marching uponLes Quatre Bras, where the Duke ofWellington, being strengthened withreinforcements under the Prince ofOrange, assumed the offensive, andgave orders for the attack. His grandobject was to maintain a line of communicationwith the Prussian troops,which the enemy, on the other hand,were as anxious to prevent, as on thispoint depended, in all probability, theultimate fate of either army. Thecontest was furious, but decisive ; andterminated in the repulse of the French,who, finding themselves suddenly exposedto solid columns of numerousbattalions, supported by a formidablecavalry, which, until close upon them,had been concealed by uneven fieldscovered with high wheat and rye, appearedpanic-struck, and fell back indismay and confusion. Marshal Neywas, however, little alarmed, expectingevery moment the arrival of a corps ofTHE ARMY.reserve, but which he now, for the firsttime, learnt, had been disposed of byBuonaparte elsewhere. " The shock,"says Marshal Ney, in his letter givingan account of the battle to the Duke ofOtranto, " which this intelligence gaveme, confounded me. Having no longerunder me more than three divisions,instead of the eight upon which I calculated,I was obliged to renounce thehopes of victory; and, in spite of theintrepidity and devotion of my troops,my utmost efforts after that could onlymaintain me in my position till theclose of the day." In this dilemma, heordered the eighth and eleventh cuirassiersto charge the first battalions, whichthey did with great bravery, and capturedone of the colours of the sixty-ninthregiment; but the fire of theadverse infantry was so deadly andperpetual, that they were compelled toretreat in rapid disorder, and Wellingtonremained in possession of QuatreBras. In this action, fell the braveDuke of Brunswick. But, notwithstandingthe repulse of Ney, Napoleon,before the close of the day, obtainedhis end, in separating the Prussians andthe English, by the complete defeat ofthe former, at Ligne, whence he forcedBlucher to retreat; and that generalhaving had his horse shot under him,only escaped falling into the hands ofthe French cuirassiers by the darknessof the night. Buonaparte now tookpossession of all the Prussian posts;directed Grouchy to pursue Blucher,with thirty thousand men ; and puthimself in readiness to attack the English,whom he felt little doubt of overpowering.On the morning of the17th, Wellington received informationof the repulse of the Prussians, and oftheir retreat to Wave ; in consequenceof which, he evacuated Quatre Bras, andretired, by Genappe, upon Waterloo,where he took up his final position nearthe forest of Soigne". With the exceptionof an affair of cavalry, in whicha corps of French lancers, after havingrepelled a charge of the seventh hussars,were, in their turn, repulsed bythe first regiment of life guards, noaction of importance occurred duringthe day. The approach of night wasaccompanied by a violent storm of rain,thunder, and lightning, which renderedthe bivouac of the troops wretched inthe extreme ; and tended rather toenervate than refresh them for theexertions of the forthcoming day.During the night, Napoleon had,either from surmise or report, imaginedthat the British had retreated ; and, onfinding them still in their position, onthe morning of the 18th, he is said tohave exclaimed, in a transport of joy,I have them, then, at last, theseEnglish!" Preparations on both sidesnow commenced for battle ; and, by teno'clock, the whole French army, withthe exception of the force underGrouchy, was seen ranged along theheights opposite to those occupied bythe British, amounting to about eightyor ninety thousand men, commandedby Napoleon in person. The armyof the Duke of Wellington consistedof about seventy thousand, whichwas so skilfully disposed, that a greatportion of it was entirely concealedfrom the enemy. About noon, thefirst discharge of cannon was heardfrom the French lines, which was followedby a furious attack on the farmof Hougoumont, where a most deadlystruggle took place, and which was soobstinately defended by the British,that the enemy set fire to the building,after having in vain attempted to drivetheir adversaries from the position. Inthe mean time, La Have Sainte wasthe scene of a severe contest; but itwas at length carried by the French,after a most sanguinary action. Theenemy now advanced towards MontSt. Jean ; and, as they approached, theEnglish artillery made dreadful havocin their ranks; but they persisted inthe attack with unflinching bravery,and with an enthusiastic perseverancewhich indicated that they had decidedon this ground as their grand point ofconcentration for victory or defeat. Theroar of the cannon, the shouts of thesoldiery, the hissing of balls and grapeshot,and the explosion of shells, nowmingled together with an awful effect ;the enemy gained ground, thoughslowly, and one of their columns drewnear to Mont St. Jean. " At the sametime," says a French officer, in his accountof the battle, " our cavalry rushedto carry the guns on the plains, butwas charged, in its turn, by the enemy'shorse, who issued in a body from thehollows where they had lain in ambushOF WELLINGTON.cade, and the slaughter became horrible.Neither side gave way one step. Freshcolumns reinforce them ; the charge isrepeated. Three times the French areon the point of forcing the positions ;and three times they are driven back.In these assaults," says the same authority,"Lord Wellington exposed himselfvery much ; and, in order to direct, inperson, the efforts of his troops, severaltimes threw himself into the midst ofthe medley, to animate them by hispresence." At this moment, the issueof the contest was doubtful ; the Britishranks, although they had sufferedmuch, were unbroken ; but great confusionprevailed in their rear, part ofwhich, it is said, had begun to movetowards Brussels in much confusion.However, no appearance of trouble orapprehension was visible in their front,which sustained the furious attacks ofthe French with such firmness and obstinacythat they, in their turn, beganto lose somewhat of their confidence andimpetuosity. It was now seven o'clock,when a general officer informed Buonaparte,who still kept ordering freshtroops forward, that his soldiers wouldbe annihilated by one of the batteries,if they continued in their present position; at the same time requesting toknow what they should do to elude itsdestructive fire. " Carry it," said theemperor : and, shortly afterwards, beingtold by an English prisoner that theBritish force was very considerable, andhad just been reinforced by sixty thousandmen, he exclaimed, " So muchthe better! the more there are, thelonger we shall fight!" At the sametime, he kept sending off despatches toParis, exclaiming to his secretary, in atone of distraction, " Above all, fail notto say the victory is mine !"He was now told that two bodies ofPrussians were opening an attack uponhis flank and rear ; but imagining themto be the corps of Grouchy, which heanxiously expected, he exclaimed, " Goto,you are frightened ; ride up to thecolumns that are deploying, and youwill find them to be Grouchy's." Butthe former report was the true one ;the Prussians, whom Grouchy had,either through design or accident, failedin coming up with, now joined theEnglish line, and decided the fate ofthe day. Lord Wellington gave thesignal for a general advance; to meetwhich, Napoleon, as his last and onlyhope, led on his imperial guard.These old warriors," says the authoritylast quoted, " entered the plainwith their accustomed intrepidity, andcourage was restored through the wholeline. The guard made several charges,but was constantly repulsed, crushedby a terrible artillery that each minuteseemed to multiply. The Frenchgrenadiers, however, still kept theirground ; and whilst they beheld thegrape-shot make day-light throughtheir ranks, destroying at the rate ofa hundred and fifty men in a minute,promptly and coolly closed their shatteredfiles, and remained firm and immoveable.But their intrepidity was oflittle avail or duration ; a charge directedagainst their flank threw theminto disorder, and exclamations of 'Allislost the guard is driven back !' wereheard on every side." It is said thata general cry of sauve qui peut wasalso raised ; but this is denied by morethan one account, written by officers ofeither army ; and Marshal Ney says inhis letter before quoted from, " therewas not a total rout, nor the cry ofsauve qui peut, as has been calumniouslystated in the bulletin." However thismay be, a complete panic suddenlyspread itself throughout the whole ofthe French army, which in an instantbecame a mass of confusion, and fled,pursued by their enemies, in a state ofdismay and disorder, which Napoleonand his officers in vain endeavoured tocheck. Night coming on, added to theconfusion, and prevented any measuresbeing taken for rallying the troops, nowscattered and dispersed to a degree thatrendered re-organization impossible.Napoleon, borne along with his flyingguard, narrowly escaped falling into thehands of the enemy, by taking refugein a cyder orchard, near the farm ofCarlton. It is said that, towards theclose of the battle, he grew desperate ;charged with the greatest bravery atthe head of his guards ; had two horseskilled under him, and courted death inthe midst of the English several times.The attack," says the Duke ofWellington, in his despatch, " succeededin every point; the enemywas forced from his position on theheights, and fled in the utmost con-theARMY.fusion, leaving behind him, as far as Icould judge, one hundred and fiftypieces of cannon, with their ammunition,which fell into our hands. Icontinued the pursuit till long afterdark, and then discontinued it, only onaccount of the fatigue of our troops,who had been engaged during twelvehours, and because I found myself onthe same road with Marshal Blucher,who assured me of his intention tofollow the enemy throughout the night :he has sent me word this morning,that he had taken sixty pieces of cannonbelonging to the imperial guard,and several carriages, baggage, &c., belongingto Buonaparte."Thus ended the memorable battle ofWaterloo, one of the most murderousthat has ever been recorded, and inwhich nearly forty thousand combatantsperished on the field. Never did theDuke of Wellington obtain a moredecided victory j nor, at the same time,was he ever in greater danger of defeat.Had Napoleon been less rash,Ney more cautious, or Grouchy moreactive, the enemy must have triumphedover us, in spite of all that Britishbravery could have effected. Until thearrival of the Prussians, under Blucherand Below, with a force of fifty thousandmen, the French were decidedlygaining ground ; and had Grouchy, atthe proper moment, been on the expectedspot, the whole English armymust have been annihilated, or com-?elle to make a precipitate retreatindeed, according to Marshal Ney, hadNapoleon marched with his most powerfulmasses to support him at QuatreBras, the British force would have undoubtedlybeen destroyed between thatplace and Genappes. With whateverjudgment, therefore, Wellington mayhave acted in the circumstances underwhich he found himself placed, it isclear that the victory he obtained wasless owing to his military skill than tothe hastiness of his adversaries, thefirmness of his own troops, and thetimely co-operation of trie Prussianallies. The French had all along theadvantage of making the first movement; they drove back the Prussiansbefore the British were aware of theiradvance ; they broke the centre of theformer before the latter could arrive totheir assistance ; and, although defeated,through the causes before mentioned,at Quatre Bras and Mount St.Jean, their attacks succeeded each otherwith such impetuosity and rapidity,that the British commander was allowedno time for the formation of anydeliberate plan for the offensive. Itwill, however, be said, that Wellingtondid but acquire additional reputationfrom victoriously terminating a contestfought under these disadvantages ofsurprise and compulsion ; but, in admittingthis, we must either allow thatNapoleon snowed very superior generalshipin his first movements, or thatWellington was deficient in that earnestwatchfulness which might have avoidedthese difficulties, and thus renderedsuccess more certain, though, perhaps,less brilliant. " Sa gloire est toute negative,"said Napoleon, alluding toWellington's conduct at Waterloo ; " sesfautes sont immenses. Lui, generaliseEuropean, charge d' aussi grands in-tenets, ayant en front un ennemi aussiprompt, aussi hardi que moi, laisserses troupes passes, dormir dans unecapitals se laisser surprendre!" Buthis reliance on his troops, and neverwas he more completely dependenton them than on the field of Waterloo,was the grand secret of his calmnessand self-security ; qualities which,in a less experienced general, wouldhave been justly taken for indifferenceand presumption. Indeed, oneof the duke's sayings was, " Whenother generals fall into errors, they areobliged to help themselves out of them ;but when I get into a scrape, my armyalways get me out of it." But howeverhe may have felt the truth of thisin his last and most glorious achievement,he acted his part, both as ageneral and soldier, in a manner whichjustifies the ascription, in a great measure,of the triumph of the day to hisown personal efforts. He moved aboutin every direction, giving his orders, andencouraging his men, in the midst ofthe hottest fire ; and, at one time, perceivingthe fifty-second and ninety-fifthregiments waver and give groundunder the attack of an overwhelmingforce, he rallied them, placed himself attheir head, and exclaiming, " We mustnot be beaten ; what will they say inEngland ?" charged in person, andturned the fortune of the day. At aDUKE OF WELLINGTON.critical part of the battle, he took hisstation on a ridge, declaring he wouldnot stir from it till forced by defeat, orcalled away by victory ; and from thisspot he beheld the overthrow of theenemy. In closing our remarks on thebattle, we quote two passages from theduke's letters, after the action, to hismother, and the Honourable WellesleyPole, which, while they attest the justiceof some of the foregoing observations,show the character of the subjectof our memoir in a very honourablelight. To the former, he says, " Buonapartedid his duty he fought thebattle with infinite skill, perseverance,and bravery; and this I do not statefrom any personal motive of claimingmerit to myself, for the victory is to beascribed to the superior physical forceand constancy of British soldiers." Tothe latter he writes thus : " Never haveI fought so hard for victory ; and never,from the gallantry of the enemy, have Ibeen so nearly beaten."The victory of Waterloo was dearlybought : some of the bravest and mostdistinguished British generals werekilled ; and the field of battle presenteda scene of carnage almost unparalleledin the annals of war. After having partedfrom Blucher, to whom he relinquishedthe pursuit of the French, Wellingtoncrossed the field by moonlight; and ashesaw himself surrounded by thebloody corpses of his soldiers and officers,covered his face with his handsand burst into tears. " My heart," saidhe, in a letter to one of his friends, " isbroken by the terrible loss I have sustainedof my old friends and companions,and my poor soldiers ; and Ishall not be satisfied with this battle,however glorious, if it does not put anend to Buonaparte."The duke now gradually advanced toParis, taking, in his way thither, severaltowns from the French, who enteredinto a treaty, on the arrival of himselfand Blucher before the capital, bywhich it was agreed that the city shouldbe evacuated by the enemy, on certainconditions, which were agreed to on the3rd of July. In a few days afterwards,he entered Paris, with the alliedarmy ; and, among the consequences ofhis victory, the restoration of Louis, andthe abdication of Buonaparte, immediatelyfollowed. As he advanced towardsthe capital, he replied to onewho suggested there was plunder in itto raise a magnificent monument to thevictors, " A monument to our armymust never be built with pillage."Whilst at Paris, he acted as commanderof the army of occupation,and took a leading part in the diplomatictransactions arising out of thedownfal of the emperor. He received,as rewards for his victory, the thanksof, and a grant of 200,000 from,the British parliament; the estate ofStrathfieldsay was also purchased forhim ; he was presented with many foreignorders of distinction ; and createdPrince of Waterloo, by the King ofthe Netherlands, with a grant of landproducing annually twenty thousandDutch florins.During his stay in the French capital,his grace rendered himself unpopular,by declining to interfere in favour ofhis old adversary, Marshal Ney, whoselife he might have saved by a singleword ; but, in compliance with thewish of the French court, the dukedid not interest himself on the occasion.So obnoxious was he to someparties, that a plot for blowing up thehotel in which he lived was formed, butfrustrated ; smoke, it has been said, wasseen to issue from one of the cellars,beneath which, on examination, wasfound a number of cartouches, withseveral barrels of oil and gunpowder.Not long after, a pistol-shot was dischargedat him, as he returned homefrom an assembly in his carriage, butthe individual who fired it contrived toelude pursuit.At the various congresses of the holyalliance, which soon followed theseevents, the Duke of Wellington representedthe English government In1819, he was made master-general ofthe ordnance ; and, at the coronation ofGeorge the Fourth, in 1821, he officiatedas lord high constable of England.While at the congress of Verona,he refused, on the part of England, tointerfere between France and Spain,when the French, under the pretext ofan allied cause, manifested a dispositionto invade the latter country. On returningto England, he began to takea more active part in the business ofparliament, and his political conductlost him much of that popularity, which,THE ARMY.by his military renown, he had previouslyacquired. He opposed a newcorn bill, which would have givensatisfaction to the mass of the people,and it was principally to his oppositionthat its rejection was attributed. Onthe death of the Duke of York, in1827, his grace was made commander-in-chiefof the army ; an appointmentwhich he, however, resigned on theformation of Mr. Canning's ministry.It having been hinted, his opposition tothe new government arose from a hopethat he might be called upon himself tofill the office of premier, he declaredhis total inaptitude for the performanceof its duties, and concluded by insistingthat " he should have been worse thanmad, if he had thought of such athing." The short administration ofLord Goderich succeeded to power onthe death of Mr. Canning; but, inJanuary, 1828, the Duke of Wellingtonaccepted office as first lord of the treasury.He was, at first, by no meanspopular in his new character, but hepropitiated the public, in some degree,bv Ins plain and straight for ward dismissalfrom office of Mr. Huskisson, notwithstandingthat gentleman's frequentovertures for areca, and, subsequently,by the repeal of the test and corporationacts, which was followed soon after, bythe measure conceding catholic emancipation.He had previously introducedand carried a corn bill, in principleprecisely the same as that he had opposedin the preceding year; and, indeed,in the commencement of hisadministration, he voted against a motionfor a committee to inquire intothe catholic claims, for granting which,he, in a short time afterwards, supportedand carried a bill, on the groundof expediency. This measure was accompaniedby another for the disfranchisementof all Irish forty-shillingfreeholders, and entitling those to avote who possessed a 10 qualification.He shortly afterwards fought a duelwith the Earl of Winchelsea, on accountof a letter written by the latter,for which he refused to apologize, imputingto the premier a desire to introducepopery into every departmentof the state. In 1829, his grace was appointedwarden of the cinque ports andgovernor of Dover Castle ; and, on the10th of April, 1830, he was gazetted asone of the commissioners for executingthe office of treasurer of the exchequerof Great Britain, and lord high treasurerof England.The same habits of industry and toneof authority he had acquired in thecamp, he carried with him into thecabinet; and although he was willingto yield to his own conviction that hehad been in error, he was uninfluencedby the dictation of others, but alwayspromptly acted, whether right or wrong,on his own conclusions. It will be obviousto all who have watched the progressof his rise, that his successes werenot the result of a chivalric spirit of martial,or even patriotic enthusiasm, but ofplans deliberately adopted, cautiouslyand prudently matured, and vigorouslyand resolutely enforced. In fine, hewas a general, not a hero ; a commander,but not, in the generous andextended sense of the word, a warrior.In saying this, we by no means wouldbe thought to impute to him a want ofpersonal bravery j on the contrary, hepossessed a degree of daring and courage,amounting almost to rashness, ofwhich many more instances might bementioned than those we have alreadyrelated. But with the greatest courage,he was wanting in that warmth of feeling,and that individual sympathy andcondescension of manner, which makea popular leader ; and which won forNapoleon, despotically as his army wascomposed, a place in the heart ofevery soldier. The subject of our memoirwas equally free from the virtuesand the vices of those generalsto whom he was opposed ; he wouldneither, like one, revenge himself uponan obstinate foe in the hour of victory ;nor, like another, after that hour hadpassed, erect a monument to a fallenfoe. To have conquered Ney was noordinaryachievement,nor one unworthythe record of posterity ; but when to himwe add Massena, Soult, Victor, Mar-mont,we pause with admiration andsurprise ; and, as the name of Napoleonterminates the list, with wonder, almostakin to incredulity. The testimony ofhis vanquished rival is not wanting tohis abilities : " Wellington," said Napoleon," is my equal as a general, mysuperior in prudence." But again :Quelle difference, entre Wellingtonet Marlborough !" Whatever may haveDUKE OF WELLINGTON.been the justice of this disparaging comparison,if we reflect only on the glorioustermination of the peninsular war,no eulogy appears too high for the manunder whom it was effected. Thwartedby the obstinacy, and deceived by thetreachery of his foreign allies ; reviledby his enemies in his own country ;and not always trusted by his friends,he triumphed over all obstacles ; causing,by his successes, the support of atottering administration at home, andthe revival of a fallen monarchy abroad.It was the gigantic vigour," saysColonel Napier, " with which the Dukeof Wellington resisted the fierceness ofFrance, and sustained the weakness ofthree inefficient cabinets, that deliveredthe peninsula." And again: " As anoble forest hides many noisome swampsand evil things, so the Duke of Wellington'slaurels have covered the innumerableerrors of the ministers."His military talents are ably delineatedby Southey, in the concluding part ofhis History of the Peninsular War:Foresight and enterprise," says thatauthor, " with our commander wenthand-in-hand ; he never advanced butso as to be sure of his retreat ; andhe never retreated, but in such anattitude as to impose upon a superiorenemy. He never gave an opportunity,and never lost one. His movementswere so rapid, as to deceiveand astonish the French, who pridedthemselves upon their own celerity.He foiled general after general, defeatedarmy after army, captured fortressafter fortress, and, in raising themilitary character of Great Britain toits old standard in the days of Marlborough,made the superiority of theBritish soldier over the Frenchman asincontestible as that of the Britishseaman."But although, for his military abilities,the Duke of Wellington has deservedlyreceived the praises of the wholecivilized world, he was by no meansthe idol of the soldiers, whom he sooften led to victory. He had theirconfidence, but not their affection.They looked up to him in the fieldof battle, but turned from him in thecamp with sentiments of dislike, if notof disgust. They followed him faithfullyas a leader, and, at his word,pointed readily the cannon's mouth jbut in their valour and obedience maybeseen the triumph of discipline, andof native hardihood ; not of devotion toa cause, nor of personal attachment to achieftain. The oft-repeated "Camarade"of Napoleon to his soldiers, neverescaped the lips of Wellington; andthat he should have conquered sucharmies, with such a leader as the Frenchcould boast of, may well justify thehistorian in ascribing to the special interferenceof Providence the defeat ofthat nation. As a general, however,Wellington possessed some qualitiessuperior to those of his great and lastopponent ; he would not condescend totalk with, or to look, individually, tothe comfort of his men ; but he wouldnever stir upon a campaign until hehad secured ample provisions for hisarmy; nor venture upon a march, attendedwith hazard, against which hehad not previously provided. He was,certainly, in some measure, compelledto act so, in consequence of the smallnumber of his troops, and of the littledependence he could place upon thearrival of fresh supplies from England ;but if his conduct were the result ofpolicy alone, it was a policy of whichhumanity makes an ingredient, as wellas considerable judgment and skill.The coolness and self-possession of theduke were seldom ruffled, either in thecamp or in the field ; but his confidencein his own plans, sometimes inclinedhim to treat the suggestions of otherswith an indifference, bordering on disdainand contempt. Whilst giving hisdirections, on one occasion, to his officers,among whom was Sir ThomasPicton, that gallant general, of whoseabilities, it is said, Wellington was somewhatjealous, ventured to differ fromhim as to the judiciousness of some of hisintended movements : " Sir ThomasPicton," said the duke, in atone equallyunbecoming to himself, and undue tothe individual addressed, " I sent foryou to hear my orders, not to receiveyours." Of his imperturbable coolnessin action, the following anecdote isrelated by Colonel Napier, in his accountof the battle of Talavera: " Hewas seated," says the colonel, " on thesummit of a hill, intently watching themovements of the advancing enemy,when Sir Rufane Donkin came to informhim that the Spanish general,THE ARMY.Cuesta, upon whom at that momentmuch depended, was betraying him.He listened to this somewhat startlingmessage, without so much as turninghis head, and then dryly answering,Very well, you may return to yourbrigade," continued his survey of theFrench.He disliked military pride, pomp, andbustle; was remarkably plain in dress,and hated all formality of manner. In1809, while at Thomas, he avoided thehonour and ceremonies intended forhim by the Portuguese general, Miranda,who had come out in great pomp,with his staff, to meet the Englishhero; whom, in consequence of theextreme simplicity of his attire, hepassed by unnoticed. He was eminentlyremarkable for the decision ofcharacter he, on all occasions, evinced ;and he no sooner determined on thepropriety of any action, but he invariablyput it into execution. LikeNapoleon, he passed through all hiscampaigns with scarcely a wound,though in battle he was generally inthe thickest of the danger. At Waterloo,a tree near which he stood wasshattered ; at Salamanca, one of thefirst shots perforated his cloak, whichwas folded on his saddle ; and, at thesame place, with a ravine in his rearand a river in front, he escaped a partyof French, by whom he might easilyhave been captured had he been recognized.In person, the Duke of Wellingtonis above the middle size, with a cold,pale, and Roman-like countenance,which is a tolerably correct index to hismind. Every feature bespeaks thesoldier, the aristocrat, and the man ofenergy and decision ; but in the eye,the most explanatory of all, the spectatorin vain looks for the outshining ofthose mental beams to which the hearthas lent its warmth.SIR JOHN MALCOLM.SIR JOHN MALCOLM was born in1769, and, in 1781, went out as a cadetto India, where, after various services,he was appointed secretary to the com-mander-in-chief at Madras ; made captainin 1797 ; and, in 1798, was appointedtown-major of Fort St. George.In January, 1799, he received instructionsto join Nizam's contingent force,with the chief command of the infantry,at the head of which he continuedto act, both in a political andmilitary capacity, till the surrender ofSeringapatam. In the following October,he embarked, in a diplomaticcapacity, for Persia ; and on his returnto Calcutta, he was appointed privatesecretary to the governor-general, whostated to the secret committee that "hehad succeeded in accomplishing everyobject of his mission, and in establishinga connexion with the actual governmentof the Persian empire, whichpromised to the British natives in India,political and commercial advantages ofthe most important description." Onthe 27th of January, 1802, he wasraised to the rank of major; and on thePersian ambassador being accidentallyshot at Bombay, he was immediatelydespatched to that presidency, to makethe necessary arrangements for therenewal of the embassy, which heaccomplished without subjecting thecompany to any considerable expense.In March, 1803, he was appointedresident of Mysore ; and, in January,1804, he went on a mission to the courtof Dowlut Rao Scindia, with whom, inthe following February, he concludedan advantageous treaty of defensivealliance and subsidy, that gained himfresh diplomatic credit with the company.In December, 1804, he waspromoted to be lieutenant-colonel ; and,in the June of the following year, hewas appointed agent of the governor-general; in which capacity he continueduntil March, 1806, having negotiated,during that period, several very importanttreaties.On the arrival of the new governor-general,Lord Into, he was, in April,1808, sent by him to the court ofPersia, &c. to endeavour to counteractthe designs of Buonaparte, who wasSIR JOHN MALCOLM.said to threaten an invasion of Indiaby way of Persia, supported by thatand the Turkish government. Failing,however, in his mission, he returnedto Calcutta in the followingAugust, and shortly afterwards proceededto his residency at Mysore, afterhaving, according to Lord Into, " laidthe government under additional obligationsto his zeal and ability." Earlyin 1810, he was despatched as envoy toPersia and the court of Arabia ; buton the appointment of Sir Gore Moseleyas ambassador, he returned home, butnot without having made such a favourableimpression on the Persianprince, that he was presented by himwith a valuable sword and star, and,at the same time, made a khan andsepahdar of the empire. While atBagdad, he transmitted to the Bengalgovernment his final report of theaffairs of Persia, a document of somuch importance, that the governmentacknowledged its receipt, on the llthof May following, to the secret committee,in terms of unqualified praise.Reaching Bombay on the 29th of November,he remained there till January,1812, employed upon his HistoricalAccount of Persia, and arrived inEngland in the month of July following.He was received by the court ofdirectors with every acknowledgmentof his merits, and, shortly afterwards,was knighted by the king. Whilst inLondon, he gave important evidencebefore the committees of the lordsand commons on the subject of the renewalof the company's charter ; and,in 1816, he again sailed for India,where on his arrival in 1817, he wasimmediately attached, as governor-general'spolitical agent, to the forceunder Lieutenant-general Sir T. Hislop,and appointed to command the thirddivision of the army, with which, aftertaking Talym by surprise, he took partin the famous battle of Mehidpoor,when the army, under Muller RaoHolkar, was completely beaten anddispersed. His valour on this occasionwas highly spoken of both abroad andat home, where a vote of thanks tohim was proposed, in the house ofcommons, by Mr. Canning; and thePrince Regent expressed his regret,that his not having attained the rank ofa major-general prevented his makinghim a knight grand cross ; desiring,however, that his intention should berecorded, and he accordingly receivedthat honour in 1821. Lord Hastingsnext employed him in visiting andsettling the distracted government andterritories of Muller Rao ; and, havingaccomplished this, and other services,by which British India gained a largeaccession of territory and treasure, hereturned to England with the rank ofmajor-general, in April, 1822; shortlyafter which, he was presented, by thosewho acted under him in the Mahrattawar of 1818 and 1819, with a superbvase, of the value of 1500.All parties concur in awarding himthe highest praises, both as a civil,political, and military character. Mr.Canning spoke of him in parliament asagallant officer, whose name wouldbe remembered in India as long as theBritish flag is hoisted in that country."As an author, he published A Sketchof the Political History of India, fromthe introduction of Mr. Pitt's bill ; ASketch of the Sikhs, a singular nationin the province of the Punjab, inIndia ; Persia, a poem ; and The Historyof Persia, from the earliest periodto the present time, a most valuableand meritorious work.ROWLAND HILL, LORD HILL.ROWLAND HILL, son of sir JohnHill, Bart, and nephew to the Rev.Rowland Hill, was born on the 1st ofAugust, 1772; educated &t Rugby ; and,at the age of sixteen, entered as ensignin the thirty-eighth regiment of foot ;from which he obtained leave of absencefor a year to conclude his military educationat Strasbourg. On his returnfrom a continental tour, he was made alieutenant ; from which, in 1792, hewas promoted to the rank of captain.THE ARMY.He went, subsequently, as secretary toa diplomatic mission to Genoa, andfrom thence proceeded to Toulon,where he served, successively, as aide-de-campto Generals Lord Mulgrave,O'Hara, and Sir David Dundas. Hewas wounded slightly in the arm,during the celebrated siege, and returnedto England with despatches.He became, by purchase, major, andsubsequently, lieutenant-colonel of theninetieth regiment, which he accompaniedto Egypt, where he was woundedin the temple, on the 13th of March,1801, and obtained the favourable noticeof the pacha.Having returned home, he, on recoveringfrom the ill effects of his wound,served both in Scotland and Ireland,and was made brigadier-general. In1805, he was promoted to the rank ofmajor-general. His next service was atthe battles of Rolica and Vimiera; andhe commanded the reserve of Sir JohnMoore's army at the battle of Corunna.In 1811, he was made lieutenant-general;and, on the renewal of war in Spain,he succeeded to the command of thecorps of General Page At the battle ofTalavera, where he was wounded in thehand, his brigade repulsed the Frenchat the point of the bayonet. He wasrewarded by the thanks of parliament,and the command of the ninety-fourthregiment. In October, 1811, he surprised,near Arroyo de Salinas, aFrench corps of two thousand fivehundred infantry and six hundred cavalry; all of whom, except two hundredwere slain or taken prisoners, andtheir baggage fell into the hands of theBritish. The Prince Regent publiclythanked him for this exploit, createdhim knight of the Bath, and made himgovernor of Blackness Castle. He destroyedthe enemy's magazines at merit,and having afterwards joined LordWellington's army, his division compelledthe enemy to retreat at Vittoria,At Almarez, he destroyed the enemy'sworks against the most resolute resistance;and for his conduct in subsequentactions, which took place inDecember, 1812, he received the thanksof the Duke of Wellington. In March,1813, he took the town and magazinesatAyre; and, in 1814, he was raisedto the peerage by the title of BaronHill, of Almarez and Folkestone, witha pension of j2,000 per annum.He received the Portuguese order ofthe Tower and Sword, and a Britishcross and four clasps for his services onthe peninsula. He was presented witha valuable sword, and the freedom ofthe city of London ; and a Greciandoric column, said to be the largest inthe world of that order, was erected tohis honour in his native county ofShropshire. The statue of his lordshipsurmounts the monument, whichstands at the entrance into Shrewsbury.He was made knight grand cross ofthe Bath in 1815, and, afterwards,commanded the Hanoverian troops inthe Netherlands till the arrival of theDuke of Wellington, who, after thebattle of Waterloo, thanked him forhis assistance and conduct there andon all former occasions. He also washonoured with the grand cross of theGuelphicic order, and the order of MariaTheresa and St. George of Russia.In October, 1815, he received a secondpatent, granting the reversion' of histitle to the male issue of his brothers.In 1825, he was made a genera), and, in1828, commander of the forces; inwhich office he has given great satisfactionto the public and his profession.His lordship is unmarried, and hastaken little part in politics. He is aplain, farmer-like person, in mannersand appearance.SIR ROBERT THOMAS WILSON.SlR ROBERT THOMAS WILSON,son of a painter, was born in London,in the year 1777; and, though originallydesigned for the law, went, in 1793, asavolunteer, to Flanders, where hejoined the Duke of York's army.Having soon obtained a commission, hewas one of six officers who, during thesiege of Laudrecies, rescued the EmperorFrances the Second of Germany,SIR ROBERT THOMAS WILSON.from being taken prisoner; for whichservice each of them received a goldmedal, and subsequently the order ofMaria Theresa. Shortly after his returnto England, he married a daughter ofColonel Belford. During the rebellionin Ireland, he served as aide-de-campto Major-general St. John. In 1799,he again accompanied the Duke ofYork to Holland ; and, having becomemajor in Hompesch's mounted riflemen,proceeded, in 1801, to take partin the various campaigns in Egypt.On his return, he published a Historyof the British Expedition to Egypt,which obtained royal patronage, onaccount of the attack it contained onthe character of Napoleon Buonaparte.The work was complained of to theEnglish government, and the counterreport of General Sebastian being publishedin reply, the controversy gaverise to so much acrimony, that it issaid to have been the primary cause ofthe war which followed. Sir RobertWilson, on his subsequent trial at Paris,in 1815, for aiding the escape of Lava-letter,declared that " he had stated inhis work what, when he published it,he believed to be true ;" which wasregarded as an admission of the falsity.In 1804, he published an Inquiry intothe present state of the British Force,which was one of the first works thatreprobated the system of corporalpunishment in the army. He shortlyafter assisted in the capture of the Capeof Good Hope. In November, 1806,he accompanied Lord Hutchinson on asecret mission to the Emperor of Russia;and, in 1808, he formed the Royal Lusitanialegion, with which he foughton the peninsula. He served as a volunteerin the allied armies, in everyengagement of consequence, from thebattle of Cultus to that of Friesland,and was rewarded by the Russian orderof St. George. In 1811, he broughtout his Account of the Campaigns inPoland in 1806 and 1807. In 1812, hereturned to Russia, where he ablyseconded the operations of GeneralKutusow; and it was chiefly by hisadvice that that officer refused an armisticeapplied for, in Napoleon's name,by Lauriston. After the peace in 1815,he visited Paris, and assisted in rescuingLafayette, for which he was tried,and sentenced to three months' imprisonment.He was censured in thegeneral orders of the Duke of York;but on his return to England, waswarmly greeted by all parties, for thegallantry and humanity he had exhibited.In 1817, he published a Sketchof the Military Power of Russia ; to anattack on which, in the Quarterly Review,he replied with great spirit. In1818, he was returned, free of expense,for the borough of Southwark, to parliament,where he took, on all questions,the popular side, and defendedthe conduct of Napoleon. At thefuneral of Queen Caroline, when thepeople and the military were in collision,he endeavoured to prevent bloodshed,and was soon after dismissedfrom the army, and denied a court-martial,in pursuance of the king'spleasure. He repaired to the continent,and while there, an annuity was purchasedfor him by public subscription,in England, of more than double theamount of his former income. He wasordered by the French government toquit Paris ; and, in 1823, he went, witha number of English volunteers, to assistthe patriots in Spain ; but not beingallowed to disembark at Lisbon, hethrew up his order of the Tower andSword, in an indignant letter to CountPamela. After assisting in the defenceof Cadizz, he returned to England inNovember, 1823, his wife having diedduring his absence. The Emperors ofRussia and Austria, and the King ofPrussia, deprived him of the respectiveorders which, for his services againstNapoleon, they had formerly conferred.In person, Sir Robert Wilson isdistinguished for the manliness of hisform and features. He is an ablewriter and speaker, and is versed inancient and modern learning, as wellas in the sciences of medicine andastronomy. As an officer, his characterstands high for gallantry ; and both inhis military and political capacity, heenjoys a high share of the public approbation.THE ARMY.CHARLES WILLIAM VANE STEWART, MARQUESS OFLONDONDERRY.THIS nobleman was born on the 18thof May, 1778. He entered the army atan early age ; commanded a brigade ofcavalry at Sahara and Benevento,during the retreat to Corunna : wasmade major-general in 1810, and actedas adjutant-general during the peninsularwar. He highly signalized himselfat Talavera, Busaco, Fuentes d'Nor, and Badajoz ; and for his services,he obtained a cross and one clasp.During the campaign of 1814, in whichyear he was made a lieutenant-general,he acted as military commissioner to thearmies of the allied sovereigns, andobtained much credit for his conduct inthat difficult post. In the year last-mentioned,he was called to the peerage,by the title of Lord Stewart, andwas afterwards appointed envoy extraordinaryto the King of Prussia, andsubsequently held the same high stationat the court of Vienna. On hisretirement from the latter, he claimedan allowance from government, whichwas granted, through the influence ofhis half-brother, the late Marquess ofLondonderry ; on one of whose papers,containing his official consent to thegrant, Lord Liverpool is said to havewritten, " too bad." On the 12th ofAugust, 1822, the subject of our memoirsucceeded to the Irish honours of hisfamily ; and was created, on the 28th ofMarch, 1823, Viscount Seaman, andEarl Vane, with remainder to his lordship'smale issue, by his second marriage.His lordship was first marriedin 1804, to Catharine, youngest daughterof the Earl of Darnley ; and afterwardsto Lady Frances Anne, onlydaughter of Sir Harry Vane Tempest?and a ward in Chancery, an event whichcreated great sensation in the fashionableworld, and on which occasion herhusband assumed the surname and armsof Vane. By his first wife, he has oneson ; and, by his second, two daughters.As an officer, the marquess is reputedto be gallant and brave; and, besidesbeing a knight grand cross of the Bath,has received the foreign orders of theTower and the Sword, St. George ofRussia, and the Sword of Stockholm.In his capacity of colonel of the tenthhussars, he attracted the notice of thepublic a few years ago, by fighting aduel with Mr. Battier, a cornet in hisregiment, to whose complaints of thearrogant and contemptuous conduct ofhis brother officers, he had refused toattend. In politics, the Marquess hasuniversally taken the Tory side, in behalfof which he has been a more frequentthan judicious speaker. He is,however, possessed of no mean ability ;and is favourably known to the publicas the author of Suggestions for theImprovement of the Force of the BritishNavy, and of Campaigns in Portugaland Spain, and those in Germany in1813-14. Both works contained inaccuracies,since corrected by their nobleauthor, which might have been, withcommon care, avoided; but in matterand style, each has the merit of beinginteresting and agreeable. In privatelife, his lordship is much and deservedlyrespected; he is a lover of literatureand the fine arts, and is said to havebeen one of the chief patrons of SirThomas Lawrence.THE NAVY.ITHE NAVY.EDWARD RUSSEL, EARL OF Oxford.EDWARD, the fourth son of FrancisRussel, Earl of Bedford, was born in theyear 1651. He entered the navy at anearly age, was appointed a lieutenant in1671, and, after serving in other shipsin the same capacity, was, on the 10thof June, 1672, promoted to the rank ofcommander of the Phoenix. Havingquitted the command of the Newcastle,to which he had been appointed in1680, he seems to have seceded forawhile from naval affairs, and to havetaken an active part in politics. Hebecame a gentleman of the bedchamberto James, Duke of York ; but, on theexecution of his cousin, Lord WilliamRussel, he retired from court ; andwhen James the Second succeeded tothe crown, he not only opposed themeasures of that monarch's government,but used all his influence in promotingthe revolution. Soon after theaccession of King William, he wasappointed admiral of the blue"; andserved, for a short time, under the Earlof Warrington.In 1690, he was employed in conveyingthe Princess Marianne of Newburgto the Groyne, in order that hermarriage with the King of Spain mightbe solemnized. At the end of the sameyear, he was appointed to the chiefcommand of the navy, and made firstlord of the admiralty. With a fleetconsisting of nearly a hundred vessels,seventy of which were line-of-battleships, he sailed for the coast of France ;but neither in this, or the next year,did he achieve any important exploit.On the 3rd of December, 1691, hewas again placed at the head of a fleet,destined to prevent the menaced invasion,in favour of the abdicatedmonarch, James the Second. TheBritish armament sailed early in May,1692, and was soon afterwards joinedby a Dutch squadron. Russel, whoseforce now consisted of ninety-nine shipsof the line, immediately proceeded inquestof the enemy, whom he discovered,on the 19th of May, off" LaHogue. The French fleet did notexceed sixty-three ships of the line ; andas they lay to windward, Orville,who commanded them, might, if he hadthought proper, have avoided an engagement; but he had received apositive order to fight, on the suppositionthat the Dutch and English squadronshad not joined. The Frenchking was apprized of their junction,before they were descried by his admiral,to whom he despatched a countermandingorder by two several vessels ;but one of these was taken by theEnglish, and the other did not arrivetill the day after the engagement.Orville, therefore, in obedience tothe first mandate, bore down alongsidethe English admiral, and fought withastonishing gallantry, until his riggingand sails being considerably damaged,his ship, which carried one hundredand four guns, was towed out of theline in great disorder. Nevertheless, theaction continued for two hours longer,and the fleets were, at length, partedby a fog. When this abated, the enemywere descried flying to the northward.Part of the combined fleet came upwith them, about eight in the evening,and the engagement was renewed ; but,after fighting for about half an hour,the French bore away, having lost fourvessels in the day's action. The nextmorning, they were discovered to thewestward, and the combined fleetschased with all the sail they could carry.THE N Navy .Russel's fore-top-mast came by theboard. The fleet, however, still continuedthe pursuit j and, on the morningof the 22nd, part of the Frenchwere discovered near the Race of Alderney,some at anchor, and somedriving to the eastward. Orville'sship, having lost her masts, ran ashorenear Cherbourg, where she was burnedby Sir Ralph Laval, together with theAdmirable, another first-rate, and theConquering, of eighty guns. Eighteenof the enemy's fleet ran into La Hogue,where they were attacked and destroyed,with a considerable number oftransports, on the 28th, by Sir GeorgeRooke. That portion of the Frenchfleet that was saved from destruction,escaped through the Race of Alderney,by such a dangerous passage, as theEnglish could not attempt, withoutexposing their ships to the most imminenthazard.Although the victory was so decisive,that, during the remainder of the war,the French would not hazard anotherbattle by sea with the English, Russelwas, on his icturn, charged with havingomitted to follow up the advantages hehad gained ; and, notwithstanding thehouse of commons agreed to a resolution,that Lord Russel had behavedhimself with courage, fidelity, and conduct,yet his dismissal from commandwas necessary to satisfy the violenceof popular clamour.In 1694, he was, however, recalled tothe service, and appointed, by King William,first commissioner for executingthe office of lord-high-admiral. Havingtaken the chief command of the fleet,he sailed to the Mediterranean, wherehe frustrated the designs of the Frenchagainst Barcelona ; and, in the followingyear, completely disconcerted a planof invasion that had been formed bythe enemy. In May, 1697, he wascreated Baron of Shine, Viscount ofBarfleur, and Earl of Orford. He wasalso made vice-admiral of England ;and, on two occasions, appointed one of(he lords justices during the absenceof King William in Holland. In 1699,upon an address of the house of commons,respecting mismanagement inthe navy, containing charges chieflylevelled against himself, he resigned allhis employments. In the year 1701,he was impeached, by the commons,of several high crimes and misdemeanors; particularly for advising thepartition treaty, and for having procureda commission for Captain Kidd, whohad committed piracies. He was unanimouslyacquitted, except on the last-mentionedcharge, which, contrary tothe inclination of the earl, who tookevery means in his power to obtain atrial, was dropped by the commons.He subsequently acted as one of thecommissioners for effecting the unionwith Scotland, and became a privy-counsellor.On the 8th of November,1709, he refused the office of ,but accepted that ot first lordof the admiralty, which he held tillthe change of ministry in the followingyear. On the accession of George theFirst, he was made one of the lordsjustices, until his majesty's arrival fromHanover; after which he was appointeda member of the privy-council, andagain became first lord of the admiralty.This post he occupied till the 16th ofApril, 1717, when he retired altogetherfrom public life, and died in the seventy-fifthyear of his age, on the 26th ofNovember, 1727. He married the thirddaughter of the Duke of Bedford, bywhom he had no issue, and his titlebecame extinct at his decease.Lord Orford frequently became theobject of calumny ; but, on every occasion,he openly met the charges thatwere laid against him. In politics, hewas fickle and indecisive, owing to hisirritable nature, which prompted himperpetually to alter his opinion as to thebest means of promoting his country'sinterests. He is generally admittedto have possessed skill and courage as aI naval officer ; and, in private life, to1 have been dignified, generous, and condescending.SIR JOHN LEAKE.SIR JOHN LEAKE.JOHN LEAKE, the second son ofCaptain Richard Leake, master-gunnerof England, was born at Rotherhithe,in the year 1656; and, at the age ofseventeen, served as midshipman, onboardthe Royal Prince, in the memorableengagement between the Englishfleet, under Sir Edward Sprague, andthe Dutch, commanded by Van Tromp.Peace being soon after concluded, he enteredthe merchant service, in which hecontinued until 1675, when he succeededhis father, as gunner of the Neptune.On the 24th of September, 1688, hewas appointed commander of the Firedrakefireship, in which, at the battleof Pantry Bay, by a species of cannoninvented by his father, called a cusheepiece, throwing a small shell instead ofshot, he set fire to one of the Frenchships of the line, for which he was, twodays afterwards, appointed captain ofthe Dartmouth frigate.On the 28th of July following, herelieved the city of Londonderry, whichwas invested by King James's army ofthirty thousand men ; and he was soonafterwards appointed, successively, tothe Oxford, of fifty-four guns, and theEagle, of seventy. With the latter ship,he was employed, in 1692, at the famousbattle off La Hogue ; where he relievedthe vessel commanded by CaptainChurchill, brother to the Duke of Marlborough,from a very perilous situation.That he bore a conspicuous part in theaction, is evident from the damage andloss which he sustained ; having hadseventeen guns dismounted ; seventymen killed, and one hundred and fiftywounded. Although the Eagle was inadisabled state, Sir George Rooke. fourdays after the engagement, hoisted hisflag in her, and succeeded in effectingthe destruction of several of the enemy'sships, that had taken refuge underCape La Hogue, notwithstanding theywere protected by an incessant firefrom the batteries.On the return of Captain Leake toEngland, his vessel was put out of commission,and he was appointed to thePlymouth ; from which, he was soontransferred to the Ossory, of ninetyguns. Early in 1694, he was orderedto the Mediterranean, under AdmiralRussel, where he remained two years,without any opportunity for distinction,as there was no engagement betweenthe hostile fleets; and at the peace ofRyswick, the Ossory was paid off.On the death of his father, in 1696,his friends, among whom was AdmiralRussel, endeavoured to get him appointedto the office of master-gunnerof England ; the application having,however, been made, not only withouthis knowledge, but contrary to his inclination,he declined the kind officesof his advocates. In May, 1699, hewas nominated to the Kent, a third-rateship; which, being paid off in thesucceeding month of February, he wasmade captain of the Berwick, of seventyguns ; but, early in the following year,he was again put out of commission.Just before the death of King William,Leake, on the recommendation of hisfriend, Admiral Churchill, was madefirst captain to the lord-high-admiral,Pembroke ; who, being superseded, onthe accession of Anne, by George,Prince of Denmark, Leake was appointedto the Association, a second-rate.Being, soon after, made commodoreof a squadron ordered toNewfoundland, he removed to theExeter, a smaller and more convenientvessel for the service. In the courseof his cruise, he destroyed more thanfifty vessels belonging to the enemy,whom he routed from all their principalsettlements in Newfoundland, and theneighbouring islands.On the 9th of December, 1702, hewas promoted to the rank of rear-admiralof the blue; but declined thehonour of knighthood, which was thenoffered him. In the ensuing month,he was made commander-in-chief, atSpithead ; and, on the 1st of March,1703, vice-admiral of the blue. In thecourse of the latter year, he proceeded,with Sir Cloudesley Shovel, to theMediterranean ; and, on his return, inthe month of November, encounteredTHE NAVY.what is generally distinguished as thegreat storm, in which the Restorationdrove athwart the hawse of Leake'sship, the Prince George ; which, however,was eventually saved by her admiral'sseamanship. In February, 1704,he accepted the honour of knighthood,and on the 19th of the same month,was appointed to convoy some troopsto Lisbon, where he arrived on the 2ndof March, and put himself under thecommand of Sir George Rooke, whomhe advised to make an attempt uponGibraltar. His recommendation wasadopted, and the enterprise provedcompletely successful.In the battle off Malaga, in the monthof August, he commanded the van ofthe combined fleet ; and, after fightingfour hours, he obliged M. d'Impreville,vice-admiral of the white and blue,to bear away, as well as the rest of theFrench van squadron. After the engagement,he was appointed to theprotection of Gibraltar ; and gainingintelligence, at Lisbon, that a Frenchfleet was besieging the fortress, he proceededwith all possible speed to itsrelief. Although, on his arrival in thebay, he found only some of the lighterships of the enemy, (who suffered thetrifling loss of two frigates and a fewsmaller vessels, which, running on shore,were burnt that they might not betakenby the English admiral,) thePrince of Hesse wrote to Leake, assuringhim that his appearance hadsaved the fortress from an assault,which would, in all probability, haveproved successful.Being informed that a squadronstronger than his own had sailed forthe purpose of looking out for him, hequitted the bay ; and, proceeding toLisbon, was there joined by five shipsof war, under the care of Sir ThomasDikes, who had brought him out anappointment as vice-admiral of thewhite, and commander-in-chief in theMediterranean. On the 6th of March,he put to sea with thirty-five sail ofthe line, twelve of which were Dutchand Portuguese. On approachingGibraltar, he found that the Frenchfleet had dispersed, with the exceptionof five ships, which he found in thebay, under the command of BaronPonte; all of these he either took ordestroyed ; and the French admiraldied of the wounds he received in theengagement. On this occasion, SirJohn Leake was presented with a goldcup, by the Prince of Hesse, who commandedthe garrison.He shortly afterwards returned toLisbon, where he was joined, in June,1705, by Sir Cloudesley Shovel ; withwhom, on the 22nd, he sailed for theMediterranean. After having effectedthe reduction of Barcelona, Shovel ,proceeded to England, leaving Leakein the Mediterranean, as commander-in-chief.The latter soon returned toLisbon to refit ; whence, on the 26th ofFebruary, 1706, he sailed on an expeditionagainst some Spanish galleons, atCadizz. This enterprise was, however,frustrated, by the treachery of the Portuguese,who had apprized the Spaniardsof his intended attack, and the galleonswere, consequently, beyond the reachof pursuit by the time of his arrival.After this, he proceeded to GibraltarBay, where he was joined, on the 13thof April, by Sir George Byng, with areinforcement from England. Theyimmediately proceeded to the relief ofKing Charles, at Barcelona, off whichthey made their appearance on the26th ; and, five days afterwards, theDuke of Anjou raised the siege, leavingbehind him all his cannon, militarystores, and equipage.After having reduced, in succession,Carthagena,Alicant,Yvica, and Majorca,Leake returned to England, where hewas greeted with the acclamations ofthe people, and flattered by the favoursof royalty. He received 1,000 bythe order of the queen ; and was presentedwith a diamond ring and gold-likedsword, by Prince George ofDenmark, then lord-high-admiral. In1707, he was made admiral of thewhite, and commander-in-chief of thefleet ; and, being ordered to the Mediterranean,it happened that Barcelonaagain needed his assistance. The citywas so closely blockaded, as to be underthe apprehension of famine ; but SirJohn, on his way out, had fortunatelycaptured seventy-five transports, ladenwith provisions, which enabled him toafford effectual relief to the garrisonand inhabitants.In 1708, he sailed for Italy, whencehe brought the new Queen of Spainto King Charles, at Barcelona. SoonSIR JOHN JENNINGS.after, he successively reduced the islandof Sardinia, and (in conjunction withLord Stanhope) that of Minorca.During his absence, he had been ;nominated one of the council of Prince jGeorge of Denmark, the lord-high \admiral, whose successor, the Earl ofPembroke, shortly after Leake's returnto England, appointed him admiral ofthe fleet ; and on the 24th of May, 1709,he was constituted rear-admiral ofGreat Britain, by patent; on presentinghim with which, the queen said, " shehad been put in mind of it by the voiceof the people."In November, 1709, he was nominatedone of the lords of the admiralty ; onwhich occasion, he resigned his post ascommander-in-chief. In the followingyear, he was appointed to succeed theEarl of Orford, as first commissioner,but declined the office, although as aprivate member, he consented to performthe duties of chairman. In January,1710, he was re-appointed com-mander-in-chief, and, in the year 1712,after having, with General Hill, in pursuanceof a treaty, taken possession ofDunkirk, he struck his flag, but was,in the following year, again appointedadmiral of the fleet.Being of Tory principles, on the accessionof George the First, he was dismissedfrom all his employments, andretired on a pension of only 600 ayear, to a small villa in the neighbourhoodof Greenwich, where, after havingrepresented the city of Rochester inthree parliaments, he died, on the 1stof August, 1720. He had married adaughter of Captain Richard Hill, ofYarmouth, and had one son, by whosemisconduct, his latter days are said tohave been embittered.Leake was an excellent seaman, bothin theory and practice : he also understoodthe discipline of the land service,and was well versed in ship-building,gunnery, and fortification. In privatelife he displayed many amiable qualities,and passed without censurethrough the whole of his professionalcareer, never having, as it appears,committed even - a mistake in thecourse of his numerous and difficultoperations.SIR JOHN JENNINGS.THE subject of this memoir was bornabout the year 1660, appointed lieutenantof the Pearl, on the 12th ofMay, 1687, and afterwards held thesame rank in the St. David and theSwallow. After having been promotedto the command of the St. Paul firesidewas, in 1690, made captain of theExperiment, of thirty-two guns, andemployed in cruising off the coast ofIreland, where he intercepted a quantityof small vessels, used as transportsin the cause of the exiled king. In 1693,he was nominated captain of the Victory,under Sir John Ashy ; and afterwards,in the month of July, was transferredto the Mary, of sixty guns, in which hewent to the Mediterranean with AdmiralRussel, afterwards Earl of Orford. In1696, he was removed to the Chichester,of eighty guns ; and, in the followingyear, was intrusted with the commandof the Plymouth, with which he capturedthe Concord, a very fine privateer,belonging to St. Maloes. Shortly afterwards,being in company with the Ryefrigate, he fell in with three Frenchships ; one of which having speedilysurrendered, he left her in charge of hisconsort, and made sail after the others ;one of which, after having been defendedwith romantic bravery, he compelledto strike her flag. Having conductedtheir prizes to port, the Rye andthe Plymouth fell in with the Severn,a British man-of-war, and the threeships steered together for the coast ofFrance, where they took five vesselsladen with wine from Bordeaux, and asmall ship of war.In consequence of the peace of Ryswick,which very soon followed, he had nofurther employment until 1702, when,he served under Sir George Rooke, inthe expedition against Cadizz. He thenseconded Vice-admiral Hobson in theattack on Vigo ; and, in the followingyear, on board the St. George, accom-THE NAVY.panted Sir Cloudesley Shovel, on hisfruitless mission for the relief of theCevenois. In 1704, he served underSir George Rooke, at the taking ofGibraltar, as well as at the battle offMalaga. On the latter occasion, hedisplayed so much gallantry as a secondto the commander-in-chief, that he washonoured with knighthood, on the 9thof October following ; and advanced tothe rank of rear-admiral of the blue,on the 24th of January, 1704-5. In thefollowing May, he sailed with a strongdetachment of the fleet, under Sir G georgeByng, for the purpose of reconnoitringthe harbour of Brest. Finding that theFrench had in readiness eighteen shipsof the line, the two admirals returnedto the place of rendezvous, where theywere joined by Sir Cloudesley Shovel ;and, after a council of war, Byng andJennings were left, with a squadron, towatch the enemy's proceedings. TheFrench ships, however, kept closely inport, and the English force had only anopportunity of taking three privateers.Jennings, subsequently, convoyed anEast India fleet from Ireland ; and returnedinto port, for the winter, aboutthe middle of November.In April, 1706, he proceeded, as secondin command to Sir George Byng,with a reinforcement to Sir John Leake,in the Mediterranean. The fleet havingrelieved Barcelona, from which theships of the enemy retired in disorder,sailed immediately for Cartagena,which surrendered on being threatenedwith an assault. Jennings was left withfour sail of the line, to arrange the internalaffairs of the place, which havingeffected, he hastened to assist Sir JohnLeake at the siege of Alicant. An assaultby sea and land being resolved on,Jennings was intrusted with the conductof the former, and, although atfirst repulsed, he succeeded, on a secondattempt, in making himself master ofthe city. At the latter end of the year,he was despatched to the West Indies,with a detachment of the fleet, withwhich he arrived at Jamaica, early in1707. The object of this expedition wasto induce the Spaniards in that part ofthe world to declare in favour of KingCharles; but the endeavours of the admiralto effect this purpose, were unavailing.On the 10th of December, 1707, hewas advanced to the rank of rear-admiralof the white ; on the 8th of January,1707-8, to that of rear-admiral of thered ; eighteen days after, to that of vice-admiralof the red; and, in March following,he was appointed commander-in-chiefin the Thames and Medway.Towards the close of the year, he hadthe charge of a squadron appointed toguard the mouth of the Streights ; andin May, 1709, he was detached, byAdmiral Byng, with ten ships of theline and three frigates, to take uponhim the protection of the coast of Portugal.In 1708, he was made admiralof the blue; and, in 1711, admiral ofthe white, and commander-in-chief inthe Mediterranean. While on this station,he conveyed King Charles, whohad become Emperor of Germany,and, subsequently, his illustrious consort,from Barcelona to Genoa. He alsosucceeded in suppressing the Salletinepirates; and, in 1713, conducted theDuke and Duchess of Savoy from VillaFranca to their new kingdom of Sicily.During the remainder of QueenAnne's reign, he was not called intoservice ; but on the accession of Georgethe First, he became a lord of the admiralty.In 1716, the Pretender havinglanded in Scotland, Jennings was despatched,with a squadron, to the Faithof Edinburgh, for the purpose of assistingthe king's troops, and harassingthe rebels on every possible opportunity.The escape of the Pretender gaveoccasion to some persons to arraignhis conduct ; but their charges wererefuted by the account published in thegazette.On the 28th of August, 1720, AdmiralJennings was nominated Rangerof Greenwich park, and governor of thehospital; to which he presented themarble statue of George the First, inthe centre of the "great square. In themonth of November, he had the commandof the convoy that attended theking from Helvoetsluysto Margate ; andin 1726, he was sent into the Mediterranean,with a squadron, for the purposeof intimidating the Spaniards, whoseproceedings had excited suspicion inthe minds of the British ministers. Hearrived in the bay of St. Antonio onthe 3rd of August, and, as war had notbeen declared, did not have recourseto hostilities. The governor of theVISCOUNT Warrington.place, however, committed himself, byfiring on some of the headmost ships,which the admiral was induced to overlook,on receiving a very handsome apology.On the 31st of the month, heanchored in the Bay of Bulls, nearCadizz, where his appearance excited somuch alarm, that, considering the objectof his expedition attained, he soonafterwards returned, with the fleet, toSpithead.On the accession george the Second,he retired from the admiralty-board ;and, in the year 1734, resigned hisrank in the navy. As a reward, however,for former services, he was, inJanuary 1732-3, nominated rear-admiralof England. His death took placeon the 23rd of December, 1745.The merits of this distinguished admiralhave been thus accurately statedby one of his biographers : " He was,as an officer, cool, diligent, and determined; as a statesman, honest and unsuspected; and, as a private gentleman,friendly, generous, and humane."GEORGE BYNG, VISCOUNT Warrington.THIS celebrated admiral was born in1663, and, at the age of fifteen, went,as a volunteer, into the naval service,which, however, he quitted, in 1681, onthe invitation of General Kirk, to accepta cadetship, in the garrison atTangier. After having risen to therank of lieutenant, he abandoned thearmy, at the request of the Earl ofDartmouth, who gave him a commissionin the Oxford; from which he soonafterwards removed to the Phoenix, andsailed to the East Indies, where, inboarding a Zinganian pirate, he was soseverely wounded, that, as the corsairwas sinking, he was taken out of thewater with scarcely any signs of life.In 1688, he appears to have been firstlieutenant to Sir John Ashy, in thefleet fitted out to frustrate the designsof the Prince of Orange, to whom, however,he was, at this time, warmlyattached. After having been introducedto the prince at Hepburn, hewaited upon him again at Windsor,with an assurance of the high regardentertained for his person, by the fleet,on which occasion he received the commandof a fourth-rate man-of-war.In 1690, in the Hope, a third-rate,he acted as second to Sir GeorgeRooke, in the engagement off Beachy.During the two next years he commandedthe Royal Oak, under LordRussel, who made him first captain ofthe fleet, in which capacity, he served,for a considerable time, in the Mediterraneanand the channel. On the breakingout of the war, in 1702, he wasappointed to the Nassau, with which heassisted at the capture and destructionof the combined fleet at Vigo. Duringthe next year, he was made rear-admiralof the red, and served in theMediterranean, under Sir CloudesleyShovel, who detached him, with a smallsquadron, to Algiers, where he is saidto have displayed much prudence andtact in renewing and improving thetreaties existing between this countryand the dey. In 1704, he led theseamen in the successful attack on Gibraltar,and so highly distinguished himselfin the subsequent battle off" Malaga,that the queen conferred on him thehonour of knighthood, "as a testimonyof her approbation of his behaviour."On the 18th of January, 1705, he wasmade rear-admiral of the blue ; and,after taking twenty privateers and aFrench man-of-war, blockaded a force,superior to his own, in the harbour ofBrest. In 1706, he saved the city ofBarcelona from being captured by theDuke of Anjou ; and, subsequently,effected the reduction of Cartagenaand Alicant. During the next year,he acted as second to-sir CloudesleyShovel, at the siege of Toulon ; and, asit is stated, saved the fleet from beingwrecked, by hoisting similar lights tothose displayed by the admiral, whenthe latter struck on the rocks of Scilly,and thus leading the ships on a differentcourse, to that which had proved so fatalto their gallant commander-in-chief.In 1708, he was promoted to the rankof admiral of the blue ; and displayedTHE NAVY.so much vigilance and skill, with hissquadron, in frustrating the designs ofthe Pretender, to effect a landing, at thehead of the French army, in Scotland,that he received the freedom of thecity of Edinburgh, as well as the offerof a seat at the admiralty board, which,however, he thought proper to decline.After having escorted Mary Anne,daughter of the Emperor Leopold, andbride elect of John, fifth king of Portugal,to Lisbon, he was made admiral ofthe white; and, in 1709, commander-in-chiefin the Mediterranean station, aswell as a commissioner of the admiralty.Towards the conclusion of QueenAnne's reign, on account of politicaldifferences with the party in power, hesurrendered his office, to which, however,he was restored, on the accessionof George the First; who, in 1715,created him a baronet, and presentedhim with a ring of great value, for hisservices, at the head of a channel squadron,in preventing the importation ofarms and military stores for the serviceof the Jacobites. In 1717, hecommanded in the Baltic; and, duringthe following year, displayed so muchprowess and activity against theSpaniards, in the Mediterranean, thathe received letters of thanks from hisown sovereign, the King of Sardinia,and the emperor, as well as a portrait ofthe latter, splendidly set in diamonds.He subsequently acted, with the entireconfidence of our allies, and withgreat credit to himself, as plenipotentiaryfrom Great Britain to all the states ofItaly; and, in August, 1720, attended theking, by express command at Hanover.In the following October, he was maderear-admiral of Great Britain and treasurerof the navy; in May, 1721, aprivy-counsellor; and, in the ensuingDecember, a viscount. In 1725, on therevival of the order, he was constituted aknight of the Bath ; and, on the accessionof George the Second, he obtainedthe chief commissionership of the admiralty; in possession of which he died, onthe 17th of January, 1732-3, leavingfour daughters and two sons, one ofwhom, Admiral John Byng, was shot,in 1757, for an alleged breach of thetwelfth article of war.From An Account of the Expeditionof the British Fleet to Sicily, the followingpassages relative to Lord Warringtonare transcribed : " He was of a slenderconstitution, but well supplied withspirits, which did not display themselvesso much in gaiety of conversation,(for he was modest in his nature)as in activity in all the duties and functionsof life, or business, in which hewas indefatigable; and, by a continuedhabit of industry, had hardened andinured a body, not naturally strong,to patience of any fatigue. He hadmade no great proficiency in school-learning,(which the early age of goingto sea seldom admits of,) but his greatdiligence, joined with excellent naturalparts, and a just sense of honour, madehim capable of conducting difficult negotiationsand commissions with properdignity and address."George the First, who knew hisabilities, used to say to his ministers,when they applied for instructions tobe sent to him for his guidance on certainimportant occasions, that he wouldsend him none, for he knew how to actwithout any." The same monarch toldhim " that he had found out the secretof obliging his enemies as well as hisfriends ; and that the court of Spainhad mentioned, with great acknowledgments,his fair and friendly behaviourin the provision of transports,and other necessaries, for the embarkationof their troops, and in protectingthem from many violences andoppressions that had been attempted."He was incapable of performing hisduty in a cold or negligent manner ;and when any service was committed tohis management, he devoted his wholetime and application to it; nor couldany fatigue or indisposition of j bodyever divert or interrupt his attentionfrom any point that required presentdespatch. To this it might, in a greatmeasure, be owing, that he was neverunfortunate in any undertakings, normiscarried in any service that was intrustedto his direction. He alwaysproceeded upon solid principles, andleft nothing to fortune that could be accomplishedby foresight and application."By Noble, he is described as havingbeen " equally skilful and brave, andcourteous as either, uniting the gracesof the army with the gallantry of thenavy." While a commoner, he representedthe town of Plymouth in severalsuccessive parliaments.SIR CHARLES WAGER.SIR CHARLES WAGER.THIS distinguished admiral was bornon the 28th of October, 1666, and enteredvery young into the service of hiscountry. On the 7th of June, 1692, hewas appointed captain of the Razeefire-ship; from which he was very soonremoved to the Samuel and Henry, offorty-four guns, in which he was sent,early in 1693, with a fleet of merchantmen,to New England. In 1695, hehad the command of the Woolwich, aship of fifty-four guns, employed in thechannel fleet under Sir CloudesleyShovel. Soon after the accession ofQueen Anne, he became captain of theHampton-court, of seventy guns ; and,in the month of April, 1703, sailed,as commodore of a small squadron, tocruise on the coast of France. He subsequentlyserved, in succession, underthe orders of Shovel, Rooke, and Leake ;with the latter of whom he acted at thetaking of Majorca, where he was exchangedas a hostage, pending thetreaty of capitulation.Owing to the commendations of theadmirals under whom he had served,he was, on his return from the Mediterranean,despatched, in the year 1707,with a squadron of nine ships of theline, to the West Indies, having underhis convoy, a valuable fleet of merchantmen,all of which he escorted safely totheir respective destinations. Havingreceived information, in the month ofDecember, that the French admiral, DuCasse, had put to sea for the purpose ofprotecting some Spanish galleons thatwere homeward bound, he set sail withthe Expedition, Portland, Kingston, anda fire-ship, for the purpose of attackingthe galleons before Du Casse could jointhem. On the 28th of May, 1708, hedescried the enemy's fleet, consisting ofseventeen sail, galleons and ships ofwar, standing towards Cartagena. Atsunset, he gallantly attacked the largestvessel, which, after having sustained anengagement for about an hour and ahalf, was blown up, and all on board,with the exception of eleven men,perished. His two consorts had, however,disregarded his signals to attack ;and, night coming on, he could onlykeep one of the enemy in sight. Hecame up with her about ten o'clock,and his own vessel, the Expedition,being now assisted by the Kingston andPortland, the enemy's ship, whichcarried fifty guns, was compelled tosurrender about two in the morning.Meantime, the galleons had dispersedand escaped.The Expedition having been muchinjured, he removed into the Portland,and arrived, on the 13th of July, atJamaica, where he brought the captainsof the Kingston and Portland to a court-martial.Although acquitted of thecharge of want of personal courage, theywere found guilty of a breach of certainarticles of war, and dismissed from theircommands. While at Jamaica, AdmiralWager's conduct, respecting theship which he had captured in the engagement,gained him universal esteem.At that time, there were no regulationsas to the distribution of prize-money ;but, whenever a vessel was captured, itfell a prey to general pillage. To remedythis evil, an act of parliament was passed,in 1707, regulating the future allotmentof prize-money, which not beingknown to Wager or his crew, they hadproceeded on the old principle; but uponreceiving intelligence of the new law,Wager ordered his captain to deliverup, for fair distribution, all the silverand valuable effects he had seized forhis own and the admiral's use, an instanceof self-denial, by which he madea deep impression upon the minds ofthe seamen.Wager, shortly afterwards, received,by a vessel from England, a commissionas rear-admiral of the blue ; and, on the2nd of December, 1708, he was maderear-admiral of the white. He remained,until 1709, in the West Indies,where the ships, under his command,were very successful in capturing prizes.On his return to England, he was immediatelymade rear-admiral of the red ;and, on the 8th of December, receivedthe honour of knighthood.During the remainder of the reignTHE NAVY.of Queen Anne, he does not appearto have been employed in actual service; but, shortly after the accession ofGeorge the First, he was appointedcommander-in-chief in the Mediterranean,and, nearly at the same time,comptroller of the navy. On the 16th ofJune, 1716, he was made vice-admiralof the blue ; on the 1st of Februaryensuing, vice-admiral of the white ; and,on the 15th of March, vice-admiral ofthe red. In 1718, he was appointeda lord of the admiralty, on which occasionhe resigned the comptrollershipof the navy.In the year 1722, in consequence ofa great outrage committed on twoEnglish gentlemen residing at Lisbon,Sir Charles Wager was intrusted witha squadron for the purpose of chastisingthe Portuguese; but the intimation ofhis threatened visit frightened theminto a speedy satisfaction for the injuriesthey had inflicted, and the armamentdid not, therefore, put to sea. In1726, he was ordered to the Baltic, toassist the Danes and Swedes againstthe Russians, who, being intimidatedby his force, abandoned their hostileintentions.In the early part of the year 1727,Gibraltar being actually besieged by theenemy, the Earl of Portmore, who wasgovernor, embarked with a reinforcementfrom England, under convoy ofa fleet commanded by Sir CharlesWager. After the siege had lasted forseveral months, a peace was concluded ;but Sir Charles thought it prudent toremain until fully assured that theSpaniards were disposed to complywith the terms of the treaty. Being, atlength, satisfied on this head, he returnedto England, on the 13th ofApril, 1728.The Spaniards, however, having againevinced hostile intentions towards England,a large squadron was intrustedto Sir Charles Wager, in May, 1729;but the enemy being awed, by theseprompt proceedings, into the necessarycompliance, the fleet was not employedon the intended service. On the 10thof July, 1731, he was made admiral ofthe blue; and, about the same time,had the command of a large armament,with which he set sail, for the purposeof seeing carried into execution theparticulars of a treaty entered into atVienna. The object of his missionbeing accomplished, he returned toEngland, where he arrived on the 10thof December, and never afterwardsassumed any naval command.On the 2 1st of June, 1733, Sir CharlesWager was nominated first lord of theadmiralty ; in January following, hewas made admiral of the white ; andhaving, on the 19th of March, 1741,quitted the admiralty board, he was, inthe month of December, appointedtreasurer of the navy. This station heheld until his death, which took placeon the 24th of May, 1743, in theseventy-seventh year of his age. Asplendid monument was erected to hismemory in Westminster-abbey. Hehad been in parliament for a number ofyears, and, at the time of his demise,was member for West Love.As a naval officer, Sir Charles Wagerpossessed considerable talent and acquirements,though not of the mostsplendid order. He was a man of soundjudgment, and remarkable coolness inthe midst of danger and difficulty.While he was at the head of the admiralty,an expedition, conducted by CaptainMiddleton, was sent out for thediscovery of a passage to the SouthSeas by the north-west part of Hudson'sBay, which, however, ended unfavourably; and Commodore Ansonperformed his celebrated voyage roundthe world ; the original idea of whichis said to have been formed and maturedby Sir Charles himself.In private life, he was much esteemedfor the unexpectedness and affability ofhis manners, and the cheerfulness of hisdisposition. It was a saying of his,that a man who would not right for agalleon, would not fight for any thing.He had a sovereign contempt for physicians,although he admitted a surgeonto be occasionally useful. Being attackedwith illness while on a cruise,it became necessary to bleed andblister him : this being done, the surgeonproposed to give him a few bolusesand a draught. " No, doctor," exclaimedSir Charles ; " you may battermy hulk as long as you please, butdon't attempt to board me !"THOMAS MATHEWS.THOMAS MATHEWS.THOMAS MATHEWS, was born atLlandaff, about the year 1670, and becamea captain in the navy, on the 24thof May, 1703. He was employed inthe Dover, under Commodore Evans,in 1707, to cruise in the soundings ; andwhile on this service, captured a Frenchfrigate of twenty-six guns. Soon after,he went on a cruise in the Chester, withthe squadron commanded by LordDursley ; and, having fallen in with threeof the enemy's ships, by outstripping hiscompanions, he succeeded, singly, incapturing the Glorieux, after a shortbut very spirited engagement. Returningto port, he refitted, and proceededto the West India station, where hetook one or two privateers. In thefollowing year, he was ordered toAmerica; and, on his passage to NewYork, captured a French vessel.At the end of 1711, he returned toEngland; and, peace being concluded,he was not further employed, until theyear 1718, when he commanded theKent, of seventy guns, one of the fleetordered to the Mediterranean, underSir George Byng. In the memorableengagement with the Spaniards, offMessina, he succeeded in capturing theSt. Carlos, of sixty guns ; and materiallyassisted Captain Master, in taking theship of the Spanish admiral. In 1719,having been left with a small squadron,to cruise off Pontemelia, for the purposeof preventing the escape of Rear-admiralHammock, who had taken refugein Messina, he captured a frigate,and drove on shore one of the enemy'sbest ships, the Santa Rosalie, of sixty-fourguns. Mathews appears to havebeen one of the persons first consultedby the admiral on all questions of importance,respecting the conduct of thewhole of this expedition, and one ofthe foremost to execute the measureshis judgment had contributed to devise.In 1722, he was sent out with asmall squadron to the East Indies ;whence he returned, in 1724, and, aftera long period of inactivity, was nominated,in 1736, a commissioner of thenavy resident at Chatham. On the 12thof March, 1741-2, he was appointedvice-admiral of the red ; and, on the25th of the same month, commander-in-chiefin the Mediterranean, and ministerplenipotentiary to the King ofSardinia and the States of Italy. Hearrived at Gibraltar, on the 7th ofMay, with four ships of the line; and,after having joined the four already inthe Mediterranean under Rear-admiralLestock, he detached Captain Norris,to destroy five Spanish gallies that hadput into the Bay of St. Tropez ; an attemptthat proved successful. By unceasingvigilance, he kept in check, foraperiod of eighteen months, the fleetswhich had taken refuge in the port ofToulon. While at Villa Franca, a vesselhaving passed in sight of his squadron,without paying the customary compliment,Admiral Mathews fired a gun asasignal for her to bring to, which beingdisregarded, he ordered one of his shipsto pursue her; and her captain continuingobstinate, his vessel was sunkby a broadside.In August, 1742, Commodore Martinwas detached by Mathews, with asquadron to Naples, where he enforcedcertain stipulations from his Sicilianmajesty. The towns of Mataro andPalais, on the coast of Catalonia, weresoon afterwards bombarded; and, Martinhaving joined Mathews, at the generalrendezvous, in the road of Hieres, wasordered to Arassa, where he destroyeda quantity of corn intended for the useof the Spaniards.In April, 1743, while Admiral Mathewswas cruising off Toulon, a party ofBritish sailors were permitted to goonshore for recreation, at the town ofHieres ; but being refused admittanceby the French garrison, a desperatefray ensued, in which one hundredand fifty of the English, who were unarmed,are said to have been killed. InAugust, Mathews was made admiralof the blue. His further operations,during this year, were confined to theassistance he gave the King of Sardinia,by landing the greater part of his marinesand a quantity of cannon at VillaTHE NAVY.Franca, by which the incursions of theenemy were effectually prevented.The governments of France andSpain, weary of the blockade of theirfleets, in the harbour of Toulon, havingsent positive orders for them to proceedto sea, on the 8th of February, 1744, theywere perceived to be under sail. TheBritish fleet, commanded by AdmiralsMathews and Lestock, got under weighon the 9th, and, for two whole days, thehostile parties were employed in manoeuvringfor the advantage of situation.The force of the English was numericallysuperior, but the enemy was in byfar better order and sailing condition.On the llth, Admiral Mathews gavethe signal to engage, but it was notrepeated by Lestock, whose division wastoo Car astern, to allow of its joining inthe attack on the enemy. Mathews boredown, in the Namur, upon the Spanishadmiral, while Captain Cornwall, of theMarlborough, who lost both his legs,and was afterwards killed by the fall ofa mast, in the conflict, encountered theIsabella with considerable bravery.Meantime, the Norfolk engaged theConstant, and compelled her to quit theline ; the Barfleur and Caroline foughtthe French admiral's ship ; and thePrincess, Somerset, with three others,attacked the Poder, which, after havingdisabled two "of her antagonists, wascompelled to surrender to the Berwick,commanded by Hawke. Night comingon, the enemy bore away, and Mathewshaving vainly pursued them alt the nextday, after making a fruitless effort toregain his former station, off Toulon,ultimately put into Mason, where herefitted.Mathews was so dissatisfied withLestock's conduct, that he suspendedhim from his command ; and Lestock,in return, accused Mathews of rashnessand precipitation, in engaging theenemy before the line of battle wasformed, affirming that he was underno necessity of hurrying on the action,as the French and Spanish admiralswere resolved to fight : he also chargedMathews with having wilfully sufferedthe escape of the enemy. Mathews wasconsequently recalled, and a parliamentaryinvestigation soon followed,which terminated in an address to hismajesty, requesting him to appoint acourt-martial to be held upon the parties.The trial of Mathews commencedin October, 1745, and continued untilJune, 1747 ; when the court (of whichSir Chaloner Ogle was president) adjudgedhim incapable of holding any furtheremployment in the king's service.This sentence was by no means satisfactoryto the people of England, whowere indignant when they found thatLestock, who did not fight, was honourablyacquitted; while the man who didfight, was dismissed the service. Theaccusation of Lestock against Mathews,as to engaging an enemy before the linedf battle was formed, seems to have beenof little weight, for it is a course of proceedingthat has been adopted by someof our most eminent naval commanders.The insinuation, that the French andSpanish admirals were resolved to fight,is expressly denied by Mathews, whosays he was fully convinced they wouldnever have come to a general engagement,but designed to draw him downthe Streights ; a statement that no onebut his enemies ever denied. Mathewspassed the brief remainder of his lifein retirement, and died about the year1751.Being a rigid disciplinarian, he paidthe utmost deference to his superiorofficers, and expected similar attentionto his own orders from subordinates.He had a great degree of pride, but itwas that of one who entertained a duesense of his own dignity and the honourof his profession. His gallantry wasnever disputed ; but some doubts seemto exist as to his capacity for command.SIR JOHN NORRIS.SIR JOHN NORRIS, the descendantof an ancient Irish family, was bornabout the year 1670, and entered thenavy by what was called a king's letter,giving him the lowest rank in the profession.He acted as a lieutenant at thebattle off Beachy Head ; and was, onthe 8th of July, 1690, appointed captainSIR JOHN NORRIS.of the Pelican. In 1693, he commandedthe Sheer-ness frigate, in which he wentout, under Sir George Rooke, to convoythe Mediterranean fleet ; of which, however,ninety sail, together with threemen-of-war, were captured, and thepreservation of the remainder appearsto have been chiefly owing to the activitywith which Norris carried intoeffect the orders of Rooke. In thefollowing year he was appointed tothe Carlisle, in which he accompaniedAdmiral Russel to the Mediterranean ;where, being detached with a squadronfor the protection of trade, he fell in with,and captured, two French men-of-war,the Content and Trident; the former ofwhich was fitted out for the Englishservice, and intrusted to Captain Norris'scommand. Soon after, he took the Foudroyant,of thirty-two guns, one of thefinest frigates belonging to the enemy.In 1696, he was sent to attempt therecovery of Hudson's Bay; and, on hisway thither, having put into St. John's,Newfoundland, he there received intelligencethat five French ships had beenseen near the Bay of Conception, inquestof which he was exceedinglyanxious to sail. A council of war,however, composed principally of militaryofficers, overruled his opinion onthe subject, and St. John's was put intoa state of defence, under the expectationof a speedy attack. A French fleet, inforcefar superior to that of the English,soon afterwards arrived, but in consequenceof the excellent preparationsthat had been made, retired withoutfiring a gun.Returning to England in the autumn,without having effected the object forwhich he had been despatched, Norriswas visited with considerable obloquy,from which, however, he soon relievedhimself. After having served, for sometime,in the Winchester, on the Mediterraneanand Newfoundland stations,he commanded the Ori'ord, inthe expedition to Cadizz, in 1702 ; and,on his way thither, captured four orfive prizes. His warmth of temper, atthis time, unfortunately betrayed himinto a serious outrage on naval discipline.In a dispute which took placeon the quarter-deck of the admiral'sship, Norris so far forgot himself as todraw his sword upon her commander,Captain Ley. He was immediately putunder arrest ; but, owing to his ownsubsequent submission, and the kindinterference of the Duke of Ormond,the affair was passed over without furthernotice.In the following year, he proceeded,with Sir Cloudesley Shovel, to the Mediterranean,and, on his voyage, captureda French privateer, of thirty-sixguns ; which, notwithstanding its inferiorityof force, fought for a long timewith the utmost courage, and did notsurrender until one-fourth of her valiantcrew were killed or wounded. A fewdays after, he took another prize, carryingsixteen guns and one hundredand ten men; and was afterwards detachedto ascertain the force of theenemy in the harbour of Cadizz. Onhis return to England, in companywith the Warspite and Lichfield, heattacked a French ship of war, of fifty-twoguns, which, after a resistance ofseveral hours' duration, was, at length,from the inequality of the contest,obliged to surrender.In the year 1704, he acted, in theengagement off Malaga, as one of theseconds to Sir Cloudesley Shovel, whobecame, from that time, the friend ofNorris, and soon after made him hiscaptain, on board the Britannia. Inthe expedition to the Mediterranean,in 1705, Norris, by his conduct in theattack on Fort Montjoi, gained thefavour of the Archduke Charles, whowrote to Queen Anne in his favour ; andbeing sent home, in the Canterbury,with the news of the surrender ofBarcelona, he was knighted, on hisarrival, and presented with one thousandguineas.In March, 1706-7, he was made rear-admiralof the blue, and, having hoistedhis flag on board the Torbay, joined thesquadron on the Mediterranean station,under the command of Sir CloudesleyShovel. He was soon detached on theimportant service of forcing the passageof the Var; which he effected with atrifling loss. Returning to England,he was appointed, with five other flag-officers,to assist Prince George in revisingthe sentence of the court-martialheld on Sir Thomas Hardy, whose acquittalthey unanimously confirmed ;and so put an end to the popular clamour,which the affair had occasioned.In December he removed to theTHE NAVY.Exeter ; with which he convoyed theVirginia fleet, from Spithead, down thechannel. On the 8th of January,1707-8,he was made rear-admiral ; and, onthe 26th, vice-admiral of the white.He next sailed in the Ranelagh, with asquadron under the command of SirJohn Leake, to the Mediterranean,where he captured about seventy barks,laden with provisions for the Duke ofAnjou's army.On the 2 1 st of December, 1708, he waspromoted to the rank of vice-admiral ofthe red ; and, early in 1709, was orderedto the Baltic, but returned before theend of the year, and was appointedadmiral of the blue. In 1710, he wassent to the Mediterranean, as com-mander-in-chief, and frustrated a contemplateddescent on the island ofSardinia. He returned to England onthe 8th of October, 1711 ; and, for sometime,remained without a command, inconsequenceof the peace of Utrecht.On the 18th of May, 1715, he sailed,with a strong squadron, to protectBritish commerce in the Baltic, whichhad suffered from the depredations ofprivateers from Sweden. In 1717, hewas sent out as envoy extraordinaryand minister plenipotentiary to the CzarPeter. On the 19th of March, 1717-18,he was nominated a lord of the admiralty; and, early in April, returned tothe Baltic, for the purpose of intimidatingthe Swedes.In the ensuing spring, he sailedfrom Spithead, to intercept a convoy ofSpanish troops, designed by the Kingof Spain to invade England, in thePretender's favour. The hostile armamentwas, however, dispersed by a galeof wind, and put back into the Spanishports with considerable damage. Hewas next employed to check the ravageswhich the Emperor of Russia, encouragedby the death of Charles theTwelfth, had commenced against thecoast of Sweden. The czar, however,retired without coming to an engagement,and the English fleet returnedto the Nore in November. In the followingspring, Sir John Norris resumedhis command in the Baltic, and effecteda treaty between Denmark and Sweden,but the czar refused to come to terms,until the following year, when seeingthe inutility of further obstinacy, heconsented to a peace.In 1723, Sir John Norris had thehonour of convoying George the Firstfrom Helvoetsluys, to England; andSweden, being again in fear of Russia,in consequence of the hostile indicationsof the empress, he was for the last time,sent to the Baltic, to afford succour to theSwedes, and disperse the Russian fleet;which, immediately on his appearance,retired into port. On the 19th of May,1730, he ceased to be a lord of the admiralty.On the 10th of January, 1732,he was promoted to the rank of admiralof the white; and soon after sailed,with a large squadron, for Lisbon;where, having afforded, by his presence,protection to Portugal, he returnedto England, and the fleet wasdismantled. Early in 1739, he was appointedvice-admiral of Great-britain ;and, on the breaking out of the Spanishwar, he was ordered to cruise in theBay of Biscay ; but, owing to tempestuousweather, he was soon compelledto put into port for the winter.In the following year, he sailed, witha force of sixteen ships of the line anda few frigates, towards the Spanishcoast, but came back with no bettersuccess than had attended him in his lastexpedition. On the 12th of October,he put to sea again, with a squadronof ten ships, and returned withouthaving effected more than on the twoformer occasions. The nation manifestedgreat dissatisfaction at the resultof these enterprises ; and as the admiral'sformer achievements had raisedhis character for valour too high forcalumny, his want of success was generallyattributed to private instructionsfrom the ministry. The design of orderingout these armaments, was, however,it has been said, merely to alarmthe enemy ; and if such were the case,the object of each expedition was fullyaccomplished.In 1744, France, with a strong force,having meditated an attack on GreatBritain, in favour of the Pretender, SirJohn Norris (who had previously beennominated admiral of the fleet) put tosea, with twenty-nine sail of the line,to frustrate the intentions of the enemy.The French armament, at the sight ofthe English squadron, retreated in thegreatest confusion, and Norris returnedto the Downs, for the purpose of blockadingthe port of Dunkirk. He soonRICHARD Stock.afterwards retired from actual service,and died on the 13th of June, 1749,leaving a daughter, and two sons, bothof whom were naval officers.Admiral Norris was more successfulas a negotiator, than as a commander.Although brave, skilful, and enterprising,he failed to acquire renown, inconsequenceof mere accidents ; and sofrequently were his fleets assailed bystorms, that he obtained the appellationof Foul-weather Jack.RICHARD Stock.RICHARD Stock, son of acaptain in the navy, having passedthrough the subordinate stages of thesame profession, became captain of theFowey, on the 29th of April, 1706. Inthe following September, he broughthome from the Mediterranean the newsof the surrender of Alicant; and, on hisreturn, he was engaged, with CaptainsConey and Stanhope, in an encounterwith the French ship, Content, whichtook place in the month of December.In 1711, he was on the Americanstation, as captain of the Weymouth;and, in the summer of that year, in theWest Indies, under Commodore Littleton.In this situation, he gave greatsatisfaction to his commander-in-chief,and succeeded in capturing one or twosmall privateers, together with theThetis, a French ship, of forty-fourguns ; and, in company with theWindsor, several inferior vessels. In1717, he was appointed to the Panther,of fifty guns, with which he servedunder Sir George Byng in the Baltic.Being ordered to cruise off Gibraltar,he captured two or three privateers ;and, in the following year, Sir GeorgeByng procured him the appointment ofcaptain of the Barfleur, in which shipthe admiral hoisted his own flag, as principalofficer in the Mediterranean. In1728, Lestock was made captain of thePrincess Amelia, of eighty guns ; and,in the next year, he had the command ofthe Royal Oak, of seventy guns, one ofthe fleet ordered out, under Sir CharlesWager, against the Spaniards: thearmament, however, did not set sail,owing to the speedy submission of theenemy ; and the Royal Oak was employed,until 1731, as a guard-ship.In 1740, he commanded the Boyne,of eighty guns, on board which ship heafterwards hoisted his broad pendant asan established commodore, and commanderof a division of the fleet orderedout, under Sir Chaloner Ogle, to reinforceVice-admiral Vernon, in theWest Indies, at the attempt on Cartagena.Lestock, with five ships, attackedthe sea-front of the castle ofBoca Chica, with much gallantry ;but with no other success than that ofassisting, by a temporary diversion, thefruitless assault on the land-side. Soonafter his return, he was sent to theMediterranean, where he served, for ashort time, under Admiral Haddock,and began to evince symptoms of thatimpatient temper, which was so apparentin his future conduct. The unfortunatestate of Admiral Haddock's healthwould not allow him to remain in service,and he, therefore, resigned thecommand to Lestock, until the arrivalof his successor, Admiral Mathews.On the first meeting of Mathews andLestock, who was now made rear-admiralof the white, the former reprimandedthe latter, in the presenceof several foreign generals, for havingneglected to send a frigate to meet himon his arrival at the Mediterranean.The animosity thus created betweenthe two admirals, continued untilMathews superseded Lestock from hiscommand, for an alleged disobedienceof orders, in not repeating the signalfor action, in a partial engagement,which took place on the llth of May,1744, between the British squadron,and the combined fleets of France andSpain. Lestock being soon afterwardssent home, was formally accused, byMathews, not only of disobeying thesignal for action, but of having fallenso far astern, the night precedingthe battle, in which Lestock took nopart, that the enemy was enabled toescape, of having set an example ofTHE NAVY.cowardice, in not attacking the rearmostof the Spanish ships, and of havingsacrificed the honour and interests ofhis country to private resentment.Lestock recriminated, and both werebrought to a court-martial ; whichended in the dismissal of Mathewsfrom the service, and the full acquittalof Lestock, who was made admiral ofthe blue two days after the decision, andappointed to the command of a strongsquadron, originally intended to reduceCanada, but afterwards employedagainst port L'L'Orient, the grand depotof the French East India company.The armament sailed on the 14thof September, 1746; and, having approachedthe city, commenced a veryspiritless attack, which was abandonedjust as the garrison was about to surrender.The cause of this failure hasbeen generally attributed to the want ofco-operation which the general experiencedfrom the admiral, it being partof the plan of attack that the fleetshould force its way into the harbour.This, however, the admiral alleged wasimpracticable, owing to the entrancebeing blocked up by the enemy ; and,indeed, had the land force acted withenergy, the assistance of the fleet wouldnot have been required. This expeditioncost the enemy only one ship, theArdent, of sixty-four guns, whk'h wasdriven on shore, and burnt by theExeter. The British force quitted thecoast of France, on the 8th of October,and Lestock died on the 13th of thefollowing December.He is said to have been a man ofmuch ability and great personal courage,but his high opinion of his own meritsrendered them of little service to thenation. He was intractable as a subordinate,austere as a commander, andsolicitous of obtaining an undue deferencefrom his equals. The peoplebeheld his acquittal with disgust, clamouredagainst his subsequent employment,and bitterly reproached him forhis conduct at Cartagena. He expired,it is said, almost without a friend, thevictim of mortified pride and disappointment.SIR CHALONER OGLE, SENIOR.SlR CHALONER OGLE, descendedfrom a very ancient family in Northumberland,appears to have entered thenavy at an early age ; on the 14th ofMarch, 1708, he was promoted fromthe Wolf, sloop of war, and made captainof the Tartar frigate. In this vesselhe was employed on the Mediterraneanstation, where he succeeded inmaking one or two valuable captures.He was not again in commission untilhe became chief officer of the Worcester,carrying fifty guns, one of thefleet sent to the Baltic, in 1717.In April, 1722, while cruising in theSwallow, a fourth-rate, off the coast ofAfrica, having heard that Roberts, thepirate, and his squadron, were close toCape Lopez, he went in search of them,and found them in a convenient bay,where two of their vessels were uponthe heel, scrubbing. Having taken inhis lower tier of guns, Roberts supposedhim to be a merchantman, and immediatelyordered one of his commanders,named Skyrin, to slip his cable, andrun out after him. Ogle, by crowdingall sail, decoyed Skyrin to a considerabledistance from land ; and thereaftera sharp action of about an hourand a half, compelled him to surrender.Ogle then returned to the bay, withthe pirate's black flag over the king'scolours. By this device he again deceivedRoberts ; who, imagining thatSkyrin had been victorious, came outwiththe two other ships of his squadron; and, after a desperate encounterof nearly two hours, in which Robertswas killed, both these ships also yieldedto the Swallow. Ogle carried his prizes,and one hundred and sixty prisoners,to Cape Coast castle, where they wereimmediately tried, and seventy-fourout of the number, capitally convicted.Fifty-two were executed, and most ofthem hung in chains, along the coast,as a warning to future depredators.Returning to England, he was immediatelyinvested with the honour ofEARL OF BERKELEY.knighthood ; but held no further command,until the year 1729, when hewas made captain of the Burford, ofseventy guns ; from which, two yearsafter, he removed to the Edinburgh ;both ships being attached to squadronsunder the orders of Sir CharlesWager. On the llth of July, 1739, hewas promoted to the rank of rear-admiralof the blue ; and, having hoistedhis flag on board the Augusta, wasdespatched, with twelve ships, to Gibraltar.On his return from this expedition,he was appointed third incommand of a fleet, sent out on acruise, in 1741, under the superintendenceof Sir John Norris. On comingback to port, he received the commandof a powerful squadron, intended forthe West Indies, to assist AdmiralVernon in the conquest of the Spanishsettlements, and sailed from Spitheadon the 26th of October, but had barelycleared the Land's End, before he wasovertaken by a dreadful gale of wind.The squadron was, however, enabledto proceed to its destination ; butSir Chaloner did not meet with anyopportunity of signalizing himself.On the 12th of March, 1741, he wasmade rear-admiral of the red ; on the9th of August, 1743, vice of the blue ;and, on the 7th of December following,vice-admiral of the white. On thereturn of Admiral Vernon to Europe,he was left on the Jamaica station, ascommander-in-chief ; and, while employedon this service, rendered himselfvery popular with the inhabitants,by his good conduct and vigilance. Onthe 19th of June, 1744, he was promotedto the rank of admiral of theblue ; in the ensuing year, he returnedfrom the West Indies, in the Cumberland; and was, soon after, nominatedpresident of the court-martial convenedfor the trials of Admirals Mathews andLestock, and the other officers whowere arraigned for their conduct in theaction off Toulon. Although he didnot subsequently go to sea, he was,on the 15th of July, 1747, raised tobe admiral of the white ; and, on the10th of July, 1749, appointed admiralof the fleet. He died in the followingyear.Sir Chaloner Ogle appears to havegained, by his general professional conduct,but particularly by the mannerof his attack and capture of the armamentof the pirate Roberts, a very highcharacter for skill and bravery.JAMES, EARL OF BERKELEY.JAMES, Earl of Berkeley, grandson ofGeorge, first Earl of Berkeley, was bornabout the year 1682; and, having enteredthe navy as a midshipman, was,on the 2nd of April, 1701, appointedcaptain of the Springs. He was afterwardsremoved to the Lichfield, of fiftyguns ; and, being detached from themain fleet under Sir George Rooke, tocruise in the soundings, he captured,after a smart action, a French ship ofwar, and a homeward-bound vessel,from Martinique, worth 40,000.He next accompanied Sir CloudesleyShovel, in an expedition for the reliefof the Cevenois ; and, on his return,assisted Captain, afterwards Sir JohnNorris, in capturing the Hazard, aFrench ship of war, carrying fifty-twoguns, which did not yield until after allher masts and rigging were completelycut up, and she had sustained a runningfight of nearly nine hours.On the 7th of March, 1704, he wascalled up to the house of peers, by thetitle of Lord Dursley ; and, during thesame year, obtained the command ofthe Boyne, an eighty-gun ship. Hesoon after accompanied Sir CloudesleyShovel, to reinforce the fleet under SirGeorge Rooke; and, in the battle offMalaga, as second to Sir John Leake,he is said, by Edward, in his NavalHistory, to have evinced undauntedcourage, steady resolution, and prudentconduct. In his ship, the Boyne, therewere more killed and wounded, than inany other vessel, except the admiral's.In 1706, having become captain of theSt. George, a second-rate, and one ofthe fleet sent out, under Sir CloudesleyShovel, to the Mediterranean, he dis-theNAVY.extinguished himself very highly at thesiege of Toulon; and captured threeforts, on one of the isles of Hieres.On his return, in the month of October,his ship struck on the ridge of rocks thatproved fatal to Sir Cloudesley Shovel;whose vessel was destroyed by the samewave that set the St. George afloat.On the 26th of January, 1707-8, hewas made vice-admiral of the blue;and proceeded, on board the Berwick,under Sir George Byng, to oppose, inthe North Sea, the armament fitted outat Dunkirk. On the successful issue ofthis expedition, the British fleet retiredinto port, and Lord Dursley was appointedto command a squadron in thechannel, with which he brought intoport several homeward-bound vessels,and convoyed the outward-bound fleetsto a safe latitude. He soon after sailedfrom Spithead, under Byng, with anarmament, intended to alarm the coastof France, and thus weaken the oppositionof the enemy to the operationsof the Duke of Marlborough inFlanders. This design being very ingeniouslyeffected, Lord Dursley wasordered to cruise in soundings witha detachment of the fleet ; but, aftercapturing a French merchant-ship, hewas obliged to put into Plymouth, onaccount of the foulness of his vessels.Having refitted his squadron, he sailed,on the 28th of September, and continuedat sea till the 7th of November; havingcaptured, in the interim, six or sevenvessels of little value or importance.On the 21st of December, he was madevice-admiral of the white ; and put tosea again on the 29th, but capturedonly a small vessel, laden with fish,from Newfoundland.In February, 1709, he sailed, onboardthe Kent, with a small squadron,on a cruise, and took two French privateers.On the 29th of March, hewas ordered to convoy the Lisbon fleetto a safe latitude; and, on the 9th ofApril, fell in with the Glorieuse andAchilles; the former of which wascompelled to submit, but the lattereffected an escape, after having sustainedconsiderable injury. The Englishsquadron also re-captured the Bristol,which had, the day before, been takenby the enemy; and, having secured a fewother less important prizes, returned,on the 30th of May, to Plymouth.Resuming his station at the entranceof the channel, he took, besides otherinconsiderable prizes, a French ship,from Guadaloupe, with a cargo valuedat more than 100,000. On the 14thof November, 1709, he was raised tothe rank of vice-admiral of the red;but struck his flag, on coming into portafew months after.By the death of his father, in 1710,he became Earl of Berkeley; and was,soon after, appointed lord lieutenantand custos rotulorum of Gloucestershire,and the city of Bristol ; warden of theforest of Dean ; and high steward ofthe city of Gloucester. On the accessionof George the First, he was madecommander of the convoy ordered toattend his majesty to England, andnominated one of the lords of the bedchamber.He was also re-appointedlord-lieutenant of Gloucestershire, andof Bristol ; and was, subsequently, restoredto the post of custos rotulorumof the former place; from all whichoffices he had been removed, in 1711,through party influence. On the 16thof April, 1717, he became a privy-counsellor,and was constituted first lord ofthe admiralty, an office which he continuedto fill, with great credit, untilthe demise of George the First. On the13th of March, 1718-19, he was appointedadmiral and commander-in-chiefof the fleet; and, on the 21st ofthe month, vice-admiral of Great Britain.By a special warrant from thecrown, he then hoisted the flag of ,and had three captainsappointed under him, although SirJohn Norris, a senior flag-officer, was,at the same time, employed in thechannel. His lordship sailed, with hissquadron, from St. Helen's, on the 29thof March, but returned to Spithead, andstruck his flag, on the 15th of April ;after which time he held no active navalcommand.He died, on the 7th of August, 1736,at Aubigny castle, near Rochelle, inFrance, leaving one son and one daughter,by his wife, Lady Louisa Lennox,eldest daughter of Charles, first duke ofRichmond.The promotions of the Earl ofBerkeley were exceedingly rapid, andeffected often in violation of the establishedrules of the service. He becamea vice-admiral at the age of thirty,EDWARD VERNON.while men of longer standing than himselfremained, in some instances, fortwenty years after without promotion.His elevation, though principally owingto his political influence, does not seemto have been unworthily bestowed, forhe was an object of esteem rather thanenvy ; and the most distinguished commanderswere content to serve underhim without a murmur. He was a manof determined courage, and considerableskill in naval affairs. That hedischarged, with great firmness, theduties intrusted to his care, will beseen from the following anecdote: Agentleman, the natural son of one ofthe most influential men of the day,having, while commodore, incurred "awell-founded suspicion of unwillingnessto engage an enemy's squadron, consistingof only one ship more than hisown, the earl, even in disobedience tohis sovereign, refused, on the commodorebeing named to a flag, to sign hisadmiral's commission ; alleging that hewould not set a bad example in the navy.Besides his honours and offices alreadymentioned, he was five times oneof the lords justices of Great Britain, aknight of the garter, constable of St.Brine's castle, and lord-lieutenant ofthe county of Surrey.EDWARD VERNON.EDWARD VERNON, the son of asecretary of state to King William, wasborn at" Westminster, on the 12th ofNovember, 1684, and received his educationunder Dr. Busby. His parentshaving, with great reluctance, consentedthat he should gratify his inclinationfor a naval life, he went to sea,under Admiral Hobson, in 1702; and,shortly afterwards, distinguished himself,as a midshipman, at the destructionof the French fleet and Spanishgalleons, in the harbour of Vigo. Hesoon after went to the West Indies,with an expedition, under CommodoreWalker; and, in 1704, served, as alieutenant, under Sir George Rooke,in the fleet that conveyed the ArchdukeCharles, as King of Spain, toLisbon ; from whom he received a presentof one hundred guineas, and a ring.He was also engaged in the action offMalaga, and, on his return to England,obtained a purse of two hundred guineas,as his share of the royal bounty.On the 22nd of January, 1706, hewas promoted to the rank of captain;and commanded, successively, the Dolphin,the Rve, and the Jersey; in whichlatter vessel he was sent to the WestIndies, with a commission of rear-admiralfor Sir Charles Wager. Beingsoon afterwards ordered on a cruise, hesucceeded in materially impeding thecommerce, and frustrating the plans ofthe enemy.In 1722, he was returned to parliamentfor Penryn, for which, after havingserved as commander of the Grafton,in the squadron sent out to join theDanish squadron, in the Baltic, he wasre-elected on the accession of George theSecond ; and soon rendered himself, byhis virulence, extremely obnoxious togovernment. Having, in July, 1739,declared warmly in the house of commons,that Porto Bello might be reducedwith six sail of the line, and thathe would stake his own life and reputationon the success of the expedition,the minister took that opportunity toremove him from the house of commons,by promoting him to the rank ofvice-admiral of the blue, and intrustinghim with a squadron, with orders toattack the Spanish settlements in theWest Indies and America. He arrivedin sight of Porto Bello on the 20th ofNovember following ; and, soon afterwards,notwithstanding his ships wereexposed to a terrific fire from theenemy's batteries, succeeded in effectinga landing. No breach, however,had previously been made ; and themen, having no scaling-ladders, someof them stood under the embrasures,while others mounted upon their shoulders,and entered the fort, under thevery mouths of the enemy's guns. Thecapitulation of the place soon followed ;and Vernon distributed among his menasum of ten thousand dollars, whichTHE NAVY.had arrived, a few days before, for thepayment of the Spanish garrison. Hissuccess was hailed with enthusiasm bythe people in England, and the freedomof the city, as well as the thanksof both houses of parliament, weretransmitted to him immediately.In 1740, he made an unsuccessfulattack on Cartagena ; but soon afterwardsreduced the castle of St. Lorenzo,at the entrance of the riverChare, whence he proceeded to Jamaica,where he was joined by so considerablea reinforcement, that his fleetnow consisted of thirty-one sail of theline; on board of which ten thousandmen were embarked, for the purpose ofreducing Cartagena ; and, it is said,that a medal was prematurely struck inEngland, to celebrate the capture of theplace, which had been calculated on asamatter of certainty. The expedition,however, completely failed ; partly, it isalleged, owing to Vernon's disagreementwith General Wentworth, themilitary commander, whom he chargedwith imprudence in command, and vacillationin his opinions respecting themeasures of attack. In 1742, they attemptedthe capture of Panama ; but,owing to the ill understanding existingbetween them, failure was the result ofthe enterprise. The admiral's intrepidityprevented him from seeing thoseobstacles which were obvious to the prudenteye of the general, whose cautionwas construed as timidity by his high-spiritedcolleague. The armament returnedto Jamaica, about the middle ofMay ; and, in the following October,Vernon obtained his recal.His reputation suffered so little, fromhis failures, that, while abroad, he waselected member of parliament, at thesame time, for Ipswich, Penryn, andRochester. On returning to England,he took his seat for the former place,and immediately resumed his attackson the ministry. On the 9th of August.1743, he was made vice-admiral of thered; and, on the 23rd of April, 1745,(having, in the interim, bitterly complainedof neglect, and ill-usage) admiralof the white. He was then employedto watch the enemy in the NorthSea, where preparations were makingto land the Pretender in England.Soon after his return, a complaint waspreferred against him, of having exactedtoo severe duty from the seamen,and of having appointed a petty officer,in opposition to the lords of the admiralty,from whom he consequently receivedan official remonstrance ; towhich, after returning to the Downs,and striking his flag, he replied with somuch asperity, in two pamphlets, thathe was struck off the list of admirals,by the king's express command.He acted no more in public life,except as a member of the house ofcommons, and died suddenly, on the30th of October, 1747, at Acton, inSuffolk. A handsome monument waserected to his memory in Westminsterabbey.An intelligent writer describes AdmiralVernon as having been too austerein his manner to win love, and toofastidious in his temper, and independentin his feelings, to court favour.He was a brave and honourable man ;possessing great abilities as a seaman,but too irascible a temper to shine as acommander. He was a coarse, andboisterous, but rather powerful speaker;a vehement pamphleteer ; and a scholarof no mean classical ability.Vernon is said to have been the firstnaval commander who brought intouse the custom of mixing water withthe spirits allowed to the seamen ; and,it is added, the new beverage was denominatedgrog, because the admiral,its patron, generally wore a grogramwaistcoat.JOHN BYNG.THIS unfortunate man, fourth son ofthe Earl of Warrington, was born atSouthill, in 1704, and entered the navyat the age of thirteen, under his father'sauspices. On the 8th of August, 1727,he became captain of the Gibraltarfrigate ; and, on the 13th of March,1741, being then commander of theSunderland, he was appointed governorof Newfoundland and its dependencies.JOHN BYNG.On his return to England, he was removedto the Winchester, one of thechannel ships ; and became rear-admiralof the blue on the 8th of August, 1745.He was next appointed commander-in-chiefof a squadron sent out to preventthe conveyance of supplies fromFrance for the use of the insurgents inScotland, whose cause he greatly impededby his bravery and vigilance. InJuly, 1747, he was made vice-admiralof the blue ; and, being promoted tothe chief command in the Mediterranean,greatly increased his reputationfor ability as a naval officer. On the12th of May, 1748, he became vice-admiralof the red ; and, in 1755, hoistedhis flag on board the Ramillies, inwhich ship he proceeded to relieve SirEdward Hawke, off Cape Finisterre.About the commencement of theyear 1756, repeated intelligence havingreached England, of the preparationsmaking by the French, in the port ofToulon, Byng was made admiral ofthe blue, and intrusted with the commandof a fleet, intended to defeat anattack upon Minorca, which, it seemed,was contemplated by the enemy. Heproceeded, with a small squadron, toGibraltar, where he was joined by a fewships, under Commodore Edgecumbe,and thence sailed for Minorca.Arriving off the island, on the 19thof May, he found the British flag stillflying on the castle of St. Philip. Earlythe next morning, he made a fruitlessattempt to communicate with the garrison; and having, shortly afterwards,discovered the enemy's fleet, he stoodtowards it, and, at two in the afternoon,made the signal for a line of battlea-head. About seven in the evening, theFrench, who were then two leagues distant,tacked, to get the weather gage ;but, not choosing to relinquish such anadvantage, Byng also put about. "In themorning, the weather being hazy, theFrench could not be seen, until towardsnoon, when Byng made the signal tobear away two points from the wind,and engage. Rear-admiral West, however,who was at a considerable distance,bore away seven points from thewind, and, with his whole division,attacked the French so impetuously,that several of their ships were soonobliged to quit the line. Had Byng, itis said, been equally on the alert, andeager to engage, the enemy would, inall probability, have been defeated, andMinorca saved ; but, their centre keepingits station, through Byng's divisionnot advancing, West was obliged torelinquish his advantage, lest he shouldbe separated from the rest of the fleet.According to Byng's statement, thesternmost ship of the van lost her fore-top-mast,by which accident, his wholedivision was compelled to back theirsails, in order that they might not fallfoul of each other. His enemies, however,alleged, that, immediately afterthe signal tor engaging had been given,and whilst the van were bearingdown upon the enemy, Byng, in theRamillies, edged away some points,so that the Trident and Louisa got towindward of him, that, in order tobring them again to their station, hebacked his mizen-topsail, and endeavouredto back his main-tops sail,that this manoeuvre, by necessarily retardingall the ships in his division,gave the enemy, whose force was aboutequal to that of the British, in shipsand weight of metal, though greatlysuperior in number of men, time toescape.The complete failure of this expeditionhas been attributed, by some, tothe inefficiency of the armament ; and,by others, to the want of firmness displayedby Byng; whose unwillingnessto risk the event of a close engagementseems to be ascribed, by a third party,to the recent examples of Mathews andLestock ; the former of whom had beendismissed for fighting, while the latterwas promoted for taking no part inthe action.A council of war being called, byByng, the next morning, it was resolved,that, as it appeared impossibleto relieve Minorca, which, after avaliant defence, sustained for ten weeks,by General Blakeney, was, at length,compelled to surrender, and that, asthe loss of the British fleet would exposethe trade of the Mediterranean, andendanger the safety of Gibraltar, animmediate return to that place wouldbe the best course to adopt. On hisarrival in the bay, Byng was supersededand arrested, by Admirals Hawke andSaunders, who placed him in custody,on board the Antelope, and shortlyafterwards sent him to England. AfterTHE NAVY.having remained for some time a closeprisoner in Greenwich hospital, on the28th of December, 1756, he was broughtto a 'court-martial, consisting of fouradmirals and nine captains, who, aftermature deliberation, found him guiltyof a breach of the twelfth article ofwar. He was, consequently, sentencedto be shot; but having been acquittedof disaffection or cowardice, he wasstrongly recommended to the king'sclemency, by all the members of thecourt-martial, who appear to have beenof opinion that he had erred only injudgment. Some doubts were also entertainedas to the legality of the sentence,which, however, was solemnlyconfirmed by the twelve judges, towhom, in consequence of a memorialfrom the admiralty, it had been referredby the king.After the warrant for his executionhad been signed, some of the membersof the court-martial having expressed awish to be released from their oath ofsecresy, in order that they might disclosethe grounds on which they hadpassed sentence of death upon him,a bill, with the sanction of government,was brought in for that purpose, andpassed through its several stages in thecommons by large majorities. It was,however, rejected by the lords ; everymember of the court-martial having distinctlyanswered in the negative, to thequestion, " whether he had any thingto reveal, which might induce the kingto pardon the delinquent?"The Marshal de Richelieu, who commandedthe enemy's land forces, andwho had witnessed the whole affair,drew up a justification of Byng's conduct,which soon reached this country:strenuous exertions were made by otherparties to procure a remission of hissentence ; which, however, was carriedinto execution, on the 14th of March,1757. A little before twelve o'clock,he walked, with great resolution andcomposure, from the grand cabin to thequarter-deck of the Monarque, attendedby two of his relations and a clergyman.He is described as having worn,on this occasion, a light grey coat, whitewaistcoat and stockings, and a largewhite wig. In about two minutes afterhe had made his appearance, he threwhis hat upon the deck, knelt upon acushion, and, having previously, withsome reluctance, permitted a bandageto be placed over his eyes, he droppedhis handkerchief as a signal for themarines to fire. Five bullets immediatelypassed through him, and hefell lifeless on the deck.That the admiral did not exert hisutmost power against the enemy," saysCampbell, in his Naval History, " is veryevident ; and it is equally apparent, hisfleet having the advantage of the wind,that his fighting or not fighting was amatter of choice. Hence it necessarilyfollows, (allowing that he ought to havefought,) that he either wanted judgmentor resolution. As to judgment, it certainlyrequired very little, to comprehendthe importance of the service upon whichhe was sent; and still less knowledgeof the history of human events, not toknow, that, when great achievementsare required, something must be left tofortune, regardless of the calculation ofchances. In all battles, whether at seaor in the field, fortuitous events musthave vast influence ; but in naval conflicts,most frequently, where a singleshot from a frigate may disable a first-rateman of war. This considerationis alone sufficient to determine anycommander of a king's ship never tostrike so long as he can swim, be theforce of his antagonist ever so superior.Upon the whole, I believe we mayequitably conclude, that Admiral Byngwas constitutionally deficient in thatdegree of personal intrepidity, by nomeans essential to the character of aprivate gentleman, but which is the sinequa non of a British admiral. Thejustice of punishing a man for a constitutionaldefect, rests solely on hisaccepting his commission with the articlesof war in his hand."Charnock, however, in his Lives andCharacters of Naval Officers of GreatBritain, after stating, that, as an officer,Byng was by no means popular, beinga very strict disciplinarian, emphaticallyadds " Though we most seriously believehim to have been by no meansdeficient in personal courage, and thatintrepidity so necessary to form a greatcommander, yet, it having been hismisfortune never to have met with anyof those brilliant opportunities of distinguishinghimself, which would haveestablished his fame far beyond thepower and malice of his enemies, heSIR CHARLES KNOWLES.did not possess that love, that enthusiasticrespect and popular kind ofadoration, which are, at times, indispensablynecessary, to enable the bestcommanders to surmount the difficultiesattendant on their situation.His force was, perhaps, in point ofcommon prudence, never equal to theservice on which he was sent : it consisted,at the outset, only of ten shipsof the line ; some of them in a very illcondition for sea, and all of them indifferentlymanned."Mr. Byng," says the same writer,in a note, " had very imprudently irritatedthe minds of his noble employersby his letter, written from Gibraltar, onhis first arrival, in which he, in prettyplain terms, reflects on the conduct ofministers, in sending him out too late toprevent the landing of the enemy onthe island itself. ' If,' said he, ' I hadbeen so happy as to have arrived atMinorca before the enemy had landed,I flatter myself I should have had it inmy power to have hindered them fromestablishing a footing there.' To thisunguarded censure, it is not improbable,the admiral owed his nun, which, ifbefore in doubt, was, from that moment,determined on. He had been weakenough to speak the truth, that he hadbeen sent out too late; and that theopportunity of saving the fortress wasirrevocably lost. This was a crime of sodark a nature as not to be forgiven.Those whom he had obliquely chargedwith remissness, found it their interestto declare against him. and endeavour,by any means, to throw off the imputationof negligence, with which theywere charged."Although there is much force in thereasoning of Campbell, the view takenby Charnock, of Byng's character, conduct,and execution, appears, on thewhole, to be tolerably correct. Hisfault seems to have consisted in a superabundanceof caution, rather thanadeficiency of personal courage : thefailure of his enterprise may also, perhaps,be, in some measure, attributedto accident. Looking at all the circumstancesof the case, it is difficult tocome to any other conclusion, than thatministers were wrong in fitting out afleet so wretchedly appointed, and aftersuch fatal delays, on the importantservice to which it was destined ; andcruelly selfish, in suffering the sentenceagainst Byng, whose defeat, had hefought with so inefficient a force as theyhad placed under his command, wouldprobably have been followed by theirdisgrace and downfal, to be carriedinto effect.SIR CHARLES KNOWLES.THIS officer was born about the year1704; and, having entered the navy,attained the rank of captain, in 1737,when he was appointed to the Diamondfrigate; with which he proceeded, in1739, to join Admiral Vernon, at Jamaica,but that commander having departedfor Porto Bello, previously to thearrival of Knowles, the latter followedhim thither; and on his arrival, wasappointed superintendent of the mines;in which capacity, he most skilfullyaccomplished the demolition of the fortresses.In the succeeding year, he wasnominated commander of the fire-ships,bomb-ketches, and small craft,ordered to attack the castle of St. Lorenzo;on the surrender of which, heacted, for a short time, as its governor.Soon after his return to England, hewas commissioned to the Weymouth, inwhich he proceeded, under Sir ChalonerOgle, to join Vernon again in the WestIndies.In the attempt on Cartagena, he appearsto have displayed extraordinaryspirit and presence of mind. Afterhaving inspected the works, and furnishedhis superior officers with a report,from which they determined onassaulting the castle of Boca Chica, hewas employed to make a feigned attack,in order to divert the attention ofthe garrison ; and not only effected thisobject, but seized on Port Sr. Joseph,captured the Spanish admiral's ship,and compelled the important fortress ofCastella Grande, containing fifty piecesTHE NAVY.of cannon, to capitulate. In the subsequentattack on the batteries atPas&o Cavallos, he behaved with greatcourage and judgment. The enterprise,however, proved unsuccessful;and, in May, 1741, Knowles returnedto Jamaica with the fleetEarly in 1743, he sailed in the Suffolk,of seventy guns, as commander of asmall squadron, to Antigua; whence,after having been joined by two moreships, he proceeded to La Guira, onwhich he made a spirited but ineffectualattack. He subsequently failed in anattempt on Porto Cavalry, by which hissquadron was so shattered, that, beingunable to undertake any further offensiveoperation, he returned forthwith toJamaica.In September, 1744, while cruisingoff Martini, he succeeded in destroyinga large Spanish ship, bound fromCadizz to Cartagena. In the followingspring, he commanded on the LeewardIslands station; and in the month ofJanuary, 1746, acted as commodore ofthe fleet then in the Downs, underVice-admiral Martin ; in which capacity,he captured two French ships, on theirpassage from Ostend, having on boardfive or six hundred of Fits-James'sregiment, and several officers of distinction.He was, shortly after, appointedgovernor of Louisburg, where hecaused some new works to be erected,which, in the subsequent war, weredestroyed with so little difficulty, thathis reputation, as an engineer, becameconsiderably tarnished.On the 15th of July, 1747, he wasmade rear-admiral of the white, andsubsequently assumed the chief commandon the Jamaica station. Whilethus employed, he so irritated the peopleof Boston, by pressing men from onboardtheir merchant-vessels, that theydetained some of his officers, whose releasehe peremptorily demanded, undera threat of bombarding the town ; which,had he not been carried to sea by asudden change in the wind, he would,probably, have carried into effectOn the 13th of February, 1748, hesailed from Jamaica, in the Cornwall,with eight ships of war and two sloops,for the purpose of making an attackon St. Jago de Cuba ; but being preventedby contrary winds from approachingthat island, he proceeded toPort Louis, in Hispaniola, which, onthe 8th of March, after a heavycannonade, he forced to capitulate.Having destroyed the fortifications, hereturned towards St. Jago de Cuba,which, however, he was deterred fromattacking, by finding a strong boom laidacross the harbour, and four vessels,filled with combustibles, moored withinit In the following August, he sailedfor the Portugal banks, in the hope ofcapturing some of the annual Spanishfleet, from Vera Cruz. The Spanishadmiral, Reggio, who was then atHavannah, having heard of his intentions,immediately put to sea for thepurpose of giving him battle; and thetwo squadrons met on the 1st of October.In number of ships and weightof metal, they were about equallymatched; but, in men, the force of theSpanish vastly exceeded that of theBritish. About two o'clock in theafternoon, the enemy having commencedfiring at a distance, Knowles,who had the wind in his favour, gavethe signal for his squadron to bear downupon them, and in less than half anhour the engagement was nearly general.After having fought the Spanishadmiral's ship for a considerable time,that of Knowles was compelled to fallastern for the purpose of repairing thedamage she had sustained. On accomplishingthis, she attacked and took theConquestadore, which had fallen outof the line in a very disabled state. Allthe other ships of the enemy's squadron,with the exception of the Africa, which,having been dismasted during the battle,was run ashore and blown up by theSpanish admiral, sheered off at nightfall,and returned to Havannah.The result of this engagement producedmany disputes between Knowlesand his subordinates, who consideredthat he had given the enemy a manifestadvantage, by beginning the action withfour ships, when he might have broughtsix to bear at the same time, and thathe ought to have shifted his flag intoanother vessel, when his own was disabled.In December, 1749, he wasbrought to a court-martial on thesecharges ; and, being found guilty ofnegligence, he was reprimanded accordingly.Government, however, appearsto have been satisfied with his conduct,for, in 1752, he was appointed governorLORD HAWKE.of Jamaica, where he met with so muchannoyance from the clamours of aparty, whose interests he had materiallyaffected by having, in compliance withthe request of a large body of merchants,removed the seat of government fromSpanish Town to Kingston, that, inJanuary, 1756, he resigned his office.In the preceding year he had been promotedto the rank of vice-admiral ofthe blue ; and, soon after his return toEngland, he was made vice of the whiteand the red, in rapid succession.In 1757, he sailed, as second in commandto Sir Edward Hawke, in theexpedition against Rochford ; the failureof which greatly increased the popularodium which he had already incurred ;and some disasters which he had experiencedin an attack with a detachmentof the fleet on Fort Fours,were animadverted upon with such severity,that he thought proper to publisha justification of his conduct. A.very offensive notice of this was, soonafterwards, printed in the Critical Review,in consequence of which he commencedproceedings against Smollettprincipal conductor, who is stated tohave concluded a letter to Wilkes, entreatingthe latter to exert his interestin putting a stop to the prosecution, inthe following terms : " If that foolishadmiral has any regard to his owncharacter, he will be quiet, rather thanprovoke further the resentment ofT. SMOLLETT."On the 31st of January, 1761, Knowlesbecame admiral of the blue ; on the19th of October, 1765, he was created abaronet; and, on the 5th of Novemberfollowing, advanced to the rank of rear-admiralof Great Britain ; which, however,he resigned in October, 1770, andentered the service of the Empress ofRussia. Peace being concluded in1774, between Russia and her opponent,Turkey, he returned to E england ; whereafterhaving been nominated admiral ofthe white, he passed the remainder ofhis life in retirement.He died on the 9th of December,1777, leaving one son, by his secondwife, Maria Magdalena Theresa Bouquet.In his early exploits, he certainlydisplayed much courage and ability ;qualities which many were not disposedto allow him, after his subsequentfailures : these, however, seem to havebeen, for the most part, occasioned byill fortune, rather than by a want ofskill or bravery. His manners were farfrom conciliating, and his natural irascibilityappears to have been progressivelyincreased during the latter partof his career, by the disappointment,opposition, and obloquy, to which hewas exposed.EDWARD, LORD HAWKE.THIS celebrated admiral, the son ofEdward Hawke, Esq. a barrister, wasborn about the year 1705 ; and, at hisown wish, entered the navy at a veryearly age. When first he went to sea,his father having held out to him thehope that he might in time become acaptain, the boy exclaimed, " If I didnot think I should rise to be an admiral,I would never go !"In 1733, he became commander ofthe Wolf; and, on the 20th of March,1734, captain of the Flamborough. In1740, he appears to have been chiefofficer of the Lark, a forty-gun ship.In the engagement off Toulon, in 1744,he had the honour of taking the Poder,the only vessel that was captured.Several officers boarded the prize, butthe captain of the vanquished vessel,pointing to the Berwick, which Hawkecommanded, declared his submission tothat vessel only, and his contempt forall the others belonging to the Englishsquadron. Hawke, it seems, disregardingdiscipline, had broken from the lineof battle, and engaged the Poder, (whichhad previously beaten off two of theBritish fleet,) with such irresistible fury,that she was compelled to strike hercolours. For this act of heroism, Hawkewas brought to a court-martial, andsentenced to dismissal from the service.He was, however, immediately restoredby the king, who, ever afterwards,designated him as his own admiral.THE NAVY.In July, 1747, he was made rear-admiralof the white, and, shortlyafterwards, obtained the command of asquadron, destined to intercept a largefleet of French merchantmen, bound,under a strong convoy, to the WestIndies. On the 9th 'of August, hesailed from Plymouth, in the Devonshire,with thirteen other men-of-war ;four, besides his own ship, of the fourthclass, and nine of the fifth. On the 14thof October, at about eight o'clock inthe morning, the French fleet was seen ;and at ten, Hawke began to form theline of battle a-head, (conformably withthe inconvenient, but now exploded,system then in use, of fighting squadronsof ships like regiments of infantry); but, finding that much valuabletime was lost in the operation, he gavesignal for his whole squadron to chase.In half an hour the foremost of hisships, the Lion and Princess Louisa,were engaged, and the action soonbecame general. The admiral compelledthe first ship he encountered tostrike; but, leaving her to be takenpossession of by the frigates astern, heproceeded to assist the Eagle and Edinburgh: the Eagle, however, becomingunmanageable, fell twice on board hisship, the Devonshire, and drove her toleeward, where she was compelled toengage with two of the enemy, until thebreeches of her guns broke loose. Oneof the French ships now directed herwhole fire against the admiral's rigging,and would soon have dismasted her, hadnot the Tilbury come up to her relief. Assoon as the breeches of her guns wererepaired, she attacked and compelledanother of the enemy to submit. Theadmiral now made a signal for the wholesquadron to engage as near as possible,and placed the Devonshire alongsideone of the largest of the enemy, which,about seven in the evening, struck hercolours. In addition "to those whichthus surrendered to the Devonshire,three more of the French men-of-warwere captured by the other ships of theBritish squadron. In his despatches,announcing the victory, Hawke stated,that he had given the enemy a completedrubbing ; and the king beingpuzzled by the word, was referred, foran explanation of it, to the Duke ofBedford, who had, a short time before,been severely chastised at Lichfield.Soon after his return, the admiralwas made a knight companion of theBath ; and, in the December following,he became member of parliament forPortsmouth. In January, 1748, hesailed, with nine ships of the line, on acruise, during which the Magnanime,of seventy-four guns, was captured bytwo of his squadron. In the followingMay, he became vice-admiral ofthe blue, and an elder brother of theTrinity-house. In 1749, he was appointedpresident of a court-martial onthe mutineers who had sailed awaywith the Chesterfield, from Cape CoastRoad, in Africa ; and, soon after, actedas naval superintendent in establishinga colony at Nova Scotia. He nextcommanded a squadron at Spithead,and, on the 9th of January, 1755, becameadmiral of the white.In 1756, after cruising for some time,with a small squadron, in the Bay ofBiscay, he was appointed to supersedeAdmiral Byng, in the Mediterranean.In 1757, he commanded the naval partof the expedition against Rochford,whence he soon returned, without havinghad an opportunity to distinguishhimself, disgusted by the imbecilityand irresolution of the military leaders.He was next employed to blockade theFrench ports in the Bay of Biscay;and, in 1758, succeeded, at the head ofseven ships of the line and three frigates,in frustrating an attempt, making bythe French, to thwart the designs ofEngland, against her American colonies.In 1758, he held a command in thefleet under Lord Anson ; but, whilein the Bay of Biscay, he was attackedby a violent fever, which compelledhim to return to Portsmouth. In thefollowing year, he commanded theblockading squadron off Brest, which,being driven into Torbay by a tempest,Conflans, with the French fleet, as soonas the storm had abated, put to sea.Hawke soon followed, and, on themorning of the 20th of November,descried the enemy off Belleisle. Onthis occasion he told his officers that hedid not intend to trouble himself byforming lines ; for that " he would attackthem in his old way, and makedownright work with them."As Hawke approached, Conflans retiredtowards the shore, for the purposeof decoying his antagonist among theSIR GEORGE Cock.rocks and shallows, which the localknowledge of his own pilots wouldenable him to avoid. The British vanattacked the rear of the French abouthalf-past two o'clock in the afternoon.Hawke, in the Royal George, withoutreturning the fire of several other ships,passed on towards the Soleil Royal,which bore Admiral Conflans' flag, inthe midst of a terrific storm, and nearlysurrounded by breakers. When apprizedby his pilot of the danger ofproceeding, he is said to have coollyreplied, " You have done your duty inpointing out the difficulties; you arenow to comply with my order, and layme alongside the Soleil Royal." Thecaptain of the Superbe, a French shipof seventy guns, as the Royal Georgeapproached the Soleil Royal, gallantlyinterposed his own vessel to save thatof his commander. The Superbe, consequently,received a broadside, intendedfor the French admiral's ship,and so terrific was its effect, that, assoon as the smoke had cleared away,the tops of her masts alone were visible,and, in another moment, the sea rolledover her colours.The Soleil Royal escaped ; but of theremainder of the French fleet, two weretaken, and a third, the These, metwith the fate of the Superbe. TheFrench, in this engagement, behavedwith chivalric bravery ; and no victory,perhaps, ever redounded more to thehonour of the British fleet. Hawke,on his return to England, was receivedwith all the enthusiastic admiration heso justly merited: the house of commonshonoured him with a vote ofthanks, and the king settled a pensionupon him of 2,000 per annum.In August, 1760, Admiral Hawkesailed from Spithead, in the RoyalGeorge, to relieve Boscawen in theBay of Biscay; and, in 1761, he commandeda large fleet, which succeededin counteracting the attempts of Franceand Spain on Portugal. On his returnto England, he was again elected forPortsmouth. On the 5th of November,1765, he became vice-admiral of GreatBritain, and, soon after, first lord ofthe admiralty ; which office he resignedin the month of January, 1771 ; and,on the 20th of May, 1776, he wascreated a peer, by the title of BaronHawke, of Paton.His death took place at Clipperton,in Middlesex, on the 16th of October,1781. He married, in early life, MissCatherine Brooke, of Burton-hall, inYorkshire, by whom he had fourchildren.Lord Hawke appears to have beena genius in that profession, for whichhis daring gallantry rendered him soeminently suitable. Disregarding thecautious principles established by thosewho had preceded him, he originateda new mode of attack, and, by hisachievements, triumphantly provedits efficiency. He was not a merecourageous man of talent, but, if it befair to judge of his conduct by itsresults, a commander who, in hisnaval exploits, displayed great judgment,as well as an unusual degree ofbravery and skill.SIR GEORGE Cock.GEORGE, son of the ReverendThomas Pocock, chaplain of Greenwichhospital, was born on the 6th of March,1706, and entered the naval service in1718, under Sir George Byng, whomhe accompanied to the Mediterranean.In 1732, ne became first lieutenant oftheNamur; on the 31st of August, 1738,he was promoted to the rank of post-captain;and commanded, successively,the Woolwich and the Sutherland. In1748, being then chief officer on theLeeward Islands station, he blockadedMartini ; and, with his cruisers, capturednearly forty vessels belonging toa French convoy from Europe.In 1754, he proceeded to the EastIndies, as captain of the Cumberland,and second in command to Rear-admiralWatson. On the 4th of February,1755, he was made rear-admiral of theblue ; and rear of the red on the 4th ofJune, 1756. In the month of March,1757, he led the attack, in the Tiger,THE NAVY.upon Chandernagore, and, though hereceived seven wounds, did not quithis deck till the end of the action, whichcontinued for three hours. On the16th of August following, he succeededto the chief command in the EastIndies, and became vice-admiral of thered on the 31st of January, 1758. Beingreinforced by Commodore Stevens, hehoisted his flag in the Yarmouth, andput to sea with a squadron, which gavechase to seven French ships, on the 29thof April, off the coast near Negapatam.An action ensued, in which the Yarmouthwas attacked by three of theenemy's vessels, and, at one time,nearly surrounded by a manoeuvre ofthe French admiral ; who, however,sheered off, on perceiving that one ofhis own ships was disabled, and thatthe Cumberland, Newcastle, and Weymouth,which had hitherto kept at adistance, were now promptly obeyingthe signals hoisted by Pocock for themto come to his assistance. Soon afterthe engagement, he caused a court-martialto be held at Madras, on theirrespective captains ; one of whom wassentenced to be dismissed from his ship,another to be cashiered, and the thirdto lose a year's rank.On the termination of these proceedings,Admiral Pocock sailed a secondtime in pursuit of the French, whomhe succeeded in bringing to action, onthe 3rd of August; but, after a runningfight of an hour, the enemy's fleet escaped,much damaged, into the road ofPondicherry, with a loss of five hundredand fifty men, killed and wounded,while that of the English was, comparatively,insignificant. Pocock nowproceeded to Bombay, for the purposeof refitting ; and, on the 17th of April,1759, he sailed again in search of theFrench fleet, with which he came insighton the 2nd of September. Heimmediately commenced a chase, butwas baffled by the going down of thewind ; and, correctly supposing that theenemy (whose force was now, as it hadbeen in the two previous engagements,superior to his own) would make forPondicherry, he proceeded thither,and came to action on the 10th. TheFrench commander, however, after aloss of fifteen hundred men, killed andwounded, again sheered off.In 1760, Pocock returned to England;in 1761, he was created a knight of theBath ; and his statue was placed in thegreat court-room, at the East Indiahouse, by order of the company, as atestimony of the high opinion whichthat body entertained of his services.Some time in 1762, he was returnedto parliament for Plymouth ; and, onthe 5th of March, in that year, he wasintrusted with the command of thenaval part of an armament againstHavannah. After having been reinforcedat Cape Nicholas, by a fleet underSir James Douglas, he passed throughthe old Straights of Bahama, without apilot, and arrived in sight of Havannahon the 5th of June. ' Two days after,the admiral, with a great part of hisfleet, made a feint on the west of theharbour, while Commodore Repel,with the residue, effected a landing ofthe troops at the opposite side. Themilitary commander, Lord Albemarle,received all the assistance from Pocockwhich the latter was enabled to renderhim, during the siege, which appears tohave been attended with great difficultyand hardships. The town and its dependencies,were, however, at length,compelled to capitulate. Nine sail ofthe line, and four frigates, were foundin the harbour; and the plunder, inready money, tobacco, and other articlesof merchandize, is said to have amountedto nearly three millions sterling.In 1776, Admiral Pocock was chosenan elder brother of the Trinity-house ;but retired in disgust from the service,on the appointment of Sir CharlesSaunders, his junior, to the office offirst lord of the admiralty. He died onthe 3rd of April, 1792, leaving one sonand one daughter.United to great benevolence of heartand mildness of manners, which endearedhim to his private connexions,Sir George Pocock, who, though athorough seaman, never uttered anoath, displayed astonishing braveryand much talent, as a commander. Anhonest zeal for the service rendered hima strict disciplinarian; but he wiselyalleviated the rigour of his regulations,by cheerfully submitting to the mostsevere of them himself, as well inrespect of diet as vigilance. WhenGeneral Tally was brought prisoner toEngland, after the reduction of Pondicherry,immediately on his arrival, heSIR CHARLES SAUNDERS.begged to be introduced to Admiral SirGeorge Pocock, whom he thus addressed: " Dear Sir George, as thefirst man in your profession, I cannotbut respect and esteem you, thoughyou have been the greatest enemy Iever had. But for you, I should havetriumphed in India, instead of beingmade a captive. When we first sailedout to give you battle, I had provideda number of musicians on board theZodiaque, intending to give the ladiesa ball upon our victory ; but you leftme only three fiddlers alive, and treatedus all so roughly, that you quite spoiledus for dancing."SIR CHARLES SAUNDERS.THIS distinguished commander enteredthe naval profession at an earlyage, and, in 1740, served, in the qualityof lieutenant, on board the Centurion,one of the squadron ordered to theSouth Seas, under Commodore Anson.During the expedition he was made acommander, and appointed to the Trial,sloop of war, in which vessel he participatedin the appalling misfortunesthat attended the enterprise. BeforeSaunders; reached the island of JuanHernandez, he had lost nearly half ofhis crew; and himself, his lieutenant,and three men, were the only personscapable of working the vessel. In September,1741, he was sent on a cruise,from Juan Hernandez, and, on the 18th,fell in with, and captured, after a longchase, a valuable merchantman, of sixhundred tons burthen.Owing to the bad condition of hissloop, the Trial, it was now determinedthat she should be scuttled, and Saundersremoved into his prize, which beingcommissioned as a frigate, he was appointedto command her, on the 26th ofSeptember, 1741; from which period,he took the rank of post-captain. TheTrial's Prize, which was the name givento his ship, cruised, for some time, offthe island of Valparaiso, and afterwardsjoined the commodore, on the 22nd ofNovember, off Nasca. Saunders assistedat the taking of Paita, and, thenceforth,served in company with Anson and theremainder of the squadron.In 1742, the Trial's Prize beingdestroyed, in order to concentrate theforces, her crew were removed to theGloucester ; but this ship being afterwardsdisposed of in a similar manner,Saunders and his men were taken onboardthe Centurion. Soon after thesquadron had anchored in the road ofMacao, he was sent with despatches toEngland. He next commanded theSapphire ; and, early in 1744, was employedin cruising off the coast ofFlanders, where he captured a galliothoy, which had on board nearly twohundred officers and men of CountLowendahl's regiment.After having been appointed, successively,to the Dunkirk, and a newly-launchedship, the Gloucester, he was,in 1746, engaged in a cruise with CaptainCheap, and captured Le Fort deNantes, a register ship from New Spain,with property on board worth morethan 100,000. In the following year,he commanded the Yarmouth, of sixty-fourguns, and very highly distinguishedhimself under Admiral Hawke,in the action with the French squadronon the 14th of October in thatyear. Captain Saunders lay two hoursand a half closely engaged with theNeptune, seventy-four, carrying sevenhundred men, and never quitted heruntil she struck ; although the Monarque,of seventy-four guns, whichlikewise yielded to the Yarmouth, layupon the bow of the latter, and anotherof the enemy was upon her stern. Notwithstandinghis ship was much disabled,and his crew reduced by thecontest, Saunders pursued, for sometime,two of the enemy, one of whichwas that of the French admiral, butwithout effect.In April, 1750, he became member forPlymouth ; and, in January, 1752, actedas commodore and commander-in-chiefat Newfoundland. In April, 1754, hewas constituted treasurer of Greenwichhospital; and, in the same year,through the interest of his permanentTHE NAVY.friend, Lord Anson, he obtained hisreturn for the borough of Heydon, inYorkshire. In March, 1755, he wasmade captain of the Prince, of ninetyguns; which he resigned in the followingDecember, on being madecomptroller of the navy. Shortly after,he became one of the elder brethren ofthe Trinity-house, and was re-electedfor Heydon, having vacated his seat byaccepting the comptrollership. In June,1756, he was made rear-admiral of theblue, and hoisted his flag in the Antelope,at Gibraltar. On Hawke's return,in January, 1757, Saunders was intrustedwith the chief command in theMediterranean; and, early in 1758, hewas made rear-admiral of the white.In 1759, he hoisted his flag as vice-admiralof the blue, on board the Neptune,of ninety guns ; and sailed fromSpithead, as commander of the navalpart of the expedition against Quebec.After having landed the troops, he issaid to have displayed extraordinaryskill and vigilance in towing ashore anumber of fire-ships, which were letdown the stream, from the town, witha view to destroy his vessels. He secondedthe military, to the utmost ofhis power, in carrying the enterprise toa successful termination ; and, on hisreturn to this country, received thethanks of parliament for his services,and the appointment of lieutenant-generalof the marines.He was then despatched with a squadronto Gibraltar, as commander-in-chiefin the Mediterranean. In 1761,he received the insignia of the Bath,and again obtained his return forHeydon. In 1762, he was made vice-admiralof the white; and, in 1765, alord of the admiralty, to the head ofwhich he was raised in the followingyear, and sworn in as privy-counsellor,on which occasion he resigned thecomptrollership of the navy. He retiredfrom office on the 13th of December,1766. In May, 1768, he took his seatagain for Heydon. In October, 1770,he was made admiral of the blue ; and,at the general election of 1774, aftermaking an unsuccessful attempt to procurehis election for Yarmouth, he wasonce more returned for Heydon. Hedied, on the 7th of December, 1775,leaving a fortune of about 80,000. Hehad married the only daughter of JamesBack, Esq. of London, banker, on the26th of September, 1751, but left noissue.Sir Charles Saunders was a veryfortunate officer; having, in the courseof his professional career, had manyopportunities of displaying his naturalgallantry and naval skill. As a publiccharacter, he appears to have beenequally admired by men of all parties;while, in private life, no man could bemore esteemed. He numbered, amonghis intimate friends, Sir George Seville,and Edmund Burke ; each of whom,in announcing the admiral's death tothe house of commons, pronounced awarm and well-merited eulogium onhis worth and talents. His remainswere privately interred in Westminster-abbey,on the 21st of December, 1775,near the monument of General Wolfe.EDWARD BOSCAWEN.EDWARD BOSCAWEN, third sonof the first Lord Falmouth, was bornin Cornwall, on the 19th of August,1711. He entered the navy at an earlyage, and was promoted to the rank ofcaptain, on the 12th of March, 1737. In1739, he commanded the Shoreham, oftwenty guns, in which he distinguishedhimself, under Admiral Vernon, at thetaking of Port Bello; and at Cartagena,with a small party of seamen, he resolutelyattacked and stormed the fascinebattery of Bare. He was returned toparliament for Truro, in 1741, and representedthat borough till the timeof his death. In 1744, he commandedthe Dreadnought, of sixty guns, andwhile cruising in the channel, captureda French frigate. He was afterwardspromoted to the Royal Sovereign, aguard-ship, at the Nore, and madecommander-in-chief of all the armedcruisers employed by government. In1746, he was appointed captain of theEDWARD BOSCAWEN.Namur, and commander of a squadron,with which he took two French vessels ;and, in 1747, he signalized himself,under Admiral Anson, in an engagementwith the French fleet, off CapeFinisterre.He was now made, successively, rear-admiralof the blue, rear-admiral ofthe white, and commander of the landand sea forces, employed in an expeditionto the East Indies. After havingmade an unsuccessful attempt on Pondicherry,he returned to England in1749 ; and, in 1751, became a lord of theadmiralty, and an elder brother of theTrinity-house. In 1755, he was madevice-admiral of the blue, and whilecruising with a squadron off Newfoundland,he captured two Frenchships. He was made vice-admiral ofthe white, in 1756; and advanced tobe admiral of the blue, on the 8th ofFebruary, 1758 ; in which year, hecommanded the naval forces at thereduction of Louisburg and St. John.On his return to England, he receivedthe thanks of the house of commons,and was nominated a privy-counsellor.Being soon after appointedto command in the Mediterranean, hepursued, and came up with, a Frenchfleet, off Cape Lagos, in Portugal, andafter a stout resistance, took three oftheir largest ships, and burnt twoothers. For these services, .he wasmade governor of the marine forces,with a salary of 3,000 a year, andreceived the thanks of parliament, aswell as the freedom of the city of Edinburgh.In 1760, he commanded, alternatelywith Sir Edward Hawke, inQuiberon Bay; where, finding no opportunityof warlike exertion, he possessedhimself of a small island nearthe river Vannes, which he plantedwith vegetables for the use of his men,who were much afflicted with scurvy.He died in England, on the 10th ofJanuary, 1761, and was buried in Cornwall,where his widow, who was distinguishedfor her literary attainments,erected a handsome monument to hismemory He left a son, who succeededto the family titles and estates, on thedeath of Viscount Falmouth, the admiral'selder brother.Admiral Boscawen was remarkablefor an extraordinary inclination of thehead towards one shoulder ; a habitwhich he contracted when a youth, bymimicking an old servant of the family,and which he could never afterwardsget rid of. He appears to have been aman of blunt manners, and exceedingbravery. One night, while cruising,the ship which he commanded fell inwith three of the enemy, and hislieutenant immediately awoke him toinquire what he should do. " Do !"exclaimed Boscawen, with an oath ;why fight them to be sure." He thenwent on deck, in his shirt, and sooncompelled the enemy to sheer off.From this exploit, he acquired the nameof old Dreadnought. He was alwayscool amid danger, and never at a lossfor a sudden expedient. A shot havingstruck a boat in which he was proceedingfrom one ship to another, he instantlytook off his wig, with whichhe stopped the leak, and thus savedthe boat from sinking.He allowed no factious difference ofopinion to interfere with his duty tohis country, but was always ready togive her his services when she requiredthem, whatever party happened to beatthe head of affairs. On his returnfrom an expedition, after a changeof ministry, being asked whether hewould continue to act as a lord of theadmiralty, he replied, " The countryhas a right to the services of its professionalmen ; and, should I be sent uponany enterprise, my situation at the admiraltywill facilitate the equipment ofthe fleet I am to command." He upheldthe honour of the service with determinedresolution, and identified theinterests of the officers under his commandwith his own. Lord Anson,while at the head of the admiralty,having refused to confirm the promotionsof two lieutenants who had beenadvanced to the rank of captainsby Boscawen, the latter threatened togive up his seat at the board, andAnson, not wishing to lose his services,at last complied. Horace Walpole styledBoscawen the most obstinate of anobstinate family ; but Lord Chatham,who must have had better means ofappreciating his character, passed thishandsome eulogium upon him : " WhenI apply to other officers respecting anyexpedition I may chance to project,they always raise difficulties; Boscawenalways finds expedients."THE NAVY.SIR HYDE PARKER, THE ELDER.THIS gallant, but unfortunate officer,the descendant of Joseph Parker, analderman of the city of London, wasborn about 1711, and became a lieutenantin the navy on the 10th ofJanuary, 1744-5. After having beenintrusted with the command of a sloopof war, he was made captain of theLively frigate, in March, 1747-8; and,in 1757, commanded the Squirrel,which intercepted, at Embden, somesupplies intended for the French army ;and took the ship America, which, afteran appeal to the lords of the admiralty,was awarded to him as a lawful prize.In April, 1759, being then in commandof the Brilliant frigate, he captured theBasque, a large French privateer ; and,in 1760, he was sent in the Norfolk,seventy-four, to the East Indies; wherehe assisted at the council of war convenedto answer Governor Pigot's demand, thatPondicherry should be delivered intothe hands of the East India company.In 1762, he removed to the Panther,in which he served, under AdmiralCornish, against Manilla; 'on the surrenderof which, he was detached, withCaptain King, of the Argo, in search ofa galleon, called the Philippine, thensupposed to be on her way to Manilla,from Europe. A few days after theyhad put to sea, the British ships descriedand chased a large Spanish vessel;but, owing to the rapidity withwhich a current was carrying heragainst the Naranjos, the Panther wascompelled to come to an anchor, andthe Argo, after an engagement of twohours' duration, was beaten off by theenemy. Meantime, the current hadabated so much, that the Pantheragain got under sail, and, on the followingmorning, engaged and capturedthe chase, which proved to be the Trinidadaa, a vessel, equal insize to a British first-rate, and, withher cargo, worth nearly six hundredthousand pounds sterling.In 1777, Parker was commissionedto a third-rate seventy-four, called theInvincible. In 1778, he was maderear-admiral of the blue ; and servedas second in command of AdmiralByron's fleet, in America and the WestIndies. Soon after the engagementbetween Byron and the French admiral,Detesting, in which Parker, beingstationed in the rear, took no part, hesucceeded Byron, who returned toEngland, as commander-in-chief on thestation; where, in the course of thewinter, he took several of the enemy'sships of war, and a considerable numberof their merchantmen and transports.The French, however, at lengthreceived a reinforcement, which renderedtheir fleet so superior in numberto his own, that he was compelled to actonthe defensive, until the arrival of SirGeorge Rodney, under whose orders heconducted the van of the British, in theaction with the Spanish fleet commandedby Don Juan de Langer,which took place in April, 1780.He had previously (in March, 1779)attained the rank of rear-admiral ofthe red ; and on his return to England,with a convoy, he was made vice-admiralof the blue. Shortly afterwards,he hoisted his flag on board theVictory, of one hundred guns, but removedit subsequently, to the Fortitude,of seventy-four, and proceeded with asmall force, to the North Sea.While in charge of a convoy, on the5th of August, in the last mentionedyear, he fell in with a Dutch squadron,on the Dogger Bank. " I was happyto find," he observes, in his despatches,that I had the wind of them ; as thegreat number of their large frigatesmight otherwise have endangered myconvoy. Having separated the men-of-warfrom the merchant-ships, andmade a signal to the last to keep theirwind, I bore away with a general signalto chase. The enemy formed theirline, consisting of eight two-deckedships, on the starboard tack : ours,including the Dolphin, consisting ofseven. Not a gun was fired on eitherside, until within the distance of halfmusket-shot. The Fortitude then beingabreast of the Dutch admiral, the actionbegan, and continued, with an unceasingfire, for three hours and fortyminutes. By this time our ships wereHARRIOT ARBUTHNOT.unmanageable. I made an effort to formthe line, in order to renew the action,but found it impracticable. The Bienfaisanthad lost her main-top-mast, andthe Buffalo her fore-yard ; the rest ofthe ships were not less shattered intheir masts, rigging, and sails. Theenemy appeared to be in as bad a condition.Both squadrons lay to, a considerabletime, near to each other, whenthe Dutch, with their convoy, boreaway for the Texel. We were not in acondition to follow them."It was well known," remarks Charnock,in his observations on this action,that several British line-of-battle, orat least of two decks, were then lyingat the Nore, in the Downs, at Harwich,and other places contiguous to the sceneof encounter, which, it is said, mighthave joined the admiral previous to theaction; thereby ensuring the destruction,or capture, of the whole Dutchforce, if administration had acted withproper energy, and given timely ordersfor the different commanders to haveeffected such a junction. This circumstance,violently insisted upon by oneparty, and as peremptorily denied bythe other, created no small degree ofcontroversy. Certain it is, the admiralconsidered himself neglected and ill-treated."The king appears to have been muchpleased with the conduct of Parker inthe engagement ; and not only reviewedhis squadron, on its arrival at the Nore,but expressed his intention of conferringon the admiral some signal mark ofroyal approbation; which, however,Parker, " with some degree of ill-temper,"declined accepting, and, shortlyafterwards, struck his flag in disgust.In 1782, by the decease of his brother,the Rev. Sir Peter Parker, he becamea baronet ; and, a change having takenplace in the cabinet, obtained the chiefcommand of a fleet, then employed inthe East Indies, to join which, he embarkedin the Juno, about the middleof October ; but he never reached hisdestination ; no tidings being heard ofthe Juno, or any of her crew, after shehad passed the Cape of Good Hope.By some it has been surmised that shewas wrecked on the island of Madagascar,but the general opinion appearsto be, that she took fire and blew up atsea.By his wife, whose maiden name wasSmithson, Sir Hyde Parker had twosons, both of whom distinguished themselvesin the service of their country.He appears to have been a man of highspirit, and much ability as a naval commander.Harriot ARBUTHNOT.nephew of the famousDoctor Arbuthnot, was born about theyear 1711. After having been for sometimein the navy, he was, in 1746,appointed commander of the Jamaicasloop, which captured two French privateers,while employed as a cruiser inthe channel. On the 22nd of June,1747, he became captain of the Surprisefrigate ; and, shortly afterwards, of theTriton; with which, in January, 1748,he captured a stout privateer fromBayonne.Captain Arbuthnot, in 1757, becamechief officer of the Garland, of twentyguns; and, in 1759, had the commandof the Portland, of fifty guns, one ofthe squadron engaged, under CommodoreDuff, in watching the proceedingsof the French fleet, in Brest harbour.In this vessel he continued until towardsthe conclusion of the war, when hecommanded the Oxford, on the WestIndia station. In 1770, he was madecaptain of the Terrible, of seventy-fourguns, a guard-ship, stationed at Plymouth; and, in 1775, he was appointeda commissioner of the navy resident atHalifax, in Nova Scotia; which officehe held until the year 1778, when hereturned to England, having, in theinterim, been made rear-admiral of thewhite. He was, shortly afterwards, appointedcommander-in-chief on theNorth American station; and, in themonth of March, 1779, being promotedto the rank of vice-admiral of theblue, he hoisted his flag on board theTHE NAVY.Europe, in which he set sail, on the2nd of May, for Jersey, which had beenattacked by the French j but the enemyhaving been repulsed before his arrival,he steered, according to his originalinstructions, for America.Having reached his destination, hewas a long time confined to port, inconsequenceof the appearance of aFrench fleet of more than twenty sailof the line j which, however, on thefailure of the well-known attempt onSavannah, immediately quitted the station,and Admiral Arbuthnot, on the26th of December, 1779, proceeded toescort Sir Henry Clinton, and histroops, to Charleston. In consequenceof the tempestuous state of the weather,scarcely any of the ships reached theirdestination before the end of January ;and almost all the horses belonging tothe artillery and cavalry perished duringthe passage. Though strongly fortified,Charleston was compelled to capitulate,and Arbuthnot received the thanks ofboth houses of parliament for his services.Intelligence having reached him, thata French fleet was expected fromEurope, he returned with all possiblehaste, to prevent the enemy fromgetting into port ; but this he was notableto effect, owing to the non-arrival,in sufficient time, of six ships of theline, sent out to him, under AdmiralGraves. In September, he was madevice-admiral of the white. During theremainder of the year, he captured someprivateers, and was employed in watchingthe enemy, who kept close in port,at Rhode Island, where they were protectedby batteries.On the 8th of March, 1781, theFrench put to sea, for the purpose ofattacking Arbuthnot ; who set sail withhis squadron on the 10th, in order tomeet the enemy, whom he discoveredon the 16th, steering for the Cape ofVirginia. In a short time, he broughtthe French to a distant action, but wasprevented from following up the partialadvantage he seems to have obtained,by a thick haze coming on, and thedisabled state of some of the Englishships.After his cruisers had taken two orthree American frigates, and someprivateers, he returned to England. Onhis arrival in London, he was mostgraciously received by the king, butnever accepted any subsequent command;although, on the 24th of September,1787, he was promoted to therank of vice-admiral of the red ; and,on the 1st of February, 1793, to that ofadmiral of the blue. He died, in GreatSuffolk-street, Charing-cross, on the31st of January, 1794, aged eighty-three,having previously survived all hischildren.Although it was not his good fortuneto be engaged in any action of first-rateimportance, his professional career wasserviceable to his country and honourableto himself.SIR SAMUEL CORNISH.THIS officer, after having served anapprenticeship to the master of a collier,entered as a common seaman, either onboarda king's ship or an East India-man,of which he soon became boatswain.In 1741, he obtained the commandof a bomb-ketch j and, in thefollowing year, that of a second-rateship, called the Namur. He next be jcame captain of the Guernsey, in whichvessel, after having captured, in companywith Captain Ambrose, a Spanishship of sixteen guns, valued at 100,000,he was present at the engagement withthe French and Spanish fleets offToulon.In 1755, he became captain of theStirling Castle ; from which, in the year1758, he was removed to the Union, asecond-rate, and one of the channelfleet, during that season, under theorders of Lord Anson. He had beenappointed to this ship, merely as atemporary officer, Lord Anson intendingit for the flag of Sir Charles Saunders,who being very few months the seniorof Cornish, the latter, feeling the indignity,wrote to the commander-in-chief,requesting that, as the Union wasintended for a flag, he might have thehonour of being permitted to serve ascaptain to the admiral. Lord AnsonLORD RODNEY.affected not to consider this applicationas a reproof, and soon afterwards promotedCornish to the rank of commodore.In May, 1759, he sailed to the EastIndies as commander of a small squadron,with which he formed a junctionwith Admiral Pocock, off Madras, on the18th of October. In February, 1760,he was detached to Fort St. George;and, on the 5th of April, the importantfortress of Radical surrendered to thesea and land forces, respectively commandedby Major Monson and himself.Shortly after, Cornish assisted Rear-admiralStevens, and Colonel Coote, inthe reduction of Pondicherry. In theyears 1760 and 1761 he became, successively,rear-admiral of the white andred ; and, on the death of Stevens,succeeded to the chief command in theEast Indies.A rupture with Spain having takenplace, Cornish sailed from Madras, onthe 1st of August, 1762, at the head ofa squadron, consisting of seven ships ofthe line, with three frigates and anEast Indiamen, for the purpose of attemptingthe reduction of Manilla,where he arrived on the 24th of September; and, the next day, some ofthe land forces attached to the armament,under the command of GeneralDraper, effected a landing. Cornish,in his despatches, states that the siege,though short, was attended with manydifficulties and great fatigues, thebesiegers having constantly fresh gales,a lee shore, and, consequently, a highsurf, to contend with; which made italways difficult, frequently hazardous,and sometimes impossible, to land withboats. On the 6th of October, the garrisonsurrendered, on condition that thecaptors should take bills on Madrid forsix millions of dollars in lieu of plunder.No part of the amount was, however,paid ; the Spanish government peremptorilyrefusing to ratify the treaty, on theground of a misunderstanding in thenegotiation, which had been carried onin the Latin language, between themilitary commander, Draper, and thegovernor, who was a Spanish archbishop.This induced Cornish to exclaim,humorously, and with an affectationof much passion, " That he neveragain would accept of a command, witha colleague who spoke Latin."Shortly after the capture of Manilla,having received intelligence that theSantissima Trinidadaa, which had onboarda cargo valued at three millionsof dollars, had entered the streights thatform the entrance to the Archipelagoof the Philippines, Cornish despatchedtwo of his ships in quest of her; andthese, after twenty-six days cruising,succeeded in effecting her capture.After having been promoted to therank of vice-admiral of the blue, he returned,with the greater part of his force,to Europe. It does not appear that heheld any subsequent command duringthe remainder of his life ; but, in considerationof his services, he was createda baronet on the 9th of January, 1766.A few days after, he became memberof parliament for Shoreham ; which boroughhe continued to represent duringthe remainder of his life. He died onthe 30th of October, 1770, two daysonly after he had been made vice-admiralof the red. He was generallyesteemed by his countrymen as a bravecommander, and a truly honest man.GEORGE Bridges, LORD RODNEY.GEORGE Bridges RODNEY,son of Henry Rodney, Esq. of ,who commanded theyacht in which George the First oncepassed over to Hanover, was born inFebruary, 1718, and, by the desire ofhis majesty, was educated for the navy.Rising rapidly through the inferior gradations,he attained the rank of captain,in 1742; and, in 1747, commanded theEagle, in the action off Cape Finisterre.In 1751, he was despatched, as commodore,to make an accurate surveyof an island, supposed to be abouteight hundred miles west of England,but returned without having effectedthe object of his enterprise. In 1757,his ship formed part of the squadronTHE NAVY.commanded by Hawke and Boscawen,on the coast of France. In the followingyear, he took a French East Indiaman ;and, in 1759, after having been maderear-admiral of the blue, bombardedHavre-disgrace, with much skill andsuccess. In 1760, while watching at themouth of the Seine, he drove ashore fiveflat-bottomed boats, destined for theinvasion of England, and destroyed afort at Port Bassin. In 1761, and thefollowing year, he was so instrumentalin reducing the islands of St. Pierre,Granada, St Lucia, St. Vincent, andMartini, that, on his return, he wasadvanced to the rank of vice-admiral,and created a baronet. On the 30th ofNovember, 1765, he was made masterof Greenwich hospital.In 1768, after a violent struggle, hewas returned for Northampton, but hisfortune was so much injured by thecontest, that, in order to avoid his creditors,he retired to France; where hereceived. an offer, through the Duke deIron, of high rank in the Frenchnavy, to which he replied in the followingterms : " It is true, Monsieurle Due, that my distresses have drivenme from my country, but no temptationcan estrange me from her service : hadthis offer been voluntary on your part,I should have considered it an insult ;but I am glad it proceeds from a sourcethat can do no wrong." The Duke deChartres having, in a previous interview,told him, that he, the duke,should command the fleet opposed tothat under Admiral Repel, and askedhis opinion as to the issue, Rodney replied," Why, my opinion is, that hewill carry your highness home withhim to teach you English."In January, 1778, Rodney, whosereply to the proposal of the Frenchking had reached the admiralty, obtainedthe rank of admiral. In thecourse of the same year, he was enabled,by the generosity of a French nobleman,to revisit England, and immediatelyapplied for active employment ;which, however, he failed to obtain,until nearly the close of 1779, when hewas appointed to the chief commandon the Leeward Islands station, andsoon after proceeded with a convoy toGibraltar.On the 8th of January, 1780, hecaptured, off Cape Finisterre, a valuablefleet of Spanish merchantmen, boundfrom St. Sebastian's to Cadizz ; and onthe 16th of the same month, he encounteredthe Spanish fleet, under DonJuan de Langer, off Cape St. Vincent.The enemy, whose force was inferior tothat of the British, offered a spiritedbut unavailing resistance : one of theirships being blown up, four captured,and the rest considerably damaged. Onhis return to England, he was presentedwith the freedom of the citiesof London and Edinburgh, the thanksof parliament, and the insignia of aknight of the Bath. He also obtained hisreturn to parliament for Westminster.In February, 1781, he commandedthe naval forces at the taking of St.Eustatius; where, in addition to avaluable booty on shore, nearly onehundred and fifty richly laden fell into the hands of thecaptors. From St. Eustatius, Rodneyproceeded towards Port Royal, off whichhe expected to meet with a powerfulFrench squadron, under Count DeGrasse ; who, however, although hisforce was considerably greater thanthat of Rodney, avoided an engagementThe British admiral, conceivingthat the manoeuvres of his opponentwere intended to decoy him into thechannel between Grenada and theSpanish main, where the rapidity ofthe current would probably have drivenhim considerably to the leeward, cautiouslyavoided falling into the snare,and, at the close of the year, returned,in the Gibraltar, to England. On hisarrival, he found himself under thenecessity of disclaiming, in parliament,the mercenary motives by which it wasinsinuated he had been influenced, withregard to the taking of St. Eustatius.On the 6th of November, 1781, hewas constituted vice-admiral of GreatBritain : shortly afterwards, he returnedto the West Indies ; where, onthe 5th of April, 1782, at the headof a squadron, consisting of thirty-sixsail of the line, he fell in with theCount De Grasse who, had just put tosea \vjth a fleet of thirty-four line-of-battleships, in the hope of effecting ajunction with the French and Spanishfleets, at Hispaniola. The British commenceda pursuit off Dominique, and,after a short and partial action, broughtthe enemy to a decisive battle on theRICHARD KEMPENFELT.12th. The attack was commenced,about seven in the morning, between theislands of Guadaloupe and Dominique.About noon, the English commander,supported by his seconds, bore downon the enemy's line, and having succeededin breaking it, the French fleetwas thrown into such confusion, that,by sunset, the British had obtained adecisive victory. One of the enemy'sships was sunk, and five others, includingLa Ville de Paris, of onehundred and ten guns, which carriedthe French admiral's flag, were capturedduring the engagement. Thismemorable victory was achieved bybreaking through the centre of theenemy's line, and placing their shipsbetween two fires ; a plan which seemsto have been originated by Mr. JohnClerk, the author of Naval Tactics.It is asserted, that Lord Rodney onceobserved to Mr. Dundas, " A countrymanof yours, Clerk, has taught ushow to fight ; and if ever I meet theFrench fleet, I will try his way ;" andduring his last illness, in a conversation,it is said, with Lord Haddington, relativeto the battle, Rodney waived hishand, and shouted, " Clerk, of Elgin,for ever !"About a month after the battle,Rodney received the thanks of parliament,the title of Baron Rodney,of Rodney Stoke, Somerset; and thegrant of a pension of ^62,000 per annum.A sum of 1,000 was also votedto him by the house of assembly atJamaica.His death took place on the 24th ofMay, 1792, and a monument was,some time afterwards, erected to hismemory, in St. Paul's cathedral, at thenational expense. He was twice married:first to Jane, daughter of CharlesCompton, Esq., and sister to Spencer,Earl of Northampton, by whom he hadseveral children ; secondly, to Henrietta,daughter of John Lies, of Lisbon,merchant, by whom, also, he hadoffspring. For some years before hisdeath, he and his wife had lived separate.The fine qualities displayed by thisbrave commander endeared him to allranks in the service. His humanitywas equal to his courage, and, notwithstandinghis successes, he had the modestyand good feeling to act upon, andacknowledge himself indebted to, thesuggestions of another, whose skill innaval tactics was superior to his own.In his habits he was so temperate, thathe often sent down the dishes from hisown table to the midshipmen's mess.Pecuniary difficulties embittered a greatportion of his life, with which, towardsits close, he became apparently disgusted; for, in a letter to a friend, heseriously expressed his deep regretthat a ball had not struck his head off,when he fought De Grasse, in the WestIndies.RICHARD KEMPENFELT.RlCHARD, the son of Lieutenant-colonelKempenfelt, a native of Sweden,who is most honourably spoken of inthe Spectator, under the appellation ofCaptain Sentry, was born at Westminster;and became a lieutenant in thenavy on the 14th of January, 1740.After having been raised to the rank ofcommander, he was, on the 17th ofJanuary, 1757, promoted to that ofpost-captain, and sailed in the Elizabeth,of sixty-four guns, as captain toCommodore Stevens, with a small squadronto the East Indies, where his conductin the engagement with the Countcache, in April, 1758, procured him afavourable notice in the admiral's despatches.He soon after removed tothe Queenborough frigate, with whichhe convoyed to Madras a strong detachmentof Colonel Draper's regiment,under the command of Major Monson.On the death of Stevens, Kempenfeltbecame captain to that admiral s successor,Cornish, under whom he greatlydistinguished himself at the siege ofManilla, on the capitulation of which,he was appointed governor of Cavite.He appears to have been soon afterwardssent to England with despatches,in which, the military and naval com-commander-in-chief mentioned him inTHE NAVY.honourable terms. He resumed hisstation, as captain of the Norfolk, in1664 ; and commanded, in succession,the Buckingham and the Alexander.In 1779, he removed to the Victory, ascaptain of the fleet, under Sir CharlesHardy; and, on the 26th of September,was made admiral of the blue, butcontinued in his former post, until theclose of 1781, when he was placed incommand of a squadron, consisting oftwelve ships of the line, besides frigates,and sent out against a Frenchfleet, bound for the West Indies ; onfalling in with which he found it underthe convoy of nineteen sail of the line ;but, notwithstanding the inferiority ofhis force, he contrived, by a bold andskilful manoeuvre, to sink three orfour, and capture fifteen, of the enemy'stransports.In March, 1782, he removed his flagfrom the Victory, to the Royal George,and served under Admiral Harrington,in the squadron ordered out to interceptthe French fleet, then about to sailfrom Brest to the East Indies. Theforce of the enemy being far superiorto that of the British, no action tookplace, but Kempenfelt displayed considerabletalent in covering the retreatof the Buffalo, an old ship, and a sluggishsailer, which would otherwise,most probably, have been cut off bythe van division of the French. Heafterwards served in the channel fleet,under Lord Howe, until the RoyalGeorge having become exceedinglyleaky, orders were given for having herrepaired at Spithead. On the morningof the 29th of August, she was sufficientlyheeled to expose the damagedpart ; but, some hours afterwards,while the admiral was writing in hiscabin, and the greater part of thepeople were at dinner, it becamenecessary, for the purpose of removingsome sheets of copper, to lower heranother streak. Just as this had beendone, a sudden and violent squallthrew the vessel more upon her side ;her gun-ports being open, she almostinstantly filled with water, and wentto the bottom before any signal of distresscould be made. A great portionof those who happened to be on deck,and some others, who floated up afterthe ship had sunk, were saved by theboats, which had put off to their assistance; but the admiral, with severalother officers, and upwards of ninehundred persons, including manywomen and children, who had beenpermitted to come on board to seetheir husbands and fathers, perishedon this awful occasion.Kemperrfeit, of whose bravery nodoubt appears to exist, is reported tohave acquired, by constant diligence,such a fund of professional knowledge,as rendered him equal to any navalcommander in Europe ; and even beforehis promotion to a flag, he hadlong been distinguished, it is said, forhis great skill in manoeuvring a fleet.In private life he was admired andrespected, on account of his piety,benevolence, and agreeable manners.SIR EDWARD HUGHES.THIS officer, the son of a gentlemanof property, in Hertfordshire, enteredthe navy at an early age, and served asamidshipman at the capture of PortoBello, with so much credit that he waspromoted to the rank of lieutenant, onthe 25th of August, 1740. In the year1747, he was ordered out to Louisburg,whither he proceeded as a passenger,in the Warwick ; and, soon afterwards,obtained the command of the Lark.In 1756, he was nominated to the DealCastle, of twenty-four guns j and, in1757, became captain of the Somerset,a seventy-four, in which ship, he continueduntil near the termination ofthe war. In 1758, he served with thehighest ere dit in the successful expeditionagainst Louisburg, under thedirection of Admiral Boscawen ; andafterwards, in that against Quebec,under Sir Charles Saunders. He waslikewise employed on the Mediterraneanstation, in the Blenheim, theflag-ship of Sir Charles Saunders.Towards the conclusion of the yearGEORGE Johnston.1770, Hughes was re-appointed to theSomerset ; and, three years after, proceededin the Salisbury, of fifty guns,with the rank of commodore, to theEast India station ; where he remaineduntil 1777. On the 23rd of January,1778, he was promoted to the rank ofrear-admiral of the blue; and, soonafter, received the insignia of a knightof the Bath. Early in 1779, he becamecommander-in-chief on the East Indiastation ; and, in his way out, effectedthe reduction of the French settlementof Goreee, on the coast of Africa. Onthe 7th of March, 1779, he was maderear-admiral of the red; and, on the26th of September, 1780, vice-admiralof the blue. On the 8th of December,1780, he attacked the squadron of HyderrAli, then lying in the port of Mangalore;and, in two hours, burnt severalof the ships, and forced the remainderto run on shore, with the exception ofone, which escaped into the harbour.M. de Suffrein, one of the mostrenowned naval officers in the Frenchservice, soon after arrived in India, forthe purpose of opposing the force underAdmiral Hughes, with a superior armament.On the 15th of February, 1781,the French admiral was seen off Madras,having with him five or six prizes,which had been taken from the Englishon his passage. On the 16th, five ofthese, and one of the enemy's vessels,with three hundred soldiers, besidescannon, military stores, and ammunitionon board, fell into the hands ofthe British. The two fleets nearedeach other on the succeeding day ; andthe English van, not being able to tackand get into action for the want ofwind, an unequal contest of three hoursduration ensued between eight of theenemy's best ships, and four of theBritish squadron, among which was theadmiral's ship, the Superbe. Notwithstandingtheir superiority, the Frenchfleet sustained considerable damage ;and, taking advantage of a favourablebreeze, hauled their wind, and stoodaway.After having repaired two of hisships, at Trincomarle, the English admiralput to sea on the 4th of March ;and, on the 30th, was joined by areinforcement from England. The adversefleets met again on the 12th ofApril, and after a warm engagement,in which the ship of Admiral Hughestook so active a part, that sixty-nine ofher men were killed and ninety-sixwounded, the enemy drew off in greatdisorder. Both fleets having repaired,the French admiral, on the 19th of April,1782, made preparations for attackingthe centre of the British squadron ; butfound it so admirably disposed forresistance, that he thought proper toretire. On the 20th of June, in thefollowing year, Sir Edward Hughes,who had previously been joined byAdmiral Bickerton, with six ships ofthe line, again engaged his skilful antagonist,De Suffrein ; who, after threehours' spirited fighting, bore away.On the 22nd of the same month, thetwo fleets were in sight of each other,off Pondicherry, but no action tookplace. Fifteen hundred of his menbeing rendered unfit for duty, by thescurvy, Sir Edward Hughes now repairedto Madras ; whence, peace havingbeen proclaimed, he proceeded,with the fleet, to England, and did notafterwards assume any command.On the 24th of September, 1787, hewas promoted to the rank of vice-admiralof the red ; and on the 1st ofFebruary, 1793, to that of admiral ofthe blue. He died at an advanced age,at his seat in Essex, on the 17th ofFebruary, 1794.Sir Edward Hughes acquired, by hisservices, the attributes of signal braveryas a subordinate, and sound judgmentas a commander. He made a large fortuneon the East India station ; a considerableportion of which, he is said tohave employed in acts of benevolence.GEORGE Johnston.GEORGE, third son of Sir JamesJohnstonee, a Scotch baronet, entered,at an early age, as a midshipman, onboardthe Lark, the captain of whichhe wounded in a duel, the result of achallenge from Johnstonee, on beingrefused his certificate. In 1755, he becamea lieutenant, under Captain Digby,THE NAVY.with whose clerk he soon afterwards hada hostile meeting, in which Johnstoneekilled his antagonist. On the 6th ofOctober, 1760, he was appointed to thecommand of the Hornet sloop, withwhich he took two French privateers,one in the North Sea, and the other onthe Lisbon station. Having attainedthe rank of post-captain, on the llth ofAugust, 1762, he commanded, successively,the Hind and the Wager, in theWest Indies ; and, in 1765, was appointedgovernor of Pensacola. In thefollowing year, he returned to England ;and, in 1768, became member for Cock-mouth.In 1770, he fought a duelwith Lord George Germaine, afterwardsViscount Sackville, whom he had incensedby a vituperative speech in thehouse of commons.In 1774, being returned for Appleby,as well as for Cockermouth, he electedto sit for the former borough. In 1778,he went out as a commissioner, to treatwith the American states, relative totheir disagreement with England; butcongress having resolved, that it wasincompatible with its honour to holdintercourse with him, in consequenceof his attempts to tamper with some ofthe members, he soon returned home ;and, in 1799, made, in the house ofcommons, a violent attack on LordHowe, for his conduct off the coast ofAmerica. He soon after went out, ascommander-in-chief, to the Lisbonstation, with the rank of establishedcommodore. On the passage thither,two of his squadron, the Tartar andthe Rattlesnake, captured the SantaMargaret, a Spanish frigate. For this,Johnstonee was warmly eulogized byhis admirers ; although, in fact, his ownship, the Romney, had no share in theaction.Towards the close of the year 1781,after having taken the Perle, a corvette,and the Artois, then considered thefinest frigate ever built, he returned toEngland; and, in March, 1782, sailedfrom Spithead, as commander-in-chiefof a secret expedition. On arriving atPort Prayaa Road, in the island of Jago,he received intelligence that a Frenchsquadron was on the look-out for him,but took no precautions against a surprise; rashly confiding, perhaps, in thestrength of his fleet, which consistedof sixteen vessels of war, of variousdescriptions, and a convoy of ten EastIndiamen, mounting twenty-five gunseach. Notwithstanding the Britishcommander's superiority of force, hewas unexpectedly attacked, on the16th of April, with only five sail ofthe line, by the French admiral, MonsieurDe Suffrein ; who, however, aftera contest of nearly an hour's duration,was compelled to retire. Three of hissquadron accompanied him ; and thefourth, after having been exposed forsome time to the whole fire of theBritish fleet, drifted, without molestation,after him, a complete wreck, withouteither masts or bowsprit Thegallant De Suffrein contrived to takeher in tow; and, having raised a stumpin her, forward, wore the shatteredhulk, and put before the wind, withhis whole force in a line of battleabreast. The British lost so much timein getting out of Port Prayaa, owing, asJohnstonee alleged, to the tardiness ofthe Isis, commanded by Sutton, thatnight was fast approaching, before theyneared the enemy, and it was thendeemed advisable to discontinue thechase.Johnstonee departed, with his fleet,from Port Prayaa, on the 1st of May ;and, in the following month, captureda Dutch East Indiaman, having a cargoon board worth 40,000. Soon afterwards,on his approaching Saldanha,the crews of five other Dutch EastIndiamen, which were lying at anchorin the bay, set fire to, and abandonedthem : but four of the number he hadthe good fortune to preserve, and, asit appears, they proved to be prizes ofconsiderable importance. On his returnto England, he touched at Lisbon,where he married a lady, to whom hehad become attached while serving onthat station. Two of his prizes werelost in the channel, but with the resthe safely arrived in port.The remainder of his life was ingloriouslydevoted to attacks in parliamenton Lord Howe ; to squabbleswith the directors of the East Indiacompany, among whom he obtained aplace in 1783; and to the bitter persecutionof Captain Sutton, of the Isis,whom he caused to be brought to acourt-martial, for his alleged delay inmaking sail after the French ships, ontheir retreating from Prayaa Bay. SuttonSIR HUGH Palliser.was kept, for a long time, a prisoner,prior to his trial, the result of whichwas a reprimand ; but, on a subsequentinquiry as to his conduct, he obtainedan honourable acquittal. He thenbrought an action against Johnstonee,in which he obtained a verdict for5,000 damages; and these, on a newtrial, which was obtained by his antagonist,were considerably increased.Johnstonee then applied for an arrest ofjudgment; which, however, was refusedby the barons of the exchequer, who confirmedthe adjudication of the secondjury. A writ of error was subsequentlybrought by the defendant, which cameon for argument before Loughboroughand Mansfield, on the 2nd of February,1786, when the judgment was reversed.Johnstonee's triumph was, however, ofshort duration ; for Sutton. on anappeal to the house of lords, procureda confirmation of the second verdict.No part of the damages were, however,as it appears, paid by Johnstonee, whodied, of a lingering and painful disorder,in May, 1787.Mere animal courage, unallied totalent, seems to have been his onlyqualification for that rank in the navyto which he was injudiciously raised.Although much admired by many ofhis contemporaries, he will, doubtless,be regarded by posterity as a turbulentsenator, an imprudent commander, anobstinate litigant, and a hot-headedduellist. On a calm examination ofhis career, there appears much tocensure, and little, if any thing, toadmire.SIR HUGH PALLISER.This admiral, the son of Captain Palliser,an infantry officer, was born atKirk Leighton, in Yorkshire, on the26th of February, 1722. Having enteredthe navy at an early age, he became alieutenant in the year 1742, and servedin that capacity, on board the Essex,in the engagement off" Toulon, in 1744.In July, 1746, he commanded theTeazle sloop, in which he capturedfour privateers ; and, on the 25th ofNovember following, was made post-captainof a seventy-gun ship, underCommodore Legge, on the LeewardIslands station. He subsequently removedto the Sutherland, in which, atPrince Rupert's Bay, Dominica, hewas wounded in three places, andlamed for life, in the left leg, by theaccidental explosion of some fire-arms.In spite of this mishap, Palliseractively pursued his profession ; and,in 1748, commanded the Sheernessfrigate, in which he proceeded tothe East Indies, bearing the news ofpeace to Admiral Boscawen. In 1750,he was made captain of the Yarmouth,guard-ship. He soon afterwards sailed,in the Seahorse, of twenty guns, for theScotch coast ; and while there, an indenturewas forged, by which it was made toappear, that he had taken on board, as avolunteer, one who was an apprentice tothe master of a merchant-vessel. Proceedingsfor this fictitious illegality onhis part, being instituted against himin the vice-admiralty court, Palliser wasarrested, and placed in the TolboothPrison, from which, however, after a:w days' confinement, he was released,through the interference of the lords ofsession.In 1753, he commanded the Bristol,of fifty guns; and, in 1755, served in theSeahorse, under Commodore Repel, inthe expedition against Virginia ; on thefailure of which, he returned to England,and was soon afterwards appointedto the Eagle, of sixty guns. On the 30thof May, 1757, while cruising off Ushant,in company with the Medway, he capturedthe Due Aquitain, a very largeFrench East India ship, after an action,in which fifty of her crew were killed,and several wounded. In the followingyear he was removed to theShrewsbury, seventy four; and whileemployed, in July, with a detachedsquadron, to watch the French fleet,in the Brest Road, he drove two frigateson shore, and took part of a fleet ofcoasting-vessels, which they had incharge. In 1753, he served under AdmiralSaunders, in the successful expenseNAVY.edition against Quebec ; and, in 1760,being then in the Mediterranean, wasdetached with a small squadron, inpursuit of a French naval force thathad gone up the Levant ; but theenemy took refuge in the Turkishports, where, in consequence of theneutrality of the Ottoman empire, theywere secure from attack.In 1762, he was despatched with asmall squadron to attempt the re-captureof St. John's, Newfoundland ;which, however, before his arrival, hadsurrendered to Captain Graves. Afterthe peace of 1764, he hoisted his broadpendant on board the Guernsey, offifty guns, and proceeded, with severalfrigates, to Newfoundland, for the protectionof the fishery. On his arrival,he found a French commander, with aforce similar to his own, who had directionsto settle all differences that shouldarise between the French and English,as to the right of fishing : Palliser, however,on the ground that the sovereigntyof the island was vested in Great Britain,not only refused to sanction anyinterference on the part of the Frenchcommander, but warned him to quitthe coast.In 1770, he was constituted comptrollerof the navy, and elected an elderbrother of the Trinity-house ; in 1773,he was created a baronet ; in the followingyear, he obtained his return toparliament for Scarborough ; and, in1775, he became a flag-officer, a lord ofthe admiralty, and lieutenant-general ofmarines.On the 27th of July, 1778, he served,as third in command, under AdmiralRepel, with the rank of vice-admiralof the blue, (to which he had been promotedon the 29th of January preceding,)in the engagement between theBritish and French fleets, off Ushant.On his return to England, finding thatmuch discontent existed among thepeople, as to the result of the encounter,in which no advantage whatever appearsto have been gained, and thatsuch result was partly attributed to hisown conduct, he solicited, and obtained,a court-martial on himself and his superiorin command, which, after a properinvestigation, acquitted Repel, anddeclared, "that Admiral Palliser's behaviourwas, in many instances, highlymeritorious and exemplary ; but blameable,in not having made known to theadmiral his distressed situation ; yet,as he was censurable in no other partof his conduct, that he ought to behonourably acquitted." He had resignedhis office of lieutenant-generalof marines, as well as his seat in parliament,during the investigation, whichhad no sooner terminated, than he waselected member for Huntingdon, andmade governor of Greenwich hospital.He passed the latter part of his lifein retirement; and, after having beenmade admiral of the white, and governorof Scarborough castle, died onthe 19th of March, 1796, of a disorderoccasioned by the wounds he receivedon board the Sutherland. His nephew,Hugh Palliser Walters, succeeded tothe title; but his natural son, GeorgePalliser, obtained the principal part ofhis property. He appears to have beena courageous and able commander ; and,though warm in his temper, a trulyestimable and benevolent man.SAMUEL, VISCOUNT HOOD.SAMUEL, son of the Rev. SamuelHood, was born at Burleigh, in Somersin December, 1724. He waseducated at Thorncombe, a maritimestation, and entered as midshipman,on board the Romney, in 1740, underAdmiral Smith, who, about the year1746, made him a lieutenant In 1754,after having received a severe wound,in cutting out an enemy's vessel, hewas appointed to the command of theJamaica sloop-of-war ; and, two yearsafterwards, advanced to the rank ofpost-captain. In 1757, with the Antelope,of fifty guns, he engaged anddestroyed a French vessel of equalmagnitude ; and, in 1759, being then incommand of the Vestal, of thirty-twoguns, attached to the squadron sent outagainst Quebec, he captured the Bellona,VISCOUNT HOOD.a French ship, of fifty guns, after a longand arduous encounter.On his return to England, LordAnson, then at the head of the admiralty,presented him to the king; who,as a reward for his gallantry, promotedhim to the Africa, of sixty-four guns,with which he was present, at the bombardmentof Havre-disgrace; and, afterhaving been employed for two yearson the coast of Ireland, he servedduring the remainder of the war, underSir Charles Saunders, in the Mediterranean.The peace that took place in1763 left his lordship unemployed for ashort time ; and, in 1768. he hoisted abroad pendant as commodore, and thecommand off Boston was assigned tohim, where he continued for some time,and greatly distinguished himself. In1778, he was nominated resident commissionerof the dock-yard at Portsmouth; and, on the 20th of April, inthe same year, was created a baronet.On the 26th of September, 1780,he became rear-admiral of the blue,and sailed at the end of the year tothe West Indies, in the Barfleur, witha squadron for the reinforcement ofSir George Rodney. Immediately onhis arrival, he was employed in preventingthe escape of the enemy's vesselsfrom the bay, during the attack onSt. Eustatius; and early in April, 1781,he was despatched, with thirteen shipsof the line, to intercept the Frenchadmiral, De Grasse, whom, on the 28thof the same month, he brought to apartial action, off Martini. De Grassehaving soon afterwards repaired toNorth America, Hood was ordered,with fourteen ships of the line, to reinforceRear-admiral Graves, on thatstation ; where, in the month of September,the British fleet came to anencounter with the enemy, in which,however, Hood, being in command ofthe rear, took no part.De Grasse having returned to theWest Indies, in order to make an attackon St. Christopher's, Hood was despatchedin pursuit of him, with twenty-twosail of the line ; and arrived off theisland, early in 1782. By some skilfulmanoeuvres, he induced the French,whose force exceeded his own, to quittheir anchorage in Basse-terre Road, ofwhich he immediately took possession ;but the number of the French troopson shore, and the ruinous state of thedefences of the island, having compelledthe governor to capitulate, on the 13thof February, the whole of the Britishfleet, on the night of the 14th, cut theircables at the same moment, and put tosea, without opposition.On the 9th of the following month,the hostile squadrons came to an engagement,in which, according to Hood'sdespatches, many of the French shipsmust have suffered very considerably.The Ville de Paris, he adds, " wasupon the heel all the next da y, coveringher shot holes ; and, by informationfrom the shore, the French have sentto St. Eustatius upwards of a thousandwounded men."Sir-george Rodney having arrivedwith a reinforcement, and taken the chiefcommand, a decisive battle ensued onthe 12th of April, when La Ville deParis, the French admiral's ship, struckto Sir Samuel Hood, who commandedthe van division of the victorious fleet.Immediately after the engagement, hewas despatched by Rodney, to interceptsuch of the enemy's discomfited squadronas might attempt to escape throughthe Mona passage ; where, on the 18th,he attacked, and succeeded in capturing,with a trifling loss, two line-of-battleships, and two frigates.Rodney now repaired to Jamaica,leaving Hood in command of twenty-fivesail of the line, off St. Domingo;whence, on peace being proclaimed,the latter returned to England. Priorto his arrival, the king had created himan Irish peer, and the corporation ofLondon voted him the freedom of thecity, in a gold box of one hundredguineas value. On his lordship's beingcreated Viscount Hood, his former titlewas transferred to his lady, by the titleof Baroness Hood, with remainder toher issue.In June, 1782, he was an unsuccessfulcandidate for Westminster; but obtainedhis return for that city in 1784.He was made commander-in-chief, atPortsmouth, in 1786; and vice-admiralof the blue on the 24th of September,1787. He vacated his seat, in 1788, onbeing appointed a lord of the admiralty,and failed to procure his re-election,being successfully opposed by LordJohn Townshend. In 1790, he was,however, again returned for Westmin-THE Navy.step ; in 1793, he was equally fortunate ;but his subsequent unqualified supportof ministers, so disgusted his constituents,being given in opposition totheir declared sentiments, that, at thenext general election, he did not thinkfit to come forward as a candidate.In 1790 and 1791, his lordship wasappointed to the command of the squadronsdestined for particular services ;but the differences with Spain andRussia being adjusted before he sailed,he struck his flag on each occasion.In 1793, he was appointed com-mander-in-chief of the fleet in theMediterranean, and effected the captureof Toulon ; which, however, soonceased to be tenable. He subsequentlyblockaded Genoa; and, after havingfailed in his first attack on Corsica,succeeded, on a second attempt, ineffecting the reduction of that island ;which, however, was shortly afterwardsretaken by the enemy. He returned,through ill-health, to England, in December,1794: in the following year,he was elected an elder brother ofthe Trinity House: in 1796, appointedgovernor of Greenwich Hospital, andcreated a viscount : in 1799, made admiralof the white ; and shortly afterwards,admiral of the blue. In additionto his other honours, he was, at thetime of his death, which took place atBath, on the 27th of January, 1816, aknight grand cross of the order of theBath. He was married, in August,1749, to Miss Susanna Linseed, daughterof the mayor of Plymouth, by whomhe had three sons ; only one of whomsurvived him. His lordship died at theadvanced age of ninety-two, and wasthe second senior admiral on the list.Lord Hood appears to have been notonly courageous and skilful, but eminentlyprudent. He was averse torisking the interests of his country, andthe lives of his men, at such a disadvantage,as would have been despisedby more daring, but less judiciouscommanders; when, however, an opportunityoccurred of coping with theenemy on even terms, no man could bemore desirous of an engagement, ormore effective in bringing it to a successfulresult.In private life he was highly esteemed,and, as a member of parliament,he is said, on account of the apparenthonesty of his intentions, to have enjoyedthe respect of those who weremost opposed to him in policy.AUGUSTUS, VISCOUNT KEPPEL.AUGUSTUS, second son of WilliamAnne Repel, second Earl of Albemarle,was born on the 2nd of April,1725, and entered the navy under theauspices of Lord Anson, with whom heserved at the taking of Paita. He wassoon afterwards promoted to the rankof lieutenant; in September, 1744, tothat of commander; and, in the followingmonth, he became captain of theSapphire frigate, with which he capturedthe Atlanta, a valuable Frenchship, and the Superbe, a Spanish cutter.In 1746, he was removed to the Maidstone;and, soon afterwards, took theFerret, a French privateer. In 1747,having ventured too near the coast ofFrance, he fell into the enemy's hands;and, on being exchanged, was broughtto a court-martial, by which, however,his conduct was declared to have beenblameless.He was next appointed to the Anson,of sixty-four guns ; and, after havingbeen employed for some time in thechannel, lie was despatched, in 1749, tothe Mediterranean, where, about theend of the year 1751, he entered into atreaty of peace with the states of Algiers,Tripoli, and Tunis. At an audiencewhich he had obtained, while on thisservice, of the Dey of Algiers, for thepurpose of demanding that some vessels,which had been taken by the pirates,should be restored, his deportment wasso spirited, that the dey exclaimed, " IVISCOUNT KEPPEL.wonder at the English king's insolence,in sending me such a foolish, beardlessboy 1" " Had my master," repliedRepel, " supposed wisdom to be measuredby the length of the beard, hewould have sent you a he-goat." Thisanswer so enraged the dey, that heordered his mutes to attend with thebow-string. Repel, however, displayedno symptom of alarm, but coolly observed,pointing through a window tothe English ships riding at anchor inthe bay, as he spoke, " If it be yourpleasure to put me to death, there areEnglishmen enough in that fleet tomake me a glorious funeral pile!" Thedey, it is added, saw so much truth inthis remark, that he consented to grantthe restitution which Repel had demanded.In 1754, Repel was employed ascommodore of the squadron whichconveyed the troops commanded byGeneral Braddock, to Virginia. Afterhis return, he commanded, successively,the Swiftsure and Torbay ; and served,under Sir Edward Hawke, in the unsuccessfulexpedition against Rochford.In 1758, he had the charge of a smallsquadron, which, in the course of itscruises in the channel, and off theFrench coast, took many prizes of importance.He was soon afterwardsappointed commander-in-chief of thetroops, as well as of the naval armamentsent out against Goreee, which,although he had lost three of his vessels,and about three hundred and fiftymen and officers during the voyage, hesucceeded in capturing. He was soonafter engaged, in the Torbay, underSir Edward Hawke, at the defeat ofthe Marquis De Conflans, and madeColonel gf the Plymouth division ofmarines.On the 29th of March, 1761, he sailedfrom Spithead, with a squadron, havingon board a body of troops, commandedby General Hodgson, to attack Belle-isle,which, after a brave resistance,was forced to capitulate. He nextserved under the command of SirGeorge Pocock, with the fleet sent outagainst Havannah, where he coveredthe landing of the troops, with greatspirit and skill. On the 21st of October,1762, he was promoted to therank of rear-admiral of the blue, andcommanded on the Havannah station,where he captured several prizes, untilthe conclusion of the war.In 1763, he was made groom of thebedchamber; and, in 1765, a lord ofthe admiralty, but held these appointmentsonly until 1766, in which yearhe convoyed the Queen of Denmarkto Holland. He was made rear-admiralof the red, on the 18th of October,1770; vice of the blue, on the 24th ofthe same month ; vice of the white,on the 31st of March, 1775; vice ofthe red, on the 3rd of February, 1776;and admiral of the red, on the 29thof January, 1778.On the 8th of June, in the last-mentionedyear, a renewal of hostilitiesbeing expected with France, a fleet oftwenty-seven sail of the line was sentinto the channel, under the commandof Admiral Repel, who hoisted hisflag on board the Victory, of one hundredguns. On the 17th of the month,he discovered two French frigates,which appeared to be reconnoitringhis squadron. To these, although warhad not been declared, he thought properto give chase, and one of them wascaptured. He subsequently took anotherfrigate and a schooner ; so that theFrench could no longer refrain fromordering reprisals to be made on Britishvessels. By the papers found on boardthe prizes, it appeared, that the enemyhad more than thirty sail of the line, andtwelve frigates, ready for sea, in Brestharbour. Repel, therefore, thoughtproper to return to port ; whence, havingobtained a reinforcement, he sailedagain, on the 10th of July. By thistime the French had put to sea ; and,on the 27th of the month, the two fleetscame to an action off Ushant. Beingupon different tacks, they passed eachother in action ; and the French so disabledthe British ships, in their rigging,that when the latter wore, they wereunable to stand after the enemy, untilthe French had, towards the closeof the day, formed their line of battleagain, to leeward of their antagonists.This," said Repel, in his despatches,I did not discourage, but allowedof their doing so, without firing uponthem, thinking they meant handsomelyto try their force with me in themorning; but," he adds, "they hadbeen so beaten in the day, that theytook advantage of the night to go off."THE NAVY.The French commander-in-chief, however,declared that, although, duringthe action, the English had the advantage,yet, that, after the firing ceased,lie had decidedly out-manoeuvred hisopponent.Soon after the engagement, Repelreturned to port, for the purpose ofrefitting ; but put to sea again, on the23rd of August, and continued afloatuntil the 28th of October. In the interim,various anonymous paragraphs,reflecting upon the admiral's conduct,in the action of the 27th of July, hadappeared in the public prints; and, atlength, Sir Hugh Palliser, the second incommand, having published some obnoxiousremarks, relative to the conductof Repel, the latter thought properto declare, in parliament, that as hewas called upon to speak out, he wouldopenly declare, that the signal forcoming into the Victory's wake, hadbeen flying from three o'clock in theafternoon until eight in the morning,obeyed, although he did not intendto accuse Sir Hugh Palliser of disobedience,or want of courage. Thelatter retorted, by charging Repel withhaving neglected to arrange his ships inorder of battle, so that a general engagementcottld not have been broughton ; with having neglected to tack anddouble upon the French, with the vanand centre divisions of the English fleet,after these had passed the enemy's rear ;thus leaving the vice-admiral of theblue exposed to be cut off, with havinggiven an opportunity to the enemyto rally unmolested, and stand after theBritish fleet; thus giving the Frenchadmiral "a pretence to claim the victory; and, lastly, with having, on themorning of the 28th of July, instead ofpursuing the enemy, led the Britishfleet in an opposite direction.The charge brought against Repelappears to have been very unpopular ;and a memorial was presented to theking, signed by Lord Hawke, andeleven other officers of distinction in thenaval service, praying his majesty notto countenance it. Orders, were, however,issued for the investigation ofRepel's conduct by a court-martial,which assembled in the Britannia, onthe 7th of January, 1799, and continueduntil the llth of the followingmonth, when the charge was solemnlydeclared to be ill-founded, and the behaviourof Repel to have been such asbecame a judicious, brave, and experiencedofficer. His acquittal was followedby the most enthusiastic re-joining, on the part of the public ; andboth houses of parliament, as well asthe city of London, and the WestIndia merchants, honoured him with avote of thanks for his gallantry andskill.In March, 1782, on the formation ofa new administration, he was appointedfirst lord of the admiralty, and sworna privy-counsellor. In the followingmonth, he was made admiral of thewhite, and created Viscount Repel,of Eldon, in the county of Suffolk.He quitted the admiralty board, onthe 28th of January, 1783, on accountof a coalition between his party, andsome of the members of the formergovernment : on the 8th of April hereturned to his post, but resigned itagain, on the 30th of December in thesame year. His death took place onthe 2nd of October, 1786. For manyyears prior to his being made a peer,he had been a member of the house ofcommons ; first for Colchester, secondlyfor Windsor, and finally for Surrey.Notwithstanding his general success,Admiral Repel appears to have possessedno more talent, as a commander,than some of his less fortunate contemporaries.He was, however, for a longperiod, the idol of the people ; and, it issaid, no officer in the service ever possessed,to a greater extent, the affectionof the navy. The celebrated AdmiralSir Charles Saunders left him an annuityof 1,200, besides a considerablesum in ready money; and the greatHawke, with many other distinguishedofficers, as we have already stated, interfered,but unsuccessfully, to preventhis being brought to a court-martial.After he had become a member of theadministration, he lost much of hispopularity, on account of his incapacityto fulfil the multitude of promises, intowhich his good-nature had unfortunatelybetrayed him.EARL HOWE.RICHARD, EARL HOWE.RlCHARD, third son of the secondViscount Howe, was born on the19th of March, 1722 ; and receivedhis education at Westminster School,and Eton. At the age of fourteen, he-becamea midshipman, on board theSevern, one of the squadron commandedby Lord Anson. He was soonafter made a lieutenant ; and, at theage of eighteen, cut out of the harbourof St. Eustatia, an English merchantman,which had been captured by aFrench privateer. In 1743, he servedon board the Burford, in the unsuccessfulattack made by CommodoreKnowles, on the town of La Guira.He was next employed, under AdmiralVernon, in the Downs ; andtowards the conclusion of 1745, becamecommander of the Baltimore, ; in which, shortly after, he fell inwith two French ships, off the coastof Scotland, and, after a spirited engagement,compelled them to sheeroff. During the action, he receiveda wound in the head from a musket-ball,and was carried from the deckapparently lifeless, but soon recoveredsufficiently to resume his post. Forhis gallantry on this occasion, he wasmade a post-captain, and obtained thecommand of the Triton frigate, inwhich he sailed to Lisbon ; where heexchanged with Captain Melbourne,into the Ripon. He subsequentlyserved on the coast of Guinea and onthe Jamaica station, where he was appointedcaptain of the Cornwall, AdmiralKnowles's flag-ship ; in which,on the termination of hostilities, in1748, he returned to England; and,during the three following years, assiduouslydevoted himself to the studyof mathematics, and naval tactics.In 1751, he was appointed, successively,to the Glory, of forty-four guns,and the Mary yacht ; from which hewas removed, in the following year, tothe Dolphin frigate, and employed onrather difficult service, partly of a diplomaticnature, which he executed withgreat judgment, on the Gibraltar station; where, as it is stated, he was onenight hastily awakened, by the lieutenantof the watch, who informed him,with great agitation, that the ship hadtaken fire, near the magazine. " If thatbe the case," replied Howe, risingleisurely to put on his clothes, " weshall soon know it." The lieutenanthurried back to the scene of danger ;but speedily returned, exclaiming, " Youneed not be afraid, sir ; the fire is extinguished!" "Afraid!" exclaimed Howe;what do you mean by that? I neverwas afraid in my life ! Pray, sir, howdoes a man feel when he is afraid ?I need not ask you how he looks."In 1754, he returned to England;and, ti the following year, was appointedto the Dunkirk, one of theships put in commission, and sent outto America, under Admiral Boscawen,in consequence of an expected rupturewith France. While proceeding to itsdestination, the British squadron fellin with a few ships that had beenseparated from the French fleet, commandedby Bois de la Mother. Beingordered to give chase, Howe, in theDunkirk, soon overtook the Alcide,and " civilly requested that her commanderwould bring her down to theadmiral ;" which, however, the Frenchcaptain declined to do ; and askedHowe, if it were peace or war. As nopositive answer could be given to thisquestion, he repeated his refusal tocomply with the request of Howe ;who, consequently, after recommendingseveral military officers and theirwives, who were standing on the deckof the Alcide, to go below, preparedfor an engagement. The French, asit appears, commenced the action ;which, however, some others of theBritish squadron having come up, terminatedin their surrender.In 1757, he was elected member ofparliament for Dartmouth. In 1758, heserved, in the Magninime, under LordHawke, and highly distinguished himselfin the attacks made on the Isle ofAix, St. Malo, and Cherbourg. Duringthe last-mentioned year, he succeededto the family titles and estates, on theTHE NAVY.death of his brother, Viscount Howe, inAmerica. He subsequently displayedextraordinary courage and coolness, atthe unfortunate affair of St. Cas ; where,principally through his exertions, madeat the imminent peril of his life, greatnumbers of the wounded were preservedfrom falling into the enemy'shands. In the memorable action betweenthe British squadron and thatcommanded by De Conflans, his shipengaged, and conquered, the Hero,of seventy-four guns ; which, however,on account of the boisterous state ofthe weather, went ashore after she hadstruck, and was lost. About this period,Howe, as it is related, on being told,one night, during a heavy gale, thatthe anchors by which his ship hadbeen riding, had come home, coollyreplied, " They ate very much in theright of it ; for I don't know who wouldstay out, such a night as this."In 17CO, he was appointed colonel ofthe Chatham division of marines ; and,with his own, and two other ships, tooka small fort, on the French coast. In1761, he commanded, alternately withSir Thomas Stanhope, the squadronstationed in the Basque Roads ; in 1762,he removed to the Princess Amelia,of eighty guns; and on the 23rd ofApril, 1763, obtained a seat at theboard of admiralty ; which he resignedin 1765, when he became treasurer ofthe navy. On the 18th of October,1770, he was made rear-admiral of theblue, and appointed to the chief commandin the Mediterranean. In 1776,he proceeded, in the Eagle, of sixty-fourguns, at the head of a squadron, tothe coast of America ; where, however,through the insufficiency of his force,and the nature of the service, he performedno very brilliant exploit. Onhis return to England, in 1782, up towhich period he appears to have continuedto be the representative of Dartmouth,he was promoted to the rank ofadmiral of the blue, and created aviscount of Great Britain. On the llthof September, in the same year, he wasdespatched, with thirty-four ships, forthe relief of Gibraltar ; which he effected,notwithstanding the superiorityof the enemy's force. On his returnto England, he received the thanks ofboth houses of parliament for his services; and, early in 1783, obtainedthe first commissionership of the admiralty;which, however, he held onlyuntil the 8th of April ; but resumed iton the 30th of December, in the sameyear. On the 24th of September, 1787,he was made admiral of the white;on the 16th of July, 1788, he resignedthe first commissionership of the admiralty; and, on the 19th of the followingmonth, he was raised to an earldom.In 1790, he hoisted his flag on boardthe Queen Charlotte, and took the commandof a powerful force intended toact against the Spaniards ; but the differences,which it was expected wouldhave led to a war, being speedily adjusted,his fleet was dismantled. Onthe commencement of hostilities withFrance, in 1793, he assumed the chiefcommand in the channel ; and, towardsthe close of the year, had askirmish of little importance with theenemy. On the 2nd of May, 1794, hesailed from St. Helens, and discoveredthe French, far to windward, on themorning of the 28th. During thatand the following day, partial actionstook place; and, on the 1st of June,having obtained the weather-gauge,Lord Howe brought the enemy to ageneral engagement. In less than anhour, according to his lordship's despatches," the French admiral, engagedby the Queen Charlotte, crowded off,and was followed by most of the shipsof his van in condition to carry sailafter him, leaving ten or twelve ofhis crippled or totally dismasted ships,exclusive of one sunk in the engagement.The Queen Charlotte had thenlost her fore-top-mast, and the main-top-mastfell over the side very soonafter. The greater number of theother ships of the British fleet were, atthis time, so much disabled, or widelyseparated, and under such circumstanceswith respect to those ships ofthe enemy in a state for action, andwith which the firing was still continued,that two or three of their dismantledships, attempting to get away,under a sprit-sail singly, or smaller sailraised on the stump of the fore-mast,could not be detained. Seven remainedin our possession ; one of which, however,sunk before adequate assistancecould be given to her crew ; but manywere saved." On the 1 eth of June, LordHowe returned to Portsmouth; and,LORD GRAVES.on the 26th, the king and queen dinedon board his flag-ship ; on which occasion,his majesty presented him with avaluable sword, and a gold chain, towhich a medal, struck for the purpose,was appended. In the following year,he was made a knight of the Garter, ageneral of marines, and admiral of thefleet; the command of which he resignedin the month of April, 1797. Shortlyafterwards, although suffering from theeffects of a recent attack of gout, heaccepted plenary powers to treat withthe mutineers in the fleet, at Spithead ;whom he speedily prevailed on to returnto their duty. This was the lastpublic act of his life, which terminatedon the 5th of August, 1799 ; and amonument was, some time after, erectedto his memory, in St. Paul's Cathedral,at the national expense. He had married,in March, 1758, the daughter ofCheveron Hartopp, Esq., by whom heleft one child.In his naval capacity, Lord Howeexcelled in prudence many of those towhom he was equal in courage as wellas skill. Brenton has said of him, inremarking upon the battle of the 1st ofJune, 1794, that, " if all had been properlymanaged, he might have completedthe greatest naval campaign recordedin history :" but his determination, afterhaving achieved so splendid a victory,to let well alone," will, doubtless, beconsidered, by many, as having beenthe best to which he could have come.It is clear, that he was by no meansdeficient in love of enterprise, andpromptitude of decision. Hawke saidof him " He never asked me how liewas to execute any service, but wentand performed it;" and his energyand self-exposure, in bringing off thewounded from St. Cas, was a splendidevidence, as much of a daring disposition,under circumstances which calledfor its display, as of admirable humanity.Though most deservedly popularwith the seamen," says Mason, " hehad no spice of the tar in his personalbehaviour. His domestic habits wereunassuming, candid, and friendly ; theyevinced, too, that he was habituallyattached to piety and temperance." Ofhis generosity and patriotism he gave aremarkable proof, early in 1798, whena voluntary subscription was set onfoot for defraying the expenses of thewar; on which occasion, although byno means wealthy, he contributed thewhole of his year's pay to the fund.As a senator, this distinguished manwas never brilliant, and often obscure;but, whatever he said was spoken uponconviction ; and the navy had, in him,its most zealous, although, perhaps, oneof its least eloquent, parliamentary advocates.He was so far above the weaknessof professional jealousy, that nomember of the legislature expressedgreater satisfaction at the successful exploitsof his naval contemporaries thanhimself. During the debate on Rodney'svictory, he not only eulogizedthat eminent commander's conduct,but took considerable pains to makehis naval excellence intelligible to landsmen."His conduct while in office, isstated by Mason, apparently with correctness,to have met with general approval: " I only say general," continueshe ; " it is not in the nature of thingsfor a rectifier of abuses to give universalsatisfaction."For a long period, Lord Howe wasknown in the navy by the soubriquetof Black Dick, which he had acquiredby hanging a mezzotint portrait ofhimself in his cabin. The original, itappears, had been taken by a foreignartist, without his knowledge; and hisamazement, on being presented withthe print, which he thought was aremarkable likeness, is described ashaving bordered on the ludicrous.THOMAS, LORD GRAVES.THOMAS, second son of Admiral ThomasGraves, was born about the year1725 ; and, after having successivelyserved, on various important occasions,under Hawke, Anson, and other distinguishedadmirals, obtained, in 1759, thecommand of the Unicorn frigate ; fromwhich, in 1761, he was removed to theAntelope, on the North American, station,and appointed governor of New-theNAVY.foundling ; in which capacity, he actedwith such promptitude, prudence, andenergy, on the capture of St. John's,by a French squadron, in 1762, thatthe place was speedily retaken. Onreturning to England, he proposednew regulations for the governmentand security of the island, which wereadopted by ministers. In 1764, he wassent, with a squadron, to inquire intothe conduct of the governors of certainforts on the coast of Africa, some ofwhom were removed, owing to theabuses which, while on this service, hediscovered. In 1769, he commandedthe Temeraire, a guard-ship, at Plymouthi in 1775, he became a colonelof marines; in 1776, he was appointedto the Nonsuch, guard-ship ; and, aboutthe same time, obtained his return toparliament, for a borough in Cornwall,n 1779, he became rear-admiral of theblue, and went out in the Conqueror,of seventy-four guns, with AdmiralByron's squadron, but soon returnedin charge of a convoy.In 1780, he sailed to America, with areinforcement of six ships of the line,for Admiral Arbuthnot ; and, in hisway out, captured a valuable FrenchEast Indiaman. On the 26th of September,in the same year, he was maderear-admiral of the red ; and, in July,1781, Admiral Arbuthnot having returnedto England, he took the chiefcommand on the American station.Being soon afterwards joined by fourteensail of the line, under Sir SamuelHood, he went in search of the CountDe Grasse, with whom, on the 5th ofSeptember, 1781, he came to a partialengagement, which was not immediatelyrenewed, owing to the disabledstate of many of the English ships.Having obtained reinforcements at NewYork, which, however, still left theBritish force much inferior, in point ofnumber, to that of the enemy, heplaced himself, for two days, in such asituation as he thought would bring theFrench to battle : but, as De Grasseseemed disinclined to risk an action,Graves resigned the command to Rear-admiralDigby, and sailed, on the 10thof November, for Jamaica, where hehad been ordered to join AdmiralParker. During his passage, he capturedthe Imperious, of thirty-eightguns ; and, on his arrival, was employedwith General Campbell, in concertingmeasures for the defence of the island,against an expected attack.In 1782, he took the command of asquadron, having under its protectionseveral prizes which had been capturedfrom De Grasse, and a number of merchant vessels. On itspassage, the fleet was almost entirelydispersed, by a storm, in which severalof the ships were lost, and the Families,in which Graves had hoisted his flag,suffered so much injury, that it becamenecessary to abandon her. The admiralarrived, safely, at Cork, but several ofthe fleet were taken by French privateers,which had set out in pursuit ofit immediately on receiving the newsof its dispersion.On the 24th of September, 1787, hewas promoted to the rank of vice-admiralof the blue ; and in 1788, havingbeen made commander-in-chief at Plymouth,he took his station on boardthe Impregnable, of ninety guns ; fromwhich, on the anticipation of a war withSpain, he removed to the Cambridge.On the 21st of September, 1790, he becamevice-admiral of the white; andwhen hostilities with France were renewed,he obtained a command in thechannel fleet, under Lord Howe. Onthe 1st of February, 1793, he was madevice-admiral of the red ; and on the 12thof April, 1794, admiral of the blue. Onthe 1st of the following June, he servedas second in command, under LordHowe, in the celebrated engagementwith the French fleet, on which occasion,his vessel, the Royal Sovereign,after having attacked and nearly capturedthe Terrible, which bore the flagof the French second in command,succeeded in taking L'Amerique, ofseventy-four guns.As a reward for his conduct, in thebattle, during which he received awound, he was raised to the Irishpeerage, and obtained a pension of1,000 per annum. On the 1st of June,1795, he became admiral of the white;and died, on the 31st of January,1802. By his wife, a daughter of WilliamPeer Williams, of Cathay, Esq.,he left two sons and two daughters.Although his career was not remarkablybrilliant, his conduct, as a commander,appears to have been decidedlyworthy of approbation.VISCOUNT Bridgeport.ALEXANDER HOOD, VISCOUNT Bridgeport.ALEXANDER, younger brother ofLord Viscount Hood, was born in theyear 1728. On the 2nd of December,1746, he became a lieutenant in thenavy ; and, on the 10th of June, 1756,he was promoted to the rank of post-captain.In the succeeding year, beingin the command of the Antelope, hesignalized himself by attacking theAquilon, of forty-eight guns and fourhundred and fifty men, which he droveon shore, after a running fight of twohours' duration. On the following dayhe captured a French privateer, mountingsixteen swivel guns, which hadbeen in company with the Aquilon, theday before her engagement with theAntelope. In 1758, with the. Minervafrigate, of thirty-two guns, to which hehad been removed, he took a privateerfrom Bayonne ; and a few days after,re-captured the Warwick.In August, 1761, his frigate formedpart of the squadron appointed to convoythe Princess Charlotte of MecklenburgStrelitz to England. At the closeof the same year, he obtained the commandof the Africa, a newly-launchedthird-rate, of sixty four guns, withwhich he served, under Sir CharlesSaunders, in the Mediterranean, duringthe remainder of the war. In 1763, hewas commissioned to the Thunderer,of seventy-four guns, a guard-ship atPortsmouth ; and, in 1766, he becametreasurer of Greenwich hospital. Hewas subsequently nominated to theRomney, of fifty guns, and employedas commodore on the North Americastation. In 1778, he removed to theRobuste, seventy-four, which, in theencounter with the French fleet, offUshant, on the 27th of July, was oneof the seconds to Sir Hugh Palliser,who commanded, under Repel, theblue division of the fleetOn the 26th of September, 1780, heattained the rank of rear-admiral ofthe white ; in 1782, he was sent outunder Lord Howe, to Gibraltar ; and,at the conclusion of the war, he appearsto have been second in command atPortsmouth. In 1784, he was returnedto parliament for Bridgewater, and,shortly after, for the town of Buckingham.In 1787, he became vice-admiralof the white ; and, in the following year,a knight companion of the Bath. In1790, he hoisted his flag in the London,of ninety guns, as fourth in commandof the channel fleet. After having beenmade rear-admiral of England, he waspromoted, on the 1st of February, 1793,to the rank of vice-admiral of the red,and, immediately afterwards, obtaineda command under Earl Howe, in themain fleet. On the 12th of April, 1794,he was made admiral of the blue, andso highly distinguished himself in thebattle of the 1st of the following June,that he was created an Irish peer, bythe title of Baron Bridport.On the 13th of June, 1795, he sailedfrom Spithead, with fourteen sail ofthe line, five frigates, two fire-ships,and a lugger, to cruise off the coastof France ; and on the 22nd of thesame month, descried an enemy's fleet,consisting of twelve ships of the line,eleven frigates, and some smaller vessels,to which he instantly gave chase,and, on the following day, after asmart action, captured the Alexander,the Formidable, and the Tigre,line-of-battle ships, almost under thebatteries of Port L'L'Orient. Somedays prior to this engagement, hehad been made admiral of the white ;and, on the 15th of March, 1796, hesucceeded Lord Howe, as vice-admiralof Great Britain. On the 31st of May,in the same year, he was raised to theEnglish peerage, by his former title ;and, when Earl Howe retired, he becamecommander-in-chief of the channelfleet. In April, 1797, his flag was pulleddown, during the mutiny at Spithead, bythe disaffected seamen ; who, however,wrote to him on the following day,disavowing all intention of personaloffence, and styling him their fatherand friend. He then went on board hisship, carrying with him a complianceto the demands of the men, as well asthe 'king's pardon. Upon this, theyreturned to duty, but, when the fleetTHE NAVY.had reached St. Helen's, and the signalwas made for sailing, the mutineersrefused to proceed, alleging that thegovernment did not intend to performits promises. Matters were, however,soon after adjusted, by Lord Howe, andthe fleet sailed on the 16th of May, inin pursuit of the enemy.Lord Bridport subsequently became ,admiral of the red, a general of marines,and, in 1801, a viscount. He was twicemarried: first, to a niece of Lord Cobham,and, on her decease, to a MissBray ; but died without issue, on the 3rdof May, 1814. He appears to have beenfully entitled to the honours and reputationhe enjoyed for the general talenthe displayed, when in chief command,and his courage and conduct as a subordinate.SAMUEL BARRINGTON.SAMUEL, the fifth son of John, firstViscount Barrington, was born in theyear 1729. In 1747, he commandedthe Weasle, sloop-of-war, from which,on the 29th of May following, hewas removed to the Bellona frigate,and, soon after, captured the Due deChartres, a French East India ship,carrying thirty guns, and one hundredand ninety-five men, after an actionof two hours and a half duration. Towardsthe close of the year, he waspromoted to the Romney, of fifty guns,and, in 1750, had the command of theSeahorse, of twenty guns, employed inthe Mediterranean. He was afterwardssuccessively appointed to the Crown,the Norwich, and the Achilles ; in thelatter of which, he served in the unsuccessfulexpedition against Rochefort.In 1758, he was employed underCaptain Patten ; and, early in 1759,after a close engagement of two hours'duration, off Cape Finisterre, he tooka French ship, called the Count deSt. Florentine, carrying sixty guns andfour hundred men. In 1760, he sailedfor Louisburg; and in the succeedingyear, served under Commodore Repel,in the expedition against Belleisle.Shortly before the conclusion of thewar, he was removed from the Achillesto the Hero, of seventy-four guns, andplaced under the command of SirThomas Hardy.In 1761, he became captain of theVenus, of thirty six guns, in which thelate Duke of Cumberland was enteredunder him as midshipman. In October,Barrington left the ship for a shorttime, in order that his royal highnessmight receive the rank of post-captain ;and when the duke was promotedto the rank of rear-admiral of theblue, proceeded with him to Lisbon,as his captain. In 1771, he was appointedto the Albion ; and, in 1777, tothe Prince of Wales, of seventy-fourguns, in which, he appears to havebeen very successful in distressing theAmericans. On the 23rd of January,1778, he was invested with the rank ofrear-admiral of the white, and orderedto the West Indies, as commander-in-chiefon that station, where, in thesummer, he was joined by a small squadron,under Commodore Hotham, withthe assistance of which, he reducedSt. Lucia. On the 6th of January, 1779,he was superseded in his command byAdmiral Byron ; under whom he commandedthe van division of the fleet,and received a wound, in the battle withCount Detesting, which took place inthe following July.He soon afterwards returned to England,and acted, for a short time, assecond in command of the channelfleet. On the 16th of the followingSeptember, he was made vice-admiralof the white; and, in April, 1782, hehoisted his flag on board the Britannia,a first-rate, in which he was detachedwith a squadron, to intercept a Frenchfleet, bound to the East Indies. Ofthese, the ships under his commandsucceeded in capturing eleven out ofeighteen transports, and the Pegasusand Dictionnaire men-of-war. In thefollowing autumn, he commanded thevan of the main fleet, sent out underLord Howe, to relieve Gibraltar; inVISCOUNT DUNCAN.1785, he acted as a member of theboard of land and sea officers, appointedto investigate and report onthe best system of national defence ;on the 24th of September, 1787, heattained the rank of admiral of theblue ; and, in 1790, on the apprehensionof a war with Spain, he was againnominated second in command of themain fleet, under Lord Howe. On the12th of April, 1794, he became admiralof the white ; on the 5th of August,1798, general of the Chatham marines,and, in 1785, lieutenant-general of thatcorps. He died at Bath, on the 16thof August, 1800.Admiral Barrington was a man ofhigh honour, undoubted courage, strictintegrity, and admirable benevolence.He devoted himself with extraordinaryzeal, when not engaged in active service,to the establishment of a societyfor the relief of indigent naval officers,their widows, and children; which, inspite of many difficulties, and withoutbeing aided by the public purse, arrivedto an efficient and prosperouscondition.ADAM, VISCOUNT DUNCAN.Adam, the son of Alexander Duncan,was born in Scotland, on the 1st of July,1731, and commenced his naval career,under Captain Haldane,of theShorehamfrigate. In 1749, he served, as a midshipman,in the Centurion, under CommodoreRepel, on the Mediterraneanstation ; and, in 1755, became secondlieutenant of the Norwich, a fourth-rate,one of the squadron sent out with thetroops, under General Braddock, toNorth America. He was next employedon board the Torbay, of seventy-fourguns, of which, after having beenwounded in the attack on Goreee, hewas made first lieutenant In 1759, heobtained the rank of commander, and in1761, that of post-captain, on board theValiant, seventy-four, with which heassisted in the expeditions against Havannah. At the latter place,he was intrusted, by Repel, with thecommand of the boats employed inlanding the military; and on the surrenderof the town, was directed to takepossession of the Spanish men-of-warin the harbour. Some discussion arisingas to a few ships on the stocks, whichthe governor appears to have beendesirous of saving, Duncan, it is said,privately took a few persons on whomhe could depend, and put an end to thecontroversy, by setting fire to the causeof it. This act," it is added, " wasmuch approved by the besiegers, inboth departments of the service, as themost expeditious mode of settling atroublesome dispute : for obvious reasons,however, the affair was keptextremely quiet; and it was knownonly to a very few persons, by whatmeans this apparent accident so fortunatelyand critically happened."During the remainder of the war, heserved on the Jamaica station, and, onthe re-commencement of hostilities, wasappointed to the Suffolk, seventy-four,from which he soon after removed tothe Monarch, of the same rate. Duringthe summer of 1779, he appears to havebeen employed in the channel fleet ;and at the conclusion of the year, accompaniedRodney to the relief ofGibraltar. In the battle between theBritish and Spanish fleets, on the 16thof January, in the next year, he bore aconspicuous part. Although his ship,the Monarch, was not coppered, and wasaltogether unadapted for fast sailing, hepressed her a-head of her consorts, andcommenced the action. After a shortbut animated encounter with the SanAugustin, and two other line-of-battleships, the latter sheered off, and theformer struck to the Monarch ; which,however, had been so damaged in therigging, by the fire of her opponents,that Duncan found it impossible tohoist out a boat for the purpose ofboarding his prize; and was, consequently,obliged to resign the honourof taking possession of her to anothercommander.In 1782, he was appointed to theBlenheim, of ninety guns, in whichhe proceeded, with Lord Howe, to therelief of Gibraltar. He next obtainedthe command of the Foudroyant, fromTHE NAVY.which, in 1783, he was removed to theEdgar, one of the guard-ships at Portsmouth.In 1787, he became rear-admiralof the blue; in 1790, rear-admiralof the white; in 1793, vice-admiral ofthe blue ; and, in 1794, vice-admiral ofthe white. Notwithstanding these promotions,and though urgent for employment,he was allowed to remain inactiveuntil the month of February, 1795, whenhe received the command of a squadronstationed in the North Sea, to act againstthe Dutch, who had a fleet lying readyfor service in the Texel. In the followingJune, he was made admiral of theblue ; and in 1796, several Russian shipswere added to his force. Early in thenext year, the mutiny which had brokenout in the channel fleet, spread to thatunder his command ; and he was, forsome time, left to blockade the Texelwith only two ships, his own (theVenerable) and the Adamant. Whilein this critical situation, by constantlymaking signals, as if there were shipsin the offing, he led the Dutch admiralto believe that the whole of his squadronwas at hand. At length, he receivedinformation that symptoms of mutinyhad appeared among his own crew ; thewhole of whom he immediately orderedon deck, and firmly told them that hewould, with his own hand, put to deaththe first man, who should presume todisplay the slightest symptom of rebellion.Then, addressing himself to oneof the disaffected, he asked, " Do you,sir, want to take the command of theship out of my hands?" The manimmediately replied in the affirmative ;and Duncan, would, as it is stated,have carried his threat into instantexecution, had not his arm beenarrested by the chaplain. He thenexclaimed, in an agitated tone, " Letthose who will stand by me and myofficers, pass over immediately to thestarboard side of the ship, that we maysee who are our friends, and who areour opponents." The whole crewobeyed, with the exception of six, whowere immediately seized and put inirons, but restored to liberty, after abrief confinement, on expressing contritionfor their conduct.Shortly after, Duncan having retiredto the Yarmouth Roads, De Winter,with his squadron, put to sea ; and nosooner had the intelligence of his departurefrom the Texel reached theBritish fleet, than all the refractorycrews returned to their duty. Duncanimmediately set sail in quest of theenemy, with whom he came in sight onthe llth of October, 1797, at aboutnine o'clock in the morning, off Cam-person,and after a pursuit of threehours' duration, succeeded in gettingbetween them and the land. At half-pasttwelve he passed through theirline, and after a severe action, capturedtwo frigates, and nine line-of-battleships, including those of De Winter andhis vice-admiral. For this brilliant victory,he was created a viscount, votedthe thanks of parliament, and granteda pension of 3,000 per annum, for life,with reversion to his two immediatesuccessors in the title.On the 14th of February, 1799, hewas made admiral of the white; earlyin the following year, he relinquishedhis command in the North Sea, andpassed the brief residue of his lifein retirement. He died at Cornwall,while on his way to Edinburgh, ofgout in the stomach, on the 4th ofAugust, 1804; leaving several childrenby his wife, a daughter of Lord PresidentDundas. In addition to his otherhonours, he had obtained the Russianorder of St. Alexander Newsky.The character of Duncan appears tohave been truly admirable. He waspatient under difficulties, energetic inaction,and modest when victorious ; asteady friend, an affectionate relative,and a kind commander. In him, themost lofty daring was associated withthe purest spirit of piety : previouslyto the battle of Camperdown, when allon board were ready for action, heknelt on the deck, for the purpose offervently commending the cause of hiscountry to Almighty protection ; andafter the battle, he called his crewtogether, and returned thanks to heavenfor the victory they had obtained.At the age of eighteen, he is said tohave been six feet four inches high.The Dutch admiral, De Winter, beingalmost as tall as himself, Duncan observedto him, after the engagement offCamperdown, " I wonder how you andI, sir, have escaped the balls in thishot battle !"KARL 8T. VINCENT.JOHN JERVIS, EARL ST. VINCENT.JOHN, second son of Swynfen Jervis,Esq., barrister at law, was born atBedford, in Staffordshire, on the 9th ofJanuary, 1734, and received his elementaryeducation at the grammar-schoolof Burton-upon-Trent. Althoughoriginally intended for the law, he enteredthe navy at the age of ten, underthe command of Admiral Rodney.After the peace of Aix-la-chapelle, hevisited France, where he appears tohave prosecuted his studies, until 1749,when he proceeded, as a midshipman,on board the Gloucester, to the Jamaicastation. He was made a lieutenant, onthe 19th of February, 1755 j and, inthe expedition against Quebec, servedon board the flag-ship of Sir CharlesSaunders, who soon afterwards advancedhim to the rank of commander.On his return to England, in 1760,he was made a post-captain, and appointedto the Gosport, in which shiphe continued until 1769, without anyopportunity of obtaining notice. In1778, he captured the Pallas, a Frenchfrigate, of thirty-two guns, with theFoudroyant, to which he had been removedin 1774 ; and in the engagementthat took place soon after between theFrench and English fleets, his ship wasclosely engaged with the enemy. InApril, 1782, while serving in the sameship, which then formed part of a squadron,under the command of AdmiralHarrington, being separated from hiscompanions, by a fog, he engaged, andcaptured, the Pegasus, a French ship ofseventy-four guns. During the contest,Jervis was struck, by a splinter, onthe temple, with such force as permanentlyto affect his powers of sight.The French commander, after hehad been made prisoner, prepared anaccount of the battle, to transmit to theminister of marine, which he thoughtproper to submit to Jervis, who, uponbeing asked his opinion as to its merits,replied, " that it had but one fault,namely, that not one word of it wastrue." " But," replied the Frenchman," I must justify myself." Hetherefore forwarded the account, forwhich, however, soon after his arrival atBrest, he was ignominiously dismissedfrom the service.On his return to England, Jervis wasinvested with the order of the Bath ;and, on the 5th of June, 1783, he marriedhis cousin, the daughter of Sir T.Parker. He subsequently representedHigh Combe, but vacated his seatin 1794, having, early in that year, acceptedthe command of a squadron,destined to assist Sir Charles Greyin the reduction of the West Indiaislands. This service was performedwith great spirit and perseverance ; but,owing to the sickness of the Britishforces, they were unable to retain thewhole of their conquests. An investigationas to the partial failure of theenterprise followed, which terminatedhonourably to both of the commanders,who were shortly afterwards presentedwith the freedom of the city of London,and the thanks of parliament.On the 1st of June, 1795, Sir JohnJervis attained the rank of admiral ofthe blue, and, although his health hadseverely suffered from the climate,while serving in the West Indies, heaccepted the command in the Mediterranean.The Spanish admiral havingput to sea from Cordova, on the 4th ofFebruary, 1797, Sir John Jervis immediatelywent in pursuit of him, with asquadron of only fifteen sail of the line,four frigates, a sloop of war, and a cutter,although the enemy's fleet consisted ofeighteen seventy-fours, two eighty-fours,six three-deckers, carrying onehundred and twelve guns each, andone four-decker, mounting one hundredand thirty-six. On the 5th, the Spaniardspassed Gibraltar, and left threeline-of-battle ships in the bay. Afew days after, they were discoveredby one of the English frigates; and, onthe night of the 13th, the two fleetswere so close to each other, that theirsignal guns were mutually heard. Onthe morning of the 14th, the whole ofthe Spanish fleet was visible to theBritish. Some of their ships appearingto be separated from the main body,THE NAVY.Jervis immediately conceived the ideaof cutting them off. Accordingly, heformed his squadron in line of battlea-head and astern, and pushing throughthe enemy, completely attained his object.By this manoeuvre, his immediateopponents were reduced to eighteen sailof the line. About noon, the Spanishadmiral attempted to wear round, andjoin his ships to leeward, but beingfrustrated, he endeavoured to sheer off.His retreat was, however, effectuallyprevented by the tactics of Jervis, andthe daring gallantry of his subordinates.The enemy being thus forced to a closeaction, suffered a signal defeat, losingfour of their ships, and an immensenumber of their men.By this defeat, the much-dreadedunion of the French, Dutch, and Spanishfleets, which would have amounted tothe appalling force of eighty sail of theline, was prevented. On his return toEngland, the victorious admiral receivedthe thanks of both houses of parliament,as well as a gold medal from theking, the title of Earl St. Vincent, anda pension of 3,000 per annum.He was subsequently employed inthe blockade of Cadizz ; but resigned hiscommand, in consequence of ill health,and returned to Portsmouth, on the18th of August, 1799. In 1800, he commandedthe channel fleet ; and, duringthe same year, received the appointmentof lieutenant-general of marines.In 1801, he was placed at the head ofthe admiralty, from which he retiredin 1804. In 1806, he resumed thecommand of the channel fleet, whichhe held until April, 1807. In 1814, hebecame a general of marines; and, in1821, admiral of the fleet. He diedwithout issue, on the 15th of March,1823 ; and, three years after, a splendidmonument was erected to his memory,in St. Paul's cathedral.Earl St. Vincent was a man of whomthis country is justly proud. He roseto the highest rank in his profession, bythe most honourable means; and rivalledthe greatest of his naval contemporaries,in genius, enterprise, and intrepidity.Though a strict disciplinarian, he wasmuch beloved by his subordinates,whose affections he gained without compromisinghis dignity. Endowed withthe most daring courage himself, henever seems, for an instant, to havedoubted that of his officers and men ;and consequently encountered, withoutthe least hesitation, difficulties anddangers which, to many others, wouldhave appeared insurmountable. Whenthe motion for a vote of thanks to thiscelebrated commander was brought forwardin the house of lords, the Dukeof Clarence said that, without meaningthe slightest offence to any otherperson, he did not hesitate to declarethat, in his opinion, Sir John Jervis wasthe best officer in his majesty's service.His private life was characterised bystrict integrity, and his political careerby a zealous regard for the welfare ofthe community. While first lord of theadmiralty, he rectified many abuses inthe navy with regard to expenditure,as well as discipline. His habits werefrugal, and, when in health, he is saidto have regularly commenced the employmentsof the day about sunrise.It is related of this admiral, that, whilecruising in the Mediterranean, he hadoccasion, at one time, to hold out seriousthreats against the Emperor ofMorocco, who, on inquiring what theBritish commander could do to injurehim, was told that, at a certain expense,(the amount of which was mentioned,)he might destroy a number of forts onthe coast. " Tell him, then," said theemperor, " that I will destroy themmyself for one half the money."SIR THOMAS Parley.THOMAS, fifth son of James Pasley,of Craig, in Dumfrieshire, in Scotland,was born there on the 2nd of March,1734; and, in 1752, commenced hisnaval career, as a midshipman, on boardthe Garland frigate. He was, soonafter, transferred to the Weasel, ,in which he successively servedunder Captains Cockburn, Webber, andDigby ; with the latter of whom heSIR THOMAS Parley.removed to the Biddeford, and fromthat vessel to the Dunkirk, which, in1757, formed part of the unsuccessfulexpedition to the coast of France.On his return to Portsmouth, he becamean established lieutenant on boardthe Roman Emperor fire-ship; but,shortly after, he was transferred, at hisown request, to the Hussar frigate,commanded by Captain Elliot, withwhom he was subsequently removed tothe A-'.olus, of thirty-six guns, in whichlie highly distinguished himself, duringthe battle with Thurot, off the coast ofIreland, in 1760.Being promoted to the rank of commodore,he was appointed to the Albany,sloop-of-war, employed in convoyingships to and from the port of Milford.He afterwards sailed to the coast ofGuinea, in his old sloop, the Weasel,from which he removed to the Pomona.In 1771, he was made post-captain, andappointed to the Seahorse, of twentyguns ; in which, during the contest withthe Caribs, he rendered essential service,it is said, in the West Indies. Returningto England in the ensuingyear, he continued unemployed till1776, when, in the Glasgow, he convoyeda valuable fleet of merchantmento and from the West Indies.His next service was in the Sybil, oftwenty-eight guns, under Admiral Edwards,on the Newfoundland station.In 1780, he was promoted to the Jupiter,of fifty guns, and sailed withCommodore Johnstonee, on a secret expedition,at the commencement of theensuing year. In the attack made onthe British squadron in Port PrayaaRoad by the French, under M. deSuffrein, his ship, the Jupiter, wasespecially distinguished for the powerand force of her fire. He had a share inthe capture that followed, of the DutchEast India ships, surprised in SaldanhaBay; and in May, 1782, went out to theWest Indies with Admiral Pigot, whohad been appointed to supersede LordRodney.Soon after his arrival, he had the goodfortune to make five captures. One of hisprizes was, however, re-taken, and carriedinto Havannah, by her own crew;who apprized the Spanish admiral ofthe fact, that the Jupiter had struckupon a shoal; and two ships, an eighty-fourand a sixty-four, were immediatelysent out to attack her. In the meantimePasley had set the Jupiter afloat ;but she had received so much injury,that he found it impossible to avoid acontest: he, therefore, brought to, andprepared for action. The Spaniards,however, were so intimidated by hisresolution, that they hauled their wind,and sheered off.Peace being soon after concluded, hereturned to England, and passed thefive following years in domestic retirement.In 1788, he was appointed tothe chief command in the Medway ;from which station, he was ordered tojoin the channel fleet, with the Bellerophon.After having commanded forthree years at Chatham, he remainedwithout employment until the commencementof the war with France,in 1793, when he hoisted his broadpendant on board the Bellerophon, ascommodore, and joined the main fleetunder Lord Howe. On the 12th ofApril, 1794, he became rear-admiral ofthe white; and, in the course of thesame year, was created a baronet, andobtained a pension of 1,000 per annum,for his admirable conduct in the greatbattle fought on the 1st of June, inwhich he had the misfortune to lose oneof his legs.In 1793, he was appointed com-mander-in-chief in the Thames andMedway ; and, in 1799, port-admiralat Portsmouth. At the termination ofhis command, he retired altogetherfrom active life, and died, at his seatnear Alton, Hants, on the 29th ofNovember, 1808; leaving two daughters,by his wife, Mary, daughter of ThomasHaywood, Esq., chief justice of theIsle of Man. He appears to have possessedall the qualifications necessaryfor a naval commander; so that, hadhe enjoyed the same opportunities, it isfar from rash to conclude that he wouldhave acquired the same renown as hismore fortunate contemporaries.204 THE Navy.SIR HYDE PARKER, THE YOUNGER.HYDE PARKER, second son of theunfortunate vice-admiral of the samename, was born in 1739, and went tosea, when a mere child, under hisfather, on board the Lively frigate. In1757, he served, as midshipman, inthe Squirrel; and, in 1758, he wasappointed lieutenant of the Brilliant;from which, in 1760, he removed, withhis father, to the Norfolk ; and waspresent, in the Panther, at the successfulattack on Manilla. Shortly after, henarrowly escaped being wrecked amongthe Naranjos, while in pursuit of alarge Spanish vessel, which, on hercapture, was found to have on board acargo worth 500,000.In 1763, he became a post-captain ;and, in 1770, served in the Phoenix,a small two-decker, of forty-four guns,on the American station, where he distinguishedhimself in the attacks madeon different posts and batteries, preparatoryto the attempt on New York ;and obtained the honour of knighthood,for the skill and courage whichhe displayed in forcing a passage abovethe enemy's works, at Jeffrey's Hook,on York island.On the 27th of November, 1778, hesailed from Sandy Hook with a squadron,carrying a small military force,against Savannah, which he reachedon the 23rd of December, and its submissionspeedily ensued. The Phoenixbeing now much in want of repair,he returned with her to England ;whence, in the same ship, which hadin the interim been completely refitted,he sailed for Jamaica, at the latter partof the following year ; and, some timeafterwards, was wrecked, in a tremendoushurricane, about three leaguesto the eastward of Vera Cruz. Hesucceeded, however, by his energy andprudence on this occasion, not only insaving nearly the whole of his crew,but also in getting on shore a quantityof stores, and four of the ship's guns.He then despatched his first-lieutenantin a boat, to Montego Bay, for relief;prior to the arrival of which, being inan enemy's country, he had constructedsufficient defences to prevent asurprise.On his return to England, he wasappointed to the Latona frigate, anddespatched to the Baltic. In August,1781, he was present at the action withthe Dutch, off the Dogger Bank ; and,soon afterwards, obtained the commandof the Goliath, a new ship of seventy-fourguns, attached to the channel fleet.In 1782, he led the van division of thefleet sent out for the relief of Gibraltar,and bore a share in the action withthe combined forces of France andSpain. After the termination of hostilities,the Goliath was retained incommission as a guard-ship, at Portsmouth.In 1787, Parker was removedto the Orion ; and, in 1790, after ashort retirement, became captain ofthe Brunswick. In February, 1793,he was promoted to the rank of rear-admiralof the white; and, soon after,having proceeded to the Mediterraneanas first captain to Lord Howe, waspresent at the surrender of Toulon,and the reduction of Corsica : prior towhich events, he had hoisted his flagonboard the St. George, as vice-admiralof the blue.In 1796, he took the command atJamaica ; in 1799, he was made admiralof the red ; and, in 1800, becamesecond in command of the channelfleet. In 1807, he commanded in chiefat the memorable attack of Copenhagen; shortly after which, he retiredfrom the service, and died, at his housein Great Cumberland-place, on the16th of March, 1807. He was twicemarried; first, to Anne, daughter ofJ. P. Bother, Esq. of Henley, by whomhe had three sons ; and, secondly, inDecember, 1801, to a daughter ofAdmiral Sir Richard Onslow. Heappears to have been not only eminentas a commander, but decidedly estimablein all the relations of privatelife.WILLIAM CORNWALLIS.WILLIAM CORNWALLIS.WlLLIAM, fourth son of Charles,fifth Lord, and first Earl of Cornwallis,was born on the 20th of February,1743-4, and appointed a lieutenant inthe navy, in 1761. In 1762, he wasmade commander of the Swift, j in April, 1765, of the PrinceEdward, of forty guns; and, in 1767,of the Guadaloupe, of thirty-two guns,in which he served for a period ofthree years in the Mediterranean. Hewas next appointed to the Pallas, ofthirty-six guns, on the African station,where he continued until 1776, whenhe was commissioned to the Isis, of fiftyguns, and proceeding to North America,signalised himself at the attack of FortIsland, on the river Delaware. In 1778,he sailed, in the Lion, of sixty-fourguns, to the West Indies, and servedwith great credit under Vice-admiralByron, in the action off Grenada ; afterwhich, the Lion being in a shatteredstate, he bore away for Jamaica.In March, 1779, being then in commandof the Lion, and two smallerships of war, while cruising off MonteChristii, he gallantly engaged a superiorFrench force, which, on the approachof some English frigates, sheered off andescaped. In the following June, whenhe appears to have had the commandof five ships of the line, and a frigate,he fell in with a French fleet, bound toNorth America, under the convoy oftenor eleven two-deckers, three or fourfrigates, a cutter, and an armed brig.Both squadrons made preparations foran engagement, and some shots werefired; but, as the French admiral,De Ternay, stated, in his despatches,knowing the magnitude of the expeditionwith which he was intrusted,and finding, from his conduct, that theofficer who had the honour of commandingthe British squadron wasnot to be trifled with, he (De Ternay)judged it most prudent to decline anyaction as much as possible." Accordingly,at the approach of night heproceeded on his course, and the nextmorning, not one of his ships wasvisible to the British squadron.At the close of the year, Cornwallisreturned to England ; and, in the ensuingspring, served in the fleet sent outfor the relief of Gibraltar, under Vice-admiralDarby; and subsequently, in theCanada, of seventy-four guns, he sailedto the West Indies, with Sir GeorgeRodney. In the encounters of thelatter with the Count De Quicken, onthe 9th and 12th of April, 1782, Cornwallissingly engaged, and captured, aFrench seventy-four; and fought theVille De Paris, while the fire of thelatter was most violent.In 1782, Cornwallis returned toEngland, his ship forming part of theconvoy to the homeward-bound fleet.He subsequently, for a short period,commanded the king's yacht; and, in1789, had the charge of a small squadronin the East Indies. On the 1st ofFebruary, 1793, he was made rear-admiralof the white ; and, in the nextyear, after having blockaded Pondicherry,while it was besieged on the landside,by a force under Colonel Braith-waite,heonce more returned to England.On the 12th of April, 1794, he wasraised to the rank of rear-admiral ofthe red ; on the 4th of July following,to that of vice-admiral of the blue ; and,on the 1st of June, 1795, to that ofvice-admiral of the red. Six days after,being then on a cruise with a smallsquadron, he chased two frigates, andcaptured a large Dutch vessel, whichthey had in tow. In the afternoon ofthe same day, he took eight merchantships, laden with wine, from Bordeaux; and, on the 17th of the month,after having gallantly sustained an attackfrom a very superior French force,off Brest, "he retreated with his ships,"says the author of the Naval History,in the form of a wedge, of which theRoyal Sovereign (his own vessel) wasthe apex ; and, whenever the enemyapproached sufficiently near, they weresoon taught to keep at a safer distance."For this masterly manoeuvre, the Britishadmiral obtained the thanks of bothhouses of parliament, and the admirationof the whole navy.THE NAVY.On the 10th of February, 1796, hewas appointed to the command of asquadron and convoy, destined for theWest Indies; but his ship, the RoyalSovereign, having, unfortunately, runfoul of a large transport, he put back torefit; leaving Captain Louis, in theMinotaur, to proceed with the fleet tothe place of its destination. The lordsof the admiralty, on being informed ofthe accident, ordered him to shift his flagto the Astrea frigate; to which, however,he is said to have declined removing.He was shortly afterwards broughtto a court-martial, by which he wascensured for not having proceeded inanother ship with the convoy, whenhis own was disabled, but acquittedof having refused to hoist his flag onboardthe StrainMarch, 1796, he was made rear-admiralof Great Britain ; in February,1799, admiral of the blue ; and, inFebruary, 1801, commander-in-chief ofthe channel fleet.In 1806, Earl St. Vincent, whomCornwallis had succeeded, resumed hispost ; and the latter, after having served,for a short time, as second in command,was compelled, by bad health, to retirefrom the service. For a number ofyears, he represented the borough ofEye, in Suffolk ; and, at one period,was member for Portsmouth. Threeyears before his death, which took placein 1819, he was created a knight commanderof the Bath. He left no issue.Cornwallis was evidently a persevering,talented, and courageous officer.It is related of him, that, when in theCanada, his crew having declared, bya round-robbin, that they would notfire a gun until their wages, (paymentof which had, by some accident, beendelayed) were discharged, he restoredcomplete subordination, by calmly addressingthem in the following terms :"My lads, the money cannot be paiduntil we return to port ; and as to yourthreat, I have only to say, that I shallput you alongside the first enemy'sship I fall in with, and I'm sure thedevil himself cannot keep you fromfighting her."SIR ROBERT CALDER.THIS officer, the fourth son of SirJames Calder, by a daughter of Rear-admiralRobert Hughes, was born onthe 2nd of July, 1745 ; and, havingentered the naval service in the year1759, became, in 1766, lieutenant ofthe Essex. On the 27th of August,1780, he was nominated post-captain;and, at the peace of 1783, commandedthe Thalia frigate, of thirty-sixguns, on the home station. In 1790,he was appointed to the Stately, ofsixty-four guns; which, however, wassoon afterwards paid off. In the followingyear, he served at Portsmouth,in the I}uke, of ninety-eight guns, ascaptain to Vice-admiral Roddam ; andin 1793, he was made commander ofthe Theseus, which formed part of LordHowe's fleet, in 1794, but bore no partin the battle which took place on the1st of June, in that year; having previouslybeen despatched, with a convoy,under the orders of Rear-admiralMontagu.In 1796, Calder was made first captainto Sir John Jervis, and brought homethe despatches announcing the battleoff Cape St. Vincent, on the 14th ofFebruary, 1797, in which he bore sodistinguished a part, that, in additionto one of the gold medals distributedamong the principal officers in thevictorious fleet, he received the honourof knighthood. On the 22nd of August,1798, he was created a baronet; inFebruary, 1799, he became rear-admiralof the blue ; and in the ensuingyear, hoisted his flag on board thePrince of Wales, of ninety-eight guns,one of the ships employed in the channel.In 1801, he was made rear-admiralof the white, and despatched to theWest Indies, with a small squadron, inquestof Admiral Gantheaume, whom,however, he had not the good fortuneto discover. In April, 1804, he waspromoted to the rank of vice-admiralof the blue ; and in the succeeding year,with a small force at his disposal, wasVISCOUNT KEITH.employed in watching the port of Ferrol,where the enemy had several vessels inastate of forwardness.On the 22nd of July, 1804, he fell inwith the combined French and Spanishsquadrons, under Admiral Villeneuve ;and though the enemy's force was farsuperior in number to his own, he gallantlyattacked their centre ; but, afteran engagement of four hours' duration,found it necessary to bring to, for thepurpose of covering the Rafael, eighty-four,and the Firme, seventy-four, whichhe had succeeded in capturing. Thenight was passed by both squadrons inrepairing the damages they had respectivelysustained ; and, on the followingday, Villeneuve being still insight,although he evinced no inclinationto renew the engagement, Calderkept such a course as was best adaptedfor the protection of his two prizes, andone of his own ships, which had beendisabled. At day-break on the 24th,Villeneuve was seen at some distance,steering for Ferrol, where he soon afterwardsarrived.Being informed, on joining Vice-admiralCollingwood, off Cadizz, that hisconduct, in the late engagement, hadexposed him to some censure at home,he returned to England forthwith ; andat his own solicitation, after having beenmade vice-admiral of the white, wasbrought to a court-martial, on the 23rdof December, 1805. He frankly admittedthat the charge brought againsthim, of not having done his best torenew the engagement was perfectlytrue ; but urged, in his defence, the probabilityof his own defeat, had a secondencounter taken place. He was, however,severely reprimanded for his conduct,which the court attributed to anerror in judgment, fully acquitting himof cowardice or disaffection.Overwhelmed with grief by the resultof this inquiry, Sir Robert Calder immediatelyretired into private life, fromwhich, however, he emerged, in 1810,to accept the office of port-admiral, atPlymouth. His death occurred on the1st of September, 1815. He was married,in May, 1799, to Amelia, onlydaughter of John Mitchell, Esq., memberof parliament for Boston, Lincolnshire,but left no issue.Sir Robert Calder's courage wasnever disputed ; and it is due to hischaracter to remark, that in not renewinga contest after he had achieveda victory, he was justified by the exampleof more eminent commandersthan himself.GEORGE KEITH ELPHINSTONE, VISCOUNT KEITH.THIS commander, the fifth son ofViscount Elphinstone, was born inScotland, in 1747. He was educated atGlasgow; and entered the navy inFebruary, 1762. In 1767, he went ona voyage to China ; in 1769, he proceededto India, under Sir John Lindsay,who made him a lieutenant; and,in 1772, he was appointed commanderof the Scorpion. He became a post-captainin 1775, and served in America,under Lord Howe and Admiral Arbuthnot.At the reduction of Charleston,he commanded a detachment of seamen; and his services were so effective,as to obtain the warm commendation ofGeneral Clinton. He was also presentat the attack on Mud Island ; and onhis return to England, with despatches,he obtained the command of the Warwick,a fifty-gun ship ; with which, in1781, he captured a Dutch man-of-war;and, soon after, Prince William Henrywas placed under him, as a midshipman.On the llth of September, 1782,being then in company with three otherships, off the Delaware, he re-capturedthe Terrier sloop, and took two Frenchvessels of war ; from one of which,however, the commander-in-chief ofthe French forces in America, and someother officers of distinction, escaped tothe shore, with a large quantity of specie.In 1793, he sailed in the Robuste,seventy-four, for the Mediterranean,with a squadron under the commandof Lord Hood, and was ordered toattack Fort La Malgue ; of which, onits being carried, he was appointedgovernor. In this capacity, he signalizedhimself by defeating two detachments,sent from Marseilles, for theTHE NAVY.relief of Toulon, and displayed so greata knowledge of military tactics, thathe was appointed to superintend theevacuation of Toulon.On the 12th of April, 1794, he wasmade rear-admiral of the blue; and,shortly afterwards, invested with theorder of the Bath. On the 4th of July,he hoisted his flag in the Barfleur, ofninety-eight guns, one of the channelfleet, as rear-admiral of the white ; andon the 2nd of April, 1795, he sailed fromSpithead,with a small squadron, againstthe Cape of Good Hope. On the 1st ofthe following month, he was advancedto the rank of vice-admiral ; and, somedays afterwards, arrived in Simeon'sBay, where he was joined by severalmen-of-war, and transports, with astrong body of troops on board, underthe command of Major Craig. Thecapture of the Cape was soon effected ;and within a short time after its reduction,the admiral, with his squadron,exerted himself so successfully in theIndian Seas, that the Moluccas, andseveral other important islands, surrenderedto the British arms.On the 16th of August, 1796, he cameup with a Dutch squadron, sent out toattempt the re-capture of the Cape ;which, on account of his very superiorforce, struck their colours without firinga gun. In January, 1797, he arrived atSpithead ; and, on the 7th of March, inthe same year, he was raised to theIrish peerage, by the title of BaronKeith. About two months after, hewas appointed to superintend the preparationsat Sheerness, against themutineers; and, in the summer, commandeda detachment of the channelfleet.In the month of December, 1798,he joined Lord St. Vincent, at Gibraltar;in February, 1799, he was madevice-admiral of the red; and, afterhaving blockaded Cadizz until the beginningof May, sailed in quest of theBrest fleet, which had eluded the vigilanceof Lord Bridport, in the channel.He could not, however, succeed inbringing the enemy to an action,although their force was much superiorto his own.In the autumn, he returned toEngland; whence, late in November,he sailed in the Queen Charlotte, ofone hundred and ten guns, to succeedEarl St. Vincent, as commander-in-chiefin the Mediterranean. Early in1800, he cruised off Port La Valette,for the purpose of preventing any succoursbeing thrown into Malta duringits siege, and took a French seventy-four,and a store-ship. On the 7th ofMarch, he anchored at Leghorn ; where,while he was on shore, a few days after,his flag-ship took fire, and, in a veryshort time, her magazines exploded.Of the crew, eleven were on shorewith the admiral ; one hundred andfifty were saved by boats ; but the remainder,amounting to nearly sevenhundred, unfortunately perished.Having hoisted his flag in the Minotaur,the admiral now proceeded toblockade Genoa ; and, by cutting off allsupplies by sea, soon compelled theFrench general to capitulate. Maltashortly after surrendered to a detachmentof his fleet ; and, about October,in conjunction with Sir Ralph Aber-crosby,he made preparations for anattack on Cadizz ; which, however, wasabandoned, on account of the pitiablestate of the inhabitants and garrison,among whom an epidemic disease, whichvery much resembled the plague, was,it appeared, making dreadful ravages.Lord Keith now proceeded with SirRalph Abercromby to Egypt, and somaterially assisted the military commandersin the expedition, that he receivedthe thanks of parliament, wasraised to the British peerage, by thetitle of Baron Keith, and made admiralof the blue. The corporation of Londonalso presented him with the freedomof the city, as well as a sword, worth onehundred guineas ; and the grand seigniorconferred on him the order of thecrescent.In 1803, he was appointed to thecommand of all the ships in the NorthSea and the English channel, which heretained until May, 1807. He had previously,(in November, 1805,) beenmade rear-admiral of the white ; andin 1812, he succeeded to the chief commandof the channel fleet. On the 14thof May, 1814, he was elevated to thedignity of a viscount of the unitedkingdom ; and about a year before hisdeath, which took place in March, 1823,he obtained leave to accept a grandcross of the royal Sardinian order ofSt. Maurice and St. Lazar, for hisSIR JOHN THOMAS DUCKWORTH.services at Genoa, in 1809. In additionto his other distinctions, he was, at thetime of his decease, admiral of the red ;marischal of Ireland; secretary, chamberlain,and keeper of the signet to thegreat steward of Scotland ; treasurerand comptroller of the household of theDuke of Clarence, and a fellow of theRoyal Society. Prior to his elevationto the British peerage, he had successivelyrepresented Dumbarton andStirlingshire. He was twice married,and left two daughters ; the eldest ofwhom succeeded to the barony, and becamethe wife of Count Flahault, one ofNapoleon's aide-decamp at the battleof Waterloo.Lord Keith is described, apparentlywith truth, as having been a man ofamiable disposition, great courage, andmuch nautical talent. His exploits,though not particularly splendid, werevery beneficial to his country ; and,though he did not wholly escape censure,he was generally admitted to havemerited the honours and rewards whichhe obtained. He appears to have displayedall the activity in politics whichhis professional labours would permit;and, at an early period of his career, tookrather a prominent part in the attemptsmade to effect a reconciliation betweenPitt and Fox.SIR JOHN THOMAS DUCKWORTH.THIS distinguished admiral, the sonof a clergyman in Buckinghamshire,was born at Leatherhead, in Surrey,on the 28th of February, 1748 ; and,after having served in several ships, asamidshipman, became a lieutenant, inJune, 1770. In the action betweenAdmiral Byron's fleet and that underCount Detesting, he served in thePrincess Royal, which carried the Britishcommander's flag, and, it is said,received so violent a blow from the skullof a black, which was driven against hisbreast by a shot, that, for some time, hewas supposed to have been killed.On the 16th of July, 1779, he becamecommander of the Rover, ,in which he cruised, for sometime,off Martini. On the 16th ofJune, 1780, he obtained post rank ; and,returning to the Princess Royal, conductedher to Jamaica; whence he proceeded,in the Grafton, seventy-four,with the charge of a convoy to England.In 1793, he was appointed tothe Orion, seventy-four, in which hesailed, on the 2nd of May, 1794, withLord Howe, from St. Helen's; and obtaineda gold chain and medal for hisadmirable conduct in the action withthe Brest fleet, on the 1st of the nextmonth. He subsequently proceeded tothe West Indies, and remained for sometimeat St. Domingo. In 1798, hecommanded the Leviathan, of seventy-fourguns, in the Mediterranean ; and,being detached by Earl St. Vincentwith a small squadron against Minorca,succeeded, jointly with Sir CharlesStewart, who commanded the landforces, in accomplishing its reduction.Early in 1799, he was promoted tothe rank of rear-admiral, and ordered tothe West Indies. On his passage, hehad the good fortune to capture elevenvaluably-laden Spanish merchantmen.On the 20th of March, 1801, in conjunctionwith Lieutenant-general Trigger,he attacked, and took, the islands ofSt. Bartholomew and St. Martin ; forwhich important service, he was madea knight of the Bath, and received apension of 1,000 per annum.In 1804, he was appointed to theJamaica station, and became vice-admiralof the blue. On the 6th ofFebruary, 1806, with a squadron, withwhich he had been previously cruisingoff Cadizz, he came up with, and attacked,the French fleet despatched forthe relief of St. Domingo; three ofwhich, after two hours' hard fighting,he captured ; and drove two others onshore, where they became completewrecks. On the news of the victoryreaching England, the thanks of bothhouses of parliament were voted to theadmiral, who was likewise presented,by the corporation of London, with thefreedom of the city, and a sword of theTHE Navy.value of two hundred guineas; and,by the house of assembly at Jamaica,with a vote of thanks, and a swordworth a thousand guineas. He wasalso raised to the rank of vice-admiralof the white ; and, being appointed tothe Royal George, of one hundred andten guns, was detached to the Mediterranean,in 1807, to force the narrowstreight of the Dardanelles ; whichservice he performed without difficulty.On arriving off Constantinople, hefound the place so well defended, andthe coast so thoroughly lined with batteries,that an attack would have beeninjudicious. He therefore returnedthrough the streights, in which he experiencedmore difficulty than on hisfirst passage ; for the Turks, knowinghe must return, had so strengthenedthe forts, as to render them somewhatformidable. He, however, cleared themin safety ; and, with the assistance ofSir Sidney Smith, drove on shore adivision of Turkish vessels, consistingof a sixty-four line-of-battle ship, threecorvettes, a brig, and two gun-boats.In 1810, he was appointed to the Newfoundlandstation ; which he quittedabout three years after, to assume thechief command at plymouth. His deathoccurred on the 14th of April, 1817.He sat in parliament, for some time, asmember for New Romney. In 1770,he married a Miss Wallis, only daughterand heiress of a gentleman residing atCamelford, in Cornwall, by whom hehad a son, who was killed in Spain,while acting as colonel, in the arrayof the Duke of Wellington.In promptitude, daring, and seamanship,Duckworth had few superiors.His deportment was particularly amiable,and his disposition generous andhumane. It is related, that on one occasion,when some of his crew weresuffering from the scurvy, he gave upthe whole of his fresh provisions, as wellas his wine, for their use, and lived entirelyupon the same fare as those ofhis men who were in good health.In person, according to a writer inthe Gentleman's Magazine, in 1817,he was " rather short, but stout-madeand muscular. He seemed never to behappy but when actively employed ;was for ever on the quarter-deck ; fondof his profession ; and, when on duty,caution and courage were so well combinedin him as to inspire confidencein his men, and ensure success to hisexertions."SIR JOHN Boreas WARREN.THIS officer, descended, on his mother'sside, from an ancient family,named Boreas, in Cornwall, was bornabout the year 1750, and educated atWinchester school. At an early agehe went into the navy, for which hehad evinced a strong disposition; but,after having made a voyage, in theAlderney sloop-of-war, he entered himselfof Emmanuel college, Cambridge,where he became pupil to Martin thebotanist, whom he subsequently presentedto the living of Little Marlow.Having purchased the Island ofLund, soon after attaining his majority,he amused himself with a yacht,in the Bristol channel, until the breakingout of the American war, when heaccepted a lieutenancy on board theNonsuch; and, shortly after, becamemaster of the Helena. In 1775, he wascreated a baronet ; and, having attainedpost rank, subsequently commanded, insuccession, the Ariadne, L'Aigle, andthe Winchelsea. Soon after hostilitieshad commenced with revolutionizedFrance, he was intrusted with a smallsquadron, which kept the enemy'scoast in great alarm, and took severalvessels of war and valuable merchantmen.In 1794, he was invested withthe order of the Bath; and, in the succeedingyear, commanded the expeditionto Quiberon Bay; which, aftertaking Fort Penthievre, failed in anattack on the island of Frontier,and returned to port without havingaccomplished the object for which ithad been destined ; owing to the superiorforce of the republicans, and tothe French royalists, who accompaniedit, not being joined, on their landing, asSIR JOHN Boreas WARREN.they had expected that they wouldhave been, by a large portion of theinhabitants, rather than to any misconducton the part of Warren, or theforces under his command.He next served in the Canada, offBrest, under Lord Bridport, by whomhe was detached, with a strong force,to the coast of Ireland, where, on thellth of October, 1798, he gave chase toa French squadron, which had on boarda number of men and military stores,destined for the assistance of the disaffectedin the sister kingdom. Heovertook the enemy early the nextmorning, and, after a severe engagement,captured three of their frigates,and La Hoche, line-of-battle ship. Forthis important victory, Sir John Warrenreceived a vote of thanks from thehouse of commons.In June, 1800, he captured threevessels of war, and destroyed severalmerchantmen, laden with provisions forthe French fleet, at Brest. After performingother less important services,he proceeded to Gibraltar; whence,early in 1801, he sailed in quest of AdmiralGantheaume; who, however, succeededin avoiding him.Soon after the peace of Amiens, hewas made a privy-counsellor, and despatchedas ambassador extraordinaryto St. Petersburg ; where, with considerablediplomatic skill, he conductedthe negotiations between Russia andEngland, respecting the retention ofMalta. On his return, he obtainedthe rank of rear-admiral ; and, early in1806, commanded a squadron, which,on the 13th of March, in that year, fellin with, and captured, the Marengoand the Belle Poule, on their returnfrom India.He subsequently rose to the rank ofvice-admiral ; in 1809, he was stationedoff Halifax; and, in 1812, obtained thechief command in North America, andthe West Indies. Two years after, hestruck his flag, and returned to England,where he died, on the 22nd ofFebruary, 1822 ; leaving several children,by his wife, a daughter of GeneralClavering. At the time of his deceasehe was admiral of the white, and knightgrand cross of the Bath. For someyears he had represented the boroughof Marlow, and, subsequently, the townof . Nottingham, in parliament. Hisqualifications, as a commander, appearto have justly entitled him to the rankhe obtained.CUTHBERT, LORD COLLINGWOOD.CUTHBERT Calling WOOD, wasborn at Newcastle-on-Tyne, on the 26thof September, 1750 ; and educated at aschool kept by the Rev. Hugh Moses.He commenced his naval career whenonly eleven years old, under the careof Captain, afterwards Admiral, Braith-waite, who had married his mother'ssister. When he first went to sea, thefirst lieutenant of the ship seeing him intears on account of his separation fromhome, in pity for his tender years, spoketo him in terms of such encouragementand kindness, that, taking the officer tohis box, he gratefully offered him alarge piece of plum-cake.In 1774, he served at Boston with AdmiralGraves ; who, in 1775, made hima lieutenant, on the day that the battlewas fought at Bunker's Hill, where heassisted, with a party of seamen. In1776, he went to Jamaica, in the Hornetsloop, and, soon afterwards, removed tothe Lowestoffe. In the summer of1779, he succeeded Nelson as commanderof the Badger; and afterwards,as a post-captain, in the Hinchinbrooke,a twenty-eight-gun frigate. In 1780,he was employed in the expeditionsent up the river San Juan ; and,being supported against the pestilentialclimate, by a strong constitution,survived most of his ship's company.He was relieved in August, 1780; andin the December following, was appointedto the command of the Pelican,a small frigate, of twenty-four guns, inwhich, after having captured Le Cerf,of sixteen guns, and re-captured theBlandford, a richly-laden vessel fromGlasgow, he suffered shipwreck, on therocks of the Moran Keys. In 1782,THE NAVY.he obtained the command of the Sampson,of sixty-four guns ; and, on thatship being paid oft', at the peace of 1783,he was despatched, in the Mediator, tothe West Indies, where he actively cooperatedwith Nelson, in carrying intoeffect the provisions of the navigationlaws against the Americans.He returned to England in 1786,and, in 1790, served in the Mermaidfrigate, under Admiral Cornish. In1793, he was appointed captain of thePrince, Rear-admiral Bowyer's flagship,and behaved with great gallantryin the celebrated engagement whichtook place on the 1st of June, in thenext year; but his services were nothonoured with the slightest notice byLord Howe, nor was his name includedin the list of those who were awardedmedals on account of the victory. Thisact of injustice created much surpriseamong the officers of the fleet ; one ofwhom, Captain Packenham, of the Invincible,is said to have remarked,that, if Collingwood had not deserveda medal, neither had he, for they weretogether the whole day."He subsequently commanded, in succession,the Barfleur, the Hector, andthe Excellent, of seventy-four guns.In the latter ship, after having convoyeda fleet of outward-bound EastIndiamen to a safe latitude, he greatlydistinguished himself in the battle offCape St Vincent, on the 14th of February,1797. After having attackedthe Salvador del Mundo and the SanIsidro, the latter of which soon hoistedEnglish colours, he poured a tremendousbroadside into the San Nicholas,which, with three other first-rates,was firing upon Nelson's ship, theCaptain. He then passed on to theSantissima Trinidadaa, and would, it issaid, most probably, have compelled herto surrender, had he not been accidentallyimpeded by one of the Englishfleet.When informed that he was awardeda medal for his services on this occasion,he told the admiral, with great feelingand firmness, that he could not consentto accept it, if the one he hadhonourably earned on the 1st of June,1794, was still withheld. "I feel,"added he, "that I was then improperlypassed over ; and to receive sucha distinction now, would be to acknowledgethe propriety of that injustice."That is precisely the answer which Iexpected from you, Captain Callingobserved the admiral ; and thetwo medals were shortly afterwardstransmitted to him by the first lord ofthe admiralty, with a civil apology forthe former omission.Collingwood was now directed toassist in the painful office of blockadingthe enemy's ports. " Our good chief,"he thus wrote to Captain Ball, " foundemployment for me; and, to occupymy mind, sent me to cruise off St. Luc-cars,to intercept the market boats,the poor cabbage carriers ! Oh ! humiliation!" In 1 799, after having enjoyeda brief interval of repose, he was maderear-admiral of the white ; and, hoistinghis flag in the Triumph, joined thechannel fleet, then commanded by LordBridport, from which he was soon afterwardsdetached, with a reinforcementof twelve sail of the line, under SirCharles Cotton, for Lord Keith, in theMediterranean. After having shiftedhis flag to the Barfleur, a second-rate,he was advanced, in January, 1801, tothe rank of rear-admiral of the red ; and,in May, 1802, returned to his family atWorketh, in Northumberland.In May, 1803, he was sent, in theVenerable, to the squadron off Brest,under Admiral Cornwallis, who saidon his approach, " Here comes Callingthe last to leave and the first tojoin me." On the 23rd of April, 1804,he became vice-admiral of the blue;and, in the following year, was engaged,with a small squadron, in theblockade of Cadizz, until compelled, bythe appearance of the combined fleetsof France and Spain, to retire. Nosooner, however, had the enemy enteredthe harbour, than he resumed hisstation, on which he remained, as com-mander-in-chief, until the arrival ofNelson, under whom, in the battle oft'Cape Trafalgar, on the 21st of October,in the same year (1805), at the headof a division of the fleet, he began theattack, and broke through the enemy'sline. On the morning of that day, nedressed himself with peculiar care ; and,meeting Lieutenant Clavellll, advised himto pull off his boots. " You had better,"he said, " put on silk stockings, as Ihave done ; for if one should get a shotin the leg, they would be so much theLORD COLLINGWOOD.more manageable for the surgeon." Hethen proceeded to visit the decks, encouragedthe men to the discharge oftheir duty, and, addressing the officers,said to them, " Now, gentlemen, let usdo something to-day which the worldmay talk of hereafter !" As he waspressing alone into the midst of thecombined fleets, Lord Nelson observedto Captain Blackwood, " See how thatnoble fellow, Collingwood, takes hisship into action : how I envy him!"By a singular coincidence, Callingis said to have exclaimed, almostat the same moment, " What wouldNelson give to be here !"He had changed his flag, about tendays before the action, from the Dreadnoughtinto the Royal Sovereign,which, after having poured a broadsideand a half into the stern of the SantaAnna, ranged up so closely alongsideher, that the lower yards of the twovessels were locked together. TheFougeux soon afterwards placed herselfon the Royal Sovereign's lee quarter,while no less than three of the enemybore on her bow. At half-past two, theSanta Anna struck ; and it is related,that, when the Spanish captain cameon board the Royal Sovereign to deliverup his sword, and was told thename of the ship which had compelledhim to surrender, he exclaimed, inbroken English, patting one of theguns with his hand as he spoke, " Ithink she should be called the RoyalDevil."By the death of Nelson, the chiefcommand devolved upon Collingwood,who, on the following day, issued anorder for a general thanksgiving toAlmighty God, for having, of hisgreat mercy, been pleased to crown theexertions of the fleet with success."Nineteen or twenty of the enemy'sships had struck during the action;but of these, on account of their disabledstate, Collingwood could onlypreserve four. James, in his NavalHistory, has stated, that more of theprizes might have been saved, if thewish, expressed by Lord Nelson in hislast moments, for anchoring the fleet,had been complied with. On the bestauthority this, however, is now declaredto have been impossible ; a fact whichhas been acknowledged in a late editionof the Life of Nelson, by Southey, who,on a previous occasion, appears to haverepeated the statement ot James.For his signal services at Trafalgar,Collingwood obtained the title of BaronCollingwood, of Caldburne and Heth-poole,in Northumberland ; a promotionto the rank of vice-admiral of the white,a commander-in-chief's medal, thethanks of both houses of parliament, anhonourable augmentation to his arms,the freedom of the principal cities ofGreat Britain, and pensions of 2,000per annum for his own life, of 1,000per annum to Lady Collingood, in theevent of his death, and of 500 perannum to each of his two daughters ;tOj whose heirs he requested that, ashehad no son, his honours might beextended, " that future Collingwoodsmight manifest in future ages theirfidelity to their country ;" but, althoughthis seems to have been theonly favour he solicited during thewhole course of his naval employment,it was refused by two different administrations.The management of the political relationsof England with the countriesbordering on the Mediterranean, devolvingupon the commander-in-chiefof the naval forces on that station,in which post he was confirmed, LordCollingwood's situation became exceedinglyarduous. By his unremittingexertions for the good of his country,he entailed upon himself a diseasewhich ultimately proved fatal. Hiseyes became weak, his body swollen,and his legs '' shrunk to tapers." Hisfriends repeatedly urged him to surrenderhis command, and to seek inEngland that repose which had becomeso necessary to his declining health ;but his feelings on the subject of disciplinebeing peculiarly strong, hethought it his duty not to quit the postwhich had been assigned to him untilhe should be duly relieved.At length he became incapable ofbearing the slightest fatigue ; and, as itwas represented to him that his returnto England had become indispensablynecessary for the preservation of his life,he surrendered his command to AdmiralMartin. When informed that hewas again at sea, he rallied for a timehis exhausted strength, and said tothose around him, " Then I may yetlive to meet the French once more!"THE NAVY.On the following day, his friend, CaptainThomas, having observed, that hefeared the motion of the vessel woulddisturb him, there being a considerableswell, he replied, " No, Thomas, I amnow in a state in which nothing in thisworld can disturb me more. I amdying ; and I am sure it must be consolatoryto you, and all who love me, tosee how comfortably I am coming to myend." Soon afterwards, he told one ofhis attendants that he had endeavouredto review all the actions of his past life,but that nothing gave him a moment'suneasiness. He then spoke, with calmnessand perfect resignation to the willof God, of his absent family; likewiseof the doubtful contest in which he wasabout to leave his country involved;and, after having taken an affectionatefarewell of his attendants, expired, withouta struggle, in the evening of the 7thof March, 1810. His body was conveyedto England, and deposited, bythe side of Lord Nelson, in St. Paul'scathedral, where a monument has beenerected to his memory at the publicexpense.This amiable, brave, and highly-giftedcommander, to use the words ofLord Hood, in the house of peers, onlywanted opportunity to prove himself asecond Nelson, to whom, as a practicalseaman, he was superior. Of the halfcentury which he passed in the navy,about forty-four years were occupiedin active employment abroad. From1793, he spent only twelve months inEngland; and, at one time, he appearsto have been nearly two years at seawithout dropping his anchor. His spiritwas broken and his health destroyed,in harassing and tedious blockades, forwhich no man could be better qualifiedthan himself. His vigilance, and carelessnessof personal exposure, were extraordinary: he frequently slept in theopen air, on a gun, from which, at intervals,throughout the night, he wouldrise to sweep the horizon with his glass,lest the enemy should escape; andwhen told by his friend and companion,Clavellll, on these occasions, that theymight safely quit the deck, he wouldreply, " I fear you are exhausted, Clave; you have need of rest so go tobed, and I will watch by myself."He was a regular attendant at divineworship ; but once observed, that hedid not comprehend the religion of anofficer, who could pray all one dayand flog his men all the next. He felta strong abhorrence towards the useof the lash ; for which he substituted,with much success, such punishmentsas watering the grog, and employmenton extra duty. Although no manheld in more entire contempt, what isordinarily styled popularity, he soughtto amuse and occupy the attention ofhis men, by every recreation that theirsituation could afford. When sick, hevisited them daily, and supplied themwith provisions from his own table ;and on their becoming convalescent, hehad them daily brought up to him forexamination. The result of this conductwas, that the sailors consideredand called him their father; and frequently,when he quitted a ship, manyof them wept at his departure. Themidshipmen he treated with parentalcare, examining them himself once aweek, and declaring, that nothing wouldgive him greater pain than that anyyoung man under his command shouldbe unable to pass.His perfect knowledge of seamanship,and his quick and correct eye,enabled him, in an instant, to discoverany thing that was out of order in hisship ; and his reproofs, on these occasions,though always short, and conveyedin the language of a gentleman,were deeply felt. On one occasion,being particularly anxious to completehis bread, and to sail immediately, heinquired of his captain, if all the boatswere gone ashore. " I have sent themall," was the reply, " except my barge."Oh ! of course," exclaimed Calling"a captain's barge must never beemployed on such services : but I hopethey make every possible use of mine."He always practised, and exacted withgreat rigour from others, the utmosteconomy in the use of naval stores. Atthe battle of Trafalgar, as the was hanging overthe gangway, he requested LieutenantClavellll to help him to take it in ; observing,that they should want it againsome other day ; and, at the battle ofSt. Vincent, he said to his boatswain,while his ship was closely engaged withthe San Isidro, " Bless me ! Mr. Peers,how came you to forget to bend ourold top-sail ? They will quite ruin thatSIR ROGER CURTIS.new one. It will never be worth afarthing again."It was his constant practice to exercisehimself in composition, by makingabstracts from the books which he read.Some of his abridgments, and the observationsby which he illustrated them,are said to be written with singularconciseness and power. " I know not,"observed one of the most eminent Englishdiplomatists, with whom he hadvery frequent communications, " whereLord Collingwood got his style, but hewrites better than any of us." Hisletters to Lady Collingwood display,in a rare combination, the frank sincerityof a sailor, the elegance of a gentleman,the acquirements of a scholar,and the pure and undiminished freshnessof a virtuous affection. He frequentlyand fondly anticipated trie hourwhen he should revisit his own fireside,never to quit it again for thequarter-deck. The affairs of his modestdomain were the subjects of hisconstant inquiry : and in one of hisletters, he told his daughters, whenthey saw Scott, his gardener, weedingtheir father's oaks, to give the old manashilling. He frequently amused himselfin the cultivation of his garden ;where, on one occasion, a brother admiraldiscovered him with old Scott, towhom he was much attached, in thebottom of a deep trench, which theywere busily occupied in digging.He was abstemious in his habits,but fond of society ; in person, ratherabove the middle stature, and of aslender, but well-proportioned, frame.By his wife, Sarah, daughter and coheiressof John Erasmus Blackett, Esq.of Newcastle, he left two daughters,the eldest of whom became the wife ofG. L. Needham, Esq. F. R S. who assumedthe name of Collingwood, on hismarriage. A most interesting selectionfrom the public and private correspondenceof his father-in-law, publishedby this gentleman, has provedof material assistance in compiling thepresent sketch.SIR ROGER CURTIS.ROGER CURTIS, son of a gentlemanwho had acquired a large propertyby farming, was born about the year1750, at Denton, in Wilts, and wasoriginally designed for his father's occupation.Evincing, however, an ardentinclination towards a maritime life, hewas permitted, somewhat reluctantly,by his parents, to embark as a midshipmanon board the Venus, in whichship the Duke of Cumberland, brotherto George the Third, was at the sametime serving in a similar capacity.In 1771, he became a lieutenant,and proceeded in the Otter, ,to Newfoundland, where hisquickness of parts gained the attentionof the governor, Admiral Shuldham,whom he was selected to accompany, in1775, when that officer obtained a commandon the American station. Inthe following year, Lieutenant Curtiswas made a commander, and appointedto the Senegal sloop, in which he actedwith credit, under Lord Howe, againstthe American colonies. His exertionswere rewarded, in the spring of 1777,by a promotion to the rank of post-captain,and, although the youngestcommander in the squadron, to that ofcaptain of the fleet ; in which character,he assisted at the conquests of NewYork, Rhode Island, and Philadelphia.On the return of his ship to Europe,he was compelled by ill health to resignhis command ; but, after a shortinterval, he was employed in the Brilliantfrigate, with a cutter under hisorders, to carry despatches to Gibraltar,which, however, he found invested bysea and land. He, therefore, proceededto Minorca, where he remained until the21st of April, 1781, when he succeededin conveying a supply of provisions tothe garrison. On his arrival, he assumedthe command of the naval forces,with the rank, while acting on shore,of brigadier-general. On the 7th ofAugust, an English sloop-of-war beingattacked near Cabaret point, by fourteenof the enemy's gun-boats andseveral launches, Curtis, with only theTHE NAVY.Repulse and Vanguard, gun-boats, proceededto her assistance, and, by thejudicious position in which he contrivedto place his boats, as well as the skilfuldirection of his firing, forced the enemyto retire, though a xebec, mountingthirty guns, was seen coming to theirrelief.As brigadier, he acted on shorewith considerable zeal and ability, andheaded the seamen, in the celebratedattack of the garrison on the enemy'sworks. Early in September, 1782, itwas thought advisable to scuttle theships in the New Mole ; and the sailorswere employed, under the immediatedirection of Brigadier Curtis, in defendingthe batteries of Europa againstthe Spanish squadron. On the 13th ofthe same month, a grand attack wasmade on the garrison, by the alliedforces of France and Spain, consistingaltogether of sixty-three sail, besidesan immense flotilla of xebecs, frigates,and gun-boats. By the well-directedfire of red-hot ball from the garrison,the Spanish battering-ships, were, however,set on fire, and Curtis, perceivingtheir distress, advanced with a divisionof gun-boats, to flank their line. TheSpaniards were, by this judicious movement,cut off from all assistance, andcompelled to abandon their vessels inorder to escape from the flames. Promptassistance was given them by the English,and Curtis hazarded his own lifeby his vigorous exertions to render helpto his adversaries. While thus employed,some pieces of timber, from aship that had been blown up, fell intoand pierced his boat; which, however,was kept afloat until assistance arrived,by stopping up the hole with seamen'sjackets.Soon after this signal victory, he contrived,though annoyed with shots bythe enemy, to take the stores from aSpanish seventy-four, that had beendriven under the walls of Gibraltar.On the arrival of Lord Howe, for therelief of the garrison, he was of greatservice to that celebrated commander,who is said to have confessed that hemight have performed the object of hismission more readily, had he implicitlyfollowed the advice of Curtis. He wassoon after appointed to the Victory ;and returned in that ship to England;whence, after having been knightedfor his services, he was despatched, in1783, with the rank of commodore, andthe additional appointment of ambassadorto the Emperor of Morocco, toresume his station at Gibraltar, wherehe continued during the remainder ofthe siege.After having, for some time, commandedthe Ganges, seventy-four, aguard-ship, at Portsmouth, he wasnominated colonel of the marines, atPlymouth, as well as captain of thefleet under Lord Howe ; and bore adistinguished part in the battle of the1st of June, 1794. On the 4th of thefollowing July, he was promoted tothe rank of rear-admiral. He also receiveda gold medal for his services,and, on the 10th of September, wascreated a baronet In 1799, he becamevice-admiral of the red; and, in 1800,obtained a separate command at theCape of Good Hope ; where he introduced,among many other economicalarrangements, the adoption of Simeon'sBay, for repairing disabled ships, whichhad previously been sent for that purposeto the East India station. On thepeace of Amiens being effected, he retiredto his residence, at Gatcombe, inHampshire, where he died, on the 14thof November, 1816; leaving two sonsby his wife, Sarah, daughter and coheiress,of Matthew Brady, Esq.Sir Roger Curtis added to the meritsof a naval officer the virtuous characteristicsof a good husband andfather, as well as of a sincere friend.His amiable disposition evinced itself inacts of kindness, even to his enemies ;and while honour was awarded to himfor his public services, the excellenceof his private conduct made him theobject of general esteem. His braveryin action was rendered doubly valuableby his judgment. It appears to havebeen on his recommendation " to letwell alone," that Lord Howe discontinuedthe chase with which he wasabout to follow up his victory, on the1st of June, 1794. Being a strict observerof discipline, he censured, withseverity, any appearance of negligence ;and, it is said, once ordered a captainon board the flag-ship, to rebuke himfor the careless manner in which he hadattached his signature to a document.Sir JAMES SAUMAUEZ.SIR JAMES SAUMAREZ.JAMES SAUMAREZ, the son of asurgeon, whose family is said to havefollowed William the Conqueror fromNormandy, was born on the llth ofMarch, 1757, at Guernsey ; and, in1770, went, as a midshipman, to theMediterranean station, in the Montreal; from which he removed to theWinchelsea frigate, and returned toEngland, in the Levant, about 1775.Soon afterwards, he joined the Bristol,in which he was present, and narrowlyescaped being killed, at the attack onFort Sullivan, in South Carolina. Forhis conduct on this occasion, he wasmade a lieutenant ; and, subsequently,commanded the Spitfire galley, withwhich he drove on shore a ship of farsuperior force to his own, and clearedthe American coast of the enemy'sprivateers.He was next intrusted with a partyof seamen and marines, at one of theadvanced posts, and acted as aid-decamp,on shore, to Commodore Brisbane.In 1781, he was transferredfrom the Victory, in which he had forsome time served, to the Fortitude, andparticipated in the action between thesquadron under Sir Hyde Parker andthe Dutch fleet, off the Dogger Bank.For his conduct on this occasion he wasmade commander of the Tisiphone, fire-ship;and George the Third, it is said,during his visit to the squadron, at theNore, having asked Sir Hyde Parkerwhether Mr. Saumarez was any relationto the two gentlemen of the samename, whohad accompanied Lord Ansonround the world, the admiral replied,that he was their nephew ; and asbrave and as good an officer as eitherof his uncles."In 1781, Saumarez discovered, and,by his zeal, materially contributed tothe capture of a number of transports,off Ushant, by the squadron commandedby Kempenfelt. He was soon afterwardspromoted to the rank of post-captain; and, in the Russell, seventy-four,took an active part in the engagementbetween Rodney and De Grasse,on the 12th of April, 1782. After aninterval of peace, during which he activelypromoted the establishment ofSunday-schools in England, he wasappointed, in 1787, to the Ambuscadefrigate; in 1790, to the Raisonable ;and, in 1793, to the Crescent, withwhich he captured, on the 20th of Octoberin that year, the French ship, LaReunion, off Cherbourg. For his successon this occasion, which was obtainedwithout the expense of a single life tothe English, although one hundred andtwenty of the enemy were killed andwounded, he received the honour ofknighthood.On the 8th of June, 1794, the Crescent,accompanied by the Druid frigate,and the Eurydice, a seventy-four gunship, while off Jersey, were chased bya French squadron, of two cut-downseventy-fours, each mounting fifty-fourguns, two frigates, and a brig. " Perceivingthe vast superiority of theenemy, Saumarez ordered the Eurydice,which was his slowest ship, tomake the best of her way to Guernsey.The Crescent and the Druid followed,under easy sail, occasionally engagingthe French, and keeping them at bay,until the Eurydice had got some distancea-head. They then made allpossible sail to get clear off; but theenemy gained so fast on them, thatthey must inevitably have been taken,had not Saumarez hauled his wind,and daringly stood along the Frenchline. This movement, as was expected,attracted the immediate attention of theenemy, and the capture of the Crescentappeared, for some time, to be inevitable; but, by the assistance of anold and experienced pilot, she pushedthrough an intricate passage neverbefore attempted by a king's ship, andeffected her escape into Guernsey Road,where her consorts also arrived.In the Orion, seventy-four, he subsequentlybore a distinguished part, inthe memorable actions off L'L'Orient andoff Cape St. Vincent. In 1798, he materiallyincreased his reputation, atthe battle of the Nile, in which he receiveda severe contusion on the side,THE NAVY.but remained on deck until the conflictwas over. After having escorted six ofthe prizes to Gibraltar, he proceededto Plymouth, and was shortly afterwardsrewarded for his services with agold medal and riband, as well as acolonelcy of marines.He next served in the Caesar, one ofthe channel fleet: in January, 1801,he was appointed rear-admiral of theblue; and, in June following, created abaronet. He subsequently commandeda division of the grand fleet off theBlack Rocks ; and, on the 14th of June,1802, sailed with a squadron destinedfor the blockade of Cadizz. On the 5thof July, he proceeded to Algesiras,where he attacked two French ships,which he found at anchor, under coverof the Spanish batteries ; but was compelledto retire, with the loss of theHannibal, one of his largest vessels.In a few hours, his squadron reachedRosa Bay, where, having received intelligenceof the approach of a Frenchand Spanish fleet, Saumarez succeededin getting his ships refitted by the 12thof the month. On the afternoon of thatday he put to sea, and coming up withthe enemy, after a spirited engagement,in sight of the garrison of Gibraltar, setfire to two of their ships, and captured athird. The remainder of the combinedsquadron, which had on board a largebody of troops, destined, it was supposed,for an attack on Lisbon, although muchinjured, effected their escape to Cadizz.For his important services, on thisoccasion, Sir James Saumarez receivedthe order of the Bath, the thanks ofparliament, a grant of 1,200 perannum, and the freedom of the city ofLondon. He subsequently became, insuccession, governor of Guernsey; avice-admiral ; second in command ofthe channel fleet, under Lord St. Vincent; and, in March, 1808, commander-in-chiefof a squadron sent to the Baltic,where he remained about four years.On the 24th of June, 1813, he was investedwith the insignia of a knightgrand cross of the royal Swedish orderof the Sword ; on the 4th of June. 1814,he was made rear-admiral of the blue ;in 1818, he received the honourableand lucrative appointment of rear-admiralof Great Britain ; and, on the demiseof Sir William Young, he succeededthat officer as vice-admiral of England.He was married on the 27th of October,1788. to Martha, only child of ThomasLe Marchant, Esq. of Guernsey.Although some of his most distinguishednaval contemporaries may, perhaps,have possessed a superior degreeof skill, none of them can be said tohave displayed a more enterprisingspirit, or more unflinching intrepidity.EDWARD Pellet, VISCOUNT Mouth.THIS admiral, second son of SamuelPellew, Esq. was born at Dover, on the19th of April, 1757 ; and, in 1771,accompanied Captain Stout, in the Junofrigate, to take possession of the placesdiscovered by Byron. He subsequentlywent to the Mediterranean with thesame officer, who, on account of somemisunderstanding between them, puthim on shore at Marseilles.On the breaking out of the Americanwar, he joined the Blonde frigate, inwhich he sailed to the relief of Quebec ;and soon after removed to the Carleton,in which he distinguished himself inthe battle fought on Lake Champlain,on the llth of October, 1776. In 1777,he was taken prisoner, with GeneralBurgoyne's forces, at Saratoga ; in 1789,he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant;and, subsequently, served onthe Flemish coast, in- the Apollo frigate ;which, while cruising near Ostend, losther captain, in a smart action with theLadislaus, a vessel pierced for thirty-twoguns, but carrying only twenty-six.Both ships suffered severely inthis encounter, which terminated in theescape of the Ladislaus to the harbourof Ostend.For his conduct on this occasion,Pellew obtained the command of theHazard sloop, stationed in the NorthSea; and, on the 31st of May, 1782,he was promoted to the rank of post-captain.In 1783, he commanded theVISCOUNT Mouth.Dictator, of sixty-four guns, in theMedway ; and afterwards, the Salisbury,of fifty guns, on the Newfoundlandstation. During this period, hetwice jumped overboard, to save afellow-creature from drowning ; though,on one of these occasions, he was labouringunder a severe indisposition.At the commencement of the warwith the French republic, he obtainedthe command of the Nymphe; withwhich, while on a cruise in the channel,he captured a French frigate, calledthe Cleopatra, after a remarkably closeand well-contested action. For thisservice, Captain Pellew was immediatelyknighted, and appointed to theArethusa, of forty-four guns, attachedto Admiral Warren's squadron. Onthe 23rd of April, 1794, the Arethusa,and three of her consorts, while cruisingoff Guernsey, fell in with four of theenemy, of which, after a spiritedaction, they captured three. On the23rd of the following August, he succeeded,with the boats of the fleet, indestroying a French frigate and two corvettes,which had been driven on shoreby the British fleet; and, in October,while cruising off Ushant, with a smallsquadron, under his own command, hecaptured a large French frigate, calledthe Artois. In the early part of 1795,being then under Admiral Warren, hewas directed to attack a French convoy,of which he captured seven, and destroyedeleven vessels, within sight ofthe Isle of Aix. Shortly afterwards, hewas again placed at the head of a smallsquadron, with which he took and destroyedfifteen sail of coasting-vessels.On the 6th of January, 1796, he performeda noble action at Plymouth.The Dutton, East Indiaman, beingdriven in by stress of weather, strucknear the citadel, and the sea brokeover her, until all her masts went bythe board, and fell towards the shore,the ship heeling off with her side toseaward. At this critical moment, SirEdward Pellew, observing that thegale increased, and knowing that theflood tide would make a complete wreckof the vessel, earnestly entreated someof the spectators to accompany him onboard,to attempt rescuing the crew ;but the port-admiral's signal midshipman,Mr. Edsell, alone volunteered hisservices. With great difficulty anddanger, by means of a single rope, theyreached the wreck, from which theysucceeded in getting a hawser on shore,and saved the whole crew. For thisheroic act, Pellew received the freedomof Plymouth ; and, in the followingMarch, was raised to the dignity of abaronet.He shortly afterwards went on acruise with the Indefatigable, and fourother frigates ; during which, he captureda fleet of French merchantmen,Reunite', of thirty-eight guns and twohundred and fifty-five men, and LaVirginie, of forty-four guns and threehundred and forty men. On the 13thof January, 1797, with his own frigate,and the Amazon, he attacked a largeFrench ship, off Ushant ; from which,however, after an engagement of fivehours' duration, he was compelled tosheer off, for the purpose of securinghis masts. During the action, the sea,it is said, constantly ran so high, thathis men were often up to their waistsin water; and, in the course of the followingnight, the Indefatigable narrowlyescaped being wrecked. Thenext morning, when her commanderintended to have renewed the battle, heperceived the enemy lying on herbroadside, with a tremendous surf beatingover her. At five o'clock, theAmazon struck the ground ; but thewhole of her crew, with the exceptionof six, who stole away in the cutterand were drowned, reached the shore,where they surrendered as prisonersof war. Of those on board the Frenchship, which proved to be Les Droitsdes Hommes, of eighty guns, upwardsof thirteen hundred unfortunatelyperished.In addition to the prizes already mentioned,Sir Edward Pellew's squadronhad, up to the end of 1798, capturedsixteen armed vessels and privateers,mounting, in the whole, two hundredand thirty-eight guns. He continuedto serve in the Indefatigable until thespring of the next year, when he removedto the Impetuous ; and, in1800, he was despatched, with a fleetof eighteen sail, to co-operate, inQuiberon Bay, with the French royalists.This expedition, as well as asubsequent one to Belleisle, being attendedwith no success, the squadronunder his command proceeded toTHE NAVY.blockade Port Louis, in the Mediterranean; where one of his lieutenantscaptured a French brig, called Le Herbert.He soon after accompanied AdmiralWarren on the expedition againstFerrol ; and, served subsequently, for ashort time, under the orders of AdmiralCornwallis. In 1802, he became acolonel of marines, and member of parliamentfor Barnstaple ; in which lattercapacity he made an able speech indefence of Earl St. Vincent, who wasthen at the head of the admiralty, onthe 15th of March, 1804, when a motionwas made for an inquiry respecting thenaval defence of the country.On the renewal of hostilities, he wasappointed to the Tonnant, of eightyguns; on which occasion, with a viewto procure the services of a respectableschoolmaster for the ship, he offered, byadvertisement, to add 50 to the governmentallowance, out of his own pocket.Having shortly afterwards taken a ship,on board of which the wife of a Frenchdeputy had embarked with 3,000, theproduce of her property, to join herhusband in banishment, at Cayenne, herestored to her the whole of the sum,and paid, from his private purse, thatshare of it to which his subordinateswere entitled.He was next employed, with therank of rear-admiral of the white, ascommander-in-chief, on the East Indiastation. In 1800, he took, or destroyed,thirty vessels at Batavia ; and in thefollowing year, completely annihilatedthe Dutch naval force in the East Indies.On the 28th of April, 1808, he was madevice-admiral of the blue ; and, after havingreceived an address of thanks from theship-owners and underwriters of Bombay,he returned, in 1809, to England.In 1810, he hoisted his flag on boardthe Christian VII. and was employedat the blockade of Flushing. He subsequentlyremoved to the Caledonia, ofone hundred and twenty guns, andsucceeded Sir Charles Cotton, as com-mander-in-chief on the Mediterraneanstation. In 1814, he was elevated tothe peerage, by the title of Baron Ex-mouth,of Canonteign, and made admiralof the blue. On the 2nd ofJanuary, 1815, he became a knight companionof the Bath; and, on the returnof Buonaparte from Elba, he assisted,with a squadron, at the reduction ofToulon, and the restoration of the Kingof Naples.In March, 1816, he sailed to Algiers,Tunis, and Tripoli ; whence, after havingconcluded treaties for the abolitionof Christian slavery (inter alia he returnedto England in June. On the20th of the next month, the Algerinehaving already violated the terms oftheir treaty, he was directed to hoisthis flag on board the Queen Charlotte,of one hundred and eight guns, andproceed with a squadron to obtain satisfaction.He arrived off Algiers, withfifteen sail of the line, four bombs,and six Dutch frigates, on the 27th ofAugust. Early the next morning, hesent a boat ashore, with a flag of truce,to announce the demands of the Britishgovernment. After a delay of threehours, during which a sea-breeze enabledthe fleet to get into the bay, theboat was seen returning, with a signalthat no answer had been obtained.Lord Exmouth immediately made hisfinal preparations for the attack thatensued, of which the following, witha few abridgments, is the account publishedby his secretary : " I remainedon the poop with his lordship, till theQueen Charlotte passed through all theenemy's batteries, without firing a gun.There were many thousand Turks andMoors looking on, astonished to seeso large a ship coming, all at once,inside the ingle ; opposite the head ofwhich she took her station, in so masterlya manner, that not more than fouror five guns could bear upon her from it.She was, however, exposed to the fire ofall their other batteries and musketry.At a few minutes before three, theAlgerine fired the first shot, at theImpregnable. Lord Exmouth, seeingonly the smoke of the gun, before thesound reached him, said, with greatalacrity, ' That will do ! Fire, my finefellows !' and before his lordship hadfinished these words, our broadside wasgiven. There being a great crowd ofpeople, the first fire was so terrible,that, they say, more than five hundredof the Turks were killed and wounded;and, after the first discharge, I sawmany running away under the walls,upon their hands and feetMy ears being deafened by the roarof the guns, I began to descend thequarter-deck. The companies of theVISCOUNT Mouth.two guns nearest the hatchway wantedwadding ; but not having it immediately,they cut off the breasts of theirjackets, and rammed them into theirguns instead. At this time, the QueenCharlotte had received several shotsbetween wind and water. All the timeof the battle, not one seaman lamentedthe dreadful continuation of the fight;but, on the contrary, the longer itlasted, the more cheerfulness and pleasurewas amongst them, notwithstandingthe firing was most tremendous onour side, particularly from the QueenCharlotte, which never slackened norceased, though his lordship severaltimes desired it, to make his observations.At eleven o'clock, p. m. hislordship having observed the destructionof the whole Algerine navy, andthe strongest part of their batteries,with the city, made signal to the fleet,to move out of the line of the batteries ;and, with a favourable breeze, we cutour cables, with the rest of the fleet,and made sail, when our firing ceased, atabout half-past eleven. When I methis lordship on the poop, his voice wasquite hoarse, and he had two slightwounds, one in the cheek, the other inthe leg ; and it was astonishing to seethecoat of his lordship, how it was allcut up by musket-ball, and grape; itwas, indeed, as if a person had taken apair of scissors, and cut it all to pieces.The gunner of the Queen Charlotte, anold man of seventy, said, ' that in hislife, he had been in more than twentyactions, but that he never knew orheard of any action, that had consumedso great a quantity of powder.' "The consequences of this attack were,a public apology, from the dey, to theBritish consul; the recovery of threehundred and eighty-two thousand dollars,for Naples and Sardinia; and theliberation from slavery of four hundredand seventy-one Neapolitans, two hundredand thirty-six Sicilians, one hundredand seventy-three Romans, sixTuscan, one hundred and sixty-oneSpaniards, one Portuguese, sevenGreeks, and twenty-eight Dutch.On his return to England, Lord Ex-mouthwas raised to the dignity of aviscount, and received the thanks ofboth houses of parliament, as well as asword from the city of London, and asplendid piece of plate from the officerswho had served under him in the expedition.In the autumn of 1817, hewas appointed to the chief command atPlymouth ; where he continued, withhis flag in the Impregnable, of onehundred and four guns, until February,1821. At the close of the war, he wasserving in the Mediterranean ; and, onhis retiring from command, the flag-officersand captains on that stationpresented him with a piece of plateworth five hundred guineas. In additionto his other honours, he has obtaineda grand cross of the Bath, and adiploma of L.L. D. By his wife, Susan,daughter of James Crowd, Esq., hehas several children.Lord Exmouth is, in every respect,an honour to the British navy. Suchan union of lofty heroism, consummateskill, and active benevolence, as he hasdisplayed, is almost without a parallel.He was a most excellent seaman, evenwhile a captain ; and took care neverto order a man to do what he himselfwould not. By way of shewinga good example, therefore, he wasaccustomed, at times, when the mainsailwas handed, to assume the postof honour himself, standing at theweather earing, while Mr. Larcom, hisfirst lieutenant, was stationed at theleeward one."He is said to be so unskilful anequestrian, that, not daring to cross ahorse, he once rode a donkey whilereviewing a body of marines. On thisoccasion, it is added, he was attendedby a favourite negro boy, named afterhis master, Edward, who, having beenmade acquainted with the vulgar appellationof the animal on which LordExmouth was mounted, innocently observed,as he walked by the side ofthe gallant admiral and his asininecharger, " Here be three Neddy, now,massa !"222 THE NAVY.SIR ALEXANDER INGLIS COCHRANE.THIS eminent commander, youngerson of Thomas, Earl of Dundonald, anduncle of Lord Cochrane, was born onthe 23rd of April, 1758 ; and, havingentered the naval service at an earlyage, was wounded, while acting as signallieutenant to Rodney, in the battlefought between the British and Frenchfleets, on the 17th of April, 1780. Havingshortly after been promoted to therank of commander, and on the 17thof December, 1782, to that of post-captain,he was commissioned to theKangaroo, and, subsequently, to theCaroline, in which he served, for sometime,on the American station.In 1790, he obtained the commandof the Hind frigate, with which, in 1793,he took eight of the enemy's privateers.He next served on the Halifax station,in the Thetis, of forty-four guns ; and,on the 17th of May, 1795, signalisedhimself, by taking, with the assistanceof Captain Beresford, in the Hussar,two out of a squadron of five Frenchships, off the Chesapeake. After havingcaptured several of the enemy's privateers,he was appointed, in February,1799, chief officer of the Ajax, of eightyguns, in which he served in the expeditionagainst Quiberon, Belleisle, andFerrol. He subsequently acted underLord Keith, on the Mediterranean station; and, in 1801, superintended thelanding of the British troops in Egypt,where, by his conduct, as commander ofa squadron of armed vessels, appointedto support the operations of the landforces against Alexandria, he obtainedthe most flattering notice from hissuperior officers. In 1803, he wascommissioned to the Northumberland,seventy-four ; and, in the next year,became rear-admiral of the blue. Earlyin 1805, he sailed, with a small squadron,from off the port of Ferrol, whichhe had been employed to blockade, tothe West Indies, in "pursuit of a Frenchfleet, commanded by Mussiessy; who,however, contrived to elude him, andreturn to port.He was next appointed the Leeward Islands station ;and shortly afterwards, joined the forceunder Lord Nelson, then in search ofthe combined fleets of Franceand Spain.He subsequently served under SirJohn Duckworth ; and displayed somuch talent and intrepidity, in thebattle fought between the squadroncommanded by that admiral, and theFrench fleet, off St. Domingo, that hewas made a knight commander of theBath, and obtained the thanks of bothhouses of parliament ; the freedom ofthe city of London, with a sword of thevalue of one hundred guineas ; a vase,worth 300, from the patriotic fund ;and a piece of plate, value 500, fromthe underwriters at Bridge-Town, Barbadoes.In 1807, he commanded the navalpart of the successful armament againstSt. Thomas, St. John, and Santa Cruz ;and, in 1809, jointly with Lieutenant-generalBeck with, effected the reductionof Martinique, for which service he receivedthe thanks of both houses ofparliament. From Martinique, he wentin pursuit of a small French squadron,and succeeded in capturing Le D'Haut-pole, of seventy-four guns, and sixhundred and eighty men. In 1809, heattained the rank of vice-admiral ; and,early in 1810, after some of his squadronhad destroyed two French frigates,at Basse-terre, he co-operated with Beckwith, in the reductionof Guadaloupe, of which he wasconstituted governor.In 1814, he hoisted his flag in theTonnant, of eighty guns, as commander-in-chiefon the North American station;and in the following year, assisted theland forces in an unsuccessful attack onNew Orleans; whence, in conjunctionwith General Lambert, he proceededagainst Mobile; shortly after the surrenderof which, he returned to England.On the 12th of August, 1819, he wasmade admiral of the blue ; and, on the1st of February, 1821, hoisted his flag onboardthe Impregnable, ninety-eight,as commander-in-chief on the Plymouthstation. He was subsequentlypromoted to the rank of admiral of theVISCOUNT NELSON.white; and, in addition to other distinctions,had obtained, prior to thedeath of George the Fourth, a grandcross of the order of the Bath. Hewas, at one time, the representativein parliament of a district of Scotchburghs, for which, however, he appearsto have lost his election, in 1806. Byhis wife, Maria, widow of Captain SirJacob Wheat, whom he married inApril, 1788, he has had several children.Among the naval commanders of hiscountry, Admiral Cochrane is certainlyentitled to a very honourable rank.The British Museum, as it appears, isindebted to him for a human skeleton,embedded in clay, which he procuredat Guadaloupe.HORATIO, VISCOUNT NELSON.HORATIO NELSON was born onthe 29th of September, 1758, at BurnhamThorpe, a village in Norfolk, ofwhich his father was rector. He losthis mother in childhood, and grew up aweakly boy, his strength being muchreduced by the ague. He, however,gave early proofs of a daring character.It has been related of him, thathaving one day strayed into the woods,and remained out beyond the usualhour, a messenger was despatched insearch of him, who found him tranquillysitting by the side of a brook, overwhich he was unable to pass ; and thathis grandmother, on his return, havingexpressed her surprise that he had notbeen driven home by hunger and fear,he replied, " Fear, grand mamma! Inever saw fear : what is it 1" At theschool of North Waltham, where heacquired the rudiments of learning, he,one night, made a hazardous descentfrom a window, and stole from the master'sgarden, some fine pears j not togratify his own appetite, for he refusedall share in the booty himself, but becauseevery other boy was afraid tomake the attempt. While on his wayto school, one morning, with his elderbrother, William, a heavy fall of snowcame on, which rendered their journey sowearisome, that they agreed to return.Their father desired them to set outagain, and left it to their honour whetherto come back or to proceed. Thesnow was deep enough to have justifiedtheir return a second time, and Williambegan to falter, but Horatio persevered,saying, " We must go on : remember,brother, it was left to our honour."He quitted school, at the age oftwelve, for the purpose of joining theRaisonable, under the command of hismaternal uncle, Captain Suckling, whoentertained but little hopes of his sicklynephew's attaining eminence as a sailor.The expedition for which the Raison-ablewas destined, having become unnecessary,he proceeded, in a merchantman,to the West Indies ; and, on hisreturn, joined his uncle, who then commandedthe Triumph, a guard-ship onthe Thames.In 1772, when Captain Phipps wasabout to sail on a voyage of discoverytowards the North Pole, Nelson, byhis uncle's interest, was admitted ascockswain under Captain Lutwidge, thesecond in command. In a few weeksafter the vessels had sailed from theNore, they became surrounded by ice.One night, he left the ship with a companion;and, early the next morning,was seen by his captain, at some distance,attacking an enormous bear.Disregarding the signal for his immediatereturn, he was about to strikethe animal a blow on the head withthe butt-end of his musket, when agun was fired from the ship, whichscared the bear away. On his return,he received a severe rebuke from hiscommander, who demanded his reasonfor engaging in so rash an adventure.Sir," replied he, " I wished to killthe bear, that I might carry the skinto my father."He next served on board the Seahorse,in the East Indies; where, byhis attentive conduct, he soon got ratedas a midshipman ; but suffered so severelyfrom the climate, that, to savehis life, he was compelled to returnto Europe. This unwelcome departurefrom India saddened his spirits for aTHE NAVY.time, and he felt impressed with an ideathat he should never rise in his profession.The voyage, however, strengthenedhim so much, that, on his arrivalin England, he was sufficiently restoredto accept the nomination of acting lieutenantto the Worcester, then going outwitha convoy to Gibraltar.In April, 1777, he was appointedsecond lieutenant of the Lowestoffefrigate, and served, for some time, onthe Jamaica station ; where, his seniorlieutenant, having gone below to searchfor his hanger, when ordered to takepossession of an American letter ofmarque, which had struck to the Lowestoffe,in a strong gale of wind, and inaheavy sea, the captain, impatient ofdelay, which he feared might deprivehim of the advantage he had gamed,said, in a tone of reproach, to thoseabout him, " Have I, then, no officerwho can board the prize ?" Nelsongenerously waited a few minutes, inexpectation of the first lieutenant'sreturn ; but, at length, hearing themaster volunteer his services, he leapedinto the boat, exclaiming, " It is myturn now ; if I come back, it will beyours !"From the Lowestoffe, he was removedinto the British, a flag-ship, ofwhich he soon became first lieutenant.In 1778, he was appointed commanderof the Badger brig, lying off Jamaica,where, by his presence of mind, hesaved the crew of the Glasgow, whichhad caught fire. On the llth of June,1779, he attained the rank of post-captain,and soon after succeeded to thecommand of the Hinchinbrook.When a French armament threatenedto invade Jamaica, Nelson undertook tocommand the batteries at Port Royal ;but the enemy's project being abandoned,he was employed in convoyingto the Honduras, a body of troops destinedfor an attack on Fort San Juan,which surrendered, after a siege ofeleven days. In the course of this enterprise,he drank some water at apoisoned spring, and his constitutionnever recovered from the effects of thedraught. He was attacked with dysentery; and would, probably, have fallena victim to the climate, had he not,fortunately, been recalled. He nowobtained the command of the Janus, offorty-four guns : fatigue, poison, anddisease had, however, so reduced him,that he was soon compelled to resignhis ship, and return to England for therecovery of his health.He was next appointed to the Albemarle,and proceeded to the NorthSeas, where he remained the wholewinter, which proved a severe trial tohis constitution. On returning to theDowns, he landed, for the purpose ofvisiting a senior officer'; and while ashore,so violent a hurricane came on, as tothreaten the wreck of his ship ; which,having, by the offer of a reward offifteen guineas, induced some boatmento put to sea with him, he reached amidthe violence of the storm.He now sailed to Canada ; where,having taken an American schoonerwhich contained the entire wealth ofthe master, a poor man with a largefamily, he generously abandoned theprize ; and, by a certificate, protectedher against any future capture. TheAmerican afterwards showed his gratitude,by risking his life to supply theAlbemarle with fresh provisions. AtQuebec, Nelson was prevented, by afriend, from entering into an improvidentmarriage. In October, 1782, heaccompanied Lord Hood to the WestIndies, where he became known to hisfuture friend, Prince William, afterwardsDuke of Clarence. At the conclusionof the war, in 1783, he returnedto England ; but, his income beinglimited, he went to reside at St. Omer,in France,In March, 1784, he was appointed tothe Boreas, of twenty-eight guns, and,proceeding to the West Indies, heldthe second command on that station ;where, contrary to the orders of AdmiralHughes, he compelled the resident commissionerat Antigua to strike a broadpendant which he had hoisted. Forthe purpose of checking the fraudulenttrading of the Americans with ourislands, he seized upon four of theirvessels; which, after a vexatious legalprosecution against him, were condemnedby the judge of Nevis, beforewhom he ably pleaded his own cause ;and afterwards threw out such suggestions,with regard to the proceedings,as led to the framing of the register act.On the llth of March, 1787, he wasmarried, at Nevis, to Mrs. Nisbet, thewidow of a physician, and the nieceVISCOUNT NELSON.of President Herbert. Prince Williamgave away the bride ; and Nelson commencedhis married life, by reconcilingthe president to his only daughter, whomhe had threatened to disinherit in hisniece's favour. While Nelson continuedon the West India station, he transmittedto government accounts of fraudshe had detected on the part of the navyagents abroad; but his information wasungraciously received by the board ofadmiralty. This treatment, togetherwith a long detention of the Boreas,after her return to England, as a slopand receiving ship, at the Nore, so disgustedhim, that he retired with hiswife to Burnham Thorpe, where hedevoted a great portion of his time torustic sports ; in which, however, heappears to have been so unskilful, thathis shooting a partridge was considered,by his friends, as a remarkableoccurrence.In 1793, he obtained the command ofthe Agamemnon, of sixty-four guns;and highly distinguished himself, underLord-hood, at the taking of Toulon ;at the siege of Bastia, where, with therank of brigadier, he superintendedthe landing of the troops ; and at thesuccessful attack on Calvi, in whichhe lost an eye. His services were,however, so completely overlooked bythe commander-in-chief, that his namedid not appear even in the list ofwounded. Soon after, while servingunder Admiral Hotham, he singly attacked,and compelled two of theenemy's ships, the Ca Ira and theCenseur, to surrender. In 1795, hebecame a colonel of marines; and,hoisting a commodore's pendant onboardthe Captain, proceeded, with asquadron of eight frigates under hiscommand, to the coast of Italy. Afterhaving assisted the Austrian forces, atGenoa, blockaded Leghorn, and takenPorto Ferrajo, he superintended theevacuation of Corsica; and, in December,1796, proceeded to perform asimilar duty at Porto Ferrajo, in theMinerve frigate; which, on her waythither, after an action of three hours'duration, compelled the Sabina, a Spanishship, to strike, and beat off anotherof the enemy's frigates; by which, however,she was compelled to abandon herprize.He next proceeded with a convoy toGibraltar; and gave Sir John Jervissuch intelligence, as led to the decisivebattle of the 13th of February, 1797, offCape St. Vincent, in which he took amost distinguished part. In disobedienceto the admiral's signals, he boregallantly down upon seven of theenemy's fleet ; and, on being askedif he had reckoned them, replied, " No ;it will be time enough to do that whenthey have struck." After having attackedthe Santissima Trinidadaa, ofone hundred and thirty-six guns, hepassed on to the San Nicholas, of eightyguns, and, compelling her to surrender,proceeded from her deck to board theSan Josef, of one hundred and twelveguns, which speedily submitted. Forhis brilliant services on this occasion,he was made a knight of the Bath,rear-admiral of the blue, and appointedto the chief command of the innersquadron at the blockade of Cadizz ;where, shortly afterwards, he was attacked,one night, in his barge, by aSpanish launch ; which, however, althoughher crew amounted to doublethe number of his own, after a mostdesperate encounter, he succeeded intaking.In the following July, he commandedthe expedition sent againstSanta Cruz ; where, while heading amidnight attack on the mole, he receiveda shot in his elbow, which compelledhim to return to his ship; and theexpedition entirely failed in its object,with a loss of two hundred and fiftymen. On his return to England, hewas, however, presented with thefreedom of the cities of London andBristol ; and, on account of his havingbeen compelled to suffer the amputationof his arm, obtained a pension of1,000 per annum. When restored tohealth, he sent a form of thanksgivingto the clergyman of St. George's,Hanover-square, which ran thus :An officer desires to return thanksto Almighty God for his perfect recoveryfrom a severe wound, and alsofor the many mercies bestowed onhim."In 1798, he hoisted his flag on boardthe Vanguard, and joined Earl St.Vincent, who detached him, with asmall squadron, to ascertain the destinationof a great armament, which wasthen fitting out at Toulon. After anarrow escape from shipwreck in theTHE NAVY.Gulph of Lyons, and a delay causedby the refitting of his ship, he receiveda reinforcement, and went in pursuitof the French, who had, in the interim,put to sea, and proceeded with Buonaparteand a large body of troops toEgypt. Nelson, however, was unableto discover what precise course theenemy had taken, and proceeded toSicily for the purpose of procuring supplies',which he fortunately obtained,through the influence of Lady Hamilton,wife of the British resident at theNeapolitan courtOn the 25th of July, 1798, he sailedfor the Morea ; and, on the 1st ofAugust, received the joyful tidings thatthe enemy were discovered riding atanchor in Aboukir Bay. His anxiety,for many preceding days, had been intense; but he now resumed his usualcheerfulness, and dined with several ofhis officers, to whom, on their quittinghis table to repair to their differentships, he said, " Before this time tomorrow,I shall have gained a peerage,or Westminster-abbey." The Frenchfleet was moored in a very advantageousposition: it consisted of fourfrigates, one ship of one hundred andtwenty guns, three of eighty, and nineof inferior force. Nelson had the samenumber of ships of the line, but all ofthem were seventy-fours. When theadvanced ships of the British squadronhad doubled the French line, (a planprojected, but never executed, by LordHood,) Nelson, in the Vanguard, withsix colours flying from different partsof the rigging, lest they should be shotaway, opened a dreadful fire againstthe Satiate, which returned it withsuch effect, as to clear the first six gunson the fore part of the Vanguard's deckthree times. In a quarter of an hour,the French ships were rapidly strikingto the British flag, and victory wasplaced beyond a doubt, when Nelsonreceived a wound on his head from apiece of langridge shot. The skin ofthe forehead fell over his remainingeye ; the blood flowed copiously ; andCaptain Berry, into whose arms he fell,believed the wound to be mortal. Whenhe was carried down into the cockpit,the surgeon instantly left a sailor whomhe was attending, and flew to Nelson ;who, though lie supposed himselfdying, declined his services, saying,I will take my turn with my bravefellows." On examination, his woundwas pronounced to be by no meansdangerous. Hearing that the Orientwas in flames, he now groped his wayup to the quarter-deck, without assistance,and, forgetful of his own sufferings,ordered boats to be sent off forthe relief of the enemy. Besides theOrient, another line-of-battle ship anda frigate were burnt: of the remainderof the French force, one frigate andnine sail of the line were taken. TheBritish loss amounted to eight hundredmen ; that of their opponents, includingprisoners, to as many thousands.As soon as the tumult of battle hadsubsided, the admiral ordered that, inevery ship, thanksgivings should bereturned to Almighty God for the victory; which would have been attendedwith even more important results, hadNelson been provided with small craft.Were I to die this minute," said he,' want of frigates' would be stamped onmy heart."Soon after the victory, he was createda British baron, and further rewardedwith a pension of 2,000 per annum, forhis own life and that of his two immediatesuccessors. He also received, fromthe sultan, a pelisse of sables, valued atfive thousand dollars, and a diamondaigrette, taken from the royal turban,valued at eighteen thousand ; from theCzar, and the King of Sardinia, theirrespective portraits, in gold boxes, setwith diamonds ; from the city of Palermo,a gold box and chain, broughton a silver waiter ; a sword from thefleet under his command, and anotherfrom the city of London ; a presentof 10,000 from the East India Company; and a valuable piece of platefrom the merchants trading to Turkey.After burning three of his prizes, andsending the remainder to England, hesailed from the scene of action, on the18th of August, to assist the King ofNaples against the French. Aboutthis period he is supposed to have commenceda criminal intimacy with LadyHamilton; and soon afterwards, underher pernicious influence, he committedan act of the most revolting barbarity.Prince Carracioli, a Neapolitan noblemanof distinguished character, but ofrevolutionary principles, and who hadbeen at the head of the Neapolitan navy,VISCOUNT NELSON,after having joined the French, as healleged, through compulsion, had escapedfrom the castles of Novo andNuovo, before they capitulated to theking's party ; but was soon detected,and brought on board the Vanguard, atnine o'clock one morning. The Britishofficers, respecting his character andyears, (for he had reached the age ofseventy,) treated him with attention,and had his fetters removed. At teno'clock he was put upon his trial, beforea court-martial consisting of Neapolitans.The proceedings lasted two hours; andCarracioli was condemned to be hung,as a traitor, at five o'clock the sameevening. He pleaded, that he had hadno time for procuring witnesses, andthat the president was his inveterate foe;but these extenuating circumstancesweighed not with Nelson. The princethen entreated that he might be shot ;but Nelson, acting by the instigation ofLady Hamilton, denied this request.At five o'clock, the prince was hung;and Lady Hamilton witnessed his execution!The body was sunk, with twohundred, and fifty pounds weight ofshot; but, about a fortnight after, itrose to the surface; and, the shot beingattached to the legs, floated uprighttowards the flag-ship, in the sight ofNelson and the Neapolitan king.In disobedience to the orders of LordKeith, who had peremptorily directedhim to sail, with his whole force, forthe protection of Minorca, Nelson continuedin the Bay of Naples. He succeeded,at length, in restoring the kingto his dominions ; and, following thecourt to Palermo, obtained, as a rewardfor his services, the dukedom of Bronze,with a revenue of about 3,000 arrear;a diamond-hilled sword, which his majestyhad received from Charles theThird ; and a truncheon, studded withallthe diamonds which their island couldfurnish, from the Greeks of Zante.Thinking that a favourable opportunityhad now arrived for expelling theFrench from the Roman states, he appliedto the governor of Minorca, to assisthim with twelve hundred men, ineffecting this object ; but being disappointedin his application, he determinedto make the attempt with adetachment of the fleet; and, sailingup the Tiber in a barge, obtained possessionof Rome. He next proceededto assist Captain Ball, at the siege ofMalta ; whence, however, he sailed inthe early part of 1800; and, while atsea, captured part of a small squadronwhich was proceeding to the relief ofthe island. He soon afterwards returned,with Lady Hamilton and herhusband, who had been dismissed fromhis employment, through Germany, toEngland ; where he was received by hisfellow-countrymen with enthusiasm ;and, on his arrival in the metropolis,was presented, by the common-council,with a golden-hilted sword, and a voteof thanks for his services. A fewmonths after, he separated from hiswife ; to whom some of his last wordswere, " I . call God to witness, thereis nothing in you, or your conduct,that I wish otherwise."In March, 1801, after having attainedthe rank of vice-admiral of theblue, he sailed for the Baltic, as secondin command, under Sir Hyde Parker ;and, on the 2nd of April, conducted theattack on Copenhagen. During the heatof the engagement, he is said to haveexclaimed, "It is warm work: this daywill be the last to many of us ; but Iwould not be elsewhere for thousands !"Sir Hyde Parker, being prevented bythe wind and tide from coming to hisassistance, and feeling alarmed at theduration of the contest, at length-madethe signal for retreat; which Nelsonordered to be acknowledged ; but exclaimed," Leave off action now ! dme if I do! I have only one eye, Ihave a right to be blind sometimes."Then, putting the glass to his blind eye,he added, " I really do not see thesignal." Shortly afterwards, he vociferated," D the signal ! keepmine for closer battle flying! That's theway I answer such signals. Nail mineto the mast !"In half an hour from this time, theDanes began to slacken their fire, andseveral of their ships were forced tostrike. Nelson, seeing that his boatswere fired upon when they went to takepossession of the prizes, wrote a note tothe crown prince, stating, " that he wascommanded to spare Denmark, thatthe line of defence which covered hershores had struck to his flag ; but thatif the firing was continued on the part ofDenmark, he must fire the prizes, andthe crews must inevitably perish." ATHE NAVY.wafer being brought to' him, he calledfor sealing-wax ; but a cannon-ballstruck off the head of the boy who wasbringing the candle. Nelson, however,ordered another to be brought, andsealed the note with the accustomedformalities, observing, that to show confusionand want of calmness, even intrifles, at such a crisis, would be attendedwith injurious results. A favourableanswer, consenting to a truce,was returned ; and, on the 9th of April,Nelson landed to conclude the terms.On one point neither party would yield,and a Dane talked of renewing hostilities." We are ready at a momentready to bombard this very night," wasthe reply of Nelson ; and, as he passedthrough the state rooms, for the purposeof discussing the subject with thecrown prince, with whom it was atlength amicably settled, he observed tothe officer on whose arm he wasleaning, " Though I have only one eye,I can see that all this will burn well."Refusing a frigate, that he might notweaken the fleet, although he alwayssuffered from sea-sickness in a smallvessel, he soon afterwards embarked inabrig, for England. On arriving atYarmouth, he proceeded at once tothe hospital, to see the men who hadbeen wounded while serving under hiscommand off Copenhagen. After abrief repose, during which he wascreated a viscount, and his honourswere made hereditary in the femaleline, he obtained the command of thechannel fleet ; with the boats of whichhe made an unsuccessful attack on theflotilla in the harbour off Bologna.The treaty of Amiens having relievedhim from his irksome employment inthe channel, he retired, with Sir Williamand Lady Hamilton, to his seat atMerton, in Surrey. On the death ofthe former, in 1803, after having vainlyendeavoured to procure some allowancefrom government, for his widow, onaccount of the services she had renderedthe fleet in Sicily, he granted her anannuity of 1,200 per annum.On the re-commencement of hostilities,he was appointed to the commandof the Mediterranean fleet; withwhich he blockaded the enemy forfourteen months, in the harbour ofToulon. At length, however, theyeluded his vigilance ; and after havingin vain attempted to come up withthem, he retired again to Merton,where Lady Hamilton continued toreside. A few weeks after, he receivedintelligence that the French and Spanishfleets, having effected a junction,had entered Cadizz. He forthwith resumedhis command in the Mediterranean,and the combined squadrons,under the command of Admirals Villeneuveand Graving, having venturedfrom port, he fell in with them offTrafalgar, on the 21st of October, 1805.After all the preparations for battlewere completed, and the officers hadreceived his last injunctions, he retiredto his cabin, and prepared a document,by which, in the event of his death, herecommended Lady Hamilton, and hisadopted daughter, Horatio NelsonThompson, to the gratitude of hiscountry. As the men, in clearing hiscabin, were removing the picture of theformer, he desired them to " take careof his guardian angel." Her miniaturehe wore near his heart. Soon after, heasked Captain Blackwood what heshould consider a victory ; and, on thatofficer replying that he should be wellsatisfied with the capture of fourteenships, Nelson answered, " I shall not becontented with less than twenty." Hislast memorable signal was, " Englandexpects every man to do his duty ;" andit was answered by a loud and simultaneousshout throughout the fleet.He decorated himself with all his starsand honours, and seemed to feel consciousthat he was about to perform adeed, of which he would not live toreap the glory. When Captain Blackwoodtook leave of him to proceed onboardhis own ship, Nelson shook himby the hand, saying, " God bless you,Blackwood ! I shall never see youagain." At a little after twelve, hisflag-ship, the Victory, opened her firefrom both sides, and ran on the Ile-double,from the main-top of which,Nelson soon after received a musket-ballin the left breast, and fell. Two ofhis crew having lifted him up, he exclaimed," They have done for me atlast; my back-bone is shot through."As they were carrying him down theladder, he ordered the tiller ropes,which had been shot away, to be replaced; and covered, with his handkerchief,his face and stars, that theVISCOUNT NELSON.sight of him might not damp the spiritsof the crew. On being told that thesurgeon was about to examine hiswound, he said, " It is of no use : hecan do nothing for me, he had betterattend to others." He then eagerly inquiredhow the day was going; andwhen informed that none of his shipshad struck, he said, " I am a dead man ;I am going fast ; let my dear LadyHamilton have my hair, and all otherthings belonging to me." He soonafterwards said, " The pain is so greatthat I wish I was dead ; yet I shouldlike to live a little longer! Whatwould become of poor Lady Hamilton,if she knew my situation ?" On hearingthat fourteen or fifteen of the enemyhad struck, he directed his captain,Hardy, to bring the fleet to anchor.I suppose," replied Hardy, " Callingmy dear lord, is to command."Never !" exclaimed Nelson, " whilstI live." He now spoke about his interment,and desired not to be thrownoverboard, but to be buried by the sideof his parents, unless the king shouldorder differently. After having againmentioned Lady Hamilton, and desiredHardy to kiss his cheek, he saidto the chaplain, " Doctor, I have notbeen a great sinner." He then kepton repeating, " Thank God, I havedone my duty !" and, after havingheard the last guns which were fired,he expired at half past four o'clock inthe afternoon.Twenty of the enemy's ships struck ;but, as it was impossible to carry hislast order of bringing the fleet to anchor,into effect, some of them escaped, andothers were destroyed. The honoursand rewards that England would haverejoiced to have bestowed upon him,were conferred upon his relatives. Mrs.Matt-ham and Mrs. Bolton, his sisters,were voted 10,000 each; and hiselder brother, a clergyman, obtainedan earldom, with a grant of 6,000 ayear; and the sum of 100,000 for thepurchase of an estate.The body of Nelson was placed in acoffin, made out of the mast of L'L'Orient,which had been presented to him byCaptain Hallowed. When he first receivedthis singular present, he hadset it up, as a conspicuous object, inhis cabin, but was prevailed upon toremove it, at the solicitation of an oldand faithful servant Before leavingLondon, for the last time, he had calledat his upholsterer's, and told him to getit ready, for that he should soon requireit. His remains were buried, with extraordinaryfuneral pomp, in St. Paul'scathedral ; where a national monumentwas erected to his memory, as well asin the guildhall of London, and variousother places in his native country, andher colonies.Nelson was the idol of those withwhom he served. He encouraged themidshipmen by the benignity of hismanners, and conciliated the men byhis utter aversion to measures of severity.He called them his children ;watched over their interests with theeye of a parent, and made their wrongshis own. When the corporation ofLondon presented him with a medalfor his blockade of the French coast,he indignantly inquired why his subordinateshad not received a similarhonour. In cases of prize-money, herepresented their claims to the admiraltyin a manner which shewed thathis whole heart and soul was bent upondoing justice to those who had foughthis battles. Like George the Third, henever forgot a face that he had onceseen. During a visit to Salisbury, inDecember, 1800, he recognized onesailor among the crowd who had servedunder him at the battle of the Nile, andanother who had assisted at the amputationof his arm, after the unsuccessfulattack on Santa Cruz.Though a rigid enforcer of disciplinein others, he was not a strict observerof it himself. Many of hys greatestachievements were wrought in directviolation of orders; but his brilliantsuccesses secured him from that punishmentwhich has been inflicted on lessfortunate commanders, for a similarbreach of the articles of war. Fromhis mother he imbibed a hatred of theFrench. "Hate a Frenchman as youwould the devil!" was his earliestprecept to a young midshipman : obedienceto the king appears to havebeen the second.In the civil avocations incidental tohis rank and profession, Nelson exhibitedthe same decisive energy thatmarked his naval career. His numerousletters to the agents of foreign powers,bear the impress of a vigorous mind ;THE NAVY.and, in the house of lords, he was alwaysheard with respectful and earnest attention.On all his undertakings he invokedthe blessing of heaven, and always returnedthanks to God for his successes.When picturing scenes of happinessand repose after his toils, he dwelt withdelight upon the idea of his regularattendance at the village church, andthe good example he should thereby setto the poor parishioners. These admirablefeelings render some parts ofhis conduct the more extraordinary.His treatment of Carracioli, and hisconnexion with Lady Hamilton, areserious blemishes on his reputation,which his most enthusiastic admirerscan never remove. From the time thathe became criminally intimate withthat woman, his happiness was at anend; and his subsequent correspondenceshews how severely he was torturedby the disapprobation of his own heart.His conduct as a husband had previouslybeen kind and unimpeachable ;and he continued to the last, an affectionaterelative and a sincere friend.In his habits, he was frugal and temperate; he rose between five and sixo'clock in the morning, and evincedgreat anxiety never to waste time.He once ordered some stores of atradesman, before he was going on anexpedition, and desired that they mightbe sent on board at a stated hour ; recollectinghimself, however, he added,A quarter of an hour earlier, if youplease, to that quarter of an hour beforehandI owe all my success in life."SIR RICHARD Astrachan.RICHARD, the eldest son of LieutenantPatrick Strachan, was born inDevonshire, on the 7th of October, 1760,and succeeded to the baronetcy ofThornton, in the county. of Kincardine,in December, 1777. He commencedhis naval career, at an early age, onboardthe Actaeon ; and from that shipremoved to the Hero, seventy-four, inwhich he served in the engagementbetween Commodore Johnstonee's squadronand that under De SufTrein, atPorto Prayaa. He was subsequentlymade first lieutenant of the Superb, ,the flag-ship of Sir EdwardHughes ; and, in 1782, became commanderof the Lizard cutter. In 1783,he attained the rank of post-captain,and, at the close of the American war,conveyed the Honourable C. A. Cathcartto China.In 1791, while on the East Indiastation, in the Phoenix, he captured theFrench frigate, Resolve, after a shortaction. In 1794, being then in commandof the Concorde, he took theEngagement, a French frigate, in thechannel ; and, while on a cruise in theMelampus, with four other frigatesunder his orders, captured nineteenof the enemy's coasting-vessels. InMay, 1795, he discovered, off the islandof Jersey, and gave chase to, a fleetof merchantmen, twelve of which, beingdriven under a battery, and abandonedby their crews, were captured.In 1796, he removed to the Diamond;in 1799, to the Captain ; and, in 1803,to the Donegal, seventy-four, withwhich, after a brief action, he tooka Spanish frigate, called the Amphitrite.In the last-mentioned year, he was appointeda colonel of marines; and, in1805, commanded the Caesar, of eightyguns, one of the squadron under AdmiralCornwallis. While cruising offFerrol, on the 4th of November, in thesame year, with four seventy-four-gunships, and as many frigates, under hiscommand, he discovered four Frenchships, which had escaped from the battleof Trafalgar ; and, after an engagementof above three hours' duration, compelledthem all to surrender. For hisservices on this occasion, early in thenext year, he received the insignia ofthe Bath, and the thanks of both housesof parliament.He was shortly afterwards promotedto the rank of rear-admiral of the red,and despatched in pursuit of AdmiralVillages, one of whose ships was destroyedby the British, on the coast ofAmerica. In 1809, he was appointed toSIR BENJAMIN HALLOWELL CAREW.the command of the fleet ordered to proceedto the Scheldt, with the troopsdestined for the attempt upon Flushing.His own ship, the St. Domingo, groundedat the commencement of the attack, butwas soon got off: the remaining objectsof the expedition having, however,shortly after, been deemed unattainable,the enterprise was abandoned with greatloss and discredit. In 1810, he attainedthe rank of vice-admiral of the blue,and was presented with the freedom ofthe city of London, as well as a valuablesword, which had been voted to himfor his victory off Ferrol, in the year1805. In July, 1821, he became a fulladmiral, and obtained a pension of1,000 per annum. He died at hisresidence, in Brimstone-square, aftera short illness, on the 3rd of February,1828, aged sixty-seven ; leaving severalchildren, by his wife, a Miss LouisaDillon, whom he had married in 1812.Sir Richard Strachan appears to havebeen deficient in none of the qualificationsof a naval commander, or thevirtues of private life. On one occasion,his benevolent disposition promptedhim to intercede on behalf of a destitutesailor's widow, who, not havingbeen married twelve months prior toher husband's decease, was, on accountof that circumstance, not strictly entitledto a pension ; which, however, she succeededin obtaining, principally throughhis humane exertions in her favour.SIR BENJAMIN HALLOWELL CAREW.BENJAMIN HALLOWELL, (who,at a late period of his life, assumed thename of Carew,) was born about theyear 1760 ; and became a lieutenant inthe navy, on the 31st of August, 1781.He served on board the Alfred, in theactions fought on the 9th and 12th ofApril, 1782, between the Count DeGrasse and Lord Rodney ; and, subsequently,at the capture of two line-ofbattle ships, a frigate, and a corvette.He was made commander about theyear 1791 : early in 1793, he proceeded,in the Camel, store-ship, to theMediterranean ; and, shortly afterwards,obtained post rank.In May, 1794, he served, as a volunteer,under Nelson, at the siege ofBastia; and, by guarding the gun-boatsstationed at the entrance of the port, interceptedthe succour intended for thebesieged. He was, subsequently, engagedat the attack on Calvi; on thereduction of which, he obtained thecommand of the Lowestoffe frigate. InJuly, 1795, he distinguished himself, ascommander of the Courageux, in theaction between Admiral Hotham's squadronand the enemy, off the HiertSsIslands. On the 19ih of December,1796, during his absence at a court-martial,his vessel parted from hercables, off Gibraltar, in a violent gale ofwind, and was lost, with nearly fivehundred of her crew.On the 14th of February, 1797, heserved, as a volunteer, on board theVictory, in the celebrated engagementoff Cape St. Vincent; whence he wassent home with despatches ; and, beingrecommended to the notice of government,obtained the command of theLively frigate On the 1st of August,1798, he served, as captain of the Swift-sure,seventy-four, at the battle of theNile. Having been ordered, with theAlexander, early on that day, to reconnoitrethe port of Alexandria, the Swift-suredid not join in the action untileight ,o'clock in the evening ; when sheopened her fire upon L'L'Orient, whichtook fire about nine, and shortly afterwardsblew up. Of part of her mainmast,Captain Hallowed ordered a coffinto be made, which he presented toNelson, who is said to have highlyprized the singular gift.After the battle, Captain Hallowedwas employed in taking possession ofAboukir Island, which he effected onthe 6th of August; and, on the 8th,he captured a corvette, of sixteen gunsand seventy men, called La Fortune.He was then engaged, under theorders of Hood, in co-operating withthe Russians and Turks, in annoyingthe French army. On the 20th ofFebruary, 1799, he joined Lord Nelson,at Palermo ; and served, as secondin command to Captain Trowbridge, inTHE NAVY.the successful attacks on the castles ofSt. Elms and Capua, in the followingJuly. About this time, he received theNeapolitan order of St. Ferdinand andof Merit. Early in August, he wasdespatched, by Nelson, to offer termsof capitulation to the garrisons of CivitasPecunia, and Castle St. Angelo ; but,before he had entirely fulfilled the objectof his mission, he received ordersto proceed to Gibraltar, where hejoined the squadron under AdmiralDuckworth. After having effected afew captures, and cruised, for a shorttime, under Admiral Bickerton, whohad hoisted his flag in the Swiftsure,he was despatched to Aboukir Bay.In June, 1801, being then in charge of aconvoy to Malta, he fell in with a Frenchsquadron, under Admiral Gantheaume ;to whom, after a close action, he wascompelled to strike. Being shortly afterwardsallowed to proceed, on his parole,to Minorca, he was there tried by acourt-martial, which honourably acquittedhim. During the short peaceof Amiens, he was stationed on boardthe Argo, forty-four, as commodore, onthe African coast. He subsequentlyassisted Sir Samuel Hood, in the reductionof St. Lucia and Tobago ; and, inJuly, 1803, returned to England, withdespatches. Early in the ensuing year,he sailed for Aboukir ; whence he proceededto Malta, and convoyed thehomeward-bound fleet from the Mediterraneanto England. On his arrival,he was appointed to the Tigre, ofeighty guns; in which he proceeded,with Nelson, to th West Indies, insearch of the French and Spanishfleets.Early in 1807, he convoyed thesecond expedition to Egypt; and remainedon that station until September,1807, when his ship was stationedbefore the port of Toulon. On the25th of October, 1809, he assisted SirGeorge Martin's squadron, in drivingon shore, near the mouth of the Rhone,four French ships of war. On the 30thof that month, he was directed, by LordCollingwood, to take charge of a detachmentof the fleet, and attack severalarmed vessels and transports in theBay of Rosas, all of which he capturedor destroyed.On the 31st of July, 1810, he wasmade a colonel of marines ; and, on the1st of August, 1811, rear-admiral of theblue. In January, 1812, he proceededto the Mediterranean, in the Malta,eighty-four, to assist the Spanish patriots.On the 2nd of January, 1815,he was made a knight commander ofthe Bath. He subsequently obtainedthe chief command on the Irish station ;and, about the year 1821, in the riverMedway. Prior to the death of Georgethe Fourth, he had attained the rankof vice-admiral of the red. He wasmarried on the 17th of February, 1800,to a daughter of Commissioner Ingle-field,of Gibraltar dock-yard ; by whomhe has issue.In the course of his professionalcareer, he has given numerous proofsof an amiable disposition, great navalskill, and calm intrepidity. By his humaneexertions, several of the crew ofthe Orient were saved from destruction,when that ship took fire, at the battle ofthe Nile. While serving off Gibraltar,he sent a trunk, containing every necessaryarticle of wearing apparel, witha draft on his agent for 100, to the captainof a French man-of-war, who hadbeen taken prisoner at Trafalgar, andwho was, apparently, on account of hissituation, and the short stay which hewas permitted to make at Gibraltar, inneed of temporary assistance. Duringthe operations against St. Elms, it becamenecessary to cut down a tree,which interposed between a batteryerected by the British, and the enemy'swalls ; and the Neapolitan labourershaving evinced a disinclination to performso dangerous a service, Hallowed,with Trowbridge, and two other persons,advanced from the works forthe purpose of encouraging them. Onreaching the tree, a shot was fired atthe officers and their two companions,from the castle, which struck theground between their legs, fortunately,however, without doing either of theman injury.SIR SAMUEL HOOD.SIR SAMUEL HOOD.SAMUEL, the second son of SamuelHood, Esq., of Kingsland, in the countyof Dorset, and nephew of Lords Bridgeportand Howe, was born about theyear 1760 ; and, it is supposed, commencedhis naval career under theauspices of the latter distinguished commander.In 1791, he commanded theJuno, of thirty-two guns, on the Jamaicastation, where he displayed anoble proof of his courage and humanity.A raft, with three personsupon it, being discovered from the masthead,he ordered out a boat for their relief;but the crew, seeing that the wavesbroke over the raft every moment,evinced some reluctance to man theboat, which, they considered, could notpossibly reach the raft in time to savethe unfortunate men who were clingingto it. Observing their disinclination,Hood leaped into the boat, declaring,that he never employed any man upona service, on which he was afraid toventure himself; and, with much difficulty,succeeded in rescuing the threepersons on the raft from their periloussituation. For this humane action, thehouse of assembly, at Jamaica, votedhim a sword, of the value of one hundredguineas.On his return from the West Indies,he served, under Lord Hood, on theMediterranean station; where his frigatewas saved from capture, under thefollowing circumstances. About theclose of 1793, being ignorant of theevacuation of Toulon, he sailed, atnight, into the port. He had alreadyreached the inner road, when his vesselstruck upon a shoal ; from which shehad not quite got clear, when she wasboarded by a boat's crew from theshore ; who, favouring the delusionunder which the commander laboured,endeavoured to decoy him to anotherpart of the harbour, where his frigatemight more easily be secured. A midshipman,however, perceiving their nationalcockades, immediately gave thealarm; and the danger of their positionbecoming evident, Hood and his crewforced the French below, and, takingadvantage of a favourable breeze, withmuch difficulty got the frigate afloat.She was scarcely under sail, whena brig-of-war, and several batteries,opened a fire upon her, in spite ofwhich however, she succeeded in escapingfrom the harbour.Shortly afterwards, he assisted in thereduction of Corsica; and, in'1796, obtainedthe command of the Zealous,seventy-four; which, in 1797, formedpart of the squadron under Nelson,employed on the unsuccessful expeditionagainst Santa Cruz ; where, afterthe failure of a spirited attack upon thetown, he was employed to negotiatewith the Spanish governor, for permissionto embark the men who hadlanded, without molestation, on conditionthat the squadron should abstainfrom a cannonade. In 1798, he wasagain placed under the command ofNelson; with whom, on its departurefrom Toulon, he proceeded in quest ofthe French fleet, which, it is said, hehad the satisfaction of being the firstto discover, in Aboukir Bay. Nelsonhaving asked him, shortly before thebattle which speedily ensued, if hethought there was a sufficient depth ofwater for the British ships to pass betweenthe enemy and the shore, Hoodreplied, that he did not know, but,with the admiral's permission, he wouldlead in and try. The Goliath, however,being the fastest sailer, "headedthe Zealous ; which speedily followed,and, taking up an advantageous position,in twelve minutes completely dismastedand conquered her antagonist,the Guerrier. On the following morning,the French admiral's ship, theGenereux, and two frigates, having cuttheir cables, and got under weigh, theZealous was ordered to intercept them ;but, after exchanging a broadside witheach of the enemy, she being unablefrom the damage she had sustainedto tack, Nelson made a signal for herto desist from any further attempt.For his services on this occasion, thename of Captain Hood was includedin the general vote of thanks from par-theNAVY.lament, and in the list of those commandersto whom gold medals weredirected to be given.On the departure of Nelson forEngland, Hood was left, with a smallsquadron, to blockade Alexandria. In1799, he participated in the expulsionof the French from Naples ; where hisgeneral services were of such utility,that he was made a commander ofthe order of Ferdinand and of Merit.Soon afterwards, he joined the channelfleet, in the Courageux ; from which, inJanuary, 1801, he was removed to theVenerable; and, in the following June,proceeded to reinforce Sir James Sauloff Cadizz. On the 6th of July,he bore a conspicuous part in an unsuccessfulattack on three line-of-battleships and a frigate, under the batteriesof Algesiras bay ; and, on the 12th ofthe same month, in the more fortunateencounter between the enemy's squadronand that under Sir James Sauma-rez, in the streights. On the followingmorning, he gave chase to an eighty-gunship; which, however, after awarm engagement, effected her escape,leaving the Venerable nearly dismastedand aground, close to the castle ofSancti Petri, whence she was withgreat difficulty got off.In 1803, he hoisted a commodore'spendant, on board the Centaur, ofseventy-four guns, and proceeded totake the chief command on the LeewardIslands station ; where, in thecourse of the year, jointly with Greenfield, he took St.Lucia, Tobago, Demerara, Essequibo,and Berbice. On the 6th of April,1804, he sailed from Barbadoes, with asquadron, having on board about twothousand troops, under the commandof Sir Charles Green, against Surinam ;which, on the 4th of May, was forcedto capitulate. In the following October,Hood was made a knight commanderof the Bath; and, about thesame time, married a daughter of LordSeaport, then governor of Barbadoes,by whom, however, he had no issue.In June, 1805, he returned to England;and, shortly afterwards, wasmade a colonel of marines. On thellth of June, 1806, he took the commandof a small squadron off Rochefort;and, on the 25th of the following September,fell in with seven of the enemy'sfrigates, off Chaperon light-house ; aspirited engagement ensued, whichterminated in the capture of La Gloire,L' Indefatigable, LaMinerve, and I/Ar-mite, by the British ; whose force, it isnecessary to remark, consisted of threeseventy-four-gun ships, and four frigates.Hood received a wound duringthe engagement, which rendered theamputation of his right arm necessary.On his arrival at Spithead, with theprizes, his wife immediately put off tosee him ; but refusing to wait until thechair could be hoisted out, she madean attempt to mount the ship's side,and, her foot slipping, she fell into thewater, from which, it being about threeo'clock in the morning, and quite dark,she was got out with great difficulty,but without having received any injury.A dissolution of parliament shortlyafterwards took place ; and Sir Samuel,having become a candidate for Westminster,obtained his return, by a considerablemajority. In 1807, duringwhich year he was elected for Bridport,he commanded the naval part of thesuccessful armament against Madeira;and, early in 1808, received the thanksof parliament for his services. He wasnext employed in his old ship, the Centaur,with Captain Byam Martin, in theImplacable, to assist the Swedes againstthe Russians, from whom he succeededin taking a seventy-four-gun ship ; and,but for the slow sailing of his allies,would, it is said, have made more importantcaptures. In 1808, he commandedthe squadron in which theBritish troops embarked, at Corunna;where he displayed so much zeal andability, that, early in the next year,he was honoured with the thanks ofparliament, made rear-admiral of thewhite, and created a baronet, withremainder to his nephew. In 1810, hebecame rear-admiral of the red; and,in the following year, proceeded totake the chief command in the EastIndies. In 1812, he was made a knightcommander, and, shortly before hisdeath, which took place on the 24th ofDecember, 1815, a knight grand crossof the Bath. His services, if not particularlybrilliant, appear to have beenarduous to himself, and beneficial tohis country.SIR HOME RIGGS POPHAM.SIR HOME RIGGS POPHAM.THIS officer, the twenty-first child,by the same mother, of a British consulatTetuan, in Morocco, whose family,by different wives, amounted to forty-four,was born at that place, on the12th of October, 1762. At the age ofthirteen, he was removed from Westminsterschool to the university of Cambridge,where he continued about ayear, and then entered the navy, underthe protection of Commodore Thompson.At the defeat of Langer's squadron,on the 30th of June, 1778, hewas present, in the Hyaena frigate ; inwhich he continued until 1782, whenhe was promoted to the rank of lieutenant,and went out as a maritimesurveyor to the African station. Hereturned to England in 1788 ; but, soonafter, proceeded to India, with a viewto increase his professional experience ;and on his arrival at Bengal, became,through the influence of Admiral Cornwallis,a member of the committee appointedto survey New Harbour, inthe river Hoogly.In 1791, he obtained the command ofone of the company's ships ; in which,while on his passage from Bengal toBombay, he was compelled, by a tempestuousmonsoon, to anchor at Pull Penang,now known as Prince of Wales'sIsland, a circumstance which led to thediscovery of a southern passage. Conceivingthe situation to be desirablefor a dock-yard, he made a chart of it,which was published with the permissionof government ; whose thanks hereceived for the benefit he had conferredon the company's commerce.He was also presented with a piece ofplate by the council ; and strongly recommended,by the court of directors,to the lords of the admiralty.After having, for some time, actedas a free trader, in which capacity hehad been singularly fortunate, he acceptedthe command of the Etruscan, anImperial East-indiaman ; which wassoon after taken, on her passage toOstend, by an English frigate, on accountof a large portion of the propertyon board her, being supposed to belongto British subjects. On the breakingout of the war with France, he returnedto the regular service ; and subsequentlydistinguished himself, at the head ofa party of seamen, under the Dukeof York, in Holland. Having conceivedthe idea of arming the Flemishfishermen, he was permitted to formthem into a regular corps ; which, underhis command, highly distinguished itselfin defending Newport. For his successfulexertions, in repairing the bridgeof communication at Nimeguen, duringthe siege of that place, by GeneralPichegru, he was promoted to the rankof post-captain, on the 4th of April,1795 ; in which year, he also superintendedthe embarkation of the Britishtroops from Holland.Having turned his attention to a planfor resisting any invasion of this country,that might be threatened by France,he proposed the organization of a corpsof sea fencibles; a suggestion which,in 1798, was carried into execution ;and, for the ensuing two years, he heldthe command of one of the companiesoccupying the district from BeachyHead to Deal, inclusive.On the 14th of May, 1798, he sailedwith a small squadron under his orders,having on board a military force,commanded by General Coote, againstOstend ; off which he arrived on the19th of the same month, and some ofthe troops were almost immediatelylanded. These, however, after havingblown up the sluice-gates of the town,being unable to remark, owing tothe roughness of the sea, were forcedto capitulate. In 1799, Captain Pop-hamwas sent to Cronstadt, in the Nilelugger, to superintend the embarkationof some Russian troops, destined toassist in the attack on Holland. Whileon this service, he was visited by theEmperor Paul, who presented him witha gold snuff-box of considerable value,I and the cross of Malta. He also receiveda splendid diamond ring fromthe empress, who, with her daughters,had condescended to partake ot a repastof salt beef and biscuits on boardTHE NAVY.his ship. In the winter of the sameyear, he was, in conjunction with CaptainGodfrey, intrusted with the commandof a small flotilla of gun-boats,on the canal of Alkmaar, in Holland,which, by skilful management, wasmade to afford considerable protectionto the flanks of the British. For hisconduct on this service, he obtainedthe special thanks of the Duke of York,and a pension of 500 per annum.In December, 1800, he was intrustedwith the command of a small squadron,which, after having conveyed reinforcementsfrom Judea, and the Cape ofGood Hope, to Sir Ralph Abercromby,in Egypt, proceeded to Calcutta. InNovember, 1801, he sailed to Macao,for the purpose of protecting theships from China, which, it was suspected,the French had fitted out anexpedition to intercept. In January,1803, he returned to Madras; andwas soon afterwards employed, by thegovernor-general, in a diplomatic capacity.He also, by the invitation of thePacha of Egypt, visited Cairo, where hesettled an advantageous tariff of customs,and secured a monopoly of thetrade in coffee to Great Britain.On his return to England, a parliamentaryinquiry was about to be made,relative to his charges for repairing theships under his command in India,when a sudden change in the ministrytook place, and he was, soon after, employedto superintend the destructionof a fleet by a new scheme, which,however, did not succeed. In 1806,he commanded the naval part of theforce which caused the Cape of GoodHope to capitulate. Shortly after, witha body of troops under General Beresford,he proceeded to Rio de laPlata, and captured Buenos Ayres.The enemy, however, soon retook thecity; and, on his return to England,Sir Home Popham, whose friends hadquitted office, was brought to a court-martial; by which he was severely reprimanded," for having, without anydirection or authority whatever, withdrawnthe whole naval force under hiscommand at the Cape, for the purposeof attacking the Spanish settlements."He was, however, shortly afterwards,appointed captain of the fleet sent outunder Admiral Gambler, against theDanes ; and, on the 8th of January,1808, he received a valuable swordfrom the corporation of London, withthe freedom of the city. In 1809, heserved in the expedition against Flushing.After having led the fleet to ananchorage, off Compost, he directedthe successful cannonade on Cavern,and commanded the flotilla despatchedup the West Scheldt, to take soundings.During the peninsular war he wasactively employed, in the Venerable,seventy-four, on the north-west coast ofSpain ; and he subsequently conveyedLord Moira, in the Stirling, to theEast Indies. After having been madea colonel of marines, he was advanced,on the 4th of June, 1814, to the rankof rear-admiral of the white, and hoistedhis flag as commander-in-chief in theriver Thames. In 1819, he commandedon the Jamaica station, and becamerear-admiral of the red. At the timeof his death, which took place on thellth of September, 1820, he was groomof the bedchamber to the Duke ofGloucester, and a fellow of the RoyalSociety. He had, for some time, beenthe representative in parliament, ofYarmouth, in the Isle of Wight; andafterwards, of Shaftesbury. By his wife,the daughter of Captain Prince, of theEast India Company's service, he leftseveral children.The services of this enterprisingofficer were brilliant as well as numerous.His ingenuity in conceptionappears to have been equal to hisbravery and judgment in execution,so that he is entitled to a very highrank among our naval commanders.His scientific acquirements are statedto have been more than respectable:among other inventions connected withhis professional pursuits, he producedan improved telegraph, which, in 1815,was adopted on the coast from theLand's End to Bridport. He publisheda pamphlet relative to the treatmenthe had experienced on his return fromthe East Indies ; A Description of Princeof Wales's Island; and Rules and Regulationsto be observed in His Majesty'sships.SIR WILLIAM SIDNEY SMITH.SIR WILLIAM SIDNEY SMITH.WILLIAM SIDNEY SMITH, theson of a captain in the army, was bornin 1764 ; and after having gone througha course of naval studies, entered thenavy, at the age of thirteen. In 1780,he became a lieutenant ; in 1782, a commander;and, in 1783, obtained postrank, with the command of the Nemesis,of twenty-eight guns. In 1778, with thepermission of his sovereign, he enteredinto the service of the King of Sweden,who presented him with the grand crossof the order of the Sword, for the skilland energy he displayed in an attackon the remains of a defeated Russianflotilla, a great part of which he appearsto have destroyed.On the termination of hostilities betweenRussia and Sweden, he enteredthe Turkish service ; but, meeting witha number of unemployed English seamen,at Smyrna, he conveyed them, inavessel he had procured at his ownexpense, to join the British fleet, atToulon, where he offered to burn theFrench dock-yards and arsenal, whichdifficult and hazardous exploit he performedwith signal ability. On hisreturn to England, in 1794, he wasappointed to the Diamond, of thirty-eightguns, attached to the squadronunder Admiral Warren. On the 4thof July, 1795, he made a bold butunsuccessful attempt on two Frenchships and a convoy, near La Hogue;and in the following September, chasedReassembled Nationale, a French corvette,of twenty-two guns, among therocks before Requiem, where she struck,and went to pieces.In March, 1796, with his own ship,and two smaller vessels, he attacked andburnt a corvette, two luggers, four brigs,and two sloops, that had taken refuge inthe port of Herqui; having previously,with a party of his men, succeeded inspiking the guns of two batteries, onthe promontory. In the following April,while attempting, with the boats of hissquadron, to tow out a French lugger,from Havre-des Grace, which haddrifted above the forts, he was attackedby a superior force, and compelled tosurrender. The French governmentrefusing to exchange him, he was confinedfor two years in the prison of theTemple, at Paris ; from which, heatlength succeeded in obtaining hisliberty, by the aid of Monsieur de Phe-lieux, a gentleman of spirit and intrepidity,and two of his friends. An orderof the minister of the day was forged,directing the gaoler of the Temple todeliver to the bearers Le ChevalierSidney Smith, for the purpose of transferringhim to another prison. Furnishedwith this document, to which,by means of a bribe, the actual seal ofthe minister had been procured, the twofriends, one of whom was dressed as anadjutant-general, and the other as asubaltern officer, presented themselvesat the prison. The gaoler read theorder, attentively examined the sealof the minister, and then withdrewinto an adjoining room, doubtless tocompare it with others in his possession.In a few minutes he returned,quite satisfied, and desired the prisonerto be called. Sir Sidney affectingto be chagrined at his removal, theadjutant-general begged to assure him,with much gravity, that governmenthad no desire to aggravate the hardshipof his situation, and that hewould be well treated in the place towhich they were going to conducthim. The gaoler then observed, thatthe adjutant-general would require sixsoldiers of the guard, as an escort ; andthe adjutant, without seeming to be theleast disconcerted, answered, that itwould be as well, and gave orders accordingly.Pretending, however, to reflectfor a moment, he turned to SirSidney, and said: " Commodore, youare a soldier ; I am one also ; yourword of honour will satisfy me ; if youwill give me that, I shall be in no needof a guard." After some other formshad been gone through, Sir SidneySmith was allowed to quit the prisonwith his liberators. They walked ashort distance, and then took a fiacre;which, however, had not gone far,before the coachman drove over aTHE NAVY.cripple. A crowd instantly collected;but Sir Sidney and his friends hastilyleft the spot, while the people were engagedin abusing the driver. The partysoon afterwards separated, and Sir Sidneyhastened to an appointed place,where he met Phelipeaux ; with whomhe proceeded, by means of false passports,to Rouen, and thence, in an openboat, to the channel, where they weretaken up by the Argo frigate, whichsoon landed them at Portsmouth.In commenting on this singular escape,Captain Brenton, in his NavalHistory, asserts, that it had been connivedat by the French authorities.Of this," he adds, " perhaps, even SirSidney himself was, at the time, ignorant.The police of France was toovigilant, and too avaricious, to allow avictim to elude its grasp without a sufficientreason ; and a bribe of 3,000,sent to one of the directory, by our owngovernment, unlocked the gates of theTemple, and removed all obstructionsto the sea coast."Shortly after his arrival in London,Sir Sidney Smith was appointed to theTigre, of eighty guns ; and in November,1798, sailed for the Mediterranean,to assume a distinct command, as anestablished commodore, on the coast ofEgypt On the 3rd of March, 1799, hesucceeded Trowbridge, in directing theblockade of Alexandria; on the 15th,he proceeded to St. Jean D'Acre ; and,on the 16th, captured a French flotilla,the guns of which he employed in thedefence" of Acre, against NapoleonBuonaparte, who invested it two daysafter. The French kept up a heavyfire, until they had effected a breach,which they made various unsuccessfulattempts to mount. Early in May,they erected batteries within ten yardsof the Turkish ravelins, and repeatedlyendeavoured to carry the place bystorm, but without success. On thefifty-first day of the siege, the fleet ofHassan Bey, with a reinforcement oftroops on board, appeared in sight.The French redoubled their efforts,in the hope of gaining possession ofthe town before the Turks could land ;and effected a lodgment in the upperstory of the north-east tower. On thefollowing day, the troops of HassanBey were got on shore, and led, bySir Sidney, to the breach ; from whichthey repulsed the enemy, after a protractedand exceedingly severe contest.A new breach was, however,speedily effected ; through which abody of French troops was permittedto enter. They descended the rampartsunmolested; but, on entering thepacha's garden, they were attacked bythe Turks, and compelled to retreat,with great loss. No subsequent attemptappears to have been made on thetown ; the siege of which was raisedon the 20th of May; and Sir SidneySmith, shortly afterwards, received asplendid sable and aigrette, from thegrand seignior, and the thanks of bothhouses of parliament, for his services.During the siege, two attempts, it issaid, were made to assassinate him ;and a paper was published, charginghim with having put some French prisonerson board a vessel infected withthe plague; but this accusation hasbeen clearly refuted by Sir RobertWilson. The paper which containedit, was attributed to Buonaparte ; whomSip Sidney thought proper to challenge.Napoleon laughed at the message ; towhich he replied, that he had no objectionto fight a duel, if Sir Sidneycould bring a Marlborough to meethim.After having refitted his squadron,Sir Sidney Smith proceeded to makean attack on the enemy, at the mouthof the Damietta branch of the Nile ;which, although at first successful,ended in a signal repulse, on accountof the impetuosity of Osman Aga, andthe troops which he commanded as areserve. Buonaparte had now quittedEgypt ; and Kleber, who had succeededhim in command, soon afterwardsentered into a convention withSir Sidney Smith, at El Frisch ; bywhich it was agreed, that, on conditionof obtaining a safe conduct home, theFrench troops should evacuate Egypt.By this treaty, the British government,denying Sir Sidney's powers, refusedto abide ; and he soon after receivedan intimation to that effect, from LordKeith, the naval commander-in-chiefon the coast of Egypt, which he forthwithdespatched to Kleber. Buonaparte,in a conversation with BarryO'Meara, on the subject, is said tohave observed, that, by this honourableconduct, he saved the French army,SIR WILLIAM SIDNEY SMITH.which, had he kept the communicationfrom Lord Keith a secret for seven oreight days longer, would necessarilyhave been compelled to surrender. TheTurkish troops, under the command ofthe grand vizier, had, however, in fullconfidence of the stability of the convention,advanced to Heliopolis, wherethey were defeated by the French,soon after the latter had receivednotice from Sir Sidney Smith, that thetreaty would not be ratified.In 1801, he co-operated, at the headof a party of seamen, with the armysent out to Egypt under Abercromby ;and he is described, in-the despatchesof the commander-in-chief, as havingbeen " indefatigable in his exertionsto forward the service on which hewas employed." In the battle whichproved fatal to Abercromby, he receiveda wound ; and soon afterwards,on account of the jealousy manifestedtowards him by the Turks, he returnedto England. At the latter endof the year, he received a valuablesword, with the freedom of the city,from the corporation of London ; andat the general election, in 1802, he wasreturned for Colchester.In 1803, he obtained the commandof a small squadron, with which, in1804, he attempted, but without success,on account of the shallowness of thewater, to prevent the sailing of a Frenchflotilla from Flushing to Ostend. Inconsequenceof this failure, he is saidto have employed himself in the constructionof vessels capable of actingwith effect in a similar situation. Earlyin the last-mentioned year, he had beenmade a colonel of marines; and, in1805, he was made rear-admiral of theblue. In 1806, he proceeded, in thePompey, of eighty guns, to the Mediterranean; and Lord Collingwood, thecommander-in-chief on that station,soon afterwards despatched him with asquadron against Naples ; which, on hisarrival, he found illuminated, on accountof Joseph Buonaparte havingproclaimed himself King of the TwoSimiles. " It would have been easy,"said he, in his despatches, " to haveinterrupted this ceremony, and show offestivity; but I considered that the unfortunateinhabitants had evil enoughon them; and that the restoration ofthe capital to its lawful sovereign andfugitive inhabitants, would be no gratification,if it should be found a heap ofruins, ashes, and bones." He, therefore,refrained from firing a single gunagainst the city ; and, having previouslythrown supplies into the fortressof Gate, which still held out againstthe enemy, he proceeded to Capri,where a party of his seamen and marineslanded, and soon compelled theFrench garrison to capitulate.About this time, he was presentedwith the grand cross of the order ofSt. Ferdinand. In 1807, he convoyedthe royal family of Portugal to SouthAmerica; and, during the same year,distinguished himself under AdmiralDuckworth, against the Turks, in theDardanelles. In 1809, he commandeda squadron on the South Americanstation ; a detachment of which, underCaptain Yeo, expelled the French fromCayenne. 'On the llth of October, 1809,he married the widow of Sir GeorgeHumboldt, formerly British consul atHamburgh. In 1812, he was appointedsecond in command of the Mediterraneanfleet, and hoisted his flag in theTremendous, seventy-four; from which,on his arrival at Toulon, he removed tothe Hibernia, On his return to England,in 1814, he was presented withthe freedom of Plymouth ; in the followingyear, he was made a knightcommander of the Bath ; and, in 1821,a full admiral.In resolution, and love of enterprise,Sir Sidney Smith has scarcely everbeen surpassed. More valorous thandiscreet, he has, on some occasions,suffered his ardour to involve him indifficulties, which a commander lessdaring and impetuous would have foreseenand avoided ; but, had his prudencebeen greater, his exploits wouldnot, perhaps, have been so honourableto himself, or so beneficial to hiscountry. His achievements, like thoseof a celebrated military commander,may, for the most part, be designatedhappy severities. In a letter toMarmont, written in 1799, Napoleonthus mentions him: " Smith is ayoung fool, who wants to make hisfortune, and is continually thrustinghimself forward ; he should be dealtwith as the captain of a fire-ship. Heis, besides, capable of any folly, and towhom no able or reasonable project canTHE N Navy .be attributed." At St. Helena, however,he spoke of him in the followingterms, to Barry O'Meara: "SidneySmith is a brave officer; he shewedgreat humanity and honour in all hisproceedings, towards the French whofell into his hands. He was confinedin the Temple as a spy ; and, at onetime, it was intended to try and executehim. Shortly after I returned fromItaly, he wrote to me from his prison,to request that I would intercede forhim ; but, under the circumstances inwhich he was taken, I could do nothingfor him. He is active, intelligent, intriguing,and indefatigable."It is related of him, that having receiveda letter, soliciting his interest toobtain a very important post for thewriter, who, it is added, might, on amoment's reflection, have perceived theabsurdity of his request, Sir Sidneyironically replied in the following terms :I am sorry I cannot oblige you ;these appointments do not rest with me.The office of prime minister is filled tothe public satisfaction, as well as theone you solicit ; the see of Canterburyis also disposed of. I fear nothingattainable in this country, will suityour ideas of power. Let me recommendyou, therefore, to go to Egypt;where I have interest to get you madea bey."SIR Josiah ROWLEY.Josiah ROWLEY, grandson of SirWilliam Rowley, vice-admiral of England,having entered the navy, in 1779,was advanced progressively to the rankof post-captain, which he attained onthe 6th of April, 1795. Being commissionedto the Brave, he served, in1797, at the Cape of Good Hope,whence he returned to England, in thesummer of 1799, in the Imperiousfrigate. He was next appointed tothe Raisonable, sixty-four, and distinguishedhimself, under Sir RobertCalder, on the 22nd of July, 1805, inthe action off Ferrol. He subsequentlyproceeded to the Cape of Good Hope,with Sir Home Popham, whom he alsoaccompanied to the Rio de la Plata.Being shortly afterwards intrustedwith the blockade of the Isles of Franceand Bourbon, on the 21st of September,1809, with the assistance of asmall military force, under Lieutenant-colonelBeating, he stormed the batteriesat St. Paul's Bay; took the Caroline,French frigate, of forty-four guns, abrig, of sixteen guns, and three othervessels; re-captured the Streatham andEurope, East-indiamen, both ladenwith valuable cargoes ; destroyed themagazines; and, in a few days, compelledthe governor to surrender. Inthe following year, the same commanders,with little difficulty, effectedthe reduction of the whole Isle ofBourbon. Shortly after, Rowley, inthe Boadicea, almost alone and unsupported,re-captured two Englishships, which had been taken in anunsuccessful attack on the enemy'sshipping at Sud-Est, and made prize' ofthe largest French frigate in the IndianSeas ; thus restoring, in that quarter, thenaval pre-eminence of the British. Hesubsequently rescued the Africaine froma superior force ; and, on the 18th ofSeptember, 1810, after a short but closeaction, took the Venus, forty-four,which had, only a few hours before,captured his majesty's ship, the Ceylon,having on board Major-general Aber-crosbyand his staff.In the following November, he served,under Admiral Bertie, in the successfulexpedition against the Isle of France.Being sent home with despatches, hewas, shortly after his arrival in England,commissioned to the America, seventy-four; which, in May, 1812, assistedby two ships of inferior force, stormedthe batteries of Languella, in the Gulfof Genoa, captured sixteen merchantmen,and destroyed several others. InDecember, 1813, after having taken thebatteries, and driven the enemy fromthe town of Via Regio, he made an unsuccessfulattempt to surprise Leghorn.Early in 1814, he assisted at the reductionof Genoa ; and, on the 4th ofJune, in the same year, attained theJOHN MACKELLAR.rank of rear-admiral. In 1815, hehoisted his flag in the Impregnable, andproceeded, with Lord Exmouth, to theMediterranean, but continued afloatonly for a short time, owing to the cessationof hostilities. In 1818, he wasappointed commander-in-chief on theIrish station, where he was employedfor three years ; during which period hereceived the freedom of the city ofCork, and obtained his return to parliamentfor Kindle.On the 2nd of November, 1813, hewas created a baronet, and, on the 4thof December, made colonel of marines.On the 4th of June, 1814, he becamerear-admiral of the blue ; in January,1815, he was made a knight commanderof the Bath ; and, subsequently,vice-admiral of the blue. As a navalcommander, he is described, apparentlywith justice, to have possessed greatjudgment, perseverance, skill, and intrepidity.JOHN MACKELLAR.THIS officer, eldest son of GeneralMackellar, was born at Minorca, in1768; and, in 1781, entered as a midshipman,on board the Romney. Hewas wounded in the action at PortoPrayaa Bay, with the French admiral,De Suffrein, and subsequently served,in various vessels, on the West India,Newfoundland, and American stations.While cruising off the Havannah, inthe Enterprise, of twenty-eight guns,he distinguished himself by the assistancehe rendered in the capture ofseveral armed vessels; and he alsocommanded one of the boats sent upthe river to destroy some store-houses;an object which, notwithstanding theresistance of the native militia, wassuccessfully accomplished. While onthe same coast, he was sent, with twoboats, to destroy a brig driven on shoreby the Enterprise, and effected his purposein the presence of five Frenchmen-of-war going in Boston Harbour.In 1790, he was made lieutenant of theCirce frigate ; he subsequently removedto, and, on the 28th of August, 1796,acted as .first-lieutenant of, the Assistance,of fifty guns, at the capture ofthe Elizabeth, by Vice-admiral Murray'ssquadron, on the Halifax station.Early in 1797, he was appointed to asloop-of-war recently launched at Bermuda; but, being superseded by anotherofficer, he returned as a passenger,in the St. Allan's, sixty-four, to England.On the 5th of July, in the sameyear, his rank of commander was confirmed; and, in the following November,he was commissioned to the Minervafrigate, armed, en flute, for the expeditionagainst Ostend ; where, in May,1798, though labouring under a severeattack of dysentery, he distinguishedhimself by the activity and zeal withwhich he defended the vessels in thebasin. On the capitulation of theBritish troops to a very superior Frenchforce, he became a prisoner of war;and while confined in the citadel atLisle, at the risk of his life, materiallyaided in quelling a mutiny among theIrish portion of the captives. Havingbeen released, in the December of thesame year, he was appointed to theWolverene sloop ; and, soon after, tothe Charon, forty-tour-gun ship, inwhich he proceeded to the Mediterranean.On the 27th of April, 1799, he waspromoted to post rank, in considerationof the gallantry that led to his late imprisonment,which, though he might haveescaped, he had braved for the purposeof remaining on shore to assist Sir EyreCoote, who was in want of an officer tocommand the seamen. From Gibraltarhe proceeded to Constantinople, with atransport of artificers and artillerymen,intended to instruct the Turks inmilitary science ; and, on his return,conducted to England, in safety, thehomeward-bound trade, from Smyrna,Sicily, and Minorca. He chased a privateerschooner on his passage, but sheescaped, by throwing overboard herboats, guns, and anchors ; and he subsequentlyassisted at the evacuation ofthe Helder.In the Jamaica, of twenty-six guns,-242THE NAVY.he next convoyed a fleet of merchantmento and from the Baltic ; retook anEnglish ship, and a brig, laden withcorn, and obliged a large privateer tolighten herself of guns in order to avoidcapture. In 1801, he was employed,in the Terpsichore, at the blockading ofBoulogne and Calais, until despatchedwith specie to the East Indies; wherehe volunteered to conduct an expeditionagainst a French squadron expected onthe coast of Malabar, to take possessionof the settlements. He accordinglysailed, in the Marquis Cornwallis, offorty-eight guns, accompanied by theUpton Castle, Indiaman, an armed brigbelonging to the company, and severalsmaller vessels, having on board aboutone thousand native troops and regulars,in order, if necessary, to compelthe governors to receive British reinforcementsat Demerara and Isle Dieu,where, it was supposed, the enemywould endeavour to form an establishmentThe object of the armamentbeing completely achieved by his skilland address, he received a letter of jthanks, on the occasion, from the go !government of Bombay.Shortly after he sailed to Goa, in theTerpsichore, accompanied by the Trident,of sixty-four guns, the Betsy, brigandtwo Indiamen, for the purpose ofconveying some troops from thence toSurat, where Governor Duncan hadbeen suddenly attacked, while endeavouringto arrange a dispute with someof the native powers. Such was thediligence of Mackellar, on this occasion,that three thousand troops were speedilylanded at Surat; the natives were defeated; and he, a second time, receivedthe thanks of the Bombay government.He was subsequently employed in theblockade of Goa ; and, in May, 1804,was appointed agent for transports andprisoners of war, and governor of thenaval hospital at Halifax; where hecontinued about six years. On hisreturn to England, seeing no prospectof employment, he obtained permissionto join the Spanish navy ; but beingunable, on his arrival at Cadizz, to procurea command suitable to his rank,he proceeded to Minorca, whence, in1812, he embarked for England.In August, 1815, as flag-captain toRear-admiral Douglas, he was employedat Jamaica, in the Salisbury, offifty-eight guns ; from which, on thellth of March, 1817, he exchanged intothe Pique, frigate. On quitting thestation, in the next year, he wasthanked by the mayor and the principalinhabitants of Kingston, for hisservices ; and some time after his returnto England, attained the rank of rear-admiral.Throughout his career this officeruniformly displayed great zeal for theservice, determination, prudence, andan honourable ardour to obtain a distinguishedplace among his naval contemporaries.SIR EDWARD Dodington.1 HIS officer, a descendant of an ancientand honourable family, and theson of a baronet, was born about 1770 ;and, in 1793, became a lieutenant inthe navy. He participated in LordHowe's victory, being employed onboardthat admiral's flag-ship, on the1st of June, 1794; and, soon after, obtainedthe command of a fire-ship, calledthe Comet. On the 6th of April, 1795,he was made a post-captain, and subsequentlyserved in the Babel, of twenty-twoguns, in Lord Bridport's engagementoff L'L'Orient On the 7th ofJanuary, 1797, being then in commandof the Druid frigate, he assisted at thecapture of a French ship, which had onboardfour hundred men, who wereabout to join the rebels in Ireland.At the battle of Trafalgar, he commandedthe Orion, seventy-four, andobtained a gold medal for his services,in common with the other superiorofficers in the victorious fleet. In 1809,he assisted at the bombardment ofFlushing, as captain of Admiral Gardner'sflag-ship, the Blake. Shortlyafterwards, he served under Sir RichardStrachan, in the expedition to theScheldt ; and subsequently, after havingSIR EDWARD Dodington.been for a short rime employed in thedefence of Cadizz, commanded a squadron,on the coast of Catalonia, whichrendered considerable assistance to theSpaniards, against the French.In 1813, he was made a colonel ofmarines, and, in the following year, arear-admiral. He was next employedas captain of the fleet, under SirAlexander Inglis Cochrane, on theAmerican station; in 1815, he becamea knight commander of theBath ; and, in 1825, a vice-admiral.He was shortly afterwards intrustedwith a fleet in the Mediterranean, towatch the proceedings of the Turks,with regard to the Greeks, in whosefavour so much sympathy existed onthe continent, that France and Russiahad fitted out a squadron for a similarpurpose. On the 25th of September,1825, Ibrahim Pacha, the Turkish governorof Greece, agreed, with the alliedadmirals, to a suspension of hostilitiesagainst the Greeks, preparatoryto a treaty of peace ; but shortly afterwards,provoked aggression by violatingthe truce. The allied squadrons hadpreviously blockaded the Turkish fleetin the harbour of Navarino, which,however, they now entered. As theyapproached, a messenger was despatchedfrom the shore, to acquaint Sir EdwardCodrington, that no vessel could be admittedto the port without the pacha'spermission. To this, the British admiralreplied, that he came to giveorders not to receive them, and thatif a single shot were fired by the Turks,the whole of their fleet should be destroyed.He had, according to hisdespatches, given directions to thoseunder his command not to commencehostilities, and on this point he appearsto have been strictly obeyed. Threecf the British ships had already passedthe batteries, when a discharge ofTurkish musketry killed LieutenantFitzroy, and wounded several men inaboat belonging to the Dartmouth ;from which vessel, as well as from LaSerene, a firing of small arms immediatelycommenced. Shortly afterwards,the latter ship received a from an Egyptian vessel ; theaction, however, did not become general,until the interpreter of the fleet hadbeen killed, while proceeding to theTurks with a pacific message, and theAsia, Sir Edward Codrington's flagshipbad been attacked. The engagementterminated in the destruction ofa great portion of the Turkish andEgyptian fleets ; the remainder, however,were neither taken nor destroyedby the allies, who appear to have committedno act of hostility after their antagonistshad ceased to fire.Soon after the battle, which was subsequentlyspoken of by government,as " an untoward event," Sir EdwardCodrington received a grand cross ofthe Bath, and avery complimentaryletter from the Emperor Nicholas, withthe military order of St. George. Inthe Russian official account of the battlehe is thus honourably and deservedlynoticed : " By his resolution, by theboldness and ability of his manoeuvres,he has taken a rank among those navalheroes whose names his country holdsin just pride." It appears that duringthe engagement he conducted himselfwith great bravery ; having stood, it issaid, on the poop, the whole time, andencouraged his men, by repeatedlyshouting, and waiving his hat so as to beseen by the most distant of those underhis command. He was constantly exposed,it is added, to the fire of theenemy, and beheld his captain of marines,some inferior officers, and manyof his finest men, fall by his side.He was married, on the 27th of December,1802, to a daughter of Mr.Hall, of Old Windsor. He is a fellowof the Royal Society, and an activemember of various public associations.SIR CHARLES BRISBANE.THIS officer, the fourth son of AdmiralJohn Brisbane, was born about 1770,and commenced his naval career whenonly nine years of age, on board theAlcide, seventy-four, from which he removed,with his father, to the Hercules.THE NAVY.In the engagement between Rodney andDe Grasse, on the 12th of April, 1782,he received a wound of so serious anature, that nine months elapsed beforehe became convalescent.In 1790, he was appointed lieutenantof the Spitfire, and subsequently servedin the Meleager, on the Mediterraneanstation under Lord Hood, who, for thezeal he displayed on various occasions,particularly at the disembarkation of thetroops at Toulon, and the erection of abattery upon Hauteur de Grasse, appointedhim to the command of FortPoet, one of the most dangerous outpostsin the neighbourhood of Toulon.He subsequently distinguished himselfin repelling the French at Fort Margrave,and received a second wound inthe attack on Corsica, where he displayedso much gallantry and judgment,as to obtain an honourable notice in thepublic despatches, announcing the surrenderof Bastia.Shortly after that event, he was removedfrom the Britannia, in which hehad previously served, to the Tarletonfire-ship, and employed to carry intoeffect a plan which he had projected fordestroying a French squadron in gordonBay; although the scheme failed,Lord Hood rewarded him for its invention,by giving him the rank of commander.In 1795, he proceeded, inthe Moselle, sloop-of-war, to Gibraltar,whence he was despatched to the WestIndies, with two transports under hischarge ; which, however, he thoughtproper to quit for the purpose of watchinga Dutch squadron. This, with greatperseverance, and under great privations,he followed, until he had ascertainedits destination, of which hehastened to acquaint Admiral Elphin-stone, under whom he was present atits capture, in Saldanha Bay, on the18th of August, 1796.For his conduct in this affair, he receivedthe thanks of the admiralty, apost-captain's commission, and the commandof the Tremendous. He wassubsequently despatched, in L'Oiseau,a frigate, to cruise off Rio de la Plata,where he engaged and beat off two largeSpanish frigates, one of which bore acommodore's pendant On his returnto the Cape, he was removed to theDortrecht, and employed to convoy someIndiamen to St. Helena; where his crew,having heard of the mutiny in thechannel, rose upon their officers, butwere promptly subdued by his extraordinaryfirmness. Seizing one ofthe ringleaders, he twisted a rope roundhis neck, and struck his companionswith salutary terror, by threatening tohang him at the yard-arm, if he daredto open his mouth against his king,country, or superior officers. He wasshortly afterwards recalled to the Cape,for the purpose of taking the commandof his former ship, the Tremendous, onboardof which a mutiny had previouslybeen subdued, by a threat from theadmiral of pouring red-hot shot into herfrom a battery, mounting one hundredpieces of cannon, off which she lay.His next employment was in theDoris, off Brest, where he commandeda squadron of frigates appointed to observethe enemy's motions. While onthis service, he daringly entered theharbour in a boat, and after havingrowed round the French fleet, formedan apparently feasible project fur itsdestruction, which, however, was notcarried into effect. In July, 1801, theboats of his squadron cut a Frenchcorvette out of Carteret Bay; andshortly after, he proceeded, in the Kentfrigate, to the West Indies, where hewas removed, first, into the Trent, andfrom that ship to the Goliath, in whichhe encountered a terrific hurricane,while convoying to England a large fleetof merchantmen. After having servedfor some time at the blockade ofRochefort, he had the misfortune tofracture two of his ribs and dislocatehis arm, through the breaking of a rope,while he was going over the side of hisvessel.In 1805, he removed to the Arethusa,with which he safely convoyed afleet of merchantmen to the West Indies,although chased by a French squadronon his passage. He then proceeded tothe Havannah station ; where, after havingmade several prizes, his ship ranashore, and could only be got off bythrowing overboard the whole of herguns. Shortly afterwards he fell inwith a Spanish ship, which he gallantlyendeavoured to come up with and board,but was compelled to abandon the chase,by the enemy's taking refuge under theMoro Castle. After having refitted atJamaica, he returned to his former stairCHARLES BRISBANE.tion, where, on the 23rd of August, 1806,with the assistance of the Anson, hedestroyed several gun-boats, and tookthe Pomona, a Spanish frigate, after asevere action, during which the Arethusawas, for a short period, in flames,from the red-hot shot fired into herfrom the Moro.In 1807, he arrived offCura<;oa, whitherhe had been despatched, with asmall squadron, for the purpose of ascertainingif the inhabitants would forman alliance with Great British. Actingon his own responsibility, he forthwithproceeded to attack the island; andalthough it was defended by very strongfortifications, soon compelled it to surrender.For this brilliant exploit, whichwas achieved with only eight hundredeffective men, notwithstanding Vice-admiralDares had calculated that tensail of the line, and as many thousandtroops, would be necessary to reducethe island, he received a gold medal,and the honour of knighthood.In 1808, he was appointed to theBlake, of seventy-four guns, and madegovernor of St. Vincent; in 1815, hebecame a knight commander of theBath ; and subsequently obtained therank of rear-admiral of the red. Shortlybefore his death, which occurred inNovember, 1829, he is said to have exclaimed" Would that I had died on thequarter-deck of a British man-of-war,fighting for my country!" He is describedas having been, " in stature,about the middle size, with a framestrong, active, and light ; in manner theperfect courtier, and in appearance elegant."In disposition he seems to havebeen convivial ; and either so imprudentor generous, that, notwithstanding hissuccesses, he failed to secure that degreeof opulence to which his services entitledhim. As governor of St. Vincent,he was remarkably popular; havingpreserved the island from discord, byhis tact in the reconciliation of conflictinginterests and wishes. Perfectlyindifferent with regard to danger, andheedless of obstacles, with a full conviction,apparently, that every thingmight be surmounted by valour, heconfidently ventured upon enterprises,which few men, of the most exaltedcourage, would have thought fit toundertake; and where failure seemedinevitable, he obtained the most completesuccess.SIR THOMAS TROWBRIDGE.OF the early career of this officer, wehave not been able to discover anyparticulars. In the month of April,1794, being then captain of the Castor,of thirty-two guns, he was captured byAdmiral Nieuilly, together with a convoyof fourteen sail of merchant-vessels,with which he was proceeding fromGuernsey to Newfoundland. As a prisoneron board the Sans PareSlle, hewas present in the great battle of the1st of June following. On the morningof that day, Lord Howe, after havingformed his line, made a signal forbreakfast, on seeing which, the Frenchadmiral observed, through an interpreter,to Trowbridge, that he thoughtthere was a disinclination on the partof the English to engage. Dropping aloaf he had in his hand, Trowbridgeexclaimed, " Not fight ! stop till theyhave had their breakfasts; I know JohnBull well, and when his belly is full,you'll get it." The encounter soonafter commenced ; and, the Sans Pareillehaving surrendered, Trowbridgeassisted in bringing her into port.In 1796, he was attached to theMediterranean fleet, under Sir JohnJervis; and intrusted with the commandof a squadron for the blockadeof Toulon. In December, he captured,near Cadizz, the Nostra Senior delCarmen, worth 30,000; and, in thebattle off Cape St. Vincent, on the 14thof February, 1797, he directed his firewith such judgment, as to separatethe sternmost and leewardmost of theSpanish ships from the main body, andprevented their re-junction, by his admirablemanoeuvring. In July, 1797,he was present at the unsuccessfulattack made on Santa Cruz by Nelson,whom, in the following year, he accom-THE NAVY.panted, in pursuit of the enemy, to themouth of the Nile ; but did not participatein the glorious battle that ensued,his ship, the Culloden, having groundedon a reef, from which she was got off,after much difficulty, with the loss ofher rudder. He was exceedingly mortifiedby this accident; in allusion towhich, Earl Spencer, the first lord ofthe admiralty, paid him the high complimentof observing, that " none presentcould better afford to forego thatday's laurels." After the battle, heapplied himself to the relief of thewounded and the sick, conducted theexchange of prisoners, and assisted injury-lasting the British ships andprizes.He next superintended the blockadeof Alexandria ; and, in 1799, commandeda squadron on the coast ofItaly. To a ship, under his orders, thecastles of Novo and Nuovo, in the Bayof Naples, capitulated, on the 19th ofJune, in that year; and he subsequentlytook Capua Greta, Civitas Vecchia, andRome. While serving on this station,he was requested, by a lieutenant-colonel,to be allowed the use of twosloops-of-war, for the reduction of asmall fort ; which, being granted, were,on the officer's solicitation, exchangedfor two frigates. A demand was thenmade for two ships of the line; onwhich, Trowbridge kicked the applicantout of his cabin, exclaiming, " Thecowardly rascal ! first sloops, thenfrigates, then ships of the line; andthen, d n him, lie is afraid to fight,after all !"He was created a baronet on the 23rdof November, 1799 ; and was subsequentlyraised to the rank of rear-admiral.On the 10th of January, 1804,he became one of the commissioners forexecuting the office of high admiral ;and, in 1805, proceeded in the Blenheim,with a convoy for the East Indies.During the voyage, he fell in witha small French squadron, which hebeat off, but could not pursue. On hisarrival at Madras, he assumed the commandon the Indian station; fromwhich, in the following year, beingordered to the Cape of Good Hope,the Blenheim was repaired for thevoyage ; but was so old, and had beenso much damaged, that she gave symptomsof literally falling to pieces. Trowbridge,however, determined on proceedingwith her to his destination; andsuch was the confidence his abilities hadinspired, that many persons became hispassengers. He departed on the 12thof January, 1807, in company withthe Java, of thirty-six guns, and theHarrier, brig, of eighteen. On the 1stof February, being off Madagascar,they were overtaken by a furious galeof wind, which obliged them to lay-to;and, in the evening, the Blenheim andJava were observed, by the Harrier,with signals of distress flying, the latterbeing seen closing, as if to render assistanceto the former, which appearedto be much lower than usual in thewater. Nothing more was seen ofeither of the two vessels by their consort;and, the sad intelligence beingcommunicated to" Sir Edward Pellew,the commander-in-chief on the IndianSeas, that officer despatched Captainthe son of Sir Thomas Trowbridge,with the Greyhound, in search of hislamented father. The voyage proved,however, unsuccessful; and no furthertidings could be learned respecting thecalamity. About seven hundred personswere, at the time it occurred, onboardthe Blenheim, and the crew ofthe Java, amounted to nearly half thatnumber.Sir Thomas Trowbridge was one ofthe most gallant admirals of his time;and, like his patron and friend, EarlSt. Vincent, it was his maxim, neverto make a difficulty. He was usuallyprepared for every kind of accident thatmight arise in the course of service,and always carried in his ship, to avoidgoing into port, the means of re-fitting.It is related of him, that, while on thecoast of Italy, he indignantly refused topermit one of his men to act as hangman,in the execution of some priests,who had been condemned to death bythe authorities ; and he fed, by his ownprivate bounty, the poor on the coast,who had been left to starve, by the rapacityof the Neapolitan court ; for whichhe appears to have entertained, andeven displayed, a thorough contempt.LORD COCHRANE.THOMAS, LORD COCHRANE.THIS officer was born in December,1775 ; and, being intended for the navalservice, was placed at an early ageunder his uncle, Sir Alexander Cochrane,with whom he served as midshipmanand lieutenant, in the West Indies,the Bay of Biscay, and on the homestation. He was afterwards appointedcommander of the Speedy, a brig offourteen guns ; and, while stationed offBarcelona, he boarded and took aSpanish sloop-of-war, called El Game,the force of which, at least doubledthat of his own vessel. During thesame year, he made several captures;and blew up the tower of Alcanenara;but was at length compelled to surrenderby a French squadron.For his conduct in the action withEl Game, he was made a post-captain,and commissioned to the Pallas,of thirty-two guns, with which he took,off the Western Islands, an immensenumber of prizes. Being off the Bayof Biscay, in April, 1806, he detachedninety men, in boats, to cut out anenemy's corvette, lying in the mouthof the river Gironde. During the progressof this exploit, he perceived threevessels approaching him, carrying togethersixty-four guns, which he chased,and drove on shore, where they werewrecked.In May, 1806, he disembarked hiscrew on the French coast, and destroyedall the signal-posts stationedto give notice of British cruisers. Onthe 14th of the same month, he had asmart encounter, off Lisle d'Aix, witha frigate and three brigs, whilst hisvessel, the Pallas, was working to windwardamong shoals, under the fire ofa battery. He succeeded in disablingone of the brigs, and, though his ownship was much shattered, continuedthe action until two other frigates weresent against him, when he retired, torepair in the offing. Having completeda most successful cruise, he returnedto Plymouth, and soon after offeredhimself as a candidate to the electorsof Honiton. He failed in his first attempt;but, at the general electionsoon after the death of Pitt, he obtainedhis return. On the decease of Fox,another dissolution took place, andLord Cochrane being put in nominationas a candidate for the city of Westminster,was elected second on the pollto Sir Francis Burdett, obtaining amajority of more than one thousandover Sheridan. He was soon after appointedto the Imperieuse, of thirty-eightguns ; and, returning to the Bayof Biscay, stormed, and laid in ruins,a fort, and brought out and burntfifteen sail of vessels, laden with merchandize,from the basin of Arcasson.Lord Cochrane subsequently servedunder Admiral Collingwood, at theblockade of Cadizz. On the 31st ofJuly, 1808, he attacked, and took possessionof, the castle of Mongol, an importantpost held by the French, commandingthe road between Barcelonaand Gerona. He kept the coast ofLanguedoc in a state of constant alarm;destroyed some newly-constructed telegraphs,at six different places on thecoast of France, besides three telegraphichouses, fourteen barracks ofthe gens d'armes, one battery, and thestrong tower on the lake of Frontenac.In November, he defended the castleof La Trinity, near Rosas, which heblew up, on the surrender of the latterplace to the French. In the Januaryfollowing, he brought out, from theport of Caldajuon, two small armedvessels, and eleven sail of victuallers,intended for the relief of the Frenchgarrison at Barcelona.On his return from the coast of Spain,he joined the squadron in the Britishchannel, commanded by Lord Gambier; and having received orders tolead the intended attack of the Frenchfleets then lying in the Basque Roads,he caused about one thousand fivehundred barrels of gunpowder to bestarted into puncheons, upon the topsof which were placed between threeand four hundred shells, charged withfusees ; and, among these, were betweentwo and three thousand hand-grenades.In this explosion-ship, Lord CochraneTHE NAVY.committed himself, with only one lieutenantand four seamen, and proceededtowards the enemy's line. At this moment,the batteries on shore were providedwith furnaces to fire red-hotshot, which added greatly to his lordship'sdanger. After having conductedthis instrument of destruction as nearas was possible to the enemy, he orderedhis crew into the boat, and followedthem, after setting fire to thefusee, which was calculated to givethem fifteen minutes to get out of thereach of the explosion. However, inconsequenceof the wind getting veryhigh, the fusee burnt so quickly, that,with the most violent exertion, againstwind and tide, this intrepid little partywas six minutes nearer than they calculatedto be, at the time of the explosion.Fortunately, the boat reached,by unparalleled exertion, only just beyondthe extent of destruction ; but thelieutenant died, partly under fatigue,and partly drowned by the waves, whichcontinually broke over them. Two ofthe four sailors were also so nearly exhausted,that their recovery was, for along time, doubtful. The enemy, immediatelycrowding all sail, ran beforewind and tide so fast, that the fire-ships,though at first very near, couldnot afterwards overtake them. Theexplosion of the engine of destructionintrusted to his lordship, had but littleeffect upon the adverse fleet, and asimilar fate attended the other fire-ships,many of which, in the darknessof the night, missed their way.As soon as Lord Cochrane reachedhis ship, the Imperieuse, he proceededto attack the French vessels, and sustainedtheir fire for more than an hourbefore any other of the ships of warentered the harbour. On the morningof the 12th, he headed an attack madeby small vessels on seven of theenemy's ships, whose situation on shoreafforded an opportunity of destroyingthem. A fire was opened on the Calcutta,of fifty-six guns, which immediatelysurrendered; and, afterwards,two ships of the line were obliged tofollow their example ; all of which wereset on fire and destroyed, their crewshaving been first taken prisoners. Inthe course of this enterprise, LordCochrane displayed his humanity assignally and nobly as his courage,though not with the same success. Thecaptain of one of the French seventy-fours,when delivering up his sword toour hero, lamented that all he had inthe world was about to be destroyed bythe conflagration of his ship : upon hearingthis, his lordship got into the boat,and pushed off to assist the prisoner inretrieving his loss ; but, as they passeda French ship, which was on fire, herguns went off, and a shot from one ofthem killed the French captain by LordCochrane's side, and so damaged theboat that she filled with water, and therest of the party were nearly drowned.In bringing away the people of theVille de Varsovie, his lordship, hearingthat a dog had been left on board, wasdetermined it should not be abandoned,but returned for it, and brought it offin his arms.For his splendid exploits in theBasque Roads, he was created a knightof the Bath, and acquired a great degreeof popularity. He returned toPlymouth with the English fleet, andfrom thence proceeded to London.Owing to the insinuations thrown outbyLord Cochrane, charging LordGambier with a neglect of his duty inthe Basque Roads, a court-martial wasdemanded by the latter nobleman, whoobtained an honourable acquittal.Cochrane was, not long after, deprivedof all his honours, in consequenceof being mixed up in a transaction,having for its object the raising of thepublic funds. It appears that, inFebruary, 1814, a person proceededfrom Dover with false news of Buonaparte'sdeath, and that he went withallpossible haste to London, spreadingeverywhere the same report. At themoment the intelligence reached theStock Exchange, two other pretendedmessengers arrived, and their corroborationsupported the rise that hadjust taken place. The imposition wassoon detected; those in the secrethaving, however, been considerablegainers.The circumstances soon becameknown to the Stock Exchange committee,and the result was the arraignmentof all the parties for a conspiracy.On the 8th of June, 1 8 14, Lord Cochrane,Mr. Butt, Random de Berenger, theHonourable Cochrane Johnstonee, andsix others, were tried upon an indict-lordCOCHRANE.ment charging them with circulatingfalse news to raise the price of thefunds. The amount of stock sold onthe occasion amounted to nearly onemillion; and, but for this plan, thepersons implicated must have been defaultersto the extent of 160,000, andnearly ruined by their speculations. Itwas proved that De Berenger, themessenger, had been allowed to changehis dress at the house of Lord Cochrane,who was accordingly found guilty, andsentenced to a fine of jl,000; to beimprisoned for twelve months in theKing's Bench ; and to be exposed foran hour, opposite the Royal Exchange,in the pillory.He made several vain attempts togain a new trial, and, on the 5th ofJuly, a motion for his expulsion fromthe house of commons was carried by alarge majority. He attended the houseon the occasion, and declared his innocenceof the conspiracy with which hehad been charged. On the 16th of thesame month, he was unanimously reelectedfor Westminster ; and, in threedays after, Lord Castlereagh informedthe house of commons, that that partof Lord Cochrane's sentence which requiredhim to be placed in the pilloryhad been remitted. It was soon afteragreed, at a chapter of the order of theBath, that his lordship should cease tobe a member; and the king at arms,being duly authorised, proceeded toHenry the Seventh's chapel, removedthe insignia of the order from LordCochrane's stall, and kicked his bannerdown the steps of the chapel. He waslikewise deprived of his rank in thenavy.Having been for some time in theKing's Bench, he escaped, on the 15thof March, 1815, and proceeded to takethe oath, as member for Westminster,in the house of commons. Whilst hewas in the house, Mr. Jones, the wardenof the prison, accompanied by severalpolice officers, entered, and forciblytook him back, and placed him in thestrong room ; but his health havingsuffered by confinement, he was subsequentlyallowed the free use of theinterior of the prison. The term ofLord Cochrane's imprisonment having,at length, expired, he went, on thevery day of his liberation, to the houseof commons, and was just in time todefeat, by his single vote, an intendedincrease of 6,000 a year to the incomeof the Duke of Cumberland. The fineimposed upon his lordship was raisedby a subscription of a penny fromeach of his constituents. The thousandpound note with which Lord Cochranepaid the fine, is, we believe, still preservedat the Bank of England, andhas this indorsement: " My healthhaving suffered by long and close confinement,and my oppressors being resolvedto deprive me of my propertyor life, I submit to robbery to preventmyself from murder, in the hope thatI may live, yet to bring the delinquentsto justice. COCHRANE."In the year 1818, he resigned hisParliamentary duties. Having left Eng-md, he arrived at Valparaiso in theyear 1819, where he went for the purposeof taking command of a squadronthat had been fitted out by the governmentof Chili. In his new occupation,in the beginning of the succeeding year,he had annihilated the commerce andnaval power of Spain on the Peruviancoast ; and distinguished himself by thecapture of the strongly fortified town ofValdivia. The invasion of Peru beingintended, he started, on the 20th ofAugust, with an expedition under thecommand of himself and General SanMartin, and soon after their arrival,the whole coast of Peru was declared inastate of blockade. The Civilian governmentrewarded his services with apresent of twenty thousand acres ofvaluable land. In the following year,several places were taken on the coastof Peru; but Callao had capitulatedto San Martin, with whom Cochranewas offended for having concluded thetreaty without his participation. Thecrews of the fleet disappointed in theirexpectation of booty, shared in the disgustfelt by the admiral ; who, in orderto appease their indignation, distributedamong them a portion of the moneycontained in the military chest, whichwas kept on board his own vessel, andsent back the remainder to Chili. SanMartin having assumed the supremepower in Peru, Lord Cochrane brokeoff all communication with him, andordered a portion of his fleet to returnto Valparaiso, whilst he proceeded withthe remainder in search of two Spanishfrigates, understood to be richly ladenTHE NAVY.with bullion. While engaged in theexpedition against Peru, he enteredthe outer ports of Callao with a partof his squadron, and proceeding at midnight,with fourteen boats and twohundred and forty men, came near tothe Emeralds, a large forty-gun frigate,moored under the guns, with asemicircle of fourteen gun-boats, and aboom made of spars chained together.Having passed the boom, Lord Cochrane,who was leading, rowed alongsidethe first gun-boat, and taking the officerby surprise, proposed to him, with apistol in his hand, the alternative ofsilence or death !" No reply wasmade ; the boats pushed on unobserved,and his lordship, mounting the side ofthe Emeralds, was the first to give thesignal. The sentinel on the gangwayfired, but was instantly cut down by thecoxswain, and Lord Cochrane, thoughwounded in the thigh, stepped on thedeck, and at the same time the frigatewas boarded on the other side by someof his lordship's party. The enemymade a gallant stand in different parts ofthe ship, and Cochrane, at the head of aparty of marines, beat them from oneof their positions. Before one o'clock,the vessel was captured, and steered outof the harbour under the fire of thewhole north face of the castle.In the house of commons, Sir JamesMackintosh, on the 21st of June, 1824,eulogized this splendid service in thehighest terms, and concluded by expressinga hope that the crown mightbe advised to restore Lord Cochraneto the service. The speech of Sir Jameswas followed by cheers from both sides,showing that the feeling in favour ofhis lordship was very general. LordCochrane, in 1823, entered the serviceof the Emperor of Brazils, with theconsent of the Civilian government, buthad only a small squadron under hiscommand. The Portuguese force consistedof thirteen ships of war, besidesnumerous armed merchantmen; andthough this armament was too strongfor his lordship to attack, he watchedand followed the enemy, and by skilfulmanoeuvres, succeeded in makingseveral captures. In the following year,a dispute arose between himself andthe Brazilian court, respecting theproceeds of certain prizes, whichwas, however, amicably settled, and heretained the command of Don Pedro'sfleet. Soon after, he blockaded Pernambuco,and offered the insurgentsvery liberal terms of surrender ; whichbeing refused, he bombarded the place,and the republicans were driven intothe town. In the course of the year1824, he was created Marquess ofMarkham, and had other titles ofnobility bestowed upon him.In June, 1825, on board the Derange,a frigate, belonging to the Emperor ofBrazils, he arrived, to repair, at Portsmouth,and anchored at Spithead,where, on landing, he was cheeredthree times by the populace. In thefollowing year, he agreed to take thecommand of the Greek fleet ; and, inthe year 1827, having been made navalcommander-in-chief in Greece, heformed a plan for raising the siege ofAthens. In consequence of the Greeksmistaking the time for advancing, theplan was rendered abortive, and theywere obliged to retire with great loss.Cochrane was so closely pressed, thathe jumped into the sea, in order toregain his vessel. Subsequently, heappeared in the service of Greece, onthe coast of Egypt. Lord Cochrane,not long after these events, returnedto London, where he has taken a housein the Regent's Park, as a permanentresidence.The naval career of Lord Cochranewas marked by a series of useful andhonourable actions, in which he invariablyacted with calmness and skill,humanity arid generosity. No officer,it has been asserted, ever attempted orsucceeded in more arduous enterprises,with so little loss. He was ever watchful; and if he intended an adventure,would, before he fired a shot, reconnoitrein person, take soundings andbearings, and pass whole nights underthe enemy's batteries, having incessantlyin use his lead-line and spyglass.Regarding his generosity, itmay be remarked, that while on boardthe Pallas, he captured a rich prize,called La Fortuna, a Spanish ship,laden with specie to the amount of150,000, and with other goods of thesame value. The captain and supercargoappeared much dejected, as theirprivate property was on board, and wasestimated at thirty thousand dollarseach. The Spaniards told his lordshipSIR HARRY BURRARD Neal.that they had families in Old Spain,and had now lost all their savings ofnearly twenty years, when they werereturning to their native country toenjoy the fruits of their industry. Thecaptain, in particular, said, he had losta similar fortune in 1799, on beingtaken by a British cruiser. LordCochrane consulted his officers as tothe propriety of returning five thousanddollars a-piece to the two Spaniards,to be paid out of the proportionsof the whole crew in the prize ; andthe men being called on deck, gavethree cheers, as a token of their approvalof the proposition.The popularity of his lordship hasbeen interrupted on one or two occasions.His continued opposition ofLord Gambier was unfortunate and ill-advised; it drew upon him a very severecensure from Sir Charles Hamilton, anaval officer of such a character as tolead a great portion of the country withhim. After Gambler's acquittal, thewhole house took up his cause, andCochrane found himself supported bya few friends only. As to the affairon the Stock Exchange, while themajority of the people considered hislordship the dupe of other persons,yet these were many, judging fromthe evidence alone, who considered himguilty.SIR HARRY BURRARD Neal.SlR HARRY BURRARD Neal,eldest son of William Bernard, Esq.succeeded to a baronetcy, by the deathof his uncle, on the 12th of April, 1791 ;and adopted the name of Nealein 1795,on his marriage with the daughter ofthe late Robert Nealee, Esq., of ShawHouse, Wiltshire. Of the earliest stagesof his naval career, we have no authenticaccount ; but, in 1793, he was commanderof the Nautilus sloop ; and, onthe 1st of February, of the same year,obtained the rank of post-captain. He,shortly after, assisted in L'Aimable,thirty-two, at the reduction of Bastia;and captured, in May, 1794, the Frenchcorvette, La Moselle, eighteen guns,off the Hieres islands. In 1795, hecommanded the St. Fiorenzo ; in whichvessel King George the Third frequentlywent on short marine excursions fromhis summer residence at Weymouth.On the 9th of May, 1797, "Sir Harry,being off Brest in this vessel, in companywith La Nymphe, discovered twoFrench men-of-war standing in for theland; which, after a short, but veryactive engagement, were compelled tosurrender. Soon after this event, theFiorenzo was fitted up to carry thePrincess of Wittenberg to Germany ;but, previously to her sailing, an ineffectualattempt was made, by themutineers at the Nore, to seduce hercrew from their duty ; and beingordered to anchor close under the sternof Parker's ship, the Sandwich, shecontrived to effect her escape ; and,getting clear through the mutinousfleet, proceeded to Harwich. On the8th of October, 1798, Sir Harry entertainedthe royal family, and a numberof the nobility, at a public breakfast, onboardof his ship, in commemoration ofNelson's victory at the Nile.In April, 1799, while the Fiorenzoand Amelia were off Belleisle, just afterthe main-topgallant, fore, and mizenmasts of the latter had been carriedaway by a squall, three French frigatesbore down on them ; when an actionensued, in which the English, by beingdrawn down to the islands of Houatand Hedge, were exposed to the firefrom their batteries. The Frenchvessels, were, however, ultimately compelledto stand in towards the Loire,two of them being in a very shatteredcondition. When the enemy retreated,the British seamen gave nine heartycheers ; while, it is said, the batteries ofthe former actually fired on the runaways.Shortly afterwards, the St. Fiorenzofell in with and capture a Frenchlettre de" marque, from Cape Francois,laden with sugar, coffee, and indigo.In 1801, Sir Harry was appointed tothe Centaur, seventy-four; afterwardsto the Royal Charlotte yacht ; and, in1804, was made one of the lords of theTHE NAVY.admiralty. In July, 1805, resigninghis seat at the board, he was commissionedto the Royal Sovereign yacht;and, soon after, to the London, ninety-eightguns, attached to the squadronunder Sir John B. Warren.On the 13th of March, 1806, SirHarry Nealee, being in command of theLondon, and assisted by the Amazon,captured a French line-of-battle shipand a frigate, after a running fight ofsix hours. In 1808, he joined thechannel fleet, under Lord Gambier;and, in the succeeding year, was presentat the destruction of the Frenchships in Aix Roads ; and, afterwards,commanded the blockading squadronoff Rochefort; a duty which he performedwith great judgment. On the31st of July, 1810, he became a rear-admiral,and was appointed to theBoyne, ninety-eight guns. In thespring of 1813, he shifted his flag intothe Ville de Paris, a first-rate, in whichit continued until the peace. He wasmade vice-admiral, "June 4th, 1814 ;K. C. B., January 2nd, 1815; G.C. B.,September 14th, 1822; and he sat, formany years, as member of parliamentfor Lymington. Sir Harry Bernard,in every service on which he was employed,sustained the character of abrave and skilful naval officer, and fullymerited the honours he received.SIR THOMAS Beam MARTIN.THIS officer, third son of Sir HenryMartin, Bart, comptroller of the navy,and member of parliament for Southampton,went, in 1793, with Lord Hood,to the Mediterranean, as commander ofthe Tisiphone sloop, from which hewas removed into the Modeste frigate.Being advanced to post rank on the5th of March, 1793, he served at thereduction of Bastia ; and, in 1795, beingon the Irish station, in the Santa Margarita,accompanied by the Cerberusfrigate, he took Le Jean Bart, a corvetteof eighteen guns, belonging to theenemy. In the following year, he tooka French frigate off 1 Sicily, on the 8th ofJune, and two privateers at the latterend of October. In 1797, he cruisedin the Tamar, with considerable success,on the West India station; where hetook, in a few months, nine privateers,and afterwards returned to England.Having been appointed to the Discard,of forty-six guns, he fell in, on the20th of October, 1798, off Brest, withan enemy's ship, which he captured,after a long contest; during which, hisship became so ungovernable, that, butfor the skilful exertions of the officersand crew of the Fisgard, her opponentwould have succeeded in escaping. In1800, while acting under the orders ofSir J. B. Warren, Captain Martin, onthe 23rd of June, headed an attack bythe boats of the squadron, on somearmed vessels in the Quimper river;but the enemy having retired, theBritish landed, and blew up three batteries.On the 1st of the followingmonth, he took charge of an enterpriseagainst some vessels lying withinthe island of Nourmontier, laden withsupplies for the fleet at Brest, andmoored under the protection of sixheavy batteries. The party, consistingof seven officers, and one hundred andeighty-five men, boarded the ships ofthe enemy, and being unable to bringthem out, were forced to destroy theirprizes. In endeavouring to get off,they experienced considerable difficulty,owing to the tide having gone down,and while vainly attempting to gettheir boats into deep water, were exposedto the heavy fire of the enemy.By taking another vessel from theiropponents, which they dragged throughthe sand for two miles, before they couldget it afloat, they at last reached theFisgard, which, during the remainderof the war, succeeded in capturingseveral French and Spanish armed vessels.She was put out of commission onthe conclusion of a peace ; and, in 1803,Captain Martin was appointed to theImpetuous, eighty-four, employed offBrest, Ferrol and Corunna, till 1807;when he removed, successively, intothe Prince of Wales and the Implacable;in the latter of which, he proceeded,SIR THOMAS Beam MARTIN.under Sir James Saumarez, to theBaltic. Being employed in assistingSweden against Russia, he, on the 26thof August, 1808, attacked, and wouldhave captured, the Se wolod,seventy-four,which was saved by the near approachof the whole Russian fleet bearingup to her assistance. She afterwardsgrounded; and having surrendered tothe Centaur, such was the injury shehad sustained in the action with theImplacable, that she was destroyed ; andCaptain Martin received the Swedishorder of the Sword, as a reward for hisservices. Continuing in the same ship,he, on the 6th of July, 1809, at the headof a small squadron, entered the Gulfof Narva; and, notwithstanding thestrength of the place, succeeded in takingtwelve Russian ships, laden with provisions,besides a number of gun-boats.Captain Martin obtained the commandof the Sovereign yacht, on the 31st ofJuly, 1810 ; was made a rear-admiral onthe 1st of August, in the followingyear ; and, with his flag in the Aboukir,proceeded to the Baltic. Here heassisted in the defence of Riga ; and,having returned to England, was appointedsecond in command at Plymouth.He was knighted in 1814;made a K. C. B. in 1815 ; and, in 1816,was made comptroller of the navy.In 1822, he was returned to parliamentfor Lymington, and subsequentlyfor Plymouth. He has been advancedto the rank of vice-admiral of the redisa director of Greenwich Hospital,and a commissioner of the board oflongitude.Sir Byam Martin was an officer ofconsiderable energy and skill; whilethe zeal and judgment he possessedrendered him also valuable to hiscountry in a civil capacity. His navalservices were numerous, though notparticularly distinguished ; and, in hisperformance of the duties of comptrollerof the navy, he evinced the same talentand assiduity by which, throughout hisnautical career, he rendered himselfeminent.SIR EDWARD BERRY.EDWARD BERRY entered themerchant service at the age of fourteen,and soon after was advanced to thesituation of mate in a West-indiamen ;in which capacity, during the Americanwar, he crossed the Atlantic. He wassubsequently pressed, and placed on thequarter-deck of a king's ship ; wherebyhis bravery in jumping on board aFrench vessel of war, which would haveprobably escaped, he compelled it tosurrender ; and for which heroic actionhe was rewarded by a lieutenant's commission.He also signalized himself, onthe 1st of June, 1794, in Lord Howe'svictory. In the early part of the year1796, he was appointed to the Agamemnon,of sixty-four guns, commandedby Commodore Nelson ; andat Porto Feraijo, being first lieutenantof his majesty's ship, Captain, Nelsonurged his promotion, for the masterlystyle in which he brought that ship tobear on the batteries. In the battleoff Cape St. Vincent, on the 14th ofFebruary, 1797, being in the Captain,with Sir Horatio Nelson, he was thefirst man to board the San Nicholas;and was among the first who tookpossession of the San Josef. For hisheroic conduct in this action, he was,on the 16th of March, 1797, advancedto the rank of post-captain.In July, 1797, he commanded one ofthe ships employed in the expeditionagainst Santa Cruz, under the directionof Nelson, whose arm was shattered bya shot which rendered amputation necessary.On being condoled with, bythe king, at a levee, for the loss of hislimb, he turned round to Berry, whohad been in the same boat with him atthe time the accident occurred, and,introducing the captain to his majesty,observed, " that he had not experiencedgreat loss, as this officer was his righthand." On the 1st of August, 1798,when Lord Nelson was wounded in thehead, at the battle of the Nile, CaptainBerry, who commanded the Vanguard,seventy-four, caught the admiral in hisarms, and took an active part in theTHE NAVY.memorable victory. His conduct washighly eulogized by Nelson, who saidin his despatches, that, when he was,of necessity, himself removed from thedeck, Captain Berry was fully equal tothe important duty which devolved onhim.Being despatched in the Leander,Captain Thomson, to carry the newsof the victory to Europe, he was metby a large French ship, called LeGenereux ; to which, though of a verysuperior force, it was determined, bythose in command of the English ship,that they would not quietly surrender.After a bloody fight of several hours, inwhich Captain Berry was wounded inthe arm, by a part of the skull of one ofsix belonging to the ship's companywho fell around him, the Leander was,at length, compelled honourably tostrike her colours. On returning toEngland, a privilege allowed to CaptainsThomson and Berry, on their parole, acourt-martial ensued, by which theformer was acquitted, and the lattereulogized for the zeal he had manifestedby giving his assistance in thecombat. The intelligence of the lateglorious victory having preceded thearrival of these gallant officers, theywere received with applause by theircountrymen. Captain Berry wasknighted, on the 12th of December,1798, and was presented with the freedomof the city of London ; on whichoccasion, the chamberlain observed,that the city of London was particularlyhappy to celebrate the magnanimityof one of its own citizens."In the autumn of the following year,he proceeded again to the Mediterranean,as captain of Nelson's flag-ship,the Foudroyant, of eighty guns; and,in March, 1800, assisted in capturinghis old opponent, Le Genereux, and LeGuillaume Tell, of eighty guns, the onlyremaining ship which had escaped fromthe battle in Aboukir Bay. The lattervessel gallantly kept her colours flyingtill she was an ungovernable log, andhad lost two hundred of her men, whilebut eight of the crew of the Foudroyantwere killed, and sixty-one wounded.She, however, expended one hundredand sixty-two barrels of gunpowder,and two thousand seven hundred andforty-nine cannon-balls in the conflict;and her captain was hurt in the foot,though he did not quit the deck duringthe whole of the engagement. In June,1800, Sir Edward Berry conveyed thequeen and part of the royal family ofNaples, from Palermo to Leghorn ; forwhich he received a gold box set withbrilliant, inclosing a diamond ring,with an autograph letter of thanks,from her majesty. The Foudroyanthaving proceeded to Minorca, to refit,Sir Edward returned to England in thePrincess Charlotte frigate ; and, duringthe remainder of the war, commandedthe Ruby, of sixty-four guns, stationedin the North Sea.After the renewal of the war, he, in1805, went, in the Agamemnon, to joinNelson's fleet, and succeeded in doingso just before the battle of Trafalgar ;though, in his passage out, he foundhimself, one night, in the midst of theRochefort squadron ; from which hecontrived to escape by his very superiorseamanship. On the 6th of February,1806, he assisted Sir .T. Duckworth indiscomfiting a French squadron off St.Domingo; and, having caused seventyto strike her colours, he proceededto attack another ship, when that whichhad surrendered to him re-hoisted hercolours, and was a second time taken.This circumstance caused an unpleasantaltercation after the action ; but thecommittee of the Patriotic Fund, atLloyd's, presented him with a sword ofthe value of one hundred guineas, andwith three silver vases, commemorativeof the three great battles in which hehad been engaged. During his continuancein the West Indies, he contributedto the capture of a Frenchbrig of eighteen guns, and of a privateerof seventeen guns and one hundred andfifteen men.On the 12th of December, 1806, heobtained a patent of baronetage, as SirEdward Berry, of Cotton, in the countyof Norfolk. In the autumn of 1811,he was appointed to the Sceptre, ofseventy-four guns ; from which, in1812, he was removed into the Bar-fleur,ninety-eight, and again sent to theMediterranean under Lord Exmouth.In December, 1813, Sir Edward wasappointed to the Royal Sovereign yacht;in the following year, he attended theallied monarchs on their visit to thefleet, at Spithead ; and he was afterwardsappointed to the Royal George.SIR PULTENEY MALCOLM.On the 2nd of January, 1815, he wasnominated a K. C. B. ; on the 12th ofAugust, 1819, he was made a colonelof marines ; and, on the 19th of July,1821, he became a rear-admiral of theblue.The subject of this memoir was theonly officer in his majesty's navy whohad the honour of three medals; havingcommanded a line-of-battle ship in thebattles of the Nile, Trafalgar, and St.Domingo. He married, on the 12th ofDecember, 1 797, his first cousin, Louisa,daughter of the Rev. Samuel Foster,D. D., rector of Shortly, Suffolk. Hedied without issue ; and the baronetcyhas, therefore, become extinct. SirEdward, like Lords St. Vincent andNelson, was remarkable for his coolnessand intrepidity in carrying into actionhis ship, which was at all times welldisciplined, but without undue severity.He enjoyed, through life, the personalfriendship of those two great men. Inprivate life, he was a sincere friend, anda man of strict integrity.SIR PULTENEY MALCOLM.SlR PULTENEY MALCOLM attainedto post rank in the navy in 1794;and on the 14th of November, the sameyear, he was commissioned to the Foxfrigate ; and, early in 1795, convoyed afleet of merchantmen to the Mediterranean.He afterwards served at Quebecand in the North Peasant was intrustedwith a convoy to the East Indies, wherehe made prize of La Modeste, of twentyguns. Towards the end of the year 1797,he was stationed in the China Seas, underthe orders of Captain Edward Cooke, ofLa Seville, forty-four; and both ships,onthe 13th of January, 1798, entered theBay of Manilla, with their vessels socompletely disguised, that the Spaniards,imagining them to be French frigates,sent off several boats to them, with officersof rank and offers of assistance.The Spaniards were detained on board,but treated with the greatest hospitality,and were all released after the Englishhad brought out the gun-boats andfeluccas which lay in the bay. Shortlyafterwards, Captain Malcolm made afruitless attack on the settlement ofSambangen, on the island of Mindanao,and afterwards steered for Pollock Bay,where, by his orders, a party of menscoured the woods, burnt the villages,and captured the chief of the natives ;as no account could be obtained ofeleven Englishmen who had gone onshore for water. In the succeedingyear, those who had survived were deliveredup, through the interference ofthe Sultan of Mindanao, who was presentedwith 1500 for his services. Onthe 18th of June, 1798, Captain Malcolmwas commissioned to the Suffolk,the flag-ship of Vice-admiral Rainier,commander-in-chief on the East Indiastation; and, subsequently, to the Victorious,where he continued until thetermination of the war.Early in 1804, he commanded theRoyal Sovereign, and afterwards theKent and Renown, in succession. In1805, he served in the Donegal, underNelson, in his pursuit to the West Indiesof the French and Spanish fleets; andafterwards formed part of AdmiralCalder's squadron, ordered off Cadizz toreinforce Collingwood. He next repairedto Gibraltar, to have his ship refitted,but learning that the enemy had put tosea, he departed on the 22nd of October,and made for the scene of action. Hearrived in time to rapture the Rays, andto signalize himself by his humane exertionsto save the lives of several woundedFrench prisoners, who, in a fit of frenzy,had cut the cables of the Berwick, inwhich they were situated. About twohundred men, however, perished, whocould not be got off the ship before shewent to pieces on the rock of St. Lucar.Afterwards, during the storm, CaptainMalcolm, in the Donegal, repeatedly examinedthe whole coast between LagosBay and Cadizz, to assist any vessels hemight find in distress ; and besides thenumber of lives he had saved, carriedinto Gibraltar the Bahama, one of thefinest line-of-battle ships in the Spanishnavy, which he found deserted nearSt. Lucar. After these events, theTHE NAVY.Donegal was employed, under Sir JohnT. Duckworth, off Cadizz, with whom itafterwards went, in pursuit of the Roche-fortsquadron, to the West Indies. Inthis expedition, Captain Malcolm servedin an engagement off St. Domingo, onthe Cth of February, 1806, and in thataction captured the Jupiter; the Donegal'sloss amounting to twelve menkilled and thirty-three wounded. Onhis passage home with the prizes, LeBrave, seventy-four, one of the capturedships, foundered ; but he hadtaken measures previously to save thepersons on board from shipwreck. Onhis return home, he was presented witha gold medal for his be) saviour in thisaction ; received the thanks of thehouse of lords and commons ; and avase of the value of 100 from thePatriotic Fund. Continuing in theDonegal, he was next attached to themain fleet under Lord Gambier, andin April, 1809, had the charge of asquadron employed on a cruising expedition.Subsequently to this, he hadthe direction of the blockade of Cher-burg;and in November, 1810, hissquadron attacked two frigates underthe batteries of La Hogue, both ofwhich were driven on shore in consequenceof the proceedings of himselfand of the captains under his orders.The Donegal was put out of commissionin 1811, and Captain Malcolm wasappointed to the Royal Oak, seventy-four,and, in the same year, was appointedcolonel of marines. In 1813, hewas made rear-admiral of the blue ; andon the 1st of June, 1814, hoisted hisflag, and sailed for North America, withthe land forces under the command ofBrigadier-general Ross. In the unsuccessfulattempt subsequently made uponNew Orleans, he directed the landingof the English army, and received theunqualified commendations of the for the zeal with whichhe performed his several duties. Onhis return to England, he found that hehad been rewarded with the order ofthe Bath, and, shortly after his arrival,he was appointed commander-in-chief ofthe squadron under orders to co-operatewith the Duke of Wellington and theBritish allies against Napoleon Buonaparte,after his escape from Elba. Atthe end of the campaign he receivedthe thanks of his grace, whom, in 1797,he had carried, in the Fox, from theCape of Good Hope to Bengal ; and, in1808, Captain Malcolm had escortedthe troops of Sir Arthur Wellesley fromCork to Portugal. Early in 1816, SirPulteney Malcolm succeeded Sir GeorgeCockburn in the command of St. Helena;and, in the course of frequentinterviews with Napoleon, received theaccounts of the ex-emperor's own lifefrom the mouth of the illustrious exile.He quitted the island in July, 1817. Onthe 19th of July, 1821, he was made vice-admiralof the blue ; and, on the deceaseof King George the Fourth, was flagofficer in the Mediterranean.On January 18th, 1809, he was marriedto Clementina, eldest daughter ofthe Hon. W. F. Elphinstone, the nieceof Lord Keith, and cousin of the Hon.Admiral Fleming. Admiral Malcolmblended the finest feelings of humanitywith the truest courage ; and thoughhe contended against an unsubduedenemy with unremitting energy, hisfoe, when vanquished, became the objectof his sympathetic clemency. In privatelife, he has the reputation of beingan amiable man ; and Napoleon Buonapartesaid of him, that few men had soprepossessing a manner and exterior.SIR JOSEPH SYDNEY YORKE.THIS officer, youngest son of the lateRight Honourable Charles Yorke, Lord-chancellorof England, went, on the15th of February, 1780, on board theDuke, of ninety-eight guns, as a midshipman.He afterwards served in theFormidable, under Lord Rodney, towhom he acted as aide-de-camp in thebattles fought off Guadaloupe, on the9th and 12th of April, 1782; afterwhich, on his return to England, Mr.Yorke was appointed, in succession, tothe Assistance, on the American station ;and the Salisbury, in which he acted asSIR JOSEPH YORKE.master's mate, on the Newfoundlandstation. He was made a lieutenant onthe 16th of June, 1789, and served inthat capacity on board the Adamant,Thisbe, and Victory. In the followingyear, he was elected member of parliamentfor Relate, in Surrey. Havingcontinued in the Victory during theSpanish and Russian armaments, he, inFebruary, 1791, commanded the Rattlesnake;in which he continued to cruisein the channel till he was made post-captainof the Circe, and was employedin the soundings at the commencementof the war with the French republic.He captured several large privateersand merchantmen, as well as a largecorvette, close to Brest, in sight of avery superior French squadron. In1794, he joined the North Sea fleet,under Lord Duncan, in the Stag ; whichcaptured, in the August of the followingyear, the Alliance, a large Bataviafrigate. Having cruised, with success,in the same vessel, till 1800, he was, inthat year, appointed to the Jason ; andserved, subsequently, in the Canada,Prince George, Barfleur, and Christian,until the 22nd of June, 1810, when hewas appointed one of the lords of theadmiralty. On this occasion, he vacated,but was re-elected to, his seat in parliament;and he had also, on the 21st ofApril, 1805, been knighted, on receivinga blue riband, as proxy, for his brother,the Earl of Hardwicke, lord-lieutenantof Ireland.Sir Joseph Yorke was, on the 31st ofJuly, 1810, made rear-admiral of theblue ; and, in the January following,having his flag on board the Vengeur,seventy-four, proceeded to the reinforcementof Lord Wellington's army inPortugal. He afterwards went to theWestern Isles, for the protection of thehomeward-bound East India fleet, whichreached England in safety. He waselected member of parliament for Sandwich,in 1812 ; was made a vice-admiralin July, 1814 ; nominated a knightcommander of the Bath, in January,1815 ; and, in the same year, was presentedwith the freedom of the boroughof Plymouth. He resigned his seatat the admiralty in 1818, and wasreturned member of parliament forRelate. Sir Joseph has been twicemarried ; first, on the 29th of March,1798, to Miss Elizabeth Astray, bywhom he had six sons and one daughter;and, secondly, on the 22nd of May,1813, to the Honourable Brian Anne,Dowager Marchioness of Clanricarde,by whom he had no issue.Though his opportunities of distinctionwere few, his naval career washighly useful and honourable. At theboard of admiralty, his nautical skilland zeal for his profession were themeans of introducing into the servicemany valuable improvements. He wasalways held in high estimation by hisfellow seamen, and was universallylooked upon as the sailor's friend. Asamember of the house of commons,he was distinguished more for hisgood-humour and jocularity, than forhis political ability, though he had alwaysa zealous regard to the interestsof the naval profession.ROBERT WALTER OTWAY.ROBERT WALTER OTWAY, sonof an officer in the army, entered thenavy in the Elizabeth, seventy-four, andbecame, in due time, a lieutenant in theImpregnable, ninety-eight, which tookpart in the engagement of the 1st of June,1794, as the flag-ship of Rear-admiralCaldwell. Having, on this occasion, displayedsingular gallantry, by going aloft,during the action, to rectify an accidentthat had occurred to the top-sail-yard,he was offered the post of first lieutenant,which he modestly declined, observingthat he was on the happiest termspossible with his messmates, and thatbeing placed so suddenly over the headsof several old officers might probablycreate jealousies, and prove detrimentalto the service." Caldwell acquiesced inthe justice of his remark ; but on his flagbeing removed to the Majestic, insistedthat Otway should be his first lieutenant,and he accordingly accompanied hiscommander to the West Indies. NotTHE NAVY.long after his arrival at Martinique, hewas appointed commander of the Thornsloop, described as a wretched little vessel,in which he took, in April, 1795, LaBelle Creole, in tended for the destructionof Martinique; the inhabitants of whichisland presented him with a sword worthtwo hundred guineas. In May following,the Thorn, having only eighty of hercrew on board, captured Le Courier Nationale,of one hundred and nineteenmen, after an action of thirty-fiveminutes. He was wounded in the engagement,and subsequently took partin the Carib war, in the island of St.Vincent Being made post-captain onthe 30th of October, he proceeded inthe Mermaid, of thirty-two guns, toGrenada, and while attacking the combinedforce of the slaves and Frenchinhabitants, refused to act on the suggestionof the English general to re-imbark, on perceiving that two shipshad arrived with reinforcements for theenemy. By ascending to a height, fromwhich" he fired some field-pieces on thevessels, he compelled them to retire,and thus gained for the English a decidedvictory. On his passage afterwardsfrom Grenada to Guadaloupe, hewas attacked, on the 8th of August,1796, by a large French frigate, LaVengeance, which had orders to sink ortake the Mermaid, but the enemy wascompelled to return, with loss, to her anchorage.Captain Otway subsequentlyassisted in cutting out twelve sail ofmerchantmen, protected by forts ; and,in 1797, removed into the Ceres, inwhich he destroyed one ship, at PortoRico, and captured another. On oneof these occasions, he nearly escapedbeing shot, and was in similar perilwhile boarding the vessel of a commodoreof a flotilla, near Havannah. Hewas shortly after appointed to the Trent,of thirty-six guns, and while off St.Juan, in 1799, he brought out aschooner, by night, from under a battery.In the same quarter, in companywith the Sparrow cutter, he attackedtwo French privateers and a Spanishbrig, and some other vessels lying atanchor near a small battery. On the approachof the English, the enemy madea signal of no quarter, and, after a shortaction, were compelled to surrender.Towards the close of the year 1800,Captain Otway returned to England,having on board Sir Hyde Parker, andafterwards, in that commander's flagship,the London, proceeded to theBaltic. In the battle of Copenhagen,he was sent, in an open boat, withinstructions for Lord Nelson, withwhom he continued until the cessationof the action. After the victory he wassent home with the despatches, butagain returned to the North Seas,where he remained for a short period.On quitting this station, he removedinto the Edgar, which, however, inJuly, 1802, was put out of commission.From 1803 till 1810, he was employed,with credit, on various services ;and, in July of the latter year, servedin the Ajax, of seventy-four guns, aspart of a squadron off Toulon, underthe orders of Blackwood. The enemybeing desirous of liberating one of theirown frigates then in Banco, came outfor the purpose, when they were immediatelyopposed by the British force,and, by the judicious proceedings ofOtway, the Seawater, of eighteenguns, was saved from capture. Hisconduct on the occasion was the subjectof praise in the official reports of thetransaction. He continued to commandthe Ajax until late in 1811, when thestate of his health compelled him toquit active service for a time, having,however, before his return home, beenpresent at the destruction of a Frenchconvoy on the coast of Catalonia, and atthe taking of La Dromedary, which hadon board a large quantity of ammunition.In 1813, he resumed the commandof the Ajax, in which he mademany prizes, and was employed in cooperatingwith the land forces at thesiege of St. Sebastian, and escorting areinforcement of troops for the army inCanada.Captain Otway was promoted to aflag on the 4th of January, 1814, andsubsequently became rear-admiral ofthe red. In 1818, he was nominatedcommander-in-chief on the Scottishcoast; and, while on that station, wherebe remained until 1821, was presentedwith the freedom of the city of Edinburgh.He was married, in 1801, to a daughterof Admiral Hollo way, by whom he hadissue several children.Admiral Otway, though his serviceshave been numerous and eminentlySIR CHARLES ROWLEY.successful, has received few of thosedistinctions usually awarded to navalofficers ; many of whom, possessing lessmerit, have received greater encouragement.His zeal was such, that duringeighteen years, he slept on shore onlyfor one night ; and the value of his servicesmay be estimated by the fact,that he took armed vessels, mounting,on an aggregate, one thousand guns,from the enemy. He was a strict disciplinarian,and acted as such equallywith regard to men and officers. Suchwas his vigilance, that he was humorouslysaid, by one of his crew,always to sleep with one eye open.SIR CHARLES ROWLEY.THIS officer, the fourth son of Vice-admiralSir Joshua Rowley, obtainedhis rank of post-captain on the 1st ofAugust, 1795 ; and, in the ensuingyear, was chief officer of the Cleopatra,of thirty-two guns ; while serving inwhich, on the American station, hemade prize of a French corvette, calledthe Aurore. He next commandedReunite ; in which he captured a vesselmounting ten guns, and assisted at thetaking of the Indian, of sixteen. Earlyin 1801, he was appointed to theBoadicea frigate, whose boats, in companywith those of the Fisgard andDiamond, brought out, and took possessionof, from under the batteries ofCorunna, El Neptune, of twenty guns,together with a gun-boat. He wasafterwards successively commissionedto the Ruby, sixty-four, and the Eagle,in which he served, under Sir SidneySmith, off the coasts of Naples andSicily ; and, in May of that year, wasactively employed in the reduction ofthe island of Capri, where his serviceswere very effective.Captain Rowley being off Brisindi,in the month of November, 1811, madeprize of La Corcyra, of forty-four guns,and having on board one hundred andthirty soldiers, with a cargo of wheatand military stores. This success wassoon followed by the storming and destructionof the battery of Cape Ceste,in the Adriatic ; which was effected bythe marines of the Eagle and a detachmentof soldiers. At the taking ofFiume, in the Adriatic, on the 3rd ofJuly, 1813, Captain Rowley bore a verydistinguished and prominent part. Ondirections being given to storm, he ledthe first division of marines to theattack, and hoisted the British colourson the battery ; while Hoste, at thehead of the marines, spiked the guns ofanother fort that had been alreadysilenced by two of the ships. Rowleyhaving now given orders for the gunsof the battery he had taken to be turnedagainst those not yet reduced, enteredthe town; which, after some severefighting, was taken : the loss to thesquadron employed on the occasionbeing only one killed and six wounded.Ninety vessels thus fell into the handsof the English, besides a large store ofordnance, ammunition, and provisions,which were brought away or destroyed.But a few days after this achievement,the fortress of Farina was taken by astorming party, in pursuance of ordersfrom Captain Rowley, who, on the 2ndof August following, in company withCaptain Hoste, took Roving, destroyedthe forts, and burnt, sank, or broughtaway, the twenty-one vessels that werelying at anchor in the harbour.At the attack upon Trieste, in thefollowing month, by Admiral Fremantle,and the Austrian general, CountNugent, Captain Rowley again signalizedhimself. " He had advanced,"says Brenton, " a long thirty-twopounder to within two hundred yardsof the Stanza, a strong building withone gun, and loop-holes for musketry,which stood upon a hill, with a wallfourteen feet high surrounding it. Onfiring the first shot from the thirty-twopounder, the ground gave way, andthe gun fell six feet below the platform.It was fine to see, (says the admiralin his despatch,) Captain Rowley andhis people immediately get a triangleabove the work, and the heavy gun,with its carriage, run up to its placeagain, in the midst of a shower of grapeTHE NAVY.and musketry, which did considerablemischief, and occasioned severe loss toour brave men ; but the perseveranceof Captain Rowley was crowned withsuccess. The army surrendered theStanza, and the castle soon followed.This place was very strong, and garrisonedby eight hundred Frenchmen ;mounted forty-five large guns, fortymortars, and four howitzers. The numberof British seamen killed amountedonly to ten, and of the wounded tothirty-five. The number of merchant-vesselstaken in the harbour was fifty-five."After this, Rowley was employedin the Adriatic, until the fall ofRagusa.As a reward for his services, he wasinvested with the order of Maria Theresaof Austria, on the 23rd of May, 1814;and, on the 4th of June, he was advancedto the rank of rear-admiral,and, subsequently, to that of vice-admiralof the blue. In January, 1815,he was made a K. C. B. ; and, in thesame year, he assumed the commandin the river Medway, and retained itfor the usual period of three years. In1820, he was appointed chief officer onthe Jamaica station, where he remainedfor a similar space of time. He wasmarried to Elizabeth, youngest daughterof the late Admiral Sir Richard King,by whom he has issue.SIR THOMAS Waterman HARDY.THIS gentleman first distinguishedhimself in the navy, by capturing theFrench ship, La Martin, off Santa Cruz,for which service he was appointed tothe rank of commander in 1797. Hisconduct, on this occasion, was so heroic,that Nelson, in consequence, solicitedpreferment for him from the com-mander-in-chief, Sir John Jervis, who,in his answer, calls the capture of LaMartin a desperate enterprise ; and,soon after, appointed Hardy to the shiphe had taken from the enemy. Afterthis achievement, he sailed to Egyptwith Nelson, to whom, after the battleof the Nile, he became flag-captain.He proceeded with Lord Nelson, afterthe battle of Copenhagen, to the Baltic,but returned home in the St. George,before the close of the year. In 1801,he was commissioned to the Isis, offifty guns ; and, early in 1802, had thehonour of conveying the late Duke ofKent to Gibraltar. From the latter shiphe was transferred to the Amphionfrigate, and employed to carry LordR. Fitzgerald, ambassador to Lisbon,from which duty he returned in themonth of December following, Nelsonand Hardy now became inseparablecompanions, and so remained until thefall of the former, in his last engagement,off Cape Trafalgar, on the 21st ofOctober, 1805. On that day, Hardywas Nelson's flag-captain; and we referto the memoir of his lordship, for anaccount of the part which our officersustained in the action, as well as forthe narrative of the conversation betweenthem before Nelson was wounded,and during his dying hours. CaptainHardy afterwards accompanied the remainsof his lordship to England ; and,on the 9th of January, 1806, assisted atthe grand ceremony of his interment atSt Paul's Cathedral. Nelson evincedhis partiality for the subject of ourmemoir by bequeathing him his telescopes,and a small pecuniary legacy.In 1806, he was created a baronet;and, soon after, commissioned to theTriumph, in which he was employedon the Halifax station, and afterwardsat Lisbon ; in respect of which latterservice, he was, in 1811, appointed achief of division in the royal armada ofPortugal, and rewarded with double theamount of the usual pay. In August,1812, he was appointed 'to the Kami Hies,seventy-four, and ordered to NorthAmerica ; and, in the course of thefollowing year, had the command of thesquadron stationed near New London.While off that place, in the month ofJune, his boats had made prize of aschooner, whose crew had left her.The captured vessel having been broughtnear the Ramillies, Sir Thomas orderedher to be placed alongside another prize,but while these directions were beingSIR HENRY Blackwood.put into execution, the vessel blew up,and killed Lieutenant Gentes and tenmen. The American merchants at NewYork, having heard that the Ramillieswas short of provisions, had placed somein the hatchway ; but in the hold weremany barrels of gunpowder, and trainslaid, so that, by means of clock-work, anexplosion might take place at a statedtime. This contrivance was the workof the merchants sanctioned, as manyimagined, by the American government,and contrived for the destructionof the Ramillies and her crew. In theyear 1814, our officer, assisted by Wilmington, captured allthe islands in Pass Macready Bay, andhe likewise bombarded the town ofBennington, the inhabitants of whichplace had aided in the attempt todestroy the Ramillies.On the 2nd of January, 1815, SirThomas Hardy was made a K. C. B ;in July, 1816, appointed to a royalyacht; on the 30th of November, 1818,commissioned to the Superb, of seventy-eightguns; and, in 1819, sailed in thatship for South America, where he actedas commodore of the British squadron.He continued on this station for aboutthree years; and was subsequently advancedto the rank of rear-admiral ofthe blue.Sir Thomas Hardy was honoured bythe particular friendship of Lord Nelson,and was mentioned by him to his presentmajesty, when Duke of Clarence,as an officer of the most distinguishedmerit.Sir Thomas married a daughter ofSir George Berkeley, and niece of theDuke of Richmond.SIR HENRY BLACKWOOD.HENRY, youngest son of Sir JohnBlackwood, entered the navy at anearly age ; and, having served in theMediterranean for a short period, acted,in 1790, as signal-midshipman, in theRoyal Charlotte, under Lord Howe,during the time of the Spanish armament.Being promoted by his lordshipto the rank of lieutenant, he served, onthe 1st of June, 1794, in the Invincible,which captured an eighty-four gun-ship,called Le Juste, after a closelyfought action of two hours. On hisreturn to Portsmouth, he was appointedcommander of the Megara, in thechannel fleet ; and having been, on the2nd of January, 1795, advanced to therank of post-captain, he, soon after, inthe Brilliant, of twenty-eight guns,while giving chase to a Spanish vessel,off Teneriffe, was brought to actionby two French frigates ; from both ofwhich, having maintained with each aspirited encounter, he succeeded inescaping. Being afterwards appointedchief officer of the Penelope frigate,attached to Lord Nelson's fleet, heformed part of a squadron employed inthe blockade of Malta. Whilststationedto watch for the Guillaume Tell, on herexpected passage from the harbour ofValette to Toulon, he descried her onthe 30th of March, 1802, and instantlygiving chase, an action ensued ; in whichtwo other ships of the English squadronhaving joined, the French vessel, aftera valiant resistance, was compelled tostrike her colours. The French admiral,Decree, ascribed his misfortuneto the heroism of Captain Blackwood,in having been the first to engage ; andour officer having towed the prize intoSyracuse, proceeded to assist in theblockade of Malta ; where he remainedtill the 5th of September, 1800, when itcapitulated to the English. Having, inJanuary, 1801, received permission toaccept the Sicilian order of St. Ferdinand,and having also signalized himselfin Lord Keith's expedition againstthe French in Egypt, he returned homein 1802; and, on the renewal of war,in the ensuing year, was appointed tothe Euryalus, of thirty-six guns. In thisfrigate he served, successively, underLords Gardner, Keith, and Nelson, onthe coast of Ireland, at Boulogne, andat Cadizz.In the battle of Trafalgar, on the21st of October, 1805, he acted withgreat bravery, and was distinguishedby the notice of Lord Nelson, who con-theNAVY.versed with him, prior to the action,on the probable extent of the victory.Sir Henry was also on board, and inthe cockpit, at the very moment whenthe commander-in-chief expired. It issingular that Nelson should have exclaimedto the subject of our memoir,at parting, after his last signal, " Godbless you, Blackwood ! I shall neverspeak to you again." In Sir Henry'saccount of the conversation he hadwith the deceased hero, he relatesthat Villeneuve, the French admiral,assured him, that, on seeing the novelmode of attack intended to be made onthe combined fleets, and which, at thatmoment, he confessed he could not inany way prevent, he called the officersof his ship around him, and pointingout the manner in which the first andsecond in command of the Britishfleet were each leading his column,he exclaimed to his officers, " Nothingbut victory can attend such gallantconduct !"On Sir Henry's return to England,he acted as train-bearer to the chiefmourner, Sir Peter Parker, at thefuneral of Nelson ; and, in 1806, he wasappointed to the Ajax, seventy-fourguns ; which, whilst lying at anchoroff the Dardanelles, took fire, on the14th of February, 1807, and was verysoon burnt to the water's edge. Of acrew amounting to six hundred andthirty-three, about two hundred andfifty lost their lives by this accident ;and Captain Blackwood, after havingjumped overboard, was half an hour inthe water before he was picked up.After this loss, for which he was triedand acquitted, Sir Henry served as avolunteer in the Royal George, theflag-ship of Admiral Duckworth ; and,afterwards, in Sir Sidney Smith's divisionof the fleet. In the subsequentproceedings of the British squadron, hedistinguished himself very highly, andwas spoken of, in the most flatteringmanner, in the official despatches of thetwo officers last mentioned.About the end of 1807, he was madechief officer of the Warspite. After hehad quitted the Mediterranean, he, in1813, made prize of three Americanletters of marque, besides various with valuable cargoes. Atthe expiration of the year, he resignedthe command of the Warspite ; and, onthe visit of the allied sovereigns to thiscountry, in 1814, he was nominatedcaptain of the fleet, of which the Dukeof Clarence was the commander-in-chief,on the occasion of the review atSpithead ; and for his marked attentionand great assistance, he received thethanks of the royal officer. On the4th of June following, he was promotedto be rear-admiral of the blue ; in thesame year, created a baronet ; and, inAugust, 1819, invested with the orderof the Bath, as a knight commander.On the 7th of January, 1820, he leftEngland, in the Leander, of sixtyguns, as commander-in-chief in theEast Indies; from which station he returnedon the llth of December, 1822 ;and at the conclusion of the Georgianera, he was vice-admiral of the blue,and flag-officer at the Nore.The Honourable Sir Henry Blackwoodhas been thrice married : first, toa daughter of Launcelot Crosbie, Esq.of Rubric; secondly, to Eliza, fourthdaughter of Captain Leghorn, R. N. ;and, thirdly, to Miss Gore, daughter ofthe late Governor Francis Gore, on the9th of May, 1803. Sir Henry possesses ahigh naval reputation, and went throughhis naval career with a courage andskill fully deserving of the honours hehas received, and the approbation whichwas bestowed on him by his differentcommanders.SIR WILLIAM HOSTE.WlLLIAM, second son of the Rev.Dixon Hoste, of Good wick, Norfolk, wasdescended from a very ancient family ofBruges, in Flanders, which, about theyear 1569, came to reside in England.The subject of this memoir was born in1780, and, on the breaking out of theFrench revolutionary war, entered thenavy as a midshipman, under the auspicesof Nelson, who, in his letters, spokeSIR WILLIAM HOSTE.of young Hoste as a good boy, and onethat would shine in the service. Havingbeen with his illustrious patron in theAgamemnon, and other ships, he was,after the expedition against Teneriffe,removed into the Theseus, seventy-four,commanded by Captain Ralph Miller.In August, 1798, Mr. Hoste succeededto the command of the Mutiny, the onlysmall vessel engaged in the battle of theNile, and his appointment being confirmed,in December, by the admiralty,he remained in this ship until the .conclusionof the war. On the 7th ofJanuary, 1802, he attained the rank ofpost-captain, when he commanded, insuccession, the Eurydice, twenty-four,and the Amphion frigate.In 1809, as senior officer in theAdriatic, he cruised with unremittingvigilance, and reinforced the garrisonsof Corfu, Ancona, and the Ionianislands. On the 8th of February, hisship, the Amphion, in company withthe Redwing, sloop-of-war, captured aFrench brig, and destroyed two storehousesat Melinda, near the coast ofDalmatia. He subsequently assistedin taking thirteen valuable merchantmenin the mole of Pesaro ; and his skillin conducting the attack, soon afterso successfully made on the fort andvessels at Cortellazzo, obtained for hima very favourable notice in the officialdespatches of Lord Collingwood. Inboat actions, Captain Hoste was singularlysuccessful ; and when unable touse his ships, he adopted that mode ofattack in preference to inactivity. InJune, 1810, the boats of the Amphion,Active, and Cerberus, captured the townof Gray, in the Gulf of Trieste, togetherwith a convoy of naval stores,designed for the arsenal, at Venice.On the 13th of March, 1811, the threeships above-named and the Volage,being all under the command of Captain.Hoste, and carrying, in all, one hundredand fifty-six guns, and eight hundredand seventy-nine men, defeated a combinedFrench and Italian force, consistingof two hundred and eighty-fourguns, and two thousand six hundredand fifty-five men, in a gallant action,which lasted for six hours, off the islandof Lissa. Two of the enemy's vesselswere taken, and a third was blown topieces, and the English loss on theoccasion was fifty men killed and onehundred and fifty wounded. All theBritish captains engaged in the affairwere presented with a gold medal commemorativeof the action. The Amphionhaving refitted at Malta, proceeded withthe prizes to Portsmouth, where she waspaid off on the 12th of August, 1811,and Captain Hoste returned, in theBacchante frigate, to the Mediterranean,where, in addition to other successfulenterprises, he captured a French privateerand two valuable convoys on thecoast of Istria and Apulia, On the13th and 14th of November, 1812, themarines of the Bacchante and two otherships captured, without opposition, asmall town, called Fesano, and CaptainHoste subsequently took two vesselsproceeding with wine from Parents toCorfu. In January, 1813, the boats ofthe Bacchante cut off a division of theenemy's flotilla; and, in the followingmonth, captured two gun-boats andeight sail of merchantmen : one of theformer of which was carrying despatchesfrom Corfu, and had on board a Frenchgeneral of artillery, who was going withhis suite to Otranto.Captain Hoste hearing, on the llth ofMay, that several vessels were lying inthe channel of Karlebago, proceededtowards that place, but the object of hisvisit had escaped before his arrival.He, however, determined on destroyingthe fort overlooking the harbour, whichrendered it a good shelter for the convoysof the enemy. He accordinglyattacked the batteries, and after somefiring, the place surrendered.On the 3rd of July, 1813, he servedon shore at the capture of Fiume, andlanded, two days afterwards, at PortoR^, where he blew up the deserted forts,and despoiled the guns and their carriages.On the 2nd of the followingmonth, after assisting in silencing thebatteries at Roving, he headed a partyof seamen, who drove the French fromthe town, demolished the works, andcarried off part of a large convoy, havingburned the rest in the harbour. He nextassisted in the reduction of the fortressesof Cattaro and Ragusa, both of which,in January, 1814, came into the possessionof the English.In March of the same year, at therequest of the inhabitants of Parma, onthe coast of Albania, Captain Hosteproceeded thither against the FrenchTHE NAVY.garrison, and the town and fortificationsfell into his hands soon after his arrival.This was his last achievement; for hesoon after quitted the Bacchante, onaccount of ill-health, and returned toEngland, as a passenger, in the Cerberusfrigate.On the 23rd of May, 1814, he receivedthe royal permission to accept and wearthe insignia of a knight of the Austrianmilitary order of Maria Theresa ; andon the 23rd of July following, wasraised to the dignity of a baronet ofGreat Britain. In the same year, heobtained an honourable augmentationof his family arms, in respect of theaction off Lissa; and on the enlargementof the order of the Bath, inJanuary, 1815, he was nominated oneof the first knights commanders.Sir William Hoste, subsequently tothis period, commanded the Albion,seventy-four, which was stationed atPortsmouth, as a guard-ship, and hadthe command of his majesty's yacht, theRoyal George, until his death, whichoccurred in 1828.He left six children, and was twicemarried : his second wife being LadyHarriet Walpole, (sister of the presentEarl of Orford,) to whom he was unitedon the 17th of April, 1817. Sir WilliamHoste died in London, on the 6th ofDecember, 1828, in the forty-eighthyear of his age. He has left three sonsand three daughters.Hoste was a man of coolness andcourage in battle ; and in the action offLissa, when the enemy were advancingto break the line, he familiarly hailedhis friend, Captain Gordon, then commandingthe Active, the ship immediatelyastern of the Amphion, in thefollowing words : " I say, Jemmy, passthe word to keep the flying jib-boomover the taffrel, for we must not letthese rascals break the line. Half-an-houron this tack, is worth two on theother."He was likewise a man of disinterestednessand magnanimity, qualitieswhich he displayed on the terminationof the conflict, in the Bocca deCattaro, when he said, to the captainof the Saracen, " Come, Harper, youwere the first to conceive the expedition: let the Saracen take possessionof Cattaro."SIR MURRAY MAXWELL.SlR MURRAY MAXWELL, sonof a merchant at Leith, entered thenavy under Sir Samuel Hood, and, in1796, was promoted to the rank oflieutenant. He became a commanderin December, 1802, and served, in June,1803, under Hood, in the Cane sloop,at the reduction of St. Lucia. Immediatelyafter this event, he removed tothe Centaur, the commodore's own ship,in which he was present at the taking ofTobago, Demerara, and Essequibo, inthe ensuing months of July and September.On the 4th of August, 1803,the lords of the admiralty confirmed hisadvancement to post-rank, and continuingwith his patron, he was employedin the blockade of Martinique,and in the spring of 1804, in the subjugationof Surinam. Captain Maxwellbeing sent, on the latter occasion, tosummon the governor to capitulate, andmeeting with a refusal, he joined withthirty seamen, the first landing party,which, after a fatiguing march of fivehours, stormed and carried Forts Frederic!and Leyden. Preparations werethen made for attacking New Amsterdam,the enemy's principal fortress,when the Dutch governor offered tosurrender, and Maxwell was one ofthose appointed to arrange the conditions.He took to England the despatchesannouncing the capitulation ofSurinam, which followed Immediatelyafterwards.He was next appointed in successionto the Century, Galatea, and Alcestis,of forty-six guns ; in the last of which,having under his orders the Mercury,and the Grasshopper brig, he distinguishedhimself very highly in anattack on a Spanish fleet near Cadizz.On this occasion he took seven tartans,laden with timber, in defiance of aflotilla of gun-boats, two of which wereSIR MURRAY MAXWELL.destroyed ; and of the batteries of Rota,and in the presence of an enemy's fleetof eleven French and Spanish ships ofthe line. He was next employed onthe coast of Italy, where, in the year1809, the Alceste, in company with theCane, destroyed three strong Martellotowers, two gun-boats, and a depot oftimber at Terracina. In May, thesucceeding year, a detachment from hisship stormed a battery near Tregus; andon the 26th of the same month, theboats of the Alceste cut out, from theport of Agate, five vessels carryingvaluable cargoes.In a short time after these events,Captain Maxwell, in the Alceste, formedpart of the in-shore squadron off Toulon; and early in 1811, assisted indestroying a French gun-brig in theharbour of Parens. Towards the endof the same year, while cruising in theAdriatic, with the Active and Uniteunder his command, he gave chase tothree French frigates, two of which weretaken.In the year 1813, Captain Maxwellcommanded the Daedalus frigate, inwhich he was wrecked, near Ceylon,while on a voyage to Madras with aconvoy of Indiamen.In October, 1815, he was, at the requestof Lord Amherst, re-appointedto the Alceste, in which he accompaniedthat nobleman in his memorable embassyto China. While engaged in theduties of his mission, Captain Maxwell,assisted by Captain Basil Hall, proceededto survey the adjacent coastand neighbouring islands ; and a narrativeof the discoveries there made,has since been published by the latter,who, in a dedication to Sir MurrayMaxwell, observed that " to his abilityin conducting the voyage, zeal in givingencouragement to every inquiry, sagacityin discovering the disposition of thenatives, and address in gaining theirconfidence and good-will, may be attributedwhatever is found interesting inthe work."While at China, Captain Maxwellhaving advanced up the Tigris withthe Alceste, a mandarin was sent out,who desired him to abandon his project,on pain of having his ship firedupon from the batteries. This threatbeing unheeded, was carried into executionby the Chinese, but the Alcestesoon silenced the attack of the enemy.Captain Maxwell nobly discharged,with his own hand, the shot whichquieted the batteries, and thus tookupon himself the whole responsibilityof having fired it; a point which itwas customary for the Chinese government,in all cases, to ascertain. Thisseasonable resistance had the effect ofa complete victory, and he readily obtainedwhat supplies he required.Proceeding homewards with-lordAmherst, his ship, the Alceste, struckon a sunken rock in the straits of Gaspar,and Maxwell was the last personwho quitted the vessel. Lord Amherstand a party of men proceeded to Ratavia in a barge ; but about two hundred,among whom was the subject of ourmemoir, still remained on the island. Aparty of armed Malay pirates havingsoon after taken possession of the wreck,and it being supposed they meditatedlanding, the English armed themselveswith small swords, dirks, chisels, andsome rude weapons of their own construction.The Malays at length set fireto the ship, and left it to be consumed.The meditated attack did not, however,take place, and, in a few days after,relief arrived from Batavia. Havinggone thither in the Ternate, they proceededto England in the Caesar, andon his way home, Captain Maxwell hadan interview with Napoleon Buonaparte,who recognised the former ashaving been present at the capture ofLa Pomona, French frigate. On histrial by court-martial, in August, 1817,for the loss of his ship, he was mostfully acquitted of any blame, and thattribunal passed a high eulogy on hismeritorious conduct.In 1815, Captain Maxwell was made acompanion of the Bath, and on the 27thof May, 1818, was invested with knighthood.At the general election in thatyear, he was put in nomination for thecity of Westminster, by the Tory party,and experienced, during his unsuccessfulcontest, much personal insult and in-jury-theEast India Company presentedSir Murray Maxwell, on the 30th of May,1819, with 1,500 for his services on hisvoyage to China, and in compensationfor the loss he sustained on his return.In June, 1821, he was commissioned tothe Bulwark, bearing the flag of SirTHE NAVY.Benjamin Hallowed Carew, at Chatham; and in November, 1822, was transferredto the Briton frigate, in which heafterwards served in South America.The professional career of Sir MurrayMaxwell does him credit for the zeal,bravery and ability, which he has onall occasions exhibited.SIR PHILIP BOWES VERB BROKE.PHILIP BOWES VERB BROKE,eldest son of Philip Bowes Broke, Esq.was educated at the Royal Academy,Portsmouth ; and, on the 25th of June,1792, went as midshipman, on boardthe Bull-dog sloop; and afterwardsserved in L'Bclair, at the siege ofBastia. In May, 1794, he removedinto the Romulus, thirty-six; and, inJune of the same year, he was transferredto the Britannia, the flag-ship ofAdmiral Hotham, who promoted him tothe rank of lieutenant, in the Southamptonfrigate. He was present inseveral successful encounters j and, actingas a repeater in Lord St. Vincent'smemorable action with the Spanishfleet off Cape St. Vincent, returned toEngland. On the 12th "of October,1798, he acted as lieutenant in theAmelia frigate ; and was present, withSir John B. Warren, in an engagementwith a French force off the coast ofIreland. Early in 1799 he was madecommander of the Shark sloop-of-war ;and, on the 14th of February, 1801, heobtained the rank of post-captain.In 1803, on the renewal of war,which succeeded the treaty of Amiens,Captain Broke was employed in (rainingthe peasantry of his own vicinityto the use of arms, as one of the measuresadopted to prevent an invasionthat was threatened.In 1805, he assumed the command ofthe Druid frigate; and, while servingoff the coast of Ireland, under LordGardner, made prize of a French privateer,called the Prince Murat. Healso captured some smaller vessels ; and,by chasing Le Pandour, of eighteenguns and one hundred and fourteenmen, caused it to be taken by AdmiralStirling's squadron.In June, 1806, he was nominated tothe Shannon frigate ; and proceeded, inApril, 1807, in company with the Meleager,thirty-two, to protect the Greenlandwhale-fishery. While on this service,he made the southern part ofSpitsbergen, and, subsequently, theharbour of Magdalena, lying in theeightieth degree of northern latitude.Having made a correct survey of thebay and harbour, he advanced towardsthe north, but being compelled by theice to take another direction, he directedhis course homewards ; and, inSeptember, arrived at North Yarmouth.Soon after, he formed part of an armamentsent against Madeira ; and,having been put in charge of the transports,he, in February, 1808, returnedto England.Towards the conclusion of the year1811, he served in the Shannon, on theHalifax station; and, in 1812, on theUnited States of America declaring waragainst Great Britain, he was ordered,with a small squadron, to watch theports of the enemy. Whilst in theexecution of this duty, he made prize,off Sandy Hook, of an American brig,called the Nautilus, of fourteen guns andone hundred and six men ; and, immediatelyafterwards, he was employedin chasing the Constitution, of fifty-sixguns, which, however, effected its escape.He then made various other captures ;burnt a quantity of American vessels ;and, a short time afterwards, joinedthe Jamaica fleet, and assisted the Thetisfrigate in convoying the merchantmento a safe latitude. After other similarservices, he proceeded towards Bostonharbour, where he discovered and challengedto battle, the American ship,Chesapeake; promising that no otherEnglish vessel should interfere. Before,however, the challenge could be conveyed,the action commenced, and continuedfor some time with great animationon both sides. Towards the closeof the battle, Broke leaped on board theenemy's ship, and having saved the lifeof an American seaman, who called forSIR HENRY Gotham.quarter, received the stroke of a cutlasson the back of the head from the wretchwhom he had spared. This woundhad nearly proved fatal, and from itseffects he never afterwards recovered.His assailant was immediately cut inpieces by the sailors of the Shannon;and the Chesapeake became a prize tothe English. The action, which onlyoccupied fifteen minutes, was one of themost bloody and determined ever foughtbetween two ships of their class, in soshort a time. The loss on board theShannon, out of three hundred and thirtymen, was three officers and twenty-threemen killed ; Captain Broke, two officers,and fifty-eight men wounded. TheChesapeake, out of a crew of four hundredand forty men, had the secondlieutenant, the master, marine officer,some midshipmen, and ninety seamenand marines killed ; Captain Lawrence,the first and third lieutenants, somemidshipmen, and one hundred and tenmen wounded.For this brilliant achievement, CaptainBroke received a gold medal, aswell as the formal thanks of the lords ofthe admiralty, besides a sword of thevalue of one hundred guineas, accompaniedby the freedom of the city, fromthe citizens of London. The people ofthe county of Suffolk, subscribed morethan 700 to be laid out in the purchaseof a piece of plate ; and a club, at Ipswich,presented him with a silver cup ofthe value of one hundred guineas. Onthe 2nd of November, 1813, he wasraised to the dignity of a baronet ; and,on his return to England, the Shannonbeing condemned as unfit for furtherservice, he was tendered the commandof another ship, which the effect of thewound he had received would not allowhim to accept. On the 2nd of January,1815, he was made a knight commanderof the order of the Bath.He was married, on the 25th ofNovember, 1802, to Sarah Louisa,daughter of Sir William Middleton,Bart., by whom he has had issue severalchildren. Independently of CaptainBroke's general naval merit, the determinedresolution which he evincedin challenging the Chesapeake, and themode of righting which he adopted, aswell as the skill observable in theprecision and certainty with which theguns of the Shannon were fired, werealone sufficient to raise him to a veryhigh position in the scale of navalmerit.SIR HENRY Gotham.HENRY, youngest son of Beaumont,second Lord Hotham, entered the navyat an early age ; and, having commandedvarious frigates, attained postrank in the navy, on the 13th ofJanuary, 1795. On the 20th of September,1800, while cruising in theImmortality, of thirty-six guns, he retookthe English ship, Monarch, fromthe enemy; and, on the 22nd, beingabout to engage with a French brig ofwar, both vessels got aground, whenthat of the enemy was destroyed, andthe English ship got off with the greatestdifficulty.In the following month of October,he assisted at the taking of a Frenchprivateer, of sixteen guns, called LeDiable a Quatre, and a vessel laden withcoffee, proceeding from Guadaloupe toBourdeaux. After this, he capturedLa Laure, of fourteen guns, and L' Invention,of twenty-four; an't, towardsthe end of the war, was stationed offBrest, to watch the motions of theenemy. The Immortality was paid offat the time of peace ; but, not longafter the rupture of 1803, CaptainHotham was commissioned to the Imperieuse,of forty guns, in which hesoon after re-captured a South Seawhaler. Removing into the Revolutionary,forty-four, he, in the earlypart of the year 1804, carried His RoyalHighness the Duke of Sussex fromLisbon to Portsmouth ; and, on the 4thof November, 1805, formed part of thesquadron under Sir Richard Strachan,when he took from the French four oftheir ships of the line ; on which occasion,the Revolutionary had twomen killed and six wounded.THE NAVY.He next served in the Defiance,seventy-four, one of Rear-admiral Stop-ford'ssquadron, and which, on the 23rdof February, 1809, drove on shore threefrigates in a bay formed by the SableD'Olonne. In the following June, heassisted in protecting Spain against theFrench, and took possession of Ferrolwithout opposition. In 1810, he wasappointed to the Northumberland,seventy-four, in which he captured aFrench privateer, on the 22nd of November; and, in 1812, he was sent, bySir Harry Nealee, to intercept twoFrench frigates and a brig, which wereexpected in the port of L'L'Orient. Beingon Isle Groans, on the 22nd of May,in company with the Growler, gun-brig,he discovered, and, by manoeuvring,contrived to intercept, the enemyat the mouth of the harbour. He engaged,in the Northumberland, at aboutthree in the afternoon, near Point dePierre Lage, with the French commodore,who was supported, for twenty-oneminutes, by the fire from threebatteries. By the skill of CaptainHotham and the master of his ship, shewas carried so near to a dry rock,named Le Gaul, that the enemy, inendeavouring to steer between it andthe Northumberland, ran all theirvessels aground, which were desertedby their crews, after they had sustained,for an hour and a quarter, thedeliberate fire of their antagonists.The Northumberland was, during thewhole of the action, exposed to a destructivefire from one of the batteries ;but Captain Hotham succeeded inmoving out of its influence on perceivingthat his object was accomplished.Both frigates were blown up ; oneduring the night, and the other onthe succeeding morning ; while thebrig, in the course of the day, wasdestroyed in a similar manner. Theyhad previously destroyed thirty-sixsail of vessels, from which they hadtaken the cargoes. In this encounter,five men belonging to Captain Hotham'sship were killed, and twenty-eightwounded.In December, 1812, he was madecaptain of the fleet, under Sir J. B.Warren, and, subsequently, held thesame appointment under Sir A. Cochrane.On the 4th of December, 1813,he was made colonel of marines ; on the4th of June, 1814, rear-admiral of theblue; and knight companion of theBath, on the 2nd of January, 1815. Hewas intrusted, on the escape of Napoleonfrom Elba, with a command inthe channel fleet ; and, after the battleof Waterloo, was stationed on theFrench coast, to prevent the flight of theex-emperor, who surrendered himselfon board the Bellerophon, then part ofHotham's armament. In 1818, he wasappointed a lord of the admiralty, asituation he held until March, 1822,and resumed in 1828 : he also occupiedit at the decease of George the Fourth,having, at the same period, the rank ofvice-admiral of the blue squadron.Sir Henry Hotham was well acquaintedwith naval tactics, and oftenturned to great advantage his perfectknowledge of that important service.His bravery was likewise considerable ;and he never wanted the courage toexecute any manoeuvre which hisskill suggested. His achievement inrunning aground the enemy's frigateson the rock called Le Gaul, is anhonourable instance of combined talentand intrepidity.FREDERICK LEWIS MAITLAND.THIS gentleman, third son of theHonourable Frederick Maitland, andgrandson of Charles, sixth Earl ofLauderdale, entered the navy as midshipman,on board the Martin sloop,and removed into the Southamptonfrigate, which took part, on the 1st ofJune, 1794, in Lord Howe's victory.On the 5th of April, 1795, he was madelieutenant of the Andromeda, but removedto the Venerable, seventy-four,the flag-ship of Admiral Duncan. In1797, he joined Earl St. Vincent in theMediterranean, who appointed him lieutenantof the Kingfisher sloop, whichassisted in capturing several privateers ;FREDERICK LEWIS MAITLAND.and such was his gallantry in the actionwith one, called the Betsey, that 50were" subscribed, by the crew of hisown ship, to purchase a sword for him,as a token of respect for his bravery.The Kingfisher was wrecked, in December,1798, at the entrance of theTagus, whilst on her passage to Gibraltar,under the temporary commandof Lieutenant Maitland. He was honourablyacquitted of all blame by acourt-martial, held on the occasion ;and, after his trial, was appointed flag-lieutenantto Earl St. Vincent.In July, 1799, being ordered, in thePenelope, to reconnoitre the Frenchand Spanish fleets, his zeal led him toonear the hostile squadron, and he wascompelled to surrender. His vesselhad a sum of money on board, intendedfor Minorca ; and the crew,seeing no chance of escape, would haveplundered the treasure, but for the interferenceof Maitland, who declaredit to be the lawful prize of the captors.He was liberated without the customaryexchange, and repaired to Gibraltar,whence, in the following August, heproceeded to England.Soon after his arrival, he was madecommander of the Cameleon, ,which he joined, off El Arise, intimeto be present at the signing of thetreaty, having for its object the evacuationof Egypt by the French republicanarmy. He returned home by anoverland journey, with a copy of thedocument; and, on his return to theMediterranean, resumed the commandof the Cameleon, in which he madeseveral captures. In 1800, he joinedthe expedition against the French, inEgypt ; where his conduct, at the landingof the army under Sir Ralph Aber-crosby,and in the battles of the 13thand 21st of March, 1801, obtained forhim the thanks of the commanders-inches,both naval and military. He hadbeen made post-captain by Lord Keith,on the 10th of December, 1800, andwas confirmed in that rank in the followingyear, by the board of admiralty.He subsequently commanded,successively, the Dragon and LaCareer ; and, on the 15th of October,1802, was commissioned, by Lord St.Vincent, to the Loire, an exceedinglyfine frigate.On the 27th of June, 1803, two ofhis boats cut out a French brig, calledLe Venteux, lying near the Isle of Bas,close under the batteries. In March,1804, he made prize of the Brave,French privateer, on the Irish station ;and, in 'August, captured La Blonde,after a running fight of fifteen minutes,preceded by a pursuit of twenty hours.In June, 1805, being off Cape Finisterre,he ordered out his boats, under LieutenantYeo, into the Bay of Tamarinds,for the purpose of attacking two Spanishprivateers, which were carried, althoughprotected by a ten-gun battery. Threemerchantmen were also taken and destroyedby the English, of whom therewere thirty-five, opposed to eightySpaniards under the protection of abattery. Captain Maitland next proceededto the town of Muros, where helanded a party of men, who put theSpaniards to flight, and destroyed thefortress. The English then pushedforward to another fort, at a quarter ofa mile's distance ; where, being met bythe governor. Lieutenant Yeo cut himdown with his sabre, and several otherSpanish officers were killed in the encounter.Quarter was given to thosewho laid down their arms ; and thewhole place being in possession ofthe English, Captain Maitland securedsome of the vessels in the harbours.He commissioned the gallant LieutenantYeo to one of the prizes ; butdid not molest the small vessels in thebay, that he might not, as he said inhis despatches, " deprive the poorerinhabitants of the means of gainingtheir livelihood."For the forbearance which was manifestedon the occasion, by the victoriousEnglish, the thanks of those who residedin the town were conveyed toMaitland, by the bishop of the place,and another man of rank in the neighbourhood.Having spiked the guns,and thrown them over the parapet, andhaving blown up part of the fort, heagain set sail ; after which, in aboutthree weeks, he captured Le Vaillant,a frigate privateer, of Bourdeaux. Onthe 13th of December, being in companywith the Egyptian, he fell in,off Rochefort, with Le Libre, carryingtwenty-four eighteen-pounders on hermain deck, six thirty-two-pound carronades,and ten long nine-pounderson her quarter-deck and forecastle.THE NAVY.The French ship being brought toaction, fought her opponents with greatcourage, and did not haul down hercolours until she was disabled, and hadtwenty of her crew killed or wounded.The Egyptian had only eight menwounded ; and none of the people ofthe Loire received any injury, althoughthe engagement was commenced bythat frigate. He took his prize toPlymouth j and, in the April following,captured the Princess of Peace, aSpanish privateer, mounting one longtwenty-four pounder. On the 28th ofNovember following, he was commissionedto the Emerald frigate, ofthirty-six guns; in which he took aFrench privateer and two other vessels,besides recapturing an American ship,called the Zulema.In 1808, he served, off the Spanishcoast, under Lord Gardner ; and sustainedan action, in the harbour ofVivere, with two strong batteries, whilehis lieutenants effected a landing, andstormed the centre fortress. CaptainMaitland continued to cruise in theEmerald for some time, during whichhe captured, besides all his formerprizes, eight armed vessels. He alsoassisted at the destruction of four Frenchships of war, in the month of April,1809. On the 3rd of June, 1813, hewas appointed to the Goliath, and employedin the West Indies and NorthAmerica; but returned home towardsthe close of the year 1814, and wascommissioned to the Boyne, in November.Early in 1815, he sailed to Cork;where, being detained by stress ofweather until the escape, from Elba,of Napoleon Buonaparte, he was transferredto the Bellerophon, of seventy-fourguns ; and, by his vigilance, preventedthe escape of the ex-emperorfrom Rochefort. Previously to thedeparture of Napoleon, he offered topresent Maitland with a gold box,having the donor's portrait on it, setwith diamonds, and said to be worththree thousand guineas, but the giftwas declined.Captain Maitland was, in October,1818, commissioned to the Vengeur, ofseventy-four guns ; in which, towardsthe close of the year 1820, he was employedin conveying, from Naples toLeghorn, the King of the two Similes.His majesty, on this occasion, personallyinvested him with the order ofSt. Ferdinand and of Merit, and presentedhim with a very valuable goldbox, bearing the portrait of the king,set round with large diamonds. TheVengeur was put out of commission onthe 18th of May, 1821; and, on thatday, Maitland assumed the commandof the Genoa, third-rate, in which hecontinued until the month of Octoberfollowing ; having, previously to quittingit, been presented with a very handsomesword by the midshipmen. Inaddition to other marks of public favour,he received, for one of his numerous services,the thanks of the common councilof London, the freedom of the city ofCork, and a valuable sword presentedto him by the Patriotic Fund Society.Captain Maitland is an officer of thehighest zeal, accompanied by greatjudgment and intrepidity. In action,his courage rendered him formidable,whilst his upright and independentconduct made him also an object ofrespect to his enemies, whether he happenedto be vanquished or victorious.JURISPRUDENCE.JURISPRUDENCE.JOHN, LORD SOMERS. -THIS celebrated lawyer and statesman,son of an eminent attorney atClifton, was born there on the 4th ofMarch, 1650. He became a commonerof Trinity College, Oxford, in 1675;and took the degree of Bea. in 1678,and that of M. A. in 1681. Having becomea member of the Middle Temple,he devoted himself to the study of thelaw, and made himself, at the sametime, in some degree, known to thepublic, by a few trifling poetical performances.By the assistance of friends,he speedily acquired an extensive practice;and, before he had attained theage of thirty, became eminent as a barrister.Being a powerful orator, and astaunch advocate of liberal opinions, heobtained the friendship of Lord Russelland Algerian Sydney, under whosepatronage he anonymously employedhis pen in the support of liberty. In1688, he was counsel for the sevenbishops ; and he had a considerableshare in bringing about the revolutionwhich followed. He soon after wasreturned to parliament as member forWorcester ; and after James the Secondhad quitted England, was appointedone of the managers of the house ofcommons to confer with the lords as tothe word abdicate.On the accession of King William,he received the appointment of solicitor-general,with the honour of knighthood.He became recorder of Gloucesterin 1690 ; attorney-general on the2nd of May, 1692 ; and lord-keeper in1693. Two years after, he was createdBaron Evesham, elevated to the lordhigh chancellorship of England, andpresented with the manors of Relateand Harleigh, in Surrey, as well as agrant of 2,100 per annum.In 1697, he had a share in the firstpartition treaty relative to the successionof the crown of Spain ; and, onthe 10th of April, 1700, an address waspresented, praying that, for his share inthis transactions might be dismissedfrom the councils of his majesty. Theking refused the address, but desiredhim voluntarily to surrender the seals,which he declined doing without thesovereign's warrant ; on the receipt ofwhich, he delivered up the insignia ofhis office. Though they had succeededin removing him from the post he hadoccupied with ability and integrity, hisenemies were not yet satisfied, but itwas proposed to impeach him. Onhearing of this, he desired to be admittedto defend himself in the house ofcommons; and his wish having beencomplied with, "he spoke," saysBurnet,so fully and clearly, that, upon hiswithdrawing, it was believed, if thequestion had been quickly put, thewhole matter had been soon at an end ;but his enemies drew out the debate tosuch a length, that the impression hisspeech had made was much worn out,and the house sitting till past midnight,they, at last, carried it by a majority ofthree or eight to impeach him." Theaffair was, however, not proceeded in bythe peers, owing to a misunderstandingwith the commons ; and King Williamdying soon after, his lordship retiredfrom public life, and devoted himself tothe study of history, antiquities, andpolite literature. From 1698 to 1703,he sat as president of the Royal Society; and, in 1706, suggested theunion of Scotland and England, ofwhich measure Queen Anne appointedhim one of the managers. In 1708, heresumed office as president of theJURISPRUDENCE.council, but retired in 1710; and diedof apoplexy, on the 20th of April, 1716.The powers of his understanding had,for some time previously to his decease,been impaired, according to some of hisbiographers, by sensual gratification.Lord Somers, besides being verylearned in his own profession, had aconsiderable knowledge of divinity,history and philosophy. In his temperhe was remarkably mild ; and asastatesman and a judge, he is representedas having been incorruptible.So independent did he keep himself ofboth parties in politics, that he wasa favourite of neither ; and the unitedstrength of both was put into requisitionto remove him from the ministry.His patriotism was pure, and hisadvocacy of liberal principles perfectlydisinterested. As a speaker, hepossessed the qualities of good taste.united with great oratorical power,which rendered his speeches, at thesame time, plain and forcible. He endeavouredto reform the abuses in thelaw courts, but parliament would notadopt his propositions. He patronisedliterary talent without regard to partyprejudice, and was himself the authorof several poetical pieces and politicaltracts.In person, he was of the middle size,with a brown complexion. He is said,by one of his biographers, " to havehad, in a high degree, the passions ofhuman nature, which he sometimes indulged;but he possessed, in a muchhigher degree, its excellencies and ornaments."Addison, whom he patronised,says, in a summary of his character,that it was brighter than even a diamond; requiring no foil to enhance itslustre.THOMAS PARKER, EARL OF MACCLESFIELD.THOMAS PARKER, the son of anattorney, and the descendant of anancient and opulent family, was born atLeeks, in Staffordshire, in 1667. Havingcompleted his education at TrinityCollege, Cambridge, he applied himselfwith industry to the study of the law,and advanced rapidly in his profession.In 1705, he was appointed counsel toQueen Anne, and Prince George ofDenmark ; and was knighted on thesame day, after having been madequeen's serjeant. He represented thecity of Derby in parliament, from 1705to 1709; in which year he was chosenone of the managers of the prosecutionof Dr. Sacheverell.Soon after, he was appointed to succeedSir John Holt, as chief-justice ofthe Court of King's Bench, at theparticular recommendation of LordsGodolphin and Sunderland ; and, onthe death of Queen Anne, he was appointedone of the lords justices ofthe kingdom, till the arrival of Georgethe First, who created him baron ofMacclesfield, and, on the 12th of May,1718, appointed him lord-chancellor.His heir apparent, the HonourableGeorge Parker, was also granted thesum of 1,200 per annum, during tiljoint lives of his majesty and himself,or till the latter should be in possessionof the office of one of the four tellersof the exchequer. On the 9th of May,1719, he was appointed one of thelords justices ; and was, about thesame time, presented with ,14,000,and an allowance of j4,000 per annum,in addition to the emoluments of hisoffice.In 1721, the king created him Earl ofMacclesfield. On 6th of May, 1725, hewas impeached by the commons, andcharged, in twenty-one articles, withhaving sold the offices of the masters inchancery to incompetent and irresponsiblepersons, and with having embezzledthe estates of widows and orphans, andextorted monies from the masters, byintimidation. It was clearly proved,that he had received more than 20,000by the sale of those offices, and had extortednearly 5,000 more from themasters, by threatening to make themdeliver in their accounts. In return forthe large sums they had paid for theirsituations, he had allowed them totraffick with the funds of the suitors,and a defalcation to a heavy amountEARL OF MACCLESFIELD.was the consequence. The managersof the impeachment attacked him withgreat virulence, charged him with ingratitudeto the king, and denouncedhim as a disgrace to the judicial character.Sir George Oxenden inveighedagainst his " boundless appetite forunlawful gain," and accused him ofplaying the tyrant" Another, indemanding punishment, begged thatit might not be said in this country,that a judge was an evening wolf,that justice standeth afarofl^ and equitycannot enter." These invectives, thoughembittered by party spirit, appear tohave been deserved; for, in the courseof his trial, which lasted thirteen days,the earl boldly avowed the truth ofthe charge of venality, but attemptedto justify it on the ground of usage, andthe custom of his predecessors. He hada stool placed for him within the bar,but was several times, during the courseof the trial, attacked with a cruel distemper.More than ninety of his peerswere present; and tinting him guilty,without a dissentient voice, they condemnedhim to pay a fine of 30,000,and to be committed, till it should bepaid, to the Tower. A motion that heshould be for ever rendered incapableof holding any office in the state, or ofsitting in parliament, and that heshould be forbidden to come within theverge of the court, was negatived ; butthe king ordered his name to be struckout of the list of privy-counsellors.The whole fine was paid in a fewdays, by the mortgage of a valuableestate ; from which it appears that theliberality of his expenditure must havekept pace with his rapacity. His impeachmenthaving originated in themalice of the Prince of Wales, whomhe had offended by an opinion that hisroya! highness had no right to controlthe education of his children, the kinggraciously promised to repay the fineto Lord Macclesfield from the privypurse, but after having received 1,000,further compensation was prevented bythe death of his majesty.The earl now retired to his seat ofOverborne Castle, in Oxfordshire, anddevoted the remainder of his days toscience and religion. It is probable thathis haughty spirit, embittered by disgraceand disappointment, fretted himto decay, and aggravated the maladywhich terminated his existence. Dr.Pearce, his constant friend, called onhim one day, and found him very ill.He said, " my mother died of the samedisorder on the eighth day, and so shallI." The eighth day came, and fulfilledthe prophecy. Calm and collected tothe last, he received the sacrament withhis son and Lady Parker. Upon inquiringafter his physician, and beingtold he was gone, he replied, " And Iam going too, but I will close my eyelidsmyself;" and, taking a solemnfarewell of those around him, hebreathed his last, on the 28th of April,1732, at the age of sixty-six. Hiswidow survived him but a year, andhe was succeeded by his only son, thefuture president of the Royal Society.His daughter was married to Sir WilliamHeathcote, a Hampshire baronet.The earl, at the time of his death,was custos rotulorum of the countiesof Oxford and Worcester, and highsteward of Henley-upon-Thames.Macclesfield was an able judge, aperson of great abilities and skill in hisprofession, and well versed in the art oflogic. Even an enemy admits hispatience in criminal trials, and theviolence done to his feelings by anact of severity. The same enemy,however, has compared him to Cokeand Jeffrey, in his haughty humour,and ungracious demeanour towards thebar : but, to Philip Yorke, afterwardsLord Hardwicke, he was a kind andencouraging patron. Notwithstandinghis venality in the sale of law offices, hisecclesiastical patronage was bestowedunsolicited, and he frequently remittedhis fees to clergymen, paid their stampsupon admission, furnished them withthe means of purchasing a library, andrepaired their churches. The learnedZachary Pearce, afterwards Bishop ofRochester, dedicated his edition ofCicero de Orator, to the chancellor,to whom he was unknown, and theearl presented him to the valuableliving of St. Martin's in the Fields,although Dr. Claret had procured agrant of it from the king, who was inHanover when it became vacant. Dr.Ellis, afterwards Bishop of St. David's,was another object of his fosteringbounty. He offered to spend 500annually, in sending students to Oxford,and applied to the bishop of thatJURISPRUDENCE.diocese, to recommend to him deservingobjects ; and there is little doubt, thathe expended every year a much largersum in promoting the studies, andministering to the wants of the clergy.He was a true friend of learning,and his house and purse were alikeopen to the unfortunate scholar. TheSaxon types having been burnt, withthe rest of Bowyer's printing materials,he was at the expense of a new set,for Elizabeth Elstob's Saxon Grammar.He munificently recompensed authorswho dedicated their works to him, andextorted no flattery in return for hisdonations. His charily was bestowedwithout ostentation, or regard to party ;and it is a moral phenomenon, that sonoble a character should have beensullied by the stain of corruption.WILLIAM, EARL COWPER.THIS eminent lawyer, son of SirWilliam Cowper, Baronet, of Hertford,was born in the castle of that nameabout the year 1670, and, having beeneducated for the bar, became recorderof Colchester, soon after he had commencedthe practice of his profession.He was appointed one of his majesty'scounsel in the reign of William theThird ; and, in 1695, being chosen arepresentative in parliament for thetown of Hertford, he spoke three timeswith applause on the first day of hisappearance in the house of commons.In the following year, he acted ascounsel for the crown, on the trial forhigh treason of Sir William Perkins andothers, convicted of having been concernedin a plot to assassinate the king ;and, on the occasion of Captain ThomasVaughan being arraigned for hightreason on the seas, Cowper was employedin a similar capacity. He likewisesupported in parliament, aboutthe same time, the bill of attainderagainst Sir John Fenwick.In 1704, he maintained, in the houseof commons, that an action at law didnot lie for an elector who had beendenied his vote for members of parliament.On the accession of QueenAnne, he was made one of her majesty'scounsel ; and, in October, 1705,lord-keeper of the great seal. He wasnext appointed one of the commissionersfor effecting the union betweenEngland and Scotland ; and, on the23rd of July, 1706, waited on the queen,with the articles that had been agreedto, for the purpose of carrying intoeffect that measure, which he "had advocatedwith considerable ability. For hisservices on this occasion, he was raisedto the peerage, on the 9th of November,1706, by the title of Baron Cowper, ofBingham ; and, on the 4th of May,1707, he was declared lord high chancellorof England. In March, 1709, hewas appointed to prepare an address,thanking the Duke of Marlboroughfor his services; and, in the followingyear, he presided at the trial of Dr.Sacheverell.On the 8th of August, 1710, theWhig ministry having resigned, hetendered the seals of office to thequeen, who returned them to himthree times, after he had laid themdown, being anxious that he shouldco-operate with the new government.So desirous was she to retain his services,that she even " begged him, asafavour," to continue to hold thechancellorship ; and this singular contest,which lasted three quarters of anhour, ended in his resuming the sealsfor that day, with an understandingthat his resignation should be acceptedon the morrow. On the accession topower of the new ministry, the lategovernment was censured for its conductwith regard to the war with Spain,and the chancellor was even accusedof favouring some dangerous measures,contemplated by Prince Eugene andthe Duke of Marlborough. His lordship'sopposition to the Earl of Oxford,drew upon him the attacks of Swift ;in reply to whose censures, publishedin the Examiner, he wrote A Letter toIsaac BickerstafF, which, in 1710, wasprinted in the fourth volume of thetracts of Lord Somers. He continuedhis adherence to the Whigs in partialCOWPER.ment, and in April, 1714, moved foran address to the queen, imploring herto continue her interposition in behalfof the Catalans, who, on the faith ofsupport from England, had been inducedto declare for the house ofAustria.On the demise of the queen, he wasappointed one of the lords justices ofthe kingdom, till the arrival of Georgethe First; who, on the 29th of August,1714, restored him to the office ofchancellor. He shortly afterwards receivedthe appointment of lord-lieutenantof the county of Hertford ; and,on the 27th of March, 1715, by specialorder of the king, who was present,he read the speech from the throne, onthe assembling of a new parliament.On the 6th of February, 1716, he wasmade lord high steward for the trialof the rebel lords ; an office he alsofilled, in the following year, on the impeachmentof the Earl of Oxford. InApril, 1718, he resigned the great seal;having, previously been created ViscountFordwicke, and raised to anearldom.In 1723, one Christopher Layer, whohad been convicted of high treason,stated, in the course of a long examination,before a secret committee of thehouse of commons, that he had beeninformed Lord Cowper was connectedwith a conspiracy for raising the Pretenderto the throne. His lordshippublicly declared his innocence, andmoved that the person who had chargedhim, should be brought before the houseof lords ; but his application was negatived,on the ground that such ameasure was not called for, as his reputationremained unsullied. On the 15thof May, in the same year, he opposedthe bill for inflicting pains and penaltieson Bishop Atterbury; and the lastpublic act of his life was his protestagainst an act for imposing a tax uponPapists, which he had resisted in itsprogress through parliament with considerableability. He died at his seat,Cone Green, Hertfordshire, on the 10thof October following.Earl Cowper's political abilities wereconsiderable; and, indeed, these qualifications,rather than the extent of hislearning, appear to have been the causeof his elevation to the high office ofchancellor: he, however, filled it withdisinterestedness, and refused the newyear's gifts with which it was customaryfor the holder of the great seal to bepresented. He possessed a sound knowledgeof English law, was exceedinglyquick of apprehension, and had a judgmentremarkable for its promptnessand solidity. As an orator, he hasbeen described, by Lord Chesterfield,to have been more distinguished bythe elegance of his language, than bythe force of his arguments. He neverspoke without universal applause. Theears and the eyes gave him up thehearts and understandings of theaudience." A writer of his time hasapplied to him the compliment passedby Ben Jonson, on Lord Merula:He commanded when he spoke ; hehad his judges angry and pleased, athis devotion. No man had their affectionsmore in his power ; and the fearof every man that heard him was, lesthe should come to an end." In principle,he was a zealous promoter ofthe cause of liberty, which he neverwould consent to sacrifice at the shrineof interest. He was bigotted to noparty, but generally acted with theWhigs, as he found that his own liberalviews often assimilated with their measures.Dean Swift, in speaking ofQueen Anne's advisers, says of him,Although his merits are later thanthe rest, he deserve a rank in thisgreat council. He was considerable inthe station of a practising lawyer ; but,as he was raised to be a chancellor anda peer, without passing through any ofthe intermediate steps, which, in thelate times, have been the constantpractice; and little skilled in the natureof government, or the true interests ofprinces, further than the municipal, orcommon law of England ; his abilities,as to foreign affairs, did not equallyappear in the council. Some formerpassages of his life were thought todisqualify him for that office, by whichhe was to be the guardian of thequeen's conscience ; but these difficultieswere easily overruled by theauthors of his promotion, who wanteda person that would be subservient toall their designs, wherein they were notdisappointed. As to his other accomplishments,he was what we usually callapiece of a scholar, and a good logicalreasoner; if this were not too oftenJURISPRUDENCE.alloyed by a fallacious way of managingan argument, which makes him apt todeceive the unwary, and sometimes todeceive himself."He was a governor of the CharterHouse, and a fellow of the RoyalSociety. He was twice married: first,to the' daughter of Sir Robert Booth,Knight ; and, secondly, to a Miss MaryClavering, of Cromwell, in Durham,by whom he had issue two sons andtwo daughters.PHILIP YORKE, LORD HARDWICKE.PHILIP YORKE, the only son of anattorney, was born at Dover, on the 1stof December, 1690. Having received aclassical education at a dissenting academyat Retinal Green, he was articledto Mr. Salkeld, of Brook Street, Hoi-born,his father's town agent, whosewife, a thrifty woman, frequently annoyedhim with household errands.To these he, at length, put a stop, bycharging her one shilling and sixpencefor a cauliflower, which she had beggedhim to buy, " as he was going pastthe green-grocer's :" sixpence for thecauliflower, and a shilling for a sedan-chairto bring it home in.In 1714, he was called to the bar;and, in 1718, by the interest of hispatron, the Duke of Newcastle, returnedto parliament for Seaford. In1720, though the youngest counsel onthe western circuit, he was appointedsolicitor-general, on the recommendationof Lord-chancellor Macclesfield,and knighted. In this capacity hemade a masterly reply to the defenceof Layer, on a trial for high-treason, in1722 ; and, having succeeded, in 1723,to the post of attorney-general, conductedthe criminal prosecutions forthe crown, with great candour andhumanity. On the impeachment of theEarl of Macclesfield, he excused himselffrom being one of the managers,and gratefully mindful of the past,defended his former patron with anhonourable warmth against the roughattacks of Mr^Serjeant Pengelly, in thehouse of commons. In 1733, he waselevated to the peerage, by the title ofBaron Hardwicke, and made chief-justiceof the King's Bench, with asalary of 2,000 a year more than hispredecessors had received.In 1737, he succeeded Lord Talboton the woolsack, and continued topreside in the court of chancery fornearly twenty years, during which timeonly three of his decrees were questioned;and even these, on appeal, thehouse of lords affirmed. On the severaloccasions of the king's absence on hiscontinental dominions, he was one ofthe lords justices of the kingdom; in1746, and the year following, he presidedas lord high steward, on thetrials of the rebel Scotch lords; in1749, on the resignation of his friend,the Duke of Newcastle, he was electedhigh-steward of the University of Cambridge;in 1754, he received the unsolicitedhonour of an earldom ; and,in 1756, fatigued with his long andarduous services, he resigned the greatseal. He died, at his house in GrosvenorSquare, on the 6th of March, 1764; andwas buried by the side of his countess,a niece of Lord-chancellor Somers, atSimple, in Cambridgeshire. At thetime of his death he was a privy-counsellor,high-steward of the Universityof Cambridge, recorder ofDover, his native place, a governor ofthe Charter House, second vice-presidentof St. George's Hospital, F. R. S.and L. L. D.Lord Hardwicke is one of those fewindividuals, in the delineation of whosecharacter truth seems to assume the garbof flattery. He demands our admirationfor his immense mass of knowledge,both of law and equity. Richand abundant as were his intellectualstores, they had the more valuableproperty of being ever applicable toimmediate use. By the variety of hislearning, and the happiness of his illustration,he imparted a novelty to themost trite, and an interest to the mostabstruse points. It is a curious coincidence,that Lord Mansfield, Burke,and Wilkes, should have expressedLORD HARDWICKE.their opinions of him in the very sameterms, namely, " When his lordshippronounced his decrees, wisdom herselfmight be supposed to speak." As asenator, he was dignified, impressive,and unruffled; as a minister, able andpatriotic. The love of place or emolumentnever deterred him from freelyremonstrating with the king, when hesaw occasion ; and, from his superioraddress and firmness, this unwelcometask frequently devolved upon him.By temperate habits, and a commandover his passions, he strengthened aweak constitution, and prolonged hislife to an unexpected duration. Hiscountenance retained in old age theappearance and vivacity of youth ; hisfaculties were unclouded to the last, anda lively piety cheered his last moments.On his death-bed, he declared that henever wronged any man to increasehis fortune; nor acquired a single acreof land which he could not, in his lastmoments, think upon with peace.To counterbalance his great and goodqualities, he has been accused of avarice;of giving slender or no encouragementto learned men ; and of seeking toaggrandize his relatives. George theSecond is said to have given him asevere rebuff, on his asking for someplace on behalf of a distant relation,shortly before he resigned : " My lord,you have been a frequent solicitor ; butI have observed that it has always beenfor some one of your family; or, withinthe circle of your relations."He is even reported to have beenguilty of a mean economy of his table,even on days of festivity, and thenceto have acquired the vulgar appellationof Judge Gripes. Lady Hardwickealso fell under the imputation of meanness; and the following story has beennarrated in support of the charge. Thepurse in which the great seal is carried,is of very expensive embroidery, andwas renewed, during Lord Hardwicke'stime, every year ; and the countess,having previously ordered that thevelvet should be of the length of one ofher state-rooms at Simple, at length;saved enough of them to hang the'room, and make curtains for the bed.Lord Hardwicke wrote a piece, calledThe Legal Judicature in Chancerystated; and when only twenty-two, senta paper to Addison, on the disadvantageof young men going abroad, before theyare capable of deriving proper instructionfrom the places they visit. It iswritten in an easy style, with a tinctureof classicality, and forms No. 364, of theSpectator, with the signature of PhilipHomebred. The following epigram, onmaking a present of a hare, is alsoattributed to him :Ditto tibi leporem ; grates iniln mette reports;Sal mea commendam funera, vestra sales.WILLIAM MURRAY, EARL MANSFIELD.WILLIAM MURRAY, the fourthson of Viscount Stormont, a noblemanattached to the Pretender, was born atPerth, on the 2nd of March, 1704.When three years old he was removedto London; and, in 1719, became aking's scholar, at Westminster School,where he rendered himself conspicuousby his lively wit, and taste for classicallearning. From thence, he was electedto Christchurch College, Oxford, andthere particularly distinguished himselfby the composition of a Latin oration inpraise of Demosthenes. After havinggraduated, he travelled through Franceand Italy, and was called to the bar in1730. From Pope, (whom he styledhis Maecenas he acquired the gracesof elocution, and, under his tuition,was accustomed to practise action beforea looking-glass. Lord Foley, althoughpossessing but a limited incomehimself, is reported to have furnishedhim with the means of pursuing hisprofession, and Murray ever evincedtowards him the warmest gratitude.Though his own means were barelyadequate to his wants, he encouragedBooth (afterwards an eminent conveyancer,and from whom he derivedhis knowledge of the laws of realproperty) to come to London, with agenerous offer of pecuniary assistance.His vivacity of manners was supposedJURISPRUDENCE.to be prejudicial to his reputation as alawyer; but, in 1732, we find him engagedin the same cause with Yorkeand Talbot. He was also employedin many appeals to the house of lords,and the abilities he displayed weremade, by his friend, Pope, the subjectof poetical eulogy.In 1737, an opportunity presenteditself, to which, in after life, he alwaysrecurred with pleasure, and from whichperiod he dated his success. In thecelebrated cause of Theophilus Gibberand Mr. Sloper, the leading counsel forthe defendant was seized, in court, witha sudden illness, and the conduct of thedefence devolved upon Murray, thejunior counsel, who managed it in somasterly a manner, that the jury gaveonly 10 damages. The action beingfor criminal intercourse with the plaintiff'swife, it involved no abstrusepoints of law, and therefore was betterfitted for the display of oratorical thanlegal ability. In his own words, businessnow poured in upon inn on allsides; and, from a few hundreds a year,he found himself, in every subsequentyear, in possession of thousands.In 1738, he increased his fortune andfamily connexions, by marrying LadyElizabeth Finch, a daughter of the Earlof Winchelsea. In 1740, he was madea king's counsel ; and, two years after,having been appointed solicitor-general,obtained a seat in parliament forBoroughbridge. The corporation ofEdinburgh presented him, in the followingyear, with the freedom of theircity, in a gold box, for defending themagainst the proceedings in parliament,which arose out of the Portions mob.On the trial of Lord Lovat, who hadbeen engaged in the Scottish rebellion,he displayed so much temperance andcandour, as to elicit praise from theprisoner himself, against whom, a person,also of the name of Murray, hadborne very strong evidence. " I thoughtmyself," said Lord Lovat, " very muchloaded by one Murray ; I have sincesuffered by another Mr. Murray, who,I must say, is an honour to his country ;and whose eloquence and learning ismuch beyond what is to be expressedby an ignorant man, like me : I heardhim with pleasure, though it wasagainst me." Lord-chancellor Talbotdeclared that " the abilities of thelearned manager never appeared withgreater splendour than at this veryhour, when his candour and humanityhave been joined to those great abilitieswhich have already made him so conspicuous,that I hope to see him oneday add lustre to the dignity of thefirst civil employment in this nation."In 1753, a charge of Jacobites wasbrought against him. It appears that,when at Westminster School, he hadformed a close friendship with a schoolfellowof the name of Vernon, who,having died before his father, a mercer,on Lydgate Hill, reputed to be friendlyto the house of Stuart, the latter, havingno heirs, bequeathed a landed estate toMr. Murray, and a report was propagatedthat the solicitor-general, when ayoung man, had, in company with thisVernon, drank the Pretender's healthon bare knees. A solemn accusation,grounded upon this absurd story, wasbrought forward against him in parliament;but he indignantly repelled thecharge as a falsehood. This occurrencedid not check his career, for, in 1754,he succeeded Sir Dudley Ryder, asattorney-general ; and, in the dischargeof that office, laid it down as an invariablerule, never to undertake a prosecutionwithout a sure prospect ofsuccess. In 1756, having previouslyrefused the great seal on the retirementof Lord Hardwicke, he was madechief justice of the King's Bench, andcreated a peer, by the title of BaronMansfield.Hitherto he had practised only in thecourt of chancery ; but, on his removalto preside in a court of law, he fullyproved the justice of what Lord Sandwichsaid of him, " That his talentswere more for common use, and moreat his fingers' ends, than those of anyother person he had known." Hebegan by reforming the abuses of thecourt ; he laid down regulations for theprevention of delay, and adopted everymeasure that could diminish the expensesof the suitor. The business ofthe court increased in an unexampledway, and yet was never got throughwith greater despatch ; though, it is said,opinions were at first written for himby Mr. Justice Parker. So averse washe to procrastination, that having onceexpressed his intention of proceedingwith a certain matter on the FridayEARL MANSFIELD.following, on being reminded by SerjeantDavy, that it was Good Friday,he exclaimed, " Never mind, the betterday the better deed." " Your lordshipwill do as you please," responded theSerjeant; " but if you do sit on thatday, I believe you will be the firstjudge who did business on a GoodFriday, since Pontius Pilate."In 1757, during his temporary tenureof the office of chancellor of the exchequer,he effected a coalition betweenFox and Pitt. At the commencementof the reign of George the Third,he was assailed on every side withpopular abuse, and fell under the lashof Junius. In 1768, Wilkes applied tohave his outlawry reversed ; and an unfavourabledecision being expected fromthe chief-justice, he was threatened, inanonymous letters, and attacked withevery species of insult and intimidation.In delivering the judgment of the court,he alluded, in an impressive speech, tothe threats which had been held outagainst him ; he declared that the lastend that can happen to a man nevercomes too soon if he falls in support ofthe law and liberty of his country, forliberty was synonymous with law andgovernment ; and that the temper of hismind, and the colour and conduct ofhis life, had given him a suit of armouragainst these arrows.In 1770, he again refused the greatseal, and incurred a fresh weight ofpopular odium from his directions to thejury in the case of Footfall, the printer.In 1776, he was created an earl, withremainder to the issue of his niece,Louisa, Viscountess Stormont. Duringthe riots in 1780, the mob destroyed hishouse in Bloomsbury Square, with all hisfurniture, pictures, books, and valuablemanuscripts. The earl and countessescaped by a postern, and took refugewith the queen, in Buckingham Palace.When he resumed his seat on thebench, he was greeted with "a reverentialsilence, expressive of sentimentsof condolence and respect, andmore affecting than the most eloquentaddress the occasion could have suggested."He refused all compensationfor his loss, to which he soon after thusalluded, in the house of lords, " Ispeak not from books, for books I havenone."In 1788, he resigned the ;on which occasion, Erskinedelivered him a letter, containing anaddress from the gentlemen of the bar,in which they lamented their loss, butremembered with peculiar satisfaction,that he was not cut off from them bythe stroke of disease, or the more distressingebb of his faculties; and that ithad pleased God to allow to the eveningof a useful and illustrious life, the fairestenjoyment that nature had ever allottedto it, the unclouded reflections of asuperior and unfading mind over itsvaried events, and the consciousnessthat it had been faithfully and eminentlydevoted to the highest duties ofhuman society, in the most distinguishednation upon earth. He expiredin a lethargic sleep, on the 20thof March, 1793, and was privatelyburied by the side of his countess,and close to the Earl of Chatham, inWestminster Abbey. Trinity Hall,Cambridge, possesses his bust, by Nol-helens; and Christchurch College, andthe Guildhall of London, his picture,from the pencils of Martin and SirJoshua Reynolds. His features wereextremely handsome, and his portraithad been painted also by Vanloo, Hudson,and Copley. His will was writtenin his own hand-writing, on little morethan half a sheet of paper, and with atotal omission of all legal verbiage. Hisproperty, amounting to 26,000 a year,was given to his nephew, ViscountStormont, after a provision for his servants,and bequests to relatives andfriends, particularly one of 2,000 toMr. Justice Buller.Lord Mansfield presided in his courtfor more than a quarter of a century,at a period when the British nation wasincreasing in wealth and commerce;and when the progressive state of societyrequired the adaptation of law tocircumstances and cases never beforecontemplated, from their never havingexisted. In effecting this, he was eminentlyskilled ; and, out of slendermaterials, may be said to have constructeda system of commercial law.In his judicial capacity he was friendlyto toleration, and received the thanksof Dr. Furneaux, for his decision inacase between the dissenters and thecity of London. For twenty years,no final difference of opinion arosebetween himself and the judges ofJURISPRUDENCE.his court, except in two cases, whenthe judgment given by him was reversed,with much difference among thejudges. Gifted with a wonderfully retentivememory expeditious, but notprecipitate he never allowed technicalityto defeat justice, but regardedless the letter of the law, than its intentand spirit. Juries he alwaystreated with the utmost respect, andhis deportment on the bench was distinguishedby peculiar urbanity.Lord Chatham, in the course of debate,after having quoted Somers andHolt, and depicted their characters insplendid colours, turning to LordMansfield, with a dignified gesture, exclaimed," I vow to God, I think thenoble lord excels them both in abilities."Bishop Warburton says, that duringMansfield's administration, the streamof justice ran as pure as from its owncelestial source ; purer than Plato daredto conceive it even in his feigned republic.It has also been observed byBishop Hurd, that his senatorial characterresembled that of Vassals, whom,Cicero declared, in addressing himselfto Brutus, to be above comparison."Lord Mansfield," adds Hurd, "waslooked up to and admired as the Ciceroof the age ; yet he was never much relishedby some of the old lawyers, whoboldly asserted that if his innovationswere to be freely adopted, they mightshut up their long revered law authorities;and, in compliment to his lordship,merely adhere to the decisions thatwere contained in Burrow's Reports.He was, it is said, applied to by thelate Mr. Owen Ruffled, for materialsto compose an account of his life, butLord Mansfield modestly replied, " thathis life was not of sufficient importanceto be written." " If," added he, to theapplicant, " you wish to write the lifeof a truly great man, write the lifeof Lord Hardwicke; who, from veryhumble means, and without familysupport and connexions, became lordhigh chancellor of England, on accountof his virtue, his talents, and hisdiligence."An old woman was once brought beforehim, charged with witchcraft, andseveral witnesses deposed to havingseen her walking with her feet in theair, and her head downwards. Thejudge, after listening with the greatestcomposure to the depositions, observedwith great solemnity, " Since you haveseen this poor woman walking in theair, though her legs are scarcely ableto support her on the earth, I can, ofcourse, entertain no doubt of the fact.But this witch is an English woman,and subject, as well as you, to all thelaws of England, every one of which, Ihave just now ran over in my mind,without being able, I assure you, to hitupon any one which prohibits personsfrom walking in the air, if they shouldfind it convenient. All those persons,therefore, who have seen the accusedperform her aerial promenades, are atliberty to imitate her example : theyhave an undoubted right to do so, andI will guarantee the most perfect impunity.They shall no more be consideredguilty than this woman, whomI pronounce innocent, and direct thatshe be set at liberty."In the senate, he commanded attentionby the persuasive grace of hiseloquence. The weight he had in thatassembly may be conjectured from whatHorace Walpole says in one of hisletters : " The third day was a sceneof confusion and folly ; for when LordMansfield is absent,He was an elegant and polite, butnot a deep scholar. In the beginningof his career, " he drank champaignewith the wits ;" and Pope, whose executorhe was appointed with others, atonetime had designed to leave him hisTwickenham villa, but Murray's prosperousadvancement rendered this unnecessary.From Wilkes, of whosesocial qualities and classical skill heentertained a high opinion, he receiveda present of his beautiful edition of theCharacters of Theophrastus, printedon vellum. His favourite books wereGiannone's History of Naples; Vattel'sLaw of Nations ; Duclos* History ofLouis the Eleventh of France, andI Raleigh's History of the World. Chililing worth, he considered a perfect modelof argumentation. He, himself, wrotedirections for the study of history, addressedto the Duke of Portland ; andalso some advice to the study of thelaw.At one of his formal Sunday eveningconversations, he said to Boswell, inEARL CAMDEN.reference to Dr. Johnson's tour in theHebrides, " He speaks ill of nobodybut Ossian;" an expression, from themanner in which it was delivered,that seemed to intimate his belief inthe authenticity of Macpherson's poems. > cedent the other."He once said to Garrick, " A man onthe bench is, now and then, in yourwhimsical situation, between tragedyand comedy ; inclination drawing himone way, and a long string of pre-charlesPRATT, EARL CAMDEN.CHARLES, son of Sir John Pratt, chiefjustice of the King's Bench, was bornin 1713, and educated at Eton, fromwhence he removed to King's College,Cambridge ; where, in succession,he proceeded to the degree of M. A. ;and, in 1731, obtained a fellowship. In1739, he entered as a student of ,and was, in due time, calledto the bar; but, for many years, solimited was his practice, that he entertainedserious thoughts of abandoningthe profession. It is, however, said,that he was diverted from this intention,by the poetical epistle of a friend,in which the names of Somers, Talbot,Cowper, and Yorke, were set beforehim, as examples of perseverance, whichhe, from that period, resolved to emulate.At length, in 1752, being employedfor the defendant in a case of libel,the King v. Owen, he so ably supportedthe rights of juries, as to laythe foundation of his future fame andfortune. In 1754, he took his seat inthe house of commons, as memberfor Denton ; became recorder of Bath,in 1759 ; and in the same year, obtainedthe office of attorney-general.He was made chief-justice 'of the CommonPleas, in December, 1761, on whichoccasion he received the honour ofknighthood. In his judicial capacity, hemanifested an independent impartiality,superior to that of any of his predecessors.In 1763, when John Wilkes,after having been conveyed to theTower, on a general warrant, wasbrought up, by virtue of a writ ofhabeas corpus, the chief-justice dischargedhim; it being his opinion, ashesubsequently stated, on the trial ofan action brought by Wilkes againstthe messenger who had arrested him,that general warrants, except in casesof high treason, were illegal, oppressive,and unwarrantable. The popularityof this spirited action was such,that he was presented with the freedomof the city of London, and hisportrait was painted expressly for theGuildhall, by Sir Joshua Reynolds.He received also the freedom of thecity of Dublin, and other parts of thekingdom testified their gratitude for thedetermination he had evinced to maintainthe liberties of the subject.In July, 1765, he was created a peer,by the title of Baron Camden ; andin July, 1766, he succeeded LordWorthington in the office of lord chancellor.Though he owed his promotionto the Buckingham administration,he did not always give it hissupport, and opposed, with considerablevigour, a bill introduced bygovernment, declaring that acts ofparliament should be, in all cases,binding on the colonies. In 1770, whenscarcity was impending, he supportedthe motion for a suspension of the law,in order to prevent the exportation ofcorn ; and though he acted, in this case,with his customary conscientiousness,he incurred, in some degree, the popularodium. Having, also, on this occasion,replied sarcastically to Lord Temple,he drew upon himself an attack fromJunius, which, however, he treated withplacid indifference. In the same year,being still averse to taxing the Americans,he felt bound to resign, as he wasunable to give his hearty support tothe measures of his colleagues. In1782, he returned to office as presidentof the council ; in which capacityhe acted, to the end of his career, withthe exception of a short secessionduring the existence of the coalitionministry. In May, 1786, he was madeViscount Bashan and Earl Camden.He died on the 18th of April, 1794;JURISPRUDENCE.having been, some time previously,married to a Miss Elizabeth Jeffreys,by whom he had several children.Lord Camden, as a judge, was ableand independent; as a statesman,straight-forward and honourable ; unwillingto compromise his consciencefor the sake of his consistency. Clearnesswas the characteristic of his eloquence," which," it has been said byone who remembers him when he presidedin the court of chancery, " wasof the colloquial kind, extremely simple;diffuse, but not desultory." Inthe house of lords, he addressed himselfmore to the judgment, than thepassions, of his auditors ; his style wasfluent, his manner persuasive, and hislanguage plain, but energetic. He hada thorough knowledge of the fundamentallaws of England, the principlesof which he regarded with respect, andsupported with ability. On resigningthe office of chancellor, he made thefollowing candid declaration of hisreasons for doing so. " I accepted thegreat seal without condition ; I meantnot, therefore, to be trammelled by hismajesty I beg pardon by his ministers.I have often drooped and hung downmy head in council, and disapproved, bymy looks, those steps which I knew myavowed opposition could not prevent.1 will do so no longer, but openly andboldly speak my sentiments." As ajudge, he was wholly unswayed bypolitical influence, and, regardless whomhe might offend, performed the dutiesof his office in a manner satisfactory tothe dictates of his own conscience, andcalculated to protect the liberties of hiscountrymen. The following observationhas been attributed to him :Lord Mansfield has a way of saying,it is a rule with me an inviolablerule never to hear a syllable said outof court about any cause that either is,or is not, in the smallest degree likelyto come before me.' Now, I, for mypart I could hear as many people aschose to talk to me about their causes ;it would never make the slightest impressionupon me."He was not above giving his attentionto matters of polite intercourse ;and on a dispute that arose betweenthe subscribers to the upper andlower rooms at Bath, he attendedall the meetings which were held,and maintained his opinions with allthe spirit of a partisan. He was fondof reading romances; and havingexhausted those written in English,French, and Italian, he, at a lateperiod of his life, commenced studyingSpanish, in order that he might beenabled to read novels in that language.By this peculiarity, he obtainedthe name of the Spanish Cato.He courted the society of Garrick, butbestowed no notice on Dr. Goldsmith,whom he met at the house of LordClare, though the poet had alreadydistinguished himself by his DesertedVillage.The punishment of the stocks havingbeen spoken lightly of by a barrister,on a trial at which he was presiding,he said, leaning over the bench, to thecounsel, " Brother, were you ever inthe stocks ? :> Being answered in thenegative, he whispered, "Then I have;and can assure you it is by no meanssuch a trifle as you have represented."It is said, that when on avisit at Lord Care's, he was walkingnear Alley, in Essex, with a gentleman,whom he requested to open theparish stocks for him, that he might beenabled to judge of the nature of thepunishment. Having done so, his companion,who was remarkable for absenceof mind, walked on, occupied with abook, and the earl, being unable toextricate himself, asked a countrymanto release him. " No, no, old gentleman,"quoth the rustic ; " you were notset there for nothing." At length, one ofLord Dare's servants passing accidentally,liberated him from his awkwardsituation.Lord Camden was the author of ananonymous tract in Mr. Hargrave'scollection, on the process of latitat inWales, and a pamphlet on the writ ofhabeas corpus.LORD Grantly.FLETCHER NORTON, LORD Grantly.FLETCHER, the son of ThomasNorton, of Grantley, in Yorkshire, wasborn on the 23rd of January, 1716;and, having been called to the bar, was,in 1761, appointed solicitor-general.He also received the honour of knighthood,and, in 1763, became attorney-general; but he was displaced in 1765,when the Honourable C. Yorke wasappointed his successor. In 1769, SirFletcher Norton was constituted chief-justicein Eyre, south of the Trent;and, in the next year, being the representativefor Guildford, he was electedspeaker of the house of commons ; and,for upwards of ten years, continued tohold that dignified situation. In 1777,when the sum of 618,000 was votedfor the discharge of his majesty's debtsa second time, Sir Fletcher Norton, onpresenting, as speaker, the bill for theroyal assent, addressed himself to thethrone in the following memorablelanguage : " Your majesty's faithfulcommons have granted a great sum todischarge the debt of the civil list ; and,considering whatever enables your majestyto support with grandeur, honour,and dignity, the crown of Great Britain,in its true lustre, will reflect honour onthe nation, they have given mostliberally, even in these times of greatdanger and difficulty, taxed almost beyondour ability to bear : and they havenow granted to your majesty an incomefar exceeding your majesty's highestwants, hoping that what they havegiven cheerfully, your majesty willspend wisely."The king did not feel offended at thebold truths and strong language inwhich he was addressed. A gentlemanthen present says, '' I narrowly watchedthe royal eye when this speech was delivered; and declare with pleasure, Idid not perceive one symptom of displeasurederanging the mild serenityand dignified softness of the Brunswickcountenance." Sir Fletcher, however,perceiving that his words had givenoffence to others, manfully declaredthat " he would sit no longer in thatchair than he was supported in the freeexercise of his duty;" and Mr. Foxhaving moved a vote of approbation, itwas unanimously carried. The speakersupported Mr. Dunning's celebratedmotion, " that the influence of thecrown was increased, is increasing, andought to be diminished," which wasmade soon afterwards. In 1782, whenan administration was formed under theMarquess of Rockingham and LordShelburne, the latter clandestinely prevailedon the king to elevate to thepeerage Mr. Dunning, a private friendof his own, by the title of Baron Ash-burton.The Marquess of Rockinghambeing piqued by this sinister conducton the part of his colleague, declared hewould not remain in office another day,unless a similar honour were conferredon his own private friend, Sir FletcherNorton. Thus was he, to gratify thepique of the minister, raised to thepeerage at a few hours' notice, by thetitle of Baron Grantley. He survivedhis sudden elevation about seven years,and died on the 1st of January, 1789,in Lincoln's-inn Field's, where he resided.A few days before his decease, beingaffected by cold and asthma, he sentfor his old friend, Mr. Pott, a surgeon,to ask his advice ; but an answer wasbrought that he was dead ; by whichintelligence his lordship was seriouslyaffected. He also sent for a physician,who happened to be absent, and hetherefore declined applying for othermedical advice ; but, two days beforehis death, it was provided by his son,who saw the danger of his father's condition.His lordship, in addition to the appointmentsalready named, was a lordof trade, an L. L. D., and recorder ofGuildford. He married, in 1741, Grace,the eldest daughter of Sir WilliamChappie, one of the judges of the court ofKing's Bench, by whom he had severalchildren. As a lawyer, Lord Grantleywas universally admitted to be eminent;and it was remarked by Johnson,Much may be done, if a man puts hiswhole mind to a particular subject. Bydoing so, Norton has made himself thegreat lawyer which he is allowed to be."JURISPRUDENCE.From the above observation, it would beinferred, that the great lexicographergave credit to his lordship for moreapplication than natural ability. Inhis judicial and senatorial character, hedisplayed remarkable independence ;and that his spirit was equal to hishonesty, is evident from the bold termsin which he addressed the throne fromthe house of commons. He has beenaccused of an inordinate love of money ;and it appears that he, on that account,gained the appellation of Sir BullfaceDoublefee. The following story is relatedof him by Lord Orford, in theworks of Walpole : " His mother livedin a mighty shabby house at Preston,which Sir Fletcher began to think notquite suitable to the dignity of one whohas the honour of being his parent ; hecheapened a better, in which were twopictures valued at 60 : the attorneyinsisted on having them as fixtures fornothing, the landlord refused, thebargain was broken off, and the dowagermadam remains in her original hut."SIR WILLIAM BLACKSTONE.SlR WILLIAM BLACKSTONE, theson of a silk mercer, in London, wasborn there, after the death of his father,on the 10th of July, 1723. His educationwas undertaken by his maternaluncle, Mr. Charles Big, by whom hewas sent to the Charter House, wherehe made rapid progress in his studies ;and, in 1738, was removed to PembrokeCollege, Oxford. Here he greatly distinguishedhimself by his classical proficiency,and, at the same time, studiedlogic and mathematics, besides compilinga work called, The Elements ofArchitecture, which he completed whenonly in his twenty-first year. In 1743,he was elected a fellow of All Soul's,and commenced studying for the baronwhich occasion, he renounced mostof his literary pursuits, and evinced hisfondness and talent for poetry, bywriting the celebrated verses, calledThe Lawyer's Farewell to his Muse,which appeared in Dudley's Miscellany.In 1745, he proceeded B. C. L. at Oxford; and, in 1746, was called to thebar; but, in consequence of his deficiencyas an orator, was slow in attainingeither profit or reputation. Having,however, been appointed bursar of AllSoul's, he showed his activity and intelligencein superintending the constructionof the Codrington library;and, as a reward for his services, was,in 1749, appointed steward of themanors of his college. In the sameyear, he became recorder of Walling-ford,and shortly afterwards took thedegree of D. C. L., and published hisEssay on Consanguinity, in support ofthe Society of All Soul's, against certainclaims made on it by the kindred of itsfounder.After seven years' unsuccessful practicein the courts at Westminster, hein1753, retired to his fellowship atOxford, and commenced delivering hiscelebrated course of lectures on thelaws of England, which conferred greatreputation both on the university andhimself. At the same time, he occasionallypractised as a provincial barrister;and, in 1754, published a work,denying the right of copyholders tovote as freeholders, in which opinionhe was afterwards confirmed, by a declaratoryact of parliament In 1755,he was appointed one of the delegatesof the Clarendon press ; and, in thatcharacter, reformed many abuses, andeffected various improvements; in orderto do which, it is said he previouslymade himself master of the art ofprinting. In 1758, he was appointedVinerian professor; and, in 1759, publisheda new edition of the GreatCharter and Charter of the Forest, withan historical preface. In the year lastmentioned, he is said to have declinedthe honour of the coif; but, nevertheless,came to London, and resumed hisattendance at Westminster Hall, wherehis previous reputation procured him alarge share of practice and emolument.In February, 1761, he was appointeda fellow of the Society of Antiquaries,and was elected member of parliamentfor Hindon; and, about the same period,vacated his fellowship, by his marriagewith a daughter of James Clitherow,SIR WILLIAM BLACKSTONE.Esq , but was shortly afterwards appointedprincipal of New Inn Hall,Oxford; the emoluments of which, fullycompensated for the loss of the formersituation. In 1763, he was appointedsolicitor-general to the queen, and madea bencher of the Inner Temple ; resignedhis Vinerian professorship, in1766; and, in 1768, was returned memberof parliament for Westbury, inWiltshire. In 1770, he published thewhole of his Commentaries on theLaws of England, in four volumes; and,in the same year, declining the post ofsolicitor-general, was made a judge ofthe Common Pleas, where he continuedto preside until the period of his death,which occurred in February, 1780.The fame of Sir William Blackstonerests chiefly on his Commentaries,which has gone through fourteeneditions with increasing popularity.The work, however, is by no means soinfluential as formerly ; and the narrowdoctrines of the author in support ofestablished prejudices, and his anti-tolerationnotions, which were exposedand attacked by Dr. Priestley, are now,for the most part, acknowledged. Ahigh tone of independence, nevertheless,in favour of the subject, is occasionallyto be found in the work,although Sir William considerably diminishedhis merit on that score, bydelivering, in the house of commons,an opinion directly at variance withwhat he had written on a similar point.This was during the discussion as to theeligibility of Mr. Wilkes to be re-electedto parliament after his expulsion thence,when Blackstone advocated the negativein an argument which confuted his previousdeclarations, and drew upon himthe resentment of Junius, who spoke ofthe honours he had lost, and thevirtues he had degraded," by this step.His Commentaries are, however, onthe whole, a most valuable and praiseworthyproduction, and justly meritthe eulogies they have received ; butthe most accurate view seems to havebeen taken of them by Sir WilliamJones, who observes, " they are themost correct and beautiful outline thatever was exhibited in any humanscience ; but they alone will no moreform a lawyer, than a general map ofthe world, however accurately andelegantly it may be delineated, willmake a geographer." In additionto the publications already mentioned,Sir William Blackstone wrote twopieces connected with the Oxford University; a Treatise on the Law ofDescents in Fee Simple ; a few fugitivepoems ; and two volumes of Reports,which appeared after his death. Healso contributed to Mr. Malone somenotes on Shakspeare, and wrote a defenceof Addison, which is inserted inthe life of that poet, in the secondedition of the life of the BiographiaBritannica.In his character of judge and politician,Sir William was more attentiveand intelligent than vigorous and conspicuous.He was unambitious of legalpreferment, and had a great aversion tothe senate, " where," he used to say,amid the rage of contending parties, aman of moderation must expect to meetwith no quarter from either side." Inprivate life, he was mild, amiable, andunostentatious ; and, notwithstandinghis contracted brow, which he is said tohave acquired from being near sighted,was a cheerful and even facetious companion.He never lost his early predilectionfor architecture, and, duringthe latter part of his life, made it subservientto the improvement of theneighbourhood around him, as well asto his own amusement. He left sevenchildren ; and, about four years after hisdeath, his arms were painted in thewindow of the chapel of All Soul's College,and a statue of him, by Bacon,was placed in their hall.SIR DAVID RAE.THIS eminent legal character, the sonof the Rev. William Rae, an episcopalianScotch clergyman, was born in1729. He received his early educationat the grammar-school of Haddington,from whence he removed to the Universecity of Edinburgh, where he attendedthe law lectures of Professor JohnErskine, and gave promise of futureexcellence. He was called to the Scotchbar in 1751 ; where, though withoutpatronage or interest, he soon raisedhimself into note, and acquired considerablepractice. The first greatcause in which he distinguished himselfwas the noted one of James DiamondMacgregor, who was tried for the forcibleabduction of a heiress, in 1752. Inthe following year, he was retained inan appeal, which brought him to London,where he became acquainted with,and the friend of, Charles Yorke, andhis father, the Lord-chancellor Hard-wicked.During this year, also, hevisited Paris, and various parts ofFrance j and, after passing throughGermany and the Low Countries, returnedto Scotland, and resumed hislegal pursuits with increasing reputationand emolumentIn 1764, he went, in company withthe late Lord Monboddo, as one ofthe commissioners to superintend, inFrance, the proofs taken of Mr. afterwardsLord, Douglas's birth, in theprogress of the celebrated case betweenhim and the Duke of Hamilton,and in which Mr. Rae was engagedtill its settlement, in 1767. In 1770,he lost his wife; an event which causedhim so much grief, that it was sometimebefore he could resume his professionalduties. He, however, soonbecame the leading counsel in theScotch court of exchequer, which he-maintainedmany years; and, in 1782,previously to which he had been urgedto adopt the English bar, by LordsMansfield, Ashburton, and others, hewas nominated a judge of the supremecivil court of Scotland, under the titleof Lord Engrave, a name he derivedfrom his elegant seat, near Edinburgh.In this station he gave such satisfaction,that, in 1785, he was appointed tosucceed Lord Bennett in the highcourt of justiciary.In the autumn of 1795, he presidedat the trial of the celebrated Unitarianclergyman, Palmer, for a seditiouslibel, and for which he sentenced himto seven years' transportation ; a sentencethat was considered unnecessarilysevere, and gained him a considerableshare of popular odium. In 1799, hewas raised to the dignity of presidingin the high court of justiciary ; and, onthe 27th of June, 1804, he was rewardedwith a baronetcy, in which hewas succeeded by his eldest son, thelate Sir David Rae.He is described as having been a manof the most amiable qualities, and belovedin all the private relations ofsociety. His learning was considerable ;and, besides writing a pamphlet to freeholders,he contributed many pieces tothe periodicals of the day. He spokewith great logical precision and forceof argument; was particularly distinguished,as a judge, for his clearness insumming up; and was known to allthe principal members of the legal,literary, and scientific world, at manyof whose houses he was a frequentguest He married, in 1761, Margaret,daughter of John Stuart, Esq. of BlairHall, by whom he had four children.GEORGE HILL.THIS eminently learned lawyer andeccentric man, born about the year1731, was the descendant of an ancientfamily in Houston, in the county ofSomerset. After receiving a liberaleducation, he was entered as a studentat one of the inns of court; and whencalled to the bar, had acquired a largestock of legal knowledge. No counselof his time surpassed him in hisacquaintance with the various forms andpractices of the courts; or was moreready in quoting precedents with facilityand correctness. On the 6th ofNovember, 1772, he was called to thedignity of a king's Serjeant. He soonafter married Miss Endicott, a ladyof fortune in Northamptonshire, bywhom he had two daughters; one ofwhom married the Honourable WilliamGEORGE HILL.Cockayne, younger son of Charles,Viscount Cullen, of Donegal. It isrelated that, on the very day of hisunion, the serjeant, having an intricatelaw case in his mind, was obliged to bereminded that the time for the nuptialceremony was approaching ; and at theusual hour in the evening, he went tohis books and papers, until called fromthem by his clerk, who suggested tohim the remembrance of the recentceremony in which he had been engaged.His general habits were equallytinctured with absence and eccentricity ;for once, on a circuit, having occasion tocite a law authority, he referred to hisbag, as usual, for the work, when,instead of ' Vine,' he, much to theamusement of the court, pulled out aplated specimen candlestick, belongingto a Birmingham commercial traveller,who had stopped at the same inn withMr. Hill, and which, in a fit of absence,he had deposited by mistake in thebag containing his papers. On anotheroccasion, being engaged in a cause atLeicester, which had already extendedto his usual hour of repose, he, findingit impossible to quit the court, gravelyrose, and, in an audible voice, desiredhis clerk " to carry his complimentsto Mrs. Hill, and express his sorrowthat he could not sleep with her, ashewas likely to be detained the wholenight."It is also related of him, that, duringa vacation, when he was accustomed toretire to his seat at Powell, in Northamptonshire,a fox, pursued by someneighbouring sportsmen, took shelterin the court yard of his residence. Atthis moment, it is said, the serjeant wasin the act of reading an ancient case, inwhich it was decided, in a trespass ofthe like kind, the owners of the groundhad a right to inflict death on the intruder;and he, therefore, gave ordersto his servants, that the fox, as an originaltrespasser, should be killed. Thehunters having arrived at the spot, withthe hounds in full cry, saw the object oftheir pursuit pinioned to the earth withpitchforks. On asking for the personwho had thus deprived them of theirprey, they were met by the serjeanthimself, who informed them that theexecution had taken place by legalauthority.He died, on the 21st of February,1808, at his house in Bedford Square,respected by all who were acquaintedwith his character. Notwithstandinghis eccentricities, Serjeant Hill was amost estimable man, and his privateconduct was always regarded as unimpeachable.From youth he had beenfond of literary pursuits ; and, at Cambridge,was the especial favourite of thefamous blind professor, Sanderson ; whodeclared that, if he devoted himself tothe study of them, he would be one ofthe greatest proficient in mathematicsthat the country had ever produced.His memory was retentive, his eruditiondeep, and he had a thorough knowledgeof the English laws and constitution.He was an excellent classical scholar,though his reading had not been varied ;as he aimed at understanding thoroughlya few authors, rather than at becomingsuperficially acquainted with the worksof many.JOHN DUNNING, LORD ASHBURTON.JOHN DUNNING, the second son ofan attorney, was born at Ashburton, inDevonshire, on the 18th of October,1731. After having received an ordinaryeducation at the free-school of hisnative town, he was articled to hisfather ; but, at the termination of hisclerkship, came to London, and studiedfor the bar. His means, in the metropolis,were but narrow ; for havingbecome acquainted with Home Tookeand Lord Kenyon, they are recorded,by the biographer of the former, tohave dined together frequently, in theneighbourhood of Chancery Lane, atsentence-halfpenny a head. Dunningattended the courts for some timewith little success; but after six or sevenyear , attained some reputation in thenorthern circuit; and, about 1760, cameinto great practice, by the manner inwhich he drew up the defence of theJURISPRUDENCE.East India Company against the claimsof the Dutch. His argument, however,against general warrants, as counsel forWilkes, was the great stepping-stone tohis fame and emolument, and broughthim into universal notice, not only asan eloquent advocate, but as a soundconstitutional lawyer.In 1766, he was chosen recorder ofBristol; solicitor general about a year jafterwards ; and, in 1768, was returnedto parliament, through the influence of jLord Shelburne, as member for Cane, ,in Wiltshire. In 1770, he went out ofoffice with his patron ; and, on his firstappearance in court, after that event, inhis ordinary bar-gown, Lord Mansfieldcomplimented him, by saying, " that,in consideration of the office he hadheld, and his high rank in business, heintended, for the future, to give himprecedence next after the king's counsel,Serjeants, and the recorder ofLondon." About the same time, hewas presented with the freedom of thatcity, in consequence of his having supportedthe petition and remonstranceof the citizens to the king, in a speechwhich, according to Mr. Roscoe, is saidto have been one of the finest pieces ofargument and eloquence ever heard inthe house. He continued his parliamentarycareer with the same liberalsentiments with which he commencedit; particularly manifesting them in hisopposition to the test act, and in hissupport of Sir George Seville's motionfor an account of pensions granted bygovernment. " It is no shame," hesaid, upon the latter occasion, *' forpersons nobly descended, when reducedto want, through the extravagance orvices of some of their ancestors, to receivebounty from the royal hand. 1should be glad to see the list of pensionersmade up of persons of that description ;but. truly, I suspect it abounds with personsof far less than even the negativemerit of maiden ladies in circumstancesof indigence." In speaking of the conductof government towards America,which he condemned throughout, heobserved, " We are now come to thatfatal dilemma, Resist, and we will cutyour throats ; submit, and we will taxyou : such is the reward of obedience."In 1782, on the formation of theadministration under the Marquessof Rockingham, Mr. Fox, and LordShelburne, he was called to the peerage,by the title of Lord Ashburton, and cameinto office as chancellor of the duchyof Lancaster. In the following year,his health began to decline; and hisdeath, which was probably hastenedthrough grief for the loss of one of hissons, took place on the 18th of August.A short while previously to his decease,he is said to have met, whilst travelling,the celebrated lawyer, Mr. Wallace,who died in the same year, and to havehad an affecting interview with him.For this purpose," says Sir NathanielWraxall, " they were carried intothe same apartment, laid down on twosofas nearly opposite, and remained foralong time in conversation ; they thenparted, as men who could not hope tomeet again in this world." Mr. Dunninghad married, in 1780, a daughter ofJohn Baring, Esq., of Larkbear, Devonshire,and was survived by hiswidow and one son.Upon the whole, Lord Ashburtonwas a good and great man ; few possesseda more estimable private character;and neither as a statesman noralawyer, was he excelled by any competitorof his day. In both capacitieshe exercised his splendid talents for thebenefit of his country; his argumentshaving, for their basis, sound constitutionalknowledge; and, for their support,first-rate powers of ratiocinationand eloquence. His sense of honour,says Sir William Jones, was lofty andheroic ; his integrity, stern and inflexible; and no love of dignity, ofwealth, or of pleasure, could havetempted him to deviate, in a single instance,from the straight line of truthand honesty. Burke, at a public meeting,described him as the first in hisprofession ; and declared, he knew noman, in any situation, of a more erectand independent spirit, of a more proudhonour, a more manly mind, or a morefirm and determined integrity. " Never,however," says Sir Nathaniel Wraxall,did nature enclose a more illuminatedmind in a body of meaner and moreabject appearance. It is difficult to dojustice to the peculiar species of uglinesswhich characterised his person andfigure, though he did not labour underany absolute deformity of shape or limb."The same authority also says, that hewas fond of viewing his face in the glass,LORD ASHBURTON.and passed no time more to his satisfactionthan in decorating himself forhis appearance in the world. He alludes,also, to the physical impedimentsDunning laboured under, from thehuskiness of his voice ; but admits that,in spite of the monotony of his tones,and his total want of animation andgrace, so powerful was reason, whenflowing from his lips, that every murmurbecame hushed, and every earattentive. At the bar, he seldom forgothis dignity, for the sake of confusinga witness ; and, when he did,met with answers which remain ratheras records of his discomfiture, thanof his discrimination or wit. Themost popular are the following :A gentleman being repeatedly askedby him if he did not lodge in the vergeof the court, at length answered,that he did. " And pray, sir," saidthe counsel, " for what reason did youtake up your residence in that place?"To avoid the rascally impertinenceof dunning" answered the witness.Whilst examining a handsome youngwoman, in a case of crim. con., heasked her whether her mistress hadever communicated the important secretto her. " No, sir," said the woman,she never did." " How, then, canyou swear to her infidelity?" "BecauseI saw another gentleman besidesmy master in bed with her." " Indeed.""Yes, indeed, sir." "And pray, mygood woman," said Dunning, " did yourmaster, for I see you are very handsome,in return for his wife's infidelity,go to bed to you ?" " That trial," said thespirited young woman, " does not comeon to-day, Mr. Slabberchaps." Oneday, whilst cross-examining and endeavouringto bother an old woman, in acase of assault, he asked her, in referenceto the identity of the defendant, whetherhe was a tall man? "Not very tall,"said she : " much about the size of yourworship's person." " Was he good-looking?"" Quite the contrary ; muchlike your honour, but a handsomernose." "Did he squint?" "A little,your worship ; but not so much as yourhonour, by a great deal." Dunningasked her no more questions.In his domestic relations, he wasamiable and affectionate in the extreme,and, says Sir A. Jones, " for somemonths before his death, the nurseryhad been his chief delight, and gavehim more pleasure than the cabinetcould have afforded."ALEXANDER WEDDERBURN, EARL Grossly.ALEXANDER, son of Peter Wed-dearborn,descended from an ancientScotch family, was born on the 13th ofFebruary, 1733, in Scotland. Beingbred to the law, he was called to thebar when twenty years of age, andhad practised some time in his nativecountry, when a real or supposed insultfrom the bench, induced him to removeto the courts of England. Having, in1753, become a member of the InnerTemple, he was, in 1757, called-to theEnglish bar ; and, in order to divesthimself of the characteristic accent ofhis countrymen, received tuition inspeaking from Messrs. Macklin andSheridan. He soon acquired celebrityin his profession; and, in 1763, wasmade a king's counsel, becoming abencher of Lincoln's Inn about thesame period. Some time afterwardshe came into parliament for the Scotchborough of Rothesay Inverary, andduring the early part of his career, hetook the popular side ; but, in January,1771, accepted the office of solicitor-generaland became a staunch adherentof the government.In 1773, he acted as advocate for LordClive, on the charge brought againsthim in the house of commons ; andin 1774, was elected member of parliamentboth for Castle Riding, in Norfolk,and Southampton, in Devonshire;on which occasion, he took his seat asrepresentative of the latter. In 1778,he was returned for Bishop's Castle, inShropshire; and, in the July of thesame year, he obtained the office ofattorney-general. During the riots in1780, he declared, in his official capacity,at a privy-council, that an assemblageof depredators might be dispersedby military force, without the form ofJURISPRUDENCE.reading the riot act; and his suggestionsbeing acted on, secured at once thepeace of the metropolis. Immediatelyafter the commotion, he was made chief-justiceof the Common Pleas; and, onthe 14th of June, in the same year, hewas raised to the peerage by the title ofBaron Loughborough.In 1783, he became first commissionerfor keeping the great seal, but afterwardsopposed Mr. Pitt's administration.Subsequently, however, in 1793,he joined the government as lord highchancellor; which office he held till hewas succeeded, in 1801, by Lord Eldon.He had, in 1795, obtained a newpatent of a barony, with remainder tohis nephews; and, on the 21st of April,1801, he was created Earl Rosslyn.He retired into private life, but diedshortly after, of apoplexy, betweenHough and Sandhill, on the 3rd ofJanuary, 1805, being in the seventy-secondyear of his age. He was buriedin St. Paul's Cathedral, by the side ofthe body of Sir Joshua Reynolds.Earl Rosslyn was a man of limitedability, but his ambition was considerable,and his ingenuity in argument,added to the pliancy with which heaccommodated himself to the views ofhis party, rendered him an useful memberof government. His oratoricalpowers were commanding, and muchdetracted from by the weakness of hisvoice, as well as the diminutiveness ofhis person. In allusion to this latterdefect, added to his having framed abill to prevent the introduction of suppliesto America, he was given, byWilkes, the name of Starvation Wed-dearborn.He had a quick, penetratingeye, and his countenance indicated thepossession of genius. He was facetiousin conversation, an agreeable companion,and ranked among his friendsmany eminent literary characters. Accordingto Mr. C. Bulla, he was a greatbenefactor to the French emigrants ;and, on being told, one day, that thechancellor of France was distressed bynot being able to procure the discountof a foreign bill, he observed, " Thechancellor of England is the only personto whom the chancellor of Franceshould apply to discount his bills."The same authority relates, that themoney was immediately sent, and thatLord Rosslyn remitted, annually, to theFrench chancellor, a sum of equalamount. He possessed considerablelearning, political as well as legal, andwas the author of a book, printed in1793, with the title of Observations onthe state of the English Prisons. Hewas twice married : first, to Mrs. ElizabethDawson, who died, without issue,in 1781; and, secondly, to Charlotte,daughter of the first Viscount Courteney,by whom he had no children.LLOYD, LORD KENYON.THIS eminent layer was born atArlington, in Flintshire, on the 5th ofOctober, 1733 ; and having been educatedat Ruthin, in Denbighshire, wasarticled, at an early age, to Mr. Tomlinson,an attorney, at Sandwich, inCheshire. On the expiration of hisarticles, Mr. Kenyon became, in Trinityterm, 1754, a student of Lincoln's Inn,and was called to the bar in Hilaryterm, 1761. He applied himself originallyto conveyancing and chancery ;and, though his progress was at firstslow, for want of opportunity, hegradually gained the reputation of beinga sound lawyer, and his legal opinionhad considerable weight and influence.In 1773, he married Miss Mary Kenyon,his cousin ; and, about the same period,contracted an intimacy with Mr. afterwardsLord-chancellor Throw.About two years after his marriage,travelling towards Bath, with his wife,he stopped at the Black Bear Inn, keptby the father of the late Sir ThomasLawrence, when the future painter,then a mere child, exhibited his skill bytaking the likenesses of Mr. and Mrs.Kenyon with remarkable accuracy. In1780, he distinguished himself by hisdefence of Lord George Gordon againsta charge of high treason ; and, in 1782,was elevated to the office of attorney-general,and appointed chief-justice ofLORD KENYON,Chester. About the same time he cameinto parliament, where he attached himselfto Mr. Pitt's party in parliament ;and, in 1784, was made master of theRolls, and created a baronet ; butthe emoluments of his high office fellshort of those he had lost by relinquishinghis practice as a counsel. Hecontinued to support the measures ofthe ministers in parliament, and, onthe 9th of June, 1788, he succeededLord Mansfield as chief-justice of theKing's Bench ; and was raised to thepeerage by the title of Lord Kenyon,Baron of Grediugton. He was appointedone of the council to assistQueen Charlotte in the care of theking's person ; and, in 1796, was madecustos rotulorum and lord-lieutenant ofhis native county.He continued to exercise his functionsas judge, and to take part in the principalpolitical questions of the period,constantly voting with the Tories, andopposing the liberal party, till his death,which took place on the 2nd of April,1802, at Bath, owing to a decay ofnature ; he having taken but littlenourishment or sleep for several weeksprevious. A splendid monument waserected to his memory in HammerChurch, Flintshire ; and he is said tohave died worth 300,000, the proceedsof his legal practice. " LordKenyon," says a writer of his owntime, " was much esteemed in privatelife ; and was, perhaps, one of the mosttemperate and regular men of his rankinhis day. He constantly rose at sixin the morning, and retired to rest,except when engaged on public business,by ten in the evening. He seldomdrank wine or spirits ; was alwayspunctual in his attendance at divineservice ; and, in his family and amongsthis relations and immediate associates,was greatly beloved." He was, however,according to Sir N. Wraxall,irascible in his temper, destitute of allrefinement in his dress or external deportment,and parsimonious, even in adegree approaching to avarice. Nevertheless,"adds the same authority, " hemore than balanced these defects bystrict morality, probity, and integrity.His benevolent attentions to the numerousdistressed and injured persons,who applied to him for legal advice, wasa truly amiable trait in his character,which cannot be too much known or toohighly estimated. Of his habits, whenchief-justice, the following anecdotegives a remarkable trait: A gentleman,who had sold Lord Kenyon acottage at Richmond, going into theneighbourhood, had a mind to take aview of his old residence ; and, on application,was readily admitted by thehousekeeper. Entering the principalroom, he saw on the table some books,which proved to be the Bible, Epictetus,and the Whole Duty of Man. " Doesmy lord read this ?" said the gentleman,taking up the Bible. " No, sir," repliedthe woman ; " he is alwaysporing over this little book," pointingto Epictetus : " I don't know what itis," added she ; " but my lady readsthe other two. They come down hereona Saturday evening, bring a shoulderor leg of mutton with them, whichserves for Sunday, and they leave methe remains, which serve me for theweek."As a speaker, though his ideas werestrong, and his diction often energetic,he sacrificed the graces of oratory totechnical phrases and a quaint formalityof expression, which he had acquiredfrom his intense study of the lawwritings. So far from being suspectedof a want of integrity in his conduct, hewas charged with an excess of zeal forthe virtue and religion of his country ;which he displayed in his constantendeavours to check those moral vicesby which social life is polluted andembittered. By his strong animadversionsagainst seduction and gaming, hesucceeded in, at least, restraining somefashionable profligates; and he cleansedthe law of many of those sordid practicesby which it was corrupted. Thoughan active politician, he does not seemto have degraded his official characterby subserviency to any party, butgenerally supported conscientiously themeasures of a Tory ministry.In private life, he was accountedamiable ; but he seems to have beenparsimonious in his own domestic arrangements.He does not appear, however,to have been illiberal, thoughthere are no records of his charity. Hewas lampooned in the Rolled, a satire,that was published with his portrait.He seems to have enjoyed the confidenceof his sovereign, George theJURISPRUDENCE.Third, with whom he corresponded onthe subject of the coronation oath, asaffecting the claims of the catholics,which correspondence was published byhis son, the present Lord Kenyon,about 1826.EDWARD, LORD Throw.EDWARD Throw, the son ofa clergyman, was born at Shield, inSuffolk, in 1736; and was sent toschool at Canterbury, where, althoughidle and obstinate, he, by his harsh disposition,contrived to maintain a sullensuperiority over his youthful fellows.At Peter House College, Cambridge,he was still more overbearing; and,although he obtained a reputation fortalent, extracted the respect of hiscollege companions less by merit thanarrogance and assumption. His habitswere dissolute and irregular ; and,on one occasion, having been absentfrom chapel, the dean, who was a manof little learning, desired him to translateinto Greek a paper from the Spectator.Having performed his task, hecarried it to his tutor, instead of thedean, on which he was summonedbefore the master and fellows, to explainhis conduct; when he coolly observed,that " what he had done, arose not fromdisrespect, but tenderness, for the dean,whom he did not wish to puzzle;" areply which nearly occasioned his expulsionfrom the college. The matterwas, however, allowed to rest, lest itshould excite ridicule; and when hebecame chancellor, Thurlow rewardedone of the fellows, who had recommendedlenient measures, by a valuablechurch preferment.On leaving the university, he becamea member of the Inner Temple, wherehe lived with more regularity, andapplied himself closely to his legalstudies. Having been called to the barin 1758, he remained for some timeunemployed; and, it is said, he seldomhad the means of carrying himself eventhe first stage on the circuit; and ananecdote is related of his having, onone occasion, reached the assize townon a horse he had taken from Londonupon trial. At length, he was one dayidling in Nando's coffee-room, when hewas requested to draw a statement ofthe facts in the famous Douglas case; atask he performed with so much ability,that a retaining fee was given him, andhe greatly distinguished himself uponthe trial. On account, however, of theviolence of his language, he was challengedby Mr. Stewart, a gentlemanof the adverse party, and a duel ensued,which terminated without bloodshed.By the influence of the Duchess ofQueensberry, he was presented with asilk gown, by Lord Bute, in 1761, whenhe encountered, and often defeated inargument, the ablest cotemporary lawyers.He was appointed solicitor-generalin 1770 ; and, in the followingyear, was made attorney-general, andelected a member of the house of commons,where he spoke strongly infavour of allowing to that officer thepower to file informations ex-officio.He conducted the prosecution againstHome Tooke ; and he, likewise, in parliament,opposed a motion for a committeeto inquire into the administrationof criminal justice. "If," said he,we allow every pitiful patriot thus toinsult us with ridiculous accusations,without making him pay forfeit lor histemerity, we shall be eternally pesteredwith the humming and buzzing of thesestingless wasps. Though they cannotwound or poison, they can teaze andvex. I hope we shall now handle themso roughly, as to make this the last ofsuch audacious attempts." He took anactive part in a debate on the suspensionof the habeas corpus act, in thecourse of which he exclaimed, " treasonand rebellion are properly and peculiarlythe native growth of America!" Oneof the last occasions on which he spokein the house of commons, was thedebate on a bill for the relief of theRoman catholics, a measure which hedeclared he had no intention to oppose.He succeeded to the woolsack on the2nd of June, 1778, and was raised tothe peerage, by the title of BaronLORD Throw.Thurlow, of Shield. Soon after hisentrance into the house of lords, hewas taunted, by the Duke of Grafton,with the obscurity of his birth, whenThurlow, in a tone of subdued indignation,having stigmatized the duke, inallusion to the impure source of hishonours, as the " accident of an accident,"thus concluded: " No one veneratesthe peerage more than I do ; but,my lords, I must say, that the peeragesolicited me, not I the peerage. Nay,more I can say, and will say, that asapeer of parliament, as speaker ofthis right honourable house, as keeper ofthe great seal, as guardian of hismajesty's conscience, as lord high chancellorof England, nay, even in thatcharacter alone, in which the duke wouldthink it an affront to be considered, butwhich character none can deny me, asaman, I am at this moment as respectable,I beg leave to add, I am as muchrespected, as the proudest peer I nowlook down upon." He resigned thegreat seal in 1783, but resumed it soonafterwards, on Mr. Pitt's accession topower. In 1788, on the discussion ofthe regency, he made a solemn declarationof fidelity and attachment to theking, his master, praying, " that in thathour when he forgot his king, his Godmight forget him." Wilkes wittily observed,on hearing it, " Forget you !he'll see you d d first!" and Burkewas also satirical at the chancellor'sexpense, comparing the tears he shedon the occasion " to those of iron whichflowed down Pluto's cheek, resemblingrather the dismal bubbling of the Styx,than the gentle murmuring streams ofAganippe."It appears, from subsequent disclosures,that there was some foundationfor the suspicions of his opponents ; and,that Thurlow had been in negociationwith the prince's friends a few days beforehe made his famous declaration offidelity to his sovereign.The dictatorial tone of Mr. Pitt wasby no means agreeable to the chancellor; and their mutual obstinacyrendered harmony between them impossible.On one occasion, when thepremier, in an argument on the Latinlanguage, claimed superiority for it overthe English, on the ground that twonegatives made a thing more positivethan any affirmative could render it,Lord Thurlow is said to have replied,then your father and mother musthave been two negatives, to have madesuch a positive fellow as you are." Themisunderstandings between the twogreat men ended in the determinationof the government to remove the chancellor;and on Lord Melville coming tobreakfast with him, intending, at thesame time, to demand the seals, Thur-lowcoolly said to him, " I know thebusiness on which you have come : youshall have the bag and seals. Therethey are, and there is your breakfast;"of which they sociably partook, andparted apparently very good friends.He was, however, much mortified at hisremoval from office, and particularly bythe conduct of the king; "who," heonce said, " has treated me in a wayin which no man has a right to treatanother." He retired to his villa,having previously secured for himself aeldership of the exchequer, and a newpatent of peerage, extending his title tohis nephews. In 1806, he repaired toBrighton, and died there of a lethargy,on the 12th of September, in the seventy-firstyear of his age. He left threedaughters, by a Miss Hervey, withwhom he had become acquainted inearly life, during his visits at Nando'scoffee-house.He was a good classical scholar, andhad a strong natural genius, which washeld in such high estimation by Dr.Johnson, that he declared there was noman in England he would condescendto prepare himself for but Thurlow.In religion, Lord Thurlow had butlittle conscience, and confessed himselfalways a supporter of that which wasuppermost. He once said to a dissenter,I would support your d d religion,if it was that of the state;" and to adeputation that had waited on him tosolicit his vote in favour of the repeal ofthe test act, he replied that he would notgive it ; and added, " I care not whetheryour religion has the ascendancy, ormine, or any, or none ; but this I know,that when you were uppermost, youkept us down ; and now, that we areuppermost, with God's help, we'll keepyou down."He never allowed his principles tostand in the way of his elevation ; butthough aggrandisement was his object,he seemed to seek it more for emolu-JURISPRUDENCE.ment than honour. He displayed anutter contempt for every kind of flattery,and even a proper expression of thankswas irksome to his feelings. He appearsto have been of a generous disposition,and after failing in his endeavours toobtain an increase of pension for Dr.Johnson, he offered him the liberty ofdrawing for 500 or 600, to enablehim to travel.In his manner he was uncouth, and,at the cabinet dinners, would withdrawfrom the table after the cloth wasremoved, and throwing himself on twochairs, indulge in sleep during the mostimportant deliberations. He was fondof conviviality and select society, whenhe would throw off the severity which,on other occasions, seemed a part of hisnature, and converse with a pleasingaffability. His eloquence was characterisedby a vehement strength of language,a closeness of argument, a solemntone of conviction, and a dignified utterance.His sentences were frequentlyconfused, and even ungrammatical ; andit has been said, " such was sometimestheir obscurity, that reason was rathersilenced by them than convinced." Asajudge, it was his pride that not one ofhis decrees had been reversed ; and, asasenator, he was a staunch opponent toevery attempt at encroachment on theroyal prerogative. After his rupturewith Pitt, he became more liberal, andopposed some of that minister's measures,which tended to curtail therights and privileges of the people.He seldom considered delicacy in conversation; and it is recorded of him,that being asked to partake of somegrapes, by the noble proprietor of amansion, in the grounds belonging towhich he was walking, he coarselyreplied, " Grapes ! didn't I tell you justnow I had got the gripes." He hadcontracted, in his youth, a habit ofswearing, which he never afterwardsabandoned; and an oath frequentlyaccompanied the expression of hissentiments.He had been united, in early life, to adaughter of Dr. Lynch, the Dean ofCanterbury, who did not long surviveher marriage, and after leaving thehouse of lords, though he kept anestablishment in St. James's Square, healways proceeded to the residence ofMiss Hervey, at Dulwich. He did not,however, allow this connexion to influencehim in the dispensation of hispatronage, and admitted no one to anyoffice through Miss Hervey's interposition.His distribution of church prefermentwas always extremely disinterested,and was bestowed, on almostall occasions, with a view to the meritsof the party on whom it was conferred.Having, when at college, given offenceto a person, by affixing to him, in raillery,the name of " Mr. Dean," he, someyears afterwards, met the same individual,whom he addressed by his oldtitle. The other sullenly remarked onthe impropriety of the appellation, whichThurlow assured him was now correct,"for," said he, " you are a dean;" andinforming him of his promotion, apologizedfor any uneasiness that his conductmight have ever occasioned to theobject of his generosity. His feelingswere generally humane, though suchwas his devotion to the strict administrationof the law, that all hisefforts were successfully directed toprevent mercy from being extended tothe brothers Perreau, the first whosuffered death for the crime of forgery.He strongly supported BishopBarrington's bill for the discouragementof adultery; declaring that, " ifhe had the blood of forty generationsof nobility flowing in his veins, hecould not be more anxious to procureit that assent and concurrence it deservedfrom their lordships." He wasnever known to be vindictive, but inthe case of his daughter, Mrs. Brown,who had offended him by her marriage.He, however, forgave her beforehis death, though by his will heleft her but 50 per month; and oncondition of her living apart from herhusband.In appearance he was stern of aspect,with harsh but regular and stronglymarked features. His eyebrows werelarge and shaggy, protruding over hispenetrating eyes which gleamed withintellect. Lavater said, on seeing oneof his pictures, " whether this man beon earth or in hell, I know not ; butwherever he is, he is a tyrant, and willrule if he can." The Duke of Norfolkkept owls, one of which was called LordThurlow, from its supposed resemblanceto the chancellor; and once, while incloseconference with his solicitor, theSIR ROBERT CHAMBERS.duke was interrupted by the exclamation,that, " Lord Thurlow had laid anegg," from his owl-keeper.Though generally despising the formsof society, he, on some occasions, behavedwith remarkable politeness andcourtesy. Once, having entered thepump-room at Bath, with dirty bootsand spurs, it was intimated to him thatit was against the rules of the place toappear there in spurs, on which he hadthem immediately removed, and declaring" the rules of Bath must not bedisputed," ordered that an apology onhis behalf should be made to the company.At another time, his daughters,having attended an assembly at Hampstead,were involved in some confusionin endeavouring to reach their carriage,and were extricated by a young officer,whom Lord Thurlow called on, andthanked, the following morning. Hehad the most thorough contempt forhereditary honours, and, always maintaininghe was descended from Thur-low,a carrier, refused to acknowledgeSecretary Throe as his ancestor. Onattending to have his patent registeredat the Herald's College, he gruffly thundered" I don't know," to the questionof an officer, who inquired the name ofhis lordship's mother.SIR ROBERT CHAMBERS.ROBERT CHAMBERS, eldest sonof an attorney, at Newcastle-on-Tyne ;was born there in 1737, and educatedin that city, at the same school withLords Eldon and Stowell. Having removedto the University of Oxford, hebecame, in 1754, an exhibitioner ofLincoln College ; and, having graduatedin 1758, soon obtained a fellowship ofUniversity College. He proceeded Mea.in 1761, and B. C. L. in 1765; being,about the same time, called to the bar,having previously become a student ofthe Middle Temple. In 1762, theuniversity elected him Vinerian professorof the laws of England ; and, in1766, he was appointed principal ofNew Inn Hall, by the Earl of Lichfield.He had, in 1768, refused the attorney-generalshipof Jamaica; but, in 1773,accepted the appointment of secondjustice in the supreme court of judicature,in Bengal. He sailed for Indiain April, 1774 ; and, in due time,resigned his Vinerian professorship,which had been held for him out ofcompliment, in case of his return withinthree years, by a deputy. The honourof knighthood was sent out to him fouryears after he had been in office, beingconferred as a special mark of royalapprobation. In 1791, he was advancedto the chief-justiceship ; and became, in1797, president of the Asiatic Society.He resigned, after twenty-three years'service in India, and returned toEngland in 1799 ; but, being unused toa northern climate, he, in 1802, wasrecommended to visit the south ofFrance, but being attacked by paralysis,in Paris, he died there on the 9th ofMay, in the year following. His bodywas removed, for interment in theTemple Church, to England.Sir Robert Chambers was early devotedto study, and had, during his life,collected a large library, of which hisoriental books were particularly valuable; he was an excellent classic ; and,at an advanced period of life, wrote anelegant Latin epitaph, for a monumentto his friend, Sir W. Jones, at Oxford.Such was his bounty, that, notwithstandingthe length of time he had been inoffice, his private fortune was very inconsiderableat the period of his retirement.As a judge, he was guided byreason and impartiality ; while his acutenessoften tended to elucidate facts bythe right application of arguments. Hispicture was painted for Mr. Thrace'sstudy, at Streatham, by Sir JoshuaReynolds, who has represented himsurrounded by his literary friends,among whom are Burke, Battle, Barrett,Johnson, and Goldsmith. He marriedthe daughter of the statuary, Wilton,and had several children ; the eldest ofwhom, a promising youth, was lost inan East Indiaman, on his way toEngland, whither he was proceedingfor his education.JURISPRUDENCE.SIR JAMES MANSFIELD.JAMES MANSFIELD, the name ofwhose family was originally Mansfield,was the son of an attorney, at Ringwood,in Hampshire. He was born in 1738,and educated at Eton, where he becamethe friend of Charles Townshend, whoafterwards was his friend and competitorat the University of Cambridge.Whilst still an under-graduate, he becamea student of the Middle Temple,and having proceeded B. A. in 1760, wascalled to the bar in 1763, taking the degreeof M. A. about the same period. Hecontinued to practice for some time,without any considerable success ; hisvoice and style of oratory having, it issaid, been unfavourable to his advancement.He was, however, in 1776, unexpectedlyreturned member of parliamentfor Cambridge University, when he obtaineda silk gown, and, in 1780, he wasre-elected to his seat in the house ofcommons. In September of the sameyear, he received the appointment ofsolicitor-general; a post which he soonresigned, though he resumed it in 1783and 1784, during the Shelburne andRockingham administration. At theensuing general election, he, however,lost his seat; and subsequently resolvedto give his undivided attention to hispractice at the bar ; but, finding Mr.Erskine, his junior, holding the firstplace in the common law courts, hethought it prudent to move into thecourt of chancery. Here he obtaineda large share of business, and thoughhe did not interfere in politics, hewas so much respected by all parties,that he obtained the chief-justiceship ofChester. He held this appointment forsome time, during which he enjoyed theamusements of the field, to which hehad been partial when at college. Hesubsequently received the honour ofknighthood, with the chief-justiceship ofthe Common Pleas, where he presidedfor some time, being acknowledged tosurpass, in sound legal knowledge, allthe other judges.He had a thorough acquaintancewith classical literature, and was also aproficient in general learning. He possessedgreat application ; and such werehis habits of industry, that, while on thecircuit, he rose at five in the morning,that he might have an opportunity ofenjoying the diversions of a sportsman.As a pleader, though the matter of hisspeeches was invariably to the purpose,the huskiness of his voice, and the wantof grace in his delivery, unfitted him forthe character of an orator. In politicshe was not a decided adherent eitherof the Whig or Tory party, though herather inclined to the former principles.He was married, and had two malechildren. He was much esteemed inprivate, and was a kind friend andliberal patron. Having procured, for anofficer in the army, a situation abroad,which involved judicial as well as militaryduties, he is said to have observedto him, " I know you to be a devilishgood, honest fellow ; and that you willdo justice in all that comes before you ;but, if you value your reputation, giveno reasons for your decisions."FRANCIS HARGRAVE.THIS eminent lawyer, the son of anattorney, was born about the year 1741,and having been educated at the CharterHouse, entered the University of Oxford,where he was indebted to his paternaluncle for the assistance necessary tothe prosecution of his studies. Havingremoved to Lincoln's Inn, he was calledto the bar in 1764; and, about thisperiod, married Miss Diana Fountain,the daughter of a clergyman ; to one ofwhose pupils, the late Earl of Guildford,FRANCIS HARGRAVE.he was in after life indebted for muchassistance and encouragement. Histalents soon procured him practice inhis profession, and in 1772, he distinguishedhimself as counsel for JamesSomerset, a negro, whom he caused tobe released from a ship bound forJamaica, and to be brought into courtby a writ of habeas corpus. His argumenton this case established theprecedent by which all slaves are freeimmediately on setting foot on shorein England, and acquired him greatpopularity.Though his business was now materiallyaugmented, his circumstances werestill far from easy ; for he had not onlyan increasing family to support, but hemaintained, at the same time, the wholeof his brother's children. Through theinterest of Lord North, he became oneof the counsel to the Treasury, with asalary of 600 per annum; but he wasdismissed, in 1789, on account of thedifference between his own politics andthose of the existing government. Hewas much annoyed at his dismissal ; and,in a letter to a friend, he animadvertson the harsh conduct of Mr. Pitt, instatingas a pretext for his removal, thathe " not only, by inattention, renderedhis place a sinecure ; but, by his opposition,made himself obnoxious to the government."He denied the first chargealtogether; and maintained, with respectto the second, that he was not, byvirtue of his place, bound to support theministers.In 1791, he was employed to drawup the Roman catholic bill ; and, in1806, having been elected recorder ofLiverpool, he, in that character, presentedan address to the Prince Regent,at the residence of Earl Derby, wherehe was, on the following day, invitedto meet his royal highness at dinner.Continuing to practice with success,as a barrister, till 1813, he became, inthe early part of that year, subject tooccasional aberrations of mind, owing tohis too intense application to a work,which, considering his years and avocations,it was impossible he could, as soonas he desired, accomplish. It becamenecessary, in order to mitigate hismalady, that he should retire from hisprofession ; a step that was extremelyinconvenient, as on his exertions alonedepended the support of his family.Though assisted by his friend, Mr.Whitbread, his pecuniary embarrassmentsincreased so much, as to renderit advisable to appeal to the house ofcommons, which ordered that Mr. Hargrave'svaluable library should be purchasedby government for 8,000, andgiven to the British Museum. Hisindependence being thus insured, hismind, in a great degree, resumed itstranquillity; and though lie deeply felt,at times, the loss of his library, it was,in some measure, compensated by thesociety of friends, and the light readingafforded by modern books and newspapers.He continued to reside with hisfamily at Chelsea, till a tumour havingappeared in his leg, which proceeded tomortification, he died from its effects,on the 16th of August, 1821, at the ageof eighty. He was in full possession ofhis mental faculties within a few hoursof his death, and he was buried in thechapel of Lincoln's Inn, of which societyhe had long been a bencher.Mr. Hargrave's legal knowledge wasconsiderable; and he wrote, during hislife, several law books, which were distinguishedby the extensive learningthey evinced, and the soundness of theirarguments. His habits were retired ;but though mixing little in society, hiscompany was courted by his privatefriends, among whom were Lords Northand Holland, Mr. Whitbread, and Mr.Fox ; during whose administration heobtained a silk gown. The summit of hisambition was a mastership in chancery ;which, however, accident and politicalbias prevented him, notwithstanding hismerits, from obtaining.His private character was as estimableas his public one, and the courteousnessof his demeanour procured him manyfriends. Such was the respect he enjoyedamong the inhabitants of Liverpool,that they allowed him, during hislatter years, to perform the duties ofrecorder by deputy.In addition to his numerous originalpublications, he published, in 1818, a revisionof Sir Edward Coke's Institutes; awork which employed him ten years, andwhich is justly spoken of by the editorof the Legal Biography as " a prodigiouspile of human sagacity and learning,for future ages to read and admire."JURISPRUDENCE.GEORGE Harding.THE subject of this memoir, born in1743, was nephew to the great LordCamden, and second son of NicholasHardingee, Esq., chief clerk of the houseof commons, who was celebrated as awriter of Latin verses. He was educatedat Eton, where he evinced apartiality both for reading and actingplays, and became a contributor tothe Musae Etonenses. Having enteredat Waltham College, Oxford, he, in1775, took the degree of B. A.; and,in the following year, made a shorttour on the continent, for which hewas provided with the means by LadyDarrell, then one hundred years o|d,and whom, at ninety, he describes asbeautiful. He, in 1778, proceeded tothe degree of M. A.; and having becomea law student, was, in due time, calledto the bar, by the society of the MiddleTemple. He, however, is said to havecultivated the muses in preference topursuing his legal studies, having comeinto a considerable fortune on attaininghis majority. He, nevertheless, soughtthe intimacy of the great lawyers ofthe day, and by the interest of hisuncle, soon obtained a patent of precedency.Having acquired a reputationfor eloquence, he came into considerablepractice; and, in 1780, being appointedsolicitor-general to the queen, he wasreturned, as member for Old Sarum, toparliament. In 1783, he distinguishedhimself by defending Sir Thomas Rum-bold,who was threatened with a bill ofpains and penalties ; and he also spokein favour of the conduct of WarrenHastings. In 1784, he married a MissLong, and went to reside at Twickenham,where he became acquainted withHorace Walpole. His ardour for professionaladvancement was considerablyretarded by his devotion to literature;but he, in 1787, obtained the office ofsenior Welsh judge, for the counties ofBrecon, Glamorgan, and Radnor. Hecontinued, for some time, to representOld Sarum in parliament, but closed hissenatorial career soon after the Union.In 1807, he lost his only survivingparent, whom he used to call his angelmother; and was occupied about thistime, in writing a life of his illustriousuncle, Earl Camden. Shortly afterwards,having experienced anotherdomestic loss, in the death of a nephew,he dissipated his grief by literary pursuits,and became a contributor to theGentleman's Magazine, in which werepublished, from his pen, a variety ofcurious anecdotes relative to his contemporaries.His death, which washastened by a fall from his horse, sometimepreviously, took place on the 26thof April, 1816, whilst he was on hiscircuit at Prestige.The person of Mr. Hardingee washandsome, and his countenance indicatedthe benevolence which adornedhis character. His temper was mildand cheerful, and such was his charitabledisposition, that he often collected,by subscription, large sums for the reliefof those whom he thought worthy of hisprotection. His abilities were considerable,though evincing more brilliancethan solidity. His conversational powerswere great ; and his wit, added to hislove of pleasantry, rendered his societyextremely agreeable. As a barrister,he was remarkable for his ingenuity inpromoting the interests of his clients ;and in his judicial character, he distinguishedhimself by the attention andscrutiny he gave to every point thatmight affect the formation of his judgment.He published several of his mostcelebrated speeches; and, in 1791, appearedhis letters to Burke, on the constitutionalexistence of an impeachmentagainst Mr. Warren Hastings. Amonghis other original productions, are a fewpoems on various occasions, and twosermons by a layman. He also editedhis father's Latin poems, and contributedlargely to the literary anecdotesof the eighteenth century. He does notappear to have left any children.EARL OF Carbury.JOHN Tower, EARL OF Carbury.JOHN Tower, Earl of Norbury,son of Daniel Toler, Esq., was bornat Blackwood, Tipperary, about the year1745. After receiving an appropriateeducation, he was called to the bar ofIreland, where he became celebratedfor his forensic jests, and shortly afterwardswas returned to parliament, bythe influence of the " undertakers," aparty so called, who were deputed, bythe British ministry, to undertake themanagement of the Irish house of commons.His Tory principles, to whichhe strictly adhered, procured him thepatronage of Lord Castlereagh, LordClare, and Mr. Pitt, through whoseinfluence he obtained, in 1789, the officeof Irish solicitor-general ; in 1798, thatof attorney-general, and, in December,1800, the chief-justiceship of the CommonPleas, (when he was made apeer,) which situation he held till 1827,when he retired on a pension of 4,000per annum, and was, at the same time,created Earl Norbury and ViscountGlancing. During the greater part ofthe time he sat upon the bench, he wasso imbecile, and indecorously regardlessof the dignity and duty of a judge, asto indulge his propensity for punningon the most awful occasions, and evenat the expense of the feelings of aprisoner whom he was just about tocondemn to the gallows. He died atDublin, on the 27th of July, 1831, inthe eighty-sixth year of his age, leavingbehind him the reputation of a goodpunster and horseman, and taking withhim to the grave, the appellation ofthe hanging judge." It was said ofhim, in one of the public journals ofthe day, " Mercy droops not beside histomb; nor will justice, eloquence, orlearning, stretch themselves within it;"and Sir Jonah Barrington characterisedhim when living, as having " a handfor every man, and a heart for nobody."He increased his fortune by marryingGrace, daughter of Hector Graham, apeeress in her own right, by the title ofBaroness Wormwood ; and, at the timeof his death, was a privy-counsellorin Ireland, trustee of the Irish linenmanufacture, and a visitor of MaynoothCollege.The following are some of the mostcelebrated instances of his humour, theonly foundation of his notoriety ; andnone of which entitle him to the appellationof a real wit. Whilst giving judgmenton a writ of right, he observed,that it was insufficient for a demandantto say he " claimed by descent. Suchan answer," he continued," would beashrewd one for a sweep, who had gotinto your house by coming down thechimney; and it would be an easy, aswell as a sweeping way, of getting in."On going up the grand staircase atthe castle, at Dublin, to attend the leveegiven by the king, on his visit to Ireland,and being so pressed, that but for thesupport of those near him, he wouldhave fallen down, he observed to thechancellor, who was at hand, " Mylord, we have tried many hard cases inour day, but you will allow that thisstair-case is the hardest of all." Onbeing informed that an officer of marines,who had seen much service,had canvassed to obtain his brother adirectorship of the National InsuranceCompany, he remarked, that " the captainwould have been, himself, moreeligible, having considerable knowledgeand experience of marine risks, beingaccustomed to receive premiums fortaking lives, and as affording a practicalproof, that although following a professionmore than doubly hazardous,his tenement had escaped all damagesby fire ;" adding, on being told that thecaptain did not possess the requisitenumber of shares to qualify him for adirector, " but his want of a sufficientstock of assurance is an insurmountablebar to his promotion." At the assizesat Nos, one day, whilst a counselwas addressing the court, an ass happenedto bray very loudly, on which heobserved, " one at a time, gentlemen,if you please;" whilst, his lordship,however, was addressing the jury, thesame ass beginning to bray, he inquired,what noise that was ?" when the counselretorted on him, by answering, "It'sJURISPRUDENCE.only the echo of the court, my lord."One day, in the Irish house of commons,the son of Edmund Burke havingappeared in the body of the house topresent a petition, was ordered to betakeninto custody, when he immediatelytook to flight, and escaped : on amember observing, no such transactionhad ever occurred before, "Oh lyes,"said Lord Norbury; " I found the verysame incident, some few days back, inthe cross-readings of the columns of anewspaper : " Yesterday, a petition waspresented to the house of commonsit fortunately missed fire, and the villainran off." Some time afterhis appearanceat a private masquerade, where he hadassumed the character of Hawthorn, inLove in a Village, he sat on the benchwith the same costume concealed beneathhis robes, which, the warmth ofthe day compelling him to throw partiallyoff, he unconsciously discoveredthe dress of Hawthorn, which verymuch disconcerted him, especially as atthe moment he was in the act of passingsentence of death upon several of therebels. On the registrar of the courtcomplaining to him that witnesses werein the habit of stealing the Testamentafter they had been sworn upon it, hereplied, " Never mind ; if the rascalsread the book, it will do them more goodthan the petty larceny may do them mischief;however, if they are not afraidof the cord, hang your Gospel in chains,and that, perhaps, by reminding thefellows of the fate of their fathers andgrandfathers, may make them behavethemselves ;" which was accordinglydone, and the Testament remained afterwardssecure.William SCOTT, LORD Swell.WILLIAM SCOTT, elder brother ofLord Eldon, and son of a coal-fitter,at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, was born onthe 28th of October, 1745. He waseducated at the grammar-school of hisnative place under the Reverend HughMoses, and removed, at the usual age,to University College, Oxford ; wherehe, in 1766, obtained a fellowship. In1767, he graduated M. A., and, in 1772,B. C. L. ; and, besides filling the officeof tutor of Corpus Christii College, was,in 1773, elected Camden professor ofancient history ; in which capacity heevinced so much ability, as to obtainthe praise of the fastidious Gibbon, whowas, at the time, attacking the generalsystem of education pursued in theuniversity. In 1779, he attained thedegree of doctor of civil law ; andcoming to London, practised, withsuccess, as an advocate, in the courts atDoctor's Commons.In 1780, he became a candidate forthe representation of the University ofOxford, but withdrew from the contestbefore the election was concluded. InLondon, he became the associate ofJohnson, Burke, and Reynolds ; butcould never induce his brother, afterwardsLord Eldon, to court the acquaintanceof those illustrious characters. In1787, he was appointed king's advocate-general; on which occasion he wasknighted, and lie subsequently becamejudge of the Consistory court of London ;vicar-general of the province of Canterbury; master of the faculties ; chancellorof the diocese of London ; and a lordof trade and plantations. In 1798, hebecame judge of the high court ofadmiralty, and was soon after swornin a member of the privy-council. In1802, he was elected member of parliamentfor Oxford ; which he continuedto represent in the house of commonstill 1821, when he was raised, with thetitle of Baron Stowell, to the dignityof the peerage. He retired, in 1828,from his judicial station, which he hadfilled with considerable ability, andwith a reputation for administering thelaws with strict impartiality.Lord Stowell was well versed in hisprofession, as well as in general scholarship.In parliament, he was not remarkablefor his oratory ; but he possesseda high character for talent, andwas the intimate friend of the brightestliterary characters of the period. Heshone conspicuously as a judge of theConsistorial court, where the nature ofSIR FRANCIS BULLER.his office required a deep knowledgeof the human heart, for which he wasparticularly eminent. In parliament,he devoted his energies to what heconsidered likely to tend to the improvementof society, and vigorouslyopposed all such measures as might beproductive of demoralization. In politics,he never evinced much party spirit,but he professes Tory principles, whichhe has always maintained with consistency.In private he is much esteemedfor his urbanity of manner, and forthe total absence of pride or haughtiness.It is related of him, that, at theage of eighty, he was seen looking onin the street, with great glee, at thetricks of Punch and Judy.He has been twice married, and hashad several children : his second wifedied in 1817, and had been the Marchionessof Sligo. His daughter, Mrs.Townshend, was married, in 1823, toViscount Sidmouth.SIR FRANCIS BULLER.FRANCIS, son of James Buller, Esq.member of parliament for Cornwall,was born there in 1745, and educatedat a private school in the west ofEngland ; whence he came to London,and becoming a student of the InnerTemple, devoted himself, with greatzeal, to the study of the law. In 1772,he commenced practice as a barrister,in the common law courts, where hisbusiness soon became considerable ;and his reputation was increased by hispublication of a work on the law relativeto trials at nisi prius. On the 24th ofMarch, 1777, he became a king's counsel;and, on the 27th of the samemonth, was appointed second judge ofthe Chester circuit. He was soon after,on the recommendation of Lord Mansfield,elevated to a judgeship of theKing's Bench; and, m 1789, receivedthe rank of a baronet. Being afflictedwith gout, and finding the duties of hisnew office too fatiguing, he was removedto the Common Pleas, in June,1794; but still labouring under ill-health,he was about to resign hisoffice altogether, when he died, of anapoplectic fit, on the 6th of June, 1800.Sir Francis Buller was not popularas a judge, on account of his leaningto the side of power and prerogative.On the trial of the Dean of St. Asaph,for libel, he endeavoured to preventthe verdict of the jury from beingrecorded, as they had found the defendantguilty of publishing only. Hisdesign, was, however, frustrated bythe resolute zeal of Mr. Erskine, whowould not allow himself to be deterredby the judge from the full performanceof his duty. He was often satirizedby Peter Pindar, and is said to havebeen the " very learned and littlejudge," to whom he addressed the linesending,'There's no such man!' the worlil exclaims, 'tistrue,But such a monster ev'ry day we view.He was a sound lawyer ; and such washis perception, that he often perceived,at a glance, the drift of an argument,which sometimes made him too hastyin his conclusions. Lord Mansfieldhad a very high opinion of his abilities,and, it is said, desired he should havebeen his successor. He married inearly life, and had two sons and twodaughters.JOHN FREEMAN Milford, LORD REDESDALE.JOHN FREEMAN Milford,Baron Redesdale, was born in Hampshire,on the 18th of August, 1748, andreceived his early education at WinchesterSchool, whence he removed to NewCollege, Oxford. He subsequentlyJURISPRUDENCE.became a student of the Temple, and wascalled to the bar, where he soon becameeminent as a chancery pleader. Hisreputation was increased by a work,which has passed through several editions,On the Pleadings in Suits in theCourt of Chancery, by English Bill;and, in a short time, he became one ofthe principal equity advocates. Hebecame a Welsh judge in 1790 ; and, in1793, was knighted, and appointedsolicitor-general ; in which character,on the memorable trial of Mr. Hardy,for high treason, his opening speechwas characterised by acuteness, candour,and feeling, and he is said tohave shed tears at its conclusion.Since 1788, he had sat in parliamentas member for Beeralston ; and, in1799, succeeded Sir John Scott as .He afterwards wasreturned to the house of commons asrepresentative of East Love ; and, in1801, was chosen speaker. He filledhis post but for a few months, beingraised to the peerage, in 1802, by thetitle of Baron Redesdale, of Clydesdale,Northumberland, upon his being appointedlord-chancellor of Ireland. Hewas displaced by the coalition administration,in 1806 ; and, in taking leaveof the Irish bar, on the 5th of March,said, " that he hoped to have ended hisdays in Ireland, but he was not permitted.His consent to depart fromEngland was yielded to the wish ofsome who now concurred in his removal: this, he owned, he did notexpect;" an address which was deliveredin a touching manner, and elicitedgreat sympathy.Lord Redesdale, upon his return toEngland, soon appeared in his place inthe upper house as a determined opponentof the ministry ; and Lord Grenville'smotion for catholic emancipationsoon gave him an opportunity ofevincing his hostility. This administrationbeing overthrown, he generallyadhered to those that have been sinceformed ; and he originated the bill forthe relief of insolvent debtors. Hedied, on the 16th of January, 1830, athis seat, Batsford Park, near Moreton.In the house of lords, he was regardedas a high legal authority, andcommittees of appeal generally heardhis opinion with deference. He wassomewhat unpopular with the catholicparty in Ireland ; but gave satisfactionin the discharge of his duties as chancellor.He married, in 1803, LadyFrances Perceval, by whom he hadone son and two daughters.JOHN FITZGIBBON, EARL OF CLARE.JOHN FITZGIBBON, Earl of Clare,eldest sen of John Fitzgibbon, Esq. abarrister of Limerick, and a memberof the Irish parliament, was born in1749, and, so early as the year 1763,became a fellow commoner of TrinityCollege, Dublin. Throughout his academicalcareer, he was the rival ofG rattan, who, at first, took the lead ; butFitzgibbon, during the latter period oftheir course, bore off every premiumfrom his talented contemporary. Havingbecome a law student of the Temple, hewas called to the Irish bar, possessing,in addition to the advantages of his ownindustry, heather's high reputation, anda tolerable private fortune. In February,1777, he distinguished himself as counselfor the University of Dublin, againstthe election of Mr. Richard HeldHutchinson, as member for the society,and his return being annulled, Mr.Fitzgibbon was chosen to supply hisplace in the Irish house of commons.In the senate, he supported the measuresof the British cabinet against thepopular party, and he was soon afterrewarded by ministers, with the actorsof Ireland. In thiscapacity he acted with considerablefirmness ; and, notwithstanding his unpopularity,forced his way, on one occasion,through the mob, accompanied byone or two friends, and broke up apublic meeting, by ascending the hustings,and threatening the sheriff, whowas chairman, with an ex-officio prosecution,unless he should immediatelycause the assembly to disperse. In1789, he strongly supported the plan ofEARL OF CLARE.the English ministers, for extending toIreland the power of the Prince Regent;and, in June of the same year, he waselevated to the dignity of lord high chancellorof Ireland ; being the first nativeof the country that had ever receivedthat honour. He was, likewise, by thetitle of Baron Fitzgibbon, promoted to theIrish peerage ; and, on the 22nd of June,1791, he became vice-chancellor of theUniversity of Dublin. Having been, onthe 20th of December, 1793, made ViscountFitzgibbon, he was created Earlof Clare, on the 10th of June, 1795 ; andon the 24th of September, 1799, he tookhis rank as an English peer, with thetitle of Lord Fitzgibbon, of Sudbury, inDevonshire. He died on the 28th ofJanuary, 1802, having, in 1787, marrieda Miss Anne Halley, sister of theeccentric Mr. Halley, who won fromLord Fitzgibbon a considerable wager,by performing a pilgrimage to Jerusalem.His lordship had a considerablefortune by his lady, who bore him fivechildren. In his character of chancellor,Earl Clare," according to Sir JonahHarrington, " collected facts with a rapidprecision, and decided on them with aprompt asperity ; depending too much onthe strength of his own judgment, andthe acuteness of his own intellect, hehated precedent, and despised the highestjudicial authorities, because theywere not his own." His talents were, nodoubt, great, but his obstinacy and arroganceoften led to their misapplication ;yet, though his decisions were oftenblamed for the haste in which theyseemed to be delivered, as they wereseldom appealed against, they do notseem generally to have deserved thecharge of impropriety. His dispositionwas haughty, his address imperious,and his language arrogant ; he had abold contempt for public opinion, anddaringly followed up his principles,regardless of their unpopularity. Hisconversation was sometimes immoral,and generally devoid of wit, or evenhumour; but in private life he wasesteemed as an active friend, a kindmaster and an indulgent landlord. Heshowed the possession of many generousqualities, of which his temper andambition considerably tended to hinderthe growth and development. As apolitician, he preferred promptitude todiscretion; and his hasty projects, howeverinjudiciously formed, were just asrashly executed.In person, he was about the middlesize, his countenance expressive, hiseye large, dark, and penetrating.JOSEPH JEKYLL.THIS well known advocate and wit,the son of a naval officer, and descendantof the eminent master of theRolls, of that name, was born in 1750,and completed his education at Christchurch,Oxford, where he graduatedM. A. in 1777. Having previously becomea student of the Inner Temple,he was, by that society, called to thebar; where he obtained a silk gown,and was appointed a commissioner oflunatics ; and, in 1805, was appointedsolicitor-general to the Prince of Wales,as Duke of Cornwall. In 1797, he wasin the house of commons, where hevoted for Mr. Grey's motion for parliamentaryreform, assisted in drawing upthe articles of impeachment against ViscountMelville, and supported the Foxand Grenville administration. On themotion for criminating Lord Melville,when a committee was allotted for, heexpressed his inclination to challengethe array, as " nothing," he observed,could be more inconsistent with theprinciples of justice, than that a righthonourable gentleman, whose own conductwas to be the subject of investigation,should be allowed to name thepersons who were to compose the jurythat was to make that investigation."Like his celebrated Whig ancestor,Sir Joseph Jekyll, observes Wilson, inhis Biography of the House of Commons,for 1806, who was said, by oneof the great poets of the day,Ne'er to have changed his principles, or wig,"he was always considered a man ofgreat wit, as well as considerable talents ;JURISPRUDENCE.and he is mentioned as such by Mr.Wilkes, in one of his letters to hisdaughter. He was the staunch politicalfriend of Fox, Erskine, Sheridan, andal! the leading men of the Whig party ;and possessed talents, both as a parliamentarydebater and advocate, of anoriginal and superior cast.He distinguished himself as an author,by publishing the letters of IgnatiusSancho, the African, and friend ofSterne and Garrick, to which he prefixeda life of the author ; and Factsand Observations relating to the TempleChurch. He became also himself thesubject of a satirical poem,! entitled,a Political Eclogue, printed in theEuropean Magazine, which was thejoint work of some eminent Whigs, towhom he had given offence by someportion of his parliamentary conduct.He married, about 1803, the daughterof Colonel Sloane, M. P., and had issueby his wife, who brought him a largefortune.The following are a few specimensof his wit, which procured him a highreputation as a punster : Garrow wasonce endeavouring to elicit from a reluctantwitness, evidence of a tender,which would have been fatal to thecause of his client's adversary. Thewitness was a very wary, acute, elderlywoman ; and there appeared but littlehopes of obtaining from her the desiredadmission. Garrow, however,persisted, until Jekyll handed him aslip of paper, on which the followinglines were written :Garrow, forbear; that tough old jadeWill never prove a tender made (maid.)Garrow read the lines, and immediatelysat down, laughing immoderately. Thelate Lord Ellenborough was said tobe a severe judge. Dining once, duringan assize, a gentleman requestedto know if he should help his lordshipto some fowl. " No," said LordEllenborough ; " I mean to try thatbeef." "If you do, my lord," saidJekyll, " it will be hung beef." Healso made the following epigram onthe word " lien," which Lord Eldonused to pronounce with the i sharp, aslyon ; and Sir Arthur Pigot with the isoft, as lean :Sir Arthur, Sir Arthur, pray, what do you ni 'an,By laying the chancellor's (ion is leansD'ye think that his kitchen's so bad as all that,That nothing within it can ever get fat ?JOHN Pilot CURRAN.JOHN Pilot CURRAN wasborn of humble parents, at Newmarket,in the county of Cork, on the 24th ofJuly, 1750. His mother, whose maidenname was Pilot, is said to have beena woman of considerable intellect ; and,as he himself took pleasure in asserting,was the inspirer of those talents whichrendered his future career so brilliantand successful. The first indication hegave of the nature of his abilities was,on the arrival of a puppet-show at hisnative village, when he supplied theplace of punch's prompter, who hadbeen taken ill; and satirized, with muchwit and severity, the vices and follies ofthe neighbourhood. The circumstancewhich led to his education is thus describedby himself: " When a boy, Iwas one day playing at marbles in thevillage ball alley, with a light heart andlighter pocket. The gibe and the jestwent gaily round, when suddenly thereappeared amongst us a stranger of avery remarkable and cheerful aspect;his intrusion was not the least restraintupon our merry little assemblage; onthe contrary, he seemed pleased, andeven delighted; he was a benevolentcreature, and the days of infancy,(after ail, the happiest we shall eversee,) perhaps, rose upon his memory.God bless him ! I see his fine formatthe distance of half a century, justas he stood before me in the little ballalley in the days of my childhood.His name was Boysee, he was the rectorof Newmarket. To me he took a particularfancy. I was winning, and wasfull of waggery, thinking every thingthat was eccentric, and by no meansa miser of my eccentricities ; every onewas welcome to a share of them ; andI had plenty to spare, after havingJOHN Pilot CURRAN.freighted the company. Some sweetmeatseasily bribed me home with him.I learned, from poorhouse, my alphabetand my grammar, and the rudiments ofthe classics. He taught me all hecould, and then sent me to the schoolat Middleton. In short, he made aman of me."Curran having acquired, at theacademy last-named, a very rapidknowledge of both ancient and modernliterature, went, on the 16th of June,1767, as a sizar, to Trinity College,Dublin. Here he was chiefly notoriousfor his wildness, cleverness, and improvidence;but did not attempt toobtain any literary distinction beyondthat of a scholarship; entertaining atthis period of his life, and ever afterwards,a great contempt both for collegeand professors. One of themhaving discovered that he had enteredinto a licentious connexion within thewalls of the college, publicly lecturedhim on the impropriety of keeping idlewomen in his rooms, upon which hedenied the charge, observing that henever kept any women idle in hisrooms. For this he was condemnedto pronounce an oration in laudesdecori, which he made the vehicle of asatire against the censor, Dr. Duigenan,and it gained him so much reputationamong his companions, that they alladvised him to make the bar his profession,which, from that moment, hedetermined to follow. On admittinghis immoral engagements to a friend,he attributed the cause of them to hisperusal of Rousseau's Eloise, which hadfor a while strongly excited his passions.The sprightly turn of his mind,however, did not prevent him from thepursuit of grave, and even religiousstudies ; and when he left college, hewas thoroughly acquainted with theScriptures, whose splendid poetry oftenformed the basis of his ideas.In 1773, he went to London, andbecame a student of the Middle Temple,subsisting, not as has been said, on thefruits of his literary labours, but on asmall stipend allowed him by Dr. Boysee,and money lent him by his affluentcompanions. In 1774, he married thedaughter of Dr. Creagh, of Dublin, whoabout that time thus wrote of him.He possesses a good understanding ;is an excellent scholar ; has some taste,and, for his years, I think, a tolerablejudgment; has uncommon abilities; isa proficient in music; has received anuniversity education ; is now preparingfor the bar, for which profession he possessesextraordinary talents; and willdisappoint all his friends if he does notdistinguish himself there." In 1775,he returned to Dublin, and, to use hisown words, " with no other possessionbut a pregnant wife," was called to theIrish bar. About the same time, hebecame acquainted with Mr. Wolverton,afterwards Lord Avonmore, in conjunctionwith whom, in 1779, he formeda patriotic and convivial society, called,The Monks of the Order of St. Patrick,to which almost all the eminent Irishopposition characters of that time belonged.In 1804, whilst speaking beforeLord Avonmore, between whom andhimself some misunderstanding thenexisted, he made so affecting an allusionto their former meetings at this society,that the judge burst into tears, andafter the rising of the court, sent for,and immediately became reconciled lohim. Though the small portion he receivedwith his wife kept him fromactual want, yet, without friends andconnexions, he, at the commencementof his professional career, encounteredmany pecuniary difficulties. Returningone day from the sessions at Cork, hewas vehemently assailed by his landlady,who insisted on the payment ofher rent for his lodgings. To avoid herreproaches he strolled into the streets,and fell into one of those gloomyreveries, to which, notwithstanding hissocial vivacity, he was often subject.After walking about," said he, " in astate of despondence, I returned homealmost in desperation, when, to my surpriseand joy, the first object I saw,was a large brief, with twenty guineaswrapped up beside it" From thatday he dated his prosperity ; the attorneywho employed him, was sopleased with his talents, that he afterwardsgave him business to the amountof 1,100, and in a short time he wasable to set up his carriage, attesting atthe same time his success and his wit,by taking for his motto, per variescauses.For the introduction to his prosperityhe was indebted to the friendship ofLord Kilwarden, his earliest patron,JURISPRUDENCE.and who, though differing from him inhis opinions and politics, continued tothe end of his life a firm and faithfulfriend. In 1782, at which period hewas rising in popularity, both as anadvocate and a champion of the people'srights, the Duke of Portland, thenlord-lieutenant, gave him a silk gown ;and in the following year, when LordWorthington was at the head of theIrish administration, Mr. Longfield,afterwards Lord Montreville, offeredhim a seat for one of his boroughs,which he declined, in consequence ofthe difference existing between themin their political opinions. Mr. Long-field,however, reminding Curran of hislarge family, hinted that his good sensewould prevail over the romance of unprofitablepatriotism, and acting uponthis supposition, returned him, a fewdays afterwards, for the borough ofKilbeggin, in Westmeath. Accordingly,he took his seat in the Irish parliament,and in the first important division votedagainst the minister ; immediately afterwhich, not being able to vacate hisseat, he purchased another, insistingon Mr. Longfield's filling it up. Havingsoon after drawn upon himself theodium of Mr. Fitzgibbon, afterwardsLord Clare, then attorney-general, towhom he was both personally andpolitically opposed, the latter, in 1785,challenged him to a duel, and throughlife manifested towards him the mostinvincible hatred. The following words,used by Curran in a debate, duringwhich Mr. Fitzgibbon had fallen asleep,were the cause of the quarrel whichled to their meeting : " 1 hope (observedthe former) I may say a fewwords on this great subject, withoutdisturbing the sleep of any righthonourable member ; and yet, perhaps,I ought rather to envy than blame thetranquillity of the right honourable gent.I do not feel myself so happily temperedas to be lulled to repose by thestorms that shake the land. If theyinvite rest to any, that rest ought notto be lavished on the guilty spirit"In the duel, Curran, observing that Mr.Fitzgibbon took aim at him for nearlyhalf a minute, exclaimed, after thelatter had fired ineffectually, "twasnot your fault, Mr. Attorney ; you weredeliberate enough !"At the bar, he manifested the samedaring and independent spirit as he didin the senate, and often provoked theanger of the judge, by his perseverancein argument, and that of the witnessby his dexterity of cross-examination.The severity of his scrutiny in the latterbranch of his profession led him intoa duel with Mr. St. Leger, a witness inthe celebrated cause of Nealee againstLord Doneraile ; and his tenacity ofinterruption from the bench madeLord Clonmell, chief-justice of theKing's Bench, more than once threatento commit him ; on one of whichoccasions he replied, " then it will bethebest thing your lordship has committedthis term." He could not refrainfrom the indulgence of his love ofpleasantry, even on the gravest occasions.In a speech on a criminal trial,just after the establishment of BotanyBay, he observed, " that should thecolony thrive, and become a regularcivil government, what a pleasant thingit would be to have the laws administeredby judges reprieved at thegallows !" On another occasion, whenlie was interested in the finding of a truebill by the grand jury, one of themcame into court, and, in rather abungling manner, explained why it wasignored, which so enraged Curran thathe exclaimed, " You, sir, can have noobjection to write upon the back of thebill, Ignoramus for self and fellow jurors;it will then be a true bill." He howeverfrequently lamented his propensityfor jesting, and asserted that it was anexpensive habit, for that it cost himnearly 500 a year. In 1787, he visitedFrance and Holland, observing of thelatter country, " that it was so miserablylow, it appeared to be swimming for itslife."While in the zenith of his popularity,he suffered a severe blow from theelopement of his wife with the Rev.Mr. Sands, against whom he broughtan action, and was awarded damages,of which he did not enforce the payment.Though, according to one of hisbiographers, he was himself guilty ofconjugal infidelity, he never recoveredthe wound occasioned by the desertionof his wife, whom he supported by anannuity, which did not cease at hisdeath, and at her request once visitedher in London, during an illness sheexpected would prove fatal. After thisJOHN Pilot CURRAN.event, it was some time before he wouldconsent to be concerned in similar cases,as the remembrance of his own, heused to say, " would let in the brineof the salt sea through the chinks ofa vessel not yet sufficiently staunchedor secured to keep it out." Finally,however, he overcame these sensations,and became counsel for the plaintiff inthe case of the Rev. C. Massey againstthe Marquis of Beaufort, for crim. con.in which, by embodying his client'sfeelings with his own, he so affectedthe Jury that they gave a verdict for10,000. It is said that the queen, onreading a report of this speech, couldnot refrain from frequently weeping.His talents in parliament, where hesupported the principles of Fox, causedovertures to be frequently made to himby the opposite party ; but to these hewould never listen, though, on oneoccasion, his friend, Lord Kilwarden,offered to procure for him the office ofsolicitor-general, provided he wouldsupport the administration, and renouncewhat his lordship .designatedthe cause of a desperate faction. Hewas a great advocate for Catholicemancipation ; and on the questioncoming before the house one evening,Mr. Ogle, to get rid of the debate,moved the order of the day, whichCurran thus powerfully denounced:I have no words to express the indignationI feel at the despicable attemptto skulk from the discussion of soimportant and so necessary a question,by the affectation of an appeal to oursecresy and our discretion. Rely uponit, sir, if our enemies condescend tofeel any curiosity as to our discussions,you might as well propose to concealfrom them the course of the Danube,or the course of the Rhine, as thecourse of a debate in this assembly,as winding, perhaps, and perhaps asmuddy as either." He concluded byreprobating the protraction of Catholicemancipation ; among the consequencesof which, he said, would be the emigrationof every man of influencefrom Ireland; an union with GreatBritain, and the extinction of the Irishname as a people.In the debate on the habeas corpussuspension act, which passed some timebefore 1798, one of its opposers, inaddressing a speaker, who advocatedthe measure, said, " Were you incarceratedfor six months under this lawyou so much extol, I should be gladto see how you would look." " Look,"said Curran ; " perhaps he would notlook a bit the worse."Towards the end of the session, in1790, having made some severe commentson the dependents of the viceroy,one of them publicly threatened toassault him, on which he sent to MajorHobart, desiring his dismissal, and thatgentleman refusing his request, a dueltook place between them. His professionalcareer was chiefly distinguishedby his defence of the leaders of therebellion in 1798, which he conductedso warmly and strenuously, that, butfor the friendship of Lord Kilwarden,his loyalty would have been more thansuspected, particularly as letters werefound in his house from Robert Emmett,a conspirator, who had formed an attachmentfor one of Curran 's daughters.His most celebrated speeches were indefence of Patrick Finney, Oliver Bond,the brothers Shares, Theobald WolfeTone, and Major Rowan ; after thetrial of the last of whom, he was carriedhome triumphantly on the shoulders ofthe populace. He also delivered somevery splendid speeches in defence of theliberty of the press, particularly on thetrial of Finery, in 1797, for a libel onLord Camden.At the commencement of his professionalcareer, he practised at thechancery bar, where his business was becomingconsiderable, when Lord Clare,his most bitter enemy, was appointedchancellor, who evinced such a prejudiceagainst any cause in which he wasemployed, that he at length lost all hisclients, and was compelled to confinehis practice to the common law courts.The contempt with which Lord Clarelistened to his arguments, may be conceivedfrom the fact of the formerhaving, one day, brought into courta large Newfoundland dog to amusehimself with, on which Curran stoppedspeaking, and being told to go on bythe chancellor replied, " Oh ! I begpardon, I took it for granted that yourlordship was employed in consultation."However, in 1790, in a cause betweenthe aldermen and common council ofDublin, tried in the council-chamber,he took the opportunity of revengingJURISPRUDENCE.himself against Lord Clare, by alludingto the unconstitutional conduct of aformer chancellor, and at the same timedrawing a portrait of the existing one,who was so exasperated at the satire,that he would scarcely suffer Curran toconclude his address. In 1800, the unionhe had prophesied took place, of whichhe always spoke as the last and mortalblow to the existence of Ireland asanation, and was so much affected, thathe for some time contemplated retiringfrom his own country to America. Onpassing the house where the measurehad been carried, with a friend who hadgiven his support to it, and who, inallusion to the building, said he couldnot behold it without a feeling of horror ;he replied, no wonder that the murderershould start at the ghost of his victim.In 1802, he visited Paris a second time,with letters of introduction to the Frenchcourt; and called several times on theCount Artois, without being able toobtain an interview. He was mortifiedby the circumstance; and a friend, towhom he mentioned the fact, afterwardstold him that he had seen the count'saide-de-camp, and informed him howhurt he had felt at no notice being takenof his visit; which so wounded Curran'spride, that he burst out into a frenzy, exclaiming," I'm disgraced, I'm humbledin the eye of that fellow! I'm miserable!"On his return from France, he fell intoa state of melancholy, which, even insociety, he could not altogether shakeoff. His forensic powers, however,were not diminished, and in the year1803, he made his celebrated speech indefence of Owen Kirwan.In 1807, after the death of Mr. Pitt, hewas made master of the Rolls in Ireland,an office of little political importance,which he accepted with chagrin, as itdestroyed his hopes of the attorney-generalship,the only appointment hewas ambitious of obtaining. His elevationmade no alteration in his demeanour,which, in his judicial capacity,received an additional urbanity amountingalmost to docility. Expressing hisabhorrence of the chuckling presumptionof authority, " I hate, said he, " toappear like a drill-sergeant, with mycane, rapping the knuckles of the private,when I become a colonel from theranks. It is vulgar; and it is the worstand most dangerous of all vulgarities ;it is founded always on bad taste, on badpassions, on some perversion of thejudgment leading into a hateful error ;it is the offspring of conscious inferiority."After holding the mastershipof the Rolls for six years, he, in 1814,retired upon a pension of 2,700 perannum. In the same year he visitedParis a third time, staying a few monthspreviously in London, where he becameacquainted with Home Tooke,Sheridan, and Lord Erskine, and wasalso introduced to the Prince Regent.Whilst he was dining, one day, at hisroyal highness's table, in company withLord Erskine, the latter, in allusion tothe bar, observed, that by being amember of it, " he had not only addedto his wealth, but to his dignity, as ithad been the means of raising him tothe peerage." " I," replied Curran,making an obeisance to the regent,am a better practical instance of itsadvantages. It has, in my person, raisedthe son of a peasant to the table of hisprince." About two years before hisretirement, he was invited to stand ascandidate for the town of Newly, onwhich occasion he made his last publicspeech of any importance, but gave upthe contest after a few days, on seeingthe impossibility of his success. Afterhis return from France, he went toreside at Crompton, near London, wherehe became daily more depressed inspirits,and grew shy and reserved. Hesaw scarcely any of his friends, withthe exception, of Mr. Moore, the poet,and Mr. Godwin, the novelist, to thelatter of whom, he had been greatlyattached during the last twenty yearsof his life, and who has thus dedicatedhis Mandeville : " To the memory ofCurran, the sincerest friend I ever had."In 1816, he went, for a few weeks, inthe hope of improving his health, toCheltenham, but lived there in a stateof complete hypochondriacal, to whichhe remained a victim till the day of hisdeath. In 1817, his health rapidly declining,he visited Ireland for the lasttime, with a view of settling his worldlyaffairs; and in the September of thesame year, passed a short time again atCheltenham, from whence he wroteseveral letters, evincing the mental disquietudeunder which he laboured. Inone of them he says, " As to Hopeherself, I have closed my accountsJOHN Pilot CURRAN.altogether with her. Drawing perpetuallyupon my credulity, 1 now findher, too late, an insolvent swindler. Ihave no hope for my persecuted country."The last sentence proves howdeeply the fate of Ireland interestedhim ; and, indeed, the cause of thedecline of his health has been ascribedsolely to the gloomy presages he had ofhis country's future miseries, which,after the union, he never ceased to predict.On his way to London from Cheltenham,he was attacked with paralysis,and on his arrival at home, he complainedof " a mountain of lead on hisheart," and sunk into a state of despondencyfrom which he never recovered.On the 8th of October, he wasseized with a fit of apoplexy, and on the14th of the same month, expired at hishouse at Crompton.Notwithstanding the melancholy stateof his mind previous to his death, hispassion for jocularity still manifesteditself. On his physician observing thathe coughed with much difficulty, hereplied, " That is rather surprising,since 1 have been practising all night."And shortly after, having received aslight apoplectic shock, and being toldnot to mind it, it would pass away ; heremarked, " I am to understand it, then,only as a boyish runaway knock at thedoor, eh ?"Curran excelled more as an advocatethan as a senator, though in the lattercharacter he made a greater number ofenemies ; for through the whole of hispolitical career, he preferred the sacrificeboth of friendship and self-interest,to the slightest dereliction of principle.The great charm of his eloquence atthe bar, was its persuasiveness, whichcreated in the minds of juries a prejudicein his favour sometimes evenagainst their better judgment. Ridiculeand sarcasm were also powerfulweapons at his command, and the skillwith which he conducted a cross examinationwas such, that no witnesscould conceal from him the most guardedtruths, in eliciting which, he saved thelife of more than one prisoner indictedfor high treason. In important cases,he seldom concluded his address withoutsome religious allusion, which heintroduced with such solemn impressiveness,as frequently to awe the juryinto an acquittal of his client. Notwithstandingthe courage with whichhe pursued his professional labours, insuch a degree as almost to intimidatethe bench itself, his first appearanceat the bar was marked by excessivenervousness and timidity. On holdinghis first brief, it was only necessary forhim to read a short sentence from hisinstructions, which he did so hurriedlyand inaudibly , that the chancellor, LordClifford, requested him to speak louder,and to repeat his words; upon whichhis agitation became so extreme, thatthe brief dropped from his hands, anda friend near him was obliged to takeit up, and do as the chancellor desired.His enunciation was naturally indistinct,and his voice harsh and shrill,but he totally overcame these defectsby reading slowly and aloud every day,a practice he recommended to all youngbarristers. His first notions of eloquencehe ascribed to hearing the compositionsof the mourners over the deadat the country wakes, from attendingwhich, he also imbibed a taste forpoetry, an art he sometimes successfullypractised. His productions, ofwhich the best is, The Plate Warmer,are more witty than sublime, and writtenless with reference to subjects ofgeneral interest than to particular occasions.The following epigram toNapoleon, on seeing the pillar raisedby him at Boulogne, will afford anexample :When ambition attains her desire,How fortune must laugh at the joke !You rase in a pillar of fire,Vou sink in a pillar of smoke.He is said^also to have written a criticismon Milton's Paradise Lost, awork to which he took many objections.He was very much urged by his friendsto write his own memoirs, which, froman extract on the subject found amonghis papers, it is supposed he at onetime contemplated. He had also preparedthe outline of a novel, but didnot complete it, as much in consequenceof his aversion to the labours ofthought, as of his fondness for thevioloncello, on which he was an excellentperformer, and often practised inhis leisure hours. Music of any kindhad an effect upon him amountingalmost to inspiration; and the daybefore making any important speech,he used to assist his imagination byJURISPRUDENCE.running carelessly for hours over thestrings of his violoncello. It was in thismanner that he prepared himself formany. of his most important causes; butagood fox chase on the day previous,was with him an occasional, and, heused to say, the best preparation. Onthe subject of studying a client's case,he observed, " I always perused mybriefs carefully when I was concernedfor the plaintiff; but it was not necessaryto do it for the defendant,because, you know, I could pick up thefacts from the opposite counsel's statement."The person of Curran was below themiddle stature, and his countenance,excepting when enlivened by the movementof a fine piercing eye, extremelyunprepossessing. At first sight, heappeared more like a boy than a man ;he was aware of his personal defects,and used to say, it cost him more,on account of them, to get at the heartof his hearer. His features, however,assumed, when he was speaking, anexpression of inspiration, and his eloquenceoften caused the reporters, whiletaking notes, for some time, to forgettheir purpose. In addition to theanecdotes already related of him, wequote the following, as strongly illustrativeof his wit and character. Oneevening, in the house of commons, Mr.Harrington having had some words withLord Norbury, then Mr. Toler, theyboth went out together with such symptomsof hostility, that the speaker desiredhis attendants to pursue them,and bring them back. Toler wascaught by his coat fastening in a door,which completely tore the skirts off, andHarrington was brought in on a man'sshoulders, and deposited in the house.The speaker desired them to givetheir honours forthwith that the mattershould proceed no further; on which,Toler got up to defend himself; buthaving no skirts to his coat, made sucha ludicrous figure, that the house burstinto a roar of laughter, which Curranrenewed, by gravely saying, that " itwas the most unparalleled insult everoffered to the house ! as it appearedthat one honourable member hadtrimmed another honourable member'sjacket within its walls, and nearlywithin view of the speaker!" LordCarleton, coming into court one day, forthe purpose of adjourning it, his lordship,in lamenting the necessity, said, " Iam aware that an important issue standsfor trial; but, the fact is, I have metwith a domestic misfortune which hasaltogether deranged my nerves!Poor Lady Carleton (in a low tone tothe bar) has most unfortunately miscarried,and " " Oh! then, my lord!"exclaimed Curran, " there was no necessityfor your lordship to make anyapology, since it now appears that yourlordship has no issue to try." Beingonce asked, what an Irish gentleman,just arrived in England, could mean,by perpetually putting out his tongue,he replied, " I suppose he's trying tocatch the English accent." Being onceengaged in a legal argument, behindhim stood his colleague, a gentlemanwhose person was remarkably talland slender, and who had originallyintended to take orders. The judgeobserving, that the case under discussioninvolved a question of ecclesiasticallaw, " Then," said Curran, " Ican refer your lordship to a high authoritybehind me, who was once intendedfor the church, though, in my opinion,he was fitter for the steeple' Whilstcross-examining a horse jockey's servant,he asked his master's age. " Inever put my hand in his mouth totry," answered the witness. The laughwas against Curran, until he retorted,You did perfectly right, friend, foryour master is said to be a great bite."He had a great horror of fleas, andafter being greatly annoyed by themone night, observed, " they seized uponmy carcass with such ferocity, that theymust have pulled me out of bed, hadthey been unanimous." On some oneobserving that no man ought to beadmitted a member of the bar whodid not possess a certain number ofacres of land, he inquired, " Pray, howmany acres make a wise-acre ?" Whilsthe was at college, a fellow-student beingcensured for pronouncing falsely thesyllable mi, in the latin word nimirum,he excused him by saying, it would bevery strange if he were acquainted withwhat, according to Horace, was knownby only one Roman :Srptimiuf, CUudi, nimirum intelligent unus."An account of his interview withBoysee, the friend and educator of hisLORD ERSKINE.youth, is thus related by himself.About five and thirty years after leavingthe school at Middleton, when I hadrisen to some eminence at the bar, andwhen I had a seat in parliament, on myreturn, one day, from court, I found anold gentleman seated alone in my drawingroom; his feet familiarly placed oneach side of the chimney piece, and hiswhole air bespeaking the consciousnessof one quite at home. He turned roundit was my friend of the ball-alley. Irushed instinctively into his arms, andburst into tears. Words cannot describethe scene which followed : ' You areright, sir; you are right,' said I; ' thechimney-piece is yours the picturesare yours the house is yours. Yougave me all I have my friend myfather my benefactor !' He dined withme ; and in the evening I caught the tearglistening in his eye, when he saw poorlittle Jack, the creature of his bounty,rising in the house of commons to replyto a right honourable. Poor Boysee ! heis now gone : and no suitor had a largerdeposit of practical benevolence in thecourt above. This is his wine; let usdrink to his memory."It is said, that he was originally intendedfor the church, and the pecuniaryassistance he received from Boysee, wasfor the purpose of enabling him to takeorders, and his mother, who lived to seehis success at the bar, always regrettedhe had not done so. Though improvidentin his youth, his family expenseswere managed with an economy whichmay be almost said to have amountedto niggardliness. Notwithstanding hisdisposition to ennui, he rose with thesun, summer and winter, and bathed incold water every morning, during bothseasons. His death is supposed to havebeen hastened by the mortification hefelt on being obliged, through the enmityof Lord Clare, to abandon hispractice at the Chancery bar; and alsoby his regret on the dissolution of hisfriendship with Mr. Ponsonby, after hisappointment to the mastership of theRolls, the subordinate situations in thepatronage of which office having beenpromised by the former to some of hisfriends, created a quarrel betweenthem : Curran having refused to becompromised by arrangements overwhich he never had any control.THOMAS, LORD ERSKINE.THOMAS ERSKINE, third son ofthe Earl of Buchan, was born in 1750,and received his education at the collegeof St. Andrew's, in Scotland. In theearly part of his life, he served both inthe navy and army, and was stationedfor three years at Minorca, as ensignin the first regiment of foot. In consequenceof his marriage and increasingfamily, he, on his return to England,left the army, and, by the advice of hismother, who jestingly said, he must belord-chancellor, prepared himself forthe bar, to which he was called in 1778.Previously to this step, he had enteredhimself a fellow-commoner of TrinityCollege, Cambridge, where he was remarkableboth for his talent and wit;the best specimen of which is his well-knownparody of Gray, written on hishaving been detained from dinner atthe college hall, by the tardiness of hishair-dresser; the first stanza of whichruns thus :Ruin seize thee, scoundrel Coe !Confusion on thy frizzing wait !Had'st thou the only comb below,Thou never more sh eldest touch my pat.Club, nor qurur, nor twisted tail,Nor en thy chattering, barber, shall availTo lave thy horse-whipped back from daily fear.,From Cantab'f curse, from Cantab's than.In 1778, Mr. Erskine took the honorarydegree of M. A. and was called tothe bar in Trinity term of the sameyear, having previously studied undera pleader of eminence. His practicewas at first small ; and he is said, onhaving been complimented on his healthand spirits about this period, to haveremarked, that " he ought to look well,as he had nothing else to do but to grow,as was said of his trees, by Lord Aber-corn."He cultivated popular speakingat a debating society, and his firstJURISPRUDENCE.opportunity for forensic display, wasin the defence of Captain Baillie, whohad accidentally heard of his abilities.Such was the effect of his speech onthis occasion, that nearly thirty briefswere put into his hand before he quittedthe court. In the course of his address,he named Lord Sandwich, who, thoughnot openly standing in the characterof prosecutor, was supposed to be chieflyinstrumental to the proceedings againstCaptain Baillie ; Mr. Erskine was proceedingto say, " Lord Sandwich hasacted, in my mind, such a part " whenhe was interrupted by Lord Mansfield,who observed, " that his lordship wasnot before the court ;" " I know thathe is not," was the spirited reply ofthe advocate; " but for that very reasonI will bring him before the court."He was employed, in 1779, as oneof the counsel for Admiral Repel ; and,in the spring of the same year, establishedhis fame, by appearing at the bar of thehouse of commons, for a bookseller,named Carman, when he successfullyopposed a bill intended to renew themonopoly of printing almanac. Suchwas the effect of his argument andeloquence, that though Lord North, whohad introduced the bill, had requestedhis brother-in-law, Lord Elliott, to comefrom Cornwall, expressly to support themeasure, that nobleman voted againstit, declaring openly, in the lobby, thatafter Mr. Erskine's speech, he could notconscientiously act otherwise.In February, 1781, he appeared ascounsel for Lord George Gordon, whowas acquitted; and, in 1783, so highwas his reputation, that though hehad been only five years at the bar, itwas thought advisable to confer uponhim a patent of precedence. In thesame year, he was brought into parliamentas member for Portsmouth, andspoke in favour of the India bill, introducedby the Whig ministry, thoughhis speech on the occasion greatly disappointedthe expectation of his friends,and gave to his enemies a handle fordetraction.In 1784, he defended, with his customarytalent, the Dean of St. Asaph,who had been indicted for publishingthe Dialogue between a Gentlemanand a Farmer, written by Sir WilliamJones ; and, in the course of the trial,boldly avowed his concurrence withthe defendant's principles. Havingsome misunderstanding with JudgeBuller, as to the wording of the verdict,he was told to sit down ; when hedeclared that he knew his duty as wellas his lordship knew his, and that hewould not alter his conduct.He was, soon after, appointedattorney-general to the Prince of Wales; and, in1789, defended Mr. Rochdale, with success,for a libel reflecting on the houseof commons.In the session of 1790, he spoke inparliament on the abatement of impeachmentsby a dissolution, and wasso exhausted in the course of his speech,that he was unable to continue hisargument. In 1792, he opposed theintroduction of the traitorous correspondencebill, and supported a motionmade by Mr. (afterwards Lord) Grey,for a reform of parliament. In the sameyear, he acted as counsel for ThomasPaine, the author of the Rights of Man,and was, in consequence, deprived of hisoffice of attorney-general to the Princeof Wales. In 1793, he appeared as theadvocate of a Mr. Frost, an attorney,charged with uttering seditious languagein a public coffee-room ; and, inthe following year, defended, at Lancaster,a gentleman named Walker, whowas indicted for a conspiracy to overthrowthe government. In the ensuingOctober, he distinguished himself by hisbrilliant defence of Hardy, and others,for a conspiracy; by whose acquittalhe saved the country from a horribleextension of the law of constructivetreason. The interest excited by thetrial had never been equalled, and sodense was the mob outside the court,that the judges could scarcely proceedto or from their carriages. He wasequally successful in favour of HomeTooke, who was arraigned immediatelyafter the other prisoners had been pronouncednot guilty. He continued toadvocate, in the house of commons,those principles capable of preserving andPromoting public liberty ; and, in April,800, on the trial of Hatfield, for shootingat the king, he, in an admirablespeech, replete with argument, completelyestablished the derangement ofthe prisoner.In 1802, he visited Paris, and waspresented to Napoleon ; who, however,passed him with the simple question,LORD ERSKINE.Eyes vous register ? In the same year,he became attorney-general to thePrince of Wales, who revived in hisperson also the dormant office of chancellorand keeper of the seals of theDuchy of Cornwall. In 1803, he actedas commander of the Law Volunteers ;but resigned the post in 1806, on hisappointment to the office of lord highchancellor. He resigned in 1807, andappeared but little in public life subsequentlyto that period.During his latter years he imprudentlyformed a second marriage witha person in a very humble capacity,and his private anxieties were considerablyincreased by pecuniary embarrassment.The Prince Regent bestowedupon him, in 1815, the order ofthe Thistle; and, he died of an inflammationof the chest, on the 17th ofNovember, 1823, at Almondale, aboutsix miles from Edinburgh. He hadthree sons and five daughters by hisfirst wife, and had other children byhis second.The eloquence of Lord Erskine wasnot characterised merely by the eleganceof its diction and the graces of its style,but was peculiarly remarkable for itsstrength and earnestness. The excellenceof his speeches did not consistmerely in the beauty of separate passages,but even in the longest of hisoratorical displays there was no weaknessor flagging. Being without thatdeep legal knowledge so necessary loanadvocate, he, with admirable tact, suppliedits place, by an undeviating adherenceto one great principle of justice,by which he gave an air of sincerityto his arguments. His eloquence wasaddressed more to the feelings than tothe taste of his audience ; his ornaments,it has been said, were ratherthose of sentiment than of diction.Notwithstanding the strength of hisown powers, both mental and physical,he frequently took laudanum to assistthem ; and was much encouraged in "hisaddress, if he observed that a fellowadvocate concurred with his arguments.He generally used, whilst speaking, toturn to Garrow, for a look of applause;and, on one occasion, not finding it,whispered to him, " who do you thinkcan get on, with that d d wet blanketof a face of your's before him?" Hewas also equally averse to a disagreeable,as a disagreeing countenance; and,on one occasion, seeing a barrister whosemouth was in continual contortion, hewhispered to one of his colleagues, thathe could not proceed if the fellow wasnot removed. He seldom displayedmuch humour ; a deficiency that mayhave arisen from the generally seriouscharacter of the subjects he had to treatof. His speeches exhibit frequent evidenceof deep philosophical reflection ;displaying, it has been remarked, aprofound acquaintance with nature andthe springs of human action. Howevercompletely his mind might appear absorbedin the subject of his address, hehad the singular faculty of being aliveto the emotions expressed in the facesof the jury, which he always made theguide of his oratory. Such was hisindependence, that he would neverallow himself to be deterred by thejudge from the rigid performance of hisduty; and the same spirit of honesty ledhim sometimes, as in the case of Paine,to sacrifice the highest political advantages.He never degraded his characterby base servility to the government;but reached the highest point of legalpreferment by a road in which hisintegrity did not incur the slightestblemish. As chancellor, he was so shorta time in office, that it is impossible tospeak fairly of his qualifications for thatexalted station ; though it is certain,he would have administered the lawswith at least unsullied impartiality.He often regretted his appointment tothe chancellorship; his acceptation ofwhich, prevented him from again pleadingat the bar, and laid the foundationof his subsequent difficulties. Indeed,he used to say to his friends, that hisonly reason for having accepted thechancellorship was to verify the predictionof his mother, as he might havebeen lord-keeper instead ; an officewhich would not have prevented himfrom resuming his situation of advocate.In parliament he disappointed theadmirers of his splendid talents, butincreased the respect of those whovenerated the enlarged liberality andconsistency of his principles. In court,his demeanour towards the bench wasrespectful without being subservient ;and, to his professional brethren, he wasremarkably courteous. He is said tohave possessed some vanity; and even31GJURISPRUDENCE.had a few weaknesses, which appear tobe much at variance with the generalgreatness of his character. He used tokeep the audience, in a crowded court,waiting for a few minutes after a causehad been called on, before he madehis appearance ; and when he entered,was invariably distinguished by a pairof new yellow gloves, and a wig dressedwith more care than those of his brotherbarristers. He and Dr. Parr, who wereboth remarkably conceited, were in thehabit of conversing together, and complimentingeach other on their respectiveabilities. On one of these occasions,Parr promised that he would writeErskine's epitaph ; to which the otherreplied, that " such an intention on thedoctor's part was almost a temptationto commit suicide."Lord Erskine had received a religiouseducation, and was deeply impressedwith the excellence of the Christian doctrine.He was aware that he had somemoral failings of his own ; but they didnot arise from any disregard to theduties of religion. His errors were,however, not of a flagrant kind; and,compared with his many virtues, weresaid to be " spots in the sun," by LordKenyon, who was a sincere admirer ofhis character.Lord Erskine had many personal advantages.His features were animatedand regular, and his action extremelygraceful. His constitution was remarkablystrong; and, for twenty-seven yearsthat he had been in practice, he wasnever prevented from attending courtone day by bodily indisposition.EDWARD LAW, LORD ELLENBOROUGH.EDWARD LAW, the fourth son ofEdmund, Bishop of Carlisle, was bornat Great Salkeld, in Cumberland, in1750; and having imbibed the firstrudiments of learning from his maternaluncle, the Rev. Humphrey Christian,he was placed at the Charter House, andwas the first scholar on the foundationwho ever became a governor of thatschool. He removed, in a short time,to Peter House College, Cambridge; ofwhich his father had been, or was, themaster ; and he gained the honourabledistinctions of third wrangler, and firstmedallist. He was now entered ofLincoln's Inn ; and having well qualifiedhimself, by unremitting industry,practised successfully as a specialpleader. On the northern circuit, fromhis family connexions, he quickly obtainedemployment, and attracted favourablenotice by his powerful eloquence.Encouraged by Chief-justiceWilles, Mr. Justice Buller, and by hisrelation, through marriage, Mr. Wallace,though disliked by Lord Kenyon, hespeedily advanced in his profession;and, in 1781, obtained a silk gown;after which he was employed to defendWarren Hastings, on his impeachmentby the house of commons. Thisopportunity became a stepping-stoneto the highest preferment ; for thoughBurke was his antagonist, he provedhimself equal to the great task he hadundertaken ; and was so vehement indefence of his client, that he was oftencalled to order. He discussed all thecharges separately, with infinite ability,and affirmed that the crimes of whichthe governor was accused, existed onlyin the splendid oratory of the managers.On the formation of the Addingtonministry, in 1801, he was made ,and almost divided thebusiness of the King's Bench with hisrival, Mr. Erskine. These powerfulcombatants were constantly engaged inawordy war; and Law, from the aptapplication of his classical knowledge,often, by a ready quotation from Virgil,was enabled to gain the advantage ofhis great antagonist. Impetuous, bold,and intolerant of contradiction, Lawoften overstepped the bounds of parliamentarylicense ; and, during the debateon the claim of the Prince ofWales, he remarked that the revenuesof the Duchy of Lancaster were placedunder the control of Henry the Sixth,during the minority of the Prince ofWales. On this, the opposition observed,that the law was shortly afterchanged. " Ay," said he, " in timesLORD ELLENBOROUGH.of trouble : the honourable gentlemenopposite seem well versed in thetroubles of their country." The wholeopposition cried out " Order !" and anexplanation took place. Nor did thejudicial character escape his causticwit. With contemptuous impatiencehe was listening to the decision of alearned judge, who took occasion toobserve, that in a certain case he hadruled a certain point. " You rule !"said the attorney-general, loud enoughfor the ears of the bystanders ; " Yourule ! you were never fit to rule anythingbut a copy-book." On the prosecutionof Governor Wall, for cruelty,he was vehement and rancorous in hisinvectives against the accused, and heldhim up as an object for public scorn.In 1802, he succeeded his old enemy,Lord Kenyon, as chief-justice of theKing's Bench, and took the title ofBaron, from the little village of Ellen-borough,where his ancestors had, formany generations, lived, in humble condition,as respectable yeomen. On thebench he had his antipathies, and borea strong aversion to the present Lord-chancellorBrougham. That learnedlord is noted for a peculiar motion of thenose, and, in allusion to this, Lord Ellen-boroughsaid, that " Mr. Brougham'snose was always twitching and quivering;and, as if conscious it deservedbeing pulled, seemed anxious to get outof the way." During the sixteen yearshe presided in his court, his judgments,which were always delivered in themost elegant language, evinced his deepknowledge of the law in all its branches ;and, on mercantile subjects, are consideredof the very highest authority.In 1817, on the trial of WilliamHone, for infamous and profane libels,Lord Ellenborough solemnly chargedthe jury to bring in a verdict of guilty.The prisoner accused his judge of partiality,and improper interruptions tothe defence ; and his lordship, thoughafflicted with a severe illness, wentthrough the harassing proceedings withsurprising fortitude. His mind, however,received, from the acquittal of theprisoner, a disappointment from whichit is said never to have recovered. InNovember, 1818, he retired, in badhealth and spirits, from the fatigues ofoffice, and expired in the Decemberfollowing. He left a fortune of 240,000 ;and obtained for his son, the presentLord Ellenborough, the valuable sinecureof the chief clerk on the Pleas sideof the King's Bench.Lord Ellenborough was a man ofcommanding intellect ; an active politicalpartizan ; and, being impatient ofinterruption, was bold and overbearingin the delivery of his sentiments. Hisspeeches had the semblance of sincerity,and lie infused into them the eleganceof classical learning without its pedantry.In the house of lords he preservedthe same lofty bearing ; and, onthe subject of the investigation into theconduct of the Princess of Wales,charged those who had propagated reportsprejudicial to the investigators,of whom he was one, with havinguttered what was " as false as hell !"He was a determined opponent of thecatholics ; on which subject his enemiesallowed him the merit of consistency.A true insight into his character maybegained from the few words used byLord Grenville, when he assigned hima seat at the council-board : " Ithought I perceived bad times approaching,and I selected him as astrong and resolute mind." Howeverunusual may have been this introductionof a lord chief-justice into thecabinet, it was a wise choice ; for ministersnever had a firmer or morecourageous supporter. As a judge, heupheld the existing laws and institutions; but the bias he evinced againstprisoners on political trials, has renderedhis name unpopular; and hewas much disliked by the bar, to whichhe was disposed to be, in general, arrogantand overbearing.In private life, he delighted in theluxuries of the table : his establishmentwas on a splendid scale, and his lady, adaughter of Commissioner Tory, anda descendant of Sir Thomas More, wasa leading character in the world offashion. His lordship had so high arespect for the culinary art, that hesent to his brother, then Bishop ofChester, who was about to give asumptuous entertainment, a turtle, accompaniedby an experienced cook,saying, in a letter, that he well knewthere was nobody at the palace whocould do justice to the turtle, and hehad therefore despatched a competentperson for the occasion.JURISPRUDENCE.SIR Victory GIBBS.VlCK Mary GIBBS, son of a surgeon,at Exeter, was born in 1750 ; and,having been educated at Eton, was removed,in 1770, to King's College,Cambridge, where he proceeded B. A.in 1772; at which period, he enteredthe society of Lincoln's Inn as a lawstudent. He took the degree of M. A.in 1775, about which time he was inpractice as a special pleader; but wassoon after called to the common lawbar, though he did not distinguish himselfthere until employed, in 1794, asthe colleague of Erskine, in the defenceof Hardy. He soon after obtained asilk gown, and became counsel to thePrince of Wales ; after which, he receivedthe appointment of chief-justiceof Chester.In 1805, he received the honour ofknighthood, with the office of solicitor-general;and, in the same year, becamea member of parliament. In1807, he became attorney-general, andwas returned to the house of commonsas the representative of the borough ofGreat Bedwin. He subsequently presentedhimself as a candidate to theelectors of Cambridge University, andwas returned by a majority of threeover Lord Palmerston. In 1810, hepresided at the assizes of Bristol, ofwhich place he was recorder, and thewalls were placarded with the wordsNo Gibbs ! but no rioting took place,a few windows only being broken. In1812, he was elevated to the of the Common Pleas, and took,for his motto, Leges juraque. In 1813,he became chief baron of the Exchequer; but retired in three years frompublic life, owing to the bad state of hishealth, and died in Russell Square, onthe 8th of February, 1820.Sir Vickary Gibbs was an elegantclassic, and had, while at Eton, distinguishedhimself as the author ofsome verses in the Musae Etonenses.In the house of commons, he waslistened to with attention, though hewas without the eloquence necessaryto form a parliamentary orator. As abarrister, he possessed profound legalknowledge, and had a happy talent ofreplying to his opponent with a sarcasm,generally tinctured by acrimonyor pettishness : on this account, hecommonly went by the name of VinegarGibbs, among his professional associates.In his judicial character, hepreserved an unimpeachable impartiality;and his decisions were nevercalled in question on the ground of injustice.His speeches on the trials ofHardy and Home Tooke were published.The latter used to say, thatwhen Sir Vickary undertook his case,he was utterly ignorant of the detailsof common law ; but he was an aptscholar, and soon acquired an astonishingproficiency. He married a sisterof Lieutenant-general Fraser.JOHN SCOTT, LORD ELDON.JOHN SCOTT, Earl Eldon, brother ofLord Stowell, and son of a coal-fitter,at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, was born onthe 4th of June, 1751, and was educatedunder the Rev. Hugh Moses, in thegrammar-school of his native city.Owing to the smallness of his father'smeans, he was about to quit entirelyall studious pursuits, for some trade orcalling; when his old instructor, whoj had noticed his talent and industry,mentioned his situation, with regret, toan opulent gentleman, who offered toiassist in furnishing the means for youngScott to proceed to one of the universities.He was accordingly removed toOxford, where, as a member of Universecity College, he applied himself zealloudly to his studies, and he took theI degree of B. A. in 1770. In the fol-lordELDON.lowing year, he obtained the chancellor'smedal for the best English essay ;and, in 1773, proceeded M. A., havingpreviously obtained a fellowship. Hewas afterwards, in 1801, made, bydiploma, a Dec. L., on being electedhigh steward of the university.In 1772, he became a student of theMiddle Temple, and followed his professionalpursuits with a zeal and assiduity,that has scarcely ever beenparalleled. He seldom entered intoany of the common recreations of youngmen, but his amusement consisted inturning pieces of poetry into the formof legal instruments ; and, it is said,he even converted the ballad of ChevyChace into the style and nature of abill in chancery. His singular applicationrendered him an object of remark; and a celebrated Chancery barristeris reported to have predicted ofhim, that he would one day be lord-chancellorof England. Having beentwo years with a special pleader, he wascalled to the bar ; where, notwithstandinghis profound legal knowledge,he at first made but little progress, onaccount of his extreme diffidence. Hepractised, for a time, as an equity draftsman;but such was the confinementattendant on the occupation, that heatone time, had serious thoughts ofabandoning his profession, and takingholy orders, or of retiring into smallpractice in his native county. It issaid that, with this intention, he hadactually given up his chambers, whenhe was prevailed on, by a London attorney,to accept a brief, in a casewhere it was supposed his profoundlegal acquirements would be productiveof considerable benefit. On this occasion,he met with great success, and determined,in consequence, to persevereagainst his timidity. Other opportunitiessoon occurred for the display ofhis abilities, which were commendedby Lord Thurlow, who, it is related,offered him a mastership in Chancery ;which, however, he thought it prudentto decline accepting.He rose rapidly into repute ; and, in1783, obtained a patent of precedency,being, about the same time, returned toparliament for VVeobly, in the interestof Lord Weymouth. Though he stipulatedfor the liberty to vote accordingto his conscience, he sided with Mr.Pitt, which opened his way to promotion;and, in 1788, he became solicitor-general,receiving, on the occasion, thehonour of knighthood. It is said, heexpressed a modest desire to declinethis mark of distinction ; but the kingexclaimed, " Pio, pio ! nonsense !"and dubbed him accordingly. In 1793,he was advanced to the attorney-generalship,and it so happened, that heprosecuted more persons for libel thanany two of his predecessors. In 1794,he conducted the celebrated prosecutionsfor treason, on which occasion hewas opposed by Erskine; who, notwithstandinga speech from Sir JohnScott, which occupied nine hours inthe delivery, obtained the acquittal ofthe prisoners.In 1799, Sir John became chief-justiceof the Common Pleas, and wascreated a peer, by the title of BaronLord Eldon. In 1801, he was raisedto the woolsack, as he has since declared,against his own inclination, butinobedience to the express desire ofhis sovereign. In 1806, on the accessionof the Whigs to power, he resignedhis office, but resumed it soon afterwards,when his own party was restoredto the government. He had a considerableshare in framing the regencybill, which passed on account of themental aberration of George the Third;and, on several occasions, his legalability proved highly valuable to theministers. After the accession of Georgethe Fourth, on the arraignment ofQueen Caroline, Lord Eldon took adecided part against her majesty ; andhis conduct gave so much satisfactionto the king, that he was raised to thedignity of Viscount Income, in Dorset.He took a principal share in all thepolitical debates ; and, by his supportof the corn bill, rendered himself sounpopular, that, on leaving the houseof lords, he was pursued by a mob tohis residence, in Bedford Square, fromwhich he escaped, by the assistance ofa sentinel, over a wall, into the gardensof the British Museum. The populaceeven went so far as to attach a rope toa lamp-post at his own door, for thepurpose, as they threatened, of hangingthe chancellor.Soon after the death of Lord Liverpool,he retired finally from office, andreceived from George the Fourth aJURISPRUDENCE.piece of plate, inscribed " to his friendJohn, Earl of Eldon." He interferedbut little in public affairs, until the introductionof the bill for the relief ofthe dissenters, and that for setting atrest the catholic claims ; both of whichmeasures he assailed with earnest, butfruitless, opposition.Lord Eldon was regarded in parliamentmore for the force of his argument,than the power of his eloquence;his speeches being addressed to the understanding,rather than to the passionsof his audience. He filled the officeof chancellor with the utmost impartiality; but incurred the imputation ofdelay, from his unwillingness to deliverjudgment without giving, to every pointin the case, the fullest deliberation.He belonged," says Parker, in hisHistory of the Court of Chancery, " tothe old school of Aristotelian lawyers,deeply versed in the fictions, subtleties,and procedure of English equity ; and,as a pedantic linguist conceives the acquisitionof dead languages to be notthe means of acquiring knowledge, butknowledge itself; so, Lord Eldon mistookthe means for the end, the formof justice for the substance of equity."In private life he is unobtrusive andunostentatious in character ; with a benevolenceof disposition, which, thoughhe is addicted to hoarding wealth, hasprompted him to numerous acts ofcharity. His impartiality and conscientiousexactness, says a writer in 1824,are proverbial. The impatience, theirritation, the hopes, the fears, the confidenttone of applicants, move him notajot from his intended course ; he looksat their claims with the lack-lustre eyeof professional indifference. In politics,he has been, at least, consistent,however he may have been mistaken ;and, certain it is, that his opinions havebeen founded on education and onbooks, rather than observation and experience.He is bigotted to those prin -cipher he has imbibed from his youth,and has mixed so little with the world,that he sees no necessity, in the alteredcircumstances of the time, for a correspondingchange in matters which shouldbe influenced by the improved state ofsociety.Lord Eldon has never displayedmuch innate genius ; but his promotionis entirely owing to his indefatigabletoil, and the pliancy with which he hasinvariably yielded to the will of hisemployers. So little has he evinced ofnatural ability, that his utility to governmenthas always been shown inhis slow, but sedulous support of theirmeasures; in which services his valuehas consisted in the dogged assiduityof his labours, into which he has neverinfused the energy of native ability.Though his political conduct has beenfar from popular, he has frequently,by the patience with which he hasborne their taunts, in a great degreedivested of their force the attacks of hisadversaries. From his youth he hasbeen averse to mixing in society, andrefused the opportunity of becomingacquainted with many illustrious literarycharacters. When urged by hisbrother, afterwards Lord Stowell, toaccompany him where he would meetthe celebrated Johnson, he replied,that " the doctor might be a greatman, but he could not draw a bill inchancery." Notwithstanding his studiouspropensities, he was fond of thewit of others ; and, sometimes, evenhimself would venture upon a jest,when in the performance of the dutiesof his office. Soon after his elevationto the woolsack, while sitting in thehouse of lords, hearing Scotch appeals,Sir John Clerk, who was pleading, happenedto say, in broad Scotch accent,In plain English, my lords;" on whichLord Eldon replied, good humoured,In plain Scotch, you mean." " Naematter," answered the advocate ; " inplain common sense, my lord, andthat's the same in all languages, ye'llken if ye understand it."Lord Eldon married, in 1772, a MissSureties, the daughter of a banker, atNewcastle; having eloped with her toGretna. The friends of both partieswere averse to the match ; and, goingwith his bride to Oxford, he sought aninterview with his brother, who advisedthe lost young man," as he termedhim, to follow the law as a profession.His straitened circumstances at thisperiod, were proverbially the cause ofthose exertions which led to his futureelevation.JOHN REEVES.JOHN REEVES.JOHN REEVES was born in 1752,and completed his education, whichwas commenced at Eton, at the Universityof Oxford, where he graduatedM. A. in 1778. At this time he was alaw student; in 1779, he published hisChart of Penal Law, and An Inquiryinto the Nature of Property and Estates ;and, in 1780, was called to the bar, bythe society of the Middle Temple, ofwhich he afterwards became a bencher.In the same year of his call, havingbeen appointed a commissioner of bankrupts,and being averse " to the wranglesof Westminster Hall," he devoted himselfto legal literature, and, in 1783,printed his first volume of the Historyof the English Law. In the followingyear, he published a second volume ofthe same ; and, in 1787, in which yearLord Hawkesbury gave him the appointmentof law clerk to the board oftrade, a second edition of it appeared,in four volumes, in which it was broughtdown to the end of the reign of Philipand Mary. This work procured him ahigh reputation ; and is as remarkablefor its profound erudition as its purityof language, which is equally free fromancient inelegance and modern affectation.In 1785, he produced his celebratedpolice bill ; under which, on itshaving passed with the most flatteringmajorities in both houses of the Britishparliament, he was appointed receiver,as a reward for his exertions.In 1791, a new court of judicaturehaving been established in Newfoundland,he was sent out as chief-justice ;and, on his return, furnished the governmentwith such amendments totheir previous bill, respecting the judicatureof Newfoundland, as laid thefoundation of a proper administrationof justice in that island. In 1793, heprinted Historical Researches concerningthe Government of Newfoundland,the profits of which being considerable,he devoted to the benefit of the Frenchrefugee clergy. About the same time,he established the Loyal Association,which, although it favoured the viewsof government, Mr. Pitt, at first, opposed,but subsequently sanctioned andencouraged, and was the means ofsimilar institutions being established alloverthe country. In 1795, he printedhis celebrated pamphlet, entitled,Thoughts on the English Government;which, in consequence of the words,without the king, the parliament isno more," was declared, on the motionof Mr. Sheridan, to be a breach of privilegeof the house of commons. Itwas also resolved by the house that thepamphlet should be burned, and that aprosecution should be instituted againstthe author, which was carried intoeffect at Guildhall, in May, 1796, whenthe jury gave the following verdict:The pamphlet which has been provedto have been written by John Reeves,Esq. is a very improper publication ;but being of opinion that his motiveswere not such as are laid in the information,we find him not guilty."He subsequently printed three lettersOn the English Government; and, in1799, he was appointed one of theking's printers ; in which capacity hepublished several new editions of theCommon Prayer Book and Bible, particularlyone of the latter, in ninevolumes. In 1803, he accepted thecharge of the alien office ; in 1805, publishedproposals for a Bible society ;and, in 1807, appeared anonymouslyhis Observations on the Catholic Bill.Both previously and subsequently tothe last-mentioned year, he publishedseveral other pamphlets on legal andconstitutional subjects ; and died, unmarried,on the 7th of August, 1829;being, at the time, a fellow of the Royaland Antiquarian Societies, and a treasurerof the Literary Fund, to which hehad been appointed in 1800. He isdescribed as having been a man of considerableability, learning, tact, andenergy of character. Although he diedrich, he would not make a will; observingthat the law would dispose ofhis property precisely as he wished itto go. As a politician, his views werenarrow, though zealous and sincere ;and whilst he was an ardent advocatefor civil and religious liberty, he opposedall popular innovations.JURISPRUDENCE.SIR WILLIAM Narrow.WILLIAM Narrow, son of a clergymanand schoolmaster, was born in1755, at Hadley, near Barnet; and,having been educated by his father, hewas placed in an attorney's office, butsoon after became a student of Lincoln'sInn, and a member of the Robin Hooddebating society. His necessary studiesbeing completed, he went to the bar,where he soon became famous, at theOld Bailey, for his tact in the cross-examinationof witnesses. He was generallyengaged to plead the cause ofprisoners j but being, one day, retainedfor the prosecution, End having asked awitness, "if he would swear, upon hisoath, that for ten years past he had everbeen employed for an honest man," theopposing counsel suddenly stopped thereply, by observing dryly, " the best wayfor the witness to answer that question,is to put it to the learned gentlemanhimself." His fame continued to increase; and he commenced his politicallabours by actively promoting the electionof Fox and Townshend, for Westminster.He soon after became memberof parliament for Gallon ; and, inApril, 1793, was made a king's counsel.Having for some time sustained his independence,he, at length, accepted theplace of attorney-general to the Princeof Wales, and subsequently, obtained thechief-justiceship of Chester. He shortlyafterwards received the honour ofknighthood, with the office of solicitor-general,and became attorney-generalon the 4th of May, 1813, at whichperiod he was member of parliamentfor Eye, in Suffolk. On the 9th ofJune, 1814, he formed part of the deputationthat waited on the King of Prussia,then in London, to present a diplomaof the Royal Humane Society to hismajesty, who had recently saved thelife of a Polish peasant. During thetime Sir William held the attorney-generalship,he supported the measuresof the Tory ministry, but introducedinto parliament many bills of a verysalutary tendency. In February, 1817,he strongly advocated the passing ofLord Castlereagh's bill for suspendingthe habeas corpus act, which was almostthe last effort of his parliamentarycareer, having been, shortly afterwards,sworn in a baron of the Exchequer.He continued, at the death of Georgethe Fourth, to fill that office, the dutiesof which he performed with talent, impartiality,and dignity. As a lawyer,he 1 was remarkable for his extraordinaryacuteness, of which, during his practicein the Old Bailey courts, he gave numerousexamples; often saving the lives ofprisoners, by detecting flaws in the indictments,or by ingeniously nullifyingthe evidence. In his capacity of actorshe did not use with severitythe extraordinary powers attachedto his office ; and, it has been observed,there were fewer prosecutions for libelin his time, than during the career ofany one of his predecessors. For thissign of his forbearance, he was complimentedin the house of commons, on the8th of May, 1816, by Mr. Brougham.In politics, he commenced his careerwith liberal principles, which he soonexchanged for those of an oppositecharacter. He had been the friend ofFox ; but became, in a short time afterwards,the advocate of Castlereagh.An anecdote is related of Sir WilliamGarrow, who, it is said, while attorney-general,made use of some observationsin the court of King's Bench, whichwere highly offensive to the GermanBaron Hompesch. The latter waitedon him, at an early hour in the morning,for satisfaction, and insisted that hisvisit should be announced to Sir William,who had not yet risen. " Tell thebaron I'm in bed, John," was Garrow'sreply to the servant who had awakenedhim; but he was told that his visitorwould wait till he was up, to which SirWilliam is said to have answered, " Willhe ? tell him then, that, by G ! he shallwait till doomsday."There was a marked distinction betweenhis conduct at the bar and on thebench; the former being impetuous, andsometimes coarse, towards a witness ;while the latter was every thing thatwas urbane and courteous.'LORD MANNERS.THOMAS MANNERS SUTTON, LORD MANNERS.THOMAS MANNERS SUTTON,son of Lord George Manners, (whoafterwards assumed the name of Sutton,)was born February 24th, 1756,and educated at the Charter House,whence he removed to Emanuel College,Cambridge. Here he obtained thehonour of being fifth wrangler; and,upon quitting college, having enteredhimself a student of Lincoln's Inn, heindue course, commenced practising asabarrister. He was appointed solicitor-generalto the Prince of Wales ; and, asmember for Newark, (which town herepresented in five parliaments) he ably,but unsuccessfully, introduced to theattention of the house the claims ofthe prince, as Duke of Cornwall. Thetalent he displayed on this occasion waseulogized by Pitt and Fox ; and, aboutthis period, Mr. Sutton was made ajustice of Anglesea, Carnarvon, andMerionethshire. In 1802, he receivedthe honour of knighthood, and the appointmentof the king's solicitor-general.In ] 803, he defended the claims ofthe Prince of Wales, when his embarrassmentsbecame a subject of parliamentaryinquiry ; and, although nolonger the prince's servant, advocatedhis royal highness's cause with so muchzeal, as to gain himself a high reputationfor dignified consistency. SirThomas Sutton, in the same year, actedas one of the official accusers of ColonelDespard ; a duty he discharged withoutacrimony or exaggeration. In 1805, hesucceeded Sir Beaumont Hotham, asone of the barons of the Exchequer;and, in 1807, was raised to the peerage,by the title of Baron Manners, of Boston,in the county of Lincoln. Immediatelyafter, he was appointed lord-chancellorof Ireland, as the successorof Mr. Ponsonby ; but, on demandingthe seals, found that he had accidentallyleft behind him the authority for theassumption of his new dignity. Duringthe long period that Lord Manners heldthe Irish seals, his conduct, as an equityjudge, was admired by every party; and,in one of his decisions, he openly challengedany man to impugn his motives,or to substantiate against him a chargeof political bias. Since his resignationof the seals, Lord Manners has beenan occasional speaker in the house ofpeers; and supported the memorableinquiry respecting the conduct of thelate Queen Caroline.Lord Manners has been twice married: in 1803, to Anne Copley, daughterof Sir Joseph Copley, who died in 1814,by whom he had no issue ; and, in 1815,to Jane Butler, sister to Richard LordCahir.SIR JOHN Nichols.JOHN Nichols, born about 1756,completed his studies at St. John's College,Oxford, where he took the degreeof B.C.L. in 1780. He became amember of Doctor's Commons in 1785,and took the degree of D. C. L. in theyear ensuing. He promoted the armedassociation among the advocates, on thethreat of invasion; and, on that account,it is said, obtained the appointment ofking's advocate-general, which was conferredon him on the 31st of October,1798, when also he was knighted. Helikewise acted as official to the archdeaconof London and Middlesex ; and,was lieutenant-colonel of the St. Giles'sVolunteers. In 1802, he became memberof parliament for the borough ofGreat Bodmin, and commenced hiscareer in the house of commons by supportingMr. Pitt's principles. In 1806, hewas returned to parliament as memberfor Hastings ; and, in the following year,was elected for both Rye and Beeral-son. In February, 1812, he opposeda motion for a committee to considerJURISPRUDENCE.the catholic claims; and, on the 24thof November, the late Lord Colchesterwas, upon his motion, elected speakerof the commons. He again opposedthe catholic claims in the following session;and in May, 1817, voted againstSir F. Burdett's motion for a reform ofparliament. He had been returned tothe house of commons, in 1813, as memberfor Great Bedwin, of which placehe was, in 1818, and 1820, elected therepresentative. In February, of thelatter year, he acted as one of the privy-counsellors,before whom the Cato Streetconspirators were examined; and, in1821, he contested, without success, therepresentation of Oxford University.In February, 1822, he again becamemember of parliament for Great Bed-win; and, in June of the same year, hepresided in the Prerogative court, on thecase of Mrs. Serres, who called herselfthe Princess Olive, of Cumberland,whose claims he dismissed, on the groundthat they did not come within hisjurisdiction. In 1823, he opposed theIrish tithe commutation bill ; and, in1826, again became member of parliamentfor Great Bedwin. In June, 1828,he assisted in establishing the King'sCollege, in London; and, in 1829, obtainedleave to bring in a bill for theregulation of clerks' salaries in theEcclesiastical court. He held, in additionto the offices named above, that ofjudge of the arches' court, and peculiarof Canterbury.His acquirements were considerable,though his rise has been attributed tohis steady adherence to Mr. Pitt'sprinciples. In parliament he was usefulto his party ; being an effective speaker,and an able opponent of the Whigopposition. He was most firmly attachedto existing institutions, arid tothe established church, of which he wasa consistent supporter, both in and outof parliament.SIR SAMUEL Reilly.THIS distinguished character, the descendantof French refugees, and the sonof a jeweller, was born, in Faith Street,Soho, London, on the 1st of March,1757. He was at first destined for theprofession of an attorney, and was placedunder a respectable gentleman in thesix clerks' office ; but having resolvedto study for the bar, he, in 1778, becamea member of Gray's Inn, and a pupil ofMr. Spranger. The regularity of hishabits, at this time, is described in aletter to his brother-in-law, Mr. Roget,to whom he writes: " You ask mehow I spend my time : in a manner souniformly the same, that a journal ofone day is a journal of all. At six, orsooner, I rise, go into the cold bath,walk to Islington, to drink a chalybeatewater, return and write or read till ten ;then go to Mr. Spranger's, where Istudy till three, dine in Faith Street,and afterward* return to Mr. Spranger's,where I remain till nine. This is thehistory of every day, with little othervariation than that of my frequentlyattending the courts of justice in themorning, instead of going to Mr.Spranger's, and of often passing myafternoons at one of the houses ofparliament"After passing some months on thecontinent, Mr. Romilly was, in June,1783, called to the bar, an event towhich he had looked forward withsuch anxiety, that he used to say,the nearer he approached the periodonce so much wished for, the morehe dreaded its arrival." His naturaldiffidence, and nervous temperament,rendered his advancement, at first, slowand doubtful, and he derived but littleemolument either from his attendancein the equity courts at Westminster,or on the midland circuit, which hewent for a few years. He, in themean time, however, by his attentionand perseverance, laid the foundationof his future eminence, and possessedhis friends with such favourable anticipationsof his subsequent career, thatDr. Parr used to say of him, " Mark mywords, Romilly is a very great man ; we,who are his friends, know this now ;but, in a little time, the whole worldwill know it."SIR SAMUEL Reilly.About 1797, at which time he was aleading counsel, these predictions beganto be realized; and, in the followingyear, he formed a matrimonial alliancewith the eldest daughter of FrancisGarrett, Esq., which gave additionalstimulus to his professional exertions.On declaring his sentiments to the lady,he is said to have remarked, that hemust " acquire two fortunes, beforethey could be married: the first forthose to whom he owed his first duty,his parents ; the second for her."In 1800, he was made a king's counsel;and, in 1806, having been appointedsolicitor-general, and knighted,he became member of parliament forGainsborough; and his splendid talentsrendered him of great service to theopposition, who selected him to conductthe evidence on the impeachmentagainst Lord Melville. His lordship wasacquitted, and even restored to office,from which he was, however, finallyremoved, owing, it is said, to an eloquentspeech made by Romilly, inwhich he observed on the improprietyof keeping in office " a man, who, notwithstandinghis acquittal, stands impeachedon the journals of the commonsby a vote that no one had hithertopresumed to move for rescinding." InJ807, on the dissolution of the Whigadministration, he went out of office,which, during the short period it wasretained by him, he had endeavoured,on all occasions, to render subservientto the interests of the people. His firstparliamentary efforts were directedtowards the repealing or amending ofsome of the anomalous and severe laws,which, at that time, disgraced the stagof England; and, in a fewinstances, he succeeded.In the course of the different sessions,he procured the repeal of the statute of8 Elis. c. 4, by. which the punishmentof death was inflicted for the offenceof privately stealing from the person ;effected an improvement in the bankruptlaw, by introducing the provisionof the statute, 49 Geo. III. c. 121 ; andbrought in three bills for the repeal ofcertain statutes making the punishmentcapital for privately stealing, in a shop,goods of the value of five shillings.His senatorial exertions in this cause,were also seconded by his pen, fromwhich his Observations on the CriminalLaw of England, as relates to CapitalPunishments, appeared about the timeof his introduction of the subject toparliament.In 1812, he was invited to stand asacandidate for Bristol, but was subsequentlyreturned for Arundel, having,in the former contest, polled as manyas one thousand seven hundred votesagainst the coalition of his two opponents,by whom he was thus defeated. In1815, he designed the chancellorship ofthe county palatine of Durham, whichhe had held for some time previously ;and, continued to support, in the houseof commons, the interests of the people,being always zealous in his oppositionto any thing that tended, in his opinion,to the diminution of public liberty.Among other popular measures, he obtainedleave to bring in a bill to repealthe game law act, which made it felonyfor an unqualified person to be foundwith a gun between eight at night andseven in the morning; and supportedSir F. Burdett's motion for parliamentaryreform.He frequently presented petitionsagainst the suspension of the habeascorpus act, and such was his popularity,that in August, 1818, he was invited tostand, at the general election, as a candidatefor Westminster, for which cityhe was returned, (without any effort onhis part) at the head of the poll. Hisgratification at this event, however, wasmuch allayed by his solicitude for LadyRomilly, whose declining health gavehim so much uneasiness, that lest herexpected dissolution might derange hisintellects, he made a will, providing forthe care of his children, and the custodyof his own estate and person, in theevent of his becoming a lunatic. Hiswife died in the October following,after which time he sank into a profoundmelancholy ; and the distressed stateof his mind soon affected his health somuch, as to render necessary a consultationof physicians. On the 2nd ofnovember, 1818, he awoke about twoo'clock in the morning, and his doctor,who sat at the bedside, seeing that hispatient was restless, inquired if he shouldcall up Dr. Roget, his relative, whoslept in the next apartment. Duringthe short absence of the medical manfrom the room, Sir Samuel rushed fromhis bed, and seizing a razor, inflicted aJURISPRUDENCE.wound on his throat, which terminatedhis existence. He was sensible whenhis friends re-entered his chamber, andmade signs that he wished to write, butwas prevented, by weakness, fromaccomplishing his desire. The familywhich he left, thus deprived of bothparents, were six sons and one daughter.Sir Samuel Romilly was a humaneand excellent man, who carried intopolitics the same benevolent principlesby which his private conduct was invariablyguided. His talents were of anature to forward his philanthropicviews: he possessed the combinedpowers of eloquence and argument,which, in the senate, considerably assistedhis advocacy of popular andliberal doctrines. His oratory was distinguishedby the total absence of ambiguityor equivocation, by strengthof reasoning, pungency of satire, andenergy of expression. His parliamentaryindependence was never sulliedthroughout the whole of his career;and, though a consistent supporter ofpopular rights, he was the true friendof social order, and urged the necessityof obedience to the existing lawsof England. The firmness and remarkableintegrity of his character,gained him the respect of all parties,while his splendid abilities secured himthe admiration both of his friends andenemies. Mr. Wilberforce spoke ofhim as " a man whose general knowledgewas only equalled by his professionalattainments ; and who broughtto the subject, all the lights of the understanding,and all the advantages of experience."His private virtues enhancedthe lustre of his public fame, and, indeed,were the basis of that politicalhonesty for which he was so singularlyeminent. In person, although hestooped a little, he was dignified ; andhis modesty of manner ingratiated himwith all whom he happened to meetin society. The susceptibility of hisnature was superior to the strength ofhis mind ; and the too great sensibilityof his feelings, was, doubtlessly, thecause of his unhappy dissolution.How noble and pure, " says hisbiographer, Mr. Roscoe, " was the ambitionof Sir Samuel Romilly, we maylearn from the following beautiful passages,where he has explained the principleson which he proposed his reformsin the criminal law. ' It is not,' saidhe, on addressing the house of commons,from light motives, it is from nofanciful notions of benevolence, that Ihave ventured to suggest any alterationin the criminal law of England. Ithas originated in many years' reflection,and in the long-established belief thata mitigation of the severe penalties ofour law will be one of the most effectualmodes to preserve and advance thehumanity and justice for which thiscountry is so eminently distinguished.'And he thus concludes the same speech :actuated by these motives, it is notto be imagined that I shall be easilydiscouraged by any of the various obstaclesso commonly, and perhaps withpropriety, opposed to every attempt toalter an established law : upon such aresistance I calculated, but am not tobe deterred. I knew that my motivesmust occasionally be misunderstood bymany, and might possibly be misrepresentedby others. I was not blind tothe road where prudence pointed topreferment; but I am not to be misledfrom comforts which no external honourscan bestow. I have long thought that itwas the duty of every man, unmovedeither by bad report or by good report,to use all the means which he possessedfor the purpose of advancing thee wellbeingof his fellow-creatures: and Iknow not any mode by which I can soeffectually advance that well-being, asby endeavouring to improve the criminallaws of my country. It has beeninsinuated, that indebted as I am to thelaw, commendation rather than censureought to be expected from me; and ithas been asserted, that under the pretextof proposing apparently immaterialalterations, my real object is to sap andundermine the whole criminal law ofEngland. Such insinuations and assertionshave not, I am well aware, beenmade by any of my honourable andlearned friends by whom I am now surrounded,and who have witnessed mywhole professional life; but they havebeen made, and I must, of course,suppose, have been really believed.' "SIR JAMES Scarlet.SIR JAMES Scarlet.THE subject of this memoir was bornin 1760, at Jamaica, where his familyhad been long settled, his brotherholding the office of chief-justice of theisland. Being sent to England for hiseducation, he was placed at a publicschool ; whence he removed to TrinityCollege, Cambridge, in 1780 ; and havingproceeded to the degree of B. A.,he, in 1784, quitted the university.Having come to London, he eagerlypursued the study of the law, as amember of the Inner Temple; devotinghimself, however, principally to theperusal of the modern reports, an acquaintancewith which he conceived tobe the most practically useful part ofa legal education. Having been calledto the bar, he chose the northern circuit,and soon gained celebrity for his dexterityin the examination of witnesses.In 1816, up to which period his reputationhad been gradually increasing, heobtained a silk gown ; and, soon after,offered himself, on the Whig interest,as a representative in parliament ofLewes, in Sussex. This, and a subsequenteffort, proved, however, unsuccessful; but, by the exertions of hisWhig friends, Mr. Scarlettt was returned,by Lord Fitzwilliam, to the house ofcommons as member for Peterborough.Finding that he was not calculated toshine as a senator, he judiciously spokebut seldom in parliament, though heintroduced a bill for the reform of the-poorlaws, which he was unable tocarry. He afterwards, unsuccessfully,contested the representation of ; and, being afterwardsmade attorney-general for the Duchyof Lancaster, conducted the prosecutionswhich arose out of the dreadfulriots at Manchester.On the accession of Canning to thepremiership, Mr. Scarlettt was knighted,and appointed to the office of king'sattorney-general. He continued in hisplace during the administration of theDuke of Wellington, whom he assistedin the abolition of the test and corporationacts, as well as in the passing of thebill for the relief of the catholics. Inhis official capacity, he rendered himselfunpopular, as well as the governmentof which he formed a part, by theprosecutions instituted against a papercalled the Morning Journal, for libelson the ministers.As a barrister, Sir James Scarlettt isless remarkable for his oratorical powers,than for the acuteness of his reasoningpowers and his tact in the examinationof witnesses. His knowledge of thelaw is extensive ; and his opinion,therefore, has the respect of the judges,while he contrives skilfully to obtainthe ear of the court, by making it apoint never to press an argument whenhe finds that those whom he addresses,have made up their minds on the subject,and that it is no longer possible toinfluence their judgments. He has ahappy facility in detecting the weakpoints of a case; and invariably usesthis power of perception for his ownbenefit, and the disadvantage of hisopponent. His success, as a pleader, is tobe attributed more to these qualities, andto his thorough knowledge of modernpractice, than to his acquaintance withthe established principles on which thelaws are founded.In the house of commons, he neverevinced the capabilities for becomingdistinguished in the senate. Withoutthe power of oratory, he does notpossess that classical taste or learningwhich might have supplied the deficiency.His political conduct hasbeen inconsistent and unpopular. Hecommenced his career as a Whig, butafterwards became a proselyte to Toryprinciples. As attorney-general, herendered himself particularly obnoxious,by his prosecutions of the press ; which,during his continuance in office, wereunusually frequent. In private life, heis said to be a man of gentle mannersand an amiable disposition. He hasfor many years been married, and hashad a numerous family. In person, heis rather above the middle size, stoutlymade, and his countenance, which isround and florid, is by no means expressiveof intellect.JURISPRUDENCE.SIR WILLIAM GRANT.THIS eminent lawyer, the son of acollector of customs in the Isle of Man,was born about 1760, near Reddensin Scotland. He received therudiments of his education at the gram-mareschalof Elgin, and completed hisclassical studies at the University ofAberdeen. Being intended for the bar,he was afforded the means of followingthat profession by his uncle, a merchantin London ; where, on his arrival,young Grant was entered a student ofone of the inns of court. After his callto the bar he went to Quebec, where hepractised ; and was present at the siegeof that town, and is reported to haveassisted at the works with a musketin his hand.Having practised successfully for someyears, he returned to England, wherehe gained the friendship of Mr. Pitt.He was soon invested with a silk gown,and a patent of precedency. He thenbecame solicitor-general to the queen,and, lastly, master of the Rolls, onwhich occasion he was knighted, andadmitted a member of the privy-council.He sat in parliament for Shaftesbury,for the borough of New Windsor, and,finally, for the county of Banff; anddistinguished himself in the house ofcommons, by very able speeches onvarious occasions, particularly, in 1791,respecting the abatement of the impeachmentof Warren Hastings ; and,on the subject of the Russian armament,in 1792. In February, 1805, hesupported the address to the crown onthe Spanish war; and in April, whenMr. Whitbread made his celebratedmotion against Lord Melville, he arguedthat an inquiry should be gone intowith a view of ascertaining whether theact of parliament had been violatedwith a corrupt intention." Soon after,(April 8th,) the master of the Rolls dividedwith the minority, and was one ofthe committee chosen to investigate thetenth report of the naval commissioners ;on which occasion he vindicated hisown political conduct, and stated hisintervention in respect to the petitionof the sheriffs of London, as a proof ofhis independence. On the llth ofJune, when Mr. Whitbread movedan impeachment, he objected to thatmeasure, on the ground " that no newcase of aggravation had been made outagainst Lord Melville." He furtherobserved, that the object of punishmentwas example; and he would callon every one who now heard him, tolay his hand on his breast and declare,whether enough had not already beendone to prevent any future treasurer ofthe navy from treading in the steps ofthe noble lord. In 1806, he opposedthe American intercourse bill; for whichhe received the thanks of a committeeof merchants of the city of London;and, in 1807, he animadverted, at considerablelength, on the bill brought inby Sir Samuel Romilly, relative to theliability of landed estates as to debts.Sir. Grant was distinguished for hisabilities, both as a senator and a judge;and had the merit of having raisedhimself to his high station by his owntalents alone. Few of his judgmentswere reversed ; and the following anecdoteproves the disinterested and liberalmind with which he exercised his functions: When it was in contemplationto increase the income of the judges,the king directed that Sir William Grantshould be asked, what advance of salaryhe expected; to which he replied, thathe did not want any, as he was perfectlysatisfied with what he had. The kingon receiving his reply, observed, " I amglad I have got one satisfied man inmy dominions."Sir William Grant was one of thosemen," observes the author of the PublicCharacters for 1823, in the Life of LordLyndhurst, " who, coming from almostthe lowest grade of private life, andlosing not only his youth, but a largeportion of his manhood, in obscurityand a very humble station, emerged, atlength, by the vigour of his own mind;and, in a very short period, passed allthose in the race of honour and emolumentwho had previously (if they hadknown) despised his presumptuousexpectations."LORD TENTERDEN.CHARLES ABBOTT, LORD TENTERDEN.CHARLES ABBOTT, the son of ahair-dresser, was born in 1760, at Canterbury,where his father attended uponthe prebends and canons, who, it is said,extended their patronage of him to thesubject of our memoir. Accordingly,by the aid of his father's employers,young Abbott was sent to the grammar-schoolof the city ; and is said to havebeen " grave, studious, and well behaved;reading his books instead ofjoining in the sports of his schoolfellows."Whilst at school, he becameacquainted with a boy named Thurlow,an illegitimate son of the chancellor; towhom, it is related, he was indebtedfor becoming, in 1781, a member ofCorpus Christii College, Oxford. Herehe distinguished himself by his application,learning, and propriety of conduct;and, after having graduated Bea., he, in1784, obtained the university poeticalprize, the subject of which was GlobusAerostaticus, the Air Balloon ; chosen,probably, from the circumstance ofLunar having just then first introducedthe air balloon into England.In 1786, he was awarded the chancellor'sgold medal for the best proseessay on The Uses and Abuses ofSatire. In 1788, lie took the degree ofM. A. ; and, becoming fellow and tutorof his college, acted in that capacity tothe son of Mr. Justice Duller. By theadvice of this famous lawyer, who expresseda high opinion of his abilities,Mr. Abbott came to London; and, enteringhimself of the Middle Temple,devoted himself to the acquirement oflegal knowledge, and soon became eminentfor his abilities as a special pleader.After continuing in this capacity forabout two years, he was called to thebar, and for some time held rather arespectable than a distinguished rankinhis profession. He had the goodfortune, however, soon to attract theparticular notice of Lord chief-justiceEllenborough, by the publication of hiscelebrated work on shipping ; which,it is said, would not have been unworthyof Buller's pen, and deservedly raisedthe name of the author high in theprofession. It was dedicated to thethen lord-chancellor, Eldon ; and, inhis address to his patron, Mr. Abbottstates, " that his lordship suggested thework, and that he undertook it at hisadvice."In 1816, Mr. Abbott was knighted,and raised to a puisne judgeship in theCommon Pleas, taking, at the time ofhis advancement, the word " labors" forhis motto. This sudden elevation ofone so little known at that time, it issaid, gave umbrage to his seniors at thebar; but his conduct in his new situation,soon evinced that he possessedevery qualification necessary to a dischargeof its duties.On the decease of Sir James LeBlanc, Sir Charles Abbott was raised tothe rank of a puisne judge in the courtof King's Bench, through the influenceof Lord Ellenborough, who, on hismeditated retirement from the bench,expressed a wish that Judge Abbottshould be his successor. Sir Charleswas accordingly appointed ; and presented,in his person, the novel andsomewhat extraordinary sight of a judgevoid of high connexions, not muchdistinguished at the bar, and whohad never held either the office ofsolicitor or attorney-general, suddenlyelevated to the rank of lord chief-justiceof the court of King's Bench. His conductthere, however, has fully justifiedhis promotion, and he was deservedlyraised to a peerage by George theFourth, who conferred on him thetitle of Baron Tenterden. He hasmanifested, on all occasions, greatjudgment, prudence, and knowledge,though latterly, not always temper, inthe exercise of his judicial functions.He suppresses, as much as is in hispower, all unnecessary display andexuberance in counsel ; bringing them,if possible, at once to the point in dispute,which his natural acuteness soonleads him to discover. In suitors, hedespises any thing like chicanery orfalsehood. As an instance of this, onone occasion, he ordered a plaintiff tobe nonsuited, because his claim was,JURISPRUDENCE.as he expressed it, mixed up with grossfalsehood. " I would have it known,"said Lord Tenterden, li that suitorscannot recover in this court, who, inthe course of their contract, have beenguilty of a lie. This is an action formedicines supplied hy a chemist; andit appears in evidence that, for the sakeof greater respectability, he was in thehabit of adding M. D. to his name, andsuffering himself to be called doctor,and reputed so. He must be nonsuited."As a senator, Lord Tenterden hasmade but little display, and is somewhatunpopular, though his integrityhas never been doubted ; and, perhaps,no man living has fewer enemiesor more friends. But thougheminent as a chief-justice, it must beconfessed his lordship has never beenvery forward to patronise improvements,whether in the laws of the land,the management of the courts, or in theconstitution of the country ; but, at thesame time, he has never offered anyviolent opposition to such as have beenbrought forward by others.ARTHUR ONSLOW.THIS indefatigable lawyer and legislator,the son of Arthur Onslow, Esq.many years collector of the customs atLiverpool, from whom he is said tohave inherited more than 100,000fortune, was born about 1760 ; and, afterhaving received a liberal education, becamea student of one of .the inns ofcourt, and was called to the commonlaw bar about 1785. He commencedhis practice in the King's Bench and onthe home circuit, where, for many years,he pursued his professional career withgreat industry and ardour, and acquireda tolerable portion of fame and emolument.In 1789, he published, in onevolume, octavo, An Institute of theLaws relative to Trials at the NisiPrius; and, for a long time, acted aschairman of the quarter sessions for thecounty of Surrey ; but declined presidingany longer, when it was proposedmaking the office stipendiary.Having become a widower, by thedecease of his first wife, formerly MissEyre, a lady of the Roman catholicpersuasion, he united himself to LadyDrake, relict of Sir Francis WilliamDrake, by whom he not only gaineda large addition to his already amplefortune, but sufficient influence, in theborough of Guilford, to get himselfreturned as its representative in parliament.This was in 1813, when hecommenced his political life by supportingthe then ministry, though hewas far from servilely dividing withthem on all occasions. On the 28th ofFebruary, 1816, on the presentation of apetition, by Sir Samuel Romilly, againstthat obnoxious impost, the income tax,lie both spoke and voted against it;and, on the following 23rd of May, aftera prefatory speech, he, for the first time,moved for the repeal of the laws againstusury.In the following month of August, hewas appointed a king's Serjeant; and,on the 4th of August, 1818, he was asecond time returned member of parliamentfor Guilford; and, on the 10thof February, 1819, brought in his billfor the repeal of the usury laws. Heagreed, however, to put off his measuresfor their repeal till the next session,in order that the effect of a resumptionof cash payments on themoney market might be first tried. Inthe following month of July, lie wasappointed recorder of Guilford ; and,in the middle of 1820, he was a thirdtime returned to parliament for thatborough. On the 5th of June following,he supported the motion of Lord JohnRussell for going into a committee onthe Grampound disfranchisement bill ;and, on the following 14th, he succeededin obtaining the appointment of a selectcommittee, to consider the proprietyof making it a standing order ofthe house, that no bill for regulatingtrade, &c. should be read a secondtime, unless with a request from suchcommittee.In 1824, he introduced his bill forthe repeal of the usury laws, a thirdSIR JAMES MACKINTOSH.time ; but it was thrown out after thesecond reading ; and, in the followingsession, he succeeded in carrying asimilar bill to the same point, when itwas once more rejected ; after whichhe appears to have renounced all furtherefforts on the subject. In July,1826, he was returned, for the fourthtime, as member of parliament for Guilford; and, on the 29th of November,strongly opposed the receiving of apetition presented by Mr. Hume, saidto be that of the Rev. Robert Taylor,but afterwards declared to be a forgery.The subject of our memoir practisednearly forty years, and, after the datelast mentioned, retired into domesticlife, taking no further part in politics.The legal knowledge of Mr. SerjeantOnslow was at least respectable, whichwas also about the standard of histalents as a barrister. In his magisterialcapacity he performed his dutieswith credit to himself, and to theentire satisfaction of others. In parliament,he never assumed the characterof a political partisan ; but zealouslylaboured to procure the adoption ofsuch measures, as he honestly believedwould be conducive to the interests ofsociety. The pertinacity he exhibitedin his advocacy of the repeal of theusury laws, is a proof of the assiduitywith which he was ready to prosecutewhatever he imagined might prove apublic benefit.SIR JAMES MACKINTOSH.THIS distinguished character, descendedfrom an old Scottish clan, whofollowed the Pretender's fortunes, andthe son of John Mackintosh, Esq., anofficer in the army, was born in yorkshire,North Britain, on the 24th of October,1765. He received the rudiments ofhis education at a school at Fortress, inRoss-shire ; and removed from thenceto King's College, Aberdeen, where hedistinguished himself by his proficiencyin Greek and mathematics, and wentthrough his various studies with a zealandability that gave promise of hisfuture eminence. From Aberdeen, bythe assistance of his aunt, he proceededto the University of Edinburgh,with a view of preparing himself forthe medical profession ; and he accordinglybecame a pupil of the celebratedCullen, under whom he studied aboutthree years. During this period, it issaid, he was in some danger of fallinginto a life of gaiety ; but having imbibedan enthusiastic admiration for the writingsof Robertson, Adam Smith, andothers, then in the zenith of their fame,he devoted himself to the ardent studyof their works, and made literature hisengrossing pursuit. He, however, tookhis medical degree in 1787, although,from his earnest attention to moral andpolitical philosophy, and, indeed, toalmost every subject but that connectedwith medicine, it is probable that, evenat this time, he contemplated abandoninghis original profession. It is,however, stated, by the editor of theLaw Magazine, that Sir James wasdissuaded from practising medicine byDr. Fraser; who, as Parr told the editorabove-named, " dreaded having such arival."In 1788, Mr. Mackintosh came toLondon, and published a pamphlet indefence of the constitutional right ofthe Prince of Wales to exercise, withoutrestriction, the functions of the regency.Owing to the excitation whichprevailed on the subject at the time, itgained great temporary attention ; and,but for the king's sudden recovery, it issaid, would have procured for its authorvery valuable patronage. However, asMr. Campbell observes, in his biographicalsketch of the subject of ourmemoir, " the theory of Pitt on thissubject triumphed over that of Fox ;and the first political essay of ourliterary hero, shared the fate of thecause which he defended."A short time afterwards Mr. Mackintoshproceeded to the continent; having,according to the authority last-mentioned,previously entered himself astudent of one of the inns of court.Another of his biographers asserts, thathe went abroad with the intention ofJURISPRUDENCE,renewing his medical studies; and heappears to have passed some time atLeyden ; where he made the acquaintanceof the principal literati of thatuniversity. He subsequently visitedLiege, where he was an eye-witness ofthe memorable contest between theprince bishop of that principality andhis subjects; and, his attention beingimmediately afterwards transferred tothe assembly of the states-general ofFrance, which at that time commandedthe attention of the whole world, hereturned to England enthusiasticallyfull of the sentiments with which theproceedings of that country had inspiredhim. These he conveyed to the worldshortly after his arrival in London,where he published, about 1791, hisVindiciffi Gallican, in answer to Mr.Burke's work on the French Revolution.The Vindicate at once fixed thefine of its author ; and, besides extractingthe applause of Burke himself,gained for the writer the friendshipof Mr. Fox, and of some of the mosteminent Whigs.The effect produced by the work onthe public, is thus described by Mr.Campbell. " Those who remember,"he says, " the impression that was madeby Burke's writings on the then livinggeneration, will recollect, that in thebetter educated classes of society, therewas a general proneness to go withBurke ; and it is my sincere opinionthat that proneness would have becomeuniversal, if such a mind as Mackintosh'shad not presented itself, like a breakwaterto the general spring-tide ofTurkish. I may be reminded thatthere was such a man as ThomasPaine; and that he strongly answered,at the bar of popular opinion, all thearguments of Burke. I deny not thisfact and I should be sorry if I could beblind, even with tears for Mackintoshin my eyes, to the services that havebeen rendered to the cause of truth, bythe shrewdness and the courage ofThomas Paine. But without disparagementto Paine, in a great and essentialview, it must be admitted, that thoughradically sound in sense, he was deficientin the stratagems of philosophywhilst Mackintosh met Burke, perfectlyhis equal in the tactics of moralscience, and in beauty of style and illustration.Hence Mackintosh went, as theapostle of liberalism, among a class, perhapstoo influential in society, to whomthe manner of Paine was repulsive.Paine had something of a coarse hatredtowards Burke's principles, but he had achivalric genius. He could foil him,moreover, at his own weapons ; he waslogician enough to detect the sophistby the rules of logic; and he turnedagainst Burke, not only popular opinion,but classical and tasteful feelings."Mr. Mackintosh, having completedthe necessary preparatory studies, was,in due time, called to the bar, but hadscarcely commenced practice when hewas left a widower with three daughters ;having married, in 1789, a Miss Stewart,of Edinburgh. He, however, devotedhimself with singular ardour to thestudy of the law of nations; and havingarranged a course of lectures on thesubject, obtained, through the influenceof the benchers, the use of Lincoln'sInn Hall for their delivery. Manyobstacles were at first thrown in theway of his request, which was opposedby several, on the assumption that hisobject was to disseminate the dangerousprinciples of the French revolution. Thepublication, however, of his intendedintroductory lecture, in 1799, entitled,A Discourse on the Law of Nature andNations, dispelled all apprehension, andremoved the previous objection. Sofar,indeed, were his lectures from inculcatingthe principles anticipated,that, it is said, they gave less offence togovernment than to some violent membersof the opposition; who, because hisoriginal ardour for the French revolutionhad abated, in consequence of thecruelties by which that event was followed,charged him with apostacy andinsincerity. His discourses were, however,attended by a large number of thewisest men of the age, and amongstthose who expressed their admirationof them, were Fox and Pitt ; the latterof whom said to him " I have no motivefor wishing to please you, but Imust be permitted to say, that I havenever met with anything so able or soelegant on the subject in any language."In 1800, Mr. Mackintosh volunteeredhis services as counsel for M.Peltier, whohad been proceeded against for a libel onthe first consul of France, NapoleonBuonaparte. On this occasion, thecounsel opposed to him were the late Mr.SIR JAMES MACKINTOSH.Perceval, the attorney-general, and Mr.Abbott, the present Lord Tenterden;against whom he advocated the causeof his client with such skill and eloquence,that he was, from that time,looked upon as an orator of the highestrank. His fee, upon this occasion, wasonly five guineas; but, although hisspeech was pronounced, by Lord Ellen-borough,to have been " the most eloquentoration he had ever heard inWestminster Hall," it was thought bymany to be injudicious as a defence;and Peltier himself said, that the fellow,as he called Mackintosh, had sacrificedhim to show off in praise of Napoleon.The conclusion of his speech is worthtranscribing, not only as a specimen ofhis powers at the time of its delivery,but for the spirit and independence bywhich it is pervaded. " In the courtwhere we are now met," said Mr.Mackintosh, " Cromwell twice sent asatirist on his tyranny to be convictedand punished as a libeller; and in thiscourt, almost in sight of the scaffoldstreaming with the blood of his sovereign,within hearing of the clash of hisbayonets which drove out parliamentswith contumely, two successive juriesrescued the intrepid satirist from hisfangs, and sent out, with defeat anddisgrace, the usurper's attorney-generalfrom what he had the insolence to callhis court. Even then, gentlemen, whenall law and liberty were trampled underthe feet of a military banditti whenthose great crimes were perpetrated on ahigh plan, and with a high hand againstthose who were the objects of publicveneration, which more than any thingelse upon earth, overwhelm the mindsof men, break their spirits, and confoundthe moral sentiments, obliteratethe distinctions between right andwrong in the understanding, and teachthe multitude to feel no longer anyreverence for that justice which theythus see triumphantly dragged at thechariot wheels of a tyrant even then,when this unhappy country, triumphantindeed abroad, but enslaved at home,had no prospect but that of a longsuccession of tyrants, wading throughslaughter to a throne even then, I say,when all seemed lost, the unconquerablespirit of English liberty survived in thehearts of English jurors. That spiritis, I trust in God, not extinct; andif any modern tyrant were, in thedrunkenness of his insolence, to hopeto awe an English jury, I trust andbelieve that they would tell him, ' Ourancestors braved the bayonets of Cromwell; we bid defiance to yours.' contemptCat i Una glacis, non per times-camtus."The manner in which he haddistinguished himself, nevertheless,recommended him to the notice of government,and he soon after receivedthe honour of knighthood, and wasappointed recorder of Bombay. In thischaracter he had frequent opportunitiesfor the display of his abilities, andperformed his functions to the satisfactionboth of the Europeans and thenatives ; and such was his independenceon the seat of judgment, that he oncedeclared the court was bound to decideby the law of nations, and not by anydirection from the king or his ministers.His first charge to the Bombay grandjury, was delivered on the 17th of July,1804, when he said that it had beenone of his chief employments to collectevery information about the characterand morality of the people that were tobe intrusted to his care, and about thedegree and kinds of vice that wereprevalent in their community. Hecompared himself in this preliminaryoccupation, to a physician appointedto an hospital, who would first examinethe books of the establishment in orderto make himself acquainted with thecomplaints that most frequently call forcure.Sir James found the principal sin ofthe Indians to be perjury; which, consideringit as indicative of the absenceof all the common restraints that withholdmen from crimes, he punishedseverely, and took the most strenuousmeasures to counteract. For this crimehe sentenced a woman to five yearsimprisonment; during which period shehad to stand once a year in the pillory,in front of the court-house, with labelson her breast and back, explanatory ofthe offence of which she had been guilty,and of the resolution of the court toadopt the most vigorous means for theextirpation of this crime. He was,however, no advocate for severe treatmenttowards criminals ; and fully actedup to his saying, that he had moreconfidence in the certainty than in theJURISPRUDENCE.severity of punishment. One of hismost eloquent addresses was on thetrial of two Dutchmen for having designedthe commission of murder, who,being convicted, and expecting to becalled up to receive sentence of death,had got knives, with the resolution ofsacrificing their sentence. The discoveryof their plan made no alterationin the conduct of Sir James, who orderedthem to be imprisoned for twelvemonths,after having thus addressedthem : " I was employed, prisoners, inconsidering the mildest judgment whichpublic duty would allow me to pronounceon you, when I learned, fromundoubted authority, that your thoughtstowards me were not of the same nature.I was credibly, or, rather, certainly informed,that you had admitted intoyour minds the desperate project ofdestroying your own lives at the barwhere" you stand, and of signalisingyour suicide by the previous destructionof at least one of the judges. If thatmurderous project had been executed,I should have been the first Britishmagistrate who ever stained with hisblood the bench on which he sat toadminister justice: but I could neverhave died better than in the dischargeof my duty. When I accepted theoffice of a minister of justice, I knewthat I ought to despise unpopularityand slander, and even death itself.Thank God, I do despise them ; and Isolemnly assure you, that I feel morecompassion for the gloomy and desperatestate of mind which could harboursuch projects, than resentment for thatpart of them which was directed againstmyself. I should consider myself asindelibly disgraced, if a thought of yourprojects against me were to influencemy judgment."Previously to leaving Bombay, SirJames founded a literary society ; andhis communications to the Asiatic Register,during his stay there, aboundwith valuable information, his computations,it is said, being probably madewith greater accuracy than those of anyother writer ; and to his researches,it is added, the learned Dr. Buchananwas materially indebted in the compilationof his voluminous works onIndia.After seven years' residence in India,Sir James was obliged, by ill health, tovisit England ; where he might have hadhigh employment, it is said, had nothis principles prevented a union withMr. Perceval. In July, 1813, he was returnedto parliament for the county ofNairn, in Scotland ; but his commencement,as a speaker in the commons,was by no means promising. Hismaiden oration was made in defence ofthe petty republics and states in theAdriatic and Mediterranean ; and, duringthe whole of the session, he conductedhimself with a littleness of viewand obstinacy of spirit, which wasneither approved of by his friends noranticipated by his foes. He, however,completely redeemed his reputationin the following session, by deliveringone of the most eloquentspeeches ever heard in parliament, onthe subject of the escape of Buonapartefrom Elba. But his greatest parliamentaryefforts were directed to theamendment of the criminal code; whichhe is said to have taken up as a solemnbequest from the originator of thathumane measure, Sir Samuel Romilly.His first motion on the subject relatedto the capital punishment of felony,and was introduced to the notice ofparliament, it is stated, by a speech ofthe very first character, both in styleand argument. It was supported byMessrs. Wilberforce, Buxton, &c. ; andsuch was the effect it produced, that hehad the satisfaction of triumphing overministerial influence and opposition, bya majority of nineteen, for the appointmentof a committee.In 1822, he had the honour of beingelected lord rector of the University ofGlasgow, in preference to Sir WalterScott; and to which high office he wasre-elected in 1823. In March, 1822,he supported Lord Normandy's motionfor the reduction of one of the .In June of the sameyear, he made a brilliant speech on thesubject of the alien bill. On the 17thof June, 1823, he was elected a vice-presidentof the Royal Society of Literature;and, in July, 1826, became oneof the council for conducting the affairsof the London University. In thesame year, he became member of parliamentfor Knaresborongh, which hecontinued to represent in succeedingparliaments; in all of which, he advocatedthe most liberal principles, andSIR JAMES MACKINTOSH.made the abolition of the slave tradethe subject of an annual motion. InApril, 1830, he supported a propositionin the house of commons for the emancipationof the Jews; and in June ofthe same year, opposed the clause ofMr. Peel's bill, which subjected a personguilty of the forgery of Exchequerbills and promissory notes to capitalpunishment. Some years after his returnfrom India, Sir James undertookan extensive historical work on theaffairs of England subsequent to therevolution; but the progress of it wasmuch retarded by his parliamentaryduties, and also by the declining stateof his health. In 1830, he published,in Larder's Cyclopedia, one volumeof a History of England, which Mr.Campbell considers an expansion ofthe prefatory matter intended for thegreater work, and eulogises the authorby saying that he has wonderfullysolved the difficulty of making historyat once amusing to the fancy, elevatingto the understanding, and interestingto the heart.Sir James Mackintosh has sustained,with distinguished honour and reputation,his three successive characters ofadvocate, judge, and statesman. In thefirst, we have already mentioned theabilities he displayed and the fame heacquired by his speech in defence ofPeltier, but, with this exception, he didlittle worthy of notice at the bar; inproof of which, the following anecdoteis related of him. When he was onceaddressing a jury, Henry Blackstone,the brother of the judge, was engagedin taking notes of the speech for thesenior counsel, who was to reply, till atlength, wearied out by the irrelevancyof the oration, he wrote down " HereMr. Mackintosh talked so much nonsense,that it was quite useless, andindeed, impossible, to follow him."In his judicial capacity, he was eminentfor his extensive knowledge of thelaw, and the impartiality with whichhe formed his judgment, unblessed bypolitical or party considerations. Inthe senate, he preserved the same independenceof conduct; and his learningand talent served to heighten theeffect of his integrity. As a parliamentaryorator, his arguments, howevervehement, were tempered by gravityand dignity; whilst, at the sametime, his eloquence lost none of thatwarmth which is so congenial with thetruth and diffusion of generous sentiments.In his domestic circle he wasmuch beloved and respected; and, inChristian society, he shone as the advocateof whatever was sacred andhallowed.Stubborn virtue," says Forbes, inhis Oriental Memoirs, " is the characteristicof this eminent lawyer, senator,and knight. He is neither to be divertedby smiles, nor deterred by frowns, fromthe course which an enlightened judgmentconcludes to be right. His virtuehas been tried by ordeals of the greatestpower, and has always come forth fromthe trial unalloyed. As an author,"continues the same writer, " Sir JamesMackintosh is much less known thanthe public, some twenty or thirty yearsago, had reason to expect he would be.Yet he stands high ; though the workswhich have gained him the reputationof a man of letters are few. His VindicateGallican has been the object of almostgeneral approval ; and Dr. Parr, in comparingthe work with the writings ofBurke and Paine, on the same subject,gives to Sir James the preference. " Myfriend," says Dr. Parr, " for I have thehonour to hail him by that splendidname, will excuse me for expressingin general terms, what I think of hiswork. In Mackintosh, then, I see thesternness of a republican, without hisacrimony; and the ardour of a reformer,without his impetuosity. His taste inmorals, like that of Mr. Burke, is equallypure and delicate with his taste in literature.His mind is so comprehensive,that generalities cease to be barren ; andso vigorous, that detail itself becomesinteresting. He introduces every questionwith perspicuity, states it with precision,and pursues it with easy, unaffectedmethod. His philosophy is farmore just, and far more amiable thanthe philosophy of Paine ; and his eloquenceis only not equal to the eloquenceof Burke. He is argumentativewithout sophistry, fervid without fury,profound without obscurity, and sublimewithout extravagance."A passage from the work which formsthe subject of the foregoing panegyric,deserves quotation ; and we select the following,as containing what Mr. Campbellcalls the character of that arch hypocriteJURISPRUDENCE.of France, Louis the Fourteenth, as afair specimen of the author's style andpower of writing: " The intrusion ofany popular voice was not likely to betolerated in the reign of Louis theFourteenth ; a reign which has been sooften celebrated as the zenith of warlikeand literary splendour, but whichhas always appeared to me to be theconsummation of whatever is afflictingand degrading in the history of thehuman race. Talents seemed, in thatreign, to be robbed of the consciouselevation of the erect and manly part,which is its noblest associate and itssurest indication. The mild purity ofFenelon, the lofty spirit of Bossuet,the masculine mind of Boileau, thesublime fervour of Corneille, wereconfounded by the contagion of ignominiousand indiscriminate servitude.It seemed as if the representative majestyof the genius and intellect ofman were prostrated before the shrineof a sanguinary and dissolute tyrant,who practised the corruption of courtswithout their mildness, and incurredthe guilt of wars without their glory.His highest praise is to have supportedthe stage part of royalty with effect.And it is surely difficult to conceiveany character more odious and despicablethan that of a puny libertine,who, under the frown of a strumpet oramonk, issues the mandate that is tomurder virtuous citizens, to desolatehappy and peaceful hamlets, to wringagonizing tears from widows and orphans.Heroism has a splendour thatalmost atones for its excesses ; but whatshall we think of him, who, from theluxurious and dastardly security inwhich he wallows at Versailles, issues,with calm and cruel apathy, his ordersto butcher the protestants of Languedoc,or to lay in ashes the villages of thePalatinate? On the recollection of suchscenes, as a scholar, I blush for theprostitution of letters ; and, as a man,I blush for the patience of humanity."Few men have been more generallyesteemed than Sir James, and he retainedthe respect of all who knew him,excepting that of Dr. Parr, who, beinga staunch Foxite, became highly indignantat the subject of our memoir foraccepting, through the influence of Mr.Pitt, the recordership of Bombay. Parrtook an opportunity of showing his virulence,a short time afterwards, at a party,where the conversation turning uponthe conduct of one Quigley, who hadlately been executed, the doctor exclaimedrepeatedly and emphatically,he might have been worse !" UponSir James asking him to explain how,he replied, " I'll tell you, Jemmy :Quigley was an Irishman, he mighthave been a Scotchman ; he was a priest,he might have been a lawyer; hewas a traitor, he might have been anapostate."In addition to the works alreadymentioned, Sir James has also writtenseveral articles in the Edinburgh Review,and other periodical journals ofimportance.Sir James," says Mr. Campbell,was, in his person, well made, andabove the middle stature. He was regularlyhandsome in youth, and evenin the decline of life, and under afflictedhealth, was a person of prepossessingand commanding appearance.His countenance had a changeful mixtureof grave and gay expression, ashrewdness combined with suavity, thatheightened and accorded with the charmof his conversation. No man was agreater master of conversation ; he overlaidyou with monologue, but overpaidwhatever you said to him with insinuatingcorrection; or else, if he approvedof your remarks, he amendedthem by rich and happy illustration.A certain thinness and sharpness ofvoice was the chief defect of his elocution; and sometimes there was, perhaps,an over-northern keenness and sharpnessin his metaphysics ; but still theworld will produce no such mentallights again."He formed a second marriage in 1798,when he was allied to Miss Allen, alady of family in Wales, by whom hehas had several children.SIR JONAH Barrington.SIR JONAH BARRINGTON.THIS learned gentleman, whose great-grandfather,a colonel in the service ofKing James, was hanged on his owngate, but saved by one of the king'stroopers ; and another of whose relations,during the subsequent disturbancesin Ireland, was effectually hangedbefore the walls of his own castle, wasborn at his father's seat in Queen'scounty, Ireland, some time in the year1767. He remained until 1776, underthe roof and tuition of his grandfather,but was removed about that timeto a school at Dublin, where, he says,I was taught prosody without verse,and rhetoric without composition ; and,to prevent me from being idle duringthe week, received castigation regularlyevery Monday morning." He afterwardswent to the Dublin University,on leaving which, he joined a volunteercorps, and became, (he observes,)before he well knew what he wasabout, a military martinet, and a red-hotpatriot. His martial enthusiasm,however, having abated, he declined alieutenant's commission in the army ;and shortly after, studied for the bar, towhich he was called in 1788.About 1790, he was returned for thecity of Team, to the Irish parliament,where he says, " I directed my earliesteffort against Curran and Grattan ; and,on the first day of my rising, exhibiteda specimen of what I may now call truearrogance." In 1793, he had so wellserved government, in the house ofcommons, that he was presented witha sinecure office attached to the port ofDublin ; and shortly afterwards, receiveda silk gown. In 1799, he hadan interview with the then Irish secretary,Lord Castlereagh, who promisedhim the solicitor-generalship, but inconsequenceof his subsequent declaration,that he would never support theUnion, the appointment was refusedhim.His independent conduct on this occasion,made him very popular, and,in 1803, he stood candidate for Dublin ;when, he says, " After three monthscanvass, in which I drank nearly asmuch porter and whiskey, with theelectors themselves, and as much teaand cherry brandy with their wives anddaughters, as would inevitably havekilled me on any other occasion, anda fifteen days' poll, 1 lost my election."About a year or two afterwards, he wasmade judge of the high court of admiraltyin Ireland ; and, in 1807, receivedthe honour of knighthood. Between1809 and 1815, he published five partsof his Historic Anecdotes and SecretMemoirs of the Legislative Union betweenGreat Britain and Ireland ; and,in the latter year, visited Paris, wherehe remained during the hundred days'reign of Napoleon.In 1827, he published, in two volumes,his Personal Sketches of his own Times;a very amusing and popular work, and ofwhich a third volume has lately appeared.In 1830, a charge of malversation wasmade against him ; and a committee ofthe house of commons having reportedthe accusation to be well founded, anaddress was presented by both housesof parliament, praying for his dischargefrom his office of judge of the high courtof Admiralty, from which he was accordinglyremoved. He made an attemptto disprove the charges, by appearingin person before the house of lords, butthe proofs against him were too clear tobe shaken.In private life, Sir Jonah was muchcourted and respected, and few have thereputation of being a more witty andentertaining companion. It is to beregretted that he should have so sulliedthe end of his public career, which, inother respects, appears to have beenhighly honourable to himself, and serviceableto his country. In 1795, LordWestmoreland thus expressed himselfin a letter to Sir Jonah, "I have notfailed to apprise Lord Camden of yourtalents and spirit, which were so usefulto my government on many occasions;"and his present majesty, when Duke ofClarence, evinced such a warm regardfor him and his family, that he educatedhis only son, and sent him intothe army.J U RISPRUDE Once.From his memoirs, which are extremelyentertaining and characteristic,he appears to have been in the confidenceof both insurgents and loyalists,during the time of the Irish rebellion ;and dining, one day, at the house of afriend, where he met his relative, CaptainKeogh, the counsellors Shears, andothers, he said to the former, " My dearKeogh, it is quite clear that you and I,in this famous rebellion, shall be ondifferent sides of the question ; and, ofcourse, one or other of us must necessarilybe hanged at or before its termination; I upon a lamp-iron in Dublin, oryou on the bridge of Wexford: now we'llmake a bargain ; if we beat you, uponmy honour, I'll do all I can to save yourneck ; and if your folks beat us, you'llsave me from the honour of the lamp-iron.We shook hands," continues SirJonah, " on the bargain, which createdmuch merriment; and I returned toWexford, with a most decided impressionof the danger of the country, anda complete presentiment that eithermyself or Captain Keogh would neversee the conclusion of that summer."His anticipations were realized ; for, onhis next visit to Wexford, he says, " Isaw the heads of Captain Keogh, Mr.Harvey, and Mr. Colclough, on spikesover the court-house door ;" their executionhaving been so speedy, that SirJonah had no time to make any exertionsto save his friend, according to hispromise.Sir Jonah could occasionally make ajoke with the same felicity that he couldrelate a story ; the following is a specimenof the former : Surveying, oneday, the ruins of an old cathedral, incompany with some friends, on one ofthe party begging to be told what thenave of the church was, " Oh !" he is saidto have replied, " that's the incumbent !"which answer reaching the ears ofa clergyman, he facetiously observed,that Sir Jonah had given a key (k) tothe question!"WILLIAM DRAPER BEST, LORD Sanford.WILLIAM DRAPER BEST, LordWynford, was born in the year 1767, inSomersetshire, and received the rudimentsof education at a provincial schoolin that county. He subsequently removedto Waltham College, Oxford,with a view of coming to the church ;but, after two years residence, findinghimself entitled to a large estate, whichdisqualified him from succeeding to afellowship, he left Oxford at the age ofsixteen, and going to London, enteredhimself a student of the Middle Temple,by which society he was called to thebar in 1789. During some portion of theprevious time of study, he had becomea member of the Crown and Rolls debatingsociety, but could never be prevailedupon to speak, although he distinguishedhimself in such a manner,shortly after commencing practice, asto attract the particular notice andcommendation of Lord Kenyon. Thiswas in a case, the brief in which fortunatelyfill into his hands through theabsence of the counsel for whom it wasdesigned ; when, the question turningon the rights of the lord of the manor,in respect to the appropriation of thewastes, he argued the point with suchability that a full practice soon followed,both in Westminster Hall and on thecircuits. His reputation was still furtherincreased by the talents he displayedin the case of Sinclair, on the prosecutionof De Colonne ; and in that ofCaptain Inns, argued before the twelvejudges, for shooting a French prisoner.He was afterwards engaged in Despard'scase; and, in 1800, at which time hewas in most extensive practice, becamesergeant-at-law, and was subsequentlyappointed chief-justice ofChester, and solicitor-general. In 1802,he entered the house of commonsas member for Petrified, Hants, andon the 24th of May, in the followingyear, he made his first important speechon the subject of a war with France,after the reception of the king'smessage,in the course of which he observed,that, in his opinion, too much timehad been occupied in discussing thepapers before the house ; for, althoughLord Sanford.it was admitted on all hands that theycontained abundant and legitimate causeof war, yet they were still discussingwhether they should agree to the addressto his majesty upon the justiceof hostilities."In the same parliament he spokeagainst the magistrates' protection bill ;opposed several of the measures adoptedtowards the latter part of the Addingtonadministration ; voted against Mr. Pitt'sadditional force bill ; spoke in supportof Mr. (now Earl) Grey's amendmentto the address to the throne, on the warwith Spain ; and voted with the majoritythat declared Lord Melville guiltyof malversation. He continued toadvocate several subsequent liberalmeasures ; and, about 1805, introducedinto parliament, and carried through,the celebrated bill for improving thelivings of the clergy in the Britishmetropolis ; who signified their gratitudeto him soon after it had passed, by presentinghim with a piece of plate, bearinga suitable inscription. In March, 1809,he was elected recorder of Guildford,in the room of Lord Grantley ; on thefollowing 29th of June, he appeared ascounsel for the late Earl of Leicester,in the prosecution of the proprietors ofthe Morning Herald newspaper, for alibel affecting his moral character ; whenhe obtained 1000 damages, and fortyshillings costs; and in December, 1811,he became the purchaser of the greattithes of the parish of Erith, in Kent, forwhich he paid 24,000 !In 1813, he was returned to parliamentas member for Bridport; and onthe 30th of November, 1814, he movedfor a return of the number of insolventdebtors released from the King's Benchprison, &c., in order to devise somemeans of distinguishing the fraudulentfrom the unfortunate debtor; and, onthe 1 1 th of April, 18 15, he obtained leaveto bring in a bill to amend the InsolventDebtor's Act ; one feature of which wasto be, that any debtor that could give upproperty which would pay fifteen shillingsin the pound, should be entitled tohis immediate discharge. In 1819, hewas knighted, and made a judge of thecourt of King's Bench ; in which capacityhe presided at several trials of greatpublic interest, and in the case of Davison,for libel, conducted himself in amanner that gave rise to a discussionin the house of commons, where Mr.Reeves accused him of being " anintemperate and political judge."He was subsequently made chief-justiceof the Common Pleas, whichsituation he resigned in the year 1825,and at the same time he was raised tothe peerage, under the title of BaronWynford.Lord Wynford was more distinguishedas an advocate than either as a judge orasenator ; his conduct having, in thesetwo characters, been much and deservedlycensured. The latter part of hisparliamentary career has been markedby inconsistency ; and, whilst on theBench, such was his occasional partiality,as well as intemperance in summing upa case to a jury, that he was not inaptlycalled "the judge-advocate." As acounsel he was an able orator and askilful lawyer, and was remarkable forhis independent bearing both at the barand in the senate.In 1830, he supported in the houseof peers Lord Lyndhurst's amendmentto the forgery bill, for retaining thepunishment of death in all cases connectedwith negotiable securities, transferof stock, and all instruments connectedtherewith.In private life, Lord Wynford is saidto be cheerful, convivial, and evenjocular; and to be as fond of a joke atthe table, as he is of a speech in thehouse of lords. He is much afflictedwith the gout, which compelled him totake the oaths on his admission to thehouse of peers on crutches ; and he wasso tormented by this malady whilst onthe bench, that some excuse may befound for the occasional irritabilitywhich he there displayed.He married, early in life,a Miss Knapp,by whom he has a numerous family.JURISPRUDENCE.JOHN COPLEY, LORD LYNDHURST.THIS eminent lawyer was born atBoston, in America, in 1770. Hisfather, whose name is well known asconnected with the arts, was one ofthe American loyalists, who was compelledto fly to England, where youngCopley received the most importantpart of his education. After havingpassed about six years at a privateseminary, he was, in 1789, sent toTrinity College; where, in 1794, hegraduated B. A. ; and, in the sameyear, evinced the industry with whichhe had applied himself to his studies,by becoming second wrangler. He obtainedalso other university honours ofminor distinction, which were succeededby a fellowship, a situation he was, induetime, compelled to resign, in consequenceof his declining to follow theprofession of divinity. Whilst at collegehe became acquainted with several eminentliterary and scientific characters,from one of whom, Professor Parish, heimbibed a love of mechanics and practicalchemistry ; which, it is said, is stillsuch a favourite amusement with him,that he not unfrequently diverts thetedium of a rainy day, or a vacation,by making the model of some house orchurch, or by repairing such articles (towhich his instruments are applicable) ashis servants or children may have demolished.Having chosen the law as aprofession, he entered himself a studentof the Temple, and was called to the barin the early part of the year 1800. Hefirst practised as a special pleader; butalthough intending to become a commonlaw advocate, he also devoted a portionof his time to the study of equityand conveyancing, and in all respectsprepared himself to fulfil the duties ofhis calling. At the close of the courtsat Westminster, he went the midlandcircuit for his assize and sessions practice; where, it is said, he distanced allhis immediate competitors, and ultimatelystepped into the practice of Mr.(afterwards Serjeant) Rough. Havingat length obtained a large portion ofbusiness, and expecting but little aidor countenance from the government,he resolved to assume the coif in 1813;upon which occasion, he appropriatelytook for his motto on the gift-ringsStudiis vigilance sevens."It was not, however, until 1817,that Serjeant Copley had an opportunityof distinguishing himself in anyprominent case. In that year the riotstook place which led to the executionof the sailor Caspian, and to the trialof two men, named Hooper and Preston,for treason, who employed, astheir counsel, Sir Charles (then Mr.)Wetherell and the subject of our memoir.The former gave great offenceto government by his vehement denunciations; but the address of Mr. Copleywas so judiciously managed, as at thesame time to do justice to his clients,and to impress their prosecutors with afavourable idea of his own talents. Inproof of this, he was shortly afterwardsappointed solicitor-general, andreceived the honour of knighthood ; and,in the same year, (1818,) married thewidow of Colonel Thomas, a lady ofgreat beauty and accomplishments.His first official employment of importancewas as counsel, with Sir RobertGifford, for the crown, in the conductof the proceedings against Queen Caroline; after the unsuccessful terminationof which he was appointed attorney-generalon the removal of Gifford fromthat post.In 1826, Sir John Copley was electedmember of parliament for the Universityof Cambridge, and, in a few monthsafterwards, he succeeded to the officeof master of the Rolls. He some timeafterwards made his memorable speechin opposition to the catholic claims;and, on the formation of a ministry byMr. Canning, Sir John Copley succeededLord Eldon, as lord high chancellorof England, with the title ofBaron Lyndhurst. He continued tohold the seals on the accession to powerof the Duke of Wellington. Governmenthaving determined on accedingto the catholic claims, Lord Lyndhurst,notwithstanding he had so recently expressedopposite sentiments, gave theLORD LYNDHURST.measure his support ; and his conducthaving made him unpopular with someof the public journals, he was chargedwith improper distribution of his officialpatronage. A particular accusation wasthat he had accepted from Sir EdwardSugden, the then solicitor-general, alarge sum of money for having procuredhis advancement to that post; but thisthe chancellor fully repelled, by prosecutinghis accusers in the court of King'sBench, where he completely vindicatedhis character.Lord Lyndhurst has risen to the mostexalted office in the state, less by theforce of his abilities than by his powerof so accommodating himself under allcircumstances to the tide of affairs as torender their flow, in some measure,subservient to his own cautious but sureviews. It was always his policy to avoidgiving offence to any party, and yet toaid, to the utmost of his power, that towhich he could most reasonably lookfor promotion. At the bar, he wasdistinguished less for oratory and learningthan for tact and urbanity, which,added to a moderate share of naturaltalent and legal knowledge, have beenthe qualities to which his rise may beattributed.As chancellor, he filled the officewith dignity, and his judgments, forthe most part, gave satisfaction to thesuitors. Towards counsel his air isdignified, but by no means cold orimperious ; his judgments are deliveredin a clear and logical style, which isalso the characteristic of his speechesin parliament. In private he bears anamiable character, and possesses themanners of a perfect gentleman. Hehas a partiality for living well, and evenluxuriously, though, while engaged inthe duties of his profession, or in preparingfor any business of importance,he is said to be remarkably abstemious.He has been accustomed from his childhoodto the best society; his taste iscultivated, and his manners are distinguishedfor their true elegance andsimplicity. After his resignation of thechancellorship, in 1830, Lord Lynd-hurst received the appointment of chiefbaron of the Exchequer.SIR JOHN LEACH.THIS distinguished judge was bornabout the year 1770, and after havingreceived a learned education, underthe late Sir Arthur Pigot, became astudent of the Middle Temple, and wascalled to the bar by that society, ofwhich he afterwards became a bencher.He commenced his practice at theChancery bar, where, by degrees, heacquired considerable reputation ; andfirst entered the house of commons asmember of parliament for Seaford,having also had the address, it is said,to bring in a friend as his colleague.On the 5th of July, 1810, he was publiclyadmitted to the honorary degreeof D. C. L., in the university theatre, atOxford. For several years he acted inparliament with decomposition ; and,in 1811, published his speech, in acommittee of the house of commons,on the state of the nation. Some timeafter, however, he came into favourwith his late majesty, then PrinceRegent, and was appointed his chancellorand keeper of the great seal forthe Duchy of Cornwall, when, to thesurprise of his friends, he suddenlychanged his former principles.His conduct, on this occasion, is supposedto have arisen out of a promisehe had given the prince to procure adivorce from the Princess of Wales, inorder to accomplish which, the Milancommission issued. In 1813, on thediscussion in the house for the appointmentof vice-chancellor, he opposed themotion on the following ground :The effect," he said, " of the appointmentof a vice-chancellor, would beto make the lord-chancellor rather apolitical than a judicial character, andso change the whole constitutional judicatureof the country. The benchof judges," he added, " was filled, (asit was and always had been,) with ableand upright lawyers ; because the lord-chancellor,by whose recommendationJURISPRUDENCE.they were generally appointed, washimself one of the first lawyers of histime, intimately connected with all themost eminent professional men, acquaintedwith their virtues, and feelinga respect for their talents. But a politicallord-chancellor would be equallyignorant of, and indifferent to, legalmerit ; and our benches of justice wouldbe filled by ministerial intrigue andcourt influence. The practice of thelaw would also sink into contempt, andbe neglected, when the highest honoursof the profession could be so muchbetter attained than by a laborious andpainful discharge of its duties."On the 31st of May, 1815, Sir Johnstrenuously opposed Lord Author's motionfor an inquiry into the expenditureof the 16100,000 voted by parliament forthe outfit of the Prince Regent; contendingthat if, as asserted, the money hadbeen applied to the payment of the debtsof his royal highness, contracted whenPrince of Wales, the country had notlost one farthing thereby.In December, 1817, he was sworn inof the privy council ; in 1818, he succeededSir T. Plumer, as vice-chancellor; and, in May, 1827, on the formationof Mr. Canning's ministry, hewas appointed to the mastership of theRolls.Sir John Leach is a man of considerablelearning and talents ; and few men,that have sat on the judicial bench,have acquitted themselves with greatersatisfaction to suitors, or more credit tothemselves, than the subject of our memoir.He is, with great truth, consideredone of the best equity judges ofhis day ; and if some few of his decisionshave been reversed, he has neversubjected himself to complaints of tardiness,nor has his court been the lessresorted to by suitors. In private lifehe is elegant and courtly ; and whilst,in his public character, he preserves thedignity of the judge, he never loses themanners of the gentleman. His modeof decision is, occasionally, as laconicas his more important judgments areelaborate and profound ; and often, aftera two hours' speech, by a very confidentcounsel, in support of an injunction, andwhom he never interrupts, will testifyhis sense of the weakness and length ofthe arguments to which he has beenso long listening, by coolly observing,This injunction is dissolved."SIR CHARLES Ethereal.THIS singular and celebrated lawyerwas born in 1770, and is the son of thelate Doctor Wetherell, master of UniversityCollege, Oxford. Having undergonethe necessary tuition, under theguidance of his father and other ablemen, he became a demy of MagdalenCollege, Oxford, where he pursued hisstudies with unceasing ardour and perseverance,and proceeded to the degreeof B. A. about 1790. On leaving theuniversity, he came to London, andentered himself a student of the InnerTemple, of which society he is now abencher He studied the equity branchof his profession, and after having kepthis terms, was called to the bar about1794. His practice was, at first, inconsiderableand unpromising, but hesuffered no pecuniary inconveniencefrom this, in consequence of receivinga handsome paternal allowance. Onthe death of his father, he came into avery large fortune, but, nevertheless,continued his attendance at court, andexerted himself as earnestly as if hehad not a shilling to depend on, exceptinghis professional gains.His first employment of importancewas in the year 1818, when Preston,Castlewood, Hooper, and others, wereindicted for high treason. The counselfor the prisoners were Wetherell,Copley, and Holt; and upon this occasion,the subject of our memoir distinguishedhimself by the delivery of aspeech of great force and eloquence, inwhich he so severely censured the conductof government in employing spies,that Lord Liverpool, who was present,is said to have been visibly incensed.The talent and boldness, however, displayedby Mr. Wetherell on this occasion,were alone remembered ; and,SIR CHARLES Ethereal.on the promotion of Sir John Copleyto the attorney-generalship, the formerwas appointed solicitor-general. Aboutthe same time he received the honourof knighthood, and came into parliament,where he took every opportunityof putting himself forward as adebater and supporter of government.At this time, the tardiness of the courtof Chancery was constantly before thecountry, and whenever the name of thechancellor was brought forward in adebate, Sir Charles was immediatelyupon his legs as his ardent defender.Indeed, upon this subject, he seemsto have considered himself in the lightof the retained advocate of LordEldon, and warmly defended his conducton all occasions, declaring thathe saw nothing worthy of surprise orcomplaint in the allegation of delayproved. The consequence of this conductwas, that the house listened tohim with impatience and chagrin, andhe lost considerably in the opinionof the public. On Sir John Copleybeing appointed master of the Rolls,Sir Charles Wetherell became actorswhich office he resignedon the formation of a ministry byMr. Canning. He was, however,reinstated by the Duke of Wellington,but was dismissed subsequently, onaccount of his refusal to support oreven to draw the bill for the relief ofthe catholics ; to whose claims he was avehement opponent.Sir Charles Wetherell, as an advocate,has neither grace nor ornament, eloquencenor persuasion; but he possessesgreat power of argument ; which he,however, often weakens by a naturalhumour, falling, at times, little short ofbuffoonery. In the house of commonshe is remarkable for the same qualities,and his speeches often excite the ridicule,but seldom sway the opinions ofhis auditors. He is listened to for theamusement his extravagance affords ;but as a senator, however conscientioushis opinions may be, the way in whichthey are generally expressed materiallydetracts from their influence. He hasinvariably maintained Tory principles,many of which he has endeavoured toenforce with a violence, which insteadof being impressive, has been entertainingand ludicrous.In private life he has many harmlesseccentric habits. He lives in a stylethat may almost be called parsimonious;and his exterior is almost as eccentricas are his habits and opinions. He. ismarried, but, we believe, has no issue.THOMAS Penman.THOMAS DENMAN, son of the celebratedphysician of that name, was bornat Nottingham, about 1770 ; and, afterhaving received a classical educationat Eton, went to complete the same atSt. John's College, Cambridge, wherehe proceeded to the degree of M. A.Having previously become a studentof Lincoln's Inn, he was called to thebar by that society, of which he subsequentlybecame a bencher and treasurer.He soon became distinguishedin the courts of Westminster and onthe midland circuit, for the manly andeloquent style of his address, as well asfor his legal knowledge and dignifieddeportment. In August, 1818, he wasreturned member of parliament forMarkham, with the late Mr. Calcralt;but was elected for his native town ofNottingham, at the dissolution whichtook place at the death of George theThird, after one of the hardest contestsever known. In parliament he distinguishedhimself as the advocate ofall popular rights ; and, on being appointedsolicitor general to the Queenof George the Fourth, he exerted himself,throughout the investigation in thehouse of lords, with a degree of intelligenceand eloquence which did himthe highest honour. " In his speech,"says the author of Public Characters,in answer to the charges, there wasone indignant apostrophe to a calumniatorof his illustrious client; and onestinging comparison which will noteasily be forgotten." The conclusionof his address on this occasion, had amost powerful effect, and deserves toJurisprudence E.be recorded. " This, my lords," saidMr. Penman, " is an inquiry unparalleledin the history of the world. Thisillustrious lady (the queen) has beensearched out and known her down-sittingand her up-rising has beensearched out ; there is no thought inher heart, and no word in her lips, buthas been brought to this ordeal therehas not an idle thought escaped, or anidle look, by which she has been betrayedinto a moment's impropriety,which has not been, by the unparalleledand disgraceful assiduity of her malignantenemies, brought against her. Itis an inquisition of the most solemnkind ; I know nothing in the wholerace of human affairs I know nothingin the whole view of eternity, which canresemble it, except that great day whenthe secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed.1 1,- who tbr sword of Leave would bear,Should be as holy as severe 'And if your lordships have been furnishedwith weapons and powers, whichscarcely, 1 had almost said, Omnisciencepossesses for coming at the secret, Ithink you will feel that some duty isimposed on you of endeavouring toimitate, at the same moment, the justice,the beneficence, and the wisdom of thatDivine authority, who, when even guiltwas detected, and vice revealed, said,If no accuser can come forward tocondemn thee, neither will I condemnthee : go, and sin no more."Every heart," says a writer in theNew Monthly Magazine, " will acknowledgethe cheerfulness of this appeal ;and while the severer judgment admitsthat, for a cause of such a nature, thereis a somewhat too daring familiarity inthe use of sacred language, and theallusion to sacred circumstances, yetthe feelings and the sympathies aretaken captive even in the reading ofsuch a passage : and how much morewould they have been, on hearing itdelivered with all the force and grace ofa finished orator, and surrounded by somany circumstances of high solemnity."In February, 1821, Mr. Penmanpresented a petition from Nottingham,complaining of the conduct ofministers generally ; and particularly oftheir non-inquiry into the Manchestermassacre; which was couched in suchstrong language, that the printing ofit was successfully opposed by Mr.Wynn, on the ground that it reflectedon the courts of justice, and on thehouse of commons. In the followingJune, the subject of our memoir defendedthe late Major Cartwright, whowas convicted in the penalty of jglOO,for unlawfully assembling at Birmingham,and electing Sir Charles Wolseylegislatorial attorney to parliament forthat town. On the 3rd of July, he supportedMr. S. Whitbread's motion foran address to the king, praying that anolle prosequi be entered by the actorsin all prosecutions commencedby the Constitutional Society;on the 4th of which month he appearedbefore the privy-council withMr. Brougham and Dr. Lushington, tosupport the late queen's claim to herconstitutional right of being included inthe coronation. In April, 1822, he waselected common-sergeant of the cityof London ; an office to which he wasappointed through the warm regard feltfor him by his fellow-citizens, bothon public and private grounds ; on the18th of July, he opposed the committalof the legislative union bill ; and on the19th of the same month, he spoke andvoted against the third reading of thealien act. On the 4th of March, 1823,he supported Mr. Hume's motion on thesubject of the tithes in Ireland, on theground, that the subject required investigation; and in the following month ofJune, he supported Mr. Williams's celebratedmotion on the subject of thedelays and expenses in the court ofChancery, in a speech of great length,during which he accused Lord Eldonof having pronounced a surreptitiousdecree. On the 10th of February, 1825,he opposed the bill for the suppressionof dangerous associations in Ireland, inaspeech of some length, at the conclusionof which, he said, that the supportof the present bill was the price whichMr. Canning paid for the lord-chancellor'sreluctant consent to the recognitionof the South American states.In the following May, he supportedMr. Brougham's proposition, on thediscussion of the judges' salaries bill,that 5,000 per annum be substitutedfor 6,000. Towards the end of thesame month, he opposed the grant tothe young Prince of Cumberland, andFRANCIS JEFFREY.severely animadverted on the propositionmade at the same time, thatthe country should pay the debts ofthe late Duke of York. In April, 1 826,on the taking into consideration of thebank charter amendment bill, he opposedthe clause for obliging countrybankers to return the names of theirpartners to the stamp office, which,however, was carried ; and, a fewdays afterwards, he supported Mr. G.Lamb's motion for leave to bring inabill to allow the assistance of counselto persons accused of felony, which wasrejected. In the meantime his reputationat the bar having increased,he at length obtained a silk gown, anda patent of precedency ; which it issupposed his zeal in defence of QueenCaroline alone prevented him from previouslyobtaining.Not only is Mr. Penman one of themost able speakers in the senate, buthis qualifications for an orator, arebeyond those of any other man at theEnglish bar. His appearance, saysthe writer from whom we have beforequoted, is strikingly prepossessing ; hisfigure is tall, and his head is of fine andnoble expression, the features massive,yet mild in their aspect, and for themost part, wearing an expression ofelegant suavity, which renders it difficultfor the spectator to believe, thatsuch a man is ever borne away into theuse of harsh and intemperate language.His voice is loud, clear, and manly, yetmellow and persuasive in its tones ; andhis enunciation is remarkably distinct.He can often be distinctly heard, whenthe crowd allows the stranger no chanceof seeing him ; but whether seen or not,no one can listen to him for a momentwithout feeling in his heart that he isquite in earnest.In private life, Mr. Penman is belovedand respected, and few have the reputationof being a kinder friend, or a moreagreeable associate. He is also a patronand promoter of literature, science, andthe fine arts ; and had a great share inthe formation of the London University.FRANCIS JEFFREY.THIS celebrated literary and legalcharacter, the eldest son of the lateGeorge Jeffrey, Esq., one of thedeputy clerks of session, in Scotland,was born in Edinburgh, on the 23rdof October, 1773. He received the rudimentsof his education at the highschool of his native city, where heafterwards engaged actively, it is said,in several literary societies, and wasone of the most conspicuous membersof that called the Speculative. In 1787,he was entered at the University ofGlasgow ; and, after having remainedthere four years, he removed to Oxford,and was admitted of Queen's College,in that university, in 1791. Havingresolved on pursuing the legal profession,he went through the necessarystudies, and was called to the bar in1795. His success was long doubtful,and it is not till within these few yearsthat he has acquired a practice co-extensivewith his abilities. In acuteness,promptness, and clearness, in the art ofillustrating, stating, and arranging, inextent of legal knowledge, in sparklingwit, keen satire, and strong and flowingeloquence, he has few equals in thecourts of Scotland.Ever quick," says the author ofSketches of the Scottish Bar, " but neverboisterous nor pushing, Jeffrey woundhis way, like an eel, from one bar tothe other. If what he had to do wasmerely a matter of form, it was despatchedin as few words as possible;generally wounded, when circumstancesadmitted, with some biting jest. If acause were to be formally argued, hisbundle of papers was unloosed, his glassapplied to his eye, and his discoursebegan, without a moment's pause. Heplunged at once into the mare magnumof the question, confident that his trainof argument would arrange itself inlucid order, almost without any exertionon his part." He possessed a most retentivememory, and could proceed fromone subject to another, however different,at a moment's warning. As hesat down, one day, at the close of a longJURISPRUDENCE.and argumentative speech, an attorney'sclerk pulled him by the gown, andwhispered in his ear, that a case inwhich he was retained had just beencalled on in the inner house. " GoodGod!" said Jeffrey, " I have heardnothing of the matter for weeks; andthat trial has driven it entirely out ofmy head ; what is it ?" The lad, in nosmall trepidation, began to recount someof the leading facts, but no sooner hadhe mentioned the first, than Jeffreyexclaimed, " I know it!" and ran over,with the most inconceivable rapidity,all the details, and every leading casethat bore upon them ; and his speechon the occasion, was one of the mostpowerful he ever delivered. His oratoryis not commanding; and it is like thefrog striving itself to the size of the ox,when he attempts to be impressive ;but once, indeed, says the writer beforequoted, we remember an apostrophe,startling, nay, commanding, from itsnative dignity and moral courage. Abaronet who had brought an action, inwhich, to gain his point, he had showna disregard of all moral or honourablerestraints, Mr. Jeffrey made the followingobservations on his conduct. " Mylords, there is no person who entertainsa higher respect for the English aristocracythan I do; or who would feelmore loth to say any thing that couldhurt the feelings or injure the reputationof any one individual member ofthat illustrious body ; but after all thatwe have this day "heard, I feel myselfwarranted in saying (here he turnedround, faced the plaintiff, who wasseated immediately behind him, andfixing upon him a cold firm look, proceededin a low determined voice thatSir has clearly shown himselfto be a notorious liar, and a commonswindler."It is, however, as a literary characterthat Mr. Jeffrey is more generallyknown to the public, to whom hisname is chiefly familiar as connectedwith the Edinburgh Review. Of thisjournal he was not only one of theoriginal projectors, but, after the firstyear, during which it was conductedby the Rev. Sydney Smith, it cameunder Mr. Jeffrey's entire controul,and has since been understood to besolely managed by him. As a review,the work holds one of the firstplaces among the British periodicals ;but though much talent and informationare displayed in the general conductof it, in its pages impartiality is oftenprevented by prejudice, and sarcasmand ridicule are found in the place ofhonest criticism and candid investigation.Such a mode of criticism, however,has not been without its goodeffects ; for, to the arrogant and supercilioustone assumed by the EdinburghReview towards Lord Byron's earlypoems, is not only attributable hislordship's " English Bards," but, probably,much of the power and energywhich the subsequent productions ofhis irritated genius so suddenly andforcibly displayed.In person, the subject of our memoiris of low stature, but his figure, whichhe tries to set off to the best advantage,is elegant and well-proportioned. Hisfeatures are continually varying in expression,and are said to have baffledour best artists. The face, according tothe writer before quoted, is rather elongated,the chin deficient, the mouth wellformed, with a mingled expression ofdetermination, sentiment, and archmockery. The eye is the most peculiarfeature of the countenance ; it is largeand sparkling, but with a want of transparency,that gives it the appearance ofa heartless enigma. He has two tonesin his voice ; the one harsh and grating,the other rich and clear, though notpowerful. His pronunciation is minced,the natural defect of youthful affectation.Mr. Jeffreys has contributed severalarticles to the Review, many ofwhich are political, and shew the sentimentsof their author to be those ofa staunch Whig. His duel with Mr.Moore, the poet, and the lines to whichit gave rise in Lord Byron's EnglishBards and Scotch Reviewers, are toowell known to the public to requiremore than a mere mention of the fact.Mr. Jeffreys has been twice married :first, in 1801, to a Miss Wilson, who borehim no children ; secondly, in 1814, toa daughter of Mr. Wilks, of New York,grand-niece of the famous John Wilks,and by whom he has issue.DANIEL O Cornell.DANIEL O'CONNELL.THIS distinguished lawyer and politician,said to be descended from anancient and princely family, in theprovince of Kerry, in Ireland, was bornthere about 1774. Being destined forthe Roman catholic priesthood, he wassent to pursue the necessary studies intheology, &c. at the college, at St.Omens, in France; where, under theJesuits, he is said to have learned theart so essential to the successful pleader,of making the worse appear the betterreason. Having, however, given upthe priesthood to follow the professionof the law, he came to London, andentered himself a student of theMiddle Temple ; and in Easter termof 1798, was called to the Irish bar.Mr. O'Connell," says Sir Jonah Barrington," was called to the bar on orabout the same day that Father Rochewas hanged. He did not finger politicsin any way for several years afterwards,but he studied law very well, and bottledit tn sum jus habenlis may beadded or not." Sir Jonah, about thistime, describes him as a large, ruddyyoung man, with a broad and savourydialect, an impenetrable countenance,intrepid address, et prater ea nihil. Hesoon became known for his forensic eloquence,and gave additional eclat to hisprofessional reputation, by displaying,on every occasion that called it forth, aconsiderable knowledge of the laws ofhis country. His political feelings wereearly developed, and he took so conspicuousa part in the public assemblies,held by the catholic body, that he soonbecame the acknowledged leader of thecatholics of Ireland. For his servicesto the catholic board, he was presentedwith a piece of plate, of the value of1000 ; and was, in all respects, lookedupon as the man of the Irish people.He continued his career at the barwith success, but seeing, in his religiousprinciples, an effectual bar to professionalpromotion, he at once directedall his energies towards the carryingof a measure for the removal of sucha barrier ; and, for this purpose, becamethe leader of the Catholic Association,on its establishment in 1825. Aboutthe same time he instituted a species ofhonorary distinction, called the Orderof Liberators, which was bestowed onthe members of the association, each ofwhom were distinguished by an appropriatedress and medal.The catholic relief bill having atlength passed, Mr. O'Connell wentdown to the house of commons to takehis seat as member for Clare, butrefusing to take the oaths, he wasordered to withdraw, on the groundthat the act for enabling catholics tosit in parliament was not in operationat the time of his election. Hewas subsequently heard at the bar ofthe house, when he claimed his right tosit and vote, under the act of union,and the relief bill ; and on the oathbeing again handed him, he declinedtaking it, saying it contained one assertionhe knew not to be true, and anotherhe believed not to be true. Anew writ, however, being issued, hewas a second time returned for Clare.In parliament, Mr. O'Connell hasinvariably advocated the most liberalmeasures, and has shown an incessantregard to the interests of Ireland. Hisoratory is vigorous, though his ideasseem sometimes confused ; but he hasalways at hand a command of languagewhich enables him to avoidobscurity in his eloquence. As a lawyerhis skill is considerable, and he possessesgreat influence over the minds ofa jury. His popular addresses producemore effect than his speeches in parliament; his oratory being more proneto stir the passions than to influencethe judgment of his auditors. His advocacyof liberal opinions has beenpowerful and consistent, while hispatriotic devotion to his country's interestshave made him, in Ireland, thesubject of the most enthusiastic admiration.In the Tour of a German Prince,he is thus described by the author:Daniel O'Connell is, indeed, no commonman, though the man of the commonalty: his exterior is attractive, andJURISPRUDENCE.the expression of intelligent good nature,united with determination andprudence, which marks his countenance,is extremely winning. It isimpossible not to follow his powerfularguments with interest ; and such isthe martial dignity of his carriage, thathe looks more like a general of Napoleon'sthan a Dublin advocate." Thewriter of Sketches of the Irish Bar,observes of him: " It would appear asif half a dozen varieties of the humanspecies, and these not always on the bestterms with each other, had been huddledtogether in the single frame of Mr.O'Connell ;" adding, " I see him distinctly,at one moment, a hard-heartedworking lawyer, the next a glowingpolitician, the next an awful theologian."In speaking of him in his privatecapacity, one writer says : " Thehalf-opened parlour shutter of his house,and the light within, announces thatsome one dwells there whose time istoo precious to permit him to regulatehis rising with the sun's. Upon thewall in front of him there hangs acrucifixion. From this, from the calmattitude of the person within, and froma certain monastic rotundity about hisneck and shoulders, your first impressionwill be, that he must be somepious dignitary of the church of Homeabsorbed in his matin devotions."His violent language in the earlypart of his popular career was notunattended with danger, and mighthave been succeeded by fatal consequences.Having, on one occasion,applied the epithet of beggarly to theDublin corporation, satisfaction was demandedfor the insult by a Mr. Destine,who, after having paraded Dublin,with a horsewhip, in search of Mr.O'Connell, called him out, and a duelensued, in which the former was killed.Mr. O'Connell, being subsequently involvedin a quarrel with Mr. (afterwardsSir Robert) Peel, a meeting was agreedon, but prevented by the arrest of theparties, and they having agreed tofight on the continent, were proceedingthither, when the subject of our memoirwas arrested and the duel prevented.Mr. O'Connell is married, and has alarge family, of whom he is said to betheidol; and such is the influence hepossesses in she vicinity of his residence,that his opinion is regarded, and followed,by the poorer classes, with asmuch deference as that of the mostdespotic monarch.SIR EDWARD BURTENSHAW Sudden.EDWARD BURTENSHAW Sudden,son of a hair-dresser in the neighbourhoodof Bond Street, London, wasborn there about the year 1775. Hisfather made a considerable sum by theinvention sofa substitute for hair powder ;the tax on which, imposed by Mr. Pitt,had nearly ruined many of those whotraded in the article. The wealth hethus acquired enabled Mr. Sugden tosend his son to a respectable school ;and being designed for the study ofthe law, he was subsequently placedin the office of Mr. Groom an eminentconveyancer. Here he acquired industrioushabits with considerable legalknowledge; and becoming a memberof Lincoln's Inn, he, after havingkept the necessary terms, was calledto the bar, after having previously practisedfor some time as a conveyancer.Before, however, he entered the courtof Chancery, he had published his PracticalTreatise on Powers, a book ofextraordinary merit, and by far the bestregular work on a subject that is abstruseand difficult, and founded upon legaldoctrines, which, fully to understand,requires years of patient study andincessant perseverance. It is said tobe the author's favourite publication;and a writer in the New MonthlyMagazine, remarks, that he may wellfeel " a lawyer's joy," in contemplatinga work which has placed upon groundsintelligible to professional men, doctrineswhich had confused the learned judgeswhen Coke and Bacon argued, andwhich, until simplified by Sugden, hadpuzzled every student since.After the subject of our memoir hadpractised a short time in the ChancerySIR EDWARD BURTENSHAW Sudden.courts, he was appointed auditor andreceiver of the Duke of Northumberland'srents, one of the largest incomesin the kingdom. From this time hecontinued gradually to rise both inwealth and professional importance ;and so much was his grace satisfied withhis man of law, that he was inducedto intercede for him with the thenlord-chancellor, Eldon, who gave hima silk gown.In 1818, Mr. Sugden caused himselfto be put in nomination as candidate forthe representation in parliament of thecounty of Sussex, and was on the pointof being elected, when Sir Godfrey Webster,the former member, arrived, andMr. Sugden was unsuccessful. He alsoexperienced a defeat on two other similaroccasions ; but soon after took hisseat in the house of commons as memberfor the borough of Weymouth. Inparliament he supported the Tories; andon the formation of a ministry by theDuke of Wellington, obtained the officeof solicitor-general. The honour ofknighthood was conferred on him atthe same period, and Sir Edward Suddenexerted himself in favour of theministerial measure for catholic emancipation.He, about this time, had aserious difference with Sir Charles We-there'll,which was of so personal a character,that, it is said, had not bothparties been, through the interferenceof friends, bound over to keep thepeace, the affair would probably haveended in a hostile meeting.In addition to the work already mentioned,Sir Edward published, in 1812,his Cursory Inquiry into the Expediencyof repealing the Annuity Act, and raisingthe Legal Rate of Interest ; in which heably showed, that evasions were moreprevalent than ever, and that usurytriumphed, notwithstanding its enactments,by means of additional screens.He is also the author of an edition ofGilbert on Uses, a Conversation witha Gentleman of Property about to buyor sell Lands; and a Treatise on theLaw of Vendors and Purchasers ofEstates, published in 1819. Too muchcannot be said in praise of this last,which has run through numerous editions,and is allowed by all competentjudges to be one of the most judiciousand practically useful books in the law.Every thing relating to the purchaseand sale of estates is laid down withcare and exactness; and the casesclassified with skill, and commentedupon with judgment and discrimination.Sir Edward Burtenshaw Sugden presentsan instance of what may be doneby application and assiduity without theadvantages of birth, fortune, connexion,or patronage. " Indeed," says the writerwe have before quoted from, " nothingbut his profound legal erudition, nothingbut his undoubted knowledge, couldhave raised him to the rank he holds ;having no advantages of birth nor ofeducation, other than legal. Though alittle man," says the same writer, " heis undoubtedly the greatest lawyer inWestminster Hall; and in the extentof his knowledge of the law of realproperty, he stands alone and unrivalled.Whether in court or at chambers,he is equally at home in his profession;with the rules of practice heis familiar, and still more so with theremote and difficult principles of ourcomplex system of law. His speechesat the bar are deficient in energyand eloquence; but no counsel canharangue more fluently, with morepropriety and gentlemanly ease, orwith a more complete knowledge ofhis subject, than Sir Edward Sugden.The unanswerable arguments he canadduce may be inferred from the factof his having, on one occasion, mistakenthe side on which he was retained,when instead of following the exampleof Erskine, who, in a similar dilemma,confuted, with remarkable adroitness,all he had advanced, Sir Edward declaredthat the law was as he hadstated, and that he could offer noopinion to the contrary.The appearance of Sir Edward incourt is agreeable, though not commanding; his figure is neat and small,his face handsome, but the somewhatsunken cheek, and the lawyer-like hueof his complexion, are witnesses of thelaborious study to which he has devotedhimself. The prevailing character ofhis appearance and manner is neatness; every thing is compact, everythingready, every thing well arranged",even to the holding of his pen, so asnot to sully his fingers.Sir Edward carries the same love oforder with him into private life, wherehe is much esteemed; and is remark-jurisprudence.able for the simplicity, cheerfulness, anddomesticity of his manners. He is fondof the retirement of the country; andhas a seat at Vulgate, in Surrey, wherehe occasionally indulges his taste, whichis of no mean order, for floral and agriculturalpursuits. He married early inlife, and has twelve children now living.ROBERT, LORD GIFFORD.ROBERT GIFFORD, son of a grocerat Exeter, was born there in 1779, and,having been educated at a school atArlington, was enabled, by the assistanceof his elder brothers, to pursuethe necessary studies for entering thelegal profession. He, on leaving school,expressed a desire to go to the bar, butwas, at the age of sixteen, articled toMr. Jones, an attorney of his nativeplace, under whom he evinced verygreat abilities. During his clerkship, itis said, Mr. Baring, then member ofparliament for the city, called at Mr.Jones's office, to ask his opinion of alegal question of some difficulty; whenthe latter, somewhat perplexed with thenature of the case, turned to youngGifford, who happened to be at hiselbow, and asked his opinion ; which hegave with such readiness and perspicuity,that Mr. Baring, on leaving the office,is said to have observed to a friend, thathe had just been talking with a youngman who, if he lived, would certainlyone day be lord-chancellor.His articles having expired, Mr.Gifford's original wish for proceedingto the bar returned upon him withdouble force, and, assured of aid fromhis brothers, he, in 1800, became astudent of the Middle Temple; and,having passed two years in a specialpleader's office, he, in 1803, commencedpractice in that branch of theprofession on his own account. By theunited efforts of his natural talents,and an extensive legal connexion, hesoon brought himself into respectablepractice; and, on the 12th of February,1808, he was called to the bar. Hethen went the western circuit, andExeter and Devon sessions ; where, aswell as in the courts of Westminster,he received a tolerable share of employmentBeing some time afterwardsengaged in a case in the King's Bench,involving several points of importancein regard to the law of real property,he exhibited so profound a knowledgeof his subject, that he attracted theparticular notice of the Lord chief-justiceEllenborough, who, in consequence,invited him to his house, andgave him every encouragement in hisfuture progress.Having risen rapidly into reputation,Mr. Gifford was, in 1817, appointedsolicitor-general ; and, shortly afterwards,knighted, and made a bencherof the Middle Temple. He then becamea member of parliament for theborough of Eye, in Suffolk ; and onthe resignation of Sir Victory Gibbs,the corporation of Bristol elected himto the office of recorder for that city. Inthe June of the year last mentioned,he became solicitor-general, in whichcapacity he conducted the prosecutionagainst Dr. Watson ; on which occasion,as well as on the special commissionissued to try the rioters at Derby, inthe following month of October, SirJames Mansfield is said to have attendedexpressly for the purpose ofhearing the speech of Sir Robert. InJuly, 1819, he succeeded Sir S. Shepherdin the office of attorney-general ;and, in the April of the following year,he conducted the prosecutions againstthe Cato-street conspirators, Thistle-woodand others.The most important sera, however,in his official career, was that of theproceedings against the late queen ;in the conducting of which he is saidto have betrayed no asperity, norevinced any eagerness to criminate hermajesty ; and throughout the proceedingsto have adhered strictly to thepledge he gave at the outset, to abstainfrom any expressions that might tend toaggravate the charge. His openingspeech was, however, by no meansequal to his reply, which occupied twodays in its delivery, and far surpassedLORD GIFFORD.the expectations of all who heard him.For these and other services, he was,on the 8th of January, 1824, madechief-justice of the Common Pleas; and,about the same time, the University ofCambridge conferred upon him thehonorary degree of M. A. During thesame year, in consequence of his superiorknowledge of the laws of Scotland,he was appointed deputy speaker ofthe house of lords, for the purpose ofassisting Lord Eldon in disposing ofthe arrear of Scotch appeals which, atthat time, remained to be decided. Accordingly,by a patent, bearing date the28th of January, 1824, Sir Robert wascreated a peer, by the title of BaronGifford, of St. Leonard's, Devonshire;and, during the two succeeding sessionsof parliament, he devoted himself soassiduously to his important charge, andso satisfactorily were his decisions receivedin Scotland, that on his visitingthat country, in the autumn of 1825, hewas received in the most marked mannerby the judges of the court of session,&c. j the corporation of Edinburghcomplimented him with the freedom ofthe city, and the university conferredupon him the degree of L. L. D. Inthe meantime, on the 5th of April,1824, he had been removed from theCommon Pleas to the mastership of theRolls; which brought him such additionallabour as had a material effectupon his health. He continued, however,for a short time, to perform, withincessant zeal, the laborious duties ofhis office, and at a salary so small, that,by the 6th of Geo. IV., an increase of hisemoluments was granted. At length,worn down by severe application tobusiness, he retired, in August, 1826,with his family, to Dover, where hedied, on the 4th of September, havingsuffered, for two days, from inflammationof the bowels. He was interredin the Rolls Chapel, his pall beingborne by seven of the judges.Lord Gifford was of about the middlesize ; his aspect mild, his eye quick andintelligent, and his manners were frankand engaging. He worked his way upby unremitting assiduity, and on becominga king's sergeant, by virtue ofhis office of solicitor-general, he chosefor his motto the words " secundus laborious."" No man," says the author ofthe Public Characters of 1828, " workedharder for his promotion than Gifford,and no one had more unexpectedlyattained it. Though not an able man,"he adds, " he was, in every respect, anhonest one ; and merited his rise in lifeby the use he made of his fortuneamongst those who depended upon him.He only missed being chancellor by notliving long enough to attain that dignity."As attorney-general, he was disinclinedto rigorous measures, and neverventured on a prosecution but whenhe was convinced that conviction wouldfollow. His appointment to the officegave satisfaction even to his politicalopponents ; and Sir Samuel Romillybore testimony to his fitness for thesituation on the score of his professionalmerit. Sir Victory Gibbs also expresseda high encomium on his abilities,saying, since the death of Dunning,he had known no man equal, asageneral lawyer, to Gifford. Hisspeeches were distinguished for anunion of brevity and perspicuity, whilehe possessed the first abilities as ageneral lawyer. His elevation, thoughrapid, excited little jealousy among hisprofessional brethren, who were attachedto him on account of his mildand unassuming character. In privatehe was universally esteemed, owing tothe constancy of his friendships and thegeneral placidity of his disposition.He was married, on the 16th of April,1816, to Harriet Louisa, daughter ofthe Rev. Edward Drew, and hadissue three sons and three daughters.A short time before his decease he satto Sir Thomas Lawrence for his portrait,at the request of the corporation ofthe city of Bristol.JURISPRUDENCE.HENRY BROUGHAM.J.HIS distinguished character, whoseancestor, Sir Thomas Vaux, bears aconspicuous part in Sir Walter Scott'stale of the Talisman, is descendedfrom an ancient family of Cumberland,which has since settled in Westmoreland.His father was proprietor ofBrougham Hall, in the latter county,and his mother niece of the celebratedhistorian, Robertson. The birth ofHenry Brougham took place in St.Andrew's Square, Edinburgh, in theyear 1779 ; and he received the rudimentsof education at the high schoolof the town, then under the superintendenceof Dr. Adam. In 1795,he entered the university, where hedistinguished himself, not so much bydiligent application, as by the aptnessand energy of mind he displayed ingrasping any subject which he madethe object of his studies. Becoming amember of a debating society, he soongave proofs of his oratorical powers,and whilst under twenty years of age,communicated to the Royal Societyof London some papers on geometry,which were inserted in the Transactionsof that body, and favourably commentedupon in foreign publications.The crowning-stone, however,"says his biographer, in the NationalPortrait Gallery, " to the vast extensionof his mental edifice, we would ascribeto the share he had taken in the productionof the Edinburgh Review." Atthe commencement of this periodical, in1802, Mr. Brougham, in conjunctionwith his schoolfellows, Jeffrey, FrancisHorner, and other since distinguishedcharacters, were its principal contributorsand supporters. Indeed, the subject ofour memoir seems to have furnishedemployment for the press at a muchearlier period than that last mentioned,if the following exclamation of an oldEdinburgh printer may be relied on;Lord sauf us ! did I ever think to seetheladdie, who used to sit kicking hisheels and whistling, in my office, tilla proof was thrown off, make sucha stir in the world as Henry Broughamhas done ? "After having been called to theScots' bar, where he made a considerablefigure, Mr. Brougham accompaniedLord Stuart de Rothsay on atour to the North of Europe, and onhis return commenced practice in thecourt of King's Bench, in London.Here, as well as on the northern circuit,which he regularly went, his reputationrapidly rose, and obtained forhim that degree and quality of practiceby which he acquired both popularityand emolument. He first entered parliamentin February, 1810, as memberfor the borough of Camelford, throughthe influence of the Duke of Bedford,and in June of the same year, introduceda bill to make the practice of theslave trade felony. In 1812, he contested,but unsuccessfully, the representationof Liverpool, with Mr. Canning.He did not at first make any very greatimpression in the house of commons,although it was soon apparent that hehad there found the field best fitted forhis exertions. In the discussion relativeto the orders in council, he particularlydistinguished himself; and, in 1815, hestrenuously opposed the corn law bill ;supported Mr. Grattan's motion infavour of the catholic claims ; and introducedhis own bill for the better educationof the poor. By this time he hadalso added to his fame as an advocate,having, in 1811, obtained the acquittalof John and Leigh Hunt, the editorsof the Examiner, for a political libel ;and, in 1814, he acted as counsel forthe celebrated Mary Ann Clarke.In 1816, he made a tour on thecontinent, and visited the Princess ofWales at Como; an introduction whichled to his being employed by herroyal highness in the proceedings subsequentlyinstituted against her asQueen of England. His parliamentaryefforts in the last named year wereprincipally with reference to the distressesof the country, and to the libertyof the press, for the better securing ofwhich he obtained leave to bring inabill. He was complimented forhis speech, on this occasion, by LordHENRY BROUGHAM.Castlereagh, who, it was rumoured, didso for the purpose of endeavouring tosecure the talents of Mr. Brougham, inaid of the ministry. In 181 7, he opposedthe suspension of the habeas corpus act;and, in 1818, succeeded in carrying hiseducation bill through a committee of thewhole house, having supported it in aspeech of extraordinary brilliance.During the session of 1819, his principalspeeches were delivered on theinvestigation of a complaint against thecustos rotulorum of Limerick, on certainproposed resolutions relative to thepublic income and expenditure, and indefence of the education committeesfrom charges preferred against them byMr. (now Sir Robert) Peel ; and in theshort but memorable session of 1819-20,he strenuously opposed the celebratedsix acts.In 1820, at the general election whichfollowed the death of George the Third,Mr. Brougham made a second attemptto secure his election as one of the representativesof the county of Westmoreland; but failing, though only bysixty-four votes, he, a third time, tookhis seat in the house of commons asmember for Winchelsea. On the 5thof May, he moved a resolution declaratoryof the expediency of thehouse with a view to the settlement ofthe civil list, taking into considerationthe droits of the crown and admiralty ;and, in the course of the session, healso obtained leave to bring in a bill forthe better education of the poor ; althoughhe was ultimately induced toabandon this measure. On the thirdday of Easter term, he took his seatin the court of King's Bench, as for Queen Caroline ; onthe announcement of whose intentionto visit England, he, in the beginningof June, proceeded, in company withLord Hutchinson, to meet her atSt. Omens. Her majesty, having rejectedthe proposals made to her, oncondition of her remaining abroad,came to London ; and, on the commencementof the proceedings againsther in the house of lords, Mr. Broughamappeared as her attorney-general, at thehead of her legal defenders. His bearing,on this occasion, was such, asalmost to awe the accusers of his royalclient, whilst his skilful cross examinationof the witnesses against her, andhis masterly speech in her behalf, hadsuch an effect, that Lord Liverpoolthought it advisable to abandon theprosecution. He spoke in the queen'sdefence for nearly two days, and concludedone of the most masterly andeloquent speeches ever delivered ineither house of parliament, by characterisingthe evidence offered againsthis royal client as " inadequate toprove a debt ; impotent to deprive ofany civil right ; ridiculous to convictof the lowest offence ; scandalous, ifbrought forward to support a charge ofthe highest nature which the lawknows ; monstrous to ruin the honourof an English queen. You have willed,my lords," he added, " the church andthe king have willed, that the queenshould be deprived of its solemn service.She has, indeed, instead of thatsolemnity, the heartfelt prayers of thepeople. She wants no prayers ofmine ; but I do here pour forth mysupplications at the throne of mercy,that that mercy may be poured downupon the people of this country in alarger measure than the merits of itsrulers may deserve, and that yourhearts may be turned to justice."In 1821, he supported the motionof Lord A. Hamilton, respecting theomission of the queen's name from theliturgy ; advised with respect to thequantity of her allowance, and to allmeasures generally affecting her. " Thequeen," he observed, in the courseof one of the debates, "has been acquitted,she must be treated as if shehad never been tried ; or there is nojustice in England."In the course of the following year,he opposed the introduction of theinsurrection act, and the measure forthe suspension of the habeas corpusact, in Ireland ; supported the motionof Lord John Russell, for a reformin parliament ; and, about the sametime, moved for a diminution of taxeson agriculturists, as a proper methodfor relieving them. In the Augustof 1822, he also excited considerablesensation by his bold and energetic defenceof Mr. Williams, the proprietor of'the Durham Chronicle, on his trial forinserting in his paper a libel reflectingon the clergy, for omitting to order thebells of the churches in that city to tollon the death of Queen Caroline. On theJURISPRU Hence.4th of February, 1823, he delivered hiscelebrated speech on the situation ofSpain, and expressed his unqualifiedabhorrence and detestation at the audaciousinterference of the continentalsovereigns in the affairs of that country ;declaring it as his opinion, that if theKing of France dared to persevere inwhat he termed that " unholy war,"judgment would that moment go forthagainst him and his family, and thedynasty of Gaul be changed at onceand for ever."In the following April, during thediscussion of the catholic claims, Mr.Brougham strongly reprobated Mr.Canning's defection from the cause ofcatholic emancipation ; declaring hisconduct to be " the most incrediblespecimen of monstrous truckling forthe purpose of obtaining office, that thewhole history of political tergiversationcould furnish." Mr. Canning declaringit " false," an altercation followed, andboth gentlemen would have been committedto the custody of the sergeant-alarms,had they not disclaimed allintention of personal allusion.Towards the end of 1823, the subjectof our memoir had the gratification ofseeing the London Mechanics' Institutionestablished ; in the formation ofwhich he had greatly assisted ; and heshortly afterwards published, for thebenefit of the institution, a very influentialpamphlet, entitled, PracticalObservations upon the Education ofthe People, addressed to the workingclasses and their employers. In June,1824, he brought before the house thecircumstances relative to the treatmentof the missionary, Smith, in Demerara;and continued to denounce the slavetrade, and to advocate the cause ofcatholic emancipation, on every opportunity.In the course of the debate respectingSmith, Mr. Brougham excited agreat sensation in the house, by the calmbut keen and cutting sarcasm with whichhe exposed the indifference of certainmembers to the fate of Smith, and theirbackwardness in recording their votesagainst his persecutors. "When," saidMr. Brougham, " there came beforethe legislature a case remarkable initself, for its consequences yet moremomentous, resembling the present inmany points, to the very letter, insomething, resembling it, I mean thetrial of Sidney, did our illustrious predecessors,within these walls, shrinkback from the honest and manly declarationof their opinion, in wordssuited to the occasion, and screen themselvesbehind such tender phrases asare resorted to, ' Don't be too violentpray be civil do be gentle ; there hasonly been a man murdered, nothingmore a total breach of all law, to besure ; an utter contempt, no doubt, ofjustice, and every thing like it in formas well as in substance ; but that's all.'Surely, then, you will be meek andpatient and forbearing, as were theDemerara judges to this poor missionary; against whom, if somewhatwas done, a great deal more was meditatedthan they durst openly perpetrate ;but who, being condemned to die, indespite of law and evidence, was onlyput to death by slow and wanton severity."In the early part of 1825, Mr.Brougham was elected lord rector ofthe University of Glasgow, in oppositionto Sir Walter Scott; he gainedthe election by the casting vote of SirJames Mackintosh ; and, at the installation,is said to have delivered oneof the most exquisite and finishedorations ever composed, although it hadbeen written during the bustle andfatigue of the northern circuit. At thegeneral election, in 1826, he, a thirdtime, unsuccessfully, contested the representationof Westmoreland, andagain took his seat in the new parliamentfor Winchelsea. In. May, 1827,he, for the first time, occupied a place onthe ministerial benches, as a supporterof Mr. Canning's ministry ; and, in theTrinity term of the same year, he receiveda patent of precedence, and againassumed a silk gown. On the death ofMr. Canning, and the appointment ofthe Duke of Wellington as premier,Mr. Brougham removed to the oppositionside of the house, and took everyopportunity of venting his sarcasm onthe incapacity of the duke as primeminister.In the spring of 1828, he made hismemorable speech on the subject ofreform in the law administration, onwhich occasion '' he spoke," says theauthority before quoted, " six hoursand a half; during all that timeHENRY BROUGHAM,rivetting the attention of his hearers.The way in which he relieved thisdry subject, into the details of whichhe was obliged to enter ; the vast bodyof information he brought forward ; andthe enlightened nature of the amendmentshe proposed, render the speechaltogether one of the most remarkablein parliamentary history."From this splendid oration we quoteone of its most impressive passages, asafair specimen of the peculiar style ofeloquence of the speaker, without whichour memoir of this great man would beincomplete.Whether," said Mr. Brougham, " Ihave the support of the ministers or no,to the house I look, with confidentexpectation, that it will controul them,and assist me. The course is clearbefore us ; the race is glorious to run.You have the power of sending yourname down through all times, illustratedby deeds of higher fame andmore useful import, than ever weredone within these walls. You saw thegreatest warrior of the age the conquerorof Italy the humbler of Germanythe terror of the North accountall his matchless victories poor, comparedwith the triumph you are nowin a condition to win; saw him contemnthe fickleness of fortune, while,despite of her, he could pronounce hismemorable boast ' I shall go down toposterity with the code in my hand.'You have vanquished him in the field ;strive now to rival him in the sacredarts of peace. Outstrip him as a lawgiver,whom in arms you overcame!The glories of the regency will beeclipsed by the more solid and enduringsplendours of the reign. The praisewhich fawning courtiers feigned for ourEdwards and Harris, the Justinian oftheir day, will be the just tribute of thewise and good, to that monarch underwhose sway so mighty a work shall beaccomplished. Of a truth, sceptres aremost chiefly to be envied, for that theybestow the power of thus conquering,and ruling thus. It was the boast ofAugustus it formed part of the lustrein which the perfidies of his earlieryears were lost that he found Romeof brick, and left it of marble ; a praisenot unworthy a great prince, and towhich the present reign is not withoutclaims. But how much nobler will beour sovereign's boast, when he shallhave it to say, that he found the lawdear, and left it cheap found it a sealedbook, left it a living letter found it thepatrimony of the rich, left it the inheritanceof the poor found it the two-edgedsword of craft and oppression,left it the staff of honesty, and the shieldof innocence. To me, much reflectingon these things, it has always seemed aworthier honour to be the instrument ofmaking you bestir yourselves in thishigh matter, than to enjoy all thatoffice can bestow office, of which thepatronage would be an irksome incumbrance,the emoluments superfluous toone who had rather, with the rest of hisindustrious fellow-citizens, make hisown hand minister to his own wants;and as for the power supposed to followit, I have lived half a century, and Ihave seen that power and place may besevered. But one power I do prize,that of being the advocate of my countrymenhere, and their fellow-labourerelsewhere, in those things which concernthe best interests of mankind.That power I know full well no governmentcan give no change can takeaway."Let the reader," says a writer inthe New Monthly Magazine, " stretchhis imagination to conceive a mannerof delivery to the utmost extent ofpossibility energetic, earnest, and appropriateto this noble piece of composition,and he will yet fall short ofthe manner in which it was actuallydelivered."In the course of the same session,Mr. Brougham spoke upon the debatesrespecting the address in reply to thespeech from the throne, the change inthe administration, the repeal of thetest and corporation acts, the slavetrade, delays in the court of Chancery,the stamp duties in India, the catholicclaims, &c. In answer to the king'sspeech, he expressed himself in terms ofindignation at the regret manifested relativeto the battle of Navarino, sayingthat he looked upon the apathy displayedtowards such a brilliant andimmortal achievement as a bad omen.During the debate on the repeal of thetest and corporation acts, Sir RobertInglis having expressed a great deference"towards " the wisdom of ourancestors," he was thus answered byJURISPRUDENCE.Mr. Brougham: " The honourablebaronet says, ' I do not like to talk soslightingly of I do not like to disparagethe wisdom of our ancestors.'Far be it from me, sir, to disparage thepraise thus bestowed by the honourablebaronet on ' the wisdom of our ancestors.'The phrase, however, I considerto have been one of the most fruitfulsources of mischief to the country ;but I must inform the honourablebaronet, that that phrase had been disparagedlong before the existence of thetest and corporation acts, not by ridicule,but by sound argument, not bythe sneers of the senseless, but by thesoundest wisdom, the greatest knowledge,the highest intellect, that Englandever produced. I commend thephrase to the mitigated censure of thehonourable baronet. For it was a lordhigh chancellor of England a personby the name of Bacon, or some suchname a name, perhaps, which has norespect in the eyes of the honourablebaronet who first stamped the seal ofdisparagement on the phrase which thehonourable baronet brings forward thisevening ' to fright the house from itspropriety.' He it was, sir, who firstreprobated the eternally recurringphrases of the ' wisdom of our ancestors.'He it was who laughed at thephrase ' experience of past ages.' Intruth," said he, " if not a contradictionin terms, it is the grossest abuse oflanguage ; for it proceeds upon thisbasis, that the world was older andwiser when it was younger, than it nowis, when every youth knows more thanthe grey hairs of former times."In the session of 1829, Mr. Broughamspoke in support of the catholic reliefbill, introduced by the ministry, andexplained the proceedings of the commissionersappointed for inquiring intopublic charities, in pursuance of the actintroduced by him eleven years previously; and who, it appeared, hadthen investigated no less than nineteenthousand charities, being morethan half the number in the wholekingdom. Towards the end of thisyear, in consequence of the Marquess ofCleveland, the patron of the boroughof Winchelsea, having given his supportto the Duke of Wellington's administration,the subject of our memoirvacated his seat ; but, in February,1830, he was again returned to parliamentfor Knaresborough, a borough inthe patronage of the Duke of Devonshire.On the 23rd of the same month,he supported Lord John Russell's motionfor transferring the franchise ofboroughs convicted of corruption, tolarge and populous towns. On the 29thof April, he brought forward his motionfor establishing courts for local jurisdiction,for the recovery of small debts.He also spoke against the vote byballot, and, in the following July,moved, in an eloquent speech, for thehouse taking into its early consideration,effectual means for the abolitionof the slave trade. As important featuresin the career of Mr. Brougham,it should also be mentioned, that he wasone of the principal promoters of theLondon University, and a founder andpatron of the Society for the Diffusionof Useful Knowledge.The character of this great man isacknowledged in all parts of the civilizedworld, as an ornament not onlyto his own country, but to the age inwhich he flourishes. Gifted in an extraordinarydegree, with mental energyand acumen, which experience hastaught him even to improve, as wellas to apply, he stands forth amid hispolitical contemporaries, a sun, by whichhis followers are dazzled and his opponentsconfounded. The senate is hisgrand arena ; he is there without a rival,although his eloquence is distinguishedneither by imagination, nor even thecommon graces of rhetoric. Nevertheless,his forcible mode of reasoning, hisoverwhelming vehemence, his impressiveand earnest manner of delivery,and his tremendous powers of sarcasm,gain him a degree of attention in thehouse which is accorded to no othermember, and render him a fearful antagonist.Indeed, either in or out of parliament,his powers of invective were, perhaps,never equalled, and wherever directed,have been most bitterly felt ; of whichthe most remarkable instance on record,is the attack he made on Mr. Canning,in 1823. Upon that occasion, saysthe author of Attic Fragments, " hecareered over the whole annals of theworld, and collected every instance inwhich genius had degraded itself atthe footstool of power, or principle hadHENRY BROUGHAM.been sacrificed to the vanity or the lucreof place; but still there was no allusionto Canning, and no connexion that ordinarymen could discover, with the businessbefore the house. When, however,he had collected every material whichsuited his purpose ; when the mass hadbecome big and black, he bound it aboutand about with the cords of illustrationand argument ; and, when its union wassecure, he swung it round and roundwith the strength of a giant and therapidity of a whirlwind, in order thatits impetus and effects might be moretremendous ; and while doing this, heever and anon glanced and pointed hisfinger to make the aim and directionsure."There are, however, many faults inthe oratory of Mr. Brougham. Labouris always visible in his efforts ; hissentences are involved and tedious;his delivery, though forcible, is neverrapid or impassioned ; and his voice,agreeable at first, becomes unmusicalwhen exerted. He has no persuasion,and is apt to be rude and personal ; bywhich he often loses his senatorialdignity, and shows that he is betterqualified to discuss questions than todeal with his fellow men. " To paint,"says an authority before cited, " thehideous wrong of tyranny and oppressionto exalt the glory of resistingthem to scourge meanness and crueltyto overwhelm ignorance and presumptionwith sarcastic scorn, were tasksperfectly congenial to Mr. Brougham'spowers. But the softness of pity thesubduing power of gentleness and goodnessthe fervency of affection, and thetenderness of love, either found nosympathy with him, or were not thoughtfit to be made use of in the exercise ofhis art :Impigcr, iracundui, iabilis, acer.'he seemed to desire to be borne alongby the torrent of his indignation, andnever stopped for a moment to watchby the fountain of human tears."As an advocate, the subject of ourmemoir was less distinguished by hislegal knowledge than by his skill inthe examination of a witness and hissubtlety in addressing a jury. He is,however, not among those who condescendto cajole a jury out of a verdict ;on the contrary, his speech is rather thelecture of one in authority, than of himwho seeks to persuade or allure. Butthough somewhat dictatorial in his arguments,he enforces them with such conscientiousconfidence, that the casuallistener feels as much mortification, assurprise, when he hears the efforts ofso splendid an advocate nullified, in oneword, by the judge on the bench, fromwhose mouth the letter of the law drops,like a dead, but destructive weight, ona fabric that, to all but the unimpassionedlawyer, seemed beyond thepower of human ingenuity to shake.He usually commences his addresses inasubdued tone, gradually increasing invehemence as he proceeds, till at last hehas been known to arrive at a paroxysmof actual fury, in which he deals outsome of those tremendous Philippics,that have made him second only toCicero in that branch of oratory.To his brother counsel, Mr. Broughamis, in general, courteous, although occasionallyapt to take offence without sufficientcause. He once had an altercation,at the Lancaster assizes, with Mr. Alder-son;who, having accused Mr. Broughamof unfairness, the latter rose from hisseat, and seemed elevated above his usualstature; his right hand was extendedupwards, as far as he could raise it, andhe suddenly struck it down upon thetable with a force which would have splita board of ordinary materials. In a voicewhich filled every corner of the court,and rivetted the attention of the astonishedcrowd, he exclaimed, " I willno longer bear silently the running fireof insinuation which has been playedupon me by my learned friend. Iresent his repeated accusation of unfairness.I will not submit to it." Mr.Anderson assured his lordship, that inhis observations he Lid not, of course,intend to accuse his learned friend, butthe parties by whom he was instructed,and by whom his case was got up. Mr.Justice Bayley said he was sorry to seeso much warmth ; for which, he thought,there was no occasion. " But I willdefend myself, my lord," exclaimed Mr.Brougham, in a loud and unsubduedtone. The matter here dropped, but itleft a painful impression on the auditory.This feeling had not subsided, when, ata later period of the day, Mr. Broughamtook away all its painfulness by a happyturn. He was examining a witness asJURISPRUDENCE.to words spoken, or something done,which led the learned gentleman toexpress a suspicion to the witness thatthe person spoken of had been in apassion. The witness said he thoughtit was so. " But I sincerely hope,"said Mr. B., " he was not in such apassion as my friend Mr. Andersonwas, just now, at somebody near me."As a writer, Mr. Brougham hasevinced powers equally transcendent andversatile; he wrote his Colonial Policyin his twenty-third year; has shownhis knowledge of natural philosophy, byseveral communications to Nicholson'sJournal; and of ethics and literature,by his articles in the Edinburgh Review.In this periodical," says a writer in theKaleidoscope, " his papers were knownby their rough vigour; by the unmusicallabour of his periods ; and his constanteffort to dip his ploughshare below thesurface and turn a deep furrow." Hisubiquity of mind is as remarkable asthe ease with which he adapts it toparticular occasions ; he can make anoration in praise of Greek at Glasgow,and in praise of trade at Liverpool ; hasbeen known to retire at night, after astormy election contest in the day, towrite an elaborate article for the EdinburghReview ; and once, during thebusiest period of a circuit, composed,whilst surrounded by his briefs, a treatiseon sheep shearing, for the Society forthe Diffusion of Useful Knowledge.In private life, he is highly respected,and sets an example of industry andactivity to all within the sphere of hisinfluence, He rises early and retireslate, subdividing his time systematically,and devoting it to the various businesshe has to perform with scrupulousregularity. He once requested a gentleman,who wanted to see him on privatebusiness, to call on him at Hill Street,any morning between six and eight.In the circle of society," says thewriter in the National Portrait Gallery,we have before quoted, " in which Mr.Brougham has moved and moves, hisgood humour, his playfulness, his manyaccomplishments, and his general acquaintancewith all subjects, from themere topic of the hour to the most profoundinvestigation, have ever madehim an especial ornament and favourite.In these periods of relaxation, the sameversatility and strength of mind, disciplinedby constant practice, whichshine so brightly on public affairs,embellish and delight the narrowerscene ; the same readiness and acutenesswhich have enabled him to surmountall the complications of a court of lawrender him, in a modified form, theidol of the dinner party or drawing-roomcompany. In conversation, heis jocular and witty ; and many of hisbon-mots are repeated, to enliven othermeetings than those in which they firstraised the laugh of mirth and pleasantry.In what our neighbours, the French,esteem so much, the saying of cleverthings, and the uttering of pointedexpressions which remain upon thememory, Mr. Brougham would bearaway the palm of excellence, even inParis; and were it worthy of our theme,or consistent with our limits, we mightentertain the reader through many apage, with the jeux esprit, repeatedfrom mouth to mouth, as the salliesof Mr. Brougham in his " hours ofease, or more playful contests of superiority."In his profession, also,lie would sometimes condescend tomake a pun. His opinion being, oneday, required, whether an action wouldlie, " yes," he replied, " if the lie too. It may finally beremarked of Mr. Brougham, that, evenat this moment, he holds a conspicuousplace, both in history and biography,which has already been awarded to himin more than one European work ofcelebrity. In the Encyclopaedia Americana,he is spoken of as " a publicbenefactor," whose life, his biographerhopes, " will long be spared to hiscountry ;" and the writer of his life inthe Biographic des Contemporains thusconcludes : " Verse dans les sciencesphysiques, profondement instruit dansle droit de son pays, habile dans le sciencede 1' economic politique, Broughamest 1' un des orateurs les plus distinguishdu siecle."Mr. Brougham was married, on the1st of April, 1819, to Mary Anne, eldestdaughter of the late Thomas Eden, Esq.,and the widow of John Spalding, Esq.He had two daughters by his wife ; theeldest of whom is dead, and his survivingchild is said to be in a stateof health, which gives her father, whois extremely fond of her, much uneasiness.STEPHEN Washington.STEPHEN Washington.THIS distinguished civilian and politician,the second son of a baronet,was born about 1780; and, having receiveda good education, he went tocomplete his studies at All Souls' College,Oxford ; where he graduated B. A.in 1803; M. A. in 1806; B. C. L. in thefollowing year; and D. C. L. in 1808.Having, in the meantime, become amember of Doctors' Commons, and ofthe Inner Temple, he was, by thatsociety, called to the bar, and commencedthe practice of a civilian, inwhich character he soon acquired distinction.He entered parliament asmember for the town of Great Yarmouth,in Norfolk, when, joining theopposition, he supported the administrationof Fox and Grenville ; and,notwithstanding his property in theWest Indies, voted, in 1807, for theabolition of the slave trade. In February,1808, he supported Mr. Tier-ney'smotion for a committee on tradeand navigation, in reference to thepolicy of the celebrated orders in council; and, on the following 9th of March,in support of Lord Folkestone, in hismotion for considering the Ode chargeagainst the Marquess of Wellesley, lategovernor of India, he contended, thatthat nobleman, " in the gratification ofhis own ambitious views, had abrogatedthe solemn provisions of ratified treaties ;and committed, by his disregard of therecorded injunctions of parliament, thegood faith of the British character, andthe security of our possessions in India."On the llth of July, 1820, Dr.Lushington, after commenting on thetreacherous conduct of France in endeavouringto set a Bourbon princeover the revolted Spanish colonies ofSouth America, moved for official copiesof all communications to the British governmenton the subject; and concludedby urging, that government should atonce consider the propriety of recognizingthe new governments of SouthAmerica; which motion, however, hewithdrew, on its being opposed by thelate Lord Castlereagh and Mr. Canning.Having, in the meantime, been appointedone of her counsel by the latequeen, the subject of our memoir, withMessrs. Brougham and Penman, obtainedleave to plead at the bar of thehouse of lords, against the bill ofpains and penalties for divorcing hermajesty ; and he also spoke in thecommons at some length, on the refusalof the lord-chamberlain to letthe queen have the-plate which hadbeen presented to her by his late majesty,George the Third, ending witha motion for all official papers on thesubject, which was afterwards negativedwithout a division. He took an animatedpart during the examination of the witnesseson the trial that followed ; and,on the 24th, 25th, and 26ih of October,in conjunction with Mr. Penman, heably summed up the defence ; and, onthe last-named day, made a most masterlyspeech on the same side, whichclosed the defence for her majesty. Onthe 3rd of July, following, he threwout some imputations against the Societyfor the Suppression of Vice, inopposition to the opinions of the lateMr. Wilberforce, on Mr. S. Whitbread'smoving an address to the king, prayinghim to direct the attorney-general toenter a nolle prosequi, in the case of allprosecutions instituted by the societystyling itself the Constitutional Association.In June, 1822, he appeared in thePrerogative court, as counsel for Mrs.Serres, the soi-disant Princess Olive, ofCumberland, in support of her claim tothe sum of 15,000, bequeathed her byGeorge the Third. On the following12th of July, he, with Mr. (now SirCharles) Wetherell, opposed the adoptionof the clauses which had beenintroduced into the amendment marriageact bill; characterizing them asobscure, inaccurate, absurd, and inconsistent;" and declaring, besides, hisundisguised hostility to the principlesof the measure.On the 9th of March, 1824, he, in abrilliant speech, supported the motionof the then chancellor of the exchequer,for a grant of 500,000 for the erectionJURISPRUDENCE.of new churches, on the ground of theadvantages afforded to fanatical dissenters,from the want of churches; andtheir vital necessity to complete a Christianeducation. He, however, on the10th of May, in the same year, warmlyopposed the bill for repairing the cathedralof Derry, which he characterizedas a scheme for taxing the people ofDerry, for purposes which were amplyprovided for by the funds in the handsof the dean and chapter." On thefollowing 14th of June, he reprobatedthe proceedings at Demerara, againstthe missionary, Smith ; declaring thatthe revolt which that ill-fated individualwas charged to have excited, wascaused by the exaction of excessivelabour, subjecting the negroes to severepunishments, and restraining them fromreligious worship. On the 17th of February,1825, Dr. Lushington movedfor copies of the committal of fivepersons to the gaol of Londonderry, inIreland, for refusing to give evidenceagainst a Roman catholic priest, whohad been guilty of celebrating illegalmarriages; when he dwelt strongly onthe severity of the laws affecting theRomish clergy in that particular; andcarried his motion without a division.On the 9th of May following, he supportedMr. Peel's motion for leave tobring in a bill to amend the lawsregulating the impannelling of juries ;and, on the 30th, on a motion beingmade for taking into consideration thereport on the king's message, relativeto the royal annuities, he moved, as anamendment, that the name of theDuke of Cumberland be omitted ; so asto leave the government of the youngprince, his son, and the application ofthe grant for his use, in the hands* ofthe king. On the 23rd of February,1830, he supported Lord John Russell'smotion for transferring the franchise ofboroughs convicted of corruption, toLeeds, Birmingham and Manchester;and on the following 5th of April, hesupported Mr. C. Grant's motion for theemancipation of the Jews.Dr. Lushington is justly esteemed asaman of learning and ability; and, butfor the consistent manner in which hehas pursued the political views withwhich he commenced his public life,would probably, ere this, have beenraised to that official trust and dignityto which his merits might justly entitlehim. It ought to be remarked, however,that notwithstanding his adherenceto the principles of economy and reformboth in church and state, few men aremore sincerely attached to the church ofEngland.MEDICAL SCIENCE.MEDICAL SCIENCE.JOHN RADCLIFFE.JOHN RADCLIFFE, the son of agentleman possessing a small estate atWakefield, in Yorkshire, was born atthat place,in the year 1650. Alternatingreceived the rudiments of education atthe grammar school of his native town,he removed, in 1665, to Oxford, wherein1669, he took the degree of B. A. atUniversity College, and afterwards becamea fellow of Lincoln. Determiningupon the practice of physic, he attendedseveral lectures on botany, chemistry,and anatomy; and distinguished himself,although neither zealous nor industrious,by the rapidity with which heacquired a knowledge of those sciences.Neglecting the older authorities, hisprincipal medical study consisted in theperusal of works published by modernsurgeons and physicians of eminence ;and his collection of books was soscanty, that, on one occasion, when Dr.Bathurst, the head of Trinity College,asked him where was his library, hepointed to a few phials, a skeleton, anda herbal. In 1672, he took the degreeof M.A.; in 1675, that of Bam.; and,immediately afterwards, commencedpractice at Oxford.He soon excited the animosity of allthe old practitioners by his sarcasms,and opposition to their mode of treatment;but, notwithstanding this disadvantage,he rapidly advanced in reputation.Having exercised his wit withmore freedom than prudence againstDr. Marshall, the rector of LincolnCollege, the latter endeavoured to enforceagainst him the statutes requiringthat, after a given period, the fellowsshould obtain a dispensation, unless theyentered into holy orders ; and Radcliffe,consequently, abandoned his fellowship.In 1682, he took the degree of M. D.,going out grand compounder ; and, in1684, having amassed considerablewealth, he removed to London ; whereinless than two years he not only becamein full practice, but received theappointment of physician to the PrincessAnne of Denmark ; whom, however, hedeclined to attend, at Nottingham, in1688, lest, it is supposed, he should giveoffence to the Orange party'; alleging, asan excuse, the number and danger ofhis other patients.On the accession of King William, hewas consulted by his majesty, notwithstandingthe attendance of the celebratedDr. Bidloe, who was chief physicianto the king; and upon the recoveryof Mr. Bentinck, (afterwardsEarl of Portland) and Mr. Zulestein,(afterwards Earl of Rochford fromsevere indisposition, in which he hadsuccessfully treated their cases, afterthey had been pronounced incurableby other medical men, the king presentedhim with five hundred guineasout of the privy purse, and proposedto make him one of the royal physicians,with an addition of 200 ayear to the usual allowance. This offerRadcliffe though proper to decline,but still continued to attend the king,from whom, during the first six yearsof his reign, he received nearly eightthousand guineas for his professionalassistance. At this time the chief nobilitywere among his patients, and hehad formed an enormous private practice;as much, perhaps, by his eccentricityof manner, as his ability in thetreatment of disease. In 1691, he receivedone thousand guineas from thequeen, for restoring to health the youngMEDICAL SCIENCE.Duke of Gloucester, son of the Princeand Princess of Denmark, whose lifehad been despaired of by the courtphysicians. After this cure his reputationbecame so great, that Dr. Gibbons,a neighbouring practitioner, is said tohave made 1,000 a year by those whowere unable to obtain admission toRadcliffe for advice.In 1694, Queen Mary being attackedwith the small-pox, he was called in toadvise upon her case, and, on perusingthe prescriptions of her other physicians,before he entered her majesty'sroom, he pronounced her " a dead woman;" a prediction which was speedilyverified. During the same year, onbeing sent for by the Princess Anne ofDenmark, he told the messenger, afterhearing her symptoms described, " thatshe had nothing but the vapours ; andwas as well as any other woman, ifshe would but think so." For this hewas dismissed from his appointment asherphysician ; but such was her confidencein his skill, that, in 1699, whenher son, the Duke of Gloucester, againbecame alarmingly indisposed, she solicitedhis attendance. On examining thepatient, he at once pronounced the caseto be hopeless, and abused the two medicalmen who had been in attendanceon his highness, with great acrimony ;assuring one, that it would have beenwell for himself and his patient had hefollowed his father's occupation of bas-betaking; and the other, that had hestuck to the murdering of nouns, as acountry school-master, he would haveescaped from deserving to be whippedwith one of his own rods.In 1695, he received 1,200 from theking, and the offer of a baronetage,(which, however, he declined, becausehe had no children to inherit it,) forhaving, at his majesty's request, goneabroad to attend the Earl of Albemarle ;who, being speedily restored to health,by Radcliffe's treatment, had presentedhim with four hundred guineas as a fee,and a diamond ring of great value, aswell as a sufficient sum to defray thewhole of his travelling expenses.Two years after, on being called intoprescribe for the king, whose physicianshad foretold his speedy recovery,and declared that he would live for anumber of years, Radcliffe took up acopy of Estrange's Esp, which hismajesty had been perusing, and, afterreading the fable of the sick man,who, on complaining of a variety ofailments, was told that all was wellwith him, he said to his royal patient,May it please your majesty, yoursand the sick man's case are the verysame : you are buoyed up, by personswho know not your malady nor themeans of removing it, with hopes thatit will soon be driven away; but Imust be plain, and tell you that, althoughin all probability, if you adhereto my prescriptions, and provided yourmajesty will forbear making long visitsto the Earl of Bradford's, (where theking, says Pittis, was wont to drink veryhard,) I may be able to lengthen outyour life for three or four years; yetI cannot venture to say I can makeyou live longer." In a short time, theking so far recovered as to be able tovisit Holland ; but, about the close of1699, he became afflicted with dropsyin the lower extremities, and sendingfor Radcliffe, asked him pointing tohis swollen ancles as he spoke " Doctor,what do you think of these ?" " Why,truly, sir," replied Radcliffe, " I wouldnot have your majesty's two legs, foryour three kingdoms. By this freedom,he gave so much offence, that theking would never afterwards receivehim ; although the Earl of Albemarle,and other influential persons, often andearnestly interceded in his behalf.On the accession of Anne, LordGodolphin exerted himself, but withoutsuccess, for Radcliffe's reinstatement asherphysician ; the queen declaringthat,if he should be sent for, he would tellher messenger again, that she had " nothingbut the vapours." In 1703, he hadan alarming attack of pleurisy, whichhe increased, at its commencement, byimprudently drinking a bottle of wine,and subsequently aggravated by neglectMr. Bernard, serjeant-surgeon tothe queen, bled him most profusely,and thus subdued the inflammation ; butthe next day he rashly insisted uponbeing carried to Kensington. Whenthe queen heard of this circumstance,which does not appear to have retardedhis recovery, she remarked, " that nobodyhad reason to take any thing illfrom him, since it was plain he hadused other people no worse than heused himself." A few years after, heJOHN RADCLIFFE.attended her husband, Prince Georgeof Denmark, at her majesty's request ;and plainly told her, that having beengrossly tampered with, nothing in theart of medicine could keep him aliveabove six days ; within which period,the prince died of dropsy.In 1710, he appears, with some difficulty,to have been dissuaded fromrelinquishing his practice, principallyby the Archbishop of York, who, underhis treatment, had recovered from avery dangerous illness. On the impeachmentof Sacheverell, he exertedhis influence, with great zeal, to procurethe acceptance of bail for that turbulentdivine ; and on the arrival ofPrince Eugene, in England, he invitedhis highness to a substantial repast ofroast beef and strong beer ; in allusionto which the prince is said to have remarked,that " he could not wonderat the bravery of the English nation,since they had such food and liquors oftheir own growth."In 1713, he became member forBuckingham, in which capacity he supportedthe malt-tax, and the bill toprevent the growth of schism. Shortlyafterwards, in consequence of frequentand severe attacks of gout, he begangradually to retire from practice ; earnestlyrecommending to his patientsDr. Mead, as his successor.Queen Anne being attacked with adangerous illness, on the 28th of July,1714, he received an order to attendher ; to which he is said to have replied,that he had taken physic, and couldnot come." The public were so indignantat his refusal, that, according to hisown statement, he did not dare to leavehome ; being threatened, in severalletters, "with being pulled to pieces,if ever he went to London." The realmotive for his non-attendance appearsto have been a doubt, in his own mind,whether the order he had received wasa sufficient authority for him to act:and, considering the violent animositywhich existed between him, and all thepractitioners of medicine of the oldschool, he may, perhaps, be acquitted ofbrutality towards the queen ; as, in casethe disorder should end fatally (whichit did), some enemy would, doubtless,attribute the event to his want of skill.The following is an extract of a letterwritten by him, on this subject, fourdays after the queen's demise : " Iknow the nature of attending crownedheads, in their last moments, too wellto be fond of waiting upon them withoutbeing sent for by a proper authority.You have heard of pardons being signedfor physicians, before a sovereign's demise.However, as ill as I was, I wouldhave went to the queen, in a horse-litter,had either her majesty, or thosein commission next her, commandedme so to do." Soon after the death ofthe queen, a member of the house ofcommons, who was a personal friend ofthe doctor, moved, apparently withouteffect, that " he might be ordered toattend in his place, for the purpose ofbeing censured for not having attendedon her majesty."He died at his house at Carshalton,on the 1st of November, 1714; and wasburied, with great honours, at Oxford,on the 4th of the following month. Byhis will, he left an estate in Yorkshire,to the master and fellows ofUniversity College, for the foundationof two travelling fellowships of 300a year each ; directing the surplus ofthe rent to be applied in the purchaseof perpetual advowson for the membersof that college : he also bequeathed500 a year to St. Bartholomew's Hospital," towards mending the diet,"and 100 a year for the purchase oflinen; to University College, 5,000for the enlargement of the building ;40,000 for the erection of a libraryat Oxford, 150 a year for the librarian,and 100 a year, for ever, for buyingbooks. He left 1,000 a year to one ofhis sisters ; 500 a year to his othersister ; the same to one of his nephews ;and to his other nephew and niece,200 a year each. The residue of hisproperty, with the exception of somesmall bequests, he gave to trustees forcharitable purposes.The character of this celebrated manhas been variously drawn ; some personsaffirming that he was nothing morethan an ingenious and active empiric,who, by constant practice had attainedsome skill in his profession, while othersassert that his cures were the result ofreflection and talent: the former areby far more numerous, but among thelatter, stands no less a name than thatof the illustrious Mead. Mandeville, inhis Essay on Charity Schools, concludesMEDICAL SCIENCE.a violent Philippic against him, by asking," What must we judge of his motive,the principle he acted upon, when,after his death, we find that he has lefta trifle amongst his relations, who stoodin need of it, and an immense treasureto an university that did not want it ?"In a letter found in his closet, after hisdecease, addressed to his sister, Milli-cent,was the following remarkable passage: " You will find, by my will, thatI have taken better care of you, thanperhaps you might expect, from myformer treatment of you ; for which,with my dying breath, I most heartilyask pardon. I had, indeed, acted thebrother's part much better, in makinga handsome settlement for you whileliving, than after my decease ; and canplead nothing in excuse, but that thelove of money, which I have emphaticallyknown to be the root of all evil,was predominant over me."His conversation was witty, his mannerexcessively abrupt, and his dispositionpetulant and irascible. On oneoccasion he suddenly quitted a patient,Lady Trevor, because her husband,knowing that he was at variance withmost of the London physicians, had sentfor Dr. Breach, of Oxford, to consultwith him. An old lady, who hadspoken disrespectfully of his talents,being taken seriously ill, her daughter,for whom he entertained a great respect,obtained a visit from him, onthe pretence that she herself was indisposed: RadclifFe's stay was, however,short ; for no sooner had he beenmade acquainted with the fact, than heabruptly departed, observing, that " heneither knew what was good for anold woman, nor what an old womanwas good for." Tyson, of Hackney,a notorious usurer, having gone to hisresidence for advice, clad in mean attire,with a view to save the fee, wasthus roughly addressed by Radcliffe,who had penetrated through his paltrydisguise : " Go home, sir, and repent,as fast as you can ; for the grave andthe devil are equally ready for Tysonof Hackney, who has raised an immenseestate out of the spoils of orphansand widows, and will certainlybe a dead man in ten days." Tyson,it is said, died about a week after,leaving property to the amount of300,000.His habits are said to have beenvery intemperate ; and he once refusedto quit a tavern, until he had finishedhis bottle, although urgently entreated,by her husband, to visit a lady who wasin great danger. Irritated by his conduct,the gentleman forcibly carried himout of the house Radcliffe, in the meantime,calling him a villain and a rascal,and swearing, that, in revenge, he wouldcure his wife; a threat which he carriedinto effect.Another tavern anecdote, to the followingeffect, has been related of him :while dining, one day, with LordGranville, and others of the principalnobility, at the Mitre, in Fleet Street,he received a letter from a man thenunder sentence of death, in Newgate,for a highway robbery, acknowledgingthat he had, some time before, stolen150 from Radcliffe ; whose intercessionhe, however, earnestly solicited,to obtain a commutation of his sentence.Radcliffe immediately applied to LordGranville on the subject ; observing,that the man's confession gave himmuch pleasure, as it established theinnocence of one whom he had unjustlysuspected of the offence ; and throughthat nobleman's interest, the culpritwas reprieved, and transported toVirginia; whence, in a short time, hesent produce to Radcliffe, exceeding invalue the amount of his loss.When residing in Bow Street, he obtainedleave to have a door placed inthe garden-wall of his next-door neighbour,Sir Godfrey Kneller, in orderthat he might take an occasional walk,among the shrubs, in Sir Godfrey'sgarden. His servants, however, atlength became so annoying to Kneller,that the latter threatened to have thedoor bricked up. " Tell him," said Radcliffe," that he is welcome to do whathe likes, so that he does not paint it."To this insulting message, Kneller replied," I can take anything from Dr.Radcliffe but his physic."In his deportment to his medicalcontemporaries, even though they coincidedwith him in opinion, he wasoverbearing and rude ; and, if they opposedhis notions, violent and grosslyinsulting. He appears, in return, tohave been visited with much abuse, onaccount of his adherence, in the treatmentof small-pox cases, to the maximsJOHN RADCLIFFE.of Sydenham, from whom, most of hisfellow-practitioners differed in opinion,on that important subject. When calledin to prescribe for the Duke of Beaufort,who had been attacked with the disorderin question, he is said to have greatlyamazed and irritated that nobleman'sgrandmother, (who, as well as her husband,had recovered under the old method,)by ordering the shutters to beopened, and the apartment to be lightedand ventilated, as though nothing wasthe matter. Her grace remonstrating,with great vehemence, against this proceeding,he told her, that if she intermeddledwith her unnecessary advice,he would do nothing for her grandson ;but that if she would instantly go home,he would answer, with his life, for thatof the duke, who, it is added, within amonth, was restored to health.He prescribed for the Marquess ofBlandford, when that young noblemanwas attacked with the same disorder, atCambridge ; but, it is said, the physiciansthere failed to comply with hisdirections, and the patient was, consequently,soon reduced to so dangerousa state, that his lordship's mother, thecelebrated Duchess of Marlborough, entreatedRadcliffe to go down to her sonimmediately. " Madam," he replied,I should only put you to a great expenseto no purpose. You have nothingto do for the marquess now, but to senddown an undertaker to take care of hisfuneral, for I can assure your gracethat, by this time, he is dead ; althoughhe would have recovered from thesmall-pox, but for the intervention ofan unfortunate malady, called ' TheDoctor.' " The young marquess, it isadded, died on the same day.He once told Dr. Mead that the secretof making a fortune was to use all mankindill. Trifling accounts he alwaysevinced a great reluctance to pay; observing,that he hated to break a guinea,because the change slipped away so fast.He once told a papier, who had frequentlydunned him for a small amount,that he, the papier, had done his workbadly, and then covered it over withearth to conceal it. " Mine is not theonly bad work which the earth conceals,"said the man, significantly.Struck with this reply, Radcliffe immediatelypaid the applicant's bill,observing, that he was a wit, and must,therefore, be poor.Not content with the vast profits ofhis profession, he was induced, in 1692,by the representations of Betterton, theactor, to risk 5,000 in a venture to theEast Indies ; which proving altogetherunsuccessful, he coolly remarked, thathe had but to go up five thousand pairsof stairs, and all would again be right.Several cases have been related, inwhich his charity was admirably freefrom ostentation. In 1704, he sent 500to the Bishop of Norwich, for the benefitof conjuring clergymen, in the dioceseof which that prelate had recently beendeprived, earnestly requesting that thename of the donor should not be divulged.In 1707, he forwarded j300to Dr. Sprats, for the relief of the episcopalclergy of Scotland, under theassumed signature of Francis Andrews ;and on another occasion, anonymouslysettled 50 per annum, for ever, on theSociety for the Propagation of the Gospelin Foreign Parts.At one period of his life, being pressedby his acquaintance to marry, he lookedout for a wife, and at length fixed hischoice upon the daughter of a wealthycitizen of London, with whom it wasagreed he should have 15,000 down,and a still larger sum on the demise otherfather, whom, however, he soonfound reason to address in the followingterms : " Mrs. Mary is a very deservinggentlewoman, but you must pardon me,if I think her by no means fit to be mywife, since she is another man's already,or ought to be. In a word, she is nobetter and no worse than actually quickwith child, which makes it necessarythat she be disposed of to him that hasthe best claim to her affections. Nodoubt but you have power enough overher to bring her to confession, which isby no means the part of a physician.I shall wish you much joy of a newson-in-law, when known, since I am byno means qualified to be so near of kin.Hanging and marrying, I find, go bydestiny ; and I might have been guiltyof the first, had I not so narrowlyescaped the last." This was the onlymatrimonial scheme in which he everengaged, the lesson proving too strongfor his memory to forget, or his prejudiceto surmount.MEDICAL SCIENCE.HUGH Chamberlain.THIS celebrated accoucheur, a nativeof London, was born about the year1664 ; and, after having received a professionaleducation, became an eminentprofessor of the obstetric art, in themetropolis. His father, his brothers,and himself, having, after much experience," by God's blessing and theirown industry," as he states, madesome important improvement in thatbranch of the profession which he hadadopted, he went to Paris, as it is supposed,for the purpose of selling it inthat capital ; where, however, as hisantagonist, Mauriceauau, had predicted,he failed in performing a difficult operation; and soon afterwards proceededto Holland. At Amsterdam, as it isstated, he disposed of the secret of theimprovement made by himself and hisfamily, for a large sum of money, toRush and Roonhuysen, medical menof high reputation in that city.Returning to England, he rapidlymade a large fortune, not so much, ifMauriceauau may be credited, from hisobstetric invention, as from his havingattentively studied that author's Observationssur la Grossest ; whichChamberlen translated and published,but it does not appear at what preciseperiod. The translation seems, however,to have been sought after by themedical practitioners of this countrywith great avidity : a second edition ofit appeared in 1716, a third in 1727, anda fourth many years after Chamberlen'sdecease.In 1688, he attended Mary of Modena,the second wife of James theSecond, at the birth of her son, theunfortunate Pretender ; of which eventhe subsequently addressed a full statementto the Princess Sophia of Hanover,mother of George the First, for thepurpose of contradicting the assertionthat the queen's pregnancy had beenfeigned." In 1690, he took the degreeof M.D. at the University of Cambridge; and during the confinement ofDr. Freind in the Tower, on suspicionof having been implicated in some ofthe proceedings for which Bishop Atterburywas impeached, he attendedmany of that physician's patients ;among whom was the prelate justmentioned, who wrote an inscriptionfor the monument erected in WestminsterAbbey, to Chamberlen's memory,shortly after his decease, whichtook place at his house, in CoventGarden, on the 17th of June, 1728.In addition to his translation of theObservations sur la Giossesse, of Maurice," who," says Chalmers, " mentionshim often, in some of his works,but always with the littleness of jealousy,"he was the author of threetracts respecting the Bank of England ;and of a Latin poem, published in theHymenseus Cantabrigiensis, on the Marriageof Prince George of Denmarkwith the Princess Anne.In his epitaph, he is described ashaving been a man of skill, liberality,and benevolence ; and Haller, withother eminent medical writers, properlyaccord him great praise for hiscelebrated improvement in the obstetricart j which, from motives of mere interest,he cautiously concealed, when,by his own admission, several liveswere lost, through ignorance, on thepart of his fellow-practitioners, of thediscovery he had made. It is proper toadd, that his claims to the merit of theinvention have been disputed. Someauthors pretend that he took the ideaof his improvement from the Arabs,whose practice, however, appears tobear no affinity to that which he is saidto have introduced. Others ascribe thehonour of originating the mode in questionto an accoucheur, named Ruff, and,according to Johnson, prior to its beingestablished by Chamberlen, it had beenpartially brought forward by Drinkwater,a surgeon at Brentford.He was thrice married ; but it doesnot appear that he left any issue.JOHN WOODWARD.JOHN WOODWARD.JOHN WOODWARD, a native ofDerbyshire, was born on the 1st ofMay, 1665, and, after having receivedthe rudiments of education at a countryschool, was put apprentice to alinen-draper, whom, however, he soonquitted, and shortly after, became acquaintedwith Dr. Peter Barwick, aphysician, " who, finding him," saysWard, his biographer, " of a very promisinggenius, took him under histuition in his own family." After havingmade considerable progress in philosophy,physic, and anatomy, he wasinvited to visit Sir Ralph Danton, Dr.Barwick's son-in-law, at Overborne, inGloucestershire, where his mineralogicalobservations and collections " ledhim to conclude," says the authoritybefore cited, " that the great mixture,which he everywhere found, both ofnative and extraneous fossils, must resultfrom some general cause ; and, atlength, convinced him of the universalityof the Mosaic deluge."In January, 1692, he was chosen professorof physic in Gresham college,on the recommendation of severaleminent men, and, particularly throughthe testimonial of Dr. Barwick, whocertified that Woodward " had madethe greatest advance, not only inphysic, anatomy, botany, and otherparts of natural philosophy, but likewisein history, geography, mathematics,philology, and all other usefullearning, of any man he ever knew ofhis age." In 1693, he was chosen afellow of the Royal Society ; and, aboutthe same period, he attracted the attentionof the virtuosi, and the ridiculeof the wits, by the private exhibition ofan old shield ; and such was his anxietyto inform the learned world of thetreasure he possessed, that he hadseveral casts made of it in plaster ofParis, and a copper-plate engraving ofit circulated at Amsterdam. " By thesemeans," says Ward, " the thoughts andcritical skill of many celebrated antiquarieswere employed about thisrarity ;" and Dwell commenced writinga Latin dissertation upon it, whichin consequence of his death, was finishedby Herne, and published under thetitle of Enrich Dwell de Paris.Equestrian Woodwardiana Dissertation.In 1695, he obtained his degree ofM. D. by a mandate from ArchbishopVenison; and, during the same year,published a work, entitled, An Essaytowards a Natural History of the Earthand Terrestrial Bodies, especially inMinerals, as also of the Sea, River, andSprings ; with an account of the UniversalDeluge, and of the Effects it hadupon the Earth. One of his propositionsin this book, the whole of whichexcited great ridicule, was, that fossilshells were the exuviae of sea fishes,against which, the opinion of naturalistswas then almost unanimous. In 1696,he published a pamphlet entitled, BriefInstructions for making Observationsin all parts of the World, as also forCollecting, Preserving, and Sendingover Natural Things, &c. ; in which heappealed to all persons in every part ofthe globe, to assist in establishing anuniversal correspondence for the improvementand diffusion of naturalKnowledge, on the plan of his Instructions;a publication which was answeredby three or four hostile letters,under different signatures ; thoughHarris, who took up the defence ofWoodward, attributed them all to thepen of Dr. Martin Lister. The controversybetween Woodward and hisopponents was terminated by a pamphlet,written by Dr. Arbuthnot, who,after drawing a comparison betweenthe former's hypothesis, relative tomarine bodies, and that of Steno, whoseideas he had been accused of borrowing,came to the conclusion, " that thoughDr. Woodward's hypothesis seemed tobe liable to many just exceptions, thewhole was not to be exploded."In 1698, he was admitted a licentiate,and in 1792, elected a fellow of theRoyal College of Physicians. In 1704,a Latin translation of his Essay havingbeen printed at Zurich, he became engagedin a controversy with Caper andLeibnitz, and, some years afterwards,MEDICAL SCIENCE.with Camerarius, who closed the disputewith a very handsome acknowledgmentof Woodward's abilities;although the latter had very insufficientlyanswered many of his objectionsin a Latin treatise, entitled,Naturalis Historia Tellers illustrateet acta; of which, an English translation,by Holloway, appeared in 1726.In 1718, he published a work, entitled,The State of Physic and Diseases,with an Inquiry into the Causesof the late Increase of them; but moreparticularly of the Small-Pox : withsome Considerations upon the NewPractice of Purging in that Disease, &c.This practice had been advocated byDr. Mead and Dr. Freind, especiallyby the latter, in his Commentary onFevers, against which was principallydirected the treatise of Woodward, whoendeavoured to show the advantage ofemetics. He, however, stood no chancewith an adversary like Freind, who,with the assistance of Dr. Mead, gaineda complete triumph over him. Thelatter, however, seems to have displayedan unbecoming virulence in the contest:and to have expressed himself, so longas thirty years afterwards, in the prefaceto his Treatise on the Small-Pox,in a manner that would have beenperfectly inexcusable, even in the heatof the dispute ; during which, it isstated, in the Medical Anecdotes, onthe authority of Dr. Lawrence, whosecorrectness on the point there is, however,strong reason to doubt, that Meadwent to Gresham College for the purposeof challenging Woodward; andmeeting him under the arch, in theway from the outer court to the greencourt, drew his sword and bid him defendhimself, or beg pardon ; which, itis supposed, he did."During the latter part of his life,which terminated on the 25th of April,1728, he devoted the chief portion ofhis time to ' his darling fossils andshells." His collection was purchasedby the university of Cambridge, towhich he had bequeathed 150 perannum, for the foundation of a mineralogicallectureship : this appears tohave been first held by Dr. ConfersMiddleton, who wrote a Latin inscriptionfor the founder's monument inWestminster Abbey. Shortly after hisdeath appeared A Catalogue of Fossilsin the collection of John Woodward,M. D., and an octavo production fromhis pen, entitled, Fossils of all Kindsdigested into a Method suitable totheir Mutual Relations and Affinity.Besides the works already mentioned,he was the author of some archaeologicaltracts, and a few contributionsto the Philosophical Transactions.Dr. Woodward, though rather eccentric,appears to have been a man ofconsiderable abilities, and great husinanity. One of his biographers states,that " as he was a genius sui generis,so his method of reasoning was oftengrounded upon a way of reason peculiarto himself." The catalogue ofhis collection has met with considerablepraise on account of the correct informationin many cases to be derivedfrom it, as to the localities of the specimens.As a geologist he is certainly entitledto high praise, for having made actualobservations the basis of his theories,which, if estimated, as they should be,by the scanty stock of materials in thepossession of philosophers, at the earlypart of the past century, may be pronouncedrather creditable, than otherwise,to bis mental capacity.GEORGE CHEYNE.THIS well-known medical writer wasborn in Scotland, in 1671, and beingoriginally destined for the church, forsome time devoted himself to theologicalstudies, which, however, he abandonedfor medical pursuits, on hearing the lecturesof Dr. Pitcairn. After having takena doctor's degree at Edinburgh, he proceededto London, where a great changesoon took place in his habits, which hadpreviously been temperate and sedentary." Upon my coming up to London,"he says, in his autobiography,I, all of a sudden, changed my whoseGEORGE CHEYNE.manner of living. I found the bottlecompanions, the younger gentry, andfree livers, to be the most easy of access,and most quickly susceptible of friendshipand acquaintance ; nothing beingnecessary for that purpose but to be ableto eat lustily, and swallow down muchliquor ; and, being naturally of a largesize, a cheerful temper, and tolerablylively imagination ; and having, in mycountry retirement, laid in astpre of ideasand facts ; by these qualifications I soonbecame caressed by them, and grewdaily in bulk, and in friendship withthese gay gentlemen andacquaintances."By continuing for some time thiscourse of life, which he pursued no lessfrom inclination than as the means ofobtaining practice, he seriously injuredhis health ; becoming nearly thirty-threestone in weight, nervous, scorbutic,short-breathed, lethargic, and listless;so that, according to one of his biographers,his life was an intolerableburden, and his condition the mostdeplorable. Being forsaken by, whathe termed, his bouncing, protesting,undertaking companions, and havingin vain tried to remove his complaintby medicine, he sank into a state ofmelancholy and dejection, from whichhe endeavoured to obtain relief in religiousreading and meditation. His attemptsucceeded; and at length, havingadopted a milk and vegetable diet, herecovered his strength, activity, andcheerfulness ; the restoration, of which,however, he ascribed, in part, to theBath waters, in an account of their naturewhich he appended to his Essay onthe Due Method of Treating the Gout.His other works consist of An Essay onHealth and Long Life, which has passedthrough numerous editions, and beentranslated into Latin ; A New Theoryof acute and slow-continued Fevers;Fluxion Methodus inversa; PhilosophicalPrinciples of Religion, Naturaland Revealed, a book dedicated to theEarl of Roxburgh, and written expresslyfor his use ; The English Malady, oraTreatise on Nervous Disorders ; Thenatural Mode of curing the Diseases ofthe Body and the Disorders of the Minddepending on the Body ; an Essay onRegimen ; and some other pieces.His productions, which appear to bechiefly on the subject of diet, are addressed,for the most part, to the studiousand the voluptuous. His maxims,both as a physician and a writer, werefounded on " a few perceptible truths;"and the system which he formed issaid to have had " a peculiar tendencyto promote virtue and religion, to calmthe passions, refine the mind, and purifythe heart."He seems to have been a man of anamiable unassuming character, and sincerelyto have regretted the hostile expressionsagainst his contemporaries ofwhich he had been guilty in some ofhis early writings. He describes hisFluxion Methodus inversa, (whichhad procured his election to the RoyalSociety, in 1705,) as having beenbrought forth in ambition, and bred upin vanity. " My defence of that work,"he adds, " against the learned andacute Mr. Abr. De Moivre. being writtenin a spirit of levity and resentment,I most sincerely retract, and wish undone,so far as it is personal or peevish,and ask him and the world pardon forit ; as I do for the defence of Dr. Pitcairn'sDissertations, and the NewTheory of Fevers, against the latelearned and ingenious Dr. Oliphant. Iheartily condemn and detest all personalreflections, all malicious and unmannerlyturns, and all false and unjustrepresentations, as unbecoming gentlemen,scholars, and Christians; and disproveand undo both performances, asfar as in me lies, in every thing thatdoes not strictly and barely relate to theargument."During the period of his illness, he readthe most celebrated works on the subjectof Christianity from its earliest ages.On these," he observes, " I have formedmy ideas, principles, and sentiments ;so as, under all the varieties of opinion,sects, disputes, and controversies, thathave been canvassed and bandied in theworld, I have scarce ever been the leastshaken, or tempted to change my sentimentsor opinions, or so much as tohesitate in any material point." One ofhis maxims was, " to neglect nothingto secure his eternal peace more thanif he had been certified he should diewithin the day ; nor to mind any thingthat his secular duties and obligationsdemanded of him, less than if he hadbeen ensured to live fifty years more."He died at Bath, in 1743, where he hadfor a long period been in rather extensiveMEDICAL SCIENCE.practice. Among his patients was thecelebrated Beau Nash ; who, on beingasked, one day, by Cheyne, if he hadfollowed his last prescription, replied inthe negative; adding, " If I had, doctor,I should certainly have broken ray neck,for I threw it out of a two pair of stairs'window."RICHARD MEAD.RlCHARD, the son of MatthewMead, a dissenting clergyman, wasborn at Stephen, on the llth of August1673. After having received theearly part of his education under thecare of his father, he went to a privateschool, in 1688, and, in the followingyear, was sent to Utrecht, where hestudied three years under the celebratedGrievous. In 1692, at which timehe was well skilled in the Greek andLatin languages, and noted for hisready talents in verse," he removedto Leyden, where he continued till1695, applying himself to the study ofphysic, in which he derived greatadvantage by constantly attending thelectures of Herman and Pitcairn. Onleaving Leyden he went to Florence,and there discovered the Tabula Ithaca.At Padua he took his degree of doctor ofphilosophy and physic; and, after havingvisited Rome and Naples, returned toStephen, in 1696, where he practisedfor some years with great success.In 1702, he published his MechanicalAccount of Poisons, a work which wasthe result of practical experiments, particularlywith the viper; the venom ofwhich he tasted, in order to ascertain theutility of the method of the Psylli, whowere accustomed to suck the woundsmade by the bite of serpents. In 1703,he was chosen physician to St. Thomas'sHospital, on which occasion he removedto Crutched Friars, where he resideduntil 1711, when he took a house in AustinFriars, and, about the same time wasappointed, by the Surgeons' Company,their anatomical lecturer. In 1704, liebecame a member of the Royal Society ;of which, in 1706, he was made one ofthe council, and, in 1717, on the nominationof Sir Isaac Newton, a vice-president.He had, also, in the interim,been admitted a fellow of the Collegeof Physicians, and been presented witha diploma of M. D. by the University ofOxford.Having attained considerable eminenceas a physician, he was called intoa consultation during the last illnessof Queen Anne ; who, although the othermedical men present appear to havetaken a favourable view of her case, heobserved, " could not hold out long ;" aprediction that was verified by her deathtaking place two days afterwards.Shortly after the accession of Georgethe First, he removed to the house ofhis lately deceased friend, Dr. Radcliffe,and at the same time resignedhis office in St. Thomas's Hospital, onwhich occasion he received the unanimousthanks of the committee for hisservices, and was presented with a governor'sstaff.In 1719, a quarantine was establishedby his advice, which had been solicitedby government, in consequence of theplague having appeared at Marseilles ;and, about the same period, he publishedA short Discourse concerning PestilentialContagion, and the Methods to beused to Prevent it. In less than ayear this work went through seven editions,the first and the last of whichwere translated into Latin by Mr. attireand Professor Ward. It appears,however, to have injured his practice,although it increased his reputation;being suspected, says one of his biographers," to be intended to prepare theway for barracks, &c. at a time of daywhen the nation was even more jealousof a standing army than now."In 1721, on the communication byLady Mary Worsley Montague, of thesuccessful results of inoculation whichshe had observed at Constantinople,Dr. Mead was ordered by the Prince ofWales to inoculate six condemned criminals,whose lives had been sparedfor the purpose. The experiment succeeding,he, in the following year, inoculatedthe two daughters of the prince,who, on coming to the throne, appointedhim his physician in ordinary.RICHARD MEAD.In 1704, having published his OratioHarveiana, it involved him in a seriousdispute with Dr. Middleton, who wroteseveral treatises against it, which, however,were successfully answered on behalfof Mead, by the learned Ward. In1734, feeling desirous of retirement,he declined the presidentship of theCollege of Physicians, and thenceforthdevoted most of his leisure time to literarypursuits connected with the profession.In 1746, he published a workin Latin, on the influence of the sunand moon upon human bodies ; and in1747, a Latin treatise on the small-poxand measles, in answer to a productionon the same subject, by Dr. Woodward,with whom he entered into a violentcontroversy, in whiche was materiallyassisted by Dr. Freind. In 1749, hepublished Medicine Sacra ; and, in 1750,his last work, entitled Monica et preceptsMedica, of which his principalbiographer, Dr. Maty, thus speaks :This is a legacy that our author hathbequeathed to his brethren ; valuable,not only for the good it may do, but,likewise, as it shows the excellent mindof the testator. To be able to accountin such a manner to posterity for the useof his time, to consecrate the last momentsof his life to the advancement ofscience, how worthy is that man tohave lived who dies thus employed!"From the time of the publication ofthis work, Dr. Mead began graduallyto decline in health, and his death tookplace on the 16th of February, 1754.He was buried in the Temple Church,and a handsome monument was erectedto his memory, by his only survivingson, in Westminster Abbey. He hadbeen twice married: first, in 1699, toa Miss Marsh, by whom he had tenchildren, seven of whom died in hislifetime; and. in 1724, to a daughterof Sir Rowland Aston, a Bedfordshirebaronet, by whom he had no issue.Besides the works already mentioned,he was the author of An Analysis ofDr. Bonomi's Researches relative tothe Itch ; of some valuable tracts ; andof various papers in the PhilosophicalTransactions.Few men remained so long at thehead of their profession, or practisedwith so much success, as Mead : fornearly fifty years his business producedhim, on an average, nearly 4,000 ayear. His professional reputation wasso great, that almost all the counties ofEngland, and the colonies belonging toit,applied to him for the choice of theirphysicians; and the most eminent medicalmen in the principal courts ofEurope frequently wrote to consulthim. He often exchanged presents withthe King of France ; and the King ofNaples once sent to request of him acomplete collection of his works ; givinghim, in return, a valuable publicationby Signor Bayard, on the Antiquities ofHerculaneum.He appears to have been an ardentadmirer of Dr. Radcliffe, who, havingone day found him reading Hippocratesin the original Greek, expressed hisastonishment, and said " Why, I neverread Hippocrates at all." " You haveno occasion to do so," replied Mead, " foryou are Hippocrates himself." This flatteringreply is stated to have procuredhim the friendship of Radcliffe ; towhose patronage, the foundation of hisimmense practice has been generallyattributed. According, however, to oneauthor, he " had his rise in life frombeing called in to see the Duchess ofat midnight. She unfortunately drankto excess. The doctor also was veryoften much in liquor, and was so thatnight. In the act of feeling her pulse,slipping his foot, he cried, ' Drunk! byG d 1" meaning himself. She, imagininghe had found out her complaint,which she wished to conceal, told thedoctor if he kept her secret she wouldrecommend him. She did so, and madehis fortune." The author of the GoldHeaded Cane states that, when notengaged at home, he generally spenthis evenings at Watson's coffee-house ;and that, in the forenoons, apothecariesused to come to him at Toms's, nearCovent Garden, with written or verbalreports of cases, on which he prescribed,without seeing the patients, for half-guineafees.One of the principal improvementswhich he brought into practice, was amethod of moderating the sudden effluxof water in tapping, on account of whichpersons had frequently died under theoperator's hands. It was said of him,that, " of all physicians who had everflourished, he gained the most, spentthe most, and enjoyed the highest fameduring hisjife-time, not only in his own,MEDICAL SCIENCE.but in foreign countries." He subscribedto the metropolitan hospitalsthen established ; successfully exertedhimself for the foundation of another byMr. Guy ; and, according to Dr. Maty,the Foundling could never have beenattempted without his assistance. Beingas much a lover of the arts and sciencesas a philanthropist, there was scarcelyany thing tending to their promotionto which," says George Edwards (acelebrated natural historian, who experiencedthe benefit of his patronage),he did not contribute in the most extensivemanner." He continually keptin his pay a number of scholars andartists. On hearing that Mr. Cartewas employed, in France, on an Englishtranslation of the History of Thanks,he not only paid that gentleman liberallyfor his labours, but employed Mr.Buckley to finish the work on a moreextended plan, and when completed,had it published at his own expense.After ten years of zealous solicitation,he persuaded the lords of the admiraltyto order that every vessel in the navyshould be provided with one of Mr.Button's machines for drawing out fouland corrupted air from ships. Hishouse, in Great Ormond Street, wherehe resided during the latter part of hislife, was styled the " Temple of Natureand Repository of Time," and noforeigner of taste or celebrity came toLondon without visiting him. Someidea of the value and extent of hislibrary may be conceived from thefact, that the sale of his books alonelasted twenty-eight days, and produced5,500 ; the rest of his collection,consisting of antiques, medals, coins,prints, and drawings, were disposed ofin about a fortnight, and fetched nearlydouble that amount.His character in private life appearsto have been very amiable. Pope said ofhim, " I highly esteem and love thatworthy man. His unaffected humanityand benevolence have stifled much ofthat envy which his eminence in hisprofession would otherwise have drawnout." His hospitality was unbounded :not satisfied with entertaining his ownfriends and acquaintances, he kept also,says the author of the Gold HeadedCane, a very handsome second table, towhich persons of inferior quality wereinvited.Notwithstanding the violence he displayedin the controversy with Woodward,whom he is even said, in theMedical Anecdotes, (the accuracy ofwhich is, however, doubtful on thispoint,) to have challenged, and compelledto beg pardon, Dr. Mead was,in his general conduct, mild and forbearing.On one occasion, a servant,whom he had asked to look for hisspectacles, told him petulantly, butwithout exciting any observation in reply,that " he was always losing histhings !" His anger was, however, occasionallyaroused. He once said to adivine, who, instead of attending to hisprescriptions had been following thedirections laid down for the cure of themalady with which he was afflicted, inawork by Dr. Cheyne : " Sir, I havenever yet, in the whole course of mypractice, taken or demanded the leastfee from a clergyman ; but, since youhave pleased, contrary to what I havemet with in any other gentleman ofyour profession, to prescribe to me, ratherthan follow my prescriptions, whenyou had committed the care of yourrecovery to my skill and trust, you mustnot take it amiss, nor will, 1 hope, thinkit unfair, if I demand ten guineas ofyou." The clergyman paid the money ;six guineas of which, Mead, however,subsequently returned.To Dr. Freind he appears to havebeen much attached. When that learnedphysician was confined in the Tower,he went there and told him that hewould do all in his power to obtain hisliberation; adding, with a smile, " Ipresume, however much your cultivatedmind is enabled to amuse itselfby reading and writing, you will haveno sort of objection to resign yournewly acquired office of Medicus Regiusad Turin." It is said, that he refusedto prescribe for Sir Robert Walpole,until that minister consented to thedischarge of Dr. Freind, to whom, onthe day of his liberation, he handed thesum of five thousand guineas, whichhe had received from Freind's patientsduring his imprisonment.JOHN FREIND.JOHN FREIND.JOHN FREIND, the son of a clergyman,was born at Croton, in Northamptonshire,some time in the year 1675.After having passed some time at WestminsterSchool, under Dr. Busby, hewas elected, in 1690, to ChristchurchCollege. Oxford ; where, according toNichols, he directed the studies ofMr. Boyle, and wrote the Examinationof Dr. Bentley's Dissertation on aesop,which exposed him to some severeremarks from that celebrated critic.He also, in conjunction with Folks,edited the Greek Oration of .aeschinesagainst Ctesiphon, with the reply ofDemosthenes ; and revised for thepress, the Delphian edition of Ovid'sMetamorphoses.In 1701, he took, successively, thedegrees of M.A. and B. M. ; and, in1703, published a work, entitled, .which passed through severaleditions, and was translated intothe principal continental languages. In1704, he became chemical professor atOxford; and, in the following year,went to Spain, as physician to theEnglish forces under the command ofthe Earl of Peterborough. He remainedabroad for about two years,during which he visited Italy; and,on his return, published a pamphletin defence of Lord Peterborough's conduct.In 1707, he was created M.D.by diploma ; and, in 1709, printed ninechemical lectures; which, being severelycensured by the author of theActa Eruditorum, who treated as fictionthe Newtonian Philosophy, Freindpublished a Latin answer, defending itsprinciples, in the Philosophical Transactions.In 1711, he was elected a fellow ofthe Royal Society ; in the following year,he accompanied the British troops toFlanders; and, in 1714, took up hisabode in London, where he soon obtainedthe reputation of being one ofthe first physicians of his day. In 1716,he became a fellow of the' College ofPhysicians ; and, shortly afterwards,published a work, entitled, Hypocritesde Morbis Popularity, liber primus ettertius : his accomodavit Novem deFebris Commentaries John Freind,M. D. In this work he displayed greaterudition, and a profound acquaintancewith the works of Hippocrates, whosepractice he accurately detailed, and ofwhose principles he avowed himself azealous advocate. Having, in the Commentaries,made some remarks relativeto the efficacy of purgative medicinesin the secondary fever of confluentsmall-pox, he was attacked by Dr.Woodward, in a treatise, entitled, TheState of Physic and Diseases ; to whichhe published a ludicrous reply, underthe name of one Field, a noted quack.In 1717, he read the Gulstonian lecture;and, in 1719, printed a letter,addressed to Dr. Mead, entitled, DePurgatives in Secunda VariorumConfluentium Fere adhibendis, whichappears to have greatly increased hisreputation.In 1720, he delivered the Tarpeianoration; and, in 1722, became memberof parliament for Launceston. In thehouse of commons, he displayed considerablehostility to Walpole; and onthe impeachment of Atterbury, advocatedthe cause of that prelate with somuch warmth, that during the suspendof the habeas corpus act, hewas charged with treasonable designs,and committed to the Tower. After aconfinement of three months, his friend,Dr. Mead, procured his enlargement,on bail ; whose recognizance were,shortly afterwards, discharged. Whilein the Tower, he produced an epistleto Dr. Mead, entitled, De quibusdamVariorum generous ; and formedthe plan of his celebrated History ofPhysic, from the time of Galen to thebeginning of the Sixteenth Century,chiefly with regard to Practice ; the firstpart of which was published in 1725,and the second in 1726. This work wassuggested by, and intended as a supplementto, Daniel Le Clerc's Histoirede la Medicine. It met with muchapprobation ; but did not wholly escapecensure, a pamphlet being published,in which the author was charged withMEDICAL SCIENCE.misrepresentation of facts ; and an articlebeing printed, in the BibliothecaAncienne et Moderne, in defence ofDaniel Le Clerc, whom he had accusedof committing numerous errors, a controversyensued ; which, however, appearsto have terminated in favour ofFreind.Soon after his liberation from theTower, he had been made physician tothe Prince of Wales ; on whose accessionto the throne, he became physicianto the queen. He did not, however,long enjoy this appointment, his deathoccurring on the 26th of July, 1728.He was buried in Westminster Abbey,where a monument, with a Latin inscription,was erected to his memory;and, among numerous other tributes tohis skill, the following lines from thepen of Samuel Wesley, were presentedto the public :When Radcliffe fell, afflicted Physic cried,How vain my power '." and languished at his tide.When Freind expir'd, deep (truck, her hair the tore,And, speechless, fainted, and reviv'd no more.Her flowing grief no farther could extend ;She mourns with Kadcli lie , but she dies with Freind.The king and queen are said to havesincerely regretted his loss, and to havesettled a pension on his widow. Hisfavourable reception at court, at thelatter part of his life, induced manyto suppose that he had sacrificed hispolitical opinions to his interest. " Dr.John Freind," says Morrice,in a letter,dated June, 1728, " is a very assiduouscourtier ; and must grow so, more andmore, every day, since his quondamfriends and acquaintances shun anddespise him ; and whenever he happensto fall in the way of them, he looks,methinks, very sillily." Bishop Atterbury,however, when in exile, observedof him " I dare say, notwithstandinghis station at court, he diedwith the same political opinions withwhich I left him. He is lamentedby men of all parties," continued thebishop, " for he was known everywhere,and confessed to be at the headof his faculty." Sir Edward Wilmot,in delivering the Harveian oration, in1573, described him as a deep philosopher,a learned physician, an elegantwriter, and an ornament to society ;as being very honest and humane, everdesirous of doing good, and of communicatingknowledge to the utmostextent of his power. As a physician,he was deservedly held in high estimation,both at home and abroad.Hoffman, Helped us, Herquet, Boer-have,and other eminent foreigners,bestowed great praise upon his extraordinarytalents. " The reputation ofDr. Freind, as a physician," says Mor-rice,the writer before quoted, as to hisalleged change of political principles,"is greatly raised, by Lord Townshend'srecovery, after the Whig doctors, particularlyPulse, declared that his lordshipmust die, if he followed the courseDr. Freind was for taking with him.But his lordship declared he would liveor die by the hands of Freind ; and soPulse took his leave, and his lordshipis, contrary to most people's expectations,past all danger.A collection of his works, in Latin,with an account of his life prefixed, byWigan, was published in London, a fewyears after his death, and subsequentlyreprinted at Paris.WILLIAM CHESELDEN.THIS eminent surgeon and anatomist,a native of Leicestershire, was born in1688, and, after having received a commonschool education, was sent to themetropolis, where he studied anatomy,under Cowper, in whose house he resided,and surgery under Feme, theprincipal surgeon of St. Thomas's Hospital.In 1710, he gave his first course oflectures ; and, in 171 1, became a fellowof the Royal Society. Having rapidlyattained great eminence as a practitioner,he was appointed chief surgeonat the hospital where he had studied,consulting surgeon of St. George's andthe Westminster Infirmary, and principalsurgeon to Queen Caroline. Agreat number of pupils constantly attendedhis lectures, which he continuedto deliver for upwards of twenty years,WILLIAM Smell.and in the course of that period rose tothe head of his profession.His first publication, entitled Anatomyof the Human Body, was publishedin 1713, and soon became a workof general reputation among medicalmen. In 1723, he produced a treatiserelative to the high operation in lithotomy,which, after having been involvedin a controversy on the subject withDr. Douglas, by whom it had previouslybeen practised, he abandonedfor the lateral method. In 1728, heimmortalized himself, says Hutchinson,by giving sight to a lad, near fourteenyears old, who had been totallyblind from his birth, by the closure ofthe iris; and, in the course of the sameyear, he published an elaborate accountof the case, which excited considerableinterest, in the Philosophical Transactions.In 1729, he became a correspondingmember of the Royal Academy ofSciences at Paris ; and, in 1732, an associateof the Royal Academy of Surgeryin the same city, being the first foreigneron whom that honour had been conferred.In 1 733, he brought out, by subscription,a work, illustrated with plates,Entitled, Orthography, or the Anatomyof the Bones, which his old antagonist,Dr. Douglas, severely attacked ; while,by Haller and Heister it was spoken ofin highly favourable terms, although theformer is said to have discovered in it afew absurdities and several minor defects.In 1737, he received the appointmentof chief surgeon to Chelsea Hospital,and some time afterwards ceased tobe a general practitioner, performingoperations and affording advice onlyin remarkably difficult or importantcases. In 1749, he published a translationof Bran's Operations in Surgery,with twenty-one plates, and manyvaluable original remarks. About thelatter part of 1751 he was attacked withparalysis ; and, on his partial recovery,proceeded, for the benefit of a change ofair, to Bath, where his life was terminatedby apoplexy, on the 10th of April,in the following year. He left onedaughter, who had married Dr. Cotes,of Woodcuts, in Shropshire.Cheselden was a man of great talentand some remarkable foibles. He hada strong predilection for pugilism, andappeared to be more ambitious of excellingas an architect or a coach-makerthan as an anatomist. Althoughdescribed as having been deplorablyvain of his abilities, he is said to haveevinced great anxiety, and sometimestrepidation, before he entered upon thedaily routine of his hospital duties,which, however, it is added, he had nosooner commenced than his self-possessionreturned, and he went throughthe most difficult operations with imperturbablecoolness, as well as singulardexterity.WILLIAM Smell.WILLIAM Smell was born inScotland, about the year 1695 ; and, in1741, after having practised for nineteenyears with great success, as an accoucheur,in a small town, in his nativecountry, he came to London, wherehe took a house in Pali-Mall, andsoon attained considerable eminence asan obstetrical lecturer and practitioner.In 1752, he published, in one volume,octavo, the substance of his lectures,under the title of A Treatise on Midwifery,to which were subsequentlyadded two more volumes, the last appearingabout five years after his death.This work, the result of forty yearsexperience, being regarded, at the timeof its completion, as the best authoritythat had then appeared of the art onwhich it treats, was translated intoseveral foreign languages ; amongothers, into French, by M. De Greville,who assigned as a reason for theundertaking, the high character whichSmellie enjoyed on the continent.In 1754, he produced, with the assistanceof Professor Cowper, a set ofthirty-six anatomical plates, and anabridgment of the Practice of Midwifery,in order to elucidate the doctrinesof his lectures. He subsequentlybecame engaged in a controversy withMEDICAL SCIENCE.Dr. Burton, and Dr. W. Douglas ; thelatter of whom charged him with malpractice,and with having degraded hisprofession, by teaching midwifery at avery low price, by granting certificatesto pupils who had only attended him afew weeks, by giving an universal lectureon the obstetrical art, for half-a-guinea,and hanging out a paper lantern,bearing the following inscription:" Midwiferytaught here for five shillings."Smellie replied only to the charge ofmal-practice, of which he proved himselfso completely guiltless, that Dr.Douglas retracted his accusation onthis point. His controversy with Dr.Burton was in consequence of his preferenceof the perforator and crotchet,to the terra occulta, an instrumentrecommended by Burton, which is nowtotally disused, and scarcely ever seen.During this dispute, Smellie committeda ludicrous blunder. An engraving ofa petrified child being designated, in acatalogue which fell into his hands, asLithopocdii Senonensis Icon, Smelliesupposed it to be the title of a book onmidwifery, which he referred to, ashaving been written by LithopaediusSenonensis.His practice was more extensive thanlucrative, being confined to the middleand lower classes of society ; his coarseperson, awkward deportment, and unpleasingmanners, precluding him frombeing much estimated by persons ofrank or distinction. " No man wasmore ready than Dr. Smellie," saidone of his pupils in answering thecritical animadversions of Dr. Douglas,to crave advice and assistance whendanger or difficulty occurred ; and, noman was more communicative withoutthe least self-sufficiency or ostentation.He never officiously intermeddledin the concerns of others, orstrove to insinuate himself into practiceby depreciating the character ofhis neighbour ; but made his wayinto business by dint of merit alone,and maintained his reputation by themost beneficent and disinterested behaviour."Being possessed of great mechanicalskill, he made such valuable improvementsin the practice of his art, asentitled him to a high rank amongmedical practitioners. It is stated inone of his publications that he educatedabove one thousand pupils of bothsexes ; who had, while under hisinstruction, by a subscription amongthemselves, supported, and affordedproper assistance during their confinement,to nearly twelve hundred poorwomen. This conduct of his pupilsmust, however, we fear, be attributedto a desire of obtaining practice, at asmall cost, rather than to disinterestedbenevolence.Dr. Smellie died in Scotland, at anadvanced age, about the year 1763.ALEXANDER Monroe, THE ELDER.THIS eminent physician and anatomist,a native of the metropolis, andson of an army surgeon, was born inthe month of September, 1697. Developing,at an early age, an inclinationfor the study of physic, he was sent,by his father, to attend the lecturesof Messrs. Hawksbee and Whistonon experimental philosophy, and theanatomical demonstrations of Mr. Che-selden,under whom he made suchremarkable progress, that Adam Drummond,the anatomical professor, at Edinburgh,on being shewn some of hispreparations, observed " If he continuesto improve himself in the studyof anatomy as he has begun, I willresign in his favour."After having attended the hospitalsat Paris, he went, in the latter partof 1718, to Leyden, where he studiedunder the celebrated Boerhaave ; withwhom he became particularly intimate,and from whom he received, inwriting, it is said, " a high opinion ofthe quickness of his parts, and of hisknowledge of his profession." In 1719,he settled at Edinburgh, and became ademonstrator of anatomy, in conjunctionwith Messrs. Drummond and M'Gill.Shortly after, he gave his first publiclecture, at the request of his father,ALEXANDER Monroe, THE ELDER.who, without his knowledge, had invitedthe president and fellows ofthe College of Physicians, and thewhole company of surgeons, to hearhim. On discovering so many eminentpersons among his auditory, he becameconfused, and entirely forgot the wordsof his intended discourse, which hehad previously written, and committedto memory. He was, consequently,obliged to express himself insuch language as occurred to him atthe moment ; but, being perfectly conversantwith his subject, he wentthrough the discourse in a masterly style.In the winter of 1720, he deliveredthe first regular course of lectures thathad ever been given at Edinburgh, onanatomy and surgery ; and, in conjunctionwith Aston, Rutherford, Sinclair,and Plummer, established, it is said,that medical school, which has sinceacquired such great reputation all overEurope." About the same period, hewas appointed to the university professorshipof anatomy, and subsequentlydelivered a course of clinical lectures atthe new hospital, in Edinburgh, to theinstitution of which he had, in somedegree, contributed, by a very ablepamphlet. In 1726, he published a valuablework, entitled, Osteology, or aTreatise on the Anatomy of the Bones ;and, about the same time, became secretaryto a society for collecting and publishingmedical observations and essays.Of these six volumes were printed,"the whole, except the first, being entirelyselected by himself; they passedthrough several editions, on the continentas well as in this country; andelicited the admiration of the greatHalter, who said that no medical manought to be without them. In hisoriginal papers, published in this collection,Dr. Monro is said, by his sonand biographer, to have made manymaterial improvements on the descriptionsbefore given, of the structureand uses of several parts of the body ;drawn many useful practical corollariesfrom anatomy ; and proposed manynew improvements in the method ofperforming chirurgical operations, mostof which are now adopted in the practiceand writings of our more modernsurgeons.In 1762, he was attacked with theinfluenza, which brought on a disorderthat kept him in a continual state ofacute suffering, for nearly five years ;and at length proved fatal to him, onthe 10th of July, 1767. Although aman of strong muscular make, andgreat strength and activity of body,he had, for a long period, been subjectto a spitting of blood on taking theleast cold, and, through his whole life,to inflammatory fever, which he usedto attribute to the too great care hisparents took of him in his youth, andto their having had him regularlyblooded twice a year; a practice which,in those days, was regarded as a greatpreservative of health.Dr. Monro appears to have beenheld in high estimation, on account ofhis talents, both at home and abroad.He was an honorary member of theRoyal Academy of Surgery, at Paris ;member of the Royal Society of London; a director of the Bank of Scotland; a manager of many public charities; and an active member of severalmedical and literary societies. A collectiveedition of his works, with amemoir of his life prefixed, was publishedin 1781, by one of his sons. HisTreatise on the Anatomy of the Bonespassed through eight editions during hislife ; and at Paris, a folio translation ofit, with splendid engravings, was produced,by the demonstrator to theRoyal Academy of Sculpture and Painting.He had married, in 1725, thesecond daughter of Sir Donald Macdonald,Bart.; and two of his sons,Donald and Alexander, became eminentmembers of the medical profession.The following character of him, byLavater, who drew it from his portrait,without knowing who was the original,is said to have been singularly correct :This man is incapable of giving offenceto any one ; and who could ever sufferhimself, designedly, to offend him ? Heloves tranquillity, order, and simpleelegance. He takes a clear view of theobjects he examines ; he thinks accurately; his ideas and his reasoningsare always equally well followed up j hismind rejects all that is false or obscure.He gives with a liberal hand ; he forgiveswith a generous heart ; and takes delightin serving his fellow-creatures. Youmay safely depend on what he says, orwhat he promises. His sensibility neverdegenerates into weakness ; he esteemsMEDICAL SCIENCE.worth, find it where he may. He isnot indifferent to the pleasures of life, |but suffers not himself to be enervatedby them. This is not what is usuallydenominated a great man ; but he possessesa much more exalted characterhe is the honour of humanity, and ofhis rank in life."It is related of him, that, after thebattle of Preston-Pans, he repaired tothe field, for the purpose of assistingthe wounded, many of whom he conveyed,in carriages, to Edinburgh,where he attended them with greatassiduity and care. He also procureda pardon for some of the rebel officers ;and drew up a memorial in behalf ofDr. Cameron, which, it is said, " wouldhave persuaded the king to have sparedhis life, had it not been for certain informationof some treasonable practicesthat were going on at the time he wasapprehended ; in which the doctor (Cameron)was suspected to be concerned."ROBERT JAMES.ROBERT JAMES, the son of a militaryofficer, by a sister of Sir RobertClarke, was born at Inversion, inStaffordshire, in the year 1703, andcompleted his education at St. John'sCollege, Oxford, where he took thedegree of B. M. After having practised,successively, at Sheffield, Lichfield, andBirmingham, he removed to London,and became a licentiate of the Collegeof Physicians. In 1743, he publishedA Medicinal Dictionary, in three volumes,folio; in 1746, a Translation ofMazzini's Treatise on the Diseasesof Artificers, with an original Supplement; and, in 1751, A Dissertationupon Fevers, a work in which heearnestly recommended a certain medicine,since known by the name ofJames's Powders ; an injudicious dose ofwhich, taken without the knowledge ofhis medical attendants, is said to haveproved fatal to the celebrated Dr. Goldsmith.By keeping the mode of preparingthese powders a secret, andselling them himself, James excited thehostility of his professional brethren ;one of whom, Dr. Battle, remarked, thathe could not, as an honest man, prescribeJames's alleged specific, withoutknowing the ingredients and theirrespective proportions.So anxious was James to monopolizethe profits of the discovery, which it hasbeen asserted he bought of a Germanbaron, named Schwanberg, that he notonly obtained a patent for it, but resortedto the meanness and illegality ofevading the condition on which exclusiveprivileges of selling new inventionsare granted by the king to those withwhom they originate, namely, theenrolment of a clear specification ofthe materials and mode of preparation,in the Court of Chancery, for theultimate benefit of the public at large.Dr. Pearson, in an elaborate paper,published in the eighty-first volumeof the Philosophical Transactions, containingthe result of a most laboriouschemical inquiry into the compositionof the powders, after positively statingthat they cannot be prepared by followingthe directions of the specification,observes, that by calcining bone ashes,that is, phosphates lime, with antimony,in a certain proportion, andafterwards exposing the mixture to awhite heat, a compound may be formedcontaining the same ingredients, in thesame proportion, and possessing thesame chemical properties.Besides the works already mentioned,Dr. James published The Practice ofPhysic, two volumes octavo, in 1746;A Treatise on Canine Madness, in1760; and A Dispensatory, in 1764. Hewas also the author of A Short Treatiseon the Disorders of Children, and AVindication of the Fever Powder, whichwere posthumously published. He diedat his house, in Breton Street, on the23rd of March, 1776, leaving severalchildren. The editor of his Vindicationstates, that it was only part of a muchlarger tract, in which the writer hadentered upon a full defence of hischaracter and conduct against theviolent attacks of his brethren of thefaculty. He had received a diplomaSIR ALEXANDER DICK.of M. D. by royal mandamus, whenthe king visited Cambridge, in theyear 1755.In person, Dr. James was large andcorpulent; in conversation, coarse; and,in general deportment, far from engaging.His intemperance frequentlybetrayed him into the commission ofgross absurdities. On comparing thepulse of a patient with his own, quickenedas it was by the stimulants he hadswallowed, he would sometimes confoundthem together, and bluntly taxthe sick person with being drunk.Such a blunder as this, it is, however,said, he was never in danger of committingearly in the day ; as, untilafter dinner, he always refrained fromthe bottle. Notwithstanding such powerfulimpediments to his advance, hisscientific skill and literary powers procuredhim a high reputation, and greatpractice.No man brings more mind to hisprofession than James," was a remarkmade of him by Dr. Johnson, from whomhe is said to have received some assistancein the production of his MedicinalDictionary ; which, says Chalmers, is,in effect, considered as a work highlyhonourable to the author, and retainsits credit unimpaired, after the continuedprogress and improvements inmedicine for several years.SIR ALEXANDER DICK.ALEXANDER, third son of sir \vn-lias Cunningham, of Warrington, byDame Janet Dick, the only child andheiress of Sir James Dick, of Preston-field,was born at the latter place, onthe 23rd of October, 1703. After havingstudied for some time at the Universityof Edinburgh, he became a pupil ofBoerhaave, at Leyden, where he tookthe degree of M. P. on the 31st ofAugust, 1725, upon which occasion, thesubject of his inaugural dissertation,was De Epilepsy. On the 23rd ofJanuary, 1727, he received a diplomaof M. D. from the University of St.Andrew's ; and on the 7th of Novemberfollowing, he was admitted a fellow ofthe Royal College of Physicians atEdinburgh.Shortly afterwards he returned to thecontinent and made an extensive tour;during which, he assiduously prosecutedhis medical studies, and, at the sametime, greatly increased his previous acquaintancewith classical literature, andantiquities. By the advice of a gentleman,named Hooke, with whom he becameacquainted abroad, he, at length,determined on entering upon the practiceof his profession ; and, with thatview, settled in Pembrokeshire, wherefora number of years, he appears tohave enjoyed high reputation as a physician.On succeeding to the familybaronetage and estate, in consequenceof the death of his elder brother withoutissue, he assumed the surname of Dick,and relinquishing practice, retired tohis native place, in Mid Lothian. Hestill, however, continued, with greatzeal, the pursuit of medical knowledge ;and acquired so much esteem amonghis professional contemporaries, that, in1756, and the six following years, hewas unanimously chosen president ofthe Edinburgh College of Physicians;and would, it is said, have again beenelected, had he not positively declinedthe proffered honour, to which, as heobserved, so many others had, by theirtalents, a right to aspire. On retiringfrom the chair, he received the unprecedentedhonour of having his portraithung up in' the hall, as a testimony ofgratitude for his exertions in promotingwhatever was conducive to the interestsor honour of the college.He appears to have displayed greatzeal in procuring a charter for theRoyal Society of Edinburgh, of which,both before and after its incorporation,he was a remarkably active member.As a manager of the Royal Infirmaryof the same city, his conduct is said tohave merited much approbation ; hischief object being to render the establishmentof twofold utility : namely,as a medical school, and a hospital forthe unfortunate. He bestowed greatattention on the culture of rhubarb,MEDICAL SCIENCE.when it was first introduced to thiscountry, by Dr. Money, of Peters-burgh; and, in 1774, produced a specimenof the plant, which procured hima gold medal from the Society of Arts.Up to within a short period of hisdeath, which occurred on the 10th ofNovember, 1785, he is said to havebeen ardently engaged in projects ofbenevolence and utility. His characterwas certainly admirable. His greatzeal and activity for the advancementof medical and general science, appearto have been equalled by his virtuesin private life. His deportment wasmild, and his disposition eminentlybenevolent: to the younger students inphysic he was uniformly encouragingand communicative ; and with theheads of the profession, a strenuousadvocate for the adoption of every discoveryor suggestion for alleviating thesufferings, or ameliorating the conditionof mankind.By his first wife, Sarah, the daughterof Alexander Dick, merchant in Edinburgh,one of his relatives, whom hemarried in April, 1736, he left twodaughters; and by his second, Mary,daughter of David Butler, Esq. ofPembrokeshire, whom he married in1762, three daughters and three sons.JAMES PARSONS.JAMES PARSONS wasbornatBarn-staple, in Devonshire, in the month ofMarch, 1705; and, on the completionof his studies, at Dublin, became tutorto Lord Kingston ; but, having an inclinationfor the medical profession, heproceeded to Paris, for the purpose ofattending the lectures of Astruc. Dunois,Emery, Jessie, and other eminentprofessors ; from whom he obtained suchhigh testimonials of ability, that, on hisremoving to the university of Rheims,the degree of M. D. was immediatelyconferred on him. In July, 1736, hereturned to his native country; and,soon after his arrival in London, wasengaged to assist in the anatomicalworks of Dr. James Douglas. He alsocommenced practice, and soon acquiredconsiderable reputation for his skill asan accoucheur.In 1738, he became physician to StGiles's Infirmary ; and, in 1740, a fellowof the Royal Society, of which hewas subsequently appointed assistantsecretary for foreign correspondence.In 1751, he was admitted a licentiate ofthe College of Physicians; and, aboutthe same period, a fellow of the Societyof Antiquaries, with some of the mosteminent of whom he had previouslyformed a close acquaintance. In 1767,he published an ingenious work, entitled,Remains of Japhet; being HistoricalInquiries into the Affinity andOrigin of the European Languages, inwhich he laboured to prove the descentof the inhabitants of this country fromComer and Magog. He was also theauthor of some medical pieces, includingPhilosophical Observations on theAnalogy between the Propagation ofAnimals and Vegetables, and numerouspapers published in the Transactions ofthe Royal Society ; the most importantof which were, Lectures on MuscularMotion, in which he considered themuscular fibres as being tubular ;Human Physiognomy Explained ; andAn Account of the Dissection of aRhinoceros, with illustrative plates,from drawings executed by himself.In 1769, he disposed of a great portionof his books, and a valuable collectionof fossils, intending to retirefrom his profession, in which he hadattained great eminence ; and with theview of improving his health, proceededto Bristol. In a short time, however,he returned to his former residence, inRed Lion Square, where he expired, onthe 4th of April, 1770. He had married,in 1739, a Miss Elizabeth Reynolds,who bore him three children, all ofwhom died young. By his will, he requestedthat his funeral should nottake place until his body displayed unequivocalmarks of decomposition.As a practitioner, he was judicious,and scrupulously honest in the statementof his opinions; to the sick poorparticularly attentive ; and to his mediaHEBERDEN.cal brethren, courteous and communicative.His conversation is said to havebeen lively, but strictly decorous ; andhis moral character, in all respects, unimpeachable.For the purpose of combiningimprovement with conviviality,he gave weekly dinners to those amonghis acquaintance who were most distinguishedfor scientific acquirementsand general ability. " The just ideashe had of the dignity of our profession,"says Dr. Maty, " as well as the commonlinks which ought to bind all its members,notwithstanding the differences ofcountry, religion, or places of education,made him bear impatiently theshackles laid upon a great number ofrespectable practitioners ; he wished,fondly wished, to see these broken;not with a view of empty honour anddangerous power, but as the only meansof serving mankind more effectually,checking the progress of designing menand illiterate practitioners, and diffusing,through the whole body, a spiritof emulation."The style of our friend's composition,"observes the same writer, " wassufficiently clear in description, thoughin argument not so close as could havebeen wished. Full of his ideas, he didnot always so dispose and connect themtogether, as to produce in the minds ofhis readers that conviction which washis own. He too much despised thoseadditional graces which command attentionwhen joined to learning, observation,and sound reasoning."WILLIAM HEBERDEN.WILLIAM HEBERDEN, a native ofLondon, was born in 1710, and, in1724, proceeded to St. John's College,Cambridge, of which, about six yearsafter, he became a fellow. He thenbegan to devote himself to medical pursuits;and, in 1739, after having takenthe degree of M. D., settled as a physician,at Cambridge, where he practisedfor about ten years ; during whichtime, he gave annual lectures on MateriaMedica, to the university students,and printed An Essay on Mithridatesand Theriaca, containing an account ofthose medicaments, and intended toshow the absurdity of employing " sucha medley of discordant simples."In 1746, he became a fellow of theRoyal College of Physicians ; and,two years after, took up his abode inthe metropolis, where he soon obtainedan extensive practice ; which, saysone of his biographers, he conductedwith great honour and liberality, andwith a constant attention to the improvementof the art, at once adorningand extending the usefulness of his profession.In 1769, he was elected afellow of the Royal Society ; and, in1778, a foreign associate of the RoyalSociety of Medicine, at Paris.At his suggestion, a periodical workwas soon afterwards commenced, entitled,Medical Transactions of theRoyal Society of Physicians; to which,among numerous other valuable communications,he contributed a paper OnAngina Pectoris as an idiopathic Disease ;and another, On the DistinguishingSymptoms of the Chicken-Pox and aMild Small-Pox. He was also theauthor of several pieces published inthe Philosophical Transactions, of someof the Athenian Letters, and many ofthe notes to Gray's edition of Hudibras ;but the work which will transmit hisname to posterity, is that entitled,Commentaries de Morborum Historia etDuration. This production is said tohave been the result of vast experience,and to have been prepared from notes,taken in the sick chamber, of the variouspeculiarities of disease ; which, itis added, are detailed with perfectcandour, and without any admixture ofhypothesis. He completed it in 1782,but, having always intended it to be aposthumous publication, it did not appearuntil about twelve months afterhis death, which took place in theninety-first year of his age, on the 17thof May, 1801, when it was printed,with an English translation from theauthor's own manuscript, by his son.By the medical profession, it appearsto have been received as an invaluableMEDICAL SCIENCE.legacy ; and the celebrated Stammering,on reprinting it in Germany, designatedthe author, in his preface,as Medicus vere Hippocrates. To thiscompliment, however, judging by thefollowing extract from a letter writtenby Dr. Lettsom, in 1787, the subjectof it would not have attached muchvalue : " Talking yesterday with Dr.Heberden, I was surprised to hear himsay, he thought nothing of Hippocrates'worth knowing, and that nothing couldbe learnt from him. He quoted Sir JohnPringle, that he would rather knowwhat will be known two thousandyears hence than what was knowntwo thousand years past."Dr. Heberden was not less estimablefor the amiable qualities of his heart,than celebrated for his professionaltalent and literary accomplishments.One of his biographers observes, thathe retired to the grave without havingcontracted on his way a single particleof corruption ; rich in the accumulatedwisdom of age, and still richer in allthe innocence of youth. He was thefriend and patron of all whose merit ornecessities attracted his notice. ForDr. Sutherland, a practitioner of moretalent than popularity, he procured theappointment of physician to the queen, asituation which his own extensive practiceprevented him from accepting. Hispiety was not inferior to his liberality ;and he gave an united example of both,in paying the widow of Dr. ConfersMiddleton 50 more than had beenoffered her by a publisher, for a scepticalwork, written by her husband, whichhe purchased for the sole purpose ofcommitting to the flames. The expressionof his countenance was calmand elevated, his manner courteous andendearing, and his general deportment,it is said, " that of a Christian and agentleman." His commentaries havelately been incorporated, by ProfessorFriedlaender, of Halle, into a Leipsicedition of Latin medical classics.By his wife, Mary, daughter ofW. Wollaston, Esq whom he marriedin 1760, Dr. Heberden had eight children,of whom only two survived him.THOMAS LAURENCE.THOMAS LAURENCE, son of acaptain in the navy, was born at Westminster,in the year 1711, and receivedthe rudiments of education at Southampton,whence he proceeded, in 1727,to Trinity College, Oxford. On thecompletion of his university studies, heremoved to the metropolis, for the purposeof attending the anatomical lecturesof Dr. Frank Nicholls, and obtaininga practical knowledge of surgery,at St. Thomas's Hospital. In 1740,after having become acquainted withDr. Bathurst, Dr. Johnson, and othereminent men, he returned to Oxford,where he took the degree of M. D., andobtained the appointment of anatomicalreader, on the resignation of Dr.Nicholls. He subsequently deliveredseveral courses of lectures in London ;first, at his residence in Lincoln's InnFields, and afterwards at a house inEssex Street, to which he had removedon his marriage with a Miss Chauncey, in1744, during which year, he was electeda fellow of the Royal College of Physicians; all the lectures instituted bywhich, he read in succession ; and sohighly were his talents valued by thecouncil, that, on their publication of theworks of Harvey, he was employed towrite the author's life in Latin, andpresented with a hundred guineas forthe performance.About 1750, he discontinued hisanatomical lectures, in consequence, itis said, of the rivalship of John Hunter,who, coming about this time to London,caused the secession of many of hispupils, who were prejudiced againsthim, on account of his personal defects ;the most prominent of which appearsto have been a convulsive motion of thecountenance, which gave pain to thebeholder, and drew off all attentionfrom the lecturer's discourse. He nowapplied himself to the general exerciseof his profession, and notwithstandingsevere fits of deafness, to which he wassubject, soon rose high in the estimationTHOMAS LAURENCE.of his patients, whose number, however,was by no means adequate to hismerits.In 1756, he published a medical dissertation,entitled, De Hydrogen ; in thefollowing year, Praelectiones Medical;and, in 1759, De Natura MuscularPraelectiones Tres. In the last mentionedyear, he became an elect, and,in 1767, president of the College ofPhysicians, an office which he continuedto hold until 1773. About thistime, Dr. Johnson addressed to him aLatin consolatory ode, his favourite sonhaving, to his deep regret, determinedon going to sea. In 1780, he was stillfurther afflicted by the loss of his wife ;and his health beginning to decline, heretired to Canterbury, where he died,of a paralytic affection, on the 6th ofJune, 1783.The biographers of Dr. Laurenceseem to "differ about the degree ofeminence to which he attained ; oneasserts that "it was his misfortune tofail ;" another, that " he practised withvery high reputation ;" and a third,that " his practice was very considerable."All, however, give himcredit for great skill, integrity, piety,and learning. Croaker, in his edition ofBoswell's Life of Johnson, speaks ofhim as " the learned and worthy Dr.Laurence, whom Dr. Johnson respectedand loved as his physician and friend."In person he was by no meansprepossessing; and he is describedas having had " a vacuity of countenancevery unfavourable to an opinionof his learning or sagacity." He wasfond of music, and played well on thevioloncello. He frequently amusedhimself with making models of ships, inamanner, it is said, that proved he waswell skilled in naval architecture. Hisdissertation, De Hydrogen, has receivedthe approbation of the highest medicalauthorities, though many charge himwith being too much addicted to theprinciples of the Stallions. It is probablethat he derived his notions fromhis master, Dr. Nicholls, whom SirJames Storehouse, one of his pupils, representsas "a professed deist, and fondof instilling pernicious principles intothe minds of his pupils."By his wife, he had six sons, of whomone became a King's Bench judge, andthree daughters ; but it does not appearhow many of his children survived him.JOHN FOTHERGILL.JOHN FOTHERGILL, whose parents Iwere members of the Society of Friends,was born at his father's estate, at Carr-end,near Richmond, in Yorkshire, onthe 8th of March, 1712. In early life,he was placed under the care of hismaternal grandfather, Thomas Hough,a resident of Frodsham, in Cheshire,by whom he was entered at the gram-mareschalof that town ; which, in1724, he quitted, for a seminary underthe superintendence of the Society ofFriends, at Jedburgh, in his nativecounty. After going through his schooleducation with great industry andtalent, he was, in 1788, apprenticed toMr.Bartlett, an eminent apothecary,at Bradford, in Yorkshire, and soonacquired such a knowledge of the business,that he was permitted to visit andprescribe for his master's patients.At the expiration of his apprenticeship,he removed to Edinburgh, andstudied under Doctors Monro, Aston,Rutherford, Sinclair, and Plummer; thefirst of whom highly esteemed him, andentertained so favourable an opinion ofhis talents, that he made him a flatteringrequest to prolong his stay at theuniversity, and qualify himself for practisingas a physician. At this period, itwas his custom to translate into Latinthose lectures which were delivered inEnglish, and" then carefully to comparethem with the opinions of the greatestmedical authorities, both ancient andmodern.He took the degree of M. D. at Edinburgh,in 1736 ; and, in the followingyear, printed his thesis, De EmeticorumUsu in varies Morbis Tractandis, whichnow holds a distinguished place in theThesaurus Medicus of Dr. Smellie.Notwithstanding the high opinionMEDICAL SCIENCE.entertained of him by the Edinburghprofessors, the natural modesty of Dr.Fothergill would not allow him to commencehis medical career, while heconsidered himself as knowing littlemore than the theory of surgery andanatomy ; he, therefore, removed toLondon, and attended, with unremittingindustry, the lectures and practiceof St. Thomas's Hospital, where, onmany occasions, his opinion was received,by his seniors, with flatteringrespect. In 1740, he accompanied somefriends to the principal towns in Flanders,of which, on his return, he communicatedan account to Dr. Gumming,in a letter written in elegant Latin.At the latter part of the same year,he commenced practice in White HartCourt, Gracechurch Street ; but, forsome years, his chief employment appearsto have been among the humblerclasses of society.In 1746, he was admitted a licentiateof the College of Physicians; and, in1748, he became very generally knownand employed, in consequence of hispublication of An Account of the SoreThroat attended with Ulcers ; a diseaseof which the children of several personsof distinction had then lately died. Thiswork went quickly through severaleditions; it was also translated intoFrench, and other continental languages,and had the effect of introducingthe mode of treatment by antiseptics,in lieu of the almost invariableuse of antiphlogistic means in everyspecies of angina. In 1751, he commenceda monthly report of the weather,and the state of disease in London,which he continued to communicate tothe Gentleman's Magazine for severalyears. In 1754, he was nominated anhonorary member of the EdinburghCollege of Physicians ; and, in the followingyear, purchased an estate atUpton, in Essex, containing, in gardenground alone, between five and sixacres of land. Here, at a vast expense,he collected, from all parts of the world,every plant which appeared to him tobe useful in medicine or manufactures,or was conspicuous for its rarity orbeauty. The number of species ofplants' or shrubs, in the open ground,was estimated at about three thousand ;and in the hot-houses and green-houses,at no less than three thousand fourhundred. After the establishment ofthis splendid botanical garden, the beststored and most extensive then existingin the known world, the celebratedLinnaeus, in compliment to Fothergill'szeal and talent, denominated a plant,of the class polynesia digynia, by thename Fothergilla ; and, on the completionof the great botanical work,by Miller, which had been begun andfinished under Dr. Fothergill's patronage,it was respectfully inscribedto him ; but the dedication" was afterwardscancelled, at his express solicitation;for he considered dedications,in general, to be more productive ofenvy to the patron than benefit to theauthor.In 1763, he was elected a fellow ofthe Royal Society ; and, in the summerof 1765, he took a lease of Lea Hall,near Middlewich, in Cheshire, to whichhe, thenceforth, regularly retired, fromMidsummer to Michaelmas, in order toobtain some respite from the excessivefatigue of his vast practice. Duringthese periodical visits to the country,it was his custom to attend, once aweek, at an inn, in Middlewich, wherehe gave advice, gratis. In 1767, heremoved to Harper Street, and considerablyenlarged the circle of his practice; the profits of which, it is said,at length amounted to 7,000 a year.During the greater part of his life,he had enjoyed good health; but, inNovember, 1778, he suffered severelyfrom a disorder, which he erroneouslybelieved to be irregular gout ; fromthis he recovered, after a short confinement; but it returned again at thelatter part of 1780, and terminated hisexistence on the 28th of December, inthat year. A few days before his death,he said to Dr. Lettsom, with greatcalmness, although in a state of acutesuffering, " I am aware of the approachingtermination of my life ; Ihope I have not lived in vain, but, insome degree, to answer the end of mycreation, by sacrificing interested considerationsand ease to the good of myfellow-creatures." His body was interredat the Friends' burial-ground,at Winchmore Hill ; his funeral beingattended by a great number of persons,many of whom had travelled upwardsof a hundred miles to pay this lasttribute of respect to his memory. HeJOHN FOTHERGILL.died worth upwards of 80,000. Byhis will, he directed that his collectionof shells, and other objects of naturalhistory, should be offered, at 500 lessthan its estimated value, to Dr. Hunter,who purchased it for 1,200. Someyears previously to his death, he hadbecome a member of the AmericanPhilosophical Society, as well as foreignassociate of the Royal Medical Societyof Paris, and of other scientific institutionson the continent.In person, Dr. Fothergill was delicatelyformed ; and his features aredescribed as having been particularlyexpressive. His address was conciliatory,and his society, it is said, delightful.His habits appear to havebeen singularly temperate and discreet ;and his general qualities of mind andheart particularly admirable. In aletter to Franklin, he declared that hewished to follow his business, becauseit was his duty, rather than his interest jand, in a communication to the sameeminent character, Fothergill is thusspoken of by Lettsom : " If we mayestimate the goodness of a man by hisdisposition to do good, and his constantendeavours and success in doing it, Ican hardly conceive that a better manhas ever existed."From among a mass of anecdotesillustrative of the excellence of his disposition,the following are selected:While negotiating for the purchase of afine piece of land, on the Surrey side ofthe Thames, which he considered welladapted for a botanical garden, heabruptly broke off the treaty, on findingthat the tenant at will, a man with alarge family, would be ruined, if ejected,observing that he should be a villainto gratify himself at the expense ofanother. It is added, that, to makeamends for the alarm which he hadoccasioned to the tenant by his proposalsfor purchasing, he presented himwith the amount which he was to havegiven for the property.Having been consulted by a curate,whose wife and five children had been atonce attacked by an epidemic fever, henot only visited, and, by unremitting care,succeeded in restoring them to health,hut presented the poor divine, whosesalary amounted to no more than 50per annum, With, to a man in such circumstances,a most handsome donation.To Captain Carver, the author of abook of travels, who, at length, fell avictim to his delicacy in not applyingfor further relief, he frequently affordedpecuniary as well as medical assistance ;and when Dr. Knight, librarian to theBritish Museum, after having lost allhis property by mining speculations,told Fothergill that a thousand poundswould make him a happy man, thedoctor exclaimed, " Say'st thou so ?then I will have the pleasure of makingthee happy ;" and immediately presentedhim with the sum he hadmentioned.To him, the school at Ackwprth, forthe children of Quakers, owes its existence;and, in the year 1767, a periodof great scarcity, he matured a planfor the supply of fish to the poor at acheap rate, by bringing it to Londonby land carriage, and disposing of it ata small loss, to be made good from afund raised for the purpose, to whichhe was the chief contributor.Like every other man, he possessedsome infirmities. While at Edinburgh,he gave great offence by walking upthe high street naked to the waist, denouncingGod's vengeance on the inhabitants.To this circumstance, whichis the more remarkable from the generalsteady and unobtrusive tenor of hisconduct, allusion was made, in a pamphletpublished by Dr. Taylor, whichcaused him so much uneasiness, that hebought up and destroyed as manycopies as he could obtain. About theyear 1773, he again subjected himselfto censure, by the part which he tookagainst Dr. Leeds, a member of theSociety of Friends, who had beenbrought up to the trade of a brushmaker, without the advantage of aliberal education, but, possessing greatnatural abilities, had devoted himselfto study ; and, having gone throughthe medical classes at Edinburgh, withremarkable assiduity, in due time hadreceived his degree. On being appointedphysician to the London Hospital,it is said, a report was spreadabroad, that he was not competentlylearned for the post he had undertaken ;and the College of Physicians summoninghim to pass his examination, heperceived so much prejudice had beenentertained against him, that he declinedto attend their requisition, and,MEDICAL SCIENCE.soon after, resigned his post. Deprivedof the means of gaining his living, andlearning that Dr. Fothergill had usedexpressions to his disadvantage, helodged a complaint against him beforehis own society. A reference to fivepersons, approved by all the parties,followed ; and three of them awarded500 to be paid to Dr. Leeds by Dr.Fothergill, as damages. Though asubmission to the determination of thearbitrators had been solemnly agreedto, Dr. Fothergill refused to pay themoney awarded; and, contrary to hisreligious principles, and the sentimentsof many of his friends, it is remarked,had recourse to Westminster Hall, torelieve nim from the penalty, which,the forms of law not having been strictlyobserved, he succeeded in evading, butwith some loss of reputation ; and hisunfortunate opponent, shortly afterwards,died of vexation.In addition to the productions alreadymentioned, Dr. Fothergill published, in1745, a letter to Dr. Mead, " on themeans of recovering a person dead inappearance ;" which, thirty years afterwards,was, in some degree, instrumentalto the formation of the RoyalHumane Society. He also, anonymously,contributed the eighth, tenth,and seventeenth articles to the fourthvolume of Medical Observations andEnquiries ; and some other papers,tending to the improvement of themetropolis. He originated a method ofgenerating and preserving ice in theWest Indies; expended upwards of1,000 in bringing out a completelynew translation of the Bible, by AnthonyPurer, a Quaker, who had beenformerly a mechanic ; employed apainter of natural history, at Leeds, andtwo ingenious artists, qualified to collectplants, one at the Cape of Good Hope,and the other on the Alps ; and not onlypatronised, but wrote the preface to,an account of a voyage to the SouthSeas, by Sidney Parkinson.WILLIAM Sullen.WILLIAM Sullen was born atLanark, in Scotland, in the year 1712 jand, after having received a commonschool education, was apprenticed to asurgeon and apothecary at Glasgow.On the expiration of his indentures, hemade several voyages to the EastIndies, in the capacity of surgeon, onboarda merchant-vessel ; and, subsequentlysettled, as a medical practitioner,at Hamilton, where the celebratedWilliam Hunter went to residewith him, in the year 1737. Beingequally desirous of improvement, theyagreed, that each should, in turn, passawinter at some university, while theother remained at Hamilton, to conductthe business which Cullen had established.The latter, accordingly, proceededto Edinburgh, where his progresswas so rapid, that he soon becamecapable of communicating valuable instructionto others. Hunter at lengthproceeded to London, and there enteredinto such arrangements with Dr.Douglas, that the plan which he hadpreviously settled with Cullen,of forminga permanent partnership, was necessarilyabandoned.The abilities of Cullen soon afterwardsprocured him the favourablenotice of the Dukes of Argyle andHamilton. In 1746, he took his degreeof M. D. and became lecturer on chemistryat the University of Glasgow,to which city he had previously removed.In 1751, he succeeded to theregius professorship of medicine ; and,in 1756, accepted an invitation to takethe chemical chair, at the University ofEdinburgh; which, in 1766, havingpreviously been appointed professor ofmateria medica, and being, in thatyear, nominated one of the lecturerson the theory and practice of physic,he resigned to Dr. Black. On thedeath of his coadjutor, Dr. Gregory,in pursuance of an arrangement whichthey had made on their taking themedical professorship in coparcenery,for the purpose of avoiding a contestedelection, he entered into sole possessionof the chair. He continued hislectures, which are said to have beenWILLIAM Sullen.very influential, on the state of opinionamong medical men, as to the scienceof physic, practising, at the same time,with great success, until within a fewmonths of his decease. This eventoccurred on the 5th of February, 1790.He had married, while at Hamilton, ayoung lady named Johnstonee, thedaughter of a clergyman, who died in1 786, leaving a numerous family.In private life, Dr. Cullen is describedas having been remarkablyamiable ; and his manners were at onceso impressive and engaging, that, as aphysician, he not only obtained theconfidence, but frequently acquired thelasting esteem of his patients. To hispupils, who were very numerous, hewas encouraging, benignant, and mostassiduous in communicating knowledge; and, even to such of his medicalbrethren as attacked his doctrineswith decided asperity, courteous andforbearing.His published works consist of Lectureson the Materia Medica ; SynopsisNosologiae Practice, containing thedoxologies of Sauvages, Linnaeus,Vogel, Sugar, and Macbride, as wellas his own ; a small tract on the recoveryof persons apparently drowned;and other minor pieces, besides hisgreat work, entitled First Lines of thePractice of Physic, which met witha most gratifying reception, and stillretains its original celebrity. Herendered himself eminently conspicuousby his complete refutation ofthe specious theory of Boerhaave, onthe humoral pathology. His doctrines,which he appears to havefounded on an enlarged view of theprinciples laid down in the SolidumVives of Frederick Hoffman, were,however, attacked with great violence,but little effect, by Doctor JohnBrown, who had, at one time, beenhis pupil.PERCIVAL POTT.PERCIVAL POTT was born inThreadneedle Street, London, on the26th of December, 1713. His fatherhaving died when he was but two yearsof age, leaving a widow, in indifferentcircumstances, he was educated at aschool at Darne, in Kent, at the expense,and under the direction, of Dr.Wilcox, Bishop of Rochester, who wasa distant relation of his mother. Hevery early evinced so strong a predilectionfor the study of surgery, that allthe persuasions of his friends were unavailingto induce him to enter thechurch, in which he had considerableprospect of preferment j and, accordingly,in 1729, he was bound apprentice toMr. Nourse, one of the surgeons of St.Bartholomew's Hospital. The study ofanatomy was, at that time, very littlecultivated in London, and Mr. Nourse,whose school was held at London House,Alternate Street, was one of the fewsurgeons who gave lectures upon thatscience. Such was the diligence of Pott,both in attending these lectures, andperforming his duties at the hospital,where he had ample opportunities ofstudying the nature and progress ofdiseases, that, in a short time, he wasemployed, by his master, in preparingthe subjects for demonstration.At the conclusion of his apprenticeship,in 1726, he settled, with his mother,in Fenchurch Street, and veryquickly obtained considerable practice ;in 1744, he was elected assistant-surgeon,and, in 1749, one of the principalsurgeons of St. Bartholomew'sHospital. Even during the years ofhis apprenticeship, he had shewn agreat antipathy to the absurd practice,then common, of using painful escharoticdressings'to wounds, but his argumentsand remonstrances on the subject weretreated with contempt ; now, however,that he had become one of the surgeonsof the hospital, he carried into effecthis enlightened views, which consistedin trusting, in the first instance, to thenatural process and powers of healing,before recourse was had to violentremedies.During the life of his mother, forwhom he entertained the most enthusiasticaffection, he determined notMEDICAL SCIENCE.to contract any matrimonial engagement; but, upon her demise, whichhappened in 1746, he married a daughterof Mr. Robert Cruttenden, and removedto Bow Lane, where he carriedon his profession with increased success.In the month of January, 1756, whileon a visit to a patient, in Kent Street,Southwark, he was thrown from hishorse, and received a compound fractureof the leg. This event produced, perhaps,one of the most extraordinaryinstances of coolness and prudence onrecord : aware of the danger of roughand injudicious treatment, he wouldnot suffer himself to be raised from thepavement, but sent a messenger fortwo chairmen from Westminster, thenearest place whence they could beobtained ; whose poles, when they arrived,he directed them to nail to adoor, which he had purchased in theinterim, on which he was then carefullyplaced, and borne to his residencein Watling Street, near St. Paul's, whitherhe had, some time before, removed.A consultation was immediatelycalled, and amputation of thelimb was resolved on; but, upon thesuggestion of Mr. Nourse, who soonafter entered the room, a successfulattempt to save the limb was made.This accident confined Mr. Pott to hishouse for several weeks ; during whichhe conceived, and partly executed, hisTreatise on Ruptures.In 1757, he published an account ofthe hernia congenital, a disease thenbut little understood. This produceda paper from Dr. William Hunter, inthe Medical Commentaries, wherein heclaimed the merit of a prior discovery ;to which Mr. Pott replied, with greaturbanity, in the second edition of hisTreatise on Ruptures, the first ofwhich had appeared in 1756. In 1758,he published an Essay on FistulaLaclirymalis, which led to the discontinuanceof an excruciating operation,by the actual cautery, recommended byCheselden. In 1760, he produced amost elaborate and luminous dissertationon injuries of the head, in whichhe arranged the symptoms of eachparticular species of injury, and pointedout the appropriate means of relief,with admirable perspicuity. Two yearsafter, he published, Practical Remarkson the Hydrocele, &c. as asupplement to his general Treatise onRuptures.In 1764, he was elected F. R. S. ; onwhich occasion, he presented a paperto the society, inserted in the fifty-fifthvolume of the Philosophical Transactions,on a remarkable case of hernia.In the following year, he produced hisTreatise on a certain species of Fistula ;for the removal of which, he recommendedan operation, that, from itssimplicity, as Sir J. Earle, in his editionof Pott's works remarks, " can only bevalued by those who are acquaintedwith the severities till then practisedin this country, and even now continuedin some others." About thistime, he instituted a course of lectureson surgery, with a view of directingstudents to the proper objects of theirinquiry ; in which he took vast painsto impress upon the minds of hishearers, that the prevention of thenecessity of operations should be thefirst consideration of a surgeon. In1768, he appended, to a new editionof his treatise On Injuries to whichthe Head is liable from ExternalViolence, what he termed, A FewGeneral Remarks ; which, however,although completed in a fortnight, embodieda complete system on fracturesand dislocations.In 1769, he removed to Lincoln'sInn Fields ; and, about three yearsafter, published his account of an improvedmethod of passing the seton, soas not to rub or injure the gland ; aproduction on which he bestowed greatpains, but with which he was neverperfectly satisfied. In 1775, appearedhis Chirurgical Observations relative tothe Cataract, the Polypus of the Nose,&c. a work which formed an importantaddition to his former elaborate productions.In 1777, on the retirement of SirCaesar Hawkins, he removed to HanoverSquare, and engaged in more activeprofessional occupation than ever ;notwithstanding which, he found timeto compose A Treatise on the Necessityof Amputation in certain Cases, in answerto a work of M. Bigger, surgeonin the Prussian army, in which theimpropriety of amputation in almostevery case had been maintained, andto another, by Tissot, Sur Inutilityde Amputation des Membres. InPERCIVAL POTT.1779, he published his Remarks onthe Palsy of the Lower Limbs, frequentlyfound to accompany a particularcurvature of the spine ; in which hetreated his subject with doubts andsurmises; but, in 1783, finding all hisopinions and speculations confirmed byexperience, he produced his further remarkson that deplorable malady ; inwhich he gave a complete descriptionof the complaint, then so little understood,that those who suffered from it,were allowed, as an inevitable consequence,to languish in deformity untilthey died, and proposed a new andefficacious method of arresting itsravages.In 1786, he was made an honoraryfellow of the Royal College of Surgeonsin Edinburgh, being, as the presidentobserved on the occasion, " the firstgentleman of the faculty they hadthought proper to bestow the honouron ;" and on the 9th of September, inthe following year, he received a similarmark of distinction from the RoyalCollege of Surgeons in Ireland. InJuly, 1787, he resigned the office ofsurgeon to St. Bartholomew's Hospital,which he used to say he had served,man and boy, for half a century. Towardsthe close of 1788, he took asevere cold, the symptoms of whichwere, a few days after, greatly aggravatedby too early a return to his professionalavocations. The next morning,on being asked how he found himself, hereplied, after some effort at recollection,My mind has a great propensity toaberration ; and I find myself muchinclined to talk nonsense, unless Istudiously collect my thoughts and fixthem." As the disorder advanced, hebecame clearer in his perception ; andon the day previous to his death, whichtook place on the 22nd of December,1788, being then sensible of his danger,he observed, " My lamp is almost extinguished; I hope it has burned for thebenefit of others." He was buried inAlderman Church, in Bow Lane, wherea tablet, erected to his memory, bearsan inscription composed by his son,the Rev. Joseph Holden Pott, Archdeaconof St. Albans. A complete editionof his works, with a biographicalmemoir prefixed, was published by hisson-in-law, Sir J. Earle, in 1790.This celebrated man, to whom, inaddition to his valuable works, theprofession is indebted for the inventionof many new instruments, and theimprovement of others, was eminentlydistinguished by coolness, energy,promptitude of decision, humanity oftreatment, and remarkable delicacy asapractitioner ; by candour and courtesyto those with whom he differed ; and byscrupulous accuracy, elegance of style,and perspicuity of reasoning, as a medicalwriter. His mildness and modestyprocured him the general esteem ofhis professional brethren, to whom it issaid he was ever ready to give thebenefit of his advice, when consultedby any of them, as he appears to havefrequently been, in cases of unusualdifficulty.ROBERT WHYTT.ROBERT WHYTT, the son of aScotch advocate, was born at Edinburgh,on the 6th of September, 1714.On the completion of his school education,he went to the University of St.Andrew's, and there took the degree ofM. A. He studied medicine under theearliest and most eminent professors ofthe Edinburgh school ; and, after havingattended the principal medical teachersat Paris and Leyden, received his degreeof M.D. at Rheims, in 1736;during which year he obtained a similarhonour at St. Andrew's.In 1737, he was admitted a licentiateof the College of Physicians at Edinburgh,and commenced practice in thatcity. In 1738, he was made a fellow ofthe college; and, in 1746, succeededDr. Sinclair, as medical professor to theuniversity, in which capacity, he is saidto have displayed abilities fully equalto the expectations his fame had excited.He was particularly distinguishedfor the ingenuity with whichhe detected the errors, whilst acknowledgingthe general excellence, of Boer-have,whose Institutions he explainedMEDICAL SCIENCE.and illustrated with singular success ;and " the opinions he himself proposed,"it is remarked, " were deliveredand enforced with such acutenessof invention, such display of facts, andforce of argument, as could rarely failto gain universal assent from his numerousauditors."In 1752, he was chosen a fellow ofthe Royal Society ; and, in 1756, onthe resignation of Dr. Rutherford, whothen filled the practical chair, he increasedhis academical labours, by carryingon, in conjunction with Drs.Monro, senior, and Cullen, the clinicallectures in the Royal Infirmary, an arrangementof great advantage to theuniversity. In 1761, he was appointedfirst physician to the king in Scotland jand, in the following year, commenceda series of lectures, entirely on a newmodel, his previous opinions havingbeen changed by a perusal of the InstitutionsPathologist of Gaius. Bythis time, his practice had become veryextensive ; foreigners of the highesteminence courted his correspondence,and there was scarcely a physician ofcelebrity in the British empire, whodid not consult him. In 1764, he waschosen president of the Royal Collegeof Physicians, at Edinburgh. In thefollowing year his health began to decline,and a complication of chronicalailments, aggravated by the deaths ofmany of his children, terminated hisexistence on the 15th of April, 1766.Dr. Whytt was equally eminent as anauthor, a practitioner, and a lecturer.In the latter capacity, he is said to havebecome particularly conspicuous, notonly for his profound acquaintance withthe medical art, but for the remarkableelegance of his composition, and theskill with which he adapted the Latintongue to the elucidation of his subjects.He contributed several papersto the Philosophical Transactions, theMedical Essays, the Medical Observations,the Physical and Literary Essays,and the Edinburgh Medical Essays:the most important of these productions(thirteen of which were eventuallycollected and published, in one volume,quarto) appear to have been, an essayOn the Vital and other InvoluntaryMotions of Animals ; another On theVirtues of Lime Water and Soap ; andObservations on the Nature, Causes,and Cure of those Disorders which arecommonly called Nervous, Hypochondriac,and Hysteric. His last work,entitled, Observations on the Dropsy ofthe Brain, was printed about two yearsafter his death.He was twice married : first, to MissRobertson, sister of General Robertson,governor of New York, by whomhe had two children, both of whomdied young; and, secondly, to a ladynamed Balfour, who bore him fourteen,eight of whom, with their mother, diedin his life-time. He is described ashaving been " a most excellent man."WILLIAM HUNTER.WILLIAM HUNTER, the seventhchild of John and Agnes Hunter, wasborn on a small estate belonging to hisfather, called Long Underwood, atKilbride, in the county of Lanark, onthe 23rd of May, 1718. In 1732, hewas sent to the University of Glasgow,where he studied divinity for aboutfive years, his friends intending him forthe church ; but, on account of his repugnanceto some of the articles of faith,he at length abandoned his theologicalpursuits, and commenced the study ofmedicine. In 1737, he went to residewith, and assist, Dr. Cullen, who wasthen established at Hamilton ; and, in1741, after having attended the lecturesof Dr. Alexander Monro, and othereminent professors, at Edinburgh, proceededto London. Immediately onhis arrival, he presented a letter ofintroduction, which he had broughtwith him from Mr. Foules, an eminentprinter, at Glasgow, to Dr. Douglas,who being at that time engaged on anelaborate work upon the bones, inwhich he required aid. engaged Hunterto assist him in dissecting.Shortly afterwards be became a pupilat St. George's Hospital, under WilkieWILLIAM HUNTER.and Nichols, and began to attend thelectures of Dr. Defaulters on experimentalphilosophy. In 1743, he contributeda paper On the Structure andDiseases of the Cartilages, to the forty-secondvolume of the PhilosophicalTransactions, in which he shewed that,contrary to the opinion which had previouslybeen entertained, they werecomposed of short perpendicular fibres,like the pile of velvet, its fibres risingup from the bone, as the silky threadsof that rise from the woven cloth orbasis." In 1746, he was engaged tosucceed Dr. Sharpe, as lecturer on surgeryto a society of naval surgeons,from whom, for his first course, he receivedseventy guineas, the largest sumhe had then ever possessed ; but whichwas reduced in a short time, throughhis liberality, to so small an amount,that he had not sufficient left to advertisehis second course, which he was,therefore, compelled to postpone. Thiscircumstance, however, he did not regret,as, though it exposed him to atemporary inconvenience, it taught himto be more prudent in future.He became a member of the Collegeof Surgeons, in 1747 ; and, early in thenext year, he went to Leyden, wherethe splendid anatomical preparations ofAlbinus inspired him with admiration,and a desire to emulate their excellence.Shortly after his return to England, hecommenced practice, chiefly in the obstetricalbranch of the profession, andon account of his great success, soonbecame surgeon-accoucheur to the Middlesexand British Lying-in Hospitals.In 1750, he obtained the degree of M.D.from the University of Glasgow, andcommenced his career as a physician.Shortly after, he visited his native place,and while riding, one day, in the neighbourhood,with Cullen, on the latterobserving how conspicuous Long Cal-underwoodappeared, he exclaimed, " If Ilive, it shall be still more conspicuous!"In 1755, he became one of the physiciansof the British L ying-in.Hospital ;on the 30th of September, 1756, alicentiate of the Royal College of Physicians; and, soon afterwards, a memberof the Medical Society, in whose Observationsand Inquiries appeared, amongvarious other productions from his penavaluable paper, entitled, History ofan Aneurism of the Aorta. In 1762,he published his Medical Commentaries: in a supplement to the first partof which, he vindicated his claim, inopposition that of Dr. Alexander Monro,(secundus) of Edinburgh, and others,to some professional discoveries, principallyas to the origin and uses of thelymphatics ; the possibility of injectingthe epididymis, and the excretory ductsof the lachrymal gland.In 1762, he was consulted by QueenCharlotte during her pregnancy, andtwo years after, he became physician-extraordinaryto her majesty. Aboutthis time, his pupil, Mr. William Hewson,began to assist at his lectures, and shortlyafterwards, was admitted his associate ;but some disagreement eventually occurred,which ended in their separation ;and Dr. Hunter then obtained the assistanceof Mr. Cruickshank. In 1767,he was elected a fellow of the RoyalSociety ; to which, in 1768, he communicatedhis Observations on the Bones,commonly supposed to be Elephants'Bones, which had been found nearthe river Ohio, in America; and subsequently,Remarks on some Bones foundin the Rock of Gibraltar. In the lastmentioned year, he was elected a fellowof the Society of Antiquaries ; and onthe institution of the Royal Academy ofArts, the king appointed him to theprofessorship of anatomy, an office inwhich he is said to have proved, by hisready adaptation of the science of anatomyto the purposes of painting andsculpture, the vigour of his genius, andthe deep resources of his mind.Having amassed considerable wealthby his practice, he proposed, in 1765,to expend 7,000 in the erection of ananatomical theatre, and to found aperpetual professorship, if governmentwould grant a site for the purpose ;on failing to obtain which, he purchaseda piece of ground in Great WindmillStreet, where he built an amphitheatreand museum, as well as a spacioushouse, to which he removed in 1770.The museum was at first fitted up withthe specimens of human and comparativeanatomy, of which he had previouslybeen in possession ; but to these, hegradually added various celebrated collections,purchased at a great expense,among others that of Dr. Fothergill ;a great number of fossils ; a splendidcabinet of coins and medals ; and, accord-medicalSCIENCE.ing to Dr. Haywood, the most magnificenttreasure of Greek and Latinbooks, that had been accumulated sincethe days of Mead. The value of hiscollection was also greatly increased bypresents from his medical friends, andit soon became known throughout Europe,as well on account of the liberalityof its regulations, as its intrinsic worthto men of science and scholars. Themunificent founder had, it appears, inhis zeal to render it as complete aspossible, been betrayed into the expenditureof a considerable sum beyondwhat he had originally destined for thepurpose. This sum he had taken fromthe funds which he had set apart toensure his independence in the declineof life, and he used to remark, that henever was perfectly easy until he hadreplaced it.In 1775, he published his most celebratedand splendid work, entitled, TheHistory of the Human Gravid Uterus,illustrated by thirty four large plates. In1780, he became involved in a painfulcontroversy with regard to the functionsof the placenta, the credit of the discoveryof which, Dr. Hunter, and his brotherJohn, appear to have respectivelyclaimed. In the last-mentioned yearhe was elected a foreign associate of theRoyal Medical Society, at Paris; in1781, on the demise of Dr. Fothergill,president of the Society of Physicians ;and in 1782, foreign associate of theFrench Academy of Sciences. He continuedhis arduous avocations, as apractitioner and lecturer, until the springof 1783, when, having imprudently, andcontrary to the advice of his friends,risen from bed, to which he had forsome time been confined by a fit of thegout, in order to deliver a discourse, hewas attacked with paralysis, and soonbecame conscious that his end wasapproaching. In his last hours, he displayedthe most perfect resignation ;and said, shortly before his decease,which took place on the 30th of March,1783, " If I had strength .enough tohold a pen, I would write how easy andpleasant a thing it is to die."As a medical practitioner, an anatomist,and a lecturer, Dr. Hunter obtainedand deserved extraordinary reputation.His discourses were clear,convincing, and admirably illustrated ;and his power of winning the confidenceof his patients is said to have been sogreat, that even when he appeared morethan usually doubtful of success, theyplaced the most implicit reliance on hisskill. In person, he was rather belowthe middle size, slender, and well made;and in deportment remarkably modestand engaging. Although munificent inhis encouragement of literature andscience, he was so economical as oftento appear parsimonious in his privateexpenses. He expended upwards of70,000 in the formation of his museum ;which, on his decease, he bequeathed tohis nephew, Dr. Baillie, for thirty years,directing that, at the end of that period,it should be removed to the Universityof Glasgow. Besides the productionsalready mentioned, he was the author ofTwo Introductory Lectures to his anatomicalcourse, posthumously published,and of some descriptive anatomicaldetails of the figures in his work on theGravid Uterus, which were completedand printed by Dr. Baillie, in 1794.RICHARD BROCKLESBY.RICHARD BROCKLESBY, the sonof Quaker parents, was horn at Mine-head,in Somersetshire, on the llth ofAugust, 1722, and educated at Bally-tore,in the north of Ireland. He commencedhis medical studies at Edinburgh,whence, about the year 1745, heremoved to Leyden, where he took hisdegree of M. D. giving, for his inauguralthesis, Dissertatio de Saliva sana et mor-rosa.In 1746, he published an essayOn the Mortality of Horned Cattle, andcommenced the practice of physic inBroad Street, London ; where, however,he gained but little by his profession,and partly subsisted upon a small allowancemade to him by his father.In 1751, he became a licentiate of theRoyal College of Physicians, in London,of which he was elected a fellow on theRICHARD BROCKLESBY.39,25th of June, 1756, having, in theinterim, obtained the honorary degreeof M. D. from the University of Dublin.Some time after, he was admitted, adeundem, a member of the Universityof Cambridge. In October, 1758, onthe recommendation of several of hisprofessional friends, he was appointed,by Lord Barrington, physician to theforces in Germany, where he remainedon duty until the peace. In 1764, hepublished Economical and Medical Observations,tending to the Improvementof Medical Hospitals ; and, soon after,settled in Norfolk Street, Strand, wherehe rapidly acquired an extensive practice,and became intimately acquaintedwith some of the most celebrated statesmenand literary characters of the day.About the year 1765, he was elected afellow of the Royal Society, which, athis suggestion, founded a professorshipof chemistry, at its establishment, atWoolwich. In 1794, the infirmities ofage compelled him to restrict his practiceto a small circle of his most intimatefriends : at the same time, he resignedhis half-pay in the army, retaining,however, the appointment of physician-generalto the royal regiment of artilleryand corps of engineers, whichhad been, a short time before, presentedto him. On the llth of December,1797, after having visited the widow ofhis friend Burke, and passed a cheerfulevening with his nephews, Mr. Beebyand Dr. Young, he complained of fatigue,while retiring to rest, and hadbeen in bed only a few minutes whenhe calmly expired. In addition to thepieces already mentioned, he was theauthor of two papers in the PhilosophicalTransactions, one of whichwas entitled An Account of a PoisonousRoot, lately found mixed with Gentian,and the other, Experiments on Cuttingthe Tendons in different Animals ;A Dissertation on the Music of theAncients; Horatio Harveiana,publishecin 1760 ; Experiments relative to theAnalysis of Seltzer Water, printed inMedical Observations ; and a few otherprofessional papers.Although of a remarkably mild unamiabledisposition, he quarrelled ancfought a duel, in which, howeverneither party was injured, with Dr.Elliott. It was a saying of his, thathe never suffered himself to have awant that was not accommodate tohis fortune ;" and the prudence withwhich he managed his finances, exposedhim to a charge of parsimony : this,however, seems to have been groundless; for he was charitable to the poor,liberal in the conduct of his household,and generous, as well as delicate, in relievingthe necessities of his friends.He granted small annuities to severaldestitute widows ; presented Burke with1,000, on an occasion when thateminent man was severely pressed formoney, observing that he had intendedto have left him as much in his will,but thought it better to offer it at a timewhen it was more useful than it mightbe, perhaps, hereafter ; and, on hearingthat Dr. Johnson was unable, fromwant of means, to proceed to the continent,for the recovery of his health,offered him an annuity of 100 forlife, which, however, Johnson refused.On the morning of his death, whenabout to proceed to Beaconsfield, for thepurpose of visiting Mrs. Burke, he replied,with great calmness, to a friend,who had expressed some apprehensionlest the journey might be prejudicialto him, " I perfectly understand thenine, and am thankful to you for it;eut where's the difference, whether Idie at a friend's house, at an. inn, or inapost-chaise ? I hope I am every wayprepared for such an event ; and, per-laps, it would be as well to elude theexpectation of it."JOHN HUNTER.JOHN HUNTER was born at LongUnderwood, in Lancashire, Scotland,on the 13th of February, 1728. In1738, he was sent to the grammarschool at Glasgow; but, owing to theindulgence of his parents, arrived,says his biographer, Dr. Adams, at hisseventeenth year, without any MEDICAL SCIENCE.ment from education. After havingresided for some time with his sister'shusband, a carpenter and cabinetmaker,at which trades he worked, butwhether for temporary employment,or with a view of following them as apermanent occupation, the conflictingtestimony of his various biographersrenders it difficult to decide, he proposedto become anatomical assistantto his celebrated brother, William, andhaving obtained the assent of the latter,proceeded, shortly after, to London.His first anatomical attempt was thedissection of an arm for the muscles,which, together with a second, of a moredifficult nature, he achieved with suchsingular dexterity, that Dr. Hunter didnot hesitate at once to declare thathe would become an excellent anatomist.Encouraged by this approbation,he continued his labours withgreat zeal, and so much success, that, inthe winter of 1749, he was appointed toinstruct the pupils in the dissecting department.In the summer of that andthe following year, he learnt the rudimentsof surgery, under Mr. Cheselden,at Chelsea Hospital; and, in 1751, becamea pupil at St. Bartholomew's,where he greatly improved himself bywitnessing the operations of Mr. Pott.In 1752, he visited Scotland ; and, inthe following year, entered, as a gentlemancommoner, at St. Mary Hall,Oxford. In 1754, he became surgeon'spupil, and, two years after, house-surgeonof St. George's Hospital. In 1755,he was admitted to a partnership in,and delivered a certain portion of, hisbrother's lectures, which he renderedparticularly attractive by the exhibitionof numerous anatomical preparations.In 1760, a consumptive complaint,brought on by his unremitting labours,induced him to go abroad as a staffsurgeon. At this period he had notonly made himself master of all thatwas known relative to anatomy, buthad made some important additions tothe science; having traced, accordingto Sir Everard Home, the ramificationof the olfactory nerves upon the membranesof the nose, and the arteries inthe gravid uterus to their terminationin the placenta; and discovered thecourse of some of the branches of thefifth pair of nerves, and the existence ofthe lymphatic vessels in birds.Having remained three years abroad,and acquired that knowledge of gunshotwounds, to which, observes Dr.Adams, we owe so many improvementsin military surgery, he returnedto London, in 1763 ; when, finding hishalf-pay and private practice insufficientto support him, he commenced,and continued teaching for severalwinters, practical anatomy and operativesurgery ; at the same time, assiduouslylabouring to extend his knowledge ofcomparative anatomy. In 1767, he waschosen a fellow of the Royal Society ;and, during the same year, broke thetendo achilles of his leg; which, however,by a peculiar treatment of hisown, is said to have been united so thathe was enabled to walk the third dayafter the accident.About 1769, he became a member ofthe Corporation of Surgeons, and waschosen one of the surgeons of St.George's Hospital. In 1770, he removedto the house previously occupiedby his. brother, in Jermyn Street;in 1771, he married a sister of Mr.Home; and, in the same year, publishedthe first part of his Treatise onthe Teeth, of which the conclusion appearedin 1778. In 1772, he threw anew light on the subject of digestion,by proving the existence of a convertingpower in the gastric juice ; on whichsubject he communicated a paper tothe Royal Society.In 1773, in consequence, says Dr.Adams, of his frequently hearing hisopinions either incorrectly quoted, ordelivered as the discoveries of others,he determined to explain them systematically,in lectures on the theoryand principles of surgery ; the two firstcourses of which he delivered gratuitously.In the same year, he dissectedthree elephants, and communicatedto the Royal Society the resultof his dissection of the torpedo ; an accountof certain receptacles of air inbirds; and a paper on the gillaroo, orgizzard trout. To the PhilosophicalTransactions for 1775, he contributedan account of the electrical organs ofthe gymnotus, and a paper containingexperiments on the powers of animalsand vegetables in producing heat. In1776, he was appointed surgeon extraordinaryto the king; wrote a paper,entitled, Proposals for the Recovery ofJOHN HUNTER.Persons apparently Drowned ; and commenceda course of Croonian lecturesbefore the Royal Society, during theprogress of which he contributed tothe Transactions an account of awoman in pregnancy communicatingthe small-pox' to the foetus, and paperson the Free Martin, the Heat of Animalsand Vegetables, and the Organ ofHearing in Fishes.In 1781, he was elected a fellow ofthe Royal Society of Sciences andBelles Lettres, at Gothenburg ; and, in1783, of the Royal Society of Medicine,and Royal Academy of Surgery, inParis. About the same time, he removedto some spacious premises on theeast side of Leicester Square, where heexpended 3,000 in the erection of abuilding for the reception of his collectionin comparative anatomy. In 1785,he communicated to the Royal Society,Anatomical Remarks on a new marineAnimal, and discovered a mode of performingthe operation for politicalaneurism-by taking up the femoralartery on the anterior part of the thigh.In 1786, he was appointed to the army ; and, inthe same year, published Observationson certain parts of the Animal Economy,and another medical work, bothof which were very favourably received.At this period he gave much of histime to a society he had founded, inconjunction with Dr. George Fordyce,called the Lyceum Medium Continence.In 1787, he was presented, bythe Royal Society, with the Colemanmedal, for three papers ; the first, containingan account of the effect of theextirpation of one ovarium upon thenumber of young; the second, on thespecific identity of the wolf, jackal,and dog ; and the third, upon the anatomyof the whale tribe. In the sameyear, he was chosen a member of theAmerican Philosophical Society, andobtained permission from the governorsof St. George's Hospital to appoint anassistant-surgeon, to whom, about twoyears afterwards, he resigned his lectures.In 1790, he was appointedinspector-general of hospitals, and of the army ; and, in 1792,became an honorary member of theChirurgeon-Physical Society of Edinburgh,and vice-president of the VeterinaryCollege, then first established.At this period, his health was in avery precarious state ; his memory impaired,and the smallest exertion, evenin conversation, occasioned him severespasms. It is said, too, that a secretfear of hydrophobia, in consequence ofhaving cut his hand while dissectinga patient who had died of that disease,preyed much upon his mind, and contributedto accelerate his death. In1790, and the two following years,his spasmodic attacks became morefrequent and violent, and his mind,more susceptible of irritation, thoughless able to endure it. His death tookplace on the 16th of October, 1793,under the following circumstances : Aregulation, which he conceived oppressive,having been made respectingthe admission of pupils at St. George'sHospital, he went there with the intentionof protesting against it in behalf ofa student who had applied to him onthe subject, when, becoming irritated,says Sir Everard Home, he went outof the room in a state of restraint, andturning round to Dr. Robertson, gavea deep groan, and expired.His eminence as an anatomist maybeinferred from the following resultsof his labours, in addition to those alreadymentioned. He discovered themode in which a bone retains its shapewhile growing, and explained the processof exfoliation. He proved thatinflammation was neither producednor increased by exposure to atmosphericalair ; and found in the bloodso many phenomena connected withlife, and not referable to any othercause, that he considered it as alive inits fluid state. Of all his labours, observesDr. Adams, none ever procuredhim a fame so justly earned, or so universal,with those who were best able toappreciate its merit, as his discoveryand account of the situation of thetestis in the foetus, with its descentinto the scrotum. He was the firstwho distinguished the various diseasescalled indiscriminately cancer ; andthe only medical man, from the timeof Celsus, who observed that in casesof lock-jaw, where the spasm is confinedto the neck, a favourable resultmay be expected, if the patient survivethe fourth day. He introduced agreat improvement in the operation forfistula lachrymal, by removing a cir-MEDICAL SCIENCE.ocular portion of the os unguis, insteadof breaking it down with the point of atrochar ; and was one of the first whoattempted to prevent hydrophobia bycutting out the part affected. His boldnessand skilfulness as an operatormay be conceived from the followingfacts : he removed, says Sir EverardHome, a tumour from the side andneck of a patient at St. George's Hospital,as large as the head to which itwas attached ; and, by bringing the cutedges of the skin together, the wholewas nearly healed by the first intention.He dissected out a tumour on theneck, which one of the best operatingsurgeons in the country had declaredno one but a fool or a madman wouldattempt ; and the patient recovered.His collection of comparative anatomycost him ninety thousand guineas,and he was justly proud of theperfection to which his labours andliberality had brought it. On Dr.Garthshore's entering the museum onemorning, and observing to him, " Ah !John, you are always at work;" hereplied, " I am ; and when I am dead,you will not soon meet with anotherJohn Hunter." His collection was materiallyimproved by the friendship ofSir Joseph Banks; who, according toSir Everard Home, not only allowedhim to take any of his own specimens,but procured him every curious animalproduction in his power, and afterwardsdivided, between him and the BritishMuseum, all the specimens of animalshe had collected in his voyage roundthe world. During the latter part ofhis life, the collection was exhibitedonce a year to the public ; and, after hisdeath, it was purchased, by government,for 15,000, and committed tothe charge of the College of Surgeons.At his establishment at Earl's Court,he made some interesting observationson bees, (communicated to the RoyalSociety, in 1792,) and, in order to aidhis researches in comparative anatomy,kept a variety of animals, the ferocityof which sometimes endangered hislife. In addition to the works alreadymentioned, he was the author of somepapers in Dr. W. Hunter's MedicalCommentaries ; of three contributions tothe Transactions of the Society for theImprovement of Medical and ChirurgicalKnowledge, of which he was oneof the original members ; and of ATreatise on the Blood, Inflammation,and Gun-shot Wounds.Few excelled him in the dissecting-room,but in the theatre he was by nomeans popular : aware of his deficiencyas a lecturer, he felt so averse to theoffice, that he was obliged to takethirty drops of laudanum before hecould commence his discourse. Insteadof offering theories, he describedfacts, which he found great difficultyin making his hearers comprehend, inconsequenceof his dwelling upon thediscovery, before he had sufficientlyexplained the means by which he hadarrived at it. He used to say to hispupils, " To perform an operation, isto mutilate a patient whom we areunable to cure ; it should, therefore,be considered as an acknowledgmentof the imperfection of our art"In his professional character, he isdescribed, as having been arrogant andoverbearing, and inclined to treat withcontempt all opinions that differed fromhis own. On being told, that his Treatiseon the Teeth would, doubtless, excitea reply, if it were only to give publicityto the answerers, he exclaimed,Yes, we have all of us vermin thatlive upon us!"He was short in his person, andcapable of great exertion, both mentaland bodily ; his countenance was remarkablythoughtful, and had a mixtureof blandness and austerity, ofwhich the former prevailed rather thanthe latter. Lavater, on seeing a printof him, exclaimed, " That man thinksfor himself." He is described, by SirEverard Home, as being readily provoked,and, when irritated, not easilysoothed : he, however, adds, that hehated deceit, was above artifice, candid,and free from reserve, even to a fault.About three years previously to thedeath of his brother, Dr. WilliamHunter, with whom, during their connexionhe had had numerous differences,a serious dispute occurredbetween them, respecting the discoveryof the structure of the placenta, whichWilliam, in his work on the graviduterus, put forth as his own, but whichundoubtedly belonged to the subjectof our memoir.MAXWELL Hartshorn.MAXWELL Hartshorn.MAXWELL Hartshorn, theson of a clergyman, was born at Kirkcudbright,in' Scotland, on the 28th ofOctober, 1732. After having receivedthe rudiments of his education at thegrammar-school of his native town, hewas, in 1746, apprenticed to a surgeonapothecary, at Edinburgh, where heremained until 1753, when he enteredthe army as surgeon's mate. In 1756,having, with the assistance of his friend,Mr. Maitland, purchased the business ofDr. John Fordyce, he settled at Bingham,in Rutlandshire, where he formedan advantageous marriage, and contractedthe acquaintance of Dr. Pulteney,Sir J. Baker, and other eminentmen.In 1763, he removed to London, and,in the following year, obtained hisdiploma of M. D. from the Universityof Edinburgh. He was soon afterwardselected physician to the British Lying-inHospital, and a fellow of the Royal andAntiquarian Societies. His practiceappears to have been remarkably extensiveand lucrative, but his life wasembittered by domestic calamities. Previouslyto 1765, he had lost two children,and in that year became a widower.In 1795, he married a second wife,whom, however, he survived; and hisonly son, William, a man of considerabletalent, who had been secretary to Mr.Dundas, a member of parliament, andone of the lords of the admiralty, diedinsane, about the year 1806.Dr. Garthshore continued to exercisethe duties of his profession until withina short period of his death, which occurredon the 1st of March, 1812. Heleft considerable property ; a great portionof which he had inherited from hisson, of whom he was accustomed tosay, " When William lived he mademe poor; at his death he made merich. He was a man of exalted piety,and most unblemished character. Althoughremarkably frugal in his habits,he contributed liberally, it is said, aswell in the form of money as advice, tothe necessities of the poor ; and to repairthe misfortunes of a friend, he had beenknown to bestow, in one gratuity, morethan the entire amount of his annualincome.He acquired great eminence in hisprofession, by his skill as an accoucheur,in which capacity he is said to havebeen exceedingly patient, while patiencewas a virtue ; and, in cases of danger,to have decided with promptitude, andacted with equal judgment and firmness.It would appear, also, that hepossessed considerable knowledge ofpharmacy. Dr. Wright, when engagedon the Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia, addressedhim in the following terms :When I come to the formulae, Imean to request the favour of you, andDr. Pearson, to give us your observationsand corrections." Notwithstandinghis vast experience, learning, andanxiety for the advancement of medicalknowledge, his productions were few innumber, and not of extraordinary importance.They consist of a case of fatalileus, inserted in the fourth, and twocases of retroverted uterus, in the fifthvolume of the Medical Observationsand Inquiries; Observations on Extra-uterineCases, in the London MedicalJournal; and A Remarkable Case ofNumerous Births, with Observations,in the seventy-seventh volume of thePhilosophical Transactions. He alsoleft behind him a diary, which he hadkept during the whole of his life,containing many thousands of closely-writtenpages, on religious, medical,and miscellaneous subjects.In countenance and figure, he closelyresembled the great Earl of Chatham.This likeness," observes a writer inthe Gentleman's Magazine, " once producedconsiderable sensation in thehouse of commons ; Lord Chatham waspointed to in the gallery; all believedhim to be there: the person reallypresent was Dr. Garthshore."MEDICAL SCIENCE.THOMAS DENMAN.THOMAS DENMAN, the son of arespectable apothecary, at Bakewell,in Derbyshire, was born there on the27th of June, 1733. After havingfinished his education at the grammar-schoolof his native town, he becamean assistant, successively, to his fatherand elder brother. In 1753, he proceededto London, and attended thepractice and lectures at St. George'sHospital, living upon an allowance, lefthim by his father, of 75 a year, untilhe procured an appointment as surgeon'smate, in the navy. In 1757,through the interest of the DowagerDuchess of Devonshire, he was madesurgeon of a ship ; and, after a cruiseof seventeen months, off the coast ofAfrica, removed to the Edgar, of sixtyguns, commanded by Captain, afterwardsAdmiral, Drake, in which heserved, on several important occasions,until the peace of 1763; when his healthhaving become materially affected bya sedulous attention to the sick andwounded in the hospitals, at Gibraltarand Havannah, he abandoned the navy,and returned to LondonAfter having commenced practice, heacquired some reputation by producingAn Essay on Puerperal Fever; and, in1764, the University of Aberdeen presentedhim with a diploma of M. D.He now endeavoured, but without success,to establish himself at Winchester;and, on returning to London, found hisprospects so bad, that he attempted toprocure a re-appointment in the navy,but was unable to obtain a warrant.At length, through the influence ofLord John Cavendish, and the recommendationof his friend, Captain Drake,he was made surgeon of one of the royalyachts, at a salary of 70 per annum.About the year 1770, he commencedthe delivery of lectures on midwifery,in conjunction with Dr. Osborne, whichthey continued, with great reputation,for a period of fifteen years ; and, nearlyat the same time, he was appointed jointphysician to the Middlesex Hospital.In 1783, he became a licentiate, inmid wifely , of the College of Physicians ;and, seven years after, an honorarymember of the Edinburgh RoyalSociety. He subsequently publishedseveral medical tracts ; and, at length,obtained a very extensive practice, fromwhich, in 1791, he partially withdrewin favour of Sir Richard Croft.Long before Dr. Jenner's great discoveryof vaccination had been universallyrecognized, Dr. Penman published,in the Medical Journal, severalimportant and decisive facts in confirmationof its efficacy. He was instrumentalin founding a charity, whichdid not finally succeed, for the relief ofpersons afflicted with cancer; and, in1815, contributed an article to the MedicalJournal, in which he stronglyrecommended the mode of treatmentpursued by Mr. Young for that disease,of the importance of which he hadsatisfied himself by personal observation.In addition to these pieces, andhis work on puerperal fever, he wasthe author of some valuable Aphorismsfor the use of Junior Practitioners ; AnIntroduction to the Practice of Midwifery,in which most of his tracts onthe subject were incorporated ; and asmall Treatise on Cancer, of which, it issaid, he had prepared a second edition,when he was taken ill, on Sunday, the26th of November, 1815, and almostimmediately expired ; leaving a son, theeminent barrister, and two daughters,the elder of whom was married to SirRichard Croft, and the younger to Dr.Matthew Baillie.From the death of Dr. WilliamHunter, this eminent man appears tohave been considered as the head of hisprofession. His deportment was unaffectedand cheerful, his dispositionkind, and his mode of living temperateand regular. As a practitioner, he is saidto have been remarkably cautious ; yet,when his mind was made up as to amode of operation, admirably firm incarrying it into effect. He was admiredby the rich and beloved by the poor ; hischaritable disposition rendering him amost welcome visitor to the latter, andhis profound obstetrical skill to both.ALEXANDER M O N R O, THE YOUNGER.ALEXANDER Monroe, THE YOUNGER.ALEXANDER, youngest son of thefirst Dr. Alexander Monro, was born atEdinburgh, on the 20th of March, 1733,and after having received the rudimentsof his education under Mr. Wendell, aneminent teacher, in his native city, hebecame the pupil of Professor Mac-laurina,Dr. Ste wart, and Sir John Pringle,under whom he acquired a knowledgeof the principles of mathematics, physics,and ethics. About 1751, he commencedthe study of medicine, and pursued itwith such indefatigable zeal and unremittingapplication, that in two years,he was enabled to assist in his father'sanatomical lectures. In his inauguraldissertation, on taking the degree ofM. D. in 1755, he is said to have displayeda profound acquaintance with thelymphatic system ; and so great was hisskill as a lecturer and demonstrator, that,when only in the twenty-second yearof his age, he was appointed professorof anatomy and surgery to the Universityof Edinburgh. He then proceededto London, Paris, Berlin, and Leyden ;and, after having gleaned all that appearedvaluable, from the most celebratedlecturers at those cities, returnedto Edinburgh ; where, in 1758, he wasadmitted a licentiate, and, in the nextyear, a fellow of the Edinburgh Collegeof Physicians.About the same period, he began togive anatomical lectures, in conjunctionwith his father, and published an essay,proving the valvular lymphatics to beone general system of absorption. Onthis subject he became involved in acontroversy with the celebrated Dr.William Hunter, who disputed his claimto the merit of the discovery. Hesubsequently published a Treatise onComparative Anatomy; The Structureand Physiology of Fishes explainedand compared with that of Man andother Animals, containing some extremelyvaluable observations in pathologyand surgery, particularly respectingthe eye and the ear of differentanimals, and the smaller branches ofthe nerves distributed upon the severalcomponent parts of the human cochlea ;Observations on the Nervous System,in which he communicated much newinformation as to the dental, auditory,and olfactory nerves ; A Description ofall the Bursse Mucosae of the HumanBody; and some other works. Healso contributed many important papersto the Essays and Transactionsprinted by the Philosophical Society(in the secretaryship to which he succeededhis father), on the effects ofnarcotics and stimulants on the nervoussystem, the use of mercury in convulsivediseases, and other interestingsubjects.In 1800, he resigned the anatomicalprofessorship in favour of his son, whohad been his coadjutor during the twopreceding years ; but continued his lectureson surgery until 1808, when hewas compelled to retire from active employmentby a painful disease, of which,after many years of great suffering, hedied, in 1817.Dr. Monro attained great eminenceas a physician and an operative surgeon,as well as a demonstrative lecturer; combining, it is observed, in hisown person, the knowledge of ChiselsBoerhaave, and Meckel. For aperiod of forty years the average annualnumber of his pupils amounted to threehundred and fifty ; and he is said, bythe excellence of his discourses, to havematerially assisted towards raising themetropolis of Scotland to the highestcelebrity as a school of medicine. Inprivate practice, according to one ofhis biographers, his skill and successhave rarely been equalled ; and, as amedical writer, his name has becomecelebrated throughout Europe. In temperhe was remarkably serene ; in conversation,lively, agreeable, and freefrom the slightest pedantry ; and, as ahusband, landlord, and friend, distinguished,it is said, for affection, tenderness,kindness, and generosity.Horticulture appears to have been hisfavourite amusement, but he never sufferedhis fondness of this pursuit to interferewith the proper discharge of hisprofessional duties.MEDICAL SCIENCE.WILLIAM WRIGHT.WILLIAM WRIGHT, was born atCries, in Perthshire, in March 1735,and after having received an appropriateeducation, was apprenticed, aboutthe year 1754, to a surgeon, at Falkirk.In 1756, he attended the differentmedical classes at Edinburgh, where hebecame remarkable for his methodicalhabits. In 1757, he made a voyage toGreenland; and in 1758, became secondsurgeon's mate of the Intrepid, ,from which, after having been presentin two engagements, he was promotedto the Dance ; and, joining LordRodney's fleet, witnessed the takingof Martinique, and other West IndiaIslands.After seven years of naval service, heobtained a Scotch diploma, and, proceedingto Jamaica, engaged himself asassistant to Dr. Gray, the principalphysician at Kingston. In 1764, heremoved to the interior of the island,and entered into partnership with hisfriend, Dr. Steel. In 1768, at whichtime he describes his success as beingbeyond his expectations, he receivedan application to contribute to themuseum of natural history, then latelyestablished at the University of Edinburgh,under the superintendence ofProfessor Ramsay. He accordinglyopened a correspondence with thatgentleman, and sent him several ornithologicaland entomological specimens ;in the preparation of which, says one ofhis biographers, " where any preservativeprogress was required, he exhibiteda singular neatness of methodand manipulation, that added greatlyto their value." On the breaking outof the epidemic small-pox among thenegroes, in the last-mentioned year,he succeeded in checking the force ofthe disease, by cold affusion on thebody of the patient; " an experiment,"it is observed, " worthy of being recorded,as presenting the first link ofthat chain of circumstances which ledto the external application of water, asaremedy in fever and other diseases."In 1771, he commenced an herbarium;during the formation of which, hecorresponded with the'principal botanistsin Great Britain and America, and,among others, with Dr. Stokes, whodedicated to him A Botanical MateriaMedica. In 1774, he was appointedsurgeon-general of Jamaica; and, inthe same year, distinguished himselfby writing a paper on the subject ofDiabetes, which was read before thePhilosophical Society, at Philadelphia,and published in the second volumeof their Transactions. For this disease,he suggested, as a remedy, a portionof lime juice saturated with sea saltonthe principle of restoring acidity tothe kidneys, which it is the tendencyof diabetes to dissipate.In 1777, he set sail for England, and,in the course of his passage, afterhaving tried all the usual methods tocure himself of a contagious fever,stripped on the deck, and had threebuckets of salt water thrown over hisbody, by which he was effectually cured.On arriving in London, he took up hisresidence with his friend, Dr. Garth-shore,attended the weekly conferences,at the house of Sir John Pringle,and became intimate with Fothergill,Solander, Pitcairn, and Banks. To thelatter, he presented several specimensof dried plants, of which he had alsosent others, in a vital state, to the royalgardens, at Kew, where he frequentlywent to watch the progress of theirgrowth. About this period he became amember of the Royal Society, to whoseTransactions he contributed an importantpaper on Cinchona Amanuensis,or Cabbage Bark Tree, which he haddiscovered in Jamaica. In 1778, heattended the lectures of Black, Monro,and Cullen, at Edinburgh ; and becamea licentiate of the Royal Collegeof Physicians. On the death of Dr.Ramsay, he was offered the appointmentof professor of natural history to theuniversity, which, however, he declined;and, in July, 1780, embarked for theWest Indies, in the capacity of surgeonto the Jamaica regiment. Two daysafter he had quitted Portsmouth, hewas taken by the Spaniards, who, how-williamWRIGHT.ever, shortly afterwards, set him atliberty ; and he appears to have devotedhimself to botanical pursuits, in theneighbourhood of London, until September,1781. when he sailed, as physto Jamaica ; where henot only formed a new herbarium, hisformer one having been lost throughhis capture by the Spaniards, but collecteda number of additional plants, ofwhich, Brown, the botanist, formed thegenus Wright.In 1785, in consequence of ill health,he again visited England, and, in thefollowing year, proceeded to Edinburgh,where, on the death of Dr. Hope, hewas put in nomination for the botanicalchair, but refused to stand as a candidateagainst his friend, Dr. Rutherford.In 1787, he received a proposal fromthe secretary of war, for his return tothe army service, which, however, hedeclined, being desirous of partiallywithdrawing from practice, and superintendingthe education of his nephew;on whose death, in 1795, he solicitedthe appointment of physician-general toan armament about to embark for theWest Indies, under Sir Ralph Aber-crosby.In his application for thissituation he was supported by SirJoseph Banks, Sir George Baker, andseveral other eminent men; but SirLucas Pepys, then at the head of thearmy medical board, refused to sanctionhis nomination, because he was not alicentiate of the College of Physicians inLondon. So valuable, however, werehis services considered, that the secretaryat war gave him the appointmentwithout this qualification, and he accordinglyproceeded to Barbadoes, early in1796.On the reduction of the medical staff,in 1798, he returned to England, havingpreviously drawn up a report of themost prevalent diseases among theEuropean troops, in the West Indies,which appeared in most of the periodicalpublications of the time, and was afterwardstranslated into several of thecontinental languages. On his arrivalin London, he was offered, but declined,the appointment of an extra licentiateof the Royal College of Physicians; and,shortly afterwards, fixed his residenceat Edinburgh; whence, in 1800, headdressed his brother in the followingterms : " The election of office-bearersin the College of Physicians, took placethis morning. I am of the council,and might have been president; but asDr. Gregory has kicked up such adust with the surgeons, I thought itbest that he should continue in office,and fight his own battle." At the closeof the same year, he published a completecollection of the medical thesesof the University of Edinburgh, arrangedin chronological order, with anindex raisonne of their contents. Aboutthe same time he was requested by SirRalph Abercromby, but without effect,to accompany the expedition to Egypt,in quality of physician to the army. In1801, he became member of the RoyalMedical Society, and in the followingyear, president of the EdinburghCollege of Physicians. In 1807, hevisited London, in the hope of obtainingsome reward for his public services ;but, failing in his object, returned toEdinburgh, where he continued duringthe remainder of his life, which terminatedon the 19th of September, 1819.As a physician, Dr. Wright was eminentlyable and zealous. By his intrepidityand skill in the use of mercury,he overcame the professional prejudiceagainst that powerful mineral, successfullycombined it with the coldaffusion, and found it " even more effective,and more safe, under the use ofthe cold bath, than without it." ANeptunist in geology, he had but littlefaith, it is said, in the Platonic theoryof Mutton and his disciples. Being adetermined anti-theorist, his opinionswere always the result of actual investigation; but he became a party to nocontroversy in their defence ; althoughposthumous distinction appears to havebeen his ruling passion. He was agreat patron of indigent merit; and suchwas the disinterestedness and generosityof his character, that, after having expendednearly the whole of his fortuneon his brother's family, he refused toallow a legacy of 5,000 to be left himby Dr. Garthshore, because he had advisedthat eminent physician as to theframing of his will. He allowed pensionsto many individuals at Edinburghand his native village, who, it is remarked,would have had serious causeto lament his death, had not those whosucceeded to his property been inheritorsof his virtues. He cortesSCIENCE.pounded with all his most eminentliterary and scientific contemporaries ;and, besides the productions alreadymentioned, published a work on Fevers,in two volumes, octavo ; and contributedvarious papers to different medical andphilosophical societies, among whichwere, A Description of the Jesuits' BarkTree of Jamaica and the Caribbees ; AnAccounts the Medicinal Plants growingin Jamaica; and a Botanical and MedicalAccount of the Quassia Simaruba.JOHN BROWN.JOHN BROWN, a native of Uncle,in Berwickshire, was born in 1735 ;and, after having acquired the rudimentsof education, became apprenticeto a weaver ; whom, however, he soonquitted, for the purpose of prosecutinghis studies at the grammar-school ofDense, to which his father, a workingman,having perceived his naturalabilities, had procured him admission.He rapidly acquired a proficiency inthe Latin and Greek languages, andaimed, it is said, at becoming a preacheramong the seceders, a sect to which hisfamily belonged. Being, however, summonedto appear before the sessionalcongregation, for having attended atthe parish church of Dense, he abandonedhis designs with regard to theministry, in disgust, and became amember of the established church.When about twenty years of age, heaccepted the situation oaf tutor in a gentleman'sfamily ; which, however, hesoon quitted; and, in 1756, began tostudy divinity, at Edinburgh. In 1758,he finally relinquished his theologicalpursuits, and, for about a year, actedas usher in the establishment where hehad been educated. During this period,he offered himself as a candidate, butwithout success, for one of the classesin the High School, at Edinburgh. Hehad now, it is said, become dissolute inhis habits, licentious in his discourse,and a professed free-thinker. An applicationfrom a student of physic, toturn an inaugural dissertation intoLatin, occasioned his return to Edinburgh,where he earned his subsistenceby the exercise of his classical abilities,as a teacher and translator ; and obtainedpermission, as an indigent scholar,to attend the lectures of different medicalprofessors. Among these was thecelebrated Cullen ; who, at length, employedhim as an assistant, and privatetutor to his children. In 1765, afterhaving seriously injured a robust constitutionby gross intemperance, hemarried, and set up an establishmentfor pupils and boarders ; but, in a fewyears, through carelessness, and ignoranceof business, his affairs fell intodisorder, and he became a bankrupt.About 1768, he was an unsuccessfulcandidate for one of the professorshipsat Edinburgh. His failure, on this occasion,he attributed to the instrumentalityof Cullen, whose doctrines heforthwith determined on attacking,although he had previously been oneof their warmest supporters. Devotinghimself, with great diligence, to the taskwhich he had thus undertaken, he soonformed a new medical theory, and publisheda work, in Latin, entitled, ElementaMedicinal ; in which, contraryto the doctrines of Cullen, and all othermedical professors, he maintained thatdiseases in general were reducible intotwo classes, the sthenic and the asthenic,attributing their origin, respectively,to excess, or insufficiency of excitation; contending, inter alia, thatwine and brandy, which had beenthought dangerous in spasmodic andconvulsive 'disorders, and in hemorrhages,were, as he had found, " themost powerful remedies in removingthem'*About the year 1772, he obtainedan Aberdeen diploma of M. D. ; and,shortly afterwards, commenced a seriesof lectures, in which he constantly usedthe Elementa Medicinae as a text book.Attracted by the novelty of his plan,and in the hope, perhaps, that a knowledgeof his system might abridge theordinary course of medical study, aJOHN BROWN.great number of young men soon becamehis pupils. As a lecturer, he wasconspicuous for the vulgarity of hismanners, and his total variance withother professors of the art, on whomhe lavished, indiscriminately, the mostvirulent abuse. It is said, by Dr.Beddoes, on the information of one ofthe Trunnions, a name by which hisfollowers were designated, that, beforecommencing his discourse, he wouldtake fifty drops of laudanum in a glassof whiskey, and repeat the dose inthe progress of the lecture, until hisimagination was exalted into phrenzy.His popularity was not of long duration:in a few years, his class diminished; and, after having twice filledthe president's chair of the MedicalSociety, he suddenly quitted Edinburgh,in very distressed circumstances,and proceeded to London, about theclose of 1786. In the following year,he attempted to excite attention, bypublishing a work, entitled, Observationson the Old Systems of Physic;and, soon after, made preparations forcommencing a course of lectures. Onthese, however, he was not permittedto enter, his death occurring on the 8thof October, 1788, in a fit of apoplexy,brought on, it is supposed, by an excessivedose of laudanum and spirits.He is said to have left a large family,in a state of absolute want.In person, he was short and fat ; indeportment coarse ; and in his habits,deplorably extravagant. He possesseda strong mind, cultivated by contemplation,more than by reading; and aprolific imagination, unrestrained byexperience. His doctrines were ingenious,but too general and abstract, toadmit of their reduction to practice.His system, however, with few facts forits foundation, was not altogether destituteof utility ; overturning, as it did,a variety of absurd and minute analogies,and leading, with advantage inmany cases, to the adoption of broadprinciples and vigorous remedies. Itsorigin may, in the opinion of many, betraced to his own intemperate habits.With him, a state of partial intoxicationwas, apparently, health ; and sobriety,accompanied, as may be supposed heusually found it, with fever and prostration,disease. Allowing the greatest possiblestress to be laid on his animosityagainst Cullen, it is difficult to cometo any other conclusion on the subject,than that he honestly believed what heso fervently taught. -Robert Jones, one of his pupils, afterhaving attended a consultation withDrs. Monro and Duncan, on the stateof a gentleman named Isaacson, whowas in a most dangerous fever, persuadedthe nurse privately to give himsuccessive doses of strongly stimulatingmedicines. At the expiration of twenty-fourhours, Monro and Duncan returned,and pronounced the patient tobe perfectly free from fever. He was,however, shortly afterwards seized witha raging delirium ; and the nurse, consequently,obtained an interview withBrown himself for advice. Firm in hisopinions, the latter, as Jones states, " endeavouredto assure her, that there waseither no inflammation in the case at all,or that it was a very different affectionfrom the inflammation that physicianswere acquainted with ; that, instead ofrequiring bleeding, and other vacantantiphlogistic means, it required thevery same treatment which had beenlast employed; and he asserted, withconfidence, that the intermission of thestimulant powers through the day, wasthe cause of all that had happened;that, in short, the present affection wasa disease of the whole system, predominantin the brain, in consequence ofthe great sinking of strength which constantlyfollows a total cessation of theuse of such highly stimulating powers.He begged, therefore, as the life ofa fellow-creature was at stake, and asshe had been so late a witness of thegood effects resulting from his methodof cure, the continuance of which hestill recommended, that she would notallow prejudice and impressions fromthe false theories of physicians, amongwhom she had been conversant, to prevailover the high probability of successfrom his mode of cure. He dismissedher, after obtaining a promise that shewould continue the plan of cure inquestion." The patient eventually recovered;owing, as the Trunnionsmaintained, to the manner in which hehad been treated, but, as their adversariesprotested, to the strength of hisconstitution.To the honour of Brown, it is related,that when suffering under very severeMEDICAL SCIENCE.privations, in London, he indignantlyrejected the offer of a considerable sumof money from a vender of medicine,for permission to give a composition ofpowerful stimulants, the name of " Dr.Brown's Exciting Pills." A life of thisextraordinary man is prefixed to thebest English version of his ElementaMedicinae, by Dr. Beddoes, which, togetherwith his Observations, have beentranslated for the use of some of themedical schools on the continent.WILLIAM HEY.WILLIAM HEY was bornsey, near Leeds, on the 23d of August,1736. When four years of age, a penknifewith which he was cutting a pieceof string, penetrated his right eye anddestroyed its power of sight. About1740, he was sent to an academy atHeath, near Wakefield, where he remainedseven years, principally underthe tuition of Mr. Hodgson, afterwardsBishop of Elphin, who entertained ahigh opinion of his abilities. In 1750,having given up, at the request of hisparents, an inclination to go to sea, hewas apprenticed to Mr. Dawson, a surgeon,at Leeds, where he remained till1757, when he went to London to completehis professional education. Duringhis apprenticeship he had been assiduouslyendeavouring to gain a practicalknowledge of drugs, and, on one occasion,in trying the effect of opium uponhimself, had seriously endangered hislife. On his arrival in London he becamea pupil of Mr. Bromfield, at St. George'sHospital, where, in the June of thefollowing year, he officiated as dresser,and, in a short time, made such advancesin the study of anatomy, that hecomposed a most accurate descriptionof the nerves and blood vessels fromhis own dissections. In the summerof 1758, he attended the medical lecturesof Dr. Donald Monro, to manyof whose pupils he appears to havebeen rather an object of ridicule, onaccount of his rigid industry and piousdeportment. " I could not," he observedin a letter to his son, at a subsequentperiod, " meet with one seriousyoung man in my profession ; but as Itook such pains that my fellow-studentswere obliged to consult me in their difficulties,I preserved a considerable checkupon their conduct" He also attendedthe lectures of Dr. Mckenzie on midwifery,with which branch of his professionhe obtained a minute acquaintance,by embracing every opportunityof witnessing its practice, and conversingwith the lecturer on the particularsof its principles. " I found, however,more advantage," he says, " from seeingthe various ways in which othersgot wrong, than from being correctedmerely for my own blunders."It appears that about this time hisfather offered him the means of prosecutinghis medical studies at Paris,which, however, he declined, principallyunder an apprehension that a residencein that city might produce some stainon his hitherto unblemished character ;and in April, 1759, he returned to Leeds,where, after having refused, in deferenceto the wishes of his parents, toenter into partnership with Mr. Dawson,he commenced business on his ownaccount, as a surgeon. For some yearshe obtained but little practice, partlyowing to his youth and inexperience,but principally, it is said, "to the austereand unbending virtue of his religiouscharacter, and a manner calculated ratherto inspire reverence, than to conciliateregard."In 1762, he was appointed medicalattendant at the Leeds workhouse, and,in 1768, surgeon of the new infirmary,which had been erected chiefly at hissuggestion. During the last-mentionedyear, in conjunction with some otherprofessional men of the town, he formeda medical society ; and in or about 1769,he became acquainted with Dr. Priestley,who not only declared that he was theonly man in Leeds who gave muchattention to his experiments, but frequentlyconsulted him on medical subjects,and recommended him for admissionto the Royal Society ; although, atthis period, Hey had published twoWILLIAM HEY.pamphlets against the theological doctrinesof Priestley, the one entitled, ADefence of the Divinity of Christ, andthe other, A Short Defence of the Doctrineof Atonement. " Both these publications,"according to Dr. John Hey,"are models of controversial writing;nothing of die odium theological appearsin them. The subjects are treatedwith a mildness and candour indicativeof the Christian spirit of the author, andyet with a firmness and seriousnessclearly demonstrating that he felt theimportance of the truths for which hewas contending."In 1773, the subject of our notice metwith an accident which prevented himfrom walking; and, in 1778, when atthe height of his success and reputation,he received a kick from his horse whichdisabled him, for a long period, fromcontinuing his professional labours. Onthis occasion, he observed to a friend,if it be the will of God that I shouldbe confined to my sofa, and He commandedme to pick, straws during theremainder of my life, I hope I shouldfeel no repugnance to his good pleasure."In 1779,he published Observations onthe Blood, with a view to controvert,from actual experiments, the doctrineof Mr. Hewson, that inflammation lessenedrather than increased its dispositionto coagulate. In 1783, he waselected president of a philosophical andliterary society, which had recently beenformed at Leeds ; in 1785, a member ofa similar society at Manchester; and, in1789, an honorary member of the RoyalMedical Society of Edinburgh. To thetwo former he contributed several valuablepapers, particularly one, On theEye of the Seal, and another, entitled,Observations on the Aurora Borealis,which was subsequently published inthe eighty-eighth volume of the PhilosophicalTransactions.In the early part of 1800, he delivereda course of anatomical lectures, at theLeeds Infirmary, and another in 1803,to one of which, on the eye, about fiftyladies were admitted. During the last-mentionedyear, he published PracticalObservations on Surgery ; which notonly elicited the approbation of manyeminent medical men, but procuredhim the honour of a diploma from theRoyal College of Surgeons. In 1805, heavea third, and in 1809, a fourth courseof lectures, the profits of which, aswell as of those he had previously delivered,he presented to the infirmary.In 1812, he retired from the office ofsurgeon to that institution, which he hadheld for more than forty-five years. Hestill, however, occasionally performedoperations and advised the directorson subjects of importance. Wheneighty-two years of age, he is said tohave frequently remarked, " that hewas obliged to bring in the aid of reasonto tell him that he was an old man."He appears, however, to have beenshortly afterwards attacked with abowel complaint, which terminated indiarrhoea, and proved fatal to him onthe 23d of March, 1819.A few days after his death, the LeedsIndependent contained a most eloquenteulogium on his character, in whichhe was designated as "a bright, anuniform, and illustrious example ofprofessional knowledge, patient andarduous research, of moral rectitude,and of Christian excellence." Shortlyafterwards, at a public meeting of theinhabitants of Leeds, a resolution, thata marble statue should be erected toperpetuate his memory, was successfullyproposed by the recorder, who, inthe course of his speech on the occasion,recited the following lines :Those means which meil'cine and the Gospel giveTo soul and body, Hey could well apply.Useful that skill which made the dying live.More useful that which taught him bow to die.He appears to have been equallyskilful as an accoucheur and a surgeon.The medical profession is said to beindebted to him for many practical improvementsin the two branches whichhe practised, and also for the introductionof electricity as a cure for blindnessproceeding from amaurosis, on whichsubject he wrote a dissertation. Healso contributed an important paper tothe seventh volume of the Medico-chirurgicalTransactions, and publishedseveral letters on the subject of Nationaland Sunday-schools, and his speech,delivered at Leeds in 1813, againstcatholic emancipation.He was a professed Methodist until1781, when, under a conviction thatthe original principles of the societyhad been departed from, he became aMEDICAL SCIENCE.member of the established church. Hefrequently gave excellent advice to thosewith whose vices his professional pursuitshad made him acquainted; andwhile in possession of the civic chair ofLeeds, which he twice occupied, laudablyexerted himself to repress debaucheryand profaneness among thelower orders of the town, among whomhe consequently became so unpopular,that they burnt him in effigy, assaultedhim in his carriage, cut the traces, andstabbed one of his horses. He delightedin sacred music, but declared the stageto be a school of immorality, where truedelicacy and dissembled modestymust be frequently tortured, or greatlyimpaired, and where gross sin wastreated with levity, or only assailed bywit and raillery. Cards and all games ofchance he denounced as being appealsto the decision of Divine Providence onan improper subject, and a breach of thethird commandment. He would neverlisten to any impure discourse; andwhile walking, made it a rule to meditateupon some given subject, chiefly inorder to preserve him " from a swarmof impertinent ideas." After his decease,a note is said to have been found on histable, addressed to a gentleman whowas accustomed to utter the exclamationGood God ! containing a serious remonstranceagainst "using the sacred nameof the Almighty as a mere expletive."He was married, in 1761, to the daughterof a Mr. Banks, by whom he hadseveral children.GEORGE FORDYCE.GEORGE FORDYCE, a native ofAberdeen, was born on the 18th ofNovember, 1 736, a short time after thedeath of his father. In 1738, he wastaken from his surviving parent, andsent to a school at Fouran, whence hewas removed to the University of Aberdeen,where he took his degree of M.A.when only fourteen years of age. Herehe formed an acquaintance with thelearned Alexander Garden, then apprenticeto an apothecary ; to his acquaintancewith whom, and the delighthe had taken, when a child, in lookingat the coloured phials in chemists'shops, he attributed his predilectionfor the study of medicine. In 1751,he was apprenticed to his uncle. Dr.John Fordyce, a medical practitionerresiding at Bingham, in northamptonshire,with whom he remained someyears, and then returned to Edinburgh,where he took his degree of M. D. inOctober, 1758.While pursuing his medical studiesat the university, he attracted, by hisdiligence and ingenuity, the notice ofDr. Cullen, from whom he received somuch assistance and so many marks ofkindness, that, in after-life, he alwaysspoke of him as ' his learned andrevered master." From Edinburghhe proceeded to London, and thence toLeyden, where he studied anatomy,under Albinus. In 1759, he returnedto England, with the determination ofsettling in the metropolis as a teacherand practitioner. Though opposed byhis relations, he persisted in his resolution; and commenced lectures onchemistry, materia medica, and thepractice of physic, which he continuedtor nearly thirty years ; his time of lecturingbeing from seven o'clock in themorning till ten, and his subjects immediatelyfollowing each other.In 1765, he became a licentiate ofthe College of Physicians ; and, in 1770,physician to St. Thomas's Hospital,after a severe contest with Dr., afterwardsSir William, Watson, againstwhom he obtained his election by amajority of three. In 1774, he waschosen a member of the Literary Club ;in 1776, a fellow of the Royal Society ;and, in 1778, a fellow of the College ofPhysicians, special grated; a circumstancewhich is dwelt upon, by hisbiographer r, as being a testimony of thehigh opinion in which he was held bythat body ; to which, during the disputebetween the fellows and licentiates, hehad been so particularly hostile as tohave forfeited all expectation of favour.It seems, however, that the college admittedhim, with a view of securing hisGEORGE FORDYCE.assistance in a new edition, then preparing,of their Pharmacopoeia, no oneamong them being so well acquaintedwith pharmaceutical chemistry as himself.In 1793, he assisted in establishinga small society of physicians andsurgeons ; the transactions of which,containing, among others, three paperswritten by himself, were published, intwo volumes, a year or two previouslyto his death, which took place on the25th of May, 1802.Notwithstanding the acknowledgedtalent of Dr. Fordyce, he had but littleprivate practice as a physician ; neitherhis manners being so refined, nor hisdress so becoming, as to make a patientdesire a repetition of his visits. It issaid, also, that he passed too much ofhis time in intemperate society ; andthat the gout, which was the cause ofhis death, was brought on by his debilitatingand irregular mode of living.He occasionally lectured for three hoursin the morning, without having undressedhimself the preceding night, acircumstance attributed by some to hispower <5f dispensing with sleep ; but byothers, with more justice, to his unduedissipation of the time in which heshould have sought it. It was this,probably, that rendered his countenancedull, heavy, and so little expressiveof the powers of his mind.His memory was remarkable; he neverlectured with notes, was punctual toall his engagements without the aid ofmemoranda, and even composed hisworks for publication from the storeslaid up in his retentive mind. Thismethod, however, made him verydeficient as a writer ; his style beingwithout arrangement, inelegant, ofteninaccurate and obscure, and sometimesungrammatical. His principalworks are, Elements of the Practice ofPhysic; Elements of Agriculture andVegetation ; A Treatise on the Digestionof Food, read before the Collegeof Physicians as the Gulstonian lecture;and Dissertations on Fever. He alsowrote eight papers in the PhilosophicalTransactions; projected the experimentsin heated rooms, of which an accountwas given to the Royal Society by SirCharles Bladder ; and was the authorof several improvements in various artsconnected with chemistry.WILLIAM HAWES.WILLIAM HAWES was born onthe 28th of November, 1736, at Islington,where he received the rudimentsof his education, which appears to havebeen completed at St. Paul's School.After having served his apprenticeshipto an apothecary, at Vauxhall, he commencedbusiness on his own account,in the Strand, and soon acquired arespectable connexion. Among hispatients was the celebrated Dr. Goldsmith,of whose death he published anaccount, in which he attributed thatevent to the circumstance of Goldsmithhaving, without the sanction of his medicaladvisers, taken large doses of Dr.James's powders ; which, however, itseems, were procured from Hawes'sshop.His next production was an ironicalbut complete exposure of the absurd-work,entitled Primitive Physic, by theRev. John Wesley. The remainder ofhis writings relate chiefly to the HumaneSociety, the establishment and promotionwhereof, he observes, employedthe best part of his rational life.This excellent institution was formed,in 1774, under the superintendence ofhimself, Drs. Cogan, Lettsom, Heberden,Goldsmith, and about thirty othergentlemen. He had, at first, muchdifficulty in awakening the attention ofthe public to the objects for which itwas founded, and obtained but littlepatronage towards carrying them intoeffect. Nothing, he remarks, but themost resolute and vigorous perseverancecould have accomplished the finaltriumph of its founders, or have enabledthem to subdue the spirit of incredulitywhich naturally opposed itself againsta humane proposition, bearing someresemblance to the marvellous. In afew months, however, after its foundation,the publication of several extraordinaryfacts, confirming the previousMEDICAL SCIENCE.statements of the society, it began toattract general notice, and to receivepartial assistance from public subscriptions.About the same time, many wereanxious to claim the merit of introducinginto England its plan and principles;which appear to have been firstadopted by a society at Amsterdam,and afterwards at Milan, Venice, Hamburgh,and Paris. The Gentleman'sMagazine, in occasionally publishingthe transactions of the AmsterdamSociety, certainly, though without success,made many efforts to arouse thecountry's attention to the subject ; butit was not until the appearance of thetranslation of the memoirs of that institution,by Dr. Cogan, and of theaccount of several successful experimentsby Hawes, that the possibilityof recovering persons apparently dead,began to be credited by the public.This was in 1773; in which year, thelatter incurred much ridicule, by advertisingrewards for persons who wouldbring, to certain places appointed onshore, all bodies rescued from theThames, between London and WestminsterBridges, and give immediatenotice of the event to him. Throughthis advertisement, he was the meansof saving many lives, and had alreadyexpended a large sum in rewards, when,at the suggestion of Dr. Cogan, it wasagreed, that each should collect sixteenfriends to the plan ; who, with themselves,in the summer of 1774, mettogether at the Chapter Coffee House,and there laid the foundation of theHumane Society in London ; taking,appropriately, for its motto, Latentscintillula forsan.The doctrine of resuscitation beingthe governing principle of the society,it may not be impertinent to state here,that both Dr. Hawes and Dr. Lettsomaward to Dr. John Fothergill the meritof being its originator. " What," saysDr. Lettsom, " Dr. Fothergill endeavouredto prove, illustrate, and enforce,respecting the recovery of drownedpersons, has been since attempted inmostmaritime states of Europe ; andhe enjoyed the pleasure of living to seethose rules adopted with success in thismetropolis, by the ardour of Dr. Hawesand others, which, upwards of thirtyyears before, he had recommended byhis pen."On the establishment of the society,an account of its views and plan waspublished. Assistants were shortlyafterwards appointed in all the differentdistricts and counties borderingthe Thames ; sermons were preachedfor its benefit ; and among other donations,the Fishmongers' Company subscribed100.In 1776, corresponding societies wereestablished in Scotland, Ireland, andsome of the principal towns in England.In the same year, a silver medal wasstruck, by order of the society, for thepurpose of rewarding the medical assistantsand others ; and four honorarygold medals were presented to the institutors,Drs. Cogan and Hawes, andto Alderman Bull and Mr. Horsfall,the president and treasurer. In 1777,Dr. Hawes endeavoured to draw theattention of the public more particularlyto the institution, by printing,and distributing gratuitously, about tenthousand copies of An Address on PrematureDeath and Premature Interment;in which he strenuously animadvertedupon the practice of consigningbodies to the grave beforeindubitable proofs of dissolution hadappeared. In 1781, he published AnAddress to the Legislature on the Importanceof the Humane Society ; andin 1782, gave, at his own expense, goldand silver prize medals, for the twobest dissertations respecting putrefactionas a criterion of death.In 1783 and 1784, the society receiveda donation of 100 from thecorporation of London ; and, in theformer year, the king became its patron,the Earl of Stamford, president,and Lord Beauchamp, and other distinguishedindividuals, vice-presidents.About the same time, the premiumsfor successful cases were raised fromfour to five guineas, and for unsuccessfulcases, from one to three. In1792, the Honourable Thomas Russell,president of the Massachusetts, sentover a subscription of 100; and, in1794, the general receiving-house waserected, in Hyde Park, the king havinggranted a piece of ground for the purpose.In 1796, Dr. Hawes published thereports of the society, from 1744 to1784, embellished with two emblematicplates, and dedicated, by permission,WILLIAM HAWES.to his majesty. They contained, amongother interesting matter, an accountof the different cases, successful andunsuccessful ; the former of which preponderated,in a proportion of two-thirds,and proved the possibility ofrecovery, after apparent death by frost,lightning, strangling, suffocation, suspension,concussion, and divers othercauses, producing consequences previouslysupposed to be mortal. Itappeared, also, that the society hadgiven birth to similar institutions, notonly all over England, but in Asia andAmerica. Its beneficial effects hadbeen commemorated, on various occasions,by divines, poets, and painters ;while, in addition to the preservationof human life, it had led to many newdiscoveries in science, by the rewardsit had held out for essays on the subjectof restoring animation. It is aninteresting fact, that the EmperorAlexander of Russia, was one of thoseto whom it adjudged the gold medal,for restoring to life, by his own exertions,a Polish peasant, who had beentaken out of the water apparently dead.No one devoted a greater portion oftime and talents to the furtherance ofthe institution, than Dr. Hawes; heaugmented the list of subscribers, obtainedpreachers to deliver sermons,by his personal applications, and alwaysmade his own interest subordinate toits promotion.In resuming an account of his privateprofessional career, we find that,in 1781, previously to which yearhe had obtained his diploma, he commenceda course of lectures on suspendedanimation, which excited thegreater attention from the faculty andthe public, as being the first ever offeredon that subject. In 1785, he was electedphysician to the London Dispensary ;and having removed, a few years afterwards,to Spital Square, exerted himselfso successfully, in 1793, in behalf of theweavers, that, according to a writer inthe Gentleman's Magazine, one thousandtwo hundred families were snatchedfrom ruin.He died on the 6th of December,1808, and was buried at Islington ; hisfuneral being attended by thirty of themanagers and directors of the HumaneSociety, of which he was treasurer atthe time of his death. He was alsovice-president of the London ElectricalSociety; and a member of severallearned institutions in England, Scotland,and America. He appears tohave married in 1759, and was survivedby a numerous family, to whomhis amiable qualities had much endearedhim.His conversation was pleasant andinstructive ; combining, as it did, appropriatehumour with judicious observation.Simple and unsuspecting,his bounty flowed from a heart, unableto remain tranquil, till it had actedupon the impulse of its generosity. Ifa subject were casually started, saysa writer in the European Magazine,that excited pity, and demanded succour,he was instantly metamorphosedinto another being; his eyes sparkled,his whole body appeared in motion;he would rise from his chair, run uptothe individual who represented thecase of human woe, draw him to thecorner of the room, and instantly openhis purse, with a request to carry hismite to the object of distress, and totake his address, for future investigation,and subsequent aid.JOHN Hogarth.JOHN Hogarth was born atScarsdale, in Yorkshire, some time inthe year 1740, and received the rudimentsof his education at the grammarschool of Jedburgh ; whence he proceededto St. John's College, Cambridge,and there took the degree of M. D. in1766. Soon after, he commenced practicingat Chester, where he becamephysician to the infirmary, and attainedgreat reputation for medical ability. In1784, he published An Inquiry how toPrevent the Small-Pox ; in 1793, ASketch of a Plan for Extirpating theSmall-Pox, in two volumes, octavo ; andin 1800, about which period, after a re-MEDICAL SCIENCE.silence of thirty years at Chester, hesettled at Bath, a work, entitled, Of theImagination as a Cause and as a Curefor the Disorders of the Body, the objectof which was to ridicule the metallictractors of Perkins.Among the other productions of thiseminent practitioner, were, Two Lettersto John Howard, Esq. on Lazarettos;A Clinical History of Diseases; SynopsisPharmacopoeias Londinensis; ALetter to Dr. Percival, on the Preventionof Infectious Fevers; and severalingenious contributions to the PhilosophicalTransactions, and other scientificand professional publications. HisInquiry as to the means of Preventingthe Small-Pox was translated intoFrench and German ; his work againstthe tractors of Perkins, has been highlyeulogized by Professor Stewart, in hisDissertation on the Progress of Philosophy; and the whole of his productionsare eminently calculated to promote theinterests of science and humanity.Dr. Haygarth greatly distinguishedhimself by introducing the establishmentof fever wards, for the preventionof contagion, in hospitals ; a plan whichis now universally adopted, and in referenceto which, Dr. Lettsom, in hisHints respecting Temperance, &c. thusexpresses himself: " In reflecting uponthe importance of the object whichDr. Haygarth has happily effected, ofstopping the progress of infectious fevers,by a plan equally simple and efficacious,the mind dwells with pleasure in witnessingthe influence of philanthropydirected by medical science." Thelearned author adds, further on : " Inarresting and subduing two poisons (thesmall-pox and fever) in pamphlets,in unveiling imposture clothed in themeretricious garb of bold quackery, (inhis tract on metallic tractors,) thatphilanthropic physician, Dr. Haygarth,justly acquires the approbation of agrateful public, and with a mind consciousof having deserved it, is truly richin its own reward, as his own sentimentstestify."On the subject of contagion, thecauses and prevention of which he investigatedon philosophical principles,he drew up a set of Rules of Safety, theadoption of which has been found particularlyadvantageous. Not confininghis exertions to professional matters, hedevoted much of his time and talents topromote the comfort and education ofthe poor. In 1812, he addressed aletter to Bishop Porters on the state ofthe free schools in the North of England;and by constantly importuninghis parliamentary friends on the subject,hastened the inquiry subsequently madeby the legislature, into the condition ofthe endowed schools of the kingdom ingeneral. He also contributed in a greatdegree to the formation of saving banks ;and established one at Bath, " on theprinciple of self support, by investingall the deposits in the public funds, andmaking the depositors liable to theirrise or fall." This plan, in which hewas supported by the opinions of theMarquess of Vanstone, ProfessorMalthus, and the Honourable GeorgeRose, was afterwards introduced intoan act of parliament, by the latter, inwhich, however, a certain rate of interestwas fixed, thus making the countryliable to a charge which had not beencontemplated by Dr. Haygarth, whopublished his ideas on the subject, in1819, in a pamphlet, entitled, An Explanationof the Principles and Proceedingsof the Provident Institution at Bath,for Savings. At the time of his death,which took place on the 10th of June,1827, he was a fellow of the RoyalSociety of London, of the Royal andMedical Societies of Edinburgh, andMember of the American Academy ofArts and Sciences.THOMAS PERCIVAL.THOMAS PERCIVAL was born atWarrington, in Lancashire, in September,1740. When only three yearsold, he had the misfortune to loseboth his parents ; and the care of hiseducation devolving on his uncle, thatgentleman placed him, when of a properage, at a private academy in the neigh-thomasPERCIVAL.boyhood of his native town ; to thefree grammar-school of which he wassubsequently removed. In 1757, hisname was enrolled as the first studentat the Warrington Academy, then justinstituted, under the superintendenceof Dr. Akin. After having acquireda high reputation for diligence in classicaland religious studies, he proceeded,in 1761, to Edinburgh, where he appliedhimself, with great assiduity, tomedical pursuits. He would, it appears,have gone either to Oxford orCambridge, but for his scruples as to asubscription to the Thirty-nine Articlesof Faith, required to be signed previouslyto matriculation at either ofthose universities.While at Edinburgh, he becameacquainted with Mr. Hume and Dr.Robertson ; and, during a visit to London,contracted a close intimacy withLord Willoughby de Parian, who madehim his constant companion, and becamehis warmest friend and patron.He was indebted to this nobleman foran early introduction to the most eminentliterary characters of the day ;and, through his recommendation, becamea fellow of the Royal Society ofLondon, being the youngest memberever admitted. In 1765, he visitedParis, Hamburgh, and Leyden, wherehe took his degree of M. D. He thenreturned to Warrington ; at which place,after a residence of a few months, hemarried the daughter of NathanielBassett, Esq. ; and, in 1767, settled atManchester.Dr. Percival held a distinguishedrank, both as a literary character anda physician. In the latter capacity, hedisplayed quick penetration, discriminatingjudgment, patient attention, and,above all, says Dr. Magee, a deepsense of responsibility. As an author,he obtained considerable reputation inthe philosophical and religious world,particularly by his Essays, medical andexperimental, and his last work, entitled,Medical Ethics ; in which, it issaid, while delineating the requisitesand qualifications of the medical practitioner,he has, unconsciously, displayedthe most exact portraiture ofhimself. His other productions consistof Observations on the DeleteriousQualities of Lead ; A Father's Instructionsto his Children ; Moral andLiterary Dissertations, which haverarely been surpassed by any didacticcomposition of a similar extent, forgenuine feeling, refined taste, purityof style, or aptness of illustration ; andseveral papers published in The Transactionsof the Manchester Literary andPhilosophical Society, of which he wasan original .member, and continuedpresident, from its first foundation,during the remainder of his life. Heattempted to establish, but failedthrough want of encouragement, publiclectures on mathematics, commerce,and the fine arts, in that town. Inaddition to his other honours, he wasa fellow of the Royal Society at Paris ;a member of the American PhilosophicalSociety of Philadelphia, of theRoyal Society of Edinburgh, and theMedical Society in London. His correspondencewas extensive, and embraceda variety of subjects : amonghis epistolary friends, were ArchdeaconPaley, Dr. Priestley, Dr. Franklin,Hannah More, and Dr. Battle. Inone of his letters to the first of thesecelebrated characters, he avows himselfa dissenter ; but his rare allusion tothe fact elsewhere, and his repeatedexpressions of respect for the churchof England, create some doubt as towhether he wished his secession fromthe establishment to be generallyknown.He died at Manchester, of a rheumaticfever, in the month of August,1804 ; and, about three years after, hisworks were published, in four volumes,octavo, with a biographical memoir prefixedby one of his sons. A Latin epitaph,by the Rev. Samuel Parr, is inscribedon his tomb; and over the president'schair, in the hall of the ManchesterPhilosophical Society, a mural tablethas been erected to his memory. Tosum up his character, observes 'one ofhis biographers, Dr. Percival was anauthor without vanity, a philosopherwithout pride, a scholar without pedantry,and a Christian without guile.MEDICAL SCIENCE.ANDREW MARSHALL.ANDREW MARSHALL, a nativeof Cheshire, was born in the year 1742 ;and, after having received a commoneducation, devoted himself to farmingpursuits, which, however, he soon relinquishedfor the study of Latin andlogic, with a view to becoming a dissentingminister, " feeling himself," asheobserved at that time, " gifted in theability of saying grace and prayer."Shortly after, he published, in theBritish Magazine, An Essay on Composition,for which he was summonedto the synod, at Edinburgh, and excommunicated.At this time, as he states,in his biographical manuscript, he wasso struck with the appearance of nature,that to get settled and provided for,was a subject which never came intohis head : but, at length, after passingtwo years in contemplative irresolution,he opened a small school at Glasgow,where he devoted his leisure to thestudy of Greek and mathematics.In 1761, he became tutor to a familyat Islay ; whence, about four years after,he proceeded to Edinburgh, and forsome time obtained a subsistence bygiving private instruction. While thusoccupied, he attended the medicalclasses, but at length professed himselfa student of divinity, and delivereddiscourses at the University Hall, aswell as at that of the seceders. In1770, at which time, he says, he wasin the habit of studying every newand difficult subject that presenteditself, he carried on a correspondencewith Dr. Young, professor of Greek,at Glasgow; in one of whose lettersto Marshall, the following passageoccurs : " Your metaphysics upon time,place, association, trees, ideas, andislands, have raised you several inchesin my estimation." About the sameperiod, he sent several papers respectingthe Greek language, to the ScotchMagazine ; and was seriously engagedin the investigation of philosophicalgrammar, and of mathematical analysis,and synthesis.In 1773, he became tutor to LordBalgonie, and, in the following year,accompanied that nobleman to the continent; where, according to his ownstatement, he saw a good deal of theworld, spoke French, studied politicsand war, was well received in general,and made connections. On returning toEdinburgh, he resumed his medical pursuits;and, in 1776, took private lessonsin botany, which science he cultivatedwith much enthusiasm, astonishing histeacher, it is said, by the warmth ofhis expressions on the beauty of theplants, and the wisdom of their structure.In January, 1777, he read, to amedical society at Edinburgh, two veryingenious papers, one in Latin, the otherEnglish ; and, in the course of the sameyear, was enabled, as he states, byfavour of Mr. Campbell, to study inLondon ; where he attended the anatomicaltheatre of Dr. William Hunter;and, being now seriously determined onpursuing his medical studies, declinedan invitation to stand as candidate forthe logical and rhetorical professorship,at St Andrew's College, although everyprospect was held out to him of success.In 1778, he obtained, through theinterest of Lord Balgonie, the appointmentof surgeon to the eighty-thirdregiment, which he accompanied toJersey, where he fulfilled his dutieswith such strictness, as occasionally toinvolve him in disputes with his superiors." I was indefatigable," he observes," in arranging my hospitalsaving the men, and curing them didoperations in Jersey got character asasurgeon waged war with the commandingofficers, and others prescribedwas consulted in all bad cases inGuernsey intent only on my dutyneglected person." Such, indeed, washis ability and success, that out of aregiment of one thousand soldiers, underhis care, only twelve died of diseaseduring a period of four years.In 1782, he wrote an inaugural dissertation,in Latin, on the best meansof preserving the health of the military,which procured him a diploma of M. D.from the University of Edinburgh. Inthe following year, his regiment havingANDREW MARSHALL.been disbanded, he determined onpractising as a surgeon in the metropolis,and for that purpose, obtained alicense from the college. He now formeda connection with Dr. Pitcairn, whomtie assisted in making anatomical preparations,and with whom, it was arrangedthat he should be co-lecturer, atSt. Bartholomew's Hospital, where Pitcairnwas about to form " a kind ofschool of physic and surgery." Theproject was, however, abandoned, anda coolness ensued between the parties,which terminated in mutual animosity.At a medical society, to which theyboth belonged, Pitcairn greatly irritatedMarshall, by accusing him of having,in a paper on fever, which he had read,borrowed his doctrines from JohnHunter. This, however, the latter deniedto be true ; and Pitcairn, consequentlyapologized for his error. Duringa subsequent meeting of the samesociety, Marshall, in consequence of adifference of opinion, had a seriousaltercation with John Hunter, which,says his biographer, probably influencedthe rest of his life. 'Having built a dissecting room, andopened an anatomical school, in ThamesInn, to which his reputation had attracteda number of pupils, he wassolicited, but without effect, to receiveAbernethy, then a young man, as hisassociate. " I have embarked," he said,on this occasion, " all my resources, andcommitted my reputation on the business,and by my industry have obtaineda footing in it ; and why should Idivide what is hardly enough whenentire, and which I have laboured hardto enjoy entire ?" He continued to lectureuntil the autumn of 1800, and didnot retire from private practice until1812, when he was attacked with anillness, which occasioned him so muchsuffering, that he is said to have constantlyprayed for death ; and when hismedical attendant suggested, on oneoccasion, the probability of his gettingbetter, he exclaimed, " My dear sir,you distress me !" He refused to permitthe alleviation of his local pain, byany medicine which would be prejudicialto his general health ; and observed,on being offered an opiate, " Wedare not interfere with that life whichGod has given us." He expired withthe utmost resignation, in the month ofApril, 1813, having before him a pictureof the crucifixion, while contemplatingwhich, he had frequently been observedto shed tears. He was a man ofgreat kindness of heart, but his sted-vastnessof purpose and laconic sincerityof expression, appear to have excitedanimosity, where his talents and virtuesought to have elicited admiration andesteem.His published works consist of fourparts ; the first, On Water on the Brain ;the second, On Canine Madness; thethird, On the Morbid Anatomy of theBrain in Mania ; and the fourth, On theNature of Mania. Many of the ideascontained in these publications appearto be original, and are expounded withsuch force of reasoning, as to renderthem worthy of serious attention. Hisopinion that the brain is affected inmania, (which led to his quarrel withJohn Hunter, in consequence of thatgentleman rudely differing from him onthe subject,) he supports, by a varietyof cases. On taking leave of his pupils,he made the following "remarkable observation: " I am confident that medicalmen will, at last, cease to ascribeprimary powers, and the first energies inanimal bodies, to the nervous system."His doctrine on the passive state of thelymphatic system, though " widely different,"says Mr. Saurey, " to that generallyreceived, was no less supportedby experiment than by reason and observation."Although neither his voice nor hisperson were adapted to oratorical display,no lecturer, it is said, possessedmore dignity or gravity, or instructedhis pupils in a more intelligent and impressivemanner. His delivery wasslow ; and as he never used an unmeaningterm, he would frequently pauseuntil he could recollect the word mostappropriate to his purpose. His anatomicaldescriptions were so vivid,arising as they did, from a mental contemplationof the part on which he wasspeaking, that his pupils, to adopt thelanguage of one of them, " saw it withtheir own eyes, exactly as he describedit, and noticed every peculiarity of itsshape and appearance, which, if he hadnot pointed them out, would haveeluded their attention."MEDICAL SCIENCE.WILLIAM FALCONER.THIS celebrated practitioner, whosefather was recorder of Chester, andwhose grandfather, the author of CryptPatefacta, died in exile withJames the Second, was born in 1743,and appears to have taken the degreeof M.D. about 1766 ; in which year hepublished a work entitled Dissertatiode Nephritis vera. He subsequentlybecame a fellow of the Royal Society,and physician to the General Hospitalat Bath ; in which city he practised,for a number of years, with extraordinarysuccess. His fame will, however,principally rest on the merit of hisnumerous productions ; the most importantof which are, Essays on theBath Waters, which went through twoeditions ; Observations on the Gout, inanswer to Dr. Cadogan ; Observationson the Poison of Copper ; On the Dietof Valetudinarians ; On the Preservationof Health in Agriculturists ; OnIschia ; Remarks on Climate, Population,Way of Life, &c. ; Account of theEpidemic Catarrhal Fever, called theInfluenza ; Dobson on Fixed Air, withan Appendix on the Use of Fixed AlkalineSalts in the Stone and Gravel,which went through four editions ; MiscellaneousTracts relating to NaturalHistory ; An Examination of Dr. Heberden'sObservations on the Increaseand Decrease of different ' Diseases,and particularly the Plague ; Adrian'sVoyage round the Euxine Sea translated,with a Geographical Dissertationand Three Discourses ; and an Essayon the Influence of the Passions, forwhich he received, from the MedicalSociety of London, the first Othersmedal, in 1784. He died atBath, of apoplexy, on the 30th ofAugust, 1824, in the eighty-first year ofhis age.Dr. Falconer appears to have beenequally celebrated for the extent of hisacquirements, both literary and professional,and the independence and integrityof his mind. His memory wasstored with quotations, anecdotes, principles,and analogies, which, in writingas well as in conversation, he introducedwith great aptness, discrimination,and effect Lord Thurlow, at whosetable he was a frequent guest, declared,that he never saw his equal ; for heknew every thing, and knew it betterthan any one else." No man, however,could be less vain or egotistical ; he wasoften heard to admit his own inefficiency,and the superiority of others ; a modesty,which his undeviating observance oftruth prevents his biographers attributingto affectation. He despisedsophistry, and scorned to use it inmaintenance of a discussion when thefacts were against him ; " In that respect,"he observed to a friend who hadbeen defending the practice, " I considermyself to be a better man thanDr. Johnson ; for I never in my lifemaintained the wrong side of an argument,knowing it to be so." He wasknown to, and much esteemed by, allthe principal men of eminence in hisprofession, who frequently consultedhim on medical and scientific subjects ;and he was the first who made the discoveryof fixed air possessing acid properties,although some attribute theprevious establishment of that fact toDr. Priestley, who, however, does notappear to have noticed it until after thepublication of Dr. Falconer's work onthe subject. His Remarks on the Influenceof Climate, Population, Way ofLife, &c. display, says one of his biographers,an almost unlimited extentof learning and research ; and his MiscellaneousTracts relating to NaturalHistory appeared of such interest, andso great a curiosity, that the Universityof Cambridge gratuitously printed thework and presented him with thecopies.JOHN COAKLEY LETTSOM.JOHN COAKLEY LETTSOM.THIS celebrated physician, the son ofa member of the Society of Friends,was born at Little Vandyke, nearTortola, a small island in the Atlantic,on the 22nd of November, 1744 ; and,about the year 1750, was sent to aschool, at Sankey, near Warrington,where he remained until 1758; whenhe proceeded to Liverpool, where hepassed a year at a seminary, in learningaccounts, and preparing himselfto follow the business of a merchantAt the suggestion, however, of Mr.Samuel Fothergill, an eloquent Quakerpreacher, and brother of the eminentphysician, whose affection he is said tohave gained by his performance of anegro dance, and who offered to becomehis guardian, he consented to bebound apprentice to Mr. Sutcliff, anapothecary, at Settle, in Yorkshire, withwhom he was placed in April, 1761.During the period of his apprenticeship,besides acquiring a tolerable, knowledgeof pharmacy, he enabled himselfboth to write and speak fluently theFrench and Latin languages ; and, withthe help of Gerard's Herbal, made suchprogress in his favorite study of botany,that he was enabled to form a respectableHortus Siccus.In 1766, he became a surgeon'sdresser at St. Thomas's Hospital, andattended several lectures ; but, in thenext year, he was compelled, by thedeath of his father, to return to hisnative island. The property left byhis deceased parent, consisted of asmall portion of land and fifty slaves ;all of whom, young Lettsom immediatelyemancipated, and thus became,it is said, a voluntary beggar at the ageof twenty-three. He shortly afterwardscommenced practice at Tortola, and,before the expiration of six months,amassed nearly 2,000 ; half of whichhe gave to his mother, and, with theremainder, returned to England.After having attended the lectures ofDrs. Cullen and Home, at Edinburgh,he proceeded to Paris, and thence toLeyden, where he took his degree ofM.D. on the 20th of June, 1769. On hisreturn to London, he commenced practiceunder the auspices of Dr. Fothergill,and, soon afterwards, became a licentiateof the Royal College of Physicians,as well as an honorary member of thePhysic-Medical Society of Edinburgh.In 1770, his increasing reputation andpractice enabled him to form an advantageousmatrimonial connexion withthe daughter of a rich tin-plate worker,named Miners ; and, in the use of thefortune which he received with his wife,he rendered himself as estimable for hisbeneficence and liberality as he wasalready popular for his medical skill.Science," says one of his biographers,"was fostered by him, genius cherished,and the useful arts encouraged ; whilethe wants of his fellow-creatures werefrequently relieved by means of food aswell as of physic." In 1772, he publishedThe Naturalist and Traveller'sCompanion, which has been translatedinto French and German; Reflectionson the General Treatment and Cure ofFevers ; and the Natural History of theTea Tree, in which he corrected anerror respecting that plant, made by SirJohn Hill, and adopted by Linnaeus,who, subsequently, wrote a letter ofthanks to Lettsom, acknowledging themistake into which he had fallen.In 1773, he was elected a physician ofthe General Dispensary, to the establishmentand prosperity of which hegreatly contributed, by his pecuniaryand professional assistance, particularlyby the publication of a pamphlet, entitled,Improvement of Medicine inLondon, on the Basis of Public Good.In the same year he assisted in the formationof the Medical Society of London,to the library of which he presentedseveral hundred books. He was alsothe proposer of the gold Fothergillianmedals, given annually by that institution,the first of which he had struckat his own expense. He also becamephysician extraordinary of the City ofLondon Lying-in Hospital ; and, in1774, co-operated with Dr. Hawes andDr. Cogan, in the establishment of theRoyal Humane Society, the reports ofMEDICAL SCIENCE.which he composed, from the death ofthe former up to the year 1813; and,whilst one of its vice-presidents, receivedthe gold medal for his successfulexertions in a case of suspendedanimation.In 1776, he published a pamphlet,entitled, Observations on the Use of Dr.Mayersbach's Medicines, which wentthrough two editions in the same year,and completely put an end to the reputationand practice of that celebratedquack. In 1778, he printed a letter onthe advantages of small-pox inoculation,which exposed him to a violentattack from Baron Dimsdale, of whoselife, however, he subsequently publishedan anonymous laudatory memoir in theEuropean Magazine. In 1782, he composed,at the request of the MedicalSociety, A Biographical Account of Dr.John Fothergill; which, from his havingbeen the occasional amanuensis, as wellas the intimate acquaintance, of thatcelebrated physician, he was enabled todoin a manner that rendered it superiorto all previous attempts on the samesubject In 1784, he also published, inthree volumes, a complete collection ofthe works of Dr. Fothergill, and addedto it a catalogue of the doctor's botanicalcollection at Upton, under the titleof Hortus Uptoniensis, together withdirections for importing seeds andplants from distant countries.About 1788, Dr. Lettsom distinguishedhimself by the introduction tothis country of mangel wurzel, the cultureof which he confidently predicted,in a pamphlet written on the subject,would prove a national benefit. In 1790,he received a diploma of L. L. D. fromthe University of Massachusetts, whichhad previously conferred on him thatof M. D. In 1791, he obtained theFothergillian medal ; and, in 1795,opposed The Dead Body Bill, in apamphlet, entitled, Hints respectingHuman Dissections; of which, he says,in a letter to Pettigrew, " I have reasonto think it produced some influenceupon the judgment of the house."Among a number of pertinent remarksin this production, he ridiculed the ideathat it was inhuman to acquire a certainpower which would enable one manto remove or mitigate the miseries ofanother ; and observed that, to preventthe acquisition of a knowledge ofanatomy, was to commit felo de se ofindividual felicity.In 1796, he published a tract, entitled,Hints for promoting a Bee Society, inconsequenceof which, one was establishedshortly afterwards, at Exeter,and another in Scotland. On the discoveryof vaccination, he contributedall his talent and influence to its promotion,and was the first to send the vaccinevirus to America. In 1801, he printeda small work, entitled, Observations onthe Cow-Pock, for which he receivedthe following compliment from Jenner:Nothing hitherto written on the subject,appears to have made so sensiblean impression on the minds of thosewho have perused it, as your elegantand excellent treatise." He printedseveral other papers and letters on thesubject, and, in consequence of the smallamount at first granted by parliamentto Jenner, for his splendid discovery,proposed that a public purse should beopened to receive the contributions ofthose who appreciated the benefit conferredby that eminent man on the humanrace ; and he would, it is said,have carried the scheme into effect, butfor the additional grant which Jennersubsequently obtained.In 1801, Dr. Lettsom published a collectionof his tracts, in three volumes,entitled, Hints designed to promoteBeneficence, Temperance, and MedicalScience. For this work, although generallycommended, he was attacked bythe editor of the Critical Review, withwhom he entered into a controversy,which terminated to his advantage. Ian1803, he persuaded Mr. Field to insert,in the Gentleman's Magazine, an accountof the different prisons visitedby that gentleman, which he introducedby some prefatory essays from his ownpen : these considerably increased thecirculation of the Magazine, and gavegreat influence to the details of Mr.Field, who observed of them, in a letter,dated in 1805, that they had producedmore advantages in twelve months thanhe had been able to effect in thirtyyears.Early in 1812, Dr. Lettsom becamea member, and soon after president, ofthe Philosophical Society of London,which, says his talented biographer,Pettigrew, was his greatest favourite,his darling child, and nurtured by himJOHN COAKLEY LETTSOM.with truly parental affection. Hefrequently delivered lectures to thesociety, took an active part in all itsdiscussions, delivered its anniversaryoration in 1813, and, two years after,felt so exceedingly anxious to bepresent at its general meeting, that hesaid, " provided he was only able to sit,and not even to speak on that occasion,he would attend it." He died, however,before it took place, on the 2d of November,1815; and it was, consequently,postponed until the 21st of that month,when an eulogy on his character waspronounced by Mr. T. I. Pettigrew, inthe presence of three hundred persons,all of whom were in mourning ; and aletter was read from the Duke of Sussex,in which his royal highness stated,that, " no one was better acquaintedwith the merits and exertions of thelate Dr. Lettsom, in every branch tendingto the advantage and relief of themetropolis than himself; he, therefore,felt greatly disappointed at being unfortunatelydeprived of paying the lasttribute of respect to the memory of soexcellent a character."Few members of his profession attainedsuch high repute as Dr. Lettsom :when only forty years of age, hispractice and emoluments exceeded thatof most of his medical contemporaries,and, for many years before he died,his professional income is stated tohave been not less than j12,000 perannum. He was, however, in thedecline of life, compelled .to dispose ofhis beautiful villa, at Grove Hill, Camberwell,celebrated by the poems ofScot and Maurice, together with agreat part of his valuable library andmuseum, on account, as Mr. Pettigrewstates, of a train of adverse circumstances,originating in the prodigalityof his benevolence. From among numberlessinstances of his generosity, agreat part of which have never beenrevealed, the following are selected : heassisted the widow and family of CaptainCarver with money, and published, athis own expense, an account of the lifeand travels of that gentleman, for theirbenefit. To Mr. Curtis, he not onlylent 500, to assist him in the publicationof the Flora Londinensis, butallowed 50 per month, to ensure theregularity of its appearance, and paidthe expenses of his journey into Yorkshire,in search of plants. To a patient,whom he found in great distress,on account of the injury done to hisproperty by the Americans, he lefta cheque, on his departure, for thepurpose of relieving his immediate necessities,and afterwards purchased hishouse, which was a freehold, for 500,and gave it him for life. He presenteda splendid collection of minerals to theUniversity of Cambridge, where theyare distinguished by the name of theLettsomian Cabinet ; to the monumentof Howard, he was one of the earliestsubscribers ; the Sea-bathing Infirmaryat Margate, was planned and foundedby himself; and he purchased a freeholdpiece of ground, in Bolt Court, for theuse of the Medical Society. He subscribedto a great number of publiccharities ; and not only represented thenecessities of the lower classes in hisworks, but personally relieved theirwants, and attended them at theirdwellings, for the purpose of mitigatingboth their bodily and mental distresses.A poor person, it is said of him, couldalways command his assistance, whilstmany an opulent one was often underthe necessity of repeatedly and unsuccessfullyurging his attendance.He once met with an adventure,similar, in some respects, to one thatbefel the Rev. Rowland Hill. " Itwas my lot," he relates, " a few yearsago, to be attacked on the highway,by a genteel-looking person, wellmounted, who demanded my money,at the same time placing a pistol to mybreast. I requested him to remove thepistol, which he instantly did. I sawhis agitation, from whence I could perceivehe had not been habituated tothis hazardous practice ; and I addedthat I had both gold and silver aboutme, which I freely gave him, but that Iwas sorry to see a young gentleman riskhis life in so unbecoming a manner,which would probably soon terminateat the gallows; that, at the best, thecasual pittance gained on the highwaywould afford but a precarious and temporarysubsistence ; but that if I couldserve him by a private assistance morebecoming his appearance, he mightfarther command my purse; and, atthe same time, I desired him to acceptacard containing my address, and tocall upon me, as he might trust to myMEDICAL SCIENCE.word for his liberty and life. He acceptedmy address, but [ observed hisvoice faltered; it was late at night;there was, however, sufficient star-lightto enable me to perceive, as I leanedtowards him on the window of thecarriage, that his bosom was overwhelmedwith conflicting passions : atlength, bending forward on his horse,and recovering the power of speech, heaffectingly said, I thank you for youroffer ; American affairs have ruinedme : I will, dear sir, wait upon you.' "The man kept his word, and Lettsom,finding, on inquiry, the account he gaveof himself to be correct, after making anunsuccessful application, in his behalf,to the commissioners for relieving theAmerican sufferers, presented a memorialon the subject to the queen, who,it is said, procured the man a commissionin the army ; and his name subsequentlyappeared, on two occasions,in the Gazette, for promotion, on accountof his meritorious conduct.No doubt exists but that his liberaland unsuspicious character betrayedhim into various acts of eccentricbenevolence, and that he frequentlybecame a dupe to the artful and undeserving.With more prudence hemight have conferred more real benefitson society, to which, however, on thewhole, he must be considered one ofthe greatest benefactors of his age.Nichols speaks of him as having beenan Israelite without guile, who mightbe said to have carried his heart in hishand; as the liberal friend of merit;and an example of beneficence to everyavenue of human distress.His extraordinary eminence as a medicalman appears the more remarkable,from his confession that he never hadany genius nor any predilection for thepractice of physic ; and from his avowedwant of memory. " This defect," saidhe, in a letter to Sir Mordaunt Martinismy lot. I believe I possess industry.I made artificial tables of my own ; andby arrangement and art, I appear, tothose who know no better, to possessmemory. I suppose I have fortythousand notes which I can refer to.Some years since, I was desired to deliveran oration at a short notice.This I effected by my notes, and myauditors thought I possessed memoryin a high degree, but, alas ! it wasfictitious." The gentleman to whomthese remarks were addressed, wrotean answer, which, however, is notworth repeating, to the following well-knownsquib, on his distinguished correspondent:When any tick to me apply,I physics, bleeds, and sweats 'em ;If after that, they choose to die,What's that to me ?I. LETTSOM.The following anecdote, related byhimself, is a forcible example of therespect and consideration in which hewas held by his medical brethren :In Askew's sale, there was sold ashort inedited letter of Hippocrates,which Dr. Wright bought for fourguineas and a half. The last physicianbeing dead, I gave Dr. Sims a commissionto bid ten guineas, or anymoney, for it. It was sold for tenshillings and sixpence ! Dr. Garth-shore,Dr. Simmons, and several literatiwere present; but Sims whispering hewanted it for me, he was not opposed."With many of the most eminentAmerican physicians, he maintained afriendly correspondence. Dr. Rush,in a letter, dated in 1788, said to him,No object lies so near my heart as theextirpation of spirituous liquors: toyou, after I am gone, I bequeath acontinuance of the war you have begunagainst them." Dr. Warehouse addressedhim as the father of the scienceof mineralogy in the United States;and, in 1790, on his death having beenreported in the Boston Gazette, Dr.Warren, of that place, wrote to him inthe following terms : " The friends ofscience and of humanity here, feltthemselves extremely interested in theevent ; and though far distant from theland which gave you birth, and personallyunknown to you, unfetteredby the narrow prejudices of place orcountry, they liberally shed tears to thememory of a man whom they had consideredas a friend and a brother."In addition to the works alreadymentioned, he was the author ofMedical Memoirs of the General Dispensary;Memoirs of Dr. Rush, andothers of his personal friends ; History ofsome of the Effects of Hard Drinking;and some minor pieces, besides variouscontributions to the papers of differentmedical and scientific societies, of whichJOHN Jackie.he was a fellow or member: amongthese were the Royal and LinnaeanSocieties ; the Society of Arts ; TheAcademy of Sciences, at Montpelier;the New York Historical Society; theMedical Linnaean Society ; the LinnaeanSociety of New England; the BathAgricultural Society; and the Literaryand Philosophical Societies of Manchesterand Philadelphia. Soon afterhis decease, a collection of his works,with a memoir of his life prefixed, waspublished by Mr. Pettigrew. It isworthy of remark, that, in a letter toDr. Plumper, he observed, " My professionalduties incessantly occupy me,and compel me to write all my essays inmy carriage, which is a material causeof their incorrect state."In person, he was tall and meagre;his face was long, and deeply furrowed;his complexion of a dark yellow tint ;his dress remarkably neat, though notalways precise enough to satisfy hisQuaker brethren. He appears to havebeen much attached to society, particularlyto that of women ; so much so,indeed, that suspicions were entertainedas to the strict propriety of his conduct ;which, however, although not free fromlevity, seems to have been entirelyabove any more serious imputation.He used to immerse himself regularly,night and morning, in a cold bath ; andhis habits are said to have been temperate; a statement, however, which isrendered doubtful, by the followingpassage in a letter which he receivedfrom Dr. Cumin : " Let me seriouslyadvise you, my friend, for the sake ofyour health, to relinquish your nocturnallucubrations and your con-civilities; to go to bed with your wifeand family at eleven o'clock, and riseevery morning as early as you please."The fruits of his marriage were twelvechildren, three only of whom survivedhim.JOHN Jackie.JOHN Jackie was born at DunfermlineAbbey, in the county of Fife,in 1748. In 1763, he commenced thestudy of medicine, under the tuition ofDr. Seaman, at Edinburgh, where heattended the lectures of Cullen, Monro,Gregory, and Black, and became, asSir Henry Ellwood, one of his fellow-students,states, " the most remarkablypopular youth he had ever known."On leaving the university, he commencedpractice at Huntingdon, whencehe removed to Southampton, where hepractised, with great reputation andsuccess, for twenty years. In 1814, heretired from business, and embarkedfor the continent; when, such was theestimation in which he was held in theneighbourhood of Southampton, thathe was detained," says a writer inthe Annual Biography, " more thanthree hours, receiving, as he went alongto the vessel, the affectionate farewellsof his patients, and of many inhabitantsand visitors to whom he was beforeunknown." On this occasion, Mr.Jekyll is said to have observed to him,Oh ! doctor, you are only going to paya visit to the Cyclades (sick ladies) ;we shall soon have you back amongstus."At Paris, he attended Mrs. Fitz-herbert ; and, some time afterwards,when nearly seventy years of age, cameby night, from Florence to Bologna,to visit Lord Hitchinbroke, and, onanother occasion, from Rome to Naples,to prescribe for Lady Glenbervie.Whilst at Rome, where he was calledil celebre medico Angles," he attendedthe Queen of Spain, LouisBuonaparte, and Prince Poniatowski ;and, at Geneva, Guienne Dumont, andMons. de Rocca, the second husbandof Madame de Steel. After passingabout ten years abroad, and publishing,while at Vevay, an essay, entitled ASketch of a New Theory of Man , which,though intended only for private distribution,was translated into Frenchshortly after its appearance, he took uphis abode at Bath, and, subsequently,at Chichester, where he died, on the29th of January, 1831, leaving twochildren, by his wife, the daughter of aFrench clergyman, highly distinguishedMEDICAL SCIENCE.for her wit and acquirements, whom hehad married early in life.As a physician, he was so celebratedfor his treatment of consumption, thatpatients, labouring under that disease,came to him from London, Edinburgh,and various parts of the country ; andhe often corresponded on the subjectwith, and was consulted by, the twoHunters, Baillie, Halford, Lettsom,Fothergill, and other eminent practitioners.He aspired to little reputationas a writer ; a few medical cases,of which those on tetanus are the mostremarkable and important, being hisonly professional publications. Indeed,he appears to have been somewhataverse to authorship, as he refused topublish a Series of Letters on Education,which he had written to his son,and an Essay on Regimen, a subject towhich he had paid particular attention.He was also requested, but in vain, towrite a biography of his contemporaries,a work for which his extensive acquaintance,retentive memory, and storeof anecdote, particularly well qualifiedhim. Hume, Blair, Dr. Johnson, LordByron, Dr. Wolcott, Home Tooke, &c.were among those with whom he hadassociated ; " and it was like lifting upthe curtain of the past," says theauthority before quoted, " to hear thisvenerable octogenarian talking of theseeminent individuals the master-spiritsof his time."It is said, that he refused almost asmany fees as he received ; and, amongother acts of generosity, he gratuitouslyattended the French emigrants, atSouthampton, and liberally suppliedthem with clothes and provisions.While in full practice, he read much,always opening a book at the dawn ofday, and never paying his professionalvisits without one in his carriage. Inperson, he was tall and handsome, particularlyin his youth, when, in consequenceof the elegance of his form, hewas admitted, before the usual time,into the Society of Free and AcceptedMasons, in order to make one of thatbody in its procession through thestreets of Edinburgh. Speaking of himin his age, the authority before quoteddescribes him as a truly beautiful oldman ; preserving his hair, teeth, andcolour, nearly to the age of eighty. Inhis appearance, he so much resembled,as to be often mistaken for, GerardAndrews, the Dean of Canterbury ;and, happening to be, one day, in St.James's, the dean's church, created noslight surprise by politely declining toassist at the communion table, whencalled upon, by one of the persons inattendance, on a sudden emergency.His manners were particularly pleasing,graceful, and urbane ; and MissHawkins, in her memoirs, speaks ofhim as " one of the most agreeableconversationists she had ever known;bringing to bear, on all subjects, theresources of a ready, acute, and luminousmind."His religious character was stronglymarked; he admired the eloquence ofthe pulpit beyond any other; and, onsome occasions, is said to have composedsermons himself.EDWARD JENNER.EDWARD JENNER, the son of aclergyman, was born at Berkeley, inGloucestershire, on the 17th of May,1749. In 1757, he was sent to a schoolat Wotton-underside, and subsequentlyto one at Cirencester, where hemade great proficiency in the classics,under the tuition of Dr. Washbourn.During his holiday hours, instead ofjoining his school-fellows at play, heis said to have generally amused himselfby searching for fossils. On leavingschool, he was articled to Mr. Ludlow,an eminent surgeon at Sudbury, nearBristol, whence, at the expirationof his apprenticeship, he went toLondon, and remained for two yearsunder the instruction of the celebratedJohn Hunter, in whose family he hadthe advantage of residing, and who, itis said, entertained so high an opinionof the talents of his pupil, as to offerhim a share of his practice.On the return of Captain Cook, fromEDWARD JENNER.his first expedition of discovery, in 1771,Jenner was selected to prepare andarrange the specimens of natural historybrought home by Mr. Banks; atask which he performed with so muchability, that he might, had he pleased,have been appointed naturalist to theexpedition which sailed in the followingyear. He preferred, however, settlingas a general practitioner, in his nativevillage, where he soon acquired considerablereputation. His zeal forthose under his care was so great, thathe would frequently pass whole daysin the house of a patient, if dangerouslyill; and so much was he beloved, and soentertaining was his conversation, thaton paying visits to such of his friends aslived at a distance, even if he prolongedhis stay until midnight, they often accompaniedhim for several miles on hisway home. Dr. Lettsom, in an addressto the London Medical Society, thusrelates an anecdote of him, whichoccurred about this period : " Dr.Jenner happened to dine with a largeparty at Bath, when something wasintroduced at the table which requiredto be warmed by the application of thecandle, and doubts were expressed byseveral persons present whether themost speedy way would be to keep theflame at a little distance under, or toimmerse the substance into it. Jennerdesired that the candle might be placednear him, and immediately putting hisfinger into the flame, suffered it toremain some time; next he put hisfinger above it, but was obliged tosnatch it away immediately. ' This,gentlemen,' said he, ' is a sufficienttest.' The next day he received a notefrom General Smith, who had been ofthe party of the preceding day, offeringhim an appointment in India,which would ensure him, in the courseof two or three years, an annual incomeof 3,000. The offer was referredto his brother, and our Jenner, fromhis attachment to him, declined it."A disappointment in his affectionssoon after occurred, which seems, forsome time, to have embittered his existence.In 1783, he addressed a distantfriend in this melancholy language :I am jaded almost to death, my dearGardner, by constant fatigue : that ofthe body I must endure, but how longI shall be able to bear that of the mind,I know not. Still the same dead weighthangs upon my heart. Would to God itwould drag it from its unhappy mansion! Then, with what pleasure could Isee an end of this silly dream of life !"He still, however, continued his.scientific and professional pursuits; inthe latter of which he attained suchhigh reputation, as to be sent for, inacase of exigency, to perform anoperation at the Gloucester Infirmary,seldom intrusted, at that time, to anybut hospital surgeons. He communicateda treatise on Ophthalmia, andseveral other important papers, manyof them, it is said, containing originalobservations, the merit of which hassince been improperly assumed byothers, to a medical society, which hehad assisted in forming at Rodborough.He also corresponded frequently withMr. Hunter, on the functions of respirationin lizards and hedgehogs, on thenatural history of the cuckoo, and onthe experiments he had made for regulatingthe strength of emetic tartar.In 1786, he appears to have been insome danger from the effects of aviolent snow-storm, which he had encounteredwhile riding from Kingscoteto Berkeley: " When I came to thehouse," he observes, " I was unable todismount without assistance. I wasalmost senseless ; but I had just recollectionand power enough left to preventthe servants from bringing me toa fire. I was carried to the stable first,and from thence was gradually introducedto a warmer atmosphere. Icould bear no greater heat than thatof the stable for some time."In March, 1788, he married a MissKingscote, of whom he thus wrote to hisfriend Gardner, early in 1779:" Thelast year of my life has been the happiest,beyond all comparison, I everexperienced ; and I will take upon me toaver, nay I would swear it, that if youcould be lucky enough to connect yourselfwith a woman of such a dispositionas kind fortune has, at last, given tome,you would find a vast addition toyour stock of happiness."In 1792, he obtained the degree ofM. D. from St. Andrew's College, andcommenced practising as a physician.Towards the end of 1794, he was attackedwith typhus, fever, and seriousapprehensions were entertained for hisMEDIC A t SCIENCE.life ; but, happily for himself, and, itmay be said, for the human race, aftersix weeks of suffering, he became convalescent.Shortly afterwards he beganto devote much of his attention toa subject on which he had, from time totime, pursued his researches, since theperiod of his apprenticeship. This wasvaccination ; the discovery of whichmay, it is said, be remotely attributedto his having heard, while serving histime at Sudbury, a dairymaid remark,that she could never take the smallpox,as she had already been attackedby casual cow-pox ; a disease commonamong the rural inhabitants of Gloucestershire,who were generally aware ofits preventive effects. By medical mentheir opinion was, however, treated asapopular error; and Jenner appears tohave prosecuted his inquiries for anumber of years on the subject, towhich his attention had been thus earlyexcited, 'under circumstances of greatdiscouragement. At the Convivial MedicalSociety of Wolverton, of which hewas a member, he repeatedly, for sometimeafter he had commenced practice,attempted to bring the prophylacticvirtues of the cow-pox under seriousconsideration, but with so little success,that he was threatened with expulsion,if he persevered in harassing those whoattended the meetings on what wastermed so unprofitable a topic.In 1780, he concluded an explanatoryletter to his friend, Gardner, on thesubject, in the following terms : " Ihave intrusted to you a most importantmatter, which, I firmly believe, willprove of essential benefit to the humanrace. I know you, and should not wishwhat I have stated to be brought intoconversation ; for should any thing untowardturn up in mjr experiments, Ishould be made, particularly by mymedical brethren, the subject of ridicule,for I am the mark they all shoot at."He persevered in his important pursuitfor many succeeding years, apparentlywith no other encouragementthan his own conviction of ultimatesuccess. " The joy I felt," he observes,in the prospect before me of being theinstrument destined to take away fromthe world one of its greatest calamities,blended with the fond hope of enjoyingindependence and domestic peace andhappiness, was often so excessive, that,in pursuing my favourite subject amongthe meadows, 1 have sometimes foundmyself in a kind of reverie. It is pleasantto me to recollect that these reflectionsalways ended in devout acknowledgmentsto that Being from whomthis and all other mercies flow."At length, he obtained the support ofMr. Cline, surgeon of St. Thomas'sHospital, and some other metropolitanpractitioners; and, in 1796, succeeded inestablishing an opinion which he hadso long entertained, that man might berendered insusceptible of the small-poxby means of vaccination. " As 1 promised,"he observes, in a letter addressedto Mr. Gardner, in the last-mentionedyear, " to let you know how I proceededin my inquiry into the nature of thatsingular disease, the cow-pox, and beingfully satisfied how much you feel interestedin its success, you will be gratifiedin hearing that I have at lengthaccomplished what I have been so longwaiting for; the passing of the vaccinevirus from one human being to another,by the ordinary mode of inoculation.A boy, of the name of Phipps, wasinoculated in the arm from the pustuleof a young woman, who was infected byher master's cows. Having never seenthe disease but in its casual way before,that is, when communicated from thecow to the hand of the milker, I wasastonished at the close resemblance ofthe pustules, in some of their stages, tothe variolous pustules. But now listento the most delightful part of my story.The boy has since been inoculated forthe small-pox, which, as I ventured topredict, produced no effect. I shall nowpursue my experiments with redoubledardour."In June, 1798, he published a quartovolume, entitled, An Inquiry into theCauses and Effects of the VariolaeVaccine, in which, he not only fullytreated on its immediate subject, butalmost demonstrated, it is said, that thesmall-pox had its origin in the grease,a disease incident to the heel of thehorse ; adding, that the equine, as he hadfound, possessed the same preventivequalities, in the human race, as thevaccine matter. A few months previouslyto the publication of this work,he visited London for the purpose ofdemonstrating the success of his discovery,but so great was the prejudiceEDWARD JENNER.against, and distrust of, vaccination,that although he remained in thecapital a quarter of a year, he wasunable to persuade a single individualto try its effects. He also had themortification of hearing, that, whilesome of his profession acknowledgedits merit, by many it was still heldup to derision and contempt. Hismost formidable opponent was Dr.Ingenious, physician to the Emperorof Austria, who, coming to England,and discovering that some personshad taken the small-pox, after havinghad the cow-pox, wrote to Jenner,denying the efficacy of the latter diseaseas a preventive against the former.Jenner replied, that the persons alludedto could not have had the true cowpox; but his explanations not satisfyinghis opponent, Jenner broke off the correspondence,and published, for a betterillustration of his principles, FurtherObservations on the Variolae Vaccine.His contest with Dr. Ingenious hadscarcely terminated, when he was attackedby a great number of the Londonphysicians, who, having witnessed theunsuccessful effect of vaccination onseveral patients at the Small-pox Hospital,threw important doubts upon theefficacy of the remedy. In these casesthe true virus had not, as he discovered,been communicated; and he consequentlysent a portion on which hecould depend, to Drs. Pearson andWoodville, who shortly afterwards impartedit to a great number of personswith complete success. Mr. Clinebeing satisfied, by an experiment, ofthe efficacy of vaccination, had, sometimebefore, solicited Jenner to settlein London, assuring him that hispractice would soon amount to 10,000a year; but Jenner appears to havethen felt no inclination to quit hisnative village, whither he had againretired, after his three months' fruitlessabode in the metropolis. Fromhis correspondence with a friend, onthe subject of Mr. Cline's recommendation,the following passage is selected :Shall I, who, even in the morning ofmy days, sought the lowly and sequesteredpaths of life, the valley, andnot the mountain ; shall I, now myevening is fast approaching, hold myselfup as an object for fortune and forfame ? Admitting it as a certainty, thatI obtain both, what stock should I addto my little fund of happiness ? Myfortune, with what flows in from myprofession, is sufficient to gratify mywishes; indeed, so limited is my ambition,that were I precluded fromfuture practice, I should be enabled toobtain all I want. And as for fame,what is it? A gilded butt, for everpierced with the arrows of malignancy."Shortly afterwards, however, fromwhat had taken place in the interim,his reluctance to quit Berkeley, appearsto have much abated, and he thusaddressed his former correspondent.In my last letter, I told you howmuch I was perplexed ; my perplexityreally amounts to agitation. On theone hand, unwilling to come to townmyself for the sake of practice, andon the other, fearful that the practice Ihave recommended, may fall into thehands of those who are incapable ofconducting it, I am thrown into a statethat was at first not perceptible as likelyto happen to me ; for, believe me, I amnot callous to all the feelings of thosewounds, which, from misrepresentation,might fall on my reputation ; on thecontrary, no nerves could feel moreacutely ; and they now are actually inatremor from anticipation."By this time, many persons in thehigher ranks of life, had permitted theirchildren to be vaccinated, and Dr.Pearson, having announced his intentionof furnishing medical men withthe virus, Jenner, to secure his well-earnedreputation to the discovery,by the advice of his friends, at lengthonce more proceeded to London, where,however, he appears to have remainedbut a short time. Shortly after hisreturn to Beverley, towards the closeof 1799, when his works had beentranslated into many European languages,and his method was about tobe introduced at Berlin, Vienna, andGeneva, he received a letter from Dr.Pearson, offering him the appointmentof extra-corresponding physician to aVaccine Institution then about to befounded. Irritated by the proposal, heresolved, at once, on another journeyto the metropolis, for the purpose offounding a rival establishment Hewas received, on his arrival, with greathonour, by the Duke of York, the Dukeof Sussex, and other distinguishedMEDICAL SCIENCE.characters ; by whose assistance he sooneffected his object, and the new society,of which he was appointed president,obtained the special patronage of hissovereign.In the last-mentioned year, (1799,) ageneral order had been issued for theadoption of his discovery by the armyand navy ; from the physicians andsurgeons of which he subsequently receiveda gold medal, as a testimony oftheir gratitude and admiration. Onreturning again to Berkeley, he waspresented with a splendid piece ofplate from the nobility and gentry residingin that neighbourhood ; and,shortly afterwards, by the advice of hisfriends, he solicited a parliamentaryreward for the vast benefit he hadconferred on mankind. A committeeof the house of commons being appointedto investigate the subject, itwas proved that vaccination had alreadyproduced a very beneficial effectin this country, and certificates of onehundred thousand successful cases, invarious parts of the world, were produced.On the report being brought up,a debate arose, as to whether he shouldbe granted 10,000, or double thatsum ; which, after the chancellor of theexchequer had declared that Jenner'sdiscovery was one of the greatest, andmost beneficial to society, that hadbeen made since the creation of man,terminated in a vote for the smallersum, by a majority of three only.Some years after, (on the 28th of July,1807,) the chancellor of the exchequerbrought forward a motion for an additionalgrant of 10,000 to Dr. Jenner,grounded on the report of the Collegeof Physicians, relative to vaccination,by which it appeared, that, out of onehundred and sixty-four thousand threehundred and eleven cases, there hadbeen only three deaths ! Mr. Morrisproposed, as an amendment, that thegrant should be 20,000 ; which wascarried, on a division, by a majority ofthirteen.At this time, the vaccine practiceprevailed in America, Asia, and everycountry in Europe ; and its discovererwas elected an associate of all theprincipal medical societies and academiesin the civilized world. The motherof the Emperor of Russia senthim a valuable diamond ring, accompaniedwith a letter, expressive of heresteem and regard for " one who hadrendered so signal a service to mankind."Napoleon, on being presentedwith a petition from him, solicitingthe release of Dr. Wickham, emphaticallysaid, " What that man asks,must not be refused ;" and Plato, onthe introduction of Dr. Jenner to theforeign potentates, and other distinguishedpersons, who visited this country,in 1814, told him that he hadextinguished the most pestilential disorderwhich had ever appeared on thebanks of the Don.From the year 1808, when the NationalVaccine Establishment was instituted,under an act of parliament, theopposition to his discovery began todecline ; experience having shewn, that,although vaccination were not an absolutepreventive, the small-pox, if at all,followed it in so mild a form, as scarcelyever to be fatal. At Berlin, within afew years, the victims of the latterdisease were reduced in the proportionof nine hundred and fifty to two, andin many places, where its ravages hadpreviously Been terrific, it was almostentirely eradicated.Dr. Jenner passed some portion ofthe latter part of his life at Cheltenham ;whence, on the death of his wife, bywhom he had a son and a daughter,he removed to Berkeley, where he expiredsuddenly, of apoplexy, on the26th of January, 1823. He was buriedin the parish church of his native place,in which a monument was erected tohis memory, bearing the following inscription:Within this tomb hath found a resting place.The great physician of the human raceBrought life and health to more than hall" mankind.Let rescued infancy his worth proclaim,And radiant beauty drop her saddest tear.For beauty's truest, trustiest friend lies here.In person, Dr. Jenner is described ashaving maintained " the ancient affinitybetween Apollo and Aesculapius." Hisdress was particularly neat ; his staturerather below the middle standard ; hiscountenance highly intelligent; and hisconversation playful with the superficial,but with the learned, profound.At an early part of his career, he issaid to have frequently amused him-danielRUTHERFORD.self by extemporaneous versification,chiefly facetious and epigrammatic ; ofwhich the following specimen, a notewhich a lady received from him with acouple of ducks, has been preserved :y dear madam, this scrap of aI 're despatched,letter.To say that Miss isA regular doctor no lunge:And, therefore, I've sent 1very much better ;she lacks,:r a couple of quare?.The meekness, gentleness, andsimplicity of his demeanour," says hisbiographer, Dr. Baron, " formed a moststriking contrast to the self-esteemwhich might have arisen from the greatand splendid consequences of his discovery.He was thankful and gratefulfor them in his heart, but to pride andvain glory he seemed to be an utterstranger." The last words which thewriter just quoted heard him speakwere, " I do not marvel that men arenot grateful to me, but I am surprisedthat they do not feel gratitude to Godfor making me a medium of good."Besides having made the grand discoverywhich exalted him to so enviablea rank among the greatest benefactorsof mankind, he investigated, with considerablesuccess, the difficult subject ofmigration among birds ; and, accordingto Dr. Baron, made considerable progressin geology, and in the knowledgeof organic remains ; amended severalpharmaceutical processes, explained thecause of one of the most painful affectionsof the heart, and advanced far inhis inquiries respecting the diseases ofthe lymphatic system. Besides the productionsalready mentioned, he was theauthor of a paper on the Natural Historyof the Cuckoo, printed in thePhilosophical Transactions j Observationson the Distemper in Dogs ; a processfor preparing pure Emetic Tartar ;and some other pieces.DANIEL RUTHERFORD.DANIEL RUTHERFORD was bornat Edinburgh, on the 3rd of November,1749 ; and, after having studied for sometimeunder Mr. Wendell, an eminentteacher in that city, was sent to completehis education at an academy in England.On his return to Edinburgh, he commencedthe study of medicine underhis father, and also obtained a knowledgeof logic, mathematics, and moraland natural philosophy, by attendingthe lectures of the most celebratedprofessors of those sciences. His medicalpreceptors were, the Drs. Monro,(primus and secundus,) Cullen, andGregory ; his tutor in chemistry, wasDr. Black ; and in botany, Dr. Hope.While a pupil at the Royal Infirmary,he paid particular attention to the clinicalpractice carried on there, andderived much benefit from witnessingthe surgical operations of Messrs. Chalmers,Wood, and James Rae ; he alsoacted as clinical clerk to Dr. Cullen,who thought so highly of his abilities,as to say, that " he had never beenmore fortunate in an hospital-assistantthan in Daniel Rutherford." The lastlectures he attended were those of Dr.Andrew Duncan, who, for the first time,made that branch of medicine calledgeneral therapeutics, the subject of aparticular course ; " and I have everyreason to believe," says Dr. Duncan,that the report which my friend,Rutherford, gave of my first essay,contributed not a little to my futuresuccess."On taking his degree of M. D., in1 772, he obtained great praise from Dr.Black, in the public hall, and in the presenceof the members of the university,for his inaugural thesis, De Were fix,in which he demonstrated his discoveryof a new gaseous fluid, by some philosopherssince described as azote, andby others as nitrogen. Shortly after,Dr. Rutherford proceeded to the continent,and on his return, commencedpractice in Edinburgh, where, in 1776,he was admitted a member of the RoyalCollege of Physicians, and elected afellow in the following year. He soonbecame extensively employed and estimatedas a physician ; and being, at thesame time, a member of the Philosophical,now the Royal, Society of Edinburgh,greatly distinguished himself byMEDICAL SCIENCE.presenting to that body a paper onnitrous acid ; in which, according to Dr.Robinson, he even more than hinted atthat doctrine, respecting acids, whichthe French chemists afterwards demonstrated.In 1786, on the death of Dr. Hope,he was elected botanical professor tothe university, and was, at the sametime, intrusted with the charge of theRoyal Botanical Garden at Edinburgh,as king's botanist for Scotland. Beingnominated also a member of the Facultyof Medicine, he became one ofthe clinical physicians to the infirmary ;and, on the death of Dr. Cullen, in1791, was appointed one of the physiciansin ordinary to that institution.Although the discharge of his numerousprofessional duties preventedhim from devoting much of his timeto his favourite pursuit, chemical philosophy,he constantly attended thepublic societies to which he belonged,as well as the aesculapius, Harveian,and Gymnastic Clubs, in the latter ofwhich he held the high office of Gym -nasiarchus Magnifies. He was muchafflicted throughout his life with thegout, of which he had experienced anattack when only ten years of age, and,notwithstanding all his efforts to checkthe disease, it proved fatal to him onthe 15th of November, 1819. He was,on that day, taken with a sudden pain,while stepping into his carriage, andafter exclaiming, " Oh ! my bowels !"fell into the arms of his daughter, andshortly afterwards expired ; leaving alarge family by his wife, a MissMichelson, whom he had married in1786.In all his dealings with mankind, Dr.Rutherford, according to his biographer,Dr. Duncan, uniformly supported thecharacter of a respectable, an honourable,and an amiable man; and thewhole course and tenor of his existencewas a preparation for another and abetter world.THOMAS COLLINGWOOD.THOMAS COLLINGWOOD wasborn at Bates Cross, near ,on the 7th of July, 1751 ;and, at eight years of age, had madeconsiderable progress in mathematics,in which science he afterwards becameso skilled, that he was often consultedby the most eminent professors. Fromhis mother, who died in 1766, he acquireda knowledge of botany; in thepursuit of which he was so ardent, thathe would make frequent excursions tofind some rare plant, and carry it manymiles, to consult others as to its nameand qualities. About 1767, he evinceda great predilection for the study ofmedicine ; and, going to Edinburgh, became,at different times, the pupil of Drs.Monro, Cullen, Ferguson, and Brown,the founder of the Brunonian system,with whom he became particularly intimate.At the university, he distinguishedhimself by his essays on theorigin and nature of bots and of tenia;and communicated several valuable andingenious papers to the several medicalsocieties of which he was a member.At the Speculative Society, he becameacquainted with Lord Alva, with whomhe laid the foundation of a society,called The Wonderful Club of Clubs;and whose acquaintance contributedgreatly to bring him into notice andreputation. He also devoted himselfto the study of natural philosophy,elocution, rhetoric, and the drama ;and, during the vacations, passed muchof his time in agricultural pursuits, apartiality for which he derived from hisfather, who had been the first to introducethe improved turnip husbandryinto Berkshire.In 1776, he commenced practice atFordham; and, in 1800, took his degreeof M. D. Some years after, hemarried a Miss Forster, and removedto Fenwick, where he instituted a publiclibrary, as well as several private literarysocieties, and, by his agricultural suggestions,contributed materially to improvethe estates of the Duke ofNorthumberland. On the death of thatnobleman, who was just about to dohim a serviceable act of patronage,THOMAS COLLINGWOOD.he removed to Sunderland, where hispractice considerably increased, thoughnot to such an extent as to preventhim from following his agricultural andliterary pursuits, or even from embarkingin mercantile affairs. At this town,he formed a speculative debating society,and was one of the institutors ofthe medical library.Up to the period of his death, whichtook place suddenly, on the 29th ofOctober, 1822, he was assiduously employedin literary and scientific pursuits,which, together with the extentand success of his practice, led to theformation of many valuable friendships,both at home and abroad. He frequentlycorresponded with Dr. Rush, ofPhiladelphia, Drs. Lettsom and Simms,Lord Somerville, Sir W. Pulteney,and several other equally distinguishedand scientific men. To the Board ofAgriculture, Medical Commentaries,Farmer's Magazine, &c. &c. he communicateda variety of essays andpapers, all of high note and utility, andsufficient in number to form severalvolumes. He suggested to Lord warringtonthe Dartmoor forest division,and cottage system, since carried intoeffect; and his representation of thestate of the county of Durham, at thetime of the general survey, receivedmuch consideration and praise. Hewrote several sermons, some of whichwere printed, and publicly delivered;a satirical farce, called Spare Ribs,acted at Fenwick; and published severalpoems, of considerable merit, particularlyone On the Immortality of theSoul, and another, entitled, The Hermit.He also left behind him the manuscriptof a tragedy, and various mathematicalworks, besides numerous others, of apoetical and dramatic nature. He wasacquainted, says the Durham Advertiser,in a notice of his death, withevery branch of science, and endowedwith a mind of most superior cast, towhich no subject appeared too intricatefor investigation. Though courteousand urbane in society, he oftenmade himself enemies by the candidand undisguised manner in which hedelivered his opinions, hypocrisy beinga veil he could never be persuaded toassume. He possessed a clear judgment,retentive memory, and argumentativepowers of a very superiorquality : and had his opportunities,observes one of his biographers, beenmore favourable than they were, thereis every reason to conclude that hemight have ranked very high amongthe first philosophers of the age. Hiswritings, however, it is added, fullyconfirm his great abilities, and have extendedhis fame to many distant parts.In his person he was tall, and wellshaped; and, in his habits, so abstemious,that, for thirty-five years, henever drank a single glass of spirits.CALEB HILLIER PARRY.CALEB HILLIER PARRY, the sonof an eminent dissenting minister, andfather of the celebrated navigator, CaptainSir Edward Parry, was born atCirencester, in Gloucestershire, on the21st of October, 1755. After havingbeen, for some time, a pupil of the Rev.Mr. Washbourn, and the schoolfellowof Jenner, with whom he contracteda lasting friendship, he went, in 1770,to the academy at Warrington, in Lancashire,where he continued three yearsunder the tuition of the celebrated Dr.Enfield. During that period, he wasremarkable for his calm temper andphilosophical turn of mind. " Hisgenius," said Dr. Enfield, in a letter tohis father, " his application, his disposition,all promise great things. He maybesafely trusted to his own mind ; inhis air and deportment there is a gravitythat, though he is not yet sixteen,he might very well pass for twenty."In 1773, he commenced his medicalstudies at Edinburgh ; whence, in 1775,he proceeded to London, and passedtwo years in the house of Dr. Penman.He returned to Edinburgh in 1777,and graduated there, in the June of thefollowing year. He subsequently becameannual president of the MedicalSociety, in obtaining a charter forMEDICAL SCIENCE.which, he is said to have been conspicuouslyinstrumental. Towards theclose of 1778, he married a Miss Rugby,to whom Mrs. Barbauld had dedicatedseveral of her poems ; and, after havingmade a tour on the continent, he settled,as a medical practitioner, at Bath.Having collected a quantity of valuablematerials relative to the fossils ofGloucestershire, he issued the prospectusof an intended work on thesubject, about the year 1781. In 1782,he was elected a governor of the BathHospital ; in 1785, his practice, whichhad previously been very limited, suddenlyincreased ; and, from this period,it gradually rose, until his professionalemoluments are said to have exceeded450 per month. In 1788, the LondonMedical Society presented him with asilver medal, for a paper which he hadcontributed to their memoirs; and, in1791, he attained considerable reputationas a political writer, by a series ofletters, printed in the Sun newspaper,under the signature of Nereus. In1800, he became a fellow of the RoyalSociety; and, in the following year, amember of the Society of Natural History,at Contingencehad previously distinguished himselfas a practical agriculturist, and receivedseveral premiums for contributionsto the Bath and West of EnglandSociety, of which he appears to havebeen one of the earliest and mostzealous supporters. In 1808, he wasmade honorary member of the IrishFarming Society; and, in 1814, a vice-presidentof the Merino Society, ofLondon ; the objects of which he hadnot only supported, with much ability,in various essays and papers relative tothe Spanish sheep, but by setting theexample of keeping a flock of thoseanimals himself. He had also drawnup an account of the mode of managingthem, which the board of agriculturehad reported to be a most able andhighly satisfactory production ; and hadpresented pieces of cloth, manufacturedFrom his own wool, to George the Third,the Prince Regent, and the Duke ofClarence.In addition to his works respectingwool and sheep, he published severalpapers, in the Farmer's Journal, onvegetation, and two essays on the racehorse,the principal one of which isentitled, On the Effects of Food, Fear,and Habit, on Animals, and of theAgency of Man, illustrated by theEnglish Race-horse. He was also theauthor of the following medical productions:Elements of Pathology andTherapeutics ; An Inquiry into theSymptoms and Causes of Angina Pectoris;Observations on the Utility ofVenesection in Purpura, published inthe Edinburgh Medical and SurgicalJournal ; Cases of Tetanus and Rabiescontagion; An Experimental Inquiryinto the Causes and Varieties of theArterial Pulse ; and a reply, publishedin the Medical and Chirurgical Review,to an attack, made by Dr. Philip, ona new theory which he had aimed atdeveloping, in most of his professionalworks, relative to what is popularlytermed a determination of blood tovarious parts of the system.In 1817, he received the gold Bedfordmedal, from the Bath and West ofEngland Society ; and continued hisprofessional and other labours, withunabated zeal and activity, until hewas attacked with paralysis, in themonth of October, 1816. Althoughpartially deprived of speech, and whollyso of the use of his right side, he continued,in some measure, his literarypursuits. He caused his daughters totranscribe, from his collection of anecdotes,the most interesting and important; and shortly before his death,which took place on the 9th of March,1822, composed an able Essay on theCharacter of Hamlet.He is described as having been handsomeand accomplished; dignified, yetaffable and entertaining; an object ofveneration to the poor, of boundlessaffection to his family, and of highesteem to his professional brethren;who erected a monument to his memory,bearing a very laudatory Latininscription, in the abbey at Bath. Asapractitioner, he was distinguished byhis prompt and decisive treatment, yetanxious solicitude for, and sympathywith, his patients ; whom, it is said,he would never deceive, deeming honestyas necessary to the character ofa physician as to that of a gentleman.He was constantly zealous to promotethe welfare of his fellow-creatures ; andfelt, as he states, a strong desire thatthe world might be the better for him,CALEB HILLIER PARRY.after he should have left it for ever.No one, who could not afford to payfees, ever failed in an application toprocure his gratuitous advice; whichhe is said to have given, prior to theyear 1805, in upwards of thirty thousandcases, exclusive of such as came underhis notice at public establishments.JAMES CURRIE.JAMES CURRIE was born at KirkpatrickFleming, in Dumfrieshire, onthe 31st of May, 1756. He receivedthe chief part of his education at theparish school of Middlebie, where heacquired a great share of classicalknowledge; and was remarkable, atthe same time, as well for his daringand impetuous spirit, as his thoughtfuland retiring habits. In 1769, he proceededto a grammar-school at Dumfries,where he studied mathematicsand geometry ; and remained until1771, when he embarked, in the serviceof a merchant, for Virginia; whence,on the commencement of disturbancesin the colonies, after having nobly renouncedhis paternal inheritance infavour of his four sisters, he determinedon returning to Scotland, and enteringthe medical profession, for which heappears to have been originally destined.Accordingly, in the spring of 1776,he embarked for Greenock ; but, on thethird day after the departure of thevessel in which he had taken his passage,he was seized, by order of the convention,and carried back to port, whereall on board were kept in close confinement.Having, however, at lengthobtained leave to proceed to Williams-burgh,he delivered a remonstrance toone of the members of the convention ;who declining to present it, unlesscertain submissive expressions were inserted,Currie resolved to withdraw it.On returning to the ship, he found allhis baggage and papers seized, and thewhole crew, it is said, " turned adrift,and left to range the forests." Havingreached Cabin Point, he was theredrafted to go to New York, as a soldier ;and he had just furnished a substitute,at a great expense, when he was againdrafted; it being, at that time, sayshis son and biographer, the policy ofthe Americans, to allow no personattached to Great Britain to enjoy thesmallest degree of quiet He nowaccepted the proposal of a friend, totake charge of a vessel bound to NorthCarolina ; but was again seized, byauthority, off Albemarle Sound. Hence,after much ill-treatment, he proceeded,in an open boat, to Denton, a distanceof one hundred and fifty miles, to waiton a body of the convention, residentat that place. On his arrival, he wasaccused of carrying provisions to theEnglish ; and told, that unless he gavesecurity for taking his cargo to someisland in the West Indies, he shouldbe detained a prisoner, and his propertyconfiscated. His proposed securitieswere refused ; but, at length,one of the members of the conventionbecoming his bondsman, he receivedpermission, after his vessel had beenunladen and inspected, to put to sea.When, however, he had completed hispreparations for sailing, he was attackedby a dysentery ; from which he hadscarcely recovered, when he fell intothe sea, and was nearly drowned.After a dangerous voyage, he arrivedsafely at St. Eustatia, about the latterend of October ; and, having disposedof his cargo, he went to Antigua, wherehe engaged himself in the service ofa mercantile establishment; but, hisemployers soon after failing, and aparalytic fever, at the same time, attackinghim, he was left, for some time,in a state of great embarrassment anddistress, from which a lucrative offer,to carry despatches to government, insome measure, relieved him. He sailedfor England, in February, 1777, andarrived at Hertford in the early partof the following May.Shortly after, he commenced a courseof medical studies, at Edinburgh, withthe most ardent and unremitting application; and, by his indefatigable industry,attracted the notice of Dr.MEDICAL SCIENCE.Cullen, and the principal universityprofessors. At the same time, he madehimself intimately acquainted with generalliterature, paid great attention tocomposition, and became deeply versedin the theories of the principal writerson the philosophy of the human mind.He also joined the Medical, Physical,and Speculative Societies ; in each ofwhich he distinguished himself by histalents and eloquence.On the termination of his medicaleducation, he was nominated surgeon'smate, with the rank of ensign, in SirWilliam Erskine's regiment; but, insteadof joining it, he graduated atGlasgow, in April, 1780, and hastenedto London, in the hope of obtaining theappointment of physician to an expeditionthat was about to sail for Jamaica.Being unsuccessful in his application,he commenced practice at Liverpool,where, by the introduction of hisuncle, he soon formed an extensiveacquaintance, and began to expresssanguine hopes of success. His loftydeportment, however, appears to havebeen some impediment to his career:My pride," he observes, in a letter tohis aunt, about this period, " is stillunconquerable ; and does not, I believe,escape observation. I have made variousand repeated attempts to bendit, but it will not do; and I fear that,should I succeed, the fabric on which itis founded, composed of my diffidence,of my honour, and of my sentiments ofindependence, might likewise crumbleinto dust."In the spring ol 1781, he was electedone of the physicians to the dispensary ;and, not long after he had obtainedthis appointment, he says, in a letter toDr. Bell, of Manchester, " I get practice,but my patients seem to die out ofspite." In 1783, he contracted a marriage,in every way advantageous, witha Miss Wallace ; and was making rapidadvances in his profession, when, abouta year after, an indisposition, broughton" by travelling to attend his friend,Dr. Bell, compelled him to remove toBristol, for the recovery of his health.He regarded this illness as the precursorof consumption, of which severalof his family had already died, andwere then dying ; to his astonishment,however, he recovered, principally byriding on horseback; and, in aboutsix months, returned to Liverpool,whence he sent to Dr. Darwin anaccount of his cure, which appearedin the Zoonomia, with the followingprefatory remarks : " The following caseof hereditary consumption is relatedby a physician of great ability, andvery extensive practice ; and, as it ishis own case, abounds with much niceobservation and useful knowledge ; andas it has been attended with a favourableevent, may give consolation tomany who are in a similar situation ;and shows that Sydenham's recommendationof riding, as a cure for consumption,is not so totally ineffectual,as is now commonly believed."On his return to Liverpool, Dr. Curriewas requested, by the Manchester PhilosophicalSociety, of which he was amember, to write a memoir of his deceasedfriend, Dr. Bell ; which, whencomposed, was published in their Transactions; and, according to Dr. Currie'sson, placed him, at once, in a highrank, in point of literary composition.About 1787, the question of the slavetrade being publicly agitated, he mademany enemies at Liverpool, wherealmost all the principal merchants haddealings in it, by openly avowing himselfits stern antagonist. In the sameyear, he wrote a very powerful andelaborate letter on the subject, to Mr.Wilberforce ; and, in March, 1788, apoem, called The African, appeared inthe London Newspapers, the joint compositionof himself and Mr. Roscoe.In 1786, he was appointed one ofthe physicians to the Liverpool Infirmary,an institution which he mostzealously supported ; in 17S9, he tooka leading part in the establishment ofa Lunatic Asylum ; and, in 1790, onthe dissenters of Liverpool petitioningparliament for a repeal of the corporationand test acts, he drew up, at theirrequest, the resolutions on the occasion.In 1790, in conjunction with Mr.Roscoe,he commenced a series of Essays, inthe Liverpool Weekly Herald, under thetitle of The Recluse. The revival of theLiterary Society, at Liverpool, in a newform, of which he became president,has been attributed, in a great measure,to his exertions ; but its meetings werediscontinued, on the breaking out ofthe French revolution, in consequenceof the heated discussions occasioned byJAMES CURRIE.that event. In 1792, at a public meeting,held respecting the opening of theIndia trade, ne drew up the resolutionsand petition to parliament, which containedsuch powerful arguments, that,on the agitation of the same question,eighteen years after, they were republished.About this time, his reputation,as a physician, stood exceedinglyhigh, and was steadily increasing; in1790, he had been elected a member ofthe London Medical Society ; and, twoyears after, he was chosen a fellow ofthe Royal Society, and also of theRoyal College of Physicians in Edinburgh.In June, 1793, he published a letter,under the signature of Jasper Wilson,addressed to Hit, on the subject of thewar with revolutionized France, ofwhich it has been said that no similarproduction ever made so great an impression,or acquired such a degree ofcelebrity : it was copied into the periodicalpublications of America, translatedinto the French and Germanlanguages, formally mentioned evenby Pitt himself, and ascribed, amongother distinguished leaders of the opposition,to Sheridan. It received fivedifferent replies; none of which, sayshis biographer, were much read; for therapid succession of the events prophesiedby Jasper Wilson confuted hisantagonists, before they could be reasonedwith. In 1797, he published,with a dedication to Sir Joseph Banks,Medical Reports on the Effects ofWater, cold and warm, as a Remedyin Fever and other Diseases, whetherapplied to the surface of the body, orused internally. In this work, thesuccess and sale of which has seldombeen surpassed, he advocated the affusionof cold water in the early stagesof fever ; a practice revived, says Dr.Good, by Dr. Wright, of Jamaica; but,he adds, it is chiefly to the judgmentand experience, the writings and recommendation,of Dr. Currie, of Liverpool,that cold water, as an externalapplication, is indebted for the highand deserved degree of popularity itagain possesses, and especially in typhus.The practice recommended, was followedin the West Indies, and otherwarm climates, particularly in Portugal;where, during the existence of an epidemicfever, cold ablution proved eminentlysuccessful. It was also adopted,to a great extent, in many parts of thiscountry ; but, among the London practitioners,it met with but partial encouragement,and is now supersededby methods requiring less judgmentand discrimination. It is proper toadd, that, in this work, (which hasbeen translated into French and German,)thermometrical observations appearto have been first recommendedas an indispensable guide in the treatmentof febrile and other diseases.In 1800, Dr. Currie published hisLife of Burns, which the succeedingbiographers of that poet have attacked,as containing misrepresentations prejudicialto the poet's character. Thesecharges are without foundation, as Dr.Currie, so far from exaggerating theerrors of Burns, appears to have palliatedwhat he could not, with honesty,conceal. The life, as well before asafter publication, was perused, withapprobation, by the family of Burns,particularly by his brother Gilbert;who, in a letter to Dr. Currie, on thesubject, uses the following expressions :I have read over the life and correspondenceof my brother, again andagain ; and am astonished to find solittle to object to. I have no alterationto propose. I am perfectly satisfiedwith your use of my communications,which, in several instances, are improvedby your alterations. Indeed,I am perfectly satisfied and highly delightedwith the whole of your workand arrangement." Sir Walter Scott,Dugald Stewart, and other distinguishedwriters, eulogized the production ; and,in a short time, it went through foureditions, the profits of three of whichwere applied to the benefit of the poet'srelatives.In 1801, on discovering that theFrench prisoners at Liverpool werereduced to a diseased and desperatestate, from want of sufficient provisions,he wrote to Sir Joseph Banks, requestinghis interference with ministers toprocure an amelioration of their condition.His letter, though it producedan investigation, which terminated inthe relief of the prisoners, brought onhim the displeasure of the board ofhealth, who censured his conduct astending to cast an undeserved reflectionon the government, and as originatingMEDICAL SCIENCE.in party prejudice. In 1799, on theestablishment, at Liverpool, of its firstliterary institution, the Athenaeum, hetook a leading part in the managementthereof; and, for many years, contributedmuch of his time to the formationof its library, to the catalogue ofwhich he prefixed an account of theorigin of the society. In 1801, he lenthis assistance to the establishment ofthe Botanic Garden ; and, to adopt hisown expression, in a letter to Mrs.Gregg, " succeeded in his favouriteobject of getting the parish to establisha hospital for contagious diseases, afterfighting various battles for it." In1802, he was presented, by the commoncouncil of Liverpool, with thefreedom of the city. About this time,the state of his health, which had sufferedseverely every successive winter,induced him to take a journey toBuxton ; and, in 1804, to Hat newgateand Bath j whence, after a stay of abouteight months, he set out, along thecoast, for Dover, "but was taken ill atSidmouth, where he died, on the 31stof August, 1805.In person, he was tall and commanding,and in his countenance repulsiveof familiarity. He had, indeed,says his son, a certain stiffnessand formality of manner, which henever altogether lost, and which madeit difficult at first to feel quite at easewith him. Those, however, with whomhe was intimate, could not fail, observesDr. Akin, of being struck by his manlyurbanity of behaviour, by the eleganceand variety of his conversation, by thesolid sense and sagacity of his remarks,and by the tokens of a feeling heart,which graced and dignified the qualitiesof his understanding. As a physician,he inspired confidence and attachmentin his patients ; and, though decisive inhis opinions, differed from his colleagueswith respect, and never hesitated tofollow their advice when he deemed itbetter than his own. Few persons ofeminence came to Liverpool withoutvisiting his house ; and his correspondenceshows the esteem and respect inwhich many held both his talents andvirtues. His chief friend and admirerwas Mr. Roscoe ; who, in conjunctionwith Professor Smyth, wrote a poeticalepitaph, which is inscribed on his tomb:among many other honourable tributesto his memory, Sir Walter Scott thusexpressed himself, in a letter to one ofDr. Currie's sons: "In sending youthe enclosed three letters of your venerableand excellent father, I am proudand happy to contribute my mite to hisfame; or, as we say on the moors, toadd a stone to his cairn."Dr. Currie was, perhaps, no less celebratedas a physician, than as an author,a philanthropist, or a politician; in thelatter character, he gained the friendshipand confidence of several distinguishedWhig statesmen; and the weightof his arguments on the subject of thewar against France, is said to haveshaken the opinion, though it couldnot overturn the resolution, of Mr. Pitt,with regard to that ruinous, but thentoo popular, measure. He was particularlyambitious of literary distinction; and used to express his anxietyon this subject, in his letters to Dr.Bell, with much originality and enthusiasm.In one of these, he observes :I despise the pitiful matter-of-factknowledge, which is busy with thewings of butterflies, and phials of mute; if ever I do any thing tobe remembered, it must be on thesubject of mind rather than matter;for I am utterly unfit for those studieswhich are at present so fashionable."His letters, published after his death,by his son, may be read with advantage,as specimens of composition,and as proofs of his careful study,and deep reflection : in one of them,he proudly expressed a conviction, thathe should be able to disappoint theprophecy of his uncle, who is stated tohave said, " he was too sentimentalever to be clever."JOSEPH ADAMS.JOSEPH ADAMS.JOSEPH ADAMS, the son of anapothecary in Basinghall Street, London,was born there in 1756, and, aftera suitable education, became apprenticeto his father. Ambitious, however,of rising to eminence in the highergrades of his profession, he relinquishedthe study of pharmacy, and attended,at different times, the lectures ofPitcairn, Pott, Saunders, and JohnHunter. After having passed someyears in study, he commenced practiceas a surgeon ; but his success being, it issaid, neither equal to his expectationsnor his merits, by the advice of Dr.Saunders and other friends, he obtaineda diploma from Aberdeen College ; and,about 1796, left London for Madeira;where, at the Lazaretto, near Funchall,he attended several persons afflictedwith leprosy, and by his minute examinationof that disease, was enabledto correct many ancient and importanterrors respecting the treatment of it.He also made several experiments onhis own person with the acarus tyro,supposed by some, but denied by JohnHunter, to be the itch-insect, the resultof which proved the correctness of thateminent surgeon's opinion. " Such,"says the author of a memoir of Dr.Adams, in the Annual Biography, " washis ardour of investigation on the subject,that he appears to have actuallycolonized this extraordinary animal onhis own person, for the purpose of obtaininga more complete demonstration."He soon obtained an extensive andlucrative practice, and, at the same time,added much to his medical knowledge,by witnessing many varieties of diseasestotally unknown in England. Amongothers, was that of the Barbadoes leg,of which, he wrote the first accuratedescription. In 1795, he published awork, entitled Observations on MorbidPoisons ; on which, it is said, his fame,both as a speculative inquirer and practicalphysician, principally rests. Inthis production he endeavoured to conveya correct definition of the wordsendemic, epidemic, contagious, and infectious;and, after adopting the originalidea of Mr. Hunter, that two actionscannot be carried on at the same timein the same part, or in the same constitution,proceeded to illustrate, by areference to other writers, the doctrineof morbid poisons, and to classify themas local diseases, on the plan pointedout by Celsus. In the same workappeared the first printed account ofthe cow-pox ; his description of which,however, except so far as related to itsconsequences on the human frame, hesubsequently found and admitted to beincorrect.About the year 1805, he returned toEngland, it is said, with his healthamended, his mind expanded, and hisfortune improved ; having, previously toquitting Madeira, written a short tracton the climate of that island. On hisarrival in London, he obtained permissionof the College of Physicians topractice as a licentiate ; and shortlyafterwards, through the influence ofJenner and other eminent practitioners,he was elected physician to the SmallpoxHospital. Here he introduced vaccinationas much as possible; but notbeing able to carry it to the extent hewished, he endeavoured to obtain aninjunction against the admission of suchpersons to the hospital as were prejudicedin favour of inoculation. In1808, however, the efficacy of vaccinationhad become so evident, that itwas submitted to, both by in and out-patientsof the hospital ; and Dr.Adams, soon after, published a pamphlet,from which it appeared that oftwenty thousand three hundred andtwenty four persons vaccinated theresince 1799, only eighteen had afterwardstaken the small-pox casually.He subsequently printed another reporton the same subject, the profits ofwhich, as well as those arising from thesale of the former one, amounting togetherto 1,517 ;16s:6d., he presentedto the hospital funds. He also employedmuch of his time in writing dissertationson the virtues of vaccination,and published answers to almost all theobjections at that time made againstMEDICAL SCIENCE.the cow-pox. He also edited, for manyyears, the Medical and Physical Journal ;gave an annual course of lectures; andacted, for some time, as physician tothe New Finsbury and Central Dispensary,in Smithfield.His death occurred on the 20th ofJune, 1818, in consequence of a compoundfracture of the leg, which hadunfortunately occurred to him about afortnight before, while viewing someland he had purchased at Holloway.Besides the productions already mentioned,he was the author of a Life ofJohn Hunter, and of a variety ofPapers in the London and Medicaljournal.Dr. Adams was too much occupied,after his return from Madeira, by theduties of his public situation, to attendextensively to private practice. Scienceand humanity are justly said to be muchindebted to him tor his zeal in behalfof vaccination ; for having given thefirst distinct account of modern leprosy,and for having proved, by actual experimenton himself, the itch and oufbes tobe two distinct diseases. So great washis desire to acquire medical experience,that, according to his biographer beforequoted, he once undertook a journey toDumfries, for no other purpose than toinquire into the nature and treatmentof a disease.WILLIAM CHARLES WELLS.WILLIAM CHARLES WELLSwas born at Charlestown, in SouthCarolina, in the spring of 1757. Hereceived his education at the grammar-schoolof Dumfries, in Scotland, andwas thence sent to the University ofEdinburgh, where he became the intimatefriend of Hume, the historian ; tohis acquaintance with whom he attributedmany beneficial effects uponhis character. In 1771, he returned toCharlestown, where he studied physic,as he states, until 1774, with such diligence,that, though quite unassisted,he acquired, perhaps, more knowledgethan in any three subsequent years ofhis life.In 1775, declining to unite with hisfriends against the British government,on the breaking out of the Americanwar, he proceeded to Edinburgh, wherehe pursued his medical studies until1778. He then attended the lecturesof Dr. William Hunter, in London, andbecame a surgeon's pupil at St. Bartholomew'sHospital. In the early part ofthe following year, he went out toHolland, as surgeon to a Scotch regiment,in the service of the UnitedProvinces; but, a few months after, receivedan insult which induced him toresign his commission, and challengehis commanding officer. Proceeding toLeyden, he there composed an inauguralthesis, preparatory to taking thedegree of M. D., which was conferredupon him, on his return to Edinburgh,in the autumn of 1780.In 1781, he set out for Charlestownto arrange the affairs of his family ;and, while there, acted, at the sametime, as a printer, a bookseller, a merchant,and, on one occasion, as judgeadvocate in a general court-martial ofmilitia prisoners. In December, 1782,on his arrival, with the king's troops,at St. Augustine, in East Florida, heedited the first weekly newspaper thathad appeared in that province ; he alsobecame captain of a volunteer corps,and manager of an amateur companyof officers, with whom he acted plays,for the relief of the loyal refugees fromCarolina and Georgia. In 1784, he revisitedLondon, and formed an intimacywith Dr. Baillie; and, after passingthree months at Paris, returned to theformer city, and settled there, as aphysician, in the autumn of 1785. In1788, he was admitted a licentiate ofthe College of Physicians; in whichcharacter he, in 1793, signed a letter tothe college, claiming to be admitted amember, by virtue of its originalcharter. In 1797, after the refusal ofthe Court of King's Bench to enforcea similar claim in the case of Dr.Stranger, he applied, in conformity witha bye-law, to the college, to examinehim as to his fitness for a fellow, and toWILLIAM CHARLES WELLS.admit or reject him accordingly. Anexamination, however, being refusedhim, he wrote a very able letter to LordKenyon respecting his decision on Dr.Stranger's case ; and, according to Dr.Currie, made the College of Physicianswince under a flagellation which theyneither knew how to submit to, norhow to repel. Some years after, thepresident sent him a message to knowif he wished to become a fellow ; anhonour, however, which he then thoughtfit to decline.In 1790, he was elected physician tothe Finsbury Dispensary ; in 1793, amember of the Royal Society ; fiveyears after, assistant physician to, and,in 1800, one of the physicians of, St.Thomas's Hospital. About this time, afit of apoplexy compelled him to adoptamost abstemious mode of living; and,in 1812, by exposing himself to the openair, while carrying on his experimentson dew, he injured his health so seriously,as to make him fear he shouldnot survive to complete his celebratedessay on that subject. It appeared,however, in 1814, and established hisreputation as a philosopher, by the importantdiscoveries it contained, and asawriter, by the perspicuity and purityof its style. In the same year, he wasadmitted a member of the Royal Societyof Edinburgh ; and, in 1816, was presented,by the Royal Society of London,with the gold and silver Rumfordmedals, as a reward for the work justmentioned. A palpitation of the heart,from which he had, for the precedingthree or four years, suffered at intervals,terminated his existence, on the 18th ofSeptember, 1817.Dr. Wells was not only a skilfulphysician, but an acute metaphysician,an able optician, mathematician, andLatin classic, and well versed in thetheories of ethics, commerce, and politicaleconomy. Besides the Essay onDew, he wrote several papers of temporaryinterest, in the PhilosophicalTransactions, and in the periodicaljournals. He also published, in 1792,An Essay upon Single Vision with TwoEyes; a work, says his biographer, inthe Edinburgh Encyclopaedia, of greatmerit, but not free from considerableerrors.He was high-minded, fearless, andresolute ; frugal, yet liberal, and generousto others ; cautious of incurringobligation, but ever eager to oblige ;irascible, yet easily appeased, except incases of insolence or oppression. Hisacquaintance with his profession hasbeen described as profound, accurate,various, and ready for use ; his conversation,though somewhat disputatious,interesting and cheerful, and alwayshaving for its object the promotionof benevolence and knowledge. It issaid that, during the first few years ofhis residence in London, he scarcelyreceived a single fee : during that time,however, though possessing but a verysmall income, he kept himself free fromserious pecuniary embarrassment, andallowed an annuity of 20 a year to apoor relation. Dr. Currie, who was hisschool-fellow and friend, thus speaks of'him, in a letter to Dr. Wright:Wells is a man singularly noble,brave beyond all sense of fear, readyto sacrifice his life to serve any generouspurpose, and not capable of amean or base thing to save his life.He has the corresponding faults, anunbending pride, unaccommodatingmanners, inflexible determination, adisposition to act solely under the influenceof his lofty spirit, and to scornthe consequences whatever they maybe.With all these obstacles to success,such is the strength of his talents, thathe would rise to the first rank of society,if the life of man were lengthenedto twice or thrice its present duration."THOMAS Beadles.THOMAS BEDDOES, the son of atanner, was born at Shifihal, in Shropshire,on the 13th of April, 1760, andmade such rapid progress at the seminarywhere he received the rudimentsof his education, that his grandfather, arich man, enabled him to complete hisstudies at the University of Oxford,MEDICAL SCIENCE.which he entered in 1776. He hadpreviously been placed, for two years,under the care of Mr. Dickerson, aclergyman, in Staffordshire, who said ofhim, " while under my tuition, his mindwas so intent upon literary pursuits,chiefly the attainment of classical learning,that I do not recollect his havingdevoted a single day, or even an hour,to diversions or frivolous amusementsof any kind."An accident turned his mind to thestudy of physic : while very young, heattended his grandfather, who died of afall from a horse, and displayed suchextraordinary interest in the treatmentpursued by the family surgeon, that hewas invited to the house of the latter,where young Beddoes busied himself somuch with the pestle, that he acquired,among his acquaintances, the name ofthe little doctor." After having gaineda high reputation as a classical scholar,and taught himself the French, German,and Italian languages, he commencedstudying, experimentally and theoretically,the subject of pneumatic chemistry,of which," says one of his biographers,"he soon became master, as far as itwas then known' He subsequentlyacquired a knowledge of mineralogyand botany, and, after his death, a manuscriptFlora Britannica was foundamong his papers, which he appears tohave written when at Oxford. Whilethere, he was accustomed, it is said, toanticipate, as one of the greatest pleasuresof manhood, the power of sittingdown uncontrolled, and playing whistall day long." Such, too, was hismemory, that he could detail, afterthe termination of a game, the exactorder in which, as well as by whom,all the cards were played.About the year 1781, he took hisdegree of B. A. and repaired to London,where he attended various lectures, andattained great proficiency in physiologyand practical anatomy, under Sheldon.In 1783, he took his degree of M. A.and in the following year, published aTranslation of Spallanzani's Dissertationon Natural History, of whichSheldon thought so highly, that henever alluded to Spallanzani, withoutreferring his students " to the translationso ably executed by his friendand former pupil." In the latter partof 1784, he removed to Edinburgh,where he passed three successive wintersin prosecuting his medical studies, andwas made president of the RoyalMedical and Natural History Societies,to the latter of which he contributedtwo curious original papers, one onthe Sexual System of Linnaeus, theother on the Scale of Being. In 1786,he edited The Translation of Scheme'sChemical Essays ; took, at Oxford, hisdegree of M. D. ; and, on returningfrom a short tour on the continent,was elected chemical lecturer to theuniversity.About 1788, he became acquaintedwith Dr. Darwin, who frequently correspondedwith him on philosophicalsubjects, and entertained so high anopinion of his abilities, as regularly tosubmit to his criticism, the proof-sheetsof his Zoonomia. His success at Oxford,as a lecturer, was unparalleled : " thetime of his residence there," says oneof his pupils, was a brilliant one in theannals of the university, and produceda taste for scientific researches thatbordered on enthusiasm." In 1790, hepublished An Analytical Account of theWritings of Mayor, under the title ofChemical Experiments and Opinions,extracted from a Work published in thelast Century ; which did much towardselucidating the opinions of Mayor, andobtaining for his name the fame itmerited. In 1791, he contributed, tothe Transactions of the Royal Society,a paper on the affinity between basaltesand granite, the result of several discoverieshe had made relating to physicalgeography, and in which he shewedhimself to be a zealous volcanic, and abeliever in the theory of Dr. Mutton. Inthe same year, he made a mineralogicalexcursion into Cornwall, and on hisreturn through Bath, a lady to whomhe was personally unknown, observedto him, " I have heard of Dr. Beddoes,that, excepting what he may know aboutfossils, and such out-of-the-way things,he is perfectly stupid, and incurablyheterodox. Besides, he is so short andfat, that he might almost do for a show."About 1792, he began to turn hisattention to politics and literature ; andprinted, but did not publish, a poem,called, Alexander's Expedition to theIndian Ocean, written in imitation ofDarwin's Lives of the Plants. In theautumn of the same year, having circusBEDDOES.lated, in the neighbourhood of his residence,in Shropshire, a political handbill,respecting the French Revolution,it raised such a clamour against him atthe university, that during the Christmasrecess, he thought it advisable toresign the chemical lectureship. Thisstep, however, he had previously hadan intention of taking, in consequenceof the small emoluments of his office ;a memorial for the increase of which,the vice-chancellor transmitted to thesecretary of state, observing to Dr.Beddoes, that " the university couldnot ask this in the name of any personso eminent as himself."After leaving Oxford, he had somethoughts of visiting France, but thetumult and massacre then going on inthat country, prevented him from doingso. " I flattered myself," he says, atthis time, " that the tree of despotismwas decaying at its roots. But thisinfernal club of Jacobins, with its madmob, will water it with innocent blood ;it will take fresh root, and put forthnew branches, and cover the wholeearth with its blasting shade." Aboutthe same period he published his workOn the Nature of Demonstrative Evidence,in which he denied the claim ofmathematics to the title of an abstractscience, and devoted much space to theconsideration of the origin of abstractterms, and the philosophy of language.In his next production, entitled, TheNature and Cure of Calculus, Sea-scurvy,Consumption, Catarrh, andFever, with the exception of a veryefficacious remedy for that form of calculouscomplaints, called nephritis calculus,he seems to have introducedmore of physiological speculations andhypotheses, than of practical observationsor applicable remedies.On his return to Shiffnal, he composedhis celebrated History of Isaac Jenkins ;a publication, which has been considered,says Dr. Stocks, as a standardof imitation, and was certainly theprototype of those cheap stories of amoral and religious tendency, whichhave supplanted the ridiculous andoften immoral fictions of a former age.It reached two editions in a few weeks;forty-five thousand copies were sold inthree years ; and, in addition to thatnumber, a large impression was struckoff, at the request of a religious society,by whom it was widely distributed.In 1793, he went to Bristol, with theintention of instituting, near the HotWells, a pneumatic establishment.Taking a house near there, he enteredinto practice, and, shortly afterwards,married a daughter of Mr. Edgeworth,the author of Practical Education. Previouslyto this event, he had publisheda letter to Dr. Darwin, containing afarther explanation of his theory of thetreatment of consumption, and hadbeen 'engaged in constructing an apparatusfor the medical exhibition ofthe airs, which when complete, wasexamined by the Duchess of Devonshire,and the principal persons inBristol, where his reputation and practicerapidly increased.About this period, he publisheda book of directions for poor peoplerespecting health, of which, Dr. Darwinsays, in a letter to him, " I have readthis little work of yours with greatpleasure. You deserve a civic crownfor saving the lives of your fellowcitizens." In 1794, he was requestedto undertake the superintendence ofthe works of John Brown, for thebenefit of his widow and children; atask he immediately accepted, thoughmuch engaged at the time in meditatingthe extension of his pneumatic scheme ;of which, in the August of the sameyear, he published an outline under thetitle of a Proposal for the Improvementof Medicine. This publication, thoughthe system it announced met withgreat opposition, sold rapidly, amongall classes of society; a circumstancewhich Dr. Beddoes describes as the signof a rising disposition in mankind totake what belonged to their welfareinto their own consideration ; and toemancipate themselves still further fromthe danger and servility of implicitconfidence."In 1795, he published an edition ofBrown's Elements of Medicine, with apreface and notes, together with anable and highly valuable analysis of theBrunomian system. In the same yearhe produced a translation, from theSpanish, of Gimbernat's New Methodof Operating in Femoral Hernia, towhich he added an appendix, recommendingan improvement in variolousinoculation. About 1796, when, accordingto his own statement, his literaryMEDICAL SCIENCE.labours were suspended and interruptedby a crowd of patients, he published, insuccession, the following pamphlets : AWord in Defence of the Bill of Rightsagainst Gagging Bills; Where wouldbe the harm of a Speedy Peace ? AnEssay on the Public Merits of Mr. Pitt ;A Letter to Mr. Pitt on the Scarcity ;and Alternatives Compared, or, Whatshall the Rich do to be safe ? The mostcelebrated of these was his Essay onthe Merits of Mr. Pitt, whom he chargedwith taxing "and oppressing the poor,and ridiculed his financial projects withthe most skilful and forcible irony, sustainedthroughout, says Dr. Stock,with an admirable air of gallingsolemnity.In 1796, he published a letter announcinghis intention of carrying intoeffect a project for the scientific educationof children by the establishmentof a manufacture of rational toys". Theextent of his scheme, however, obligedhim finally to abandon it, though heseems to have had no anticipation ofits failure, as, in inviting subscribers,he remarks, " I have made the subscriptiona kind of favour, as in factit will be ; for I propose to myself noother recompense than the satisfactionof setting on foot a scheme of boundlessutility." Shortly after, appeared twoparts of his Considerations on FactitiousAirs, the greater portion of which wereoccupied by the description of a newlyinvented pneumatic apparatus, by Mr.Watt, with whom he was particularlyintimate, and whose letters he verycarefully preserved. In the autumn of1797, he wrote An Introductory Lectureto a Course of Anatomical Lectures,about to be delivered at Bristol, atwhich, he expressed a wish that femalesshould be present. " I would not, indeed,"said he, " have been concernedin proposing an exhibition of blood andbones for their amusement; but no objectionon the ground of indelicacy ordisgust, can be brought against someanatomical subjects." According to hissuggestion, a series of ten lectures wasprepared, which were attended by fortyladies of the first respectability. Afterthis he delivered a course of chemicallectures, accompanied with experimentsprincipally of his own invention.In 1798, he witnessed, to his greatjoy, the opening of the Pneumatic Institution,and being assisted by hisfriend, Mr. Wedgwood, with 1,000 forcarrying it on, he, at the recommendationof Mr. Giddy, engaged the celebratedHumphrey Davy, to act as superintendant.About two years after,he published his Hygeia, or Essays,Moral and Medical, on the Causesaffecting the Personal State of the Middlingand Affluent Classes ; in a prospectusto which he had observed, that,as the public at large must be totallyincapable of profiting by writings towhich a knowledge of the human frameis pre-requisite, no house could havea more dangerous inmate than theFamily Physician ; and that a systemof domestic medicine, must prove aconstant source of domestic mischief.These essays formed one of his mostvaluable publications, being equallyuseful to the general reader and themedical practitioner. They, however,struck so much at the root of establishedprejudices with regard tofashion and education, and so plainlyexposed certain errors in the physicaland moral treatment of youth, that theywere at first vehemently assailed by aportion of the public, and several of theliterary and scientific journals.In 1803, he was engaged in a controversywith Dr. Fox, respecting thecontagiousness of the influenza whichbroke out in the spring of that year, atBristol ; a dispute in which his adversary,who was an anti-antagonist, appearsto have had the advantage. In thecourse of the same year he received avisit from the celebrated Dr. JosephFrank, of Vienna, who thus gives anaccount of the interview : " After waitingabout a quarter of an hour, Dr.Beddoes appeared, with several booksunder his arm. The first words thathe addressed to me were, ' Which Dr.Frank are you ? for there are a greatmany of you.' Before I could answerhim, he laid before me in a row, severalbooks, all written by Franks, constantlyasking, as he turned them over, ' Is thatyou ? is that you ?' " The chief objectof Dr. Frank's visit was to see the PneumaticInstitution ; but the practice forwhich it had been established was nowalmost abandoned, and the establishmentused as a dispensary ; the treatmentof cases by gasses being scarcelyever resorted to, as its results wereTHOMAS BEDDOES.found not always to be relied on. Dr-eddies,however, did not resign hisconviction of its efficacy ; and althoughupon the Pneumatic, now called thePreventive Institution, assuming a differentcharacter, he devoted his laboursand writings to the promotion of its newobjects, he insisted to the last on thefeasibility of carrying into effect the intentionsfor which it had originally beenfounded. In 1805, he delivered a courseof anatomical lectures, at the institution; after which, at the solicitationof many persons of consequence, hebegan to make preparations for enteringinto practice, in London, when he wasattacked by hydrops pericarditis, fromwhich, however, he recovered, in thesummer of 1806; during which year,he published A Manual of Health ;and, in 1807, A Treatise on Fever,as connected with Inflammation, theprincipal object of which was to establish,that, in idiopathic fever, the stomachand contiguous parts were moreconstantly and more deeply affectedwith inflammation, than the brain andits membrane.In the summer of 1808, he published,in the Bristol Gazette, a series of paperswarning the poor against debaucheryin harvest time ; and, in the same year,addressed a letter to Sir Joseph Banks,on the subject of Medical Reform,affixing to it, by way of motto, " Takephysic, Physic!" About the same timehe attended many dissections at theFrench prison, and drew up severalpapers for the Medical and PhysicalJournal, to one of the most importantof which; he thus quaintly alludes:Quietly and stilly have I put forth abit of pathological doctrine, drawn fromno superficial sources." Two days afterwriting the letter, from which thisquotation is made, an illness, underwhich he had been suffering for aboutsix weeks, terminated fatally, and carriedhim off on the 24th of December,1808. He was conscious of his approachingdeath, which he anticipatedwith much calmness and resignation,saying to Dr. Craufruind, after desiringhis family to leave the room: " Isuppose, doctor, you are aware thatthis cannot hold long : tell me. do notyou think so?" This was but a fewhours before his decease, during whichtime he directed the conversation toa medical topic, with an ardour andearnestness, which brought on anexhaustion, from which he did notagain recover.The character of Dr. Beddoes wasa mixture of enthusiasm and perseverance,blended with a philanthropic eccentricityand originality that promptedhim to speculations equally startling,extensive, and meritorious. Of no onecan it be more justly said, that in attemptingtoo much, he effected toolittle ; and yet few men have mademore sincere efforts to benefit mankindthrough the means of their own knowledgethan himself. 'Quick and subtlein seizing an idea, he was equally hastyin communicating, and obstinate indefending it ; seldom did he discoverhis own errors, and as rarely retractedthem when discovered by others. Hewas, however, a man of generous andendearing qualities; and, " under anapparent coldness of manner, which,towards those for whom he felt neithersympathy nor respect, was almost repulsive,concealed warm feeling andeven vivid interest."As a medical writer, he was not onlyconcise and skilful, but bold, profound,and sublime ; seldom delivering a lectureor essay, without introducing themost dignified moral inferences, andapt poetical illustrations. To some ofthem it has been objected, that thematter is too speculative and abstruse,and the style too lofty and refined forthe purpose in view ; a fault, certainly,not to be denied, if intended to conveyinstruction to beginners in medicalscience. No man, however, knew betterhow to adapt his writings to the capacityof thejpoor: in all his compositionsfor their benefit and amelioration, particularlyin his History of Isaac Jenkins,he used a language perfectly free fromvulgarity, yet so natural and characteristic,that not a sentence could bemisconstrued. In most of his works aspirit of acute indignation prevails, asif he anticipated, while writing, thatapathy to his plans, and " that want ofzeal for the improvement of medicine,of which," says his principal biographer,he so often complained, though morein sorrow than in anger." In his attackon Mr. Pitt, he evinced a degreeof gall and bitterness which surprisedthose who knew the innate kindness ofMEDICAL SCIENCE.his heart ; but to this he was promptedby no feeling of personal hostility, butfrom a sincere conviction that the measuresof that minister were entailing onhis country ruin and misery.The tenor of his writings caused himto be censured and dreaded by manyas an experimental practitioner; butthis is denied by Dr. Stocks, who assertsthat he never proposed a plan of curewithout a most deliberate and circumspectreview of the case, nor adopteda new remedy, except in cases wherethe most common ones had been foundinefficacious." His method of treatinga patient was simple and candid : if hedid not perfectly understand the disorder,he confessed his ignorance atonce, but when otherwise, he prescribedwith general success ; and, in his treatmentof nervous diseases, he was particularlyeminent and fortunate. Thecharge against him of an avariciousaddiction to fees, has some foundation,and seems to have been engenderedfrom the parsimonious habits of hisearly life ; he was, however, often knownto refuse remuneration, and devotedlarge sums to the establishment of thePneumatic Institution. His library consistedof many thousand volumes; healso left behind a most extensive andvaluable mineralogical cabinet, and alaboratory, in which, says Dr. Stock,he had accumulated every article requisitefor his researches to an almostextravagant extent."In society he was generally shy andreserved ; abrupt when familiar, but unobtrusiveand unostentatious, more inclinedto listen than to speak, so muchso, that even among those who knewhis abilities, " he was almost habituallysilent." He was particularly partial tothe company of young persons, and welleducated women, whose mental powers,he used to say, were " only inferior tothose of men, in consequence of theinferior pains bestowed on their cultivation."As a father and husband, hewas anxious and affectionate ; would alwayshave his wife and children in thesame room where he was writing; andwas so kind to domestic animals, that,on the cat jumping upon the paper hispen was tracing, lie would often, ratherthan disturb it, take up a book andcontinue reading it till the animal hadremoved. His indefatigable industrywas as astonishing as his genius wasgreat, and accomplished much for theinterests both of science and humanity;and he only failed in some of his projects," because they were beyond thegrasp of human power to accomplish,and of human industry and humanactivity to execute."The Edinburgh Medical and SurgicalJournal thus concludes a summary ofhis character: the reputation of Dr.Beddoes as a physician has not yetattained so high a rank as it deserves.There is an ardour of talent, an animatingearnestness, a stimulant exaggerationin his writings, well adaptedto arouse the torpor, and to provokethe attention of medical readers. Hehad the mind of a poet, and a painter,and displayed the powers of his imaginationin vivid representations offacts and theories. He was a pioneerin the road to discovery. Those highviews, and that habitual appeal to theclassical minds of philosophers whichhe uniformly displayed, have not obtainedsuch sanction as they ought;his zeal has been mistaken for presumption,but perhaps some future agewill affix to it the juster character ofenergy and truth. He was a man ofgreat learning, and understood perfectlythe Greek, Latin, French, Italian,Spanish, and German languages. Histemper was admirable, and he washighly respectable in all the relations ofprivate life."MATTHEW Bailie.MATTHEW Bailie, the son of aScotch clergyman, and nephew of Dr.William and Mr. John Hunter, wasborn at Holy, near Hamilton, in Scotland,on the 27th of October, 1761.After having received the rudiments ofhis education under the care of hisfather, he was sent, in 1773, to theMATTHEW Bailie.University of Glasgow, whence, in1730, he removed to Baliol College,Oxford. He commenced the study ofmedicine under Dr. William Hunter,in whose house he resided, and bywhom he was employed to arrangepreparations for the lectures, to conductthe demonstrations, and to superintendthe operations of the students.In 1783, on the death of his uncle,he commenced giving lectures in conjunctionwith Mr. Cruickshank. In1789, he took the degree of M. D. atOxford ; and, in 1799, the increase ofhis practice compelling him to resignhis lectures, the students presented himwith a valuable piece of plate in testimonyof their admiration of his meritsas a teacher of anatomy ; a science towhich he had principally devoted hisearly labours, and in which he hadbeen greatly assisted by the preparationsbequeathed to him by his uncle.In addition to the press of professionalbusiness, it seems, the conduct of hisassociate in the lectureship was a powerfulinducement to his resignation of it ;but for this," observed Mr. CharlesBell, in a public address to his students,I have his own authority for saying,he would have continued to lecturefor some years longer."In 1787, Dr. Baillie was electedphysician to St. George's Hospital, andremained so for thirteen years. In1790, he was appointed a fellow of theCollege of Physicians ; acted as censorin 1792 and 1797 ; and as commissioner,under the act of parliament for theinspection and licensing of mad-houses,in 1794 and 1795. About 1798, on theretirement from practice of Dr. Pitcairn,who thought so highly of Baillie thathe would consult no other practitioner,his business and reputation increasedto such a degree, that there was scarcelya person of rank and fortune who didnot employ him. He attended theDuke of Gloucester, in the treatment ofwhose case, though it terminated fatally,he gave such proofs of his ability,that he was called in to join the consultationon the illness of George theThird, who, in 1800, appointed himone of his physicians in ordinary, andoffered to make him a baronet. Fromthat time up to the death of the king,he was the principal director of theroyal treatment, and the public opinionon the subject was always regulated byhis own. In the mean time, his practicecontinued to increase, and to suchan extent, that, in one of his busiestyears, when he had scarcely time totake a single regular meal, he is saidto have received nearly 10,000. Toescape from such constant and fatiguingemployment, he contrived, for a time,in the latter part of his life, by placingdifficulties in the way of those whowished to consult him, to gain a littleleisure and repose ; but relapsing involuntarilyinto practice almost as fullas ever, his health became injured, andhe was obliged to leave London forTunbridge. Here however, he onlycontinued to get worse, and removing,shortly afterwards, to his seat at House, near Cirencester, diedthere on the 23rd of September, 1823.Dr. Baillie was not less respected andbeloved as a man, than distinguishedas a physician. To his own profession,he was liberal and open in the extreme,especially to junior practitioners, whomhe always treated with encouragementand consideration, never making a patientdissatisfied with them by his observationsafter consultation, and alwaysmeeting them punctually at themoment of an appointment. " I considerit," he used to express himself,not only a professional, but a moralduty, punctually to meet my professionalbrethren of all ranks. My equalshave a right to such a mark of myrespect, and I should shudder at theapprehension of lessening a junior practitionerin the eyes of his patient, bynot keeping an appointment with him."In the private relations of life, he wasfrank, kind, cheerful, and affectionate;taking an interest in every one aroundhim, and endearing himself to all by hismild virtues and domestic charities. Itwas aptly said of him, by Mr. Bell,all wished to imitate his life none todetract from his fame." The samegentleman relates the following instanceof his high-minded generosity : Themerest chance brought me acquaintedwith a circumstance very honourable toDr. Baillie. While still a young man,and not affluent, his uncle Williamdying, left him the small family estateof Long Calderwpod. We all know ofthe unhappy misunderstanding thatexisted between Dr. Hunter and hisMEDICAL SCIENCE.brother John. Dr. Baillie felt that heowed this bequest to the partiality ofhis uncle, and made it over to JohnHunter. The latter long refused, butinthe end, the family estate remainedthe property of the brother, and not ofthe nephew of Dr. Hunter." Dr.Baillie possessed two very great advantagesin his profession, an accurateknowledge of the structure of thehuman body, and a perfect distinctnessand arrangement in the art ofstatement; the first of these qualificationsbeing the more valuable, as, atthat time, few physicians were goodanatomists. His mode of examiningpatients had an appearance, at first,of haste and carelessness; but, saysMr. Bell, when he had to deliver hisopinion, and more especially when hehad to communicate with the family,there was a clearness in his statement,a reasonableness in all he said, and aconvincing simplicity in his manner,that had the most soothing and happyinfluence. His skill as a lecturer, andthe clearness and simplicity with whichhe delivered his lectures, were owing,in a great measure, to the instruction hereceived from his uncle ; who, accordingto the Gold-headed Cane, used toteach him in the following manner :Matthew, do you know anythingof to-day's lecture ?" demanded Dr.Hunter, of his nephew. " Yes, sir, Ihope I do." " Well, then, demonstrateto me." " I will go and fetch the preparation,sir." " Oh ! no, Matthew ;if you know the subject really, you willknow it whether the preparation beabsent or present."After his retirement from out-doorpractice, he would listen very patientlyto the details of all who consulted him ;but, in the early part of his professionalcareer, when engaged in his businessseventeen hours a day, he was not unfrequentlyput out of temper by thetedious loquacity of some of his patients.On one occasion, being sent forto attend a lady, whose illness did notprevent her from going to the operathe same evening, he was, with somedisgust, leaving her house, when shecalled him up stairs again, to inquirewhether, on her return from thetheatre, she might eat oysters. " Yes,ma'am," replied Baillie, "shells andall."In his will, he left 300 to the societyfor relief of widows and orphansof medical men ; and the whole of hislibrary to the College of Physicians,having previously given them thepresent alluded to in the followingparagraph, inserted in the annals ofthe college. " That our posterity,"said the president, " may know theextent of its obligation to the benefactorwhose death we all deplore, be itrecorded, that Dr. Baillie gave thewhole of his most valuable collection ofanatomical preparations to the college,and 600 tor the preservation of thesame; and this, too, after the exampleof the illustrious Harvey, in his lifetime."This present was made byBaillie in 1818, and the college addedthe same sum to it, making 1,200,which was called The Baillie Fund.To the rising generation of physicians,"concludes the above paragraph,"it may be useful to hold upfor an example his remarkable simplicityof heart, his strict and clearintegrity, his generosity, and that religiousprinciple by which his conductseemed always to be governed, as wellcalculated to secure to them the respectand good-will of their colleagues, andthe high estimation and confidence ofthe public. As another proof of therespect entertained for him by the Collegeof Physicians, it may be mentionedthat, at the last quarterly commissionbefore his death, on his entering theroom where they were assembled, inan evident state of ill health, businesswas instantly suspended, and all spontaneouslyrose, and remained standing,until he had taken his seat ; a complimentnever before paid to any memberof the college.Dr. Baillie's writings, though not few,were more valuable than voluminous.His principal work, entitled The MorbidAnatomy of the Human Body, waspublished in 1793, and was the chiefmeans of bringing him into practiceand note. This publication, to whichhe added an appendix in 1807, andillustrated with a series of engravingsin 1799, was thought so highly of byDr. Stammering, one of the most distinguishedanatomists of Germany, thathe translated it into his own language,and subjoined to it many new casesand copious notes. Dr. Baillie alsoSIR RICHARD CROFT.published An Anatomical Descriptionof the Gravid Uterus ; wrote two papersin the Philosophical Transactions,twelve in the Transactions of the Societyfor the Improvement of Medical andChirurgical Knowledge, and seven inthe Medical Transactions published bythe College of Physicians. He married,early in life, the second daughter ofDr. Penman, sister of the presentattorney-general, and was brother ofthe celebrated authoress, Joanna Baillie.In person, he was below the middlesize ; his countenance, though not prepossessing,was open and intelligent;and, to the last, he retained his Scotchdialect, which he was too proud of hisown country to attempt to alter. Hismanners and address were by no meansengaging or imposing to a casual observer; " but," says the author of theGold-headed Cane, "before he hadbeen in company with you for fiveminutes, he would have convinced youthat he was one of the most sensible,clear-headed physicians you had everlistened to."Notwithstanding his general amiabilityin his domestic circle, the multiplicityof his professional concerns wouldsometimes betray him into an irritability,of temper. He frequently,says one of his biographers, came tohis own table, after a day of fatigue,and held up his hands to the familycircle, eager to welcome him home,saying, "Don't speak tome;" and then,presently, after a glass of wine, andwhen the transitory cloud had clearedaway from his brow, with a smile ofaffection, he would look round andexclaim, " You may speak to menow !" As a physician, nis charactermay be summed up in the words heused to say to his own family : " Iknow better than others, perhaps,from my knowledge of anatomy, howto discover a disease; but-when I havedone so, I do not know better how tocure it."SIR RICHARD CROFT.SIR RICHARD CROFT, the son ofa poor baronet of ancient descent, wasborn on the 9th of January, 1762.After receiving an ordinary educationat an academy at Derby, he was placedunder the care of Mr. Chaucer, a surgeon,at Burton-on-Trent; whence,after the expiration of the term of hisapprenticeship, he removed to London.Having attended, for two or threeseasons, several courses of lectures atthe different hospitals, he went toTutbury, in Staffordshire, where he becamethe partner of his former master,and succeeded to the whole of hisbusiness, on Mr. Chaucer's returningto Burton-on-Trent. After remainingat Tutbury nearly five years, he settled,for a short time, at Oxford, in the expectationthat Sir Charles Nourse wasabout to retire from business in thatcity, and would afford him an opportunityof succeeding to his practice.Being mistaken in this idea, he proceededto London, and, a short timeafterwards, married a daughter of Dr.Penman, to whom he had obtaineda letter of introduction from his father-in-law'sbrother, Dr. Joseph Penman,while residing at Tutbury.A few months subsequent to thisevent, he, at the recommendation ofhis father-in-law, went to Paris, tosuperintend the accouchement of theDuchess of Devonshire ; his conduct,on which occasion, greatly increasedhis business on his return to London.From this time up to that of his attendanceon the Princess Charlotte, aperiod of nearly thirty years, he continuedto increase in fame and fortune,till he was considered the first accoucheurin the metropolis. After thefatal termination of the princess'sdelivery, the obloquy which it gaverise to, and the disappointment it occasionedhim, preyed upon his mindto such a degree, that, about threemonths subsequent to her death, aftercoming home from a labour of thesame lingering kind, he, in a fit oftemporary insanity, shot himself in hisbed-room.It was proved at the inquest, held onMEDICAL SCIENCE.his body, that, since the death of thePrincess Charlotte, he had never beenentirely free from fits of melancholyand abstraction ; and on Dr. Thackeray'sasking after one of his patients, hereplied, " That he would give fivehundred guineas if it were over, ratherthan have to attend her." On thenight of his suicide, lie exclaimed tohis servant, who complained of beingunwell, " What is your agitation comparedto mine ?" and, a few days before,he struck his forehead with muchviolence, in the presence Mr. Rolling,and abruptly said to him, " Good God !what will become of me?" His conduct,with reference to the princess,was much censured at the time ; butDr. Bailey confirmed the propriety ofit in every particular, and the royalfamily expressed their conviction of thesame, and endeavoured to soothe hisdespair at the result. He was a man offine feelings, of the most honourableprinciples, and the most generous disposition; and he was equally regrettedby the friends to whom he had endearedhimself by the quality of his heart, andthe patients to whom he had becomevaluable from the solicitude and skill hehad so successfully displayed in theirbehalf.JOHN ABERNETHY.JOHN ABERNETHY was born, accordingto some, at Derry, in Ireland,to others, at Abernethy, in Perthshire,about the year 1763-4. A fan early age,he accompanied his parents to London,who sent him to a day-school in Loth-buryj and, on his leaving it, apprenticedhim to Mr. (afterwards Sir Charles)Black, surgeon to St. Bartholomew'sHospital, under whom he pursued hisstudies with great assiduity. His eccentricitydeveloped itself at a very earlyperiod of his life ; and he is said to haveattended the medical lectures in thedress of a groom, which procured himthe appellation of " the ostler." At St.Bartholomew's Hospital he succeededMr. Pott, as assistant-surgeon, and gavelectures on anatomy and surgery ; shortlyafter which, he published two works,entitled, Surgical Observations, andLectures, explanatory of Mr. Hunter'sOpinion of the Vital Process." Aboutthe same time, he became professor ofanatomy to the corporation of surgeons; and, on the death of Sir CharlesBlack, was appointed surgeon to St.Bartholomew's Hospital. This situationhe filled with such zeal and ability,that the number of the students greatlyincreased, and the reputation of thehospital was much extended. His lectureson anatomy, surgery, and pathology,were esteemed superior tothose of any other practitioner; andhis successful operation of tying theexternal iliac artery, for aneurism, ofwhich he published an account, renderedhis own name famous in themedical world, and added to the creditof the English school of surgerythroughout Europe. He continued tohold his situation at the hospital tillwithin a few years of his death, whichtook place at Enfield, on the 30th ofApril, 1831 ; at which time he was oneof the court of assistants of the Collegeof Surgeons, and a curator of the museum;honorary member of the MedicalSocieties of Edinburgh, Paris, andPhiladelphia, and a F. R. S.Mr. Abernethy's first publication appearedin 1793, under the title of Surgicaland Philosophical Essays ; on aperusal of which, the author of thePursuits of Literature, characterized himas " a young surgeon from whom themedical art and natural science wouldhereafter receive great accessions." In1804, he published Surgical Observations,&c., of which a second part appearedin 1806, containing an accountof the diseases of the health in general,and of the digestive organs in particular;his great work of reference, inall such cases, commonly known asMy Book ! The whole, however, bothof his preceding and later workshave been published by Messrs. Long-manand Co., in six octavo volumes.1. On the Origin and Treatment ofLocal Diseases, and on Aneurisms,JOHN ABERNETHY.including directions for the treatment ofDisorders of the Digestive Organs ; 2.On Diseases resembling Syphilis, and onDiseases of the Urethra; 3. On Injuriesof the Head and MiscellaneousSubjects; 4. Lumbar Abscesses and"Tumours ; 5. Physiological Lectures ;and, 6, another volume of PhysiologicalLectures. He also wrote for Dr. Trees'sEncyclopaedia, the anatomical and physiologicalarticles, from the letter A to theword Canal ; of which, that on Arteryis considered the most importantIn person, Mr. Abernethy was of themiddle size, well made, though somewhatportly; slightly florid in complexion,with a high forehead, and mostintelligent eyes. In private life, hepossessed many amiable qualities; andwas equally beloved by his family, andesteemed by his friends. His skill inhis profession was founded on experienceand observation ; but he was somewhattoo bigotted in his notions and consequenttreatment of the stomach as themedium of a cure for all diseases. " Wehave seen," says the Medical Review,more than one instance where life was,in all human probability, sacrificed byan obstinate disregard of all examinationof the case, and a blind perseverancein one system of treatmenttotally inapplicable to the occasion."He was particularly inimical to thedivision of surgery into separate departments,such as jurist, oculist, &c.,which he contended were all necessaryto the education of a surgeon. As alecturer, he was familiar and colloquial,and had a degree of quaintness in hismanner, when communicating any thingamusing, which suited the attention ofhis hearers, whilst, at the same time,they could not refrain from laughing. Ithas been said of him, that he was aseccentric in his method of diet, as inhis mode of prescribing for others ; andthat, among other things, he used toeat Abernethy biscuits, which inducedthe public to purchase them, under thesupposition that he had invented them ;whereas the name they bear, is simplythat of the baker who first producedthem.Numberless are the anecdotes toldof his eccentricities, which disgusted somany patients, that Sir Astley Cooperused to say " Abernethy's mannerwas worth a thousand a year tohim." Some of his patients he wouldcut short with, " Sir, I have heardenough! you have heard of my book?"Yes." " Then go home and read it."To a lady, complaining of low spirits,he would say, " Don't come to me ;go and buy a skipping-rope;" and,to another, who said she felt a painin holding her arm over her head, hereplied, " then what a d d fool youmust be to hold it up!" He sometimes,however, met with his match ; andcutting a gentleman, one day, short,the patient suddenly locked the door,slipped the key into his pocket, andprotested he would be heard; whichso pleased Abernethy, that he not onlycomplied with the patient's wishes, butcomplimented him on the resolute mannerhe adopted. A young lady, witha waist of about ten inches in circumference,having asked his advice respectinga difficulty of respiration which shefelt, he thundered out, " Go, miss, intothe next room unlace your stays, andwalk a dozen times up and down theapartment." The young lady, terrifiedat his look, did as she was bidden ;went into the adjoining room, loosenedone or two ligatures of her stays, andwalked up and down the required numberof times. On re-appearing beforethe sage, he asked her, " how she felt ?"to which she faintly replied, " a littlebetter." " Only a little better! return,miss, to the room, unlace the remainderof your stays, and walk fourteen timesup and down, and come back to me."The young lady implicitly obeyed themandate ; and, on the question beingagain put to her, " how she felt?" sheanswered, " much relieved." " Nowonder you should feel relieved," rejoinedMr. A. ; " for, know, miss, in thatdiminutive space you confined six andthirty yards of guts; therefore, howcould you feel well?" Being calledupon by a gentleman, who had givenhim a fee of 20, to re-attend his wife,he exclaimed, " Are you the d d foolthat gave me 20 the other day ? Gohome, and tell your wife to dine earlier,eat less and do you keep your moneyin your pocket, for the advice of nodoctor is worth 20!" A lady, determinedto treat him after his own fashion,having, in some way, injured her thumb,on entering his room, merely thrust itout towards him, with " My thumb,MEDICAL SCIENCE.sir!" " You, madam," said he, " arethe only sensible woman I ever had forapatient." A barrister, one day, callingupon him with a badly ulcerated leg,uncovering it for his inspection, " Fall !"said he, " turning from him in disgust,shut it up, shut it up! that will do!I've seen enough ! shut it up !" Andafter advising him to read his book,received his fee which he was chagrinedto perceive was but a shilling; and,shewing it to the lawyer, the latterechoed his words with an arch look,Shut it up, shut it up! that will do !I've seen enough! shut it up!" leavingAbernethy not a little mortified at theresult of the visit. " What a head fullof disease!' 1 said he, one day, to afat gentleman, who complained of aweak stomach : " go down to the seaside,"was his advice, " with my bookin your pocket; take plenty of exercise,and don't stuff your guts somuch, and perhaps you may live threemonths longer." Meeting the samegentleman, in the Strand, some sixmonths after, he went up to him, andabruptly, it is said, accosted him with.Good God, sir ! are you aliveyet?" A lady, one day, calling onhim, he desired her to put out hertongue. " Have you a husband?"said he. " Yes," replied the patient.Then," answered Abernethy, " tellhim he will not have a wife this daysix months." Notwithstanding, however,this brutal mode of treating apatient, he, on many occasions, evinceda kindness and interest which endedin not only restoring them to health,but in his accompanying his advicewith a liberal present. A patient, whomhe had for some time visited, havingrequested to know the amount of hisdebt for professional aid and care, hesmiled, and said, " Who is that youngwoman?" " She is my wife." "Whatis your rank in the army ?" " I am ahalf-pay lieutenant." " Oh ! very well ;wait till you are a general, then comeand see me, and we'll talk about it."He never made any distinction betweena poor and a rich patient, but wasrather more attentive to the former ;and, on one occasion, gave great offenceto a certain peer, by refusing to seehim out of his turn. On entering hisapartment, the nobleman, having indignantlyasked Abernethy if he knewwho he was, stated his rank, name, &c.when Abernethy, it is said, replied, withthe most provoking sang froid, " AndI, sir, am John Abernethy, surgeon,lecturer of St. Bartholomew's Hospital,&c. and if you wish to consult me, I amnow ready to hear what you have tosay in your turn." The Duke of Whaving insisted on seeing him out ofhis usual hours, abruptly entered hisparlour, one day; he asked him howhe got into the room. " By the door,"was the reply. " Then," said Abernethy," I recommend you to makeyour exit by the same way." He issaid to have given another proof of hisindependence, by refusing to attendGeorge the Fourth until he had deliveredhis lecture at the hospital ; inconsequenceof which he lost a royalappointment.JOHN MASON GOOD.JOHN MASON GOOD, the son of aclergyman, was born at Epping, on the13th of February, 1766 ; and receivedhis education in his father's school, atWellingborough, in Hampshire. About1791, he was apprenticed to Mr. Johnson,a surgeon apothecary, at Gosport.where he taught himself Italian, and,by devoting an hour a day to fencingor cricket, rectified a curvature of thespine, which he had brought on throughintense application, when at school. Atthis period of his life, he never wentout without a common-place book inhis pocket, nor made a call where therewas a library, without making an extractfrom some of its volumes. Shortlyafter the commencement of his apprenticeship,he composed A Dictionary ofPoetic Endings; several small poems;and An abstracted View of the principalTropes and Figures of Rhetoric,in their Origin and Powers, illustratedby Examples, collected and original.JOHN MASON GOOD.So far, however, was he from neglectinghis professional studies, that withina year after the commencement of hisapprenticeship, during the illness ofhis master, he prepared medicines withoutany superintendence. On the deathof Mr. Johnson, he was placed, to servethe remainder of his time, with a surgeonat Havant.During his subsequent attendance atthe medical lectures in London, he becamea distinguished member of theSociety for the Promotion of NaturalPhilosophy, then existing among thestudents at Guy's Hospital; to whichhe communicated An Investigation ofthe Theory of Earthquakes; and severalother Essays. In August, 1784, he enteredinto partnership with Mr. Decks,at Sudbury ; and, though only twentyyears of age, gave such proofs of hisskill and ability, that, in a few months,he was suffered entirely to conduct thebusiness. In the following year, hemarried a Miss Godfrey; who, in sixmonths afterwards, died of consumption.He remained a widower until1788, when he became the husband ofMiss Penn, the daughter of a richbanker. In 1790, he became acquaintedwith Dr. Nathan Drake, author of TheGleaner, and Literary Hours; to whomhe wrote a very elegant poetical epistle,in 1791, at which time he was engagedin studying Hebrew ; " of which, saysDr. Gregory, " he soon acquired a clearand critical knowledge."About 1792, having become embarrassedin his circumstances, by the defaultof some friends, he was compelledto seek pecuniary assistance from hisfather-in-law, to pay a portion of hisdebts; from the residue of which, heresolved, if possible, to emancipate himselfby his literary exertions. With thisview, he made translations from the bestforeign writers, and composed severaloriginal works: among which were, atragedy, entitled Ethelbert; The Revolution,a comedy ; the Female Mirror,a didactic poem ; The Summer Recess,a poem, in three books ; and Ten Essayson Moral Philosophy ; for none ofwhich, however, he could procure anyremuneration. At length he became aregular contributor to one of the Londonreviews, and the World newspaper,to the readers of which he was knownby the denomination of the Rural Bard.In 1793, he became a member of theCollege of Surgeons, and entered intopartnership with a London practitionerof very extensive connexions; withwhom, however, he became involved insuch serious disputes, as brought abouta separation. The business havingproved unsuccessful, he now obtainedassistance again from Mr. Penn ; butnot to the full extent of his liabilities,which, by the most unremitting exertion,both literary and professional, hewas at length enabled to discharge.In 1794, he obtained a premium oftwenty guineas from Dr. Lettsom, forthe best dissertation on a question relativeto diseases in workhouses. Thiswas shortly after published, at the requestof the Medical Society ; of whichhe appears to have acted, for some time,as secretary. He was also a leadingmember of the General PharmaceuticAssociation, established in 1794, principallyfor the purpose of preserving thedistinction between the apothecary andthe druggist ; to further which object,he drew up, and published, in 1795,A History of Medicine, so far as it relatesto the Profession of the Apothecary,from the earliest Accounts to thepresent Time. In 1801, prior to whichyear he had found time to acquire aknowledge of the German, Spanish,Arabic, and Persian languages, advertingto the prosperous state of his business,he thus speaks of his literarylabours, in a letter to Dr. Drake : " Ihave edited the Critical Review, besideswriting several of its most elaboratearticles; I have, every week, supplieda column of matter for the SundayReview ; and have, some days, had thegreat weight of the British Press uponmy hands." Shortly after, he receiveda severe shock from the death of hisonly son, a youth of extraordinarytalents. On his tomb he placed an inscription,concluding with these lines :Early, bright, transient, chute, as morning dew.He sparkled, and exhaled, and went to Heaven.In 1805, he published his translationof Lucretius On the Nature of Things.Dr. Gregory observes of this work, thatit was composed in the streets ofLondon, during the translator's extensivewalks, to visit his numerous patients.His practice, continues thesame authority, " was to take in hisMEDICAL SCIENCE.pocket two or three leaves of an octavoedition of the original ; to read over apassage two or three times, as he walkedalong, until he had engraved it uponhis memory ; then to translate thepassage, meditate upon his translation,correct and elaborate it, until he hadsatisfied himself. In the same mannerwould he proceed with a second, third,and fourth passage and after he hadreturned home, and disposed of all hisprofessional business, he would go tohis standing desk, and enter upon hismanuscript so much of the translationas he had been able to prepare satisfactorily."From 1803 up to 1812, in conjunctionwith Dr. Gregory and Mr. NewtonBosworth, he devoted great part of histime to the composition of the Apologia,or Universal Dictionary of Arts,Sciences, and Words, a work published,in 1813, in twelve volumes, octavo. Inthe autumn of 1810, and the winters ofthe two following years, he delivered aseries of lectures at the Surrey Institution,which were published, in 1826,On the Nature of the Material World,of the Animate World, and of theMind.His next employment appears to havebeen on The British Review, thenunder the direction of Mr. Roberts,author of the Looker-on, with whomhe was particularly intimate. In 1820,he received a diploma of M. D. fromAberdeen, and became an honorarymember of the Medical and ChirurgicalSociety, in that city. About six monthsafter, in a letter to Dr. Drake, alludingto his success as a physician, he says,I wish I had commenced earlier, for ithas succeeded beyond my best expectations.You will be surprised to learn,that almost the first patient I had, onentering my new department, was SirGilbert Blame, who paid me this compliment,as I feel it to be, from merefriendship."About this period, he published APhysiological System of Nosology, witha corrected and simplified Nomenclature; and, in 1822, The Study ofMedicine, in four volumes, octavo. Thelatter production proved remarkablysuccessful; it was eulogized by SirHenry Halford, Dr. Bailie, and all theprincipal physicians of Great Britain ;by Drs. Hosack and Francis, of NewYork ; and by several eminent men onthe continent. In the Medico-chirurgicalReview, it was pronounced " beyondall comparison, the best work ofthe kind in the English language;"and, in the Edinburgh Medical Journal,the most comprehensive and correctview of medical knowledge extant"During the last seven years of Dr.Good's life, his health, though it hadpreviously been remarkably good, graduallydeclined ; a fact attributed, byDr. Gregory, to the too sudden changeof his habits in ceasing to visit hispatients on foot. This, added to hisincessant application, professional andliterary, produced great mental as wellas bodily depression. In 1826, he observed,in a letter to Dr. Walton, " Ihave trifled with time too much already ;it is high time to awake and be sober,and prepare to leave it for eternity."In the following December, althoughin a state of great debility, he insistedon paying a visit to his daughter, Mrs.Nealee, at Clipperton, in whose househe died, of an inflammation of thebladder, on the 2nd of January, 1827.The character of Dr. Good wasamiable in the extreme ; " the mainingredients in it," says Dr. Gregory,were cheerfulness, activity, frankness,acuteness of intellect, and kindness ofheart." Suavity and hilarity markedhis ordinary deportment, and he engagedin conversation with a vivacityand buoyancy of spirits that made hissociety no less enlivening than entertainingand instructive. Notwithstandinghis great classical attainments, heseldom introduced into his discourse aquotation from foreign languages, although,in addition to those alreadymentioned, he had made some progressin the Russian, Sanscrit, and Chinese.Until near the close of his life, his incessantoccupations never produced inhim a weariness either of mind or body ;the transition from one pursuit toanother being a sufficient relief to both.It was one of his remarks, that hecould pass to five or six distinct topicsof interesting research within the compassof twelve hours, and enter uponeach with as much freshness and vigouras though he had just arisen from agood night's sleep. He made it a rulealways to be doing something, whetherwalking or riding, night or day ; andSIR HENRY Afford.thus, while travelling, he would oftenamuse himself with the design andcompletion of a whole poem. Anotherpeculiarity in his character, was hislove of method and arrangement, whichwas equally visible in his wardrobe,accounts, books, papers, and manuscripts.After his death, several packetswere found, all bearing superscriptionsindicating the contents of them, and thedegree of attention required, and of theimportance attached to each.In domestic life, his affection andsolicitude for those around him wasaccompanied by a simplicity and condescensionthat made him the idol ofhis home. To all children, and hisown in particular, his treatment wasmost kind and endearing: he delightedto talk with and instruct them ; and,to promote their health and amusement,would often spend a considerable portionof his time in teaching them toplay at battledore, or some other activegame. " During my intimacy withhim, " observes Mr. Roberts, editor ofthe British Review, " he was alwaysbusily engaged in some intellectual oractive employments for the benefit ofhumanity, without neglecting any of thehourly calls upon his friendship, hisfeeling, and his courtesy. I hardlybelieve there has existed the personwho, in the midst of studies so severe,has maintained so kind a temper, andso constant a good nature."The leading faculty of Dr. Good'sintellectual character, was that of acquisition,and what he once knew henever forgot. As a lecturer, he wascalm, luminous, and impressive ; hekept his eyes almost constantly on hisauditors, and always amplified or repeateda sentence, whenever one amongthem did not seem fully to comprehendits meaning.In addition to his works alreadymentioned, he was the author of anEssay on Medical Technology, publishedin the Transactions of the MedicalSociety, which procured him theFothergillian medal ; Memoirs of Dr.Gentes ; and Translations of the Psalms,the Proverbs, the Song of Solomon, andthe Book of Job, which obtained forhim an eminent station among Hebrewscholars, and high reputation both as apoet and biblical critic.He was deeply imbued with a devotionalspirit, which he carried withhim into all the transactions of life.For the use of himself and his family,he drew up several essays and forms ofprayer, which were found, after hisdeath, in a bundle of manuscripts superscribed" occasional thoughts." " Whenprescribing for his patients," says one ofhis biographers, " he was in the habitof praying for divine direction ; on administeringa medicine himself he wasoften known to utter a short ejaculatoryprayer ; and in cases where a fatal issuewas inevitable, he most scrupulouslyavoided the cruel delusion too commonon such occasions, but, with the utmostdelicacy of feeling, announced his apprehensions."He was an active memberof the Church Missionary Society ;the committee of which, after his death,sent his widow a resolution, expressiveof their sorrow at the heavy loss theyhad sustained by his decease.SIR HENRY Afford.THIS distinguished physician is theson of Dr. Vaughan, a physician at Leicester,and was born in that city at thelatter end of the year 1766. He commencedhis education at Rugby School,whence he removed, in 1783, to ChristchurchCollege, Oxford, where he tookhis medical degrees in succession, andobtained a fellowship about eleven yearsafter his entrance into the university.Having chosen the profession of medicine,he commenced the study of physicat Edinburgh, where he passed twoyears, and afterwards attended the hospitalsin London, where he entered intopractice in 1793. About the same timehe married the Honourable Miss F. St.John; an alliance which, in conjunctionwith his own abilities, introduced him toextensive and fashionable employment.He was shortly afterwards appointedphysician extraordinary to George the4o2MEDICAL SCIENCE.Third, and created a baronet, prior towhich be had been elected a fellow ofthe College of Physicians in London.During the long illness of his royalpatient, to whom he became physicianin ordinary, Sir Henry distinguishedhimself by his unremitting care andattention, and attracted the regard ofthe Prince of Wales, who generallyselected him as his medical adviser.In 1820, the subject of our memoirwas chosen president of the Royal Collegeof Physicians, a situation he stillretains as well as that of physician inordinary to their present majesties ;which appointment he had also heldunder George the Fourth. Sir Henry,who changed his name to Halford, onsucceeding to some family estates, doesnot appear to have published more thantwo works Oratio Harveiana Habita,1800, quarto; and An Account of whatappeared on opening the Coffin of KingCharles the First, in St. George'sChapel, at Windsor, 1813, quarto. Thefirst of these evinces considerable classicallearning; and shows, says theAuthor of Public Characters, " that itsauthor did not walk idly in the academicshades of Oxford." In addition to theworks mentioned, Sir Henry contributeda few papers to the Medical Transactions,and to those of the College ofPhysicians.Sir Henry Halford is not only anable physician, but, as a man of generalscience, takes a very high stand in hisprofession. " His treatment," says theauthority before cited, " is founded ongeneral principles, and he is well acquaintedwith the agents employed inmedicine, arid with the art of proportioningthem to the exigency of thecase." No man is more generally employedin the circles of rank and fashionthan Sir Henry ; and such is the extentof his practice, that he is said to realizeby it nearly ,30,000 per annum. Heis the brother of the present Mr. BaronVaughan, and both in his professionaland private character is much esteemedand respected. In addition to his otherdistinctions, he is a fellow of the Royaland Antiquarian Societies.SAMUEL Merrimac.THIS eminent metropolitan physician,the son of a writer on political economy,was born at Marlborough, in Wiltshire,on the 25th of October, 1771. He receivedhis education at the free-schoolof that town ; and on the death of hisfather, whom he lost at an early age,commenced the study of medicine underhis uncle, who attended, during his life,at nearly twelve thousand labours.Under his instructions, the subject ofour memoir rapidly obtained a knowledgeof his profession, and, in 1800,succeeded to the business of his relation.About this time he married his cousin ;and in 1807, he ceased to act as anapothecary, and confined himself tothe practice of midwifery, in which hesoon became eminent. In 1808, he procureda diploma from Marischal College,Aberdeen, on which occasion his testimonialswere signed by Sir Henry Halford,Dr. Baillie, &c. ; and in the Septemberof the same year, he was electedphysician-accoucheur to the WestminsterGeneral Dispensary, after a sharpcontest with Dr. Clough. In 1809, hewas unanimously appointed to succeedDr. Poignard in the same situation, atthe Middlesex Hospital, where he gavelectures on midwifery, and on thediseases of women and children, whichwere very numerously attended.Dr. Merrimac is not only celebratedas one of the first accoucheurs of theday, but has also written several valuableworks, principally relative to theobstetric art. His first publication appearedin 1805, entitled, Observationson some late Attempts to depreciatethe Value and Efficacy of Vaccine Inoculation,octavo ; which has been succeededby the following : A Dissertationon the Retroversion of the Womb,including some Observations on Extra-uterineGestation, octavo, 1810 ; A Synopsisof the various kinds of DifficultParturition, with Practical Remarks onthe Management of Labours, 12mo.1814; a most excellent work, whichTHOMAS Bateman.has gone through several editions, andbeen translated into the French, German,and Italian languages ; and Underwood'sTreatise on the Diseases ofChildren, revised, with notes and observations,octavo, 1827.Dr. Merrimac is also the author ofseveral papers inserted in various scientificjournals and transactions ; and is aF. L. S., and a fellow of the Imperialand Royal Academy of Sciences atSiena.THOMAS BATEMAN.THOMAS BATEMAN was born atWhitby, in Yorkshire, on the 29th ofApril, 1778. When four years of age,he was placed under the care of a dissentingclergyman, and made greatprogress in his studies ; although heappeared so silent and indolent at home,that his father used to say, " he wouldnever be good for any thing." About1790, he removed to an academy atThornton ; where he not only acquiredgreat classical knowledge, but madehimself acquainted with the elementsof botany, astronomy, and electricity ;cultivating, at the same time, as amusements,music and drawing. Beforeleaving school, he had constructed, withimperfect tools, a planetarium, and anelectrical machine, and completed anextensive hortus siccus.In 1794, he was apprenticed to anapothecary, at Whitby, with whom hecontinued three years ; adding, in thattime, to his pharmaceutic studies, thoseof the French language, mathematics,and mineralogy. In 1797, he went toLondon, and entered himself as physician'spupil at St. George's Hospital,where he attended the lectures of Dr.Bui Hie ; which, together with a winter'sanatomical practice, " strengthened,"says one of his biographers, " the bentof his talent for accurate observation,and of the character he afterwards displayedfor taking practical views." In1798, he went to Edinburgh ; whereafterhaving acted as clinical clerk atthe infirmary, and one of the presidentsof the Royal Medical Society, he tookhis degree of M. D. in 1801 ; the subjectof his inaugural thesis being entitled,Haemorrhage Petechialis.Proceeding to London shortly after,he became pupil to Dr. Willan, at thePublic Dispensary ; where, after havingacted, for a short time, as assistantphysician, he succeeded Dr. Dimsdale,in 1804. About the same time, he wasappointed-physician to the Fever Institution;and, in 1805, he was admitteda licentiate of the College of Physicians;but, notwithstanding his laboriousexertions to arrive at eminence, he derivedbut little emolument from hisprofession till 1811, when his practiceand reputation suddenly and considerablyincreased. He was principallycelebrated, as a practitioner and author,for his skill in cutaneous diseases ; inall questions relating to which, " he became,"says his biographer, " the principalauthority : a distinction which,"it is added, " was well confirmed by theappearance of his Synopsis, in 1813."This publication was succeeded by oneentitled, Delineations of the CutaneousDiseases, with seventy coloured plates,partly from the pencil of Dr. Willan ;a work which has been characterizedas one of essential importance in facilitatingthe acquisition of a readydiagnostic tact. The Synopsis was,shortly after its appearance, translatedinto the German, French, and .Italianlanguages ; and both that, and theDelineations, were requested, as a present,by the Emperor of Russia; who,in return, sent Dr. Bateman a ring ofthe value of one hundred guineas, anda desire that all his future works shouldbe transmitted to St. Petersburg.In the spring of 1815, he was attackedby an illness, arising from aderangement of the functions of thedigestive organs; from the effects ofwhich he never afterwards recovered.After taking several journeys into thenorth, in the hope of deriving somebenefit from travelling, he returned inastate of increased debility ; his sightbecame affected ; and, in 1817, failedso rapidly, that, by the advice of Dr.MEDICAL SCIENCE.Pearson, he had recourse to mercury ;but the distressing train of symptomswhich ensued, and of which he publishedan account in the Medico Chi -surgical Transactions, soon compelledhim to relinquish it. He was now entreatedto retire into the country, andtry the effect of mental rest, and acomplete cessation from reading andwriting; but an epidemic fever havingbroken out in London, he insisted onrecommencing his attendance at theFever Institution ; where, for the spaceof six months, he had, on an average,seven hundred patients. His exertions,added to his former ill state of health,reduced him to such a state of debility,that he resigned his office of physicianto the institution, on the abatement ofthe epidemic, of which he shortly afterwardspublished an able account. Aboutthe same time, he collected his Reportson the Edinburgh Medical and SurgicalJournal, into one volume, to whichhe prefixed an historical and interestingsketch of the state of health in London,during the eighteenth century.In the summer of 1819, while on hisway to Whitby, a further attack of illnessdetermined him to retire from thePublic Dispensary, and to pass theremainder of his life in Yorkshire, asfree from business as possible. Onreceiving his resignation, the committeepresented him with a handsome pieceof plate, and nominated him a lifegovernor, and consulting physician ;which latter office he declined, in consequenceof the distance he residedfrom London. Towards the winter of1819, he slightly improved in his health;but, on the approach of spring, in thefollowing year, he became so weak,that he was apprehensive the mereexertion of walking across the room,would prove fatal to him ; and, on the9th of April, 1820, he expired.The character of Dr. Bateman, bothprivate and professional, is said to havebeen marked by strict morality, andunimpeachable integrity : he has, however,been charged with dissipation,and a leaning towards the doctrines ofmaterialism. At the commencementof his illness, in 1815, he exclaimed,in a paroxysm of pain, to a friend whoattended him, " All these sufferings areajust punishment for my long scepticism,and neglect of God and religion !"A conversation ensued, in which hewas absurd enough to attribute his scepticalnotions to the natural tendency ofsome of his professional studies. Sometimeafter, he said, in allusion to thefirst of Scott's Essays on some of themost Important Subjects in Religion,which had been read to him by a friend,"This is demonstration! completedemonstration !" During the latter partof his life, he devoted the greater portionof his time to religious meditationand discourse, and died, it is said, a mostsincere Christian.Although endowed with extremesensibility, and the warmest affections,his deportment to strangers was coldand forbidding : his language to allwas simple, direct, and, without considerationor consciousness, the exactecho of his heart. On one occasion,he peremptorily refused to prolong apleasant visit, because, as he said, to acompanion, he had promised he wouldbe at home at twelve o'clock, and couldnot break his word even to a chambermaid.Besides the publications alreadymentioned, Dr. Bateman was the author(with two exceptions) of the medicalarticles in Trees's Encyclopaedia, from theletter C inclusive. Though he wrotewith such ease and fluency, that, to usehis own words, when he began, he consideredhis labour done, his compositionswere preceded by the most indefatigableand extensive research : asan instance of which, he relates, thatto prepare for the single article, Imagination,he read the greater part of oneand twenty volumes. " It would behardly too much to say," observes hisbiographer, in the Gentleman's Magazine," that he never wasted a minute."Even while dinner was being placedupon the table, he always had a pen inhis hand, or executed a passage on theorgan. To this instrument he wasso much attached, that, although heseldom discontinued his studies untiltwo or three o'clock in the morning, hewould generally play upon it for anhour, before he retired to restNo physician, it is said, ever diedmore generally esteemed, both by hisprivate friends, and his medical contemporaries.He was mentioned by oneas a pattern of sterling moral worth;another said, that the more he knew,RICHARD POWELL.the more did he respect him for hisintegrity and understanding ; and athird declared, that, in him, the facultyhad lost more perspicuity, judgment,greater extent of learning, and morepractical familiarity with disease, thanwere combined in any other man whomhe had ever known.RICHARD POWELL.THE subject of this memoir, the sonof a tradesman at Oxford, was bornthere some time in the year 1782. Hecommenced his education at Winchester,whence he removed to one of the twogreat universities, with the intention ofqualifying himself for the church.Having, however, altered his mind infavour of medicine, he commenced thenecessary course of study, and afterhaving taken his degree of M. D. cameto London, and entered himself a pupilat St. Bartholomew's Hospital. Here hemade such progress in his profession,and gave such proofs of his practicaland theoretical knowledge, that on theresignation of Dr. Nathan, he waschosen to succeed him as physician tothe institution. He immediately followedup the appointment by a courseof lectures on pathology, chemistry, andpharmacy ; but notwithstanding hisefforts to form a class of medical pupils,he was unsuccessful, and, at length,resigned the lectureship to Dr. Hue.Having been admitted a fellow of theRoyal College of Physicians in London,and constituted a censor, Dr. Powellset on foot an inquiry into the state ofmedicine within his jurisdiction, andattempted the correction of many abusesin the college ; in which he partly succeeded,although he met with repeatedand obstinate opposition. His principallabours, however, were relative to thepharmacopoeia of his college, which, inconsequenceof the numerous improvementsintroduced into medicine, sincethe last revision, made, in his opinion,a new edition of the work necessary. Heaccordingly undertook the task, which,with the assistance of Dr. Maton, andafter much difficulty, he accomplished.On its completion, Dr. Powell was appointedto publish a translation of thework, by way of recompense for histrouble in compiling the Latin edition,which appeared in 1809, on the sameday with the translation. The latter,in consequence of the haste with whichit had been done, contained no lessthan one hundred and fifty errors,which caused it to be censured by allthe medical reviews. A corrected editionsubsequently was published, butstill containing so many chemical errors,that it became the subject of censure fromthe pen of Mr. Phillips, an experiencedmetropolitan chemist. In 1815, thirdedition appeared, in which many of theobjections to which it was before liable,have been removed.Dr. Powell was, in 1823, secretary tothe commissioners for regulating mad-houses,and " he has afforded," says theauthor of Public Characters, " muchuseful and interesting information tothe world on that distressing mentalmalady, mania." He has also distinguishedhimself by his services to theinstitution for the encouragement ofarts, manufactures, and commerce, ofwhich he became a vice-president. Hehas published several papers in theMedical Transactions, of which themost important is one giving an accountof a case of hydrophobia, whichcame under his superintendence at St.Bartholomew's Hospital, and which excitedgreat interest at the time in themedical world. Dr. Powell is not onlyspoken of as an able and scientific physician,but also as an excellent Greekand Latin classic.MEDICAL SCIENCE.ROBERT GOOCH.ROBERT GOOCH, the son of anaval officer, was born at Yarmouth, inNorfolk, in June, 1784. After havingreceived the rudiments of education ata day school, he was placed, about theyear 1799, with Mr. Barrett, a surgeonand apothecary, in his native town ;and, shortly afterwards, taught himselfLatin. He thus describes how he usedto pass a portion of his time, duringthe early part of his apprenticeship :When I had nothing else to do, nopills to roll nor mixtures to compose, 1used, by the advice of my master, to goup into my bed-room, and there, withCheselden before me, learn the anatomyof the bones, by the aid of some looseones, together with a whole articulatedskeleton." This, which hung up in abox at the foot of his bed, was, for sometime,such an object of alarm, that, onenight, he fancied it came out of its caseand approached him. " I tried," hesays, " to think of something else, butinvain. I shut my eyes, and began toforget myself, when, whether 1 wasawake or asleep, or between both, Icannot tell, but suddenly I felt twobony hands grasp my ancles, and pullme down the bed : if it had been real,it could not have been more distinct."He is said, about this time, to have derivedgreat benefit from a manuscriptcopy of the lectures of Astley Cooper,and to have had his reasoning powersmuch strengthened by reading and discussionwith a blind gentleman, namedHarley, to whom, at his death, he left100 as a token of his gratitude andesteem.In 1804, he went to Edinburgh,where he pursued his medical studieswith great assiduity ; attended theRoyal Infirmary ; and became a memberof the Medical and SpeculativeSocieties. Though shy and reservedin company, he took an active part inthe debates of his fellow-students ;and, " on one occasion," it is said,when a medical coxcomb had writtena paper as full of pretension as it wasvoid of merit, so severely handled him,that the writer burst into tears andleft the meeting." During the periodallowed by the vacations, at Edinburgh,he passed the principal part of his timeat Yarmouth, where ne became attachedto a Miss Bolingbroke, whom he subsequentlymarried.In June, 1807, he took his degree ofM. D., and, after making a tour inthe Highlands, proceeded to London,where he became a pupil of AstleyCooper, and passed the winter in dissecting.In 1808, he entered intopartnership with a Mr. James, ofCroydon, and persuaded some of hisfriends to establish the London MedicalReview, to which, during its existenceof five years, he became a principalcontributor. Shortly after the death ofhis wife, which appears to have occurredin 1811, he removed fromCroydon to the city of London, wherehe soon obtained an extensive andlucrative practice as an accoucheur;chiefly, it is said, owing to the strongrecommendations of Mr. Young, Dr.Barrington, and Sir William Knightonon ;the latter of whom, in all matters ofimportance, he was accustomed to consult.In 1812, he became physician tothe Westminster Lying-in Hospital,and joint lecturer at St. Bartholomew's,with Dr. Thynne, on whose decease,which shortly afterwards took place,the whole profits derivable from theoffice devolved on Dr. Gooch. " Youwill be glad to hear," he says, aboutthis time, in a letter to a friend, " thatpractice is coming in upon me, in away and with a rapidity which surprisesme ; if its after progress is at all proportionateto its commencement (ofwhich I feel no doubt), it will sooncarry me out of the reach of pecuniarycares."In 1814, he married the sister of Mr.Travers ; observing, as a reason for nolonger delaying a second union, " Losttime is lost happiness: the years ofman are threescore and ten ; themonths, therefore, eight hundred andforty ; about three hundred and sixtyof my share are already gone, howmany have I to spare ?" Although, atROBERT GOOCH.this time, his practice and reputationwere equally on the increase, it was nottill eighteen months afterwards that hebegan to lose the fear of being overtakenby poverty ; which, combinedwith the anxiety attendant on his officeas lecturer, had an injurious effectupon his health. In 1816, taking advantageof the superabundance of SirWilliam Knightonon's practice at the westend of the town, he, at the suggestionof that gentleman, removed to Berne'sStreet, where he carried on his professionallabours with still greater successthan he had in the city. Amongother patients to whom he was introducedby Sir William Knightonon, wasthe Marquess Wellesley ; during avisit to whom, at Ramsgate, he wastaken alarmingly ill, and was treatedwith great kindness and regard by thatnobleman, who sent one of his ownservants to London with him. Afterhis recovery, his business became stillmore extensive. " In my profession,"he observes in a letter to a friend, abouttwo years after, " I am striding on witha rapidity which I had no right to expectat my age and standing. This isthe happiest time of my life: my homeis delightful to me ; my station satisfactory,whether I regard what is doingfor me, or what I am doing for others;my pecuniary cares gone ; my prospectsbright ; and, I may add, as certain asany thing can be, that is, if I live andpreserve my health ; but there's therub, that troubles me more than ever."In 1802, he was severely afflicted bythe death of his eldest son : for sometimehe could talk on no other subject ;and one night he went to rest, prayingthat the apparition of his boy wouldappear, and satisfy the doubts by whichhe had been harassed, respecting hisfuture state. Soon after, his practicehaving become restricted, owing to hisbad state of health, he began to devotemuch of his time to theological literatureand religious meditation. In 1822,he visited Paris ; but the excursion gavehim no pleasure, and only served to increasethe melancholy it was intendedto dispel. " I am an old man," hethus wrote in reference to the journey ;with me, the bloom is off the plum;there is nothing in life which can affordme lively pleasure, except for a moment,but the pleasures I have found aroundmy fire-side." He no longer receivedany delight from literary pursuits;seldom read a book ; and, except for ashort time, had scarcely patience toconverse with any but his most intimatefriends. In 1824, after making a tourinto Wales, he passed a few weeks inNorfolk, and finding, on his return toLondon, the subject of altering thequarantine laws in agitation, he wrotean article on the contagious nature ofthe plague, which appeared in theQuarterly Review, for December, 1825.The occupation seems to have arousedhim from his gloom ; and, in a letter tohis friend Southey, he announced, invehement language, his intention ofproducing a paper in opposition to " aset of half educated, wrong-headedmedical adventurers, trying to persuadethe government that the plague is notcontagious."Towards the close of 1825, he againvisited the continent; from which, however,he returned, in so weak a state,that he was compelled to relinquish hispractice in midwifery, and confine himselfto that of prescription. In April,1S26, he became, through the influenceof Sir William Knightonon, librarian tothe king. This appointment he wasglad to accept, as he began to fear hiscontinued illness would oblige him toresign his profession altogether. AtMalvern, however, where he passed thesummer of the same year, he was somuch invigorated, that he returned totown, able to employ himself activelyin business, and in the composition of awork on the diseases peculiar to women,which he published in 1829. Hisbodily powers, soon after, began todecay with great rapidity. " He became,"says one of his biographers, " aliving skeleton ; and so helpless, that hewas fed like an infant ; once or twicehe grew delirious, for a few minutes,and the consciousness that he was so,distressed him greatly." His mentalenergies he retained to the last ; and issaid to have written a paper on anatomy,since inserted in the QuarterlyReview, only a week or two before hisdeath, which took place, after muchsuffering, on the 16th of February,1830.In person, he was short and thin ;in features, handsome; in the expressionof his countenance, melancholy,MEDICAL SCIENCE.but intelligent ; and, in deportment,tranquil and impressive. His prepossessingmanners, his high reputationfor skill, and the evident kindness ofhis heart, rarely failed, it is said, toprocure him the attachment and confidenceof his patients. By most of hismedical contemporaries he was equallyesteemed and admired. His treatiseon the diseases peculiar to women isdescribed as being the most valuablework on the subject, in any language;"and that portion of it which relates topuerperal fever, and puerperal madness,as being, " probably, the most importantadditions to practical medicine of thepresent age."JOSEPH CONSTANTINE Carle.JOSEPH CONSTANTINE carle,after having completed his medicaleducation, was appointed surgeon tothe York Hospital, at Chelsea, for thecure of contraction of the limbs, whichsituation he held for a short time ; andon his resignation of it, went abroadfor further improvement in his profession.He returned to England andcommenced practice in London, wherein1801, he published a Descriptionof the Muscles of the Human Bony asthey appear on Dissection. In the followingyear, he published An Introductionto Electricity, and Galvanism,having previously made several experimentsin the latter branch ofscience, which he warmly patronisedon its first introduction into England.He was also a great advocate for thevaccine inoculation, and was appointedone of the fascinating surgeons of theNational Vaccine Institution. He hasalso distinguished himself by introducinginto this country the operationperformed in India for making a falsenose; and, in 1816, published An Accountof Two Successful Operations ofRestoring a Lost Nose from the Integumentsof the Forehead, performed byhimself. In 1819, he published hisHistory of the High Operation for theStone, by incision above the Pubis, andan Account of the Various Methods ofLithotomy, from the Earliest Perioddown to the Present Time. He wasvery anxious to bring the high operationinto practice, having witnessed theperformance of it at Paris with greatsuccess. After the publication of thkwork, Mr. Carpue directed his attentionto cutaneous diseases ; for the cure ofwhich he endeavoured to establish ahospital; and has, for many years, continuedactively to employ himself inthe accumulation of scientific and professionalknowledge.APPENDIX.THE ARMY.GUEST, (JOSHUA,) born in 1660,was the defender of Edinburgh Castle in1745, when the rebels took possession ofthe Scotch metropolis. He held thecommand of the castle at a seasonwhich threatened danger to the houseof Hanover, and has acquired a namelessfrom his own merits than the fearsof his fellow-countrymen ; for it wasno great exploit to maintain a fortressagainst an Highland army unprovidedwith artillery. He seems to have beena timid man ; for when General Preston,the deputy-governor, wished to disperse,by cannon, the crowd who had assembledto hear the Pretender's proclamation,General Guest said it would bedamaging the good subjects of the city,and his own friends would suffer by it.Preston, however, disregarded this cautiousreasoning, and ordered a cannonto be fired, which drove down the sideof a house that served as a shelter tothe rebels, and they instantly retiredto a safer distance. Guest's vigilancewas, however, incessant; for, during thesiege, he never retired to rest until sixo'clock in the morning, when he wasrelieved by General Preston, nearly asaged as himself. He made a sally fromthe castle, and seized about two thousandloaves, which were to have beensent after the rebels, who had with themonly four days' provision. As a proofof his honesty, it is said that he wasoffered 200,000 by the Pretender, tohave surrendered the castle, which contained,at the time, riches to the amountof one million and an half. In thesummer of 1746 he visited London,and being very infirm, arrived at hislodgings in Brook Street, in a horselitter. He soon after waited on theking, who received him and conversedwith him very graciously. After a serviceof sixty years, he died on the 14thof October, 1747, and was buried inWestminster Abbey, where a monument,in the south aisle, records hisgallant " defence of Edinburgh Castle.HAMILTON, (GEORGE, Earl ofOrkney,) fourth son of the Duke ofHamilton, was born about 1666. Hegave early proofs of a martial spirit, andwas bred up to the military professionunder his uncle, the Earl of Dumbarton.In the battles of Boyne,Aghrim, Steenkirk, and Landed, andat the sieges of Alone, Limerick, andNamur, he displayed such undauntedgallantry, that William presented himwith a regiment ; appointed him a ; and created him anIrish earl. He successively was promotedto the rank of lieutenant-general,invested with the order of the Thistle,elected one of the sixteen Scotch peersin the British parliament of 1708,and sworn a privy-counsellor. In theFlemish campaign of 1712, he servedunder the Duke of Ormond; and, in1714, was appointed gentleman of thebedchamber to George the First, andgovernor of Virginia. George the Secondpromoted him to the rank of field-marshal,and intrusted him with the governorshipof Edinburgh Castle. By adaughter of Sir Edward Villiers, he leftheiresses; and it is a remarkable fact,that the title, up to the present time,has been borne by none but females.The earl died on the 29th of January,1737. In the quaint language of acontemporary memorialist, " he was avery well-shaped black man ; was brave;but by reason of a hesitation in hisspeech, wanted expression." Dean Swiftcalls him " an honest, good-naturedgentleman, who hath much distinguishedhimself as a soldier."WILLS, (Sir CHARLES,) was bornabout 1670 ; in IJ05, he served, as ,under the Earl of Peterborough,in Spain, where he was oneof the council of war who thought thecapture of Barcelona impracticable. AtSt. Istevan de Litera, at the head of asmall detachment, he repulsed the Chevalierd'Asfeldt, who had attacked him4(52APPENDIX.with nine squadrons of horse, and asmany battalions of infantry. The troopson both sides fought with the mostdesperate courage, keeping up theirfire until the muzzles of their piecesmet, and then charging each other atthe point of the bayonet. Four hundredof the enemy were left dead onthe field. In 1715, being then a major-general,he held a command in thenorth of England at the time of therebellion. When Forster took possessionof Preston, Wills marched againstthat town with six regiments of horse,and one battalion of foot ; and had advancedto the bridge of Kibble, beforethe rebels were aware of his approach.They then began to raise barricades,and prepared for a defence. On the12th of November, Wills made avigorous attack upon the town in twodifferent places, but was repulsed withvery considerable loss. The next day,General Carpenter having arrived witha body of troops, assumed the chiefcommand, and the rebels soon aftersurrendered. In 1716, General Willswas appointed colonel of the thirdregiment of foot ; in 1726, colonel ofthe first regiment of foot guards ; and,in 1739, was promoted to the rank ofgeneral of foot, and field-marshal. Hewas also a knight of the Bath ; of the ordnance ; andsat in parliament for Witness, from1713 until the time of his death, whichtook place on the 25th of December,1741.VAN KEPPEL, (ARNOLD Roost,Earl of Albemarle,) son of a Dutchnoble, was born in 1670, and came overto England as a page of honour toWilliam, who made him one of thegrooms of the bedchamber ; master ofthe robes ; and subsequently createdhim, for his courage and fidelity in thearmy, Baron Ash ford, Viscount Bury,and Earl of Albemarle in Normandy.He was a major-general before 1697,and in that year was employed in thecamp at Propelled. Jn the year following,he was appointed colonel ofthe first troop of horse guards ; and introducedthe Polish envoy to Williamat Loo, which seat the king afterwardspresented to him. He was soon afterinstalled a knight of the Garter, andseemed to have engrossed the royalfavour so entirely, that he disposed ofevery thing that was in the king'spower. On the death of the king, whohad bequeathed to him two hundredthousand guilders, he retired to hisnative country, where he took his seatas a member of the nobility in the assemblyof the states general, and wasappointed general of the Dutch forces.In 1705, he paid a visit to England;and, attending the queen to Cambridge,received the honorary degree of doctorof laws : soon after which he returnedagain to Holland ; and having left theHague to join the army under Avershe was at the forcing of theFrench lines near Tirlemont. He alsobore a part in the battles of Ramilliesand Oudenarde ; and, at the siege ofLisle, was despatched, by the Duke ofMarlborough, with thirty squadrons, tocover a convoy of ammunition, whichthe enemy were endeavouring to intercept;which service he successfullyeffected. In 1711, he conducted aconvoy of ammunition and artillery tothe siege of Buchan ; and, commandingat the battle of Detain, in1712, he was made prisoner; but wassoon released, and entertained PrinceEugene for the winter season in hishouse at the Hague. On the deathof Queen Anne, he was sent, by thestates general, to Hanover, to congratulateGeorge the First on his accessionto the British throne; and afterwardsreceived him, with the Prince ofWales, on the frontiers of the unitedprovinces. In 1716, he was madecolonel of the Swiss battalion in theDutch service, and held several of thehighest offices in his native country.He died on the 30th of May, 1718;leaving, by his wife, a daughter of theLord of St. Gravemoor, an only son,who succeeded him in his titles andestates. Bishop Burnet describes theEarl of Albemarle as a cheerful youngman, that had the art to please; butwas so much given up to his own pleasures,that he could scarcely submit tothe attendance and drudgery that wasnecessary to maintain his post : he hadall the arts of a court, and was civilto all. He shared in all the pleasuresof William, who never suffered him tobe long absent from his person ; and hewas equally trusted and admired byQueen Anne and George the First.THE ARMY.His exquisitely beautiful person, expensivemode of living, his open andlively conversation, elegant manners,and a total absence of all Dutch phlegm,contrasting forcibly with the stiff rectitudeof his rival, Portland, endearedhtm to the English nation, who lamentedhis death, in the prime of manhood,with sincere regret. He, however, cameunder the lash of Swift, who has thrownout a dark and virulent hint respectinghis companionship in William'spleasures.LIGONIER, (FRANCIS,) a militaryman of great bravery, was a youngerbrother of the first Earl Ligonier.When Eland's dastardly dragoons losttheir brave commander, Gardiner, atthe battle of Preston Pans, George theSecond promoted Ligonier to the vacantcolonelcy; observing, " 1 will give thema man who will make them fight." Althoughso enfeebled by illness, thathe could scarcely sit his horse, hewould, contrary to all advice, marchwith the army to Falkirk, where hecommanded the brigade of dragoons,at the head of which he displayed extraordinarybut unavailing gallantry.During the contest, and subsequentretreat to Linlithgow, where he arrivedabout one o'clock in the morning, hisclothes were completely soaked by therain, and the consequence was a violentcold, which soon carried him off. Theinscription on a monument, erected tohis memory by Lord Ligonier, statesthat he was, " though a native ofFrance, a zealous protestant, and subjectof England, and sacrificed himselfin its defence against a popish pretender."Crawley, (JAMES O'HARA,Lord,) was born in 1690, and havingentered the army, served, when onlyseventeen years of age, at the battle ofAlmanza, in Spain. He was in actionduring the remainder of Queen Anne'swars; became colonel of the royal Englishfusileers ; and, a few years after theaccession of George the First, was madea baron by that monarch. In 1727, hewas appointed aide-de-camp to theking, and gradually rose to the rank offield-marshal ; having, in the meantime,become colonel of various regiments,and acted twice as an ambassador toPortugal ; and being, at the period ofhis last promotion, colonel of the Cold-streamregiment of foot guards, andgovernor of Portsmouth. He died in1774, when his title became extinct,having left no issue by his wife, whowas a daughter of Lord Mountjoy. Hewas a man of the most commandingtalents, both as a soldier and a diplomatist,and in both capacities renderedeminent services to his country.HODGSON, (STUDHOLM,) was bornin 1708 ; and, in 1761, at which timehe was a lieutenant-general, distinguishedhimself by commanding theBritish troops at the attack on Belleisle,which he took, after an obstinate siegeof two months. Before he could effectthe lauding of his troops, GeneralHodgson was three times repulsed, andhe had no ordinary obstacles to surmountin leading his men to the siejre;the cannon having to be drawn up steeprocks, and then dragged, for twoleagues, along a very rugged road. Forhis services on this occasion, he was, onthe 19th of March, 1765, promoted tobe major-general; on the 21st of September,he was nominated governor ofFort St. George, and Fort Augustus,in Scotland ; on the 8th of November,he attended the funeral of his RoyalHighness the Duke of Cumberland,as gentleman of the horse ; and, onthe 2nd of August, 1796, he wascreated a field-marshal ; and died in1798. On the occasion of the takingof Belleisle, the city of London addressedthe king, and various otherdemonstrations of public joy took place;and it was thought that no action ofgreater gallantry had been performedduring the whole war, than that by whichthe enemy had been driven from thepossession of the town by the Britishtroops under the command of GeneralHodgson.Facets, (WILLIAM,) was bornin Yorkshire, about 1720, and afterhaving received his education at thefree grammar school in Lancashire, obtaineda commission in the army, forwhich he had imbibed an early predilection.His first military essay was asavolunteer in Flanders, where, by hisgallant conduct, he obtained a pair ofcolours; but marrying soon after, re-APPEN DIX.signed them, at the earnest request ofhis wife's family. His desire, however,for a military career remaining unabated,he entered the third guards, anddevoted himself with great zeal to thetheoretical study of his profession.With a view to his further improvement,he also made himself acquaintedwith the continental languages, andpublished, shortly afterwards, a translationfrom the French of Marshal Saxe'sArt of War, and two other works onthe same subject from the German.Having attained the situation of adjutant,his abilities and unremitting attentionrecommended him to the late GeneralElliot, who took him to Germanyas his aide-de-camp, and on the death ofthe general, he filled the same situationunder the Marquess of Granny. In thiscapacity he brought the accounts of thebattle of Hamburgh to England, wherehe was introduced to George the Second,who received him graciously, and notthe less so, it is added, on his giving thewhole account of the action in German.Soon after he was rewarded with a companyin the guards, with the rank oflieutenant-colonel in the army ; and becamemilitary secretary to, and theintimate and confidential friend of, LordGranny. He was afterwards employedin settling part of the affairs in the warwith Germany ; by which means hebecame known to the great Frederick,whose opinion of his talents, it is said,was so nigh, that he made him somevery tempting offers, which he, however,declined. He died on the 22d of April,1804 ; being, at the time, colonel of thethird dragoon guards, and governor ofChelsea Hospital, in the chapel ofwhich he was buried; his funeral beingfollowed by the Prince of Wales, theDukes of Clarence and Kent, and severaldistinguished noblemen and statesmen.MELVILLE, (ROBERT,) was bornin Scotland, on the 12th of October,1723 ; and, after having passed sometimeat the grammar school of Leven,completed his education at the universitiesof Glasgow and Edinburgh; bythe latter of which, after he had distinguishedhimself as a military man,he was honoured with the degree ofdoctor of laws. Early in 1744, hejoined the allied army in the Netherlands,as ensign in the twenty-fifthregiment of foot, with which he returned,in the following year, to serveagainst the Pretender's adherents inNorth Britain. At the latter end of1746, he was again sent abroad with hisregiment, and obtained a lieutenancyfor his conduct at Laffeldt. While besiegedin Hath, after the battle of Fonshe narrowly escaped destruction,a shell having passed through the bedin which he slept. While proceedingto Ireland, at the termination of thewar, he was wrecked on the coast ofNormandy, but escaped without injury;and, in 1751, obtained a captain's commission.He was next employed onthe recruiting service, in Scotland ; andbecame aide-de-camp to the Earl ofPandora. In 1756, he served as majorof the thirty-eighth, in Antigua ; and,subsequently, assisted in the expeditionsagainst Martinique and Guada-loupe: on the reduction of the latter,he was appointed its lieutenant-governor;and, on the death of Brigadier-generalCrump, in 1760, he succeededto the chief government. He hadpreviously been made a lieutenant-colonelof the sixty-third regiment;and, on his return to England, in 1763,as a reward for his eminent services,after the fall of Guadaloupe, during thereduction of the other French islandsin the West Indies, he was promotedto the rank of brigadier-general, andmade captain-general and governor-inchesof Grenada, the Grenadines, Dominica,St. Vincent, and Tobago. Inthis station, which he filled for aboutseven years, his conduct appears tohave been prudent, disinterested, andproductive of much benefit to the colonists.On the cession of Tobago, in1783, to the French, by whom it hadbeen taken during the war, GeneralMelville was deputed, with Mr. (afterwardsSir William) Young, to solicitsome indulgence from the French governmenttowards the British settlerson the island, for whom ministers hadneglected to obtain the usual stipulations.On the termination of his mission,which proved decidedly successful,he visited Switzerland, Italy, the LowCountries, Germany, &c., chiefly witha view of examining the spots on whichgreat military events, ancient and modern,had taken place. Guided byPolybius, he traced a new but appalARMY.gently obvious rout of Hannibal's marchacross the Alps. To military researchhe appears to have been much attached ;he also displayed a strong inclinationtowards botanical pursuits, and was anunwearied labourer in the cause ofcharity. He projected, and, at his ownexpense established, the Royal Garden,in the island of St. Vincent, which,however, was afterwards supported entirelyby government; and to the fundsof various benevolent establishments,especially to those of the Scottish Corporation,or Hospital, in London, hecontributed not only much from hispurse, considering the narrowness ofhis means, but largely by his exertions.He was a fellow of the Royal and AntiquarianSocieties of London and Edinburgh;a member of the Board of Agriculture;a warm supporter of the Societyof Arts ; and, at the time of his death,which occurred on the 29th of August,1809, a full general ; having been elevatedto that rank in October, 1789.During the latter part of his life, hewas afflicted with blindness, a misfortunewhich he remotely attributed tohis having been severely injured by theexplosion of a house, while he commandedthe advanced posts at Guada-loupe.KINGSLEY, (WILLIAM,) descendedfrom an ancient family who take theirname from a place in Cheshire, wasborn in Kent, where his family hadsettled, and acquired large possessions.In 1742, he was aide-de-camp to theEarl of Dunmore, who commanded thetroops sent over to Flanders for theservice of the Queen of Hungary. Hewas present at the battle of Dettingen,in 1743 ; and, in the following year,was made captain-lieutenant, with therank of lieutenant-colonel. At Laffeldt,he distinguished himself by his exertions,and narrowly escaped with hislife, a cannon-ball passing between hislegs, and killing: four men behind him.In the year 1757, he went with thetwentieth regiment, of which he wasthen colonel, in the expedition againstRochefort, and was to have commandedthe troops at the landing. In 1758, hewas advanced to the rank of major-general,and appointed to the staff inGermany. At Minded, where, in conjunctionwith Landgrave, he commandedthe British infantry, whichbore the brunt of the battle, his regimentsuffered more than any other inthe field, and displayed the most extraordinaryprowess. General Kingsleyhad his horse shot under him, and hishat and clothes were perforated withbullets. As he was leaving the field ofbattle, a soldier cried out to his comrade,Look at the old boy, he's well peppered."He received the thanks ofPrince Ferdinand for his great courage,and the good order in which he conductedhis brigade ; and historians unitein attributing the victory to the fewregiments of British infantry, commandedby Landgrave and Kingsley.He also was engaged in the night attackon Wittenberg; when, out of onethousand French, four hundred weretaken prisoners, with two pieces of artillery,and great numbers were slaughteredby the troops, whom they exasperatedby firing from the houses. Hedied unmarried, in 1769, and was buriedin the family vault at Kennington, nearAshford, in Kent, where his descendantsstill possess a small estate. GeneralKingsley was a skilful and gallantofficer, and much beloved in the Britisharmy. His popularity has been handeddown by tradition, and a painting ofhis head hangs out as the sign, at theinn, near Maidstone. He was a frank,downright Englishman, who dischargedhis duty with earnest zeal. In hismanuscript account of his early campaigns,which contain some valuableplans and information, he more thanonce complains of the inefficiency of thegeneral officers, and the unaccountableindulgence frequently shown by theallies to " the most perfidious, ungrateful,and imposing Dutch." Sir JoshuaReynolds has painted his portrait; andhis features, indicative of his character,are regular, bold, and manly.FANNING, (EDMUND,) was bornabout 1725 ; and although bred to theprofession of the law in America, chieflydistinguished himself in that countryby raising several regiments, which hecommanded in the service of governmentagainst the insurgents. In 1774,as a reward for his services, he wasappointed surveyor-general of the royallands in North Carolina; after whichhe suffered severely, both in person aridAPPENDIX.property, from the attacks of the revolutionists,against whom he continuedto fight until the close of the Americanwar. He came to England in 1782, atwhich time he was a colonel ; and hewas ultimately promoted to the rank ofgeneral. In 1785, he was appointedlieutenant-governor of Nova Scotia andits dependencies; and, in 1786, on therecal of Lieutenant-governor Paterson,he was removed to the Island of St.John, now Prince Edward Island, wherehe remained till 1805. The braveryand fidelity of this officer merit thehighest eulogium ; his services not beingmerely those of a hireling, but of avoluntary, loyal, and devoted subject.He was always favourably mentionedby his commanding officer in the publicdespatches ; and Lord North, amongothers, spoke of him, in the house ofcommons, in terms of the highest approbation.WALL, (JOSEPH,) was born inDublin, in 1737 ; and, after having conductedhimself with great gallantry andability in the king's service, obtained acommand in that of the East IndiaCompany, and went out to Bombay,from whence, in a few years, he returnedto Ireland. It is said that he now commencedthe trade of fortune-hunting ;and was so intrusive to one lady, thatshe instituted a prosecution against himfor assault and defamation. In 1773,he was appointed secretary and clerkof the council of the province of Senegambia,in Africa; and, in 1782, hewas lieutenant-governor of the islandof Goreee, with the rank of a field-officer.In that year, his ill state ofhealth compelled him to return to England,and as he was preparing for hisembarkation, discontent arose amongthe troops, who demanded a settlementfor their short allowance, which soenraged him, that he ordered one olthem, Benjamin Armstrong, a serjeantin the African corps, to receive eighthundred lashes. No court-martial wassummoned ; but the man having beenstripped, was tied to the gun-carriage,and flogged by five or six blacks withpieces of rope, while the governor stoodby, exclaiming, " Lay on, you blackrascals , or I'll lay on you ! cut him tothe heart ! cut his liver out!" in consequenceof which, the man died in a fewdays. On Wall's arrival in England, aninquiry was instituted into his conduct;when, from the absence of the principalwitnesses, the charges were not substantiated,and he was set at liberty, but wassubsequently apprehended in 1784. He,however, escaped to Scotland, where hemarried a sister of Lord Seaport, andpassed over to France, whence he returnedin disguise, in 1797 ; and, in 1802,surrendered himself for trial, in thehope of an acquittal, and being enabledthereby to obtain possession of a considerableproperty belonging to hiswife. He, however, was found guilty,and sentenced to be hanged ; and thoughtwice respited, was executed on the28th of January, amidst the yells andexecrations of an immense mob. GovernorWall was six feet four inches inheight, of a comely person, and elegantmanners, but does not appear to havepossessed one redeeming virtue to detractfrom the obloquy so deservedlyattached to his name.CRAIG. (JAMES HENRY,) was bornabout 1740, and having entered thearmy, served with distinction in variousparts of the world, but particularly inAmerica, where, in 1790, he attainedthe rank of full colonel. In 1794, hewas made major-general ; and, in thefollowing year, commanded the expeditionsent against the Cape of GoodHope, which led to the reduction of thatcolony. In 1797, he commanded asuccessful expedition against Manilla;and being afterwards raised to the rankof lieutenant-general, and the local oneof general, he, in conjunction with SirJ. Stuart, conducted the army of theMediterranean to Sicily. In 1807, hewas appointed commander-in-chief ofCanada ; colonel of the seventieth foot,in 1809; and, died in 1812, after havingreceived the honour of K. B. Sir JamesCraig was an officer of great merit andability, and displayed great judgment inhis government of Canada, during amost delicate and trying period ofaffairs.H Harcourt, (WILLIAM, Earl Harcourt,)was born on the 20th of March,1743 ; and entered the army, in 1759, asan ensign in the foot guards. In thefollowing October, he obtained a captaincyin the sixteenth light dragoons;THE ARMY.and, after having exchanged to the thirddragoons, joined the British army inAmerica, where, in 1779, he was made afull colonel of the former regiment, at thehead of which he distinguished himselfin several actions, and in one of them,took prisoner the American general,Lee. This exploit struck terror, for atime, into the enemy, and procuredColonel Harcourt the approbation of theking, who, in consequence, appointedhim one of his aides-de-camp. In 1782,he was raised to the rank of major-general;of lieutenant-general in 1783;and, in the following year, succeeded tothe command of part of the Britishforces in Holland. In 1798, in whichyear he was made a groom of the royalbedchamber, he was promoted to therank of general ; and, in 1809, succeededto his title, and took his seat inthe house of peers. On the accession ofGeorge the Fourth, he was made aknight grand cross ofThe Bath, andcarried the union standard at thecoronation of that monarch ; shortlyafter which event, he was created afield-marshal. Previously to this, hehad been governor of Hull j and hesubsequently became governor of Portsmouth,and of Plymouth. He wasalso the first governor of the RoyalMilitary College at Sandhurst, and wasfor some years lieutenant of WindsorForest; and, at the time of his death,which occurred in 1827, was a memberof the consolidated board of generalofficers, and a commissioner of theRoyal Military College, and of theRoyal Military Asylum. He was abrave soldier, and was as staunch asupporter of government in the senateas in the field. He was much respectedby George the Third and his queen,with whom he lived on terms of closeintimacy. He married, in 1778, thewidow of Thomas Lockhart, Esq., butleft no issue.Dunham, (Sir JAMES STEWART,Baronet,) the only son of the celebratedpolitical and financial writer of the samename, was born in Scotland in the year1745 ; and after having received a militaryeducation in Germany, entered theBritish service at the age of sixteen, asacornet of the first royal regiment ofdragoons. After serving two yearsunder prince Ferdinand, he graduallyrose to the rank of colonel ; and in 1788,being in Ireland, he was commissionedto improve the system of discipline inthe cavalry, which he effected withcredit to himself, and with benefit tothe army. In 1789 he commanded thegarrison at Dublin ; and, in 1791, wasappointed to the command of the twelfthregiment of light dragoons, with whichhe remained in Ireland until the terminationof the rebellion in that country ;having previously been raised to therank of general. As an officer, SirJames Dunham is chiefly conspicuousfor his conduct during the disturbancesin Ireland, which he contributed in agreat degree to check, by his energeticarid prudent measures. Instead of resortingto military force, he formed aplan for bringing the power of the civilmagistrate into efficient action, and heonly took the field against the rebelswhen forbearance became dangerous.ANDRE, (JOHN,) born in 1751, relinquishedhis trade of a merchant tojoin the British army in America,where he soon attained the rank ofmajor and adjutant-general, and wasemployed by Sir Henry Clinton tocarry on a negotiation with Arnold, theAmerican general. In the performanceof this hazardous duty, he entered, indisguise, the enemy's lines, one night,when he was taken, and condemnedby a court-martial, to be hanged asaspy ; which sentence was carried intoexecution on the 2nd of October, 1780,in spite of the intercession of Sir HenryClinton and General Arnold, and ofthe request of Major Andre to Washington,to be shot instead of hanged.He died with great fortitude, saying, afew moments previously to the Americans," I consider this hour as the mostglorious of my life. Remember, I dieas becomes a British officer, while themanner of my death must reflect disgraceon your commander." He wasmuch beloved by the whole army, whichwent into mourning for him ; and amonument, by order of the king, waserected to his memory in WestminsterAbbey. Major Andre had written, whilein America, a satirical poem, called theCow Chace, on the defeat of two thousandrebels by a small body of seventyrefugees ; the last canto of which wasprinted on the very day that he was takenAPPENDIX.prisoner. Washington has been muchcensured for his treatment of this officer; who, however, only suffered forfailing in a plot, which, if successful,would have endangered the infantliberties of the American republic.Despair, (EDWARD MARCUS,)was born in 1751, at tiueen's County,in Ireland ; and, at the age of fourteen,became an ensign in the fiftieth regiment.He soon after obtained a companyin the seventy-ninth, and hisconduct gained for him the approbationof his superior officers. At theclose of the American war, he servedin the West Indies, and during twentyyears, was detached from the corps,and engaged on several very importantservices. In 1779, he acted with greatcredit as engineer in the expedition toSt. Juan; and he was subsequently employedon some public works in Jamaica,where his skill obtained for himthe thanks of the governor and council,with the appointment of commander-in-chiefof Rattan, with that of fieldengineer, and the rank of lieutenant-colonel.He afterwards, at the headof the inhabitants of Cape Gracias aDies, retook the principal Spanishsettlements on the Black River ; forwhich service he drained, a secondtime, the thanks of the governor andcouncil of Jamaica. He attained therank of colonel in 1783; and, in thefollowing year, was appointed chiefcommissioner for receiving and settlingthe ceded territory, and he was alsomade superintendent of the coast ofHonduras. In these parts he obtainedmany important concessions from theSpaniards ; but his interests were soonfound to clash with a party of settlers,who preferred certain charges againsthim, which he went to meet inEngland. His conduct was declaredto have been highly satisfactory, buthe was not reinstated in the office ofsuperintendent, which had been, in theinterim, abolished. He sought compensation,and soon began to urge hisclaims with so much violence, that hewas confined by government in ColdBath Fields Prison ; afterwards in theHouse of Industry, Shrewsbury; andultimately in Tothill Fields Bridewell.After a long incarceration he was setat liberty, when, in a spirit of revenge,he connected himself with a band ofdesperate men, with whom he formeda plot for overthrowing the government.Having, however, been betrayed, Despardand his accomplices were taken,on the 16th of November, 1802, at theOakley Arms, Lambeth, where theyhad met to deliberate on the project ofassassinating the king as he proceeded,on the next day, to parliament. Thewere all brought to trial on the 5th ofFebruary, 1803; and it was sworn inevidence, by one of his associates, thatColonel Despard, speaking of the propositionfor murdering his majesty,sprang up, and said : " If no one elsewill do it, I will my heart is callousI have well weighed the matter."The colonel was found guilty; but thejury recommended him to mercy, onthe ground of his former services andcharacter; the former of which wereattested by Sir Evan Nepean, SirAlfred Clarke, and Lord Nelson. LordNelson said : " We served together, in1799, on the Spanish main; we weretogether in the enemy's trenches,and slept in the same tent. ColonelDespard was then a loyal man anda brave officer." He was, however,ordered for execution ; and after sentencewas passed, several clergymenvainly attempted to obtain an interview ;his answer to all applications of thekind being " that his mind was madeup on the subject of religion." Herefused to attend the prison chapel, orto receive the sacrament On Monday,the 21st of February, he was broughtto the scaffold, with six of his confederates,and the deportment of them allwas firm, but not indecorous. Thecolonel made a long address to thespectators, at the end of which, thevoice of a female (supposed to be thecolonel's wife), having exclaimed " hedies for all of you," a loud cheer wasgiven by the populace. The body ofthe colonel was buried in St. Paul'sChurch yard, near the north door of thecathedral. He was always remarkablefor his bravery, which did not forsakehim in his last moments ; but the disaffectionwith which his mind was tainted,had extinguished the loyalty for whichNelson had given him credit. Hemight have been regarded as a manreally desirous of benefitting his fellowcountrymen, though with a mistakenTHE ARMY.notion of the best means of doing so,had not the conduct which led to hisexecution resulted immediately from asupposed injustice he had experiencedat the hands of the then existing government.LINDSAY, (ALEXANDER, Earl ofBalcarros,) the eldest son of the fifthEarl of Balcairos, was born in 1752 ; andin 1767, in which year he succeeded hisfather in the family honours, becameensign of the fifty-third foot, whichregiment he joined at Gibraltar. Havingpassed two years in travelling onthe continent, he obtained a majorityin the fifty-third foot; and served threeyears in Canada and North America,under the late Generals Sir Guy Carletonand Burgoyne. After various services,he was raised to the rank ofmajor-general ; and, in 1794, was sentto command the forces in Jamaica,where he was also placed at the headdf the civil administration as lieutenant-governor,and returned to England,where he died in March, 1825. Hewas a most meritorious officer ; and, atthe time of his death, was one of therepresentative peers for Scotland, buttook no active part in politics.BECKWITH, (Sir GEORGE,) thesecond son of the late Major-generalBeckwith, was born in the year 1753;and being bred to the army, became, onthe 20th of July, 1771, an ensign of thethirty-seventh foot. On the 7th ofJuly", 1775, he obtained a lieutenancy;and. on the 1st of January, in the followingyear, he embarked, with thesame regiment, under the orders ofthe Marquess Cornwallis, for America;where, on his arrival, he was nominatedadjutant to a battalion of grenadiers,with whom he shortly afterwards servedin the unsuccessful operation againstCharlestown. He next served with thegrenadiers, on the following 27th ofSeptember, in the memorable battle ofBrooklyn ; in the action at the landingupon York Island ; at the affair of WhitePlains ; and at the storming of theheights of Fort Kuyphausen : soon afterwhich he embarked for Rhode Island,with the corps detached there, whichclosed the campaign. He rejoined thebody of the army, in the Jerseys, in themonth of February, 1777, where heremained till the opening of the campaign; but, on the 2nd of July, purchasinga captain-lieutenancy, heembarked with the fleet for the Pennsylvaniacampaign, and served at thebattles of Brandywine and Germantown,remaining under canvass tillJanuary, 1778, when the army retiredinto winter quarters, in Philadelphia.In the May following, he succeeded toan effective company ; and, about thesame time, became aide-de-camp to thecommander of the Hessian troops, GeneralKuyphausen, and served, as such,at the battle of Monmouth, in Jersey.In 1781, he was ordered, by Sir HenryClinton, to accompany the notoriousBrigadier-general Arnold, in an attackupon New London, in which service heassisted at the carrying, by assault, ofFort Griswold, a strong field-work,having twenty-six pieces of heavy cannon; the loss of the British being tenofficers and two hundred men killedand wounded. On the 30th of the followingNovember, he obtained thebrevet rank of major; and GeneralKuyphausen having resigned the commandof the Hessians in 1782, hecontinued for a few weeks with hissuccessor, General Loser; but in theJune of the same year, he was appointedaide-de-camp to the late Lord Dorchester,by whom he was employed innegotiating the arrangements that tookplace with General Washington, for thewithdrawal of the British from America,in 1783. In 1786, he went to Canada,in the capacity of aide-de-camp to LordDorchester, by whom he was employed,not only in a military capacity, but alsoin political matters, in the United States;and, on the 18th of November, 1790,his zeal and ability were rewarded withthe brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel.In 1793, he was appointed adjutant-generalto the British forces in NorthAmerica; on the 25th of August, 1795,he received the brevet rank of colonel.In April, 1797, he was nominated colonelupon the staff in Bermuda; to the civilgovernment of which he succeeded inthe spring of the following year, andcontinued there until 1803, when hereturned to England, having, in themean time, been raised to the rankof major-general. In 1804, he wasremoved to the staff in the Leewardand Windward Islands, and appointedAPPENDIX.governor of St. Vincent's, whither heproceeded. On the death of the com-mander-in-chief, Sir William Myers,at Barbadoes, he returned to that island,and held the same office until March,1806, when he was raised to the localrank of general. About the . c ane time,he was superseded by Lieutenant-generalBowyer ; but was immediatelyplaced on the staff as second in command,having, on the 30th of August,1805, been raised to the rank of lieut; and, in April, 1806, herepaired to his former station at St.Vincent's. In the November of thesame year, having held the rank ofcaptain of the thirty-seventh twenty-nineyears, he was appointed colonel ofthe sixth garrison battalion. In June,1808, General Bowyer retiring from hispost, the chief command at Barbadoesa second time devolved upon him ; and,in the following month of October, hewas nominated to the command of theforces in the Leeward and WindwardIslands. In January, 1809, at the headof ten thousand men, he conducted theoperations against Martinique, andobliged that valuable island to surrenderin twenty-four days ; and, in the summerof the same year, he captured somesmall islands, called the Saintes ; forwhich services he was rewarded withthe military order of the Bath and thecolonelcy of the second West India regiment.In January, 1810, he attackedand captured, in eight days, the islandof Guadaloupe ; immediately after, tookSt. Martin and St. Eustatius ; and, intwenty-one days from the time of histaking the field, he deprived the enemyof all his West India possessions. Onthe 4th of June, 1814, he was rewardedwith the rank of general ; and, aboutthe same time, returned to England,for the restoration of his health. InOctober, 1816, however, he was appointedto the command of the troopsin Ireland, which he held during thesucceeding four years ; having, on thedeath of the Earl of Lindsey, on the21st of September, 1818, been removedfrom the colonelcy of the second WestIndia, to the eighty-ninth regiment.In March, 1820, he returned to England,when the baneful effects of hislong residence and arduous services inthe West Indies became visible on hishealth, and at length deprived him oflife, on the 20th of March, 1823. Highencomiums have justly been passedupon him for his humanity, his talents,and bravery. He never forgot his dutyas a governor, but always adopted suchmeasures as would best ensure thesafety, happiness, and welfare of theinhabitants intrusted to his charge.The merchants of the West Indies, it issaid, consider the period of his administrationof the laws as the brightest oftheir history ; and he was so belovedat Barbadoes, that, on his resolving toreturn to Europe for the restoration ofhis health, the legislature voted him aservice of plate, of the value of 2500.DON, (Sir GEORGE,) was born about1754, and commenced his military careeras ensign of the fifty-first foot, andafter a series of various services abroad,obtained the colonelcy of the ninety-sixthregiment. He was aide-de-campto General Murray, at Minorca, and wasplaced on the staff of that island duringthe siege of the castle of St. Philip,and commanded the fifty-ninth regimentat Gibraltar. He also servedunder various distinguished commandersin Flanders, Germany, and Holland; and during the winter campaignof 1794, in the last-mentioned country,acted as adjutant general to the Britisharmy. In the same year he was appointedaide-de-camp to George theThird, and, on his promotion to therank of major-general, shortly afterwards,he was appointed to the commandof the Isle of Wight. In 1795, beingemployed in the expedition to the Hel-der,he was detained a prisoner until1800 ; about six years after which hewas appointed governor of Jersey. Thispost he retained until 1814, in whichyear he was made a full general andlieutenant-governor of Gibraltar, a situationhe still continues to hold. He isone of the oldest officers living in theservice; and in addition to his otherhonours, has been presented with themilitary orders of a G. C. B. and aG.C.H.TARLETON, (BARRASTRE,) wasborn in Liverpool, on the 21st of August,1754, and at first commenced studyingthe law, but, on the breaking outof the war in America, he entered thearmy, and having arrived in that countARMY.try was permitted to raise a body oftroops called the " British Legion,"which he commanded in several successfulexcursions against the enemy.Such was the daring intrepidity, energy,and skill, with which he conducted hiscorps, that he may be said to havegreatly accelerated, if not secured, someof the most important victories underLord Cornwallis. On his return toEngland he was made a colonel, andbecame so popular, that, in 1790, he wasreturned free of expense as member forLiverpool, which he represented in threesubsequent parliaments. In the houseof commons he generally voted with theopposition ; was one of those who declaredthe Duke of Wellington's conductin Spain to have been rash and precipitate,and among other liberal measures,advocated reform, and supported themotion for putting the officers of thenavy on an equal footing with those ofthe army. In 1818, previously to whichhe had been raised to the rank of general,he was created a baronet, and onthe coronation of George the Fourthwas made a K. C. B. He married, in1798, a daughter of the Duke of Lancasterand Kesteven, but had no issue byhis wife. General Tarleton was one ofthe bravest officers of his time; and isdescribed as having been to the British,in the American war, what Arnold, inhis early career, was sto the Americans.He is however, charged by Gordon, in hisHistory of theatrical Revolution, withhaving been somewhat too sanguinaryin the action with Colonel Burford ; butthe general, who himself published anaccount of the campaign of 1780 and1781, explains the matter by saying,that " his soldiers thinking that he hadbeen slain by the Americans, were stimulatedto a vindictive asperity noteasily restrained." Whatever, however,his conduct might have been on the occasion,it was specially applauded byLord Cornwallis in his public despatches,who seems to have thought a spirit ofrevenge an useful ingredient in thecomposition of a soldier.Villette, (WILLIAM ANNE,)the descendant of an ancient Frenchfamily, which had settled in Englandafter the revocation of the edict ofNantes, was born on the 14th of June,1754, at Bern, in Switzerland, wherehis father was diplomatically employedby George the Second. He was educatedat a private school near Bath, andat the University of St. Andrew's. Beingintended for the bar, he became a studentat Lincoln's Inn, but kept two orthree terms only ; having, in 1775, obtaineda cornetcy in the tenth regimentof dragoons. He attended Sir W. Pitt,while commander of the forces in Ireland,as aide-de-camp and secretary;and, on the breaking out of the war in1793, having previously attained therank of lieutenant-colonel in the sixty-ninthfoot, he was sent with thatregimentto the Mediterranean. He highly distinguishedhimself at Toulon, Corsica, andBastia, of which, on its capture, he wasmade governor, and would, but for apoint of etiquette, have obtained thethanks of parliament for his services.In 1796, illness compelled him to returnto England ; in 1797. he went toPortugal, where he served for some timeunder Sir C. Stuart; in 1798, he waspromoted to the rank of major-general,and appointed comptroller of the householdto the Duke of Kent. In the followingyear he was sent to Corfu, witha view of raising a corps of Albaniansfor his majesty's service ; but he soonbecame convinced that the proposedmeasure would be highly inexpedient,and it was accordingly abandoned. Henext served at Malta under GeneralPigot; on whose departure in 1801,Villettess was appointed to the chiefcommand, which he retained until 1807,when he was recalled for the purpose ofbeing sent to the Baltic, under LordCathcart. The expedition had, however,sailed before he could reach England.Shortly after his arrival, Villettess,then a lieutenant-general, was appointedcolonel of the fortieth foot, and of Jamaica, whitherhe cheerfully proceeded, notwithstandinghis strong presentiment that heshould speedily fall a victim to the climate.In the following summer, heundertook a military tour of inspection,during which he was attacked by afever, of which he expired, after threedays' illness, on the 14ih of July, 1808.Villettess is said to have been an amiableman and a good soldier ; at Bastia hedisplayed much courage; and whilecommander-in-chief at Malta, considerablejudgment, especially in quelling aAPPENDIX.mutiny at Fort Ricoli. Though notbrilliant, his career was at once honourableto himself and useful to the nation.PHIPPS, (HENRY, Earl Mulgrave,)was born on the 14th of February,1755; and, on entering the army, rosegradually to the rank of a captain andlieutenant-colonel, which he became in1783, having previously served withdistinction both in America and theWest Indies. In 1790, he was raisedto the rank of colonel ; and, in 1792,succeeded, on the death of his brother,to the Irish barony of New Ross, inthe county of Wexford. In 1793, hewas appointed colonel of the thirty-firstfoot ; and, in 1794, in which yearhe was created Baron Mulgrave, in theBritish peerage, greatly distinguishedhimself at the taking of Toulon, andwas raised to the rank of major-general.On the 1st of June, 1801, he was promotedto be lieutenant-general ; and hewas subsequently appointed chancellorof the duchy of Lancaster ; secretaryof state for the foreign department;and first lord of the admiralty. In1809, he was raised to the rank of general; and, in the following year, heresigned his post at the admiralty forthe office of master-general of the ordnance.In 1812, he was created anearl; since which he has received theorder of a knight grand cross of theBath ; become governor of ScarboroughCastle ; and filled the posts of custosrotulorum, and vice-admiral of the eastriding of the county of York. Hecommenced his parliamentary career in1789 ; and, in both houses, generallysupported the measures of government*The merits of Lord Mulgrave as asoldier, if not of the highest, are of arespectable order ; and for his servicesin America, the West Indies, the Mediterranean,and in Holland, he receivedthe approbation and thanks of his commandingofficers, in their public orders.He married, on the 20th of October,179.5, Sophia, daughter of WilliamMaking, Esq., of West Lexington, inDurham, and has several sons anddaughters.Athwart, (WILLIAM Shaw.Earl,) was born in 1755. and receivedhis education at the University of Glasgow,with a design of following theprofession of the law. Coming, however,to his family estates, in 177C. heentered the army in the year following,and went out to America, where heserved in the sixteenth light dragoons,and became successively aide-de-campto Sir T. Wilson and Sir Henry Clinton.After having conducted himself withgreat gallantry, in several actions, hewas appointed aide-de-camp to thecommander-in-chief, and served as suchat the battle of Monmouth Court House;and having raised the corps called theCaledonian Volunteers, he disappointedto it with the provincial rank of colonel,and occasionally commanded with it atthe outposts. On the 13th of April,1779, he obtained the majority of thethirty-eighth foot; during the autumnof which year, he was appointed toserve as quarter-master-general to theforces in North America, till the arrivalof General Dalrymple. After havingbeen present at the siege of Charles-town,he, in 1780, returned to England;and, in the following year, obtained acompany, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel,in the Coldstream guards;which, in 1789, he exchanged for thetwenty-ninth foot, and became colonelof that regiment. In 1793, he was appointedbrigadier-general, and attachedto the forces under Lord Moira ; and,in 1794, joined the Duke of York'sarmy, at Arnheim ; and served with itduring the remainder of the campaign.In 1797, he was appointed colonel ofthe second regiment of horse guards,placed on the staff in Great Britain;and made a lieutenant-general on the1st of January, 1801. In 1805, he wasordered as ambassador to Russia; but,instead of proceeding thither, was sentto take the command of the Britisharmy, in Hanover, where he acquiredan entire ascendancy over the senate ofBremen, and conciliated the Russiangeneral, Bensingen, and all the officersof his army, with whom the Britishwere then combined. He was recalledhome after the death of Mr. Pitt, andacted as commander of the forces inScotland, till 1807, when" he was senton a mission to Sweden ; and afterwardsjoined Lord Gambier in the expeditionagainst Copenhagen. On hisreturn to England, he was rewardedwith the dignity of an English viscounty;and, on the 12th of January,THE ARMY.1812, was raised to the rank of general.In 1813, he was again called upon to beemployed on a diplomatic mission toSt. Petersburg ; and, during the sameyear, the Emperor Alexander conferredupon him the imperial Russian order ofSt. Andrew, and the cross of the militaryorder of St. George, of the fourthclass; and, on the 18th of June, 1814,he was created a British peer. He hasthe reputation of a brave, intelligent,and trust-worthy officer; and, as astatesman, always supported the warsystem, and generally voted for themeasures of ministers. In June, 1779,he married, at New York, in America,the daughter of Andrew Elliot, Esq.,of that place, by whom he has hadissue, five sons and three daughters.Cooks, (GEORGE,) was bornabout 1755, and after having served as amidshipman in the navy until 1777, heinthe following year, obtained a commissionin the second regiment of artillery,with which he proceeded to theWest Indies in 1780. After variousservices, he was, in 1800, appointed,with the rank of major, to the commandof the artillery under Brigadier-generalMaitland, at the siege of Belle-isle.He afterwards proceeded withthe army to Egypt, and landed in theBay of Aboukir all the field-pieces,according to a plan of his own, neverbefore adopted. Previously to quittingEgypt, where he conducted himselfwith much skill and bravery, he waspresented with a gold medal by theGrand Seignior, and appointed to a troopof horse artillery, and on his return toEngland, in 1803, he was promoted to amajority, and in the year following, toa lieutenant-colonelcy. In Septemberfollowing, he was appointed to thecommand of the artillery in the Dublindistrict, to which situation he returned,after having gone out with the artilleryto Hanover, under the command of LordCathcart. In May, 1807, he served underLord Cathcart, at Copenhagen ; and, inOctober, 1808, he embarked, in commandof the artillery, forty-eight field-piecesand one thousand two hundred men, tobe landed at Corunna, with the armyunder General the late Sir David Baird.On the 29th of December following, hesupported, with the horse artillery, thecavalry on the plains of Benevento,when the French general, Lefebre, andseveral of the imperial army, were madeprisoners. After the retreat to Corunna,he, on the 13th of January, 1809, preparedand blew up the two great magazinesthree miles from that place, containingnearly twelve thousand barrelsof gunpowder. In July, he commandedthe artillery at Walcheren ; and, after thesurrender of Flushing, he returned toEngland, where he succeeded to a colonelcyin the royal artillery ; and, on the4th of June, 1814, was promoted to therank of major-general in the army. Hewas one of the most efficient artilleryofficers of his day ; and has seen moreservice than almost any man of thesame standing in the army. His prowessand skill were of a first-rate character ;and it was confessed by various com-commander-in-chief, that to him is due noinconsiderable portion of the successesthat attended the armies to which hewas attached.MONTAGUE, (EDWARD,) fourthson of Admiral, and brother of Vice-admiralMontague, was born about1755 ; and was educated for the armyat the Military Academy,Woolwich. In1770, he went out as a cadet to the EastIndies. About 1781, being appointed tothe command of a company, he wasemployed under General Goddard, indemolishing the various forts in theGorilla country ; and whilst attemptingto force the gates of one, he was severelywounded in the cheek by an arrow,which entering on one side of his face,nearly penetrated to the other. Heinstantly broke the shaft off close tothe iron barb, and gallantly leading onhis corps to the attack, succeeded inpenetrating and carrying the fort ; thepoint of the arrow remaining in hisface for several days afterwards. In1784, he obtained the rank of major;and at the siege of Cuddalore, manifestedsuch superior judgment intakingpost on an eminence, that hewas complimented on his skill, by anofficer of rank in the army of theenemy. In the expedition againstSeringapatam, he was selected by MarquessCornwallis, to attack the stupendousfortresses of Nunderdroog andRamahdroog; the first of which waspronounced, by the engineer, almostimpregnable. He was ordered to pro-appendix.need from Bangalore to join the army,with his best train of artillery, and theexpedition with which he performed themovement, is said to have excited theastonishment of the whole army. Heshortly afterwards reduced the strongfort of Severndroog, a service in whichhe displayed great tact and activity.In 1794, he was advanced to the rankof lieutenant-colonel ; and was chosento command the corps attached to theBengal army, about to join GeneralHarris in his enterprise against Seringapatam.About three days previouslyto its capture, serving with his usualgallantry in the trenches, his arm wasshattered by a cannon-ball, in such amanner as to require immediate amputation.The wound proved fatal;but such was his unconquerable spirit,that after the operation, he insisted onbeing carried into the trenches, wherehe continued to the last to encouragehis men by his presence. He was of agenerous, frank, and benevolent nature ;beloved both in public and private life,and especially by the army, with whichhe had served for a period of twentyyears.AUCHMUTY, (Sir SAMUEL,) wasborn in 1756, and entered the army, atthe age of twenty, as a volunteer inthe forty-fifth foot, then serving inAmerica. He soon attained the rankof lieutenant, and was engaged inseveral actions, particularly those ofBrooklyn and White Plains. On hisreturn to England he exchanged intothe seventy-fifth, and went to India,where he served, from 1783 to 1796, onthe Malabar coast, in Mysore, againstthe Rohillas, and at the first siegeof Seringapatam. In 1795, he becamemajor of the seventy-fifth foot; and,about two years after, lieutenant-colonelof the tenth. In 1800, he went out toEgypt, where he acted as adjutant-generaluntil the middle of 1802. Hewas next employed, with the rank ofbrigadier-general, in South America.Arriving at the Rio de la Plata, at theend of 1806, he assumed the chiefcommand ; General Beresford, with themain body of the British forces, beingthen in the enemy's hands at BuenosAyres, which had recently been capturedby the Spaniards. In January, 1807,he attacked Monte Video, which histroops, after having repulsed the garrisonin a sally, carried by storm, onthe 3rd of the following month. InMay, he was succeeded by GeneralWhitelocke, under whom he bore apart in the disastrous affair at BuenosAyres, the result of which was a totalevacuation of the territory of La Plataby the British, and eventually the dismissalof Whitelocke from the service.In 1808, he was made a major-general ;and two years afterwards, took thechief command of the forces in theCarnatic. After having completely defeatedthe Dutch, and, in conjunctionwith the navy, reduced Java, hereturned to England, in 1813, and wasmade a lieutenant-general. He subsequentlybecame commander-in-chiefof the forces in Ireland, where, inAugust, 1822, while riding in PhoenixPark, he suddenly dropped from hishorse and expired. He nat been rewardedfor his services with the thanksof parliament on two occasions; agrand cross of the Bath ; a gold medal,commemorative of the capture of Java ;and, in 1812, with the colonelcy of theseventy-eighth. Unsupported either byfamily or wealth, but endowed withmuch courage and great abilities, SirSamuel Auchmuty acquired that rankinthe service, and those honours fromhis sovereign and the country, whichhe so well deserved, by merit alone.In private life his character is said tohave been decidedly estimable.PITT, (JOHN, Earl of Chatham,)eldest son of the great statesman, wasborn on the 10th of September, 1756;and having entered the army, rose bydegrees to the rank of a full general. In1778, he succeeded to the title of Earlof Chatham ; and, by the influence ofhis brother, became successively firstlord of the admiralty, lord privy seal,lord president of the council, and of the ordnance. About1807, he became governor of Jersey; andabout 1820, was appointed governor ofGibraltar, having previously been raisedto the dignity of K. G. The Earl ofChatham did not display much abilityeither as a statesman or soldier; thesolitary exploit by which he obtainednotoriety in the latter character, beingas commander of the ill-fated expeditionto Walcheren; the success ofTHE ARMY.which, had it been probable, he had byno means the talent or energy to ensure.He married, in 1783, Mary Elizabeth,second daughter of Thomas Townshend,first Viscount Sydney, by whomhe has no issue.HUTCHINSON, (JOHN HELY.Earlof Donoughmore,) th second son ofthe celebrated Held Hutchinson, wasborn in Ireland, on the 15th of May.1757 ; and, after receiving a liberaleducation at Eton, returned to completehis studies at Trinity College, Dublin.He commenced his career in the armyas cornet of the eighteenth dragoons ;and after removing to two other regiments,went to finish his military educationat Strasbourg, whence he wasrecalled to take his seat in the Irishhouse of commons, as one of the membersfor the city of Cork. On thebreaking out of the war with France,in 1793, he obtained permission to raisea regiment, with which he assisted toput down the revolt in Ireland. Heserved in the first expedition to Holland,as colonel, and afterwards as ,under the Duke of York,and went out to Egypt as second incommand under Sir Ralph Aber-crosby.At the death of that officer,at the battle of Alexandria, he assumedthe chief command; and, in that capacity,successfully terminated the Egyptiancampaign. As a reward for hisservices, he had the order of the Bathbestowed on him; he was returned tothe first imperial parliament afterthe union, but, being created an Irishpeer, in 1801, he did not take his seat.He was, at the same time, further rewardedwith a pension of 2000 perannum, and was raised to the rank oflieutenant-general. At the peace ofAmiens, he returned home ; and, afterhaving unsuccessfully performed twodiplomatic missions to Russia, he turnedhis attention to politics, and joined theopposition in the house of peers. Notwithstanding,however, his politicalsentiments, he was, in 1815, made oneof the knights grand crosses; and, onthe announcement of Queen Caroline'sintention to come to England, wasdeputed, by the kin, to meet Mr.Brougham at St. Omens, and proposeto him certain terms for the residence ofher majesty abroad. Since that period,he has interfered but little in publicmatters; and, in 1825, he succeeded hisbrother as Earl of Donoughmore,being, at that time, colonel of theeighteenth foot and governor of StirlingCastle. Lord Donoughmore was notonly a distinguished and successful general,but, when he saw occasion to beso, an able and eloquent statesman. Inthe Irish parliament, he supported thecause of the union; and, during thediscussion of that measure, is said tohave delivered one of the most argumentative,eloquent, and impressivespeeches, perhaps, ever produced inany legislative assembly.WHITELOCKE, (JOHN,) was bornabout 1759, and was brought up to themilitary profession, under the patronageof Lord Aylesbury, who placed him atLocked's Military Academy, near Chelsea,and, in 1777, procured him an ensigncyin the fourteenth regiment offoot. In 1787, having married a daughterof Mr. Lewis, chief clerk of the waroffice, he became a field-officer, throughthe influence of his father-in-law ; andin 1793, was promoted to the lieutenant-colonelof the thirteenth foot, withwhich he served some time in the WestIndies. He returned to England in1794, when he was appointed to thehome staff; and, on the 1st of September,1795, he was made colonel of aregiment in the West Indies, and promotedto the rank of brigadier-generalon the 10th of the same month. In1807, at which time he was a lieutenant-general,he served with Sir 8. Auch-duty at the siege of Buenos Ayres ;after the unsuccessful attack on whichtown, he returned to England, and wasbrought to a court-martial for his conductin the affair. Four charges werepreferred against him, the substanceof which was, that he had not exhibitedproper management or exertion in theattack on Buenos Ayres; and that hehad concluded a treaty with the enemy,for the surrender of Monte Video, afterhe had captured that fort, and had everymeans for retaining possession of itIn his defence he stated that the inhabitantsof Buenos Ayres were too muchexasperated with the British to renderits reduction of any advantage ; andthat he had yielded up Monte Video atthe suggestion of the enemy's general,APPENDIX.who informed him that unless cessationof hostilities took place, he could notanswer for the lives of the British prisoners.He was, however, found guilty,and sentenced to " be cashiered, and bedeclared totally unfit and unworthy toserve his majesty in any military capacitywhatever ;" which sentence, notwithstandinghis former services, wascarried into effect, with the approbationof the king. General Whitelocke wasa most valiant officer ; and less blamewas attached to him on the occasion ofthe court-martial, than to those whoacted in command with him, on thefaith of whose advice he is said to haveacted, more than on his own experience,which, as a military tactician,was certainly too inconsiderable [ towarrant the trust assigned to him.ASTON, (HARVEY,) born in 1760,attained the rank of captain in thearmy about 1784; and, soon after thebreaking out of the war with France,having become a lieutenant-colonel, hejoined the army in India. His conductgained him promotion to the rank ofcolonel, ia 1796 ; and he was soon afterput in command at Tanjore. In 1799,while absent from his regiment, havingbeen informed of a quarrel betweena lieutenant and Majors Picton andAllan, he declared in a private letter,that he considered the two latter hadacted towards the lieutenant with illiberality.This having come to the earsof the majors, they demanded a court-martial,which was refused, and thecolonel himself was called upon for anexplanation. He answered that hecould not be called to account for hispublic conduct by the officers of hiscorps, but added that he should beready to give satisfaction to any onewho could allege any thing againsthim as a private gentleman. He wasaccordingly challenged by Major Picton,and a meeting followed, when the major'spistol flashed in the pan, andColonel Aston fired in the air. Thenext day satisfaction was demanded ofhim, in offensive language, by MajorAllan, with whom he accordingly wentout, and having received his antagonist'sfire without showing signs ofbeing hurt, the colonel, in an erectposture and with the utmost composure,levelled his pistol, to show hehad the power to discharge it, andthen laying it across his breast, said,He was shot through the bodyhe believed the wound was mortaland he therefore declined to fire forit should not be said of him that thelast act of his life was an act of revenge."He languished for a weekin excessive pain, which he bore withouta murmur, and died deeply regrettedby all who knew him.GRAHAM, (THOMAS, Lord Lyne-doch,) entered the army as a volunteer,and, in 1794, served at the siege ofToulon, under Lord Mulgrave ; forhis conduct on which occasion he receivedthe special thanks of that nobleman.Having returned to England,he raised a battalion of the ninetiethregiment, of which he was appointedlieutenant colonel, and colonel in 1795.In the year following, he obtained permissionto join the Austrian army ; and,on his return to Gibraltar, proceededwith the expedition against Minorca,and was, for two years, at the blockadeof Malta. In 1803, he was made ; and, in 1808, accompaniedSir John Moore, as aide-de-camp, inhis expedition to Sweden; and, subsequently,went with that general toSpain. In 1809, he commanded a divisionat the siege of Flushing; in 1810,he commanded the British troops atCadizz, and was made a lieutenant-general; and, in 1811, fought and wonthe battle of Barons. The same yearhe was made second in command underLord Wellington, and was present atthe siege of Ciudad Rodrigo ; but, hissight failing him, he was obliged toreturn to England. In 1813, he againjoined the army in Spain, led the leftwing at Vittoria, reduced the town andcitadel of St. Sebastian, crossed theBidassoa, and (after a severe contest)established the British army on the territoryof France. Ill health again compelledhim to go to England, and, withthe local rank of general, he was appointedto command the forces inHolland. On the 3rd of May, 1814, hewas created a peer of the empire, bythe title of Baron Lynedoch, of Balgo-wan, Perthshire, and refused a grant of2000 per annum, to himself and heirs,which was intended to have accompaniedhis elevation. He was alsoTHE ARMY.made a grandee of the first class, inSpain. In 1821, he was made generalin the army ; obtained the colonelcy ofthe fourteenth foot in 1826, and the governorshipof Dumbarton Castle in 1829.For his repeated services, he frequentlyreceived the thanks of parliament ; andSheridan, speaking of him, said, " hehad known him in private life, and neverwas there seated a loftier spirit in abraver heart." Alluding to his servicesduring the retreat to Corunna, he said,that "in the hour of peril, Grahamwas their best adviser in the hour ofdisaster, Graham was their surest consolation."The conduct and characterof Lord Lynedoch have been the subjectof eulogium by Walter Scott, in hisVision of Don Frederick, the concludingstanzas of which are dedicated to hislordship.MAITLAND, (Sir THOMAS,) thethird son of the Earl of Lauderdale,was born about 1760 ; and, having enteredthe army in 1778, rose rapidly tothe rank of lieutenant-general, withouthaving achieved any military exploit ofimportance. In 1813, he was appointedgovernor and commander-in-chief overMalta; and was subsequently nominatedlord-high-commissioner of the Ionianislands, and commander-in-chief of trueforces in the Mediterranean. He diedat Malta, in 1824, at which time he wasa privy-counsellor, and knight grandcross of the Bath, and of the Ionianorders. Sir Thomas is principally tobe considered in his capacity of governor; in which character he gave theGreeks a constitutional charter, framedon the principles of policy and justice,and restored their country to great comparativeprosperity, without imposingadditional taxes on the people. Hewas not, however, free from unpopularity; which he is said to have incurred,in a great measure, by removing thestatue of Count Schulembourg from thecitadel of Corfu, to make way for hisown, and by superintending the negotiationwhich led to the surrender ofthe Christian town of Parma, into thehands of the Turks. He, nevertheless,died much respected and lamented;and, at his funeral, an oration in praiseof him was spoken by Count Bulgarianobleman of one of the first familiesin Corfu.MUNRO, (Sir THOMAS, Bart ) wasborn about 1760, and, in 1778, proceededto India, where he distinguished himselfin the Mysore war ; and was nominatedone of the assistants to ColonelRead, in settling and governing theprovinces captured from Tippoo Said.His conduct at the taking of Seringapatamattracted the notice of LordWellesley, who selected him to administerthe government of Canara, andalso appointed him over the provincesceded by the Nizam, in 1801. In 1804,he obtained the rank of lieutenant-colonel; and, after having visited Englandin 1808, was sent by the East IndiaCompany to Madras, on an importantmission, which he performed in a mostsatisfactory manner. In 1813, he attainedthe rank of colonel ; and, in1817, received the rank of major-general,and was appointed to head an expeditionagainst Soondoon, which hecaptured. For his services, he was madea commander and knight companion ofthe Bath, and a vote of thanks to himwas moved in the house of commons,on the 4th of March, 1819, by Mr.Canning, who passed the highest complimentsupon General Munro, both asamilitary and a civil officer. In 1820,he was appointed governor of Madras ;in 1825, was created a baronet ; and diedin India, on the 6th of July, 1827, ofcholera morbus. Sir Thomas Munrowas remarkable not only for his skilland bravery as an officer, but for thevigour of his mind, and the comprehensivenessof his understanding. " England,"said Mr. Canning, " never produceda more accomplished statesman,nor India, fertile as it is in heroes, amore skilful soldier."SPENCER, (Sir BRENT,) the descendantof a respectable Irish family,was born in or about the year 1760,and entered the army in 1778. Hewas first engaged in active service, atBrimstone Hill, in the island of St. Christopher,when that fortress, which hadbeen considered almost impregnable,was taken by the French. Havinggradually risen to the rank of major,he commanded the thirteenth foot, atJamaica, in 1791. For some time afterwardshe was actively employed indifferentparts of the West Indies; and,in 1797, became a brigadier-general.APPENDIX.On his return to England, he was madeaide-de-camp and equerry to the king,with whom he appears to have been anespecial favourite. He commanded thefortieth regiment in the expedition tothe Holder, in 1799; and obtained muchpraise from the Duke of York for hisgallantry at the storming of Oudecapel.In 1801, he went out to Egypt, at thehead of a brigade of light troops, formingpart of the reserve under Sir JohnMoore; and distinguished himself atthe commencement of the campaign,by carrying with the bayonet, an entrenchmentwhich had severely galledthe British troops during their landing.He subsequently displayed muchbravery in the actions on the 13th and21st of March ; commanded the successfulattack against Rosetta, and receivedthe thanks of the commander-in-chieffor his brilliant conduct in the affairbefore Alexandria. At the conclusionof the war, he returned to England ;and was appointed brigadier-general ofthe staff in the Sussex district. In1805, he became a major-general ; andin 1807, he commanded a brigade atthe siege of Copenhagen, where hecovered the embarkation of the troops,which, it presupposed, would have beeninterrupted by the Danes. In 1808, hewas sent out to the peninsula, andreceived the thanks of Sir ArthurWellesley, for his advice and assistanceat the battles of Kolica and Vimiera,Shortly after the convention of Cintra,he returned to England, and, as a rewardfor his services, was created a knightof the Bath. In May, 1810, he wasappointed second in command of thearmy in Portugal, where he displayedgreat ability and courage, especially atI5usaro and Fuentes Donor. In 1811,he came back to England, and wasmade a lieutenant-general j in 1821, hebecame a full general ; and after passingsome years in rural retirement, diedat the Lee, near Great Dissenter, inBuckinghamshire, on the 29th of December,1828. In addition to his otherhonours, Sir Brent Spencer was governorof Cork, and a knight of thePortuguese order of the Tower andSword. In private life. Spencer wasmuch beloved ; and, as a commander,deservedly admired for his firmness,skill, and zealous devotion to his militaryduties.CAMPBELL, (Sir ALEXANDER,Bart.) born in Scotland, in 1761, enteredthe army in 1776, and commanded threecompanies of the ninety-seventh regiment,on board Admiral Darby's ship,in 1780. In 1781, he served at thesiege of Gibraltar, but remained onhalf-pay from 1783 till 1787, when hewas appointed to the seventy-fourthregiment, then forming for service inthe East Indies, and for which he raisednearly five hundred men. In 1793, hewent to India ; and, in 1794, was appointedbrigade-major to the king'stroops on the coast of Coromandel, andsubsequently, in the same year, wasselected governor of Madras, for thecivil, judicial, and military charge ofthe settlement and fort of Pondicherry.In 1799, at which time he was a ,rejoined the army underGeneral (afterwards Lord) Harris, sentagainst Tippoo Sultaun ; and at thesiege and capture of Seringapatam, heacquitted himself with such bravery,as to call forth the strongest expressionsof approbation from the commander-in-chief.In 1800, he was appointed tothe command of Fort Bangalore ; andin the following year, commanded theforce destined to reduce the Danishsettlement of Triangular, which heeffected. In 1802, lie was appointedto the command of the northern divisionof the Madras army; and, in 1805, hesucceeded the Duke of Wellington,then Sir Arthur Wellesley, in thecommand of Seringapatam, and all theTippoo Sultaun's dominions. In 1808,he returned to England, and was appointeda brigadier-general, and placedon the staff in Ireland. In 1809, hewas appointed to the staff of the armyserving in Portugal and Spain; andwas present at the crossing of theDouro, and in the pursuit of GeneralSoult. At Talavera, where he receiveda severe wound in the thigh, he commandedthe right wing of the Britisharmy, and distinguished himself in sucha manner, that he was specially recommendedfor promotion, and was,in consequence,made colonel of the light infantryvolunteers. In 1810, he was madea major-general ; knighted in 1812; and,in 1813, landed at Mauritius, as commanderof the forces, with the local rankof lieutenant-general. In 1815, he wascreated a baronet; in the same year wasTHE ARMY.47'Jmade colonel of the eightieth foot ; and,in 1820, was appointed commander-in-chiefat Madras, in the occupation ofwhich office he died, at Fort St. George,in December, 1825; on which occasionthe Company's army went into mourningfor a fortnight. He is described ashaving been a man of great talent,distinguished for zeal and attachmentto the service, and a soldier of the mostintrepid and tried courage. He married,first, Olympia Elizabeth, sister to SirJohn Forehead, Bart., by whom hehad two sons and three daughters ; and,secondly, Elizabeth Anne, daughter ofthe Rev. Thomas Pemberton, by whomhe had a son and a daughter.Crack, (JOHN FRANCIS, BaronHolden,) whose family claims descentfrom the ancient princes of Wales, wasborn on the 12th of August, 1762, andwas the only son of John Crack,Archbishop of Dublin. He entered thearmy in 1777, and, in twelve years, hadreached the rank of lieutenant-colonel.He served in the West Indies, and thedisturbed districts of Ireland ; and, onthe breaking out of the war withFrance, was employed at the reductionof Martini, St. Lucia, and Guada-loupe. He was wounded in the campaignon the first of these islands ; and,on his return to England, he receivedthe thanks of parliament. His regimentbeing reduced, was placed onhalf-pay, but, in 1798, he was mademajor-general, and he acted as during the rebellion inIreland. He was in the actions atVinegar Hill, and Ballynahinch, atwhich latter place he was severelywounded. In the war in Egypt, hetook a conspicuous part, and receivedfrom the Grand Signor the order ofthe Crescent. Soon after, he was appointedto the chief command of theEast India Company's forces, at Madras ;was made lieutenant-general ; and, afterthe departure of Lord Lake, commanded,for some time, the whole ofthe forces in the Indian peninsula.The native troops became dissatisfiedwith some regulations he made respectingtheir dress, and which gave rise, in1806, to the mutiny at Vellore. Hecommanded the British troops left tooccupy and defend Portugal, in 1808-9,and was superseded in that commandby Sir A. Wellesley. Subsequently, hewas made governor of Gibraltar, a situationwhich he soon resigned. In 1809,he obtained the command of the forty-thirdfoot; and the government of theCape of Good Hope was given to him in1811, but he resigned it in 1814, whenhe was made general in the army.The grand cross of the Bath was conferredon him soon after; and, in 1819,he was raised to the peerage, by thetitle of Baron Holden, of Grim-son,in the county of Kildare. Thisbeing an Irish barony, he, in 1820,unsuccessfully presented himself as acandidate for York, on the ministerialinterest. His lordship married thethird daughter of the Earl of Clan-william,in 1798, by whom he has oneson, a lieutenant-colonel in the army.FITZGERALD, (Lord EDWARD,)firth son of the first Duke of Leinster,and grandson of Charles, second Dukeof Richmond, was born on the 15th ofOctober, 1763. After the death of hisfather, he went to reside with his motherand her second husband, Mr. WilliamOgilvie, under whose superintendencehis education was directed, chiefly towardsmilitary pursuits, for which hehad evinced an early predilection. In1779, he returned to England, and,having entered the army, sailed toAmerica, where he became aide-de-campto Lord Rawdon, and greatly distinguishedhimself by his intrepidityand courage. During this campaign, hegave many proofs of valour amountingto rashness, and was, on one occasion,left insensible in the field, at EntawSprings, severely wounded in the thigh ;in which state he was found by a poornegro, who nursed him in his hut, till herecovered. In 1783, he was on GeneralO'Hara's staff, at St. Lucia, and returningto his native country, he entered theIrish house of commons; but he found aparliamentary life, he said, so insipid,that, but for his mother, he believed heshould have joined the Turks or Russians.In 1786, he entered himself astudent of the Military Academy atWoolwich ; and, at the termination ofhis parliamentary career, proceeded ona tour to the continent, on his returnfrom whence, an attachment he hadpreviously formed, having become hopeless,induced him to join his regimentAPPENDIX.in America, where, according to Mr.Moore, he imbibed those republicannotions which, ultimately, proved sodisastrous to him. Through his instrumentality,the celebrated WilliamCobbett, then a sergeant-major in hisregiment, was discharged, who spoke ofhim as " a most humane and excellentman, and the only real honest officerhe ever knew in the army." Havingdetermined on returning to England,he made several journies through unvisitedtracts of country on his waythither, and arrived at home in 1790,when he learned that the lady towhom he had been attached wasmarried to another. At this time, hisuncle, the Duke of Richmond, beingin office, he was, through his recommendation,appointed to lead the enterprise,then in contemplation, againstCadizz, on his promise that he wouldnot appear in the Irish parliamentin opposition to government. Beingreturned, however, to parliament, bythe Duke of Leinster, he was accused,by the Duke of Richmond, of breakinghis word, and a rupture took placebetween them, which ended in hislosing the appointment. During theprogress of the French revolution, in1792, he visited Paris, and becameintimate with Paine, of whom he wrotein terms of admiration and enthusiasm,and desired his mother to address himas " Le Citoyen Edward Fitzgerald."Shortly afterwards, he assisted at adinner, given by the English in Paris,in honour of the successes of theFrench armies, at which meeting hepublicly renounced his titles, and expressedhis republican principles insuch a manner, that he was, withoutinquiry, dismissed the British army.Whilst in France, he married Pamela,the adopted daughter of Madame deGentis, and the reputed child ofPhilippe Elite ; shortly after which,he proceeded to Dublin, " where," saysMr. Moore, " he plunged at once intothe political atmosphere, himself, morethan sufficiently excited." Here hejoined the society called The UnitedIrishmen; and also attached himself toan armed association, under the nameof the first national battalion ; whichthe viceroy having issued a proclamationto put down, an address, approvingof the measure, was proposed in parliament,when Lord Edward exclaimed:I give my most hearty disapprobationto that address; for I do think, thatthe lord-lieutenant, and the majority ofthis house, are the worst subjects theking has." " Take down his words,"was immediately echoed from all partsof the house ; " and being," says Mr.Moore, " permitted to explain, he didso with some humour, by repeatingwhat he had before declared, adding,I am sorry for it ;' which apology, aftera debate, next day, of two hours' long,was accepted." At this period, treasonableassociations were being organizedover the whole of Ireland, and were defendedby Lord Edward in parliament,who, some time afterwards, went toParis to treat with the French directoryon behalf of the conspirators. On hisreturn to Ireland, he was suspected bythe government, but he, nevertheless,continued his secret measures againstit, till at length a warrant was issuedfor his apprehension, together with theother leaders of the conspiracy. Hewas, however, previously to his capture,afforded many opportunities of escape,of all of which he refused to avail himself,saying: " It is now out of thequestion ; I am too deeply pledged tothese men to be able to withdraw withhonour." A thousand pounds was thenoffered for his apprehension ; and informationhaving, at length, been obtainedof his retreat, he was secured, after adesperate struggle with his assailants,in which he killed Major Ryan, andwas himself much wounded. On beinglodged in prison, he was treated withgreat care and attention, and everyexertion was made to procure hispardon, by his friends and relatives,who, it is said, were assisted in theirendeavours by the Prince of Wales.During his captivity, his illness increasedto such a degree, that heoccasionally became delirious, but towardsits termination he grew calmand composed, and died, with perfectresignation, on the 3rd of June, 1798.Mr. Moore represents Lord Edward asthe hero and the martyr of a goodcause ; and dedicates his biography toa lady, as the memoirs of her illustriousrelative. He says, that the concession,late, but effectual, of thosemeasures of emancipation and reform,which it was the first object of LordTHE ARMY.Edward and his brave associates toobtain, has set a seal upon the generaljustice of them, which no power ofcourts or countries can ever do away.Lord Edward Fitzgerald possessed considerablemental powers and great personalbravery, but wanted that prudentcommand over his passions necessaryto form a great civil, military, or politicalcharacter. Being himself theslave of his own ardent impulses,they were capable of being so excitedand worked upon as to render himthe tool of others. General Sir JohnDoyle wrote of him: " Of my lamentedand ill-fated friend's excellentqualities I should never tire in speaking.His frank and open manner,his universal benevolence, his eaietede coeur, his valour almost chivalrous,and, above all, his unassuming tone,made him the idol of all who servedwith him. His affection for his family,and particularly for his mother, formedthe most amiable point in his character,and his letters to her are full of thetenderest expressions of love and duty."His widow retired to Hamburgh, andmarried a second time in less thantwo years after his decease. The attainderwas removed from his namesome time afterwards.HISLOP, (Sir THOMAS,) son ofColonel Hislop, was born on the 5th ofJuly, 1764, and entered his father's regiment(the royal artillery) as a cadet,in 1778, but remained till the followingyear at the Royal Academy, Woolwich.In 1780, he went to Gibraltar, where hewas stationed till 1783, when he becamea lieutenant. He afterwards served ascaptain at the siege of Toulon, and inCorsica ; was made a major on his returnhome; and, in 1795, went to theWest Indies, as lieutenant-colonel of thethirty-ninth regiment. He reduced theDutch colonies of Demerara, Essequibo,and Berbice, of which he was appointedgovernor ; and, in 1803, he became of Trinidad. In 1809,he was advanced to the rank of major-general; and, in 1810, acted as second incommand against Guadaloupe: he receiveda medal for his services, andresumed his command at Trinidad ; but,early in 1811, returned, on account ofill health, to England. In a short time,he again engaged in active service, andwas placed on the staff of Bombay, withthe local rank of lieutenant-general, andthe command of the Company's troops.He was captured by an American frigate,in his voyage to India, and returnedto England in a cartel. He wasimmediately appointed to the commandof the Madras army ; was created a baronet,on the 2nd of November, 1813;and proceeded, in June, 1814, to Meta,having received the rank of lieutenant-general.He held an important commandin the campaign against thePindarees and the Mahratta princes ;though the vote of thanks passed bythe house of commons and the IndiaCompany each contained a clause inwhich those bodies declared they didnot mean to offer any opinion on thecharge of putting to death, in cold blood,the governor of Tanner, which wasimputed to Sir Thomas Hislop. Theaccusation was, however, never investigated;and he was made K. C. B. inSeptember, 1818; knight grand crossin the following month ; and, in 1822,was permitted an augmentation of hisarms, and received the command ofthe ninety-third regiment. In December,1829, he obtained commandof the forty-eighth. Sir Thomas Hislopwas always regarded as a brave officer;but is particularly distinguished for thevalour he displayed on his voyage fromEngland to Bombay, in the Javanese.This ship, having no troops on board,being attacked by a privateer, Sir Thomas,though obliged to remain inactive,stood at the capstan, encouraging thesailors, while bullets and splinters wereflying about on every side. To hisgallantry on this occasion, he is said tobe indebted, both for his appointment tothe Madras command and his elevationto a baronetcy.HOPE, (the Honourable JOHN, Earlof Hopetown,) son of the second Earlof Hopetown, was born on the 17th ofAugust, 1766, and having been educatedabroad, joined the army, as a volunteer,at the age of fifteen. Having obtaineda cornetcy in the tenth dragoons, in theyear 1784, he was gradually advancedto the rank of lieutenant-colonel of thetwenty-fifth foot, to which he was appointedin 1793; and he was employedunder Sir Ralph Abercromby, in 1795,as adjutant-general, with the local rankAPPENDIX.of brigadier-general in the LeewardIslands. Being elected member ofparliament for Linlithgowshire, hereturned to England in the followingyear, and, in 1799, went to Holland asdeputy adjutant-general ; but beingseverely wounded in landing at theHeld, he was forced to return to England.In 1800, he accompanied theexpedition to Egypt as adjutant-general,and, in the battle of Alexandria,was wounded in the hand : he shortlyafter negotiated for the surrender ofCairo, and concluded the conventionthereon with General Billiard, theFrench commander. He became major-generalin 1802, and deputy-governorof Portsmouth in 1805, a post he resignedin the same year, being orderedto the continent with the commandof some troops under Lord CathcartBeing made lieutenant-general in 1808,he proceeded to Sweden, as second incommand to Sir John Moore ; withwhom he was soon after present at thefamous battle of Corunna. By the exertionsof General Hope, the victorywas secured : he superintended theembarkation of the troops, and was thelast to go on board, having previouslyperambulated the city to assure himselfthat not one of his soldiers was left aprisoner in Corunna. He received thethanks of parliament, and was made aknight of the order of the Bath ; a Britishpeerage being, at the same time,conferred on his elder brother. He wasnext employed in the unfortunate Walcherenexpedition ; and, returning toSpain in 1810, he was presented with amedal. He was afterwards appointedcommander-in-chief in Ireland, wherehe remained till 1813, when he becamesecond in command to Lord Wellington,in the peninsula. He received a severecontusion, while heading the British leftwing at the battle of the Nive, and wasafterwards severely wounded and takenprisoner, in a sally of the garrison, atthe reduction of Bayonne, with whichservice he had been intrusted. Havingreturned home, he was made an Englishpeer, by the title of Baron Niddry, onthe 17th of May, 1814, and declined apension of 2000 per annum. In 1815,he was made a knight grand cross ofthe Bath ; in 1816, he succeeded to hisbrother's title ; was made general in1819; and was appointed to the commandof the forty-second foot in 1820.In 1822, when George the Fourth wasin Scotland, the Earl of Hopetown wasone of the few persons he honouredwith a visit. He was twice married:first to his cousin, Elizabeth Weir,who died in 1811, by whom he hadno issue; and, secondly, to the thirddaughter of Sir John Wedderburn, bywhom he had nine sons and two daughters.He died at Paris, on the 27th ofAugust, 1823, aged fifty-seven. Hewas a brave and determined soldier;and his private character was, in everyrespect, estimable. As a senator, hisspeeches were distinguished by theircommon sense and plainness.MACKAY, (ROBERT,) entered thearmy as a volunteer; and, in 1778,obtained a commission in the nativeinfantry of Madras, in which he servedunder Sir Hector Munro, at the investmentof Pondicherry. As a rewardfor his gallantry, he was afterwards appointedto the adjutant of the fourthbattalion of native infantry ; and, joiningthe army commanded by Sir EyreCoote, took part in all the engagementsagainst Hippo Said up to the affair ofVelore. He was next appointed aide-de-campto Colonel Reinhold, of theHanoverian; and, after being presentin some severe actions, under the commandof General Stuart, he obtainedpermission to proceed to Madras, wherehe was appointed to a native corps inone of the northern provinces. In 1785,he was captain-lieutenant to a corpsdoing duty at Madras ; and, in 1789,was promoted to a company, and appointedto a regiment of European infantryat Velore, with which he servedin the field nearly two years as first-lieutenant.In 1793, he was appointedto command a native corps in the subsidiaryforce, with which he made severalsuccessful attacks on the refractory subjectsof the Nizam of the Deccan. a tractof country of which he was afterwardsdeputed to take possession. He continuedin almost constant, and generallysuccessful, service, until 1802, when heset sail for England, where he arrivedafter an absence of thirty years. In1804, he was made ; colonel, in 1808 ; major-general,in 1811 ; and lieutenant-generalin 1821. Few officers have so wellTHE ARMY.deserved the rank to which they haveattained as General Mackay. His zeal,bravery, and long services, have seldombeen surpassed; and had he receivedthe highest military honours, they wouldnot have been inadequate to his deserts.Provost , (Sir GEORGE, Bart,)born in the year 1767, entered thearmy at an early age, and first distinguishedhimself as lieutenant-colonel ofa battalion of the sixtieth regiment ofinfantry, serving in the West Indies. AtSt. Vincent, St. Lucia, and Dominica,he conducted himself with such remarkablegallantry, that he was made governorof the last-mentioned place, andabout 1803, was created a baronet. In1805, he was appointed lieutenant-governorof Portsmouth ; and, in 1808, hewas selected to fill the important chargeof lieutenant-governor and lieutenant-general,commanding the forces in theprovince of Nova Scotia. In the autumnof the same year, he proceeded tothe West Indies, and was second incommand upon the expedition at thecapture of the island of Martinique;after which he returned to his governmentin Nova Scotia, and succeeded SirJames Craig, as governor and of the forces in all BritishNorth America. In 1814, he embarkedfor England, and died at his residencein Baker Street, London, in 1816. SirGeorge Prevost was one of the most meritoriousand useful officers of his day.It seems, however, that the mildness ofhis government in Canada gave rise tosome charges against him, which hecame to England purposely to repel;and his anxiety upon the occasion issupposed to have hastened his death.So much was he, nevertheless, beloved,that it is said, his death, when it wasknown at Quebec, " drew tears fromthe eyes of those very persons who hadopposed his administration as too indulgent"Notwithstanding his death,his widow insisted on an examinationtaking place of the charges that hadbeen brought against her husband ; whichwas refused. His innocence, however,may be presumed from the fact of thePrince Regent having conferred on hiswidow the privilege of adding supportersto her arms, accompanied withan acknowledgment of her husband'svalour and loyalty.LUMLEY, (the Honourable SirWILLIAM,) the son of the late Earl ofScarborough, was born in the year 1769,and entered the tenth light dragoons in1787 ; became a captain in 1793 ; and, inthe following year, he was appointedaide-de-camp to Earl Fitzwilliam, lord-lieutenantof Ireland. In 1795, he wasappointed major of Ward's levy, whichwas disbanded on the 24th of June following.He was shortly after appointedlieutenant-colonel of the late twenty-secondlight dragoons, with which heserved in Ireland during the rebellion ;and, on the 7th of June, 1798, was engagedin the affair of Antrim, in whichhe was severely wounded. In 1801, heproceeded to Egypt, and superintendedthe embarkation of the French army.He also served in the East during thesiege of Alexandria, after which he returnedto England; and, on the 29th ofApril, 1802, he received the brevet rankof colonel. The twenty-second beingdisbanded about that period, on the following25th of June he was reduced, andremained on half-pay till the 9th of July,1803; when he was appointed colonel ofthe third reserve, or garrison battalion,which he formed by his own personalexertions. On the 25th of March, 1805,this corps also was disbanded, and hewas again reduced to half-pay ; having,on the 25th of June, 1805, been appointedto the staff 1 of the London district.On the 7th of August, 1806, hewas nominated to the staff of the Capeof Good Hope ; and, in the October ofthe same year, he proceeded, as secondin command, to the Rio de la Plata.On the 16th of January, 1807, he wasat the head of the advance, or light brigade,at the landing of the British, andalso during the siege of Monte Video.He likewise commanded a brigade inthe unfortunate attack, made in July,upon the town of Buenos Ayres. Hereturned to England with the army, inthe following November; and, in April,1808, proceeded to Malta, but was removedfrom thence, in August, to thestaff, in Sicily. In November, 1809, heagain returned to England, for the recoveryof his health, having sufferedrepeatedly from dangerous attacks of aliver complaint; and, on the following25th of October, his services were rewardedwith the rank of major-general.He was appointed to the staff of theAPPENDIX.army then serving in the peninsula,where he particularly distinguishedhimself on several occasions, and commandeda brigade of cavalry at thebattle of Albufera, fought in 1811. Onthe 7th of November, 1812, he was appointedcolonel of the West Indiarangers ; and, on the 4th of June, 1814,was raised to the rank of lieutenant-general.In January, 1815, he wasmade K.C.B. ; and, in June, 1819, wasgazetted as governor of the Bermudas.He has, for some years, been governorof those isles ; but is said to haverendered himself unpopular as such,from the exercise of unnecessary harshness.He is a brave and intrepid officer ;and, on all occasions where he has commanded,has shewn himself worthy ofthe trust reposed in him by his superiors.OSWALD, (Sir JOHN,) was bornabout 1770, and was appointed secondlieutenant of the twenty-third foot, inthe month of February, 1788; a yearafter which he obtained a lieutenant cyin the seventh foot. In the July following,he embarked, with his regiment,for Gibraltar; and, in January,1791, was appointed to the captaincy ofan independent company, but was attached,with the same rank, in March,to one in the thirty-fifth foot. He was,for some time, brigade-major to GeneralLeland ; but, wishing for active employment,afterwards joined the second battalionof grenadiers, with which heembarked for the West Indies, underSir Charles Grey, and was present atthe taking of Martinique, St. Lucia,and Guadaloupe. In 1797, he returned,with his regiment, to England, andwas appointed a lieutenant-colonel ;and, in 1799, embarked for Holland,where he received the special thanksof the Duke of Gloucester, for hisgallantry in the affair of the 19th ofSeptember; but he was so severelywounded as to be obliged to seek restorationof his health in England.On his recovery, he served underGeneral Pigot, at the taking of Malta,and, after the peace of Amiens, returnedhome ; but, on the breaking outof hostilities, in 1804, he received thebrevet rank of colonel ; and, in 1806,joined the army commanded by thelate Sir J. Craig, in Sicily, where hewas appointed commandant of mezzo.In consequence of his gallantconduct while covering the disembarkationof the troops in St. Eugenia Bay,he was intrusted with the third brigadeof the army, with which he was presentat the battle of Maidaa; twenty-twodays after, he took Scylla Castle, inCalabria; and, in February, 1807, heembarked for Egypt, under the ordersof Major-general Fraser. After havingassisted at the taking of Alexandria,he marched, as second in command,against Rosetta; after his admirableretreat from which town, he was appointedcommandant of Alexandria ; and,in June, 1808, was made brigadier-generalin the Mediterranean. In 1809,he received the command of the reserveof the army destined for Naples, withwhich he proceeded to Italy, and tookthe island of Provide, of which hewas appointed commandant. In July,however, he returned to Sicily ; and inSeptember, a force was confided tohim, destined to expel the enemy fromcertain of the Ionian Islands, of whichhe took Zante, Cephalonia, Ithaca, andCerigo. He next stormed and took thefortress of Santa Laura; and shortlyafterwards, being intrusted with thewhole civil administration of the aboveislands he established an advantageousintercourse with the neighbouringTurkish Pachas, and, by his judiciousmanagement, possessed the Greeks witha favourable prepossession of the Britishgovernment. At the commencement of1811, he was appointed colonel of theGreek light infantry, a corps he hadhimself formed and organized from theprisoners he had made of that nation ;shortly after which he sailed for England,where, on the 4th of June, hewas raised to the rank of major-general,and placed on the staff of thewestern district. In the following August,he was nominated to the peninsularstaff, under the Duke of Wellington,on joining which he was placed incommand of the fifth division of thearmy ; and after distinguishing himselfby heading its masterly retreat frombefore Tordesilias, returned to England.On his rejoining the army, in 1812, hewas again attached to the fifth division,forming part of the left column, underthe orders of Lieutenant-general Sir J.Graham, under whom he was presentat all the actions previous to the captureTHE ARMY.of St. Sebastian, the taking of which,as well as of Victoria, his military skilland intrepidity had not a little accelerated.A short while after the formerfort had been carried, he obtained leaveto return to England, where, in August,1819, he was promoted to the rank oflieutenant-general ; in the followingOctober, he obtained the colonelcy ofthe thirty-fifth foot; and, in 1820, hewas created a knight grand cross ofthe Bath. Too much can scarcely besaid in praise of the tact and gallantrydisplayed by this brave officer. Hewas thanked by the British parliamentfor his services, and has also receivedthree medals. He has also been createda K. C. B. ; and the inhabitants of theIonian Isles were so sensible of thebenefit they derived from his prudentmanagement after their capture, thatthey presented him, at his departure,with numerous addresses, accompaniedwith an appropriate gift.ANSON, (Sir GEORGE,) was bornabout 1770, and entered the army asacornet, in the sixteenth light dragoons,in 1786, but exchanged afterwardsinto the twentieth, with whichregiment he served five years in Jamaica;and on his return to England,in 1797, he exchanged into the fifteenthdragoons, and proceeded tojoin the army in Holland, being, at thattime a lieutenant-colonel. In 1805,he was appointed aide-de-camp to theking, and received the rank of colonel ;and being afterwards appointed of the sixteenth light dragoons,proceeded to Portugal in 1809,and commanded that regiment in theattack upon Oporto. In the same yearhe was appointed a brigadier-general,and in that capacity commanded a bodyof cavalry at the battles of Talavera,Salamanca, and Vittoria. In 1810, atwhich time he was member of parliamentfor Lichfield, he was made amajor-general ; a colonel of the twen-ty-third light dragoons in 1814; and,in 1815, was created a K.C.B. in consequenceof his having been at the battleof Waterloo. In 1819, he became alieutenant-general ; and, at that time,was still a member of the house ofcommons. He is known as an officerof superior talents and great intrepidity,but attracted no attention in parliament,where he voted generally withthe Whigs. He married, on the 27thof May, 1800, Frances, grand-daughterof Sir Robert, and sister of Sir Frederick,Hamilton, Bart., by whom he hasseveral children.CLINTON, (Sir HENRY,) entered thearmy in 1787, as ensign in the eleventhfoot, and, in 1788 and 1789, served, withthe Brunswick corps, in Holland. In1793 and 1794, he was aide-de-camp tothe Duke of York, in the Netherlands ;in 1795, became lieutenant-colonel ofthe sixty-sixth, and acted under SirR. Abercromby, in the West Indies, atthe landing in St. Lucia, and the siegeand surrender of Morne Fortuneee.While on his return to England, in1796, he was taken prisoner, but procuredhis liberation in the followingsummer, and soon afterwards exchangedinto the first foot guards, with whom heserved against the rebels, in Ireland,where he acted as aide-de-camp to LordCornwallis, and was present at the surrenderof General Humbert's Frenchforce at Ballinamuck. In the followingyear, he was attached, in a diplomaticcapacity, to the Austro-Russian armyin Italy, and was afterwards appointedto attend Sparrow into Switzerland.He next acted as adjutant general inthe East Indies, under Lord Lake ; and,in the battle of Lasswariee, commandedthe right wing of the British army. In1804, he was despatched on a mission tothe Russian army in Moravia. In 1806,he embarked for Sicily, and commandedthe garrison of Syracuse until January,1808, when he was appointed brigadier-general,and went with Sir John Mooreto Sweden. Being subsequently employedas adjutant-general to the armyin Portugal, he served at the battle ofVimeira, and throughout the retreat toCorunna, of which, soon after his arrivalin this country, he published a vindication.In 1809, he was made a major-general,and adjutant-general of theforces in Ireland. Two years afterwards,he returned to the peninsula,where he much increased his militaryreputation by the courage and abilitywhich he displayed at the battles ofSalamanca, Nivelle, Nive, Orthes, andToulouse. In 1813, he became a lieut; and, during the campaignthat followed Napoleon's escape fromAPPEN DIX.Elba, he was second in command of theBelgian army, one division of which heheaded in the celebrated battle of Waterloo.At the time of his death, whichtook place on the llth of December,1829, he was a knight grand cross ofthe Bath. He had also received for hiseminent services, the thanks of thehouse of commons, an honorary cross,clasp, and medal, and the insignia ofthe orders Maria Theresa, St. Georgeof Russia, and Wilhelm of the Netherlands.Being a distant relation to theDuke of Newcastle, he sat in two parliamentsfor Boroughbridge, but nevertook a very active part in politics. Hewas married, in 1799, to Lady SusanCharters, but had no issue. Like manyof his brave contemporaries, Sir HenryClinton evinced no traits by which hischaracter could be individualized ; andit can only be said of him, that, in along course of active employment, hecontributed much, by his ability andcourage, to the honour of his professionand the glory of Great Britain.RAMSAY, (GEORGE, Earl of Dalhousie,)born in 1770, succeeded hisfather in the title and estates in 1787,and entered the army at an earlyage. In 1794, he had reached the rankof lieutenant-colonel. He was mademajor-general in 1808, and commandeda division at the battles of Vittoria andthe Pyrenees ; and his services on theoccasion were rewarded with a clasp andmedal. He became a lieutenant-generalin 1813, and distinguished himselfhighly at the battle of Waterloo. Onthe 18th of July, 1815, he was elevatedto the British peerage; was made grandcross of the order of the Bath, and receivedthe thanks of parliament. Hewas subsequently appointed lieutenant-generalof Nova Scotia, a post he resigned,in 1819, for that of governor-generalof British North America. In1824, he founded the Literary and HistoricalSociety of Quebec ; and subsequentlyplanted Wolfe's plain with oats,which gave occasion to the followingepigram :Some men love honour,Other men love groats ;Here Wolfe reaped laurel.,Lord Dalhousie, oats."In 1829, he was appointed commander-in-chiefof the forces in the East Indies,where he received the local rank ofgeneral, which, subsequently, (July,1830,) was extended to that of generalin the army. In 1805, he marriedMiss Brown, of Coalition, by whom hehas three sons.Vassal, (Lieut-colonel,) bornabout 1770, rose in the army to the commandof the thirty-eighth foot, which heled,in 1807, at the storming of MonteVideo. The troops were ordered to theassault, though exposed to a heavy fireon marching towards the breach, whichthe men having missed, they wouldhave retreated in confusion, but for theencouragement given them by ColonelVassals, who continually cried out,My brave men, do not flinch; everybullet has its billet ! Push on ! followme, thirty-eighth !" Having got withinthe breach, he was still continuing toadvance, when a grape-shot broke hislegs, and he fell, exclaiming, " Push on,my good soldiers ! charge them ! nevermind me ! somebody will pick me up !it's only the loss of a leg in the service!" He continued to cry out, all thetime that the action lasted, " I don'tcare for my leg, if my regiment doesits duty ; and I hope they will !" Hejoined in the cheer with which the menhailed the surrender of the town, andinsisted on being carried to the head ofhis regiment He died on the 7th ofFebruary, 1807; and, as his corpse wasbeing carried through the room in whichColonel Browning lay mortally wounded,that gallant officer exclaimed,There goes a brave soldier, and Ishall soon follow him!" At eight inthe evening, both were buried with militaryhonours. Lieutenant-colonelVassals, by his conduct in his last moments,deservedly gained the title of ahero. He left behind him a wife andthree children.LONG, (RICHARD BALLARD,) wasborn on the 4th of April, 1771, and,after having been educated at Harrow,removed to the University of Got-tinge,whence he returned to Englandin 1791, and entered the dragoons, ofwhich he became a captain in 1793.He accompanied his regiment to jointhe Duke of York's army in Flanders ;and, in 1794, he succeeded to the postof major of brigade, in which characterARMY.ter he was present at most of theactions fought in Holland and theNetherlands. Having been appointeddeputy-adjutant-general, he remainedwith the army during the whole of theretreat, and, in 1796, arrived in England.He continued on the home stafftill he was appointed aide-de-camp toSir William Pitt ; and, on the 26th ofJuly, 1797, he was gazetted as majorof the York rangers, from which hewas promoted, by purchase, to thelieutenant-colonelcy of the Hompeschmounted riflemen, with which he servedin Ireland with great credit during thewhole of the rebellion. He returnedto England in 1800; and, on the 30thof May, was appointed lieutenant-colonelof the York hussars, the officersof which, when it was disbanded atthe peace of Amiens, presented himwith a sword of great value. He thenpassed some time at the military collegeat High Wycomb; but, on the renewalof war, he was, on the 30th ofDecember, 1803, gazetted lieutenant-colonelof the second dragoon guards,with which he went, in the followingyear, to Ireland. In August, 1805, heaccepted the command of the lightdragoon guards ; and, on the 17th ofDecember, of the same year, he assumedthe lieutenant-colonelcy of thefifteenth dragoons, on the recommendationof their colonel, the Duke of Cumberland,who returned his thanks toLong for the excellent state of disciplineinto which the regiment wasbrought under his directions. On the25th of April, 1808, he was gazettedcolonel; and, on the 30th of Octoberfollowing, embarked for Spain, to serveunder Sir John Moore, as colonel ofthe staff of the army. In consequenceof the rapid retreat of the Britishtroops, he never joined them on theirmarch, but, after traversing a great tractof country, he remarked at Vigo,whence he proceeded to Corunna,where he arrived on the evening precedingthe battle. He had no command,but volunteered his services, andwas present throughout the whole ofthe engagement. Having landed afterwardsat Portsmouth, he was appointed,in 1809, adjutant-general to the forces,under the command of the Earl ofChatham, engaged in the expedition toWalcheren. After the capture of Flushing,he returned with the army toEngland ; and, in the following year,having joined the army under LordWellington, at Coimbra, was appointedto command the cavalry in the south,under the orders of Marshal Beresford.He directed the cavalry movements inthe action at Campo Major ; was engagedat Los Santos ; and was secondin command of the cavalry in thebattle of Albufera, for his exertions onwhich occasion he afterwards receivedthe thanks of parliament. He wassubsequently engaged in the actions atUsage, Ribera, Arroyo del Molino,and Almarez ; and, on the 4th of June,1811, was gazetted major-general. Heproceeded with the army to Madrid,to join Lord Wellington, with whom hewas present at the battles of Vittoria,the Pyrenees, and at Pampeluna. Hewas publicly thanked by Sir Rowland(now Lord) Hill, for his active exertionsin rescuing four hundred woundedBritish soldiers in the Pyrenees fromthe hands of the enemy ; and was recalledsoon after, in order to make roomfor the promised appointment of ajunior officer. On his return to England,he was offered, but declined, acommand in Scotland. He was gazettedlieutenant-general on the 19th of July,1821, and died at his residence, in berkeleySquare, London, on the 2nd ofMarch, 1825. Lieutenant-general Longadded to the virtues of a brave militarycommander that scrupulous sense ofjustice, which induced him to declineadvancement, when it tended to elevatehim above the heads of olderofficers, whom his own modest pretensionstaught him to regard as hissuperiors. With this generosity anddisinterestedness of disposition he unitedthe highest principles of honour andindependence, which induced all whowere acquainted with him to esteemand venerate his character.COLE, (Hon. Sir GALBRAITHLOWRY,) next brother to the Earl ofEnniskillen, was born on the 1st ofMay, 1772. He entered the army atan early age ; distinguished himself ona variety of occasions; and, in 1801,was raised to the rank of colonel.He was second in command at thebattle of Maidaa, and commanded adivision at the battles of Albufera,APPENDIX.Salamanca, Vittoria, the Pyrenees, Neville,Orthes, and Toulouse. For theseservices, he obtained a cross and fourclasps, and received (21st May, 1815)the thanks of parliament. He wasalso made a knight grand cross of theorder of the Bath, and knight of theTower and Sword. In 1808, he becamemajor-general; in 1811, he receivedthe local rank (in Spain and Portugal)of lieutenant-general ; and, two yearsafterwards, was made lieutenant-generalin the army. In 1818, he was appointedgovernor of Gravesend andTilbury Fort ; governor-general of theMauritius, in 1822; and colonel of thetwenty-seventh regiment in 1826; fouryears after which, he was advanced tothe rank of full general. In 1806, SirLowry Cole was returned to parliamentfor Fermanagh, in Ireland, and severelyreprehended the then administrationfor its conduct towards that country. Heretained his seat until he went to theMauritius. In June, 1815, he marriedthe youngest daughter of the Earl ofSalisbury, and has several children.STEWART,(theHon.SirWitLiAM,)fourth son of the Earl of Galloway,entered the army at a very early age ;and, whilst serving in the West Indies,was appointed lieutenant-colonel in1795, and assistant adjutant-generalto Lord Moira's army. He was sentto St. Domingo, in 1796 ; appointedcommandant at St. Nicholas, in 1797 ;and visited the continent in 1799,where he served under the ArchdukeCharles, Marshal Sparrow, and GeneralKorsacow, in Swabia, Switzerland,and Italy. He formed a riflecorps in 1800, and served in the expeditionto the Ferrol; he was woundedin the attack on Copenhagen, and received,subsequently, the thanks ofparliament, and the rank of colonel.Between 1802 and 1809, he was employedin the home service, in Sicilyand" Egypt. In 1808, he was promotedto the rank of major-general, and, thenext year, was at the head of the lightbrigade at Walcheren. From 1810 to18 14, he served, almost without interruption,in the peninsula, where he commandedthe second division of the alliedarmy, and obtained a cross and two claspsfor his services. In 1813, he was madelieutenant-general ; he several timesreceived the thanks of parliament; andwas honoured with the grand cross of theBath, and the order of the Tower andSword. He died on the 7th of January,1827, at Culloden.ROSS, (ROBERT,) was born at RossTremor, in the year 1774; and havingbeen educated at Trinity College, Dublin,entered the army, and served as majorof the twenty-eighth, in Holland, wherehe distinguished himself in repelling theattack made by the French on the linesof Sir Ralph Abercromby, who thankedhim for his gallantry. Having recoveredfrom a wound he received on the occasion,he proceeded to the Mediterranean,as lieutenant-colonel of the twentieth,and won the battle of Maidaa. by arrivingjust in time to throw his regiment onthe enemy's flank, and force them toretreat, immediately after they had beganto attack the left line of the British.He was present in the Portuguese campaign,up to the retreat of Corunna; andhis conduct at Vittoria induced theDuke of Wellington to appoint him tothe head of a brigade which he commandedat the battle of the Pyrenees,where two horses were killed underhim. He was now raised to the rankof major-general; and, at the battle ofOrthes, he received a severe wound,from which he had scarcely recovered,when he was sent, at the head of fivethousand men, against North America.He took the town of Washington withoutdifficulty ; and was moving, on the12th of September, 1814, towards Baltimore,when a conflict took place, inwhich he was killed by a shot from a rifle.The insignia of the order of the Bathwas transmitted to his widow, by desireof the Prince Regent The twentiethregiment erected, in the church of RossTremor, a monument to his memory ;and another was raised, at the publicexpense, in St. Paul's Cathedral. Majorgeneral Ross was enthusiastically devotedto his profession ; and it was saidby Colonel Brook, his successor in command,that his only fault, if it might bedeemed so, was an excess of gallantryand enterprise.CAVENDISH (WILLIAM HENRY,Lord Bentinck), the second son of thelate Duke of Portland, was born on the14th of September, 1774, and havingTHE ARMY.entered the army, became a captain inthe Scotch Greys; with which he servedin Flanders, under the late Duke ofYork, to whom he was appointed aide-de-camp.In 1795, he attained therank of colonel, and was made aide-de-campto George the Third ; and, in 1799,he joined Suwarroff's army, in Italy,where he continued in active serviceuntil 1801. In 1803, he went out toIndia, as governor of Madras ; was madea major-general in 1805 ; and, in 1808,was despatched on a mission to theSpanish court, relative to the invasionof that country by France. He thenjoined Sir John Moore, at Corunna,where he commanded a brigade withgreat skill and valour. His next appointmentof importance, was as com-mander-in-chief of the forces in Sicily ;and for his judicious conduct in thenegotiations with that court, he waspromoted to the rank of lieutenant-general.He has since been appointedcolonel of the eleventh dragoons, anda full general, besides having receivedthe distinctions of K. B., G.C. B., andG. C. H. He married, on the 19th ofFebruary, 1803, MaryAcheson, daughterof Arthur Earl of Gosport, by whom hehas issue.STAUNTON, (FRANCIS,) was bornin Cheshire, about 1779 ; and havingentered the army, became a lieutenantin the grenadier battalion of Bombay,with which he served in India andEgypt, until compelled, by ill health,to return to England. On his recovery,he went out again to India, with the rankof captain ; and soon afterwards distinguishedhimself at the battle of Cory-gain, where, with about nine hundredmen, he defeated thirty thousand of theenemy; an achievement which wasspoken of by Sir T. Hislop, as " one ofthe most splendid and heroic actionsever fought." For this service, he wasappointed honorary aide-de-camp to theMarquess of Hastings; and, in 1819,was raised to the rank of major. Hisconduct was also highly praised, in thehouse of commons, by Mr. Canning,who lamented that " the rank of sobrave an officer did not entitle him tobe recorded in the notes of the house."Major Staunton also received the medalsof Egypt and Seringapatam; and it is tobe regretted that so heroic a soldiershould have received the poor rewardof a majority, whilst that of a field-marshalhas been bestowed on somewhose services, compared with those ofthe subject of this memoir, are worthlessand insignificant.CAMPBELL, (Sir Nie,) commencedhis career, in 1797, as ensignin the sixth West India regiment, withwhich he served until 1801, when heobtained a company in the ninety-fifthrifles. He next became assistant quarein the southern district;and, in 1805, procured a majorityin the forty-third foot, which he accompaniedto Jamaica. In 1808, he wasappointed deputy-adjutant-general tothe forces in the windward and leewardislands, with the brevet of lieutenant-colonel; and assisted at the capture ofMartini, the Saintes, and Guadaloupe.In 1811 and 1812, he bore an activepart as colonel of the sixteenth regimentof Portuguese infantry, in the blockadeof Almeida, the sieges of Cuidad Rodrigo,Badajoz,and Burgos, and the battleof Salamanca. In 1813, he proceeded,through Sweden, to the head-quartersof the Emperor of Russia, in Poland,where, with Sir Robert Wilson, andColonel Lowe, he was employed toreport to the British government, theoperations of the allies, with whom heremained, until their entry into Paris,previously to which event he wasseverely wounded by a cossack, whomistook him for an enemy. In April,1814, he was appointed-commissioner,on the part of England, to accompanyNapoleon to Elba, where he remained,but in no definite capacity, until theex-emperor's return to France. Whilein this ambiguous employment, whichwas something between that of gaolerand a spy, he found Buonaparte so difficultof access, that ha had recourse to theexpedient of frequently making shortvoyages, which afforded him opportunitiesof seeing him, on the pretext ofpaying his respects, as well on hisdeparture, as on his return from each.At length, while," says Napoleon, inthe Manuscrit de St. Helene, " theEnglish officer was amusing himself atLeghorn, I set sail with a favourablewind." Campbell, however, incurredno blame on account of the exile'sescape. He served, with the brevetAPPENDIX.rank of colonel, throughout the campaignof 1815; during which heheaded one of the columns at theassault on Camera. In 1825, hebecame a major-general; and, abouta year after, was appointed to thegovernorship of Sierra Leone, wherehe died in 1827. He had previouslybeen knighted, made a companion ofthe Bath, and received the insignia ofthe orders of St. Anne, St. George,and St. Wiademir, from the Emperorof Russia.BLANTYRE, (Lord,) was born atEdinburgh, on the 10th of June, 1775 ;and, on the 5th of November, 1783,succeeded to the family estates andtitle as eleventh Lord Blantyre. Havingcompleted his education at Cambridge,he entered the army, at the age ofnineteen ; and, soon after, repeatedlysold out of one regiment into another,at a great expense of rank and money,in order to gratify his desire of beingon active service. He served in theunsuccessful expedition to Holland,having previously been aide-de-camp toGeneral Fraser, in Portugal ; and was,subsequently, chosen to act in the samecapacity under General Sir CharlesStuart, whom he accompanied to Egypt.After the troops were withdrawn, hewent, on a special mission, to Constantinople;and, in 1807, accompaniedthe expedition to the Baltic. In 1809,at the head of the second battalion ofthe forty-second regiment, he joinedLord Wellington's army in Spain, withwhich he continued for three years ;during which he was occasionally atthe head of the brigade, and was presentat the battles of Busaco andFuentes d'JEnore. Having, on the latteroccasion, driven back a regiment ofthe enemy's cavalry, which had brokenin on the British infantry, he was honourablymentioned in the despatches. He served atBadajoz, and on other occasions, tillhis regiment was so reduced that it wasordered home to recruit its numbers; a public order of thanks beingissued by the commander-in-chief onits leaving the peninsula. He nowretired to his estate in Scotland ; and onthe 26th of February, 1813, marriedFrances, the grand-daughter of the lateAdmiral Lord Rodney. Being opposedto the political opinions of the thenadministration, he continued to live secludedtill 1819, when, at the earnestsolicitation of Lord Liverpool, he assumedthe office of lord-lieutenant ofRenfrewshire, with an understandingthat it should not compromise his politicalindependence as a representativepeer of Scotland. In this new capacity,his firm, though mild and conciliatingconduct, tended greatly to preserve thetranquillity of the country. He was,about this time, made major-general inthe army, and a C. B. ; and, in 1822, waspresented, with his two brothers, in thepresence of his aged mother, to Georgethe Fourth, on the occasion of theking's visit to Scotland. During thelatter part of his life, Lord Blantyreresided chiefly on the continent; and,early in 1830, his lady, by whom he hadalready several children, bore him twinsat Brussels. He soon after visitedScotland, chiefly for the purpose ofaccelerating the finishing of a mansionin progress of erection, on his estateat Erskine, on the Clyde. Hearingthat disturbances had broken out inBelgium, he returned to the protectionof his family in Brussels; and happening,out of curiosity, to look from awindow in the Rue Royale, fromwhich he had, a few minutes before,warned away a maid-servant, he waskilled by a musket-ball, fired by one ofthe Dutch troops, who were passing atthe moment. Lord Blantyre was endearedto his family by his domesticvirtues, and to all who knew him bythe excellence of his general character.His warm-heartiness was apparent inhis regard to the wishes and happinessof those about him, and his mannerwas remarkable for its elegance. Asasoldier, he was brave and prudent,though decisive ; as a politician, hewas liberal, inclining to the oppositionof the day, of which, however, ne neverwas a bigoted partizan.LOWE, (Sir HUDSON,) was employedas a military officer in a foreign corps,acting chiefly in the Mediterranean,and receiving pay from England. Heheld, in 1801, the office of surgeon-major,to the garrison of Gibraltar,which he resigned on the 26th of September;but continued in the samequarter as assistant-inspector of hospitalARMY.talk. In 1803, he was appointed assistantquarter-master-general, which posthe resigned in the same year, on beingappointed to the command of a corps.In 1806, he was made governor of theisland of Capri, and after retaining possessionof it for more than two years,was obliged to surrender the place tothe French. In 1809, he served underLieutenant-general Sir John Stuart,and Brigadier-general Oswald ; and waswith those generals at the taking of St.Laura, on which occasion his conductwas favourably spoken of in the publicdespatches. In 1813, he was intrustedwith the 200,000 granted by parliamenttowards the relief of the Russians ; andearly in the succeeding year, was attachedto the army of Silesia, underMarshal Blucher, whom he accompaniedin his subsequent campaigns,during which he attracted the favourablenotice of the allied sovereigns. InJune, 1815, he was knighted, and promotedto the rank of major-general inthe army ; and, shortly afterwards, wentout on foreign service, in conjunctionwith Lord Exmouth, whom he assistedin the taking of Toulon, in the followingAugust. In two months afterwards, hewas invested with the local rank oflieutenant-general on the continent ; onthe 23d of January, 1816, he was madea knight commander of the Bath ; and,immediately set sail for St. Helena, ofwhich island he had been appointedgovernor, on the determination of governmentto send thither the EmperorNapoleon. His first interview with theillustrious exile, produced anything butagood feeling between himself and theemperor, whose dislike to Sir Hudsonwas increased by the restraint put uponhis wishes and movements. In the courseof their disputes, it is asserted, that Buonapartecalled Sir Hudson Lowe a thief-taker,a scrivener to Blucher, and acommandant of brigands ; and declaredthat no government could be so meanas to give the orders he caused to beexecuted. On the other hand, GeneralLowe is reported to have said, that heconsidered All Pacha a much morerespectable scoundrel than Buonaparte ;and to have told Mr. O'Meara, Napoleon'ssurgeon, that Napoleon was agreat liar; which, he added, he mightrepeat to the ex-emperor, if he thoughtfit. The result of this misunderstandingwas a formal complaint against SirHudson, made by the ex-emperor, in1817, to parliament, when Lord Hollandspoke in behalf of the latter, and LordBathurst, defended the former. SirHudson had also several disputes withthe surgeon of Napoleon, Mr. O'Meara,and Mr. John Stokes ; one of whom wasdismissed the service for an unfoundedcalumny, and the other was sent awayfrom St. Helena. On the death of Buonaparte,in 1821, Sir Hudson resignedhis office ; and on arriving in England, in1822, was publicly assaulted by the sonof Count Las Casas, in revenge for someaffront offered to the Count, in the interdictionof a letter he had been aboutto send from St. Helena to Europe. Hewas also attacked by Mr. O'Meara, inhis Voice from St Helena ; and, in 1823,he applied for a criminal informationagainst the author, but was refusedby the court of King's Bench, in consequenceof the lapse of time. In June,1822, Sir Hudson Lowe was appointedcolonel of the ninety-third Highlandregiment of foot: in 1824, governor ofAntigua; in 1825, he was again permittedto assume the rank of lieutenant-generalupon the continent ; and at thepresent time he is second in commandin the island of Ceylon, an appointmentsaid to produce 4,000 a year. He wasmarried on the 16th of December, 1815,to Mrs. Johnson, the widow of ColonelJohnson, by whom he has issue. Withrespect to Sir Hudson's conduct towardsNapoleon, there have been such varyingaccounts, and all written in the spirit ofparty feeling, that none can be altogetherrelied on. The emperor, however,seems to have, in some measure, provokedby his own haughtiness, theunpleasant surveillance of Sir Hudson ;who, on the other hand, besides beingof a warm and irritable temper, accordingto Sir Walter Scott, had an oppressivesense of the importance and difficultiesof his situation, to a nervous andirritating degree.PACK, (Sir DENIS,) a native ofIreland, entered the fourteenth dragoonsas cornet, in 1791 ; served in thecampaign of 1794, under Lord Moira ;and volunteered to carry an importantdespatch to Newport, from which, whenit was invested by the French, he hadgreat difficulty in escaping. He wasAPPENDIX.afterwards engaged at Boxtel, and otherplaces; and bore a part in the arduouswinter campaign which followed. In1795, he went from England to QuiberonBay, with a small detachment ofdragoons, and afterwards served in theIsle Dieu, for some months, as field-officer.During the rebellion in Ireland,he was actively employed ; and,after the surrender of General Humbert,commanded the escort in charge ofhim, and the other French generals, toDublin. In 1800, he became lieutenant-colonelof the seventy-first; in 1805,went to the Cape of Good Hope, underSir D. Baird; and, in 1806, accompaniedBeresford's expedition to South America,where he was taken prisoner, butescaped, and was afterwards appointedto the command of all the light companies,at whose head he twice defeatedthe enemy, and received three woundsin the attack on Buenos Ayres. Heafterwards served in Portugal; and, in1809, he was sent to Walcheren, wherehe stormed a battery, manned by morethan five times his force. In 1810, hebecame aide-de-camp to the king ; and,afterwards signalized himself in severalbattles, particularly at Salamanca andToulouse. In 1813, he was made amajor-general ; and, at the conclusionof the peninsular war, in which he waseight times wounded, returned to England,and, in 1815, was made knightcommander of the Bath, and received across and seven clasps. In the sameyear he was wounded at Waterloo ; and,after the battle, received the grand crossof the Bath, and the order of St. Wla-dimir and Maria Theresa, from theEmperors of Russia and Austria. In1819, he was made lieutenant-governorof Plymouth; and, in 1822, obtainedthe colonelcy of the eighty-fourth. Hewas married to the sister of the secondMarquess of Waterford ; and died onthe 24th of July, 1824, in London.CARROL, (Sir WILLIAM PARKER,)was born in Tipperary, about 1776;and, for a short time, studied the law,but imbibing a predilection for the army,he entered the hundred and thirty-fifth,and afterwards the eighty-seventh regiment,in which he served in the expeditionagainst Holland. In 1800, he wasplaced on the half-pay of the line, witha captaincy in a defensible regiment, atGibraltar; whence, in consequence ofhis having, as president of a court-martial,decreed wheat was considered tooslight a corporal punishment to a soldier,he was ordered to remove; and, on hisarrival in London, found himself superseded.However, an inquiry having beenmade, and laid before the commander-in-chief,he was reinstated in his rank,and shortly afterwards, he distinguishedhimself by his gallant conduct in theexpedition against Buenos Ayres. Whilstin Spain, he was left, by General White-locke,as a hostage in the hands of theSpaniards, whose friendship he gainedby his knowledge of their language, andprocured the release of several Britishofficers. He was afterwards sent toSpain as a military commissioner ; and,in the peninsular war, literally foughthis way up to rank and fame, havingbeen engaged in twenty-eight differentbattles, in many of which he held distinguishedcommand. In May, 1809,hs rendered an essential service to theMarquess of Romana, by attacking hisopponent, Marshal Ney, whilst theCount, in the mean time, escaped fromOverdo, with the authorities of the town,and all the wealth, public and private.At the close of the war he returned toEngland, a lieutenant-colonel in hisown regiment, and with the rank ofmajor-general's the service of Spain;and decorated with a great number offoreign crosses, which he received permissionto wear from his own sovereign,by whom he was knighted. Sometimein 1812, the freedom of the cityof Dublin was voted him ; the membersof the Irish bar presented him with asword ; and the noblemen and gentlemenof Ireland presented him with asilver cup, of the value of two hundredguineas. In addition to his skill andbravery during the peninsular war, hedistinguished himself by his liberalityto his own regiment, and other troopsunder his command, whom he suppliedwith many comforts out of his ownprivate purse.VIVIAN, (Sir RICHARD Hussy,Baronet,) born about 1776, entered thearmy as an ensign in the twentieth regimentof foot, in July, 1793, during thewinter of which year he was employedon the coast of France with the armyunder the command of Lord Moira. OnTHE ARMY.the 7th of May, 1794, he was appointedto a company in the twenty-eighth foot,and, in June following, landed with thearmy at Ostend. He was present atthe sortie from Nimeguen, and was leftin that place, with a detachment, until itwas finally evacuated. On the 8th ofJanuary, 1795, he fought in the actionat Geldermasten, in Holland; and, inthe following year, returned to England,whence he sailed, with AdmiralChristian, for the West Indies. InAugust, 1796, he embarked for Gibraltar,where he remained till August,1798, when he exchanged into theseventh light dragoons, which, in August,1799, joined the expedition to theHelder, in the course of which he wasseven times engaged ; being in thebattles of the 19th of September, andthe 2nd and 5th of October, of that year,besides several skirmishes. Having returnedto England, he was, in March,1803, advanced to the rank of major ;and, on the 14th of September, 1804,being made lieutenant-colonel of thetwenty-fifth light dragoon she exchangedinto his late corps, the seventh, withwhich he embarked, in October, 1808,for Corunna. He was in the differentskirmishes during the arduous retreatin the January following ; his regimentforming the rear-guard of the army.On the 20th of February, 1812, hereceived the brevet rank of colonel;and, in the August of the followingyear, embarked in command of theseventh light dragoons, for the peninsula.Having joined the army of theMarquess of Wellington, in October, hewas, in the following month, appointedto the command of a brigade of cavalry,and was present at the crossingof the Neve, and in different skirmishesthat took place during theadvance of the army. He was presentat the battle of Orthes ; at the entranceinto Bourdeaux ; and, on the 8th ofApril, in the advance upon Toulouse,was so severely wounded, that his rightarm was disabled. In the followingmonth of June he returned to England,and, on the 4th, was raised tothe rank of major-general, on whichoccasion the officers of his regimentvoted him a piece of plate of the valueof three hundred guineas. Subsequently,at Waterloo, he commandedthe sixth brigade of cavalry, and soonafter received the rank of a knightcommander of the military order ofthe Bath ; and was likewise made aknight of the Hanoverian, Russian, andAustrian orders. He also became oneof the equerries to the Prince Regent,and he shortly after served on the staffat Brighton. On the 15th of March,1824, at which time he sat in parliament,he opposed Mr. Hume's motionfor the abolition of military flogging,which, he said, he lamented to observe,was necessary to discipline. In July,1829, he was returned to parliament forWindsor, for which he had sat in theformer session ; in January, 1827, hewas appointed colonel of the twelfthlight dragoons ; and, in the followingmonth of December, of the same year,was raised to a baronetcy. In March,1829, he supported the bill for catholicemancipation. The military characterof Sir R. H. Vivian is. justly admired,and his intrepidity has been warmlyeulogized by the Duke of Wellington.As a politician he has rendered himselfoccasionally conspicuous, by his supportor opposition of the plans proposedby others, but he has originated nomeasure of importance, either civil orprofessional.COTTON, (Stapleton, Lord Com-burmese,) eldest son of Sir RobertCotton, was born in 1777; entered thearmy in 1791, while still at WestminsterSchool; and having been professionallyeducated at a military school, joinedhis regiment, (the Welsh fusileers,) inDublin. Having been promoted tothe dragoon guards, he served, in 1793and 1794, under the Duke of York, inFlanders ; and, in 1796, having becomelieutenant-colonel of the twenty-fifthlight dragoons, he assisted at the reductionof the Cape, and afterwardsproceeded to the assistance of ColonelWellesley, against Hippo Said, in India.He distinguished himself particularlyat the battle of Mallvelly ; and after theMysore war, returned to England, and,in 1800, exchanged into the sixteenthdragoons, which he commanded, inIreland, until 1803, when he wasmade major-general. In 1808, he wassent to Portugal with a brigade ofcavalry, and was at the battle of Talavera,and most of the subsequent actionsof the peninsula. At the battleAPPENDIX.of Salamanca, he was second in commandto the Duke of Wellington. Hereceived the order of the Bath, andthe repeated thanks of parliament forhis conduct in that campaign, and wasmade lieutenant-general in 1811. In1813, he was made commander of thetwentieth dragoons, and received thegrand cross of the Tower and Swordfrom the Prince Regent of Portugal, besidesthat of the order of Ferdinand fromthe King of Spain. On the conclusionof the war he was advanced to thepeerage, by the title of Baron Comber-mere,of Combermere, in Cheshire, anddeclined a pension of 2.000 a-yearthat was offered to him by government.In 1816, he was appointed governor ofBarbadoes, and commander of the forcesin the West Indies. In 1820, he receivedthe local rank of general in theEast Indies ; and having returned toEngland in 1821, he was made governorof Sheerness, and was appointed to thecommand of the third dragoon guards.In 1825, he was appointed commander-in-chiefof the forces in Bengal, andmade general in the army ; and prosecutedthe Burmese war with so muchvigour and effect, as shortly brought itto a conclusion. For these serviceshe received the thanks of parliament,besides a present from the East Indiacompany, and was elevated to the rankof Viscount Combermere, of Bhurtpore,in the East Indies; and, on his returnto England, in 1829, was made colonelof the first life guards. His lordshiphas been twice married : first, to theeldest daughter of the third Duke ofNewcastle, by whom he had three sons,who are all dead; and, secondly, toMiss Caroline Fulke-Greville, by whomhe has one son and two daughters.Lord Combermere represented the boroughof Newark in three successiveparliaments, before his elevation to thepeerage. He has taken little part inpolitics, and is an eager follower ofIsaac Walton, being one of the keenestand most devoted anglers in England.TORRENS, (Sir HENRY,) the sonof a clergyman, was born in Ireland,in 1779, and having received a scientificmilitary education, was appointed to anensigncy in the fifty-third foot, of whichhe became lieutenant in 1794 ; and wasremoved to the sixty-third foot in 1795.He accompanied the expedition to theWest Indies, in the winter of the latteryear ; served at the taking of St. Lucia,and was severely wounded at the siegeof Morne Fortunes, in that island, onthe 1st of May 1796. On the 9th of Junefollowing, he rejoined his corps at St.Vincent, and was present at the attackand storm of three French redoubts,on the 10th of June; he served sevenmonths in the Carib country, andcommanded a post in the woods duringthe reduction of those people. InMarch, 1797, he was promoted to acompany in the West India regiment ;with which he served as captain andpaymaster, until June, 1798, when hereturned to England; and, in Augustfollowing, was appointed aide-de-campto General Whitelocke. In Novemberof the same year, he went to Portugalas aide-de-camp to General Cutler;and in August, 1799, he was removedto the twentieth foot. He served inthe expedition to the Helder, and wasin the actions of the 2nd and 6th of October,and was severely wounded in boththighs, on the latter day, from whichhe suffers to the present time, the ballnot having been extracted. In November,1799, he was promoted to a majority,in the Sorry Rangers, which corps heformed and commanded. After havingserved with it one year in Nova Scotia,he was removed to the eighty-sixth foot,which he joined in Egypt, and commandedin the march across the deserton its return to India. He subsequentlycommanded it in the field for two years,during the war with Scindia; afterwhich, he came home on account ofill health. In January, 1805, he waspromoted to the rank of lieutenant-colonel,by brevet ; served as assistantadjutant-general to the Kent districtfor fifteen months; was removed asmajor, to the eighty-ninth foot ; andwent as military secretary to the expeditionto South America, in 1807. Aftertaking part in the attack of BuenosAyres, he returned to England, wherehe was appointed, in December, 1807,assistant military secretary to the com-mander-in-chief. In 1808, he servedas military secretary in the expeditionto Portugal; and was present at thebattles of Rolica and Vimiera. In theOctober of that year, he returned toEngland, to his former situation ofTHE ARMY.assistant military secretary to the com-mander-in-chief; since which, he hasbeen appointed chief secretary. InJune, 1811, he was removed to a companyin the third foot guards ; in February,1812, received the rank ofcolonel ; and major-general on the 4thof June, 1814. In January, 1815, hewas raised to the dignity of a knightcommander of the military order ofthe Bath ; in November of the sameyear, was included in those generalofficers who received foreign orders;and, on the 28th of March, 1820, he wasgazetted adjutant-general of the forces.He died on the 23rd of August, 1828,in consequence of a fall from his horse,in a fit of apoplexy, leaving behindhim a widow and children. As anofficer, he made himself particularlyconspicuous in carrying into effect variousimprovements in cavalry tactics ;upon which subject he has publishedan able work. He was held in highestimation by the late Duke of York ;and was an officer whose labours andtalents were devoted to his profession,and to the improvement and interest ofthe British army in general.PONSONBY,(FR Acis CAVENDISH,)second son to the Earl of Besborough,and nephew to Earl Spencer, enteredthe army in 1800; became lieutenant-colonelin 1810; colonel in 1814; andmajor-general in 1825. His chief serviceshave been in the peninsula, andhe obtained a cross for his conductat Busaco, Salamanca, Vittoria, and theNive, where he acted as assistant adju-tant-general. He was wounded whenthe army were on the lines of TorresVedras, and also at the siege of Burgos.At Waterloo, where he received severalwounds, he was thrown on the ground,trampled on by cavalry and infantry,and his life was saved with difficulty.General Ponsonby is a companion ofthe Bath, knight of the Tower andSword, of Maria Theresa, and of St.George of Russia. He has been in parliament,but never distinguished himselfas a senator.Ship, (JOHN,) was born in the year1785, at Saxmundham, in Suffolk, andcommenced his military career as adrummer in an experimental regiment,raised by government, with which, afterseeing some service at the Cape of GoodHope, he proceeded to the East Indiesin 1801. Here he applied himself toreading and writing, and was intrustedto keep the captain's private accounts ;after which, to use his own words, heleft firing, and obtained the dignity offull private, and corporal." In a fewmonths, he rose to the post of sergeant,in which capacity he led the forlorn hopethree times at the storming of the fort ofBhurtpore, for which he was rewardedwith an ensigncy in the sixty-fifth regiment.Through the influence of LordLake, he was shortly afterwards appointedlieutenant in the seventy-sixthregiment, with which he proceeded toCalcutta, whence he shortly afterwardsembarked for England, where he becameso involved in debt, that he was compelledto sell his commission. Havingpaid his debts, he enlisted in the twenty-fourthdragoons, with which regiment,about three months afterwards, havingin the Interim been advanced to sergeant,he landed at Calcutta, in the autumnof 1808, whence he proceeded up theGanges to Cawnpore, and thence byland, to Meeruff. Here lie rose progressively,to drill corporal, drill-sergeant,and regimental sergeant-major ;and in consideration of his services, wasat length presented, by the Marquess ofHas tings, with an ensigncy in the eighty-seventhregiment, which he proceeded tojoin at Pinafore. A short while afterwardshe was engaged in the battle ofMuckwanpore, where he distinguishedhimself by killing in single combat one ofthe enemy's most formidable chieftains,whose death is said to have contributednot a little to turn the current of affairsin favour of the British in the Nepaulcampaign. On the termination of thisexpedition, Shippp paid a visit to Cawnpore,where he was married, in April,1816 ; and after eighteen months' absence,his regiment was ordered on anexpedition against the Haters Rajah.In the course of this campaign, hereceived a wound in the hand, inconsequenceof which he was orderedhome. He was, however, soon enabledto return to India, where he was immediatelyemployed in the expeditionagainst the Pindarees ; and was at thesame time appointed baggage-masterto his regiment. At the close of thecampaign in 1819, he returned to hisAPPEN DIX.family at Cawnpore; and in 1821, wasraised to the rank of lieutenant. Notlong afterwards, he entered into a horse-racingspeculation with the major ofhis regiment; and disputes havingoccurred between them, in consequenceof its failure, Shippp made charges againstthe major, for which he was dismissedthe service, but allowed to sell hiscommission. To add to his misfortunes,about the same period he losthis wife ; and returned to England inaffliction, poverty, and unmerited disgrace.No British soldier was ever moreeminent for activity and intrepidity,than Shippp ; and it is to be regrettedthat government should have so illrewarded the services of one, who contributednot a little towards the successof the British arms in the East Indiancampaigns of his time ; and whose onlyerror was a want of prudence in themanner of laying out the trifling emolumentshe had accumulated.FITZROY, (JAMES HENRY, LordSomerset,) youngest son of Henry, fifthDuke of Beaufort, was born on the 30thof September, 1788; and entered thearmy, in 1804, as cornet of the fourthdragoons. Having obtained a companyin the same regiment, he served inSpain and Portugal with such distinction,that in 1809, he was appointedaide-de-camp ; and, in the followingyear, military secretary to the Duke ofWellington. After having taken partin all the important peninsular battles,he joined in the action at Waterloo,where he conducted himself with greatbravery, and had the misfortune to losean arm. In 1815, he became a ;and in the same year, asareward for his services, was made aknight commander of the Bath, andappointed extra aide-de-camp to thePrince Regent, with the rank of fullcolonel of the army. In 1818, he wasreturned to parliament for the boroughof Truro; in 1819, on the death of SirF. Harvey, he was appointed secretaryto the master-general of the ordnance,which situation he afterwards resignedon Mr. Canning's coming into power in1827. He again came into office underthe Duke of Wellington, as militarysecretary to the commander-in-chief,which post he continues to hold, having,in the meantime, been raised to therank of a major-general in the army.Few officers in the British army standdeservedly higher for intrepidity andbravery than Lord Fitzroy Somerset;who, it was admitted by the Duke ofWellington, did not a little contributeto the successes gained by the Britisharms in the peninsular war.M'CARTHY, (Sir CHARLES,) a nativeof Ireland, was appointed governorand commander-in-chief of SierraLeone, in 1815. By affording protectionto the Fancies, a native tribe, whohad been oppressed by the Ashantees ;the king of the latter', in 1823, movedtowards Cape Coast with a great force,and sent to Sir Charles, threatening tomake his head an ornament to thegreat war drum of Ashantee. On mentioningthis intimation to some officers,in a jocular way, it created a laugh,but Sir Charles, with a presentiment ofevil, seriously observed, " You neednot laugh, it may so happen." Twodays before his death, he said, in anironical manner, to two Ashantee prisoners,who had been brought beforehim, " I hear your master wants myjaw bones for his big drum ; very well,I am going to give them to him tomorrow."On the day preceding theaction, the rain poured in torrentsupon the soldiers, already reduced byseveral days' severe marching throughmorasses and tangled forests. Whenthe engagement was at the hottest, theammunition became exhausted ; and theAshantees, ten times the number of theBritish and their allies, received a reinforcementof five thousand men. A totalroute ensued. Sir Charles M'Carthyreceived a wound in the breast from abullet, and while resting against thetrunk of a tree, was cruelly butcheredby the enemy. This fatal event occurredon the 21st of January, 1824.His loss was deeply felt by the colony,to whom he had endeared himself bythe benevolence of his rule, and his mildendeavours to propagate Christianity.THE NAVY.OSBORNE, (PEREGRINE, Duke ofLeeds,) known in the naval world asEarl of Darby, and Marquess of Carmarthen,the third son of Thomas,first Duke of Leeds, was born in theyear 1658, and evinced an early inclinationfor the naval profession. Heserved as a volunteer on board variousships, and, on the 2nd of January,1691, was appointed commander of theSuffolk. After having highly distinguishedhimself at the battle of LaHogue, as well as on other occasions,he was, on the 12th of July, 1693, advancedto the rank of rear-admiral.In the succeeding year, he served underLord Berkeley ; and commanded thenaval forces in the disastrous attack onBrest, in which he narrowly escapedbeing killed, by the bursting of a bombon his own vessel. In the ensuingNovember, he was appointed to commandthe ships that escorted the kingfrom Holland. During part of thesummer of 1695, he was stationed, forthe protection of trade, with a squadronat the entrance of the channel. Whileon this service, he withdrew, to avoidwhat he conceived to be a Frenchfleet, of force superior to his own, butwhich proved to be a number of merchant-ships. The consequencewas, that several vessels fromBarbadoes, as well as two others, withvaluable cargoes, from the East Indies,being thus left wholly without protection,fell into the hands of the enemy.This mishap was treated by governmentas an accident; and, in the year1697, he was made colonel of the firstregiment of marines, and rear-admiralof the white; but he assumed no subsequentcommand, except in April,1705, when he convoyed the Duke ofMarlborough to Holland, and, afterwards,a fleet of merchantmen fromthence to England. Having passedthrough the regular stages of preferment,he was, on the 21st of December,1708, appointed admiral and com-mander-in-chief of the fleet. On thedeath of his father, in 1712, he becameDuke of Leeds, and retired from theservice ; but long before the formerevent, he had been called up, by writ,to the house of peers, by the title ofLord Osborne, of Ireton, and took hisseat on the 19th of March, 1689-90.His death occurred on the 25th ofJune, 1729. By his wife, Bridget, onlydaughter of Sir Thomas Hyde, of SouthMyms, in the county of Hertford, hehad two sons ; the survivor of whom,Peregrine Osborne, succeeded to his titleand estates. His private character hasbeen attacked by Burnet, who calls himan extravagant man, both in his pleasuresand his humours. This chargehas been met by Charnock, who says,the first, were it true, the public havebut little, or, indeed, nothing to do with ;and, for the second, there will be butlittle difficulty in acquitting him of it,when it is considered that, as lookingforward to the advantages of rank andfortune, he had patriotism or greatnessof mind sufficient to encounter thedangers, difficulties, and hardships, incidentto a naval service. When hehad afterwards so deservedly attained amost elevated rank in that very service,he had so much public spirit as to offer,in the year 1707, to sail with a smallsquadron to Madagascar, to suppress anest of pirates ; a command few menwould have wished to undertake, andstill fewer would have solicited."HOSIER, (FRANCIS,) whose misfortuneshave conferred upon him aposthumous renown, was fourth lieutenantof the Neptune, a second-rateship, in 1692. He was captain of theSalisbury, in 1706, and was despatchedto the Scilly Islands, to receive onboardthe body of Sir Cloudesley Shovel.He subsequently captured two vessels,the one French, the other Spanish ;and, in 1719, was second captain of theDorsetshire, under the Earl of Berkeley.In the following year, he was appointedsecond in command of the fleet sentAPPENDIX.to the Baltic, under Sir John Norris.In April, 1726, he was sent, with astrong fleet, to the West Indies, to blockup the Spanish galleons in the ports ofthat country ; and, should they attemptto come out, to seize, and bring them toEngland. He arrived off Porto Bell,where, owing to the unwholesome climate,his men fell sick, and scarcelyenough were left to navigate the shipsto Jamaica, where the admiral remainedsome short time for the recovery of theinvalids. He recruited his deficiencyin numbers, by engaging some seamenhe fortunately found at Jamaica unemployed; and his own men being nowrestored to health, by his attentiveexertions and the humanity of the inhabitants,he put to sea once more, andresumed his former station. Here heremained exposed to the insults andtaunts of the Spaniards, but fetteredby his instructions from chastisingtheir insolence. His ships were ruinedby the worms ; his men perished daily,carried off by disease and the malignantclimate ; and the broken-heartedadmiral died, on the 23rd of August,1727. A few days before his death, hehad been made vice-admiral of thewhite. His body was embalmed, andburied in the ballast of his ship, inwhich it was afterwards brought toEngland for interment. It has beenobserved, by Charnock, that the misfortunesand merit of Admiral Hosiersurvived him longer than is usuallythe case, either with the greatest ormost unhappy of mankind : and it isno slender testimony of worth, whenthe absence of panegyric is feelinglysupplied by compassion.WARREN, (Sir PETER,) was bornin 1703 ; and, after having activelyserved in the navy for many years,distinguished himself, in 1745, as commanderof the armament against Louisburg,which he captured on the 17thof June. He was, at this time, a commodore,and captain of the Superbe;and, in a few weeks afterwards, hisservices were further rewarded by hisappointment to a rear-admiralship ofthe blue. In 1746, he fell in with theFrench squadron, and achieved such avictory over the enemy, as tended torender the then existing views of theFrench government almost abortive.His exploits rendered him so popularat home, that, in 1747, he was returnedto parliament for the city of Westminster;and, some time afterwards,the freedom of the city, and of thegoldsmith's company, was presented tohim. In 1752, he was elected aldermanof Billingsgate ward ; but declined thehonour, in a letter, in which he sent200 to the ward ; one half to be distributedamongst the poor, and the otherhalf (o be disposed of as the common-councilof the ward should direct. Hedied in Ireland, on the 29th of July,1752, and a splendid monument waserected to his memory in WestminsterAbbey. Sir Peter Warren was not onlya popular and heroic officer, but inprivate life he had the character of agood and amiable man ; and passedthrough life without making a singleenemy.HOLMES, (CHARLES,) was bornabout 1710; and, in 1742, commandedthe Sapphire, of forty guns, in which hetook several prizes, whilst cruising offthe coast of Portugal. He subsequentlywas appointed to the Enterprise, theLennox, the Anson, and the Grafton, inwhich last vessel he had the commandof a small squadron, on the coast ofNorth America, where he distinguishedhimself in a few engagements of minorimportance. In 1758, he had the chargeof a small force on the rivers Wear, Elbe,and Ems; dislodged seven thousandFrench and German troops, who hadoccupied the city of Embden ; and madesuch excellent dispositions of his vessels,in those rivers, as not only obtained himthe freedom and high acknowledgmentsof that city, but also gained him the mostparticular approbation and thanks ofPrince Ferdinand of Brunswick. Hewas soon after made rear-admiral of theblue ; and, in 1759, was appointed thirdin command of the fleet sent out underSir Charles Saunders, for the purpose ofreducing Quebec; and was, at the sameperiod, advanced to the rank of rear-admiralof the white. On his returnhome, he received the thanks of thehouse of commons (in which he had aseat, as representative for Newport,Isle of Wight) ; and, early in 1760, wasnominated commander-in-chief on theJamaica station, where he died, on the21st of November, 1761. As a navalTHE NAVY.officer, Admiral Holmes had the reputationof being brave, vigilant, active, inflexible,and just; and, in private life, hewas affable and amiable. He did not,however, escape detraction ; and, in1750, challenged an examination of hisconduct by court-martial, which endedin his honourable acquittal.BEAUCLERK, (Lord AUBREY,)eighth son of Charles, first Duke ofSt. Albans, was born in 1710; and, onthe 1st of April, 1731, became a post-captain,and was appointed to the Ludlow.In 1739, he was promoted to thePrince Frederick, of seventy guns; andwent out, in the following year, underSir Chaloner Ogle, to reinforce AdmiralVernon, previous to the expeditionagainst Cartagena. On the 23rd ofMarch, 1741, he was engaged, underCommodore Lestock, in the attack onthe castle of Bocca Chica; and LordAubrey Beauclerk's vessel being in thethickest of the action, his legs were bothshot off, but he would not have hiswounds dressed till he had given hisorders that the ship should fight to thelast extremity. He died in a short timeafter. A handsome monument in WestminsterAbbey, bears an inscription,describing him as a brave commander,and an amiable man, equalled byfew in modesty, candour and benevolence.He married the daughter ofSir Henry Newton, and widow of SirFrancis Alexander, but died withoutissue.WATSON, (CHARLES,) was born in1714, and, about 1744, was commanderof the Dragon sixty-gun ship, in whichhe served, with great gallantry, againstthe combined squadrons of France andSpain, off Toulon. He took part inLord Anson's engagement of the 3rd ofMay, 1747, and also in that of the sameyear, between Lord Hawke and M.De L'Entendiere ; and, for his braveryin the latter, he was made rear-admiralof the blue, and appointed governor andcommander-in-chief of the Newfoundlandstation. In 1754, he was intrustedwith a naval armament, with which hesailed to the East Indies, and soon afterhis arrival, received his majesty's commission,constituting him rear-admiralof the red. His first proceeding was thereduction of Fort Genial, the capital ofthe arch-pirate Anglia; which, withthe co-operation of Colonel (afterwardsLord) Clive, he effected, early in the year1756. In the same year, he assisted atthe taking of Calcutta; and, after havingperformed various other services, hedied at that place, on the 16th of August,1757, at which time he was vice-admiralof the white. He was sincerely anddeservedly lamented by his countrymenin the east ; and the East India Company,in gratitude for his eminent services,caused a splendid monument tobe raised to his memory in WestminsterAbbey.DOUGLASS, (Sir JAMES,) was bornabout 1715 ; and, having entered thenavy, was, in 1755, appointed to thecommand of the Bedford, seventy four,in which he captured three Frenchmerchantmen. In May, 1757, he commandedthe Alcide, one of Sir EdwardHawke's squadron, on the occasionof his unsuccessful expedition againstRochefort. During the year 1758, hewas successfully and actively employedin cruising in the channel; and early thesucceeding year, was ordered to join SirCharles Saunders, then about to proceedagainst Quebec. After the successfultermination of that expedition, he wassent home with the despatches; and,on his arrival, received the honour ofknighthood, and the accustomed royalpresent of 500. In 1760, he was madecommodore at the Leeward Islands ;and whilst off Antigua, did considerableinjury to the enemy, by the variouscaptures he effected. In 1761, he assistedLord Rollo in attacking theisland of Dominica, the reduction ofwhich was effected with the trivial lossof eight men killed and wounded. In1762, he sailed for England; and, in theOctober of that year, was promoted tothe rank of rear-admiral of the white. Heafterwards went out to the West Indiesas commander-in-chief; and, in 1773,he was appointed commander-in-chiefat Portsmouth, and retained that officefor the usual period of three years. Hewas progressively advanced till 1782,when he became admiral of the white ;and died at Scotland, in 1787.SHOULDHAM, (MOLYNEAUX,) theson of a clergyman, entered the navyat the age of ten years, and was, onAPPENDIX.the 12th of May, 1746, made captainof the Sheerness frigate, employed incruising off the coast of Scotland. Hecommanded the Seaford, in 1754 ; andremoved to the Warwick, a sixty gunship, which was compelled to strike toa French force, consisting of a ship ofseventy-four guns, another of sixty,and a frigate. In 1761, Shouldham, inthe Raisonable, of sixty-four guns, accompaniedAdmiral Rodney in hisexpedition against Martini, and losthis vessel, by running upon a reef ofrocks of which the pilot was ignorant.In a few days after, he was employedin landing the army under GeneralMonckton, which was the last servicehe was engaged in for a length of time.In 1768, he was appointed to the Cornwall,seventy-four; and, early in theyear 1771, to the Royal Oak, of equalmagnitude. In 1772, he was governorof Newfoundland ; in 1775, rear-admiralof the white ; and was returned,soon after, member for Fowey. Henext went on board the Chatham, offifty guns, to command on the Americanstation ; on the 3rd of February,1776, lie was promoted to the rankof vice-admiral of the blues and, onthe 3rd of July, was advanced to thepeerage of Ireland, by the title ofBaron Shouldham. His lordship returnedfrom America in 1777 ; and,in the succeeding year, convoyed theoutward-bound West Indian and Americanfleets to a safe latitude. He wasafterwards made port-admiral of Plymouth,an office which he held untilthe year 1783, except at intervals, whenit was filled by Vice-admiral Milbanke.On the 19th of March, 1779, he wasraised to the rank of vice-admiral ofthe white ; on the 26th of September,1780, to that of vice of the red ; onthe 24th of September, 1787, he becameadmiral of the blue ; and, on the 1st ofFebruary, 1793, admiral of the white.Admiral Lord Shouldham died, withoutissue, at Lisbon, on the 30th of August,1798, when the title became extinct.His lordship was a gallant and intelligentofficer; and, although he hadthe misfortune to lose two ships, yet itwas under circumstances for which hecould not be accounted blameable.Pinkerton, (RICHARD,) becamea post-captain in the navy on the 21stof August, 1759, after which time hecommanded, successively, the Culloden ;the Glasgow, the Lively, the Renown,and the Marlborough. In 1773, hesteered the barge in which George theThird reviewed the fleet at Portsmouth ;and, on the 24th of June, received thehonour of knighthood. Sir Richardsubsequently commanded the Augusta,and the Terrible, seventy-four; in thelatter of which, he captured an Americanprivateer. Afterwards, he wasattached to the channel fleet, underAdmiral Repel; and, in the actionwith the enemy, off Ushant, on the 27thof July, 1778, was second in the line tothe leading ship, and had thirty menkilled and wounded. On the 19th ofMay previous to the engagement, hewas created a baronet. In the monthof April, 1779, Sir Richard Bickerton,in company with the Ramillies, succeededin taking eight of the merchantmen,with valuable cargoes, from theWest Indies. On leaving the Terrible,he was appointed to the Fortitude, ofseventy-four guns; and proceeded, inthe main fleet under Admiral Darby,in 1781, to the relief of Gibraltar. InAugust, he was re-appointed to theAugusta yacht, in which he attendedhis majesty during his visit to the NorthSea squadron. Bickerton, towards theconclusion of the year, was nominatedto the Gibraltar, an eighty-gun ship,in which he hoisted his broad pendant,as an established commodore. Hedeparted, under convoy, on the 6thof February, 1782, with a squadronintended for India; where he joinedSir Edward Hughes, just time enoughto participate in the engagement of the20th of June, 1783, with the celebratedM. De Suffrein. In 1787, he waspromoted to the rank of rear-admiral ;and, in 1790, hoisted his flag in theImpregnable, and was nominated to acommand in the channel fleet. He wasadvanced to be vice-admiral of thewhite, on the 21st of September, 1790;and, after the apprehension of a warhad subsided, was transferred to the St.George, of ninety-eight guns, and constitutedport-admiral of Plymouth.While holding this command, he diedof an apoplectic fit, on the 25th of February,1792. Sir Richard Bickertonwas married, in 1758, to Mrs. Marie-anneHasty, by whom he had fourTHE NAVY.children : two sons and two daughters.At the period of his decease he wasrepresentative in parliament for thecity of Rochester.LOCKHART ROSS, (Sir JOHN,)distinguished as Captain Lockhart untilhe assumed the name of Ross, was ofScottish extraction, and was promotedto the rank of lieutenant in the royalnavy, on the 21st of October, 1743.On the 23rd of March, 1756, he wasmade a post-captain, and appointed tothe Tartar frigate, stationed in theBritish channel ; and, being a fast sailer,Captain Lockhart had the good fortune,whilst cruising in her, to meet withmore success than any of his contemporaries.His success in taking thevessels of the enemy raised his name sohigh, that an English privateer, beingin great danger of capture, is reportedto have run alongside her adversary,and ordered the commander to striketo " The Tartar, Captain Lockhart;"a demand which was met with instantcompliance. On the return of thecaptain into port, the freedom of theborough of Plymouth was voted him inagold box; and, soon after, the merchantsand underwriters of the city ofLondon presented him with a silver cupand salver, bearing a representation ofthe Tartar, and of seven privateersshe had taken. Early in 1758, he tooka vessel off St. Domingo, of considerablevalue; and his name strucksuch terror into the enemy, that theyfitted out a stout frigate, mountingeighteen twelve-pounders, and mannedwith a select crew of three hundredand fifty men, one hundred of whomwere the sons of merchants, who hadvolunteered for the especial purpose ofcruising in the supposed track of theTartar. In 1759, he was promoted tothe Chatham, of fifty guns, and had twofrigates placed under him, which, onthe 18th of May, descried and capturedthe Arethusa. In July, he went underCommodore Duff, to watch, from QuiberonBay, the motions of the Frenchfleet, in Brest; and, in the followingyear, he was appointed to the Bedford,a third-rate, which he resigned soonafter. About the same time, he changedhis name to Ross; and, in 1761, waschosen member of parliament for theunited burghs of Lanark, and someothers; and, in 1768, was returned forthe shire of Lanark. Captain LockhartRoss was, in 1777, appointed to theShrewsbury, of seventy-four guns, inwhich ship he was very smartly engaged,under Admiral Repel, in theaction with the French fleet, on the27th of July, 1778. On the 19th ofMarch, 1779, he was promoted to therank of rear-admiral of the blue, andhoisted his flag on board the RoyalGeorge, of one hundred guns, as fourthin command in the channel. In theyear last mentioned, he became entitledto a Scotch baronetcy ; and, shortlyafterwards, accompanied Sir GeorgeRodney in the expedition for the reliefof Gibraltar. Returning to England,in 1780, he again served in the channelfleet; and, on the 26th of September,in the same year, was raised to berear-admiral of the red. In July, 1782,he went, with Lord Howe, on a shortcruise, and, on his return, resigned hiscommand. On the 24th of September,1787, he was made vice-admiral of theblue ; and died, on the 9th of June,1790, at his family seat, BalagowanCastle, in Scotland. Admiral Ross wasa brave and excellent officer ; and, ashewas successful in every enterprise,it is fair to suppose that opportunity wasall that was wanting to his attainmentof the highest point of professionalcelebrity. He was, as a man, humaneand benevolent ; for, in the summerof 1782, by a bountiful distributionof provisions, among the poor onhis estates, he saved the lives of manyof those who must, at that periodof distress, have otherwise inevitablyperished.MOUNT EDGECUMBE,(GEORGE,Earl of,) second son of Richard, firstEarl of Mount Edgecumbe, served asmidshipman in the Mediterranean, onboardone of the ships under the commandof Admiral Haddock. He waspromoted, successively, to the ranksof lieutenant and commander; and,on the 19th of August, 1744, was madecaptain of the Kennington, of twentyguns. In the following year, he wasremoved to the Salisbury, a fifty gun-ship; and, on the 30th of January,1747, he fell in with, and captured, theJason, a French East India ship, ofseven hundred tons, laden with a veryAPPENDIX.valuable cargo. In November, hewas returned as representative for theboroughs of Plympton and Fowey ; buttook his seat for the latter place. In1751, he had the command of the Monmouth,and was sent to Gibraltar, assenior officer of a small squadron, to shiftpart of the garrison, and bring hometwo of the regiments. In the followingyear, the captain removed into theDeptforcl, of sixty guns, and was soonafter appointed commander, with thenominal rank of commodore, of a smallsquadron, with which he proceeded tothe Mediterranean, where he remainedon the station, until 1756. In 1758, heserved in America, under Admiral Bos-caen; and, in 1759, shared in theglory of defeating, off Belleisle, in themonth of November, the last effort ofthe naval power of France. At thegeneral election, in 1761, he was athird time returned for the borough ofFowey; and, on the 21st of October,1762, was made rear-admiral of theblue ; having, in the interim, succeededto the peerage, by the death ofhis elder brother. The next monthhe took the oaths as lord-lieutenantof the county of Cornwall ; and inJune, the year following, resigned thesituation of clerk of the council of theDuchy of Lancaster, which he had forsome time held. In the year 1764,he was appointed port-admiral, at Plymouth; and, in 1770, he was made vice-admiralof the blue. On the occasionof his majesty's visit to Spithead, to reviewa division of the fleet, Lord MountEdgecumbe was promoted to the rankof vice-admiral of the white. In themonth of July following, he attendedLord North, on his installation as chancellorof the University of Oxford ; andreceived, in consequence, the honorarydegree of doctor of laws. On the 3rdof February, 1776, he was advanced tothe rank of vice-admiral of the red ; onthe 29th of January, 1778, to that ofadmiral of the blue ; and lastly, wasmade admiral of the white, on the 8thof April, 1782. On the 17th of February,1781, he was created ViscountMount Edgecumbe and Valletort; and,on the 18th of August, 1789, Earl ofMount Edgecumbe. His civil appointmentskept pace with his promotionsin the navy. In 1765, he was made aprivy-counsellor, and appointed treasurerof the household. In 1771, hewas made one of the joint vice-treasurersof Ireland ; but gave up thisoffice, in 1773, on being appointedcaptain of the band of gentlemen-pensioners.This station he resignedon the change of ministry, in 1782,and filled no office till February, 1784,when he was again named one of thevice-treasurers of Ireland. He held thisappointment until his decease, whichhappened in the month of February,1795. The Earl of Mount Edgecumbe,though he rose to the highest honoursof his profession, was not distinguishedby any brilliant exploits; and for hisimportant civil appointments, he wasmore indebted to party connexions,than to the services which he performed.DIGBY, (Honourable ROBERT,)grandson of the fifth Lord Digby, wasborn about the year 1720 ; became captainof the Solely frigate, on the 5thof August, 1755 ; and, subsequently,served, in 1757, on board the Dunkirk,a sixty-gun ship, at the unsuccessfulexpedition against Rochefort. He waspresent, in 1758, with Admiral Repel,in his expedition against Goreee, andafterwards with Hawke, when he defeatedthe Marquess de Conflans. In1760, he was ordered to the Mediterranean,where he served for some time ;and, on the 4th of April, 1775, he wasconstituted a colonel of marines. In1778, he was appointed to the Ramillies,seventy-four, in which he was engaged,under Admiral Repel, in his encounterwith the French fleet off Ushant. Onthe 19th of March, 1779, he was advancedto the rank of rear-admiral of theblue; and, as commander of one of thedivisions of the channel fleet, hoistedhis flag on board the Prince George,where he was joined by the Duke ofClarence, then Prince William Henry,who commenced his naval career underAdmiral Digby. His subsequent serviceswere of minor importance ; and,after his return to England, he rosegradually to the rank of admiral of thewhite, which he obtained in June, 1795.He was married, on the 17th of August,1784, to Mrs. Jaunty, eldest daughter ofAndrew Elliott, Esq. ; and, about theyear 1761, he was returned to parliamentfor the city of Wells.THE NAVY.PARKER, (Sir PETER,) the son ofRear-admiral Christopher Parker, wasborn in 1723, and entered the navyunder the auspices of his father. In1743, he was appointed lieutenant ofthe Russel ; and, in 1747, promoted tothe command of the Margate; fromwhich he removed, in 1749, to theLancaster. In 1757, he was employedin the Wo olwich, of fifty guns, on theWest India station ; in 1758, he commandedthe Montagu, with which hetook a number of prizes in the channel ;and, in 1761, he served in AdmiralRepel's squadron, in the Buckingham,off Belleisle, where he acquired muchreputation in a successful encounterwith some of the enemy's craft ; which,being low in the water, and adaptedfor carrying heavy metal, were deemedparticularly formidable. In 1762, heremoved from the Buckingham to theTerrible, a new seventy-four; which,however, at the conclusion of the war,was put out of commission. In 1774,he was appointed to the Barfleur, ofninety guns ; and, in 1775, hoisted hisbroad pendant on board the Bristol,of fifty guns ; in which he proceeded,with a squadron under his command,to the American station. On accountof bad weather, and other impediments,he did not reach Cape Fateuntil May, 1776. In the followingmonth, he made an unsuccessful attackon Charlestown, in South Carolina.Shortly afterwards, he joined LordHowe, the commander-in-chief, at NewYork ; whence he was despatched, withthe Asia, Renown, and Preston, to distractthe attention of the enemy, whilethe army attacked the lines on theLong Island. Towards the close of thesame year, he proceeded, in commandof a small squadron, to make an attempton Rhode Island, of which he obtainedpossession without loss. He was nowadvanced to the rank of rear-admiralof the blue ; and, a few months after,appointed to the chief command on theJamaica station, where he served withsignal success until 1782, in which yearhe returned with a convoy to England.In the interim he had been made, successively,rear-admiral of the white,vice-admiral of the blue, and vice-admiralof the white. On the 26th ofDecember, in the last-mentioned year,he was created a baronet; and, subsequently,became commander-in-chiefat Portsmouth ; member of parliamentfor Maldon; admiral of the blue; and,finally, admiral of the white. He diedin 1811, leaving two sons and twodaughters, by his wife, whose maidenname was Nugent.RODDAM, (ROBERT,) was bornabout 1724, and, after having served forsome time as a midshipman, was takeninto the ship of Sir Chaloner Ogle,whom he accompanied in the expedition,under Admiral Vernon, to theSpanish settlements ; on which service,he behaved with great bravery. Onthe 3rd of November, 1741, Mr. Roddamwas made third lieutenant of the Superb; and, by his skill, was twice themeans of saving the vessel, on her returnto England. He was, on the 7th ofSeptember, 1742, commissioned thirdlieutenant of the Monmouth, and,while cruising off Cape Teneriffe, captureda Spanish ship, worth 100,000.He was next promoted to the commandof the Viper sloop, in which he wassent, by Sir Peter Warren, who headedthe western squadron, to attack thirtyvessels, laden with naval stores, andlying in Sidera Bay, near Cape Portugal.The attempt was successful : the youngofficer took the battery, destroyed allthe vessels in the bay, and, with threeor four prizes, he, in three days, rejoinedhis admiral. For this service,he was promoted to the Greyhoundfrigate, with the rank of post-captain ;and on his arrival at Portsmouth, hewas solicited, by the inhabitants, tobecome their representative in parliament,an honour which he, however,thought proper respectfully to decline.In 1755, he proceeded, in the Greenwich,to the Jamaica station, and whilecruising off Hispaniola, on the 16th ofMarch, 1757, he was compelled to strikehis colours to a French force, but resolutelyrefused to leave his ship in oneof his own boats ; declaring, that hewould rather fight the unequal battle,than give up his sword, till it was,according to custom, regularly sent forbythe enemy. His demand was, aftersome delay, complied with; and afterhis release, being tried by a court-martialat Jamaica, he was declared to havereflected honour on the British navy.In 1759, whilst in command of theAPPENDIX.Colchester, being ordered to relieve CaptainDuff, off Belleisle, he carried hisship between the Saints and the shore,into Anime Bay; and is said to havebeen the first English navigator whoevermade the perilous attempt. In1770, Captain Roddam was appointedto the Lennox ; and, about eight yearsafterwards, he was made rear-admiralof the white, and ordered to Chatham,as commander-in-chief at the Noreand in the river Medway. On the19th of March, 1779, he received therank of vice-admiral of the blue ; andwas promoted to be vice-admiral ofthe white, September 26th, 1780 ; andvice-admiral of the red, September24th, 1787. He was appointed, April20th, 1789, commander-in-chief atPortsmouth ; and continued, for threeyears, to perform the duties of thatoffice, with zeal, despatch, and ability.Among other instances, he got theguard-ships ready for sea in five days ;and, in a fortnight, had five sail moreready at Spithead. This extraordinaryexpedition so astonished the Frenchnation, that their newspapers noticedthat British ships of war sprung uplike mushrooms. He struck his flag atPortsmouth, in 1792 ; was promoted tobe admiral of the blue, in the Februaryof the following year ; admiral of thewhite, on the 12th of April, 1794 ; and,in 1805, admiral of the red; at thehead of which he stood, at his death,which took place in April, 1808, atNewcastle. He was an able and enterprisingcommander ; and, though hewould not have risked the lives of hismen, by an unequal engagement, sozealous was he of the honour of theBritish flag, that, in his own words,he would have fought as long as hecould swim, rather than have submittedto its receiving an indignity."SCHOMBERG, (Sir ALEXANDER,)was, on the llth of December, 1747,Promoted to the rank of lieutenant; and,having served in that capacity on boardthe Intrepid, was, on the 5th of April,1757, made a post-captain, and appointedto the Richmond frigate ; fromwhich he removed, at the end of theyear, to the Diana. In the spring of1760, he accompanied CommodoreWanton on the expedition undertakenfor the relief of Quebec ; and, on the16th of May, in company with CaptainDeane, in the Lowestoft, successfullyattacked a small French force whichlay above the town, consisting of twofrigates, two armed ships, and someinferior vessels. Captain Schombergreturned to England; and, soon afterhis arrival, was appointed to the Essex,of sixty-four guns ; in which he continuedduring the remainder of the war.In 1762, he was one of the officersemployed in occasionally cruising inthe channel, to watch the small remnantof the French naval force which hadescaped destruction at the time of thedefeat of the Marquess de Conflans.Peace ensuing, the Essex was put outof commission; but, in 1771, CaptainSchomberg was appointed to the Prudent,of sixty-four guns, in consequenceof the apprehended rupture with Spain ;and, in the month of December following,he took the command of his majesty'syacht, the Dorset, stationed inthe port of Dublin; which appointmenthe held until his decease. In the year1777, he received the honour of knighthood;and died, on the 19th of March,1804, at his house in Ely Place, Dublin.He was an experienced and gallantofficer, with a thorough knowledge ofnaval tactics. At the time of his decease,he had been nearly fifty years a captain,and was the oldest officer of that rankinthe royal navy. He was in highesteem amongst his brother officers,whose respect for his memory wasmanifested by the circumstance of sixadmirals being his pall-bearers.MIDDLETON, (CHARLES, LordBarham,) the youngest son of RobertMiddleton, Esq., was born at Leith, inOctober, 1726. Having entered thenavy, he, in 1761, commanded theEmerald frigate, of thirty-two guns, onthe West India station ; where he distinguishedhimself so highly by hisactivity in protecting the commerce ofthat part of the world, that the assemblyof Barbadoes voted him their thanks,and presented him with a gold-hiltedsword, as a token of the high sensethey entertained of his important services.Before the conclusion of thewar, he removed from the Emeraldinto the Adventure, in which he servedon the home station until peace waseffected. His next command was inTHE NAVY.1775, when he was appointed to theAugusta, of sixty guns, which was stationedat Chatham, as a guard-ship. Hequitted that ship in the year 1777, andin August of the following year, wasconstituted comptroller of the navy ; anoffice which he held until 1790. Onthe 24th of September, 1787, he waspromoted to the rank of rear-admiralof the white ; and, at the general electionin 1784, was returned to parliamentfor the city of Rochester. On the1st of September, 1790, he was maderear-admiral of the red ; on the 1st ofFebruary, 1793, vice-admiral of thewhite; on the 12th of April, in the succeedingyear, vice-admiral of the red;and, on the 1st of June, 1795, admiralof the blue. As a flag officer he neverheld any command. He was created abaronet on the 4th of September, 1781 ;and in the year 1806, was raised to thedignity of the peerage, by the title ofBaron Barham, of Barham Court. Hewas a member of the privy-council ;one of the elder brethren of the TrinityHouse ; and first lord of the admiraltyduring the important victories of Sir R.Calder, Lord Nelson, Sir R. Strachan,and Sir J. Duckworth. He held otherpublic appointments, besides being oneof the vice-presidents of the LockHospital, and of other charitable institutions.Lord Barham died at his seatin Kent, on the 17th of June, 1813, inthe eighty-seventh year of his age. Hemarried Margaret, daughter of JamesGambler, Esq., barrister-at-law, andhad, by his wife, one daughter. AdmiralLord Barham was more distinguishedfor his civil than his naval services ; thelatter of which were small in numberand importance, but honourable on accountof the skill with which they wereperformed.OGLE, (Sir CHALONER,) was bornabout the year 1727; and, in 1761, atwhich time he was captain of the Aquilon,distinguished himself by taking, atdifferent times, five of the enemy's privateers.In 1770, he was nominatedchief officer of the Elizabeth, of seventy-fourguns; and, about the same time,received the honour of knighthood r In1774, he was appointed to the Resolution;and, in 1779, accompanied SirGeorge Rodney, to the relief of Gibraltar; but, being placed in the rear, hadno opportunity of distinguishing himselfin the action. Returning to England,he fell in with a French convoy boundto the East Indies; and, after an actionof half an hour, succeeded in capturinga sixty-four-gun ship, without the lossof even one of his crew. He afterwards,under the command of Admiral Rodney,went out to the West India station ; and,on the 26th of September, 1780, waspromoted to the rank of rear-admiralof the blue. In the February followinghe came home in the Greyhound ; anddid not afterwards hold any command,but, on the 24th of September, 1787, wasmade vice-admiral of the blue ; on the1st of February, 1793, vice of the red;and on the 12th of April, 1794, admiralof the blue squadron. He married, onthe 7th of September, 1761, Miss EstherThomas, youngest daughter of theBishop of Winchester, by whom he hadissue. He died on the 28th of August,1816, at his seat, in the county of Hants,in his eighty-ninth year; and, at thetime of his decease, was senior admiralin the royal navy.ELLIOTT, (JOHN,) was born aboutthe year 1730 ; and, in 1760, being onthe Irish station, had the charge ofthree frigates, with which he captureda small squadron under the Frenchcommander, Thurot, lying off the Isleof Man. For their conduct in thisaffair, Captain Elliott and two otherofficers received from the Irish parliamenta vote of thanks, and had also thefreedom of the city of Cork presentedto them in silver boxes. He afterwardssuccessively commanded the Bellonaand the Trident; was made a commodore,in 1777 ; and, in the followingyear, accompanied Sir George BridgesRodney's expedition undertaken for therelief of Gibraltar. On his return,Captain Elliott was employed in thechannel fleet, as commander of theEdgar, until June, 1782, when hequilted that ship ; but, during the remainderof the war, was not engagedin any matters of importance. In1786, he was nominated governor ofNewfoundland, and retained the appointmentfor the usual period of threeyears. On the 24th of September,1787, he was made rear-admiral of thered; and, on the 21st of February,1790, vice of the blue ; soon afterAPPENDIX.which, he was appointed to a commandin the fleet intended to be sent againstSpain, on the apprehension of hostilitiesconcerning Nootka Sound. Thetime of his death is not known.DOUGLAS, (CHARLES,) of Scotchdescent, is reputed to have been in theDutch service, before he entered theBritish navy. He was made an Englishlieutenant on the 4th of December,1753; and commander, on the 24th ofFebruary, 1759 ; was appointed captainof the Syren, of twenty guns,on the 13th of March, 1761 ; and, inSeptember, 1762, proceeded, under LordMelville, to Newfoundland, in order todisperse the French squadron, underM. De Ternay. In this ship, he attendedthe transports, and covered thelanding of Lieutenant-colonel Amherst,and his troops; a duty he very diligentlyperformed. In 1767, he commandedthe Emerald frigate, of thirty-two guns,on a cruising expedition ; and, towardsthe end of the year 1770, was commissionedto the St. Albans, of sixty-fourguns; and, in 1775, became captainof the Isis, of fifty guns, in whichhe proceeded to North America. Afterhaving, with incredible difficulty, forcedhis way through large fields of thickice, for the space of nearly sixty leagues,he reached the river St. Lawrence, andproceeded to the relief of the capital ofCanada, then closely besieged by theNorth American army; and, on hisarrival, drove the opposing army up theriver in great confusion. He remainedon this station for a short time, andreturned home at the close of the year.As a testimony of his services, he wascreated a baronet, on the 28th ofDecember, 1776 ; and, in 1777, wasemployed on the home station, withthe command of the Stirling Castle, ofsixty-four guns, which vessel was consideredthe slowest sailer in the fleet,being called, according to a quaintterm used amongst seamen, a haystack.He, however, contrived to get it up, soas to take a prominent part in theaction off Ushant, on the 27th of July;and was, soon after, promoted to theDuke, of ninety-eight guns ; and employedin the channel fleet, until theyear 1781, when he became first captainof the Formidable, the flag-ship of SirGeorge Rodney, commander-in-chiefon the West India station. As captainof the fleet, he distinguished himself inthe engagements of the 9th and 12th ofApril, 1782, with the Count de Grasse.Rodney himself is said to have acknowledgedto his private friends, that hissuccess was, in a great degree, attributableto the advice and assistance ofDouglas ; and, in his public despatches,he pays him this tribute : " My owncaptain, Sir Charles Douglas, meritsevery thing I can possibly say: hisunremitted diligence and activity greatlyeased me in the unavoidable fatigue ofthe day." In October, 1783, he hoistedhis broad pendant, as an establishedcommodore, on board the Assistance, offifty guns, in which ship he proceededto assume the chief command on theNova Scotia station. He retained thisappointment until 1786, when he wasrecalled, as it would appear, at his ownrequest, in consequence of some disgusthe had taken. He was promoted tothe rank of rear-admiral of the blue, onthe 24th of September, 1787; and, inJanuary, 1789, is said to have beenre-appointed to the North Americanstation ; but died, at Edinburgh, ofapoplexy, early in the following month.Sir Charles Douglas was distinguished,as an officer, by perseverance andcourage; and, having a taste for mechanicalpursuits, he turned it toaccount, whenever it might, in anydegree, benefit the service. The locksintroduced into the navy, in 1758. asasubstitute for matches, were revisedand improved upon by him ; and wereadopted with success in his own andother ships. It is said that he was acquaintedwith six European languages,and could speak them correctly.KINGSMILL, (Sir ROBERT BRICE,)whose original name was Brice, wasborn about the year 1731, at Belfast;and, at an early age, entered the navalservice, for which he had evinced a predilection.Having filled, with credit, theprevious subordinate stations, he was,in 1762, made a post-captain, and appointedto the Crescent; but he did notcome into action until 1778, In whichyear he commanded the Vigilant, in theengagement between Admiral Repeland Count D'Orvilliers. In the year1790, Kingsmill was appointed to theDuke, of ninety guns; on the 1st ofTHE NAVY.50?February, 1793. advanced to be rear-admiralof the white; and, shortly afterwards,he was nominated on the Irish station. In thissituation he gave general satisfaction ;he distressed and injured the commonfoe to a serious extent ; and the cruisersunder his directions succeeded incapturing twenty-one vessels of war,mounting altogether five hundred andninety-six guns. He resigned his officein 1800, in which year he was created abaronet; and, in 1805, he was madeadmiral of the red; in the November ofwhich year he died, without issue, at hisseat in Hampshire.ROWLEY, (SiR JOSHUA,) was bornin 1732 ; and having entered the navy,commanded the Montagu, of sixtyguns ; in which, in 1757, he proceededto the Mediterranean, and theresignalized himself, under AdmiralOsborn, in the attack made in February,1758, on the Marquess du Queene'ssquadron. On the 20th of November,1759, he assisted materially in LordHawke's defeat of the French fleetunder M. Conflans. In 1760, CaptainRowley was commissioned to the Superb,seventy-four; and in May, 1762,was ordered, with a small armament,in charge of the outward-bound convoyto the East Indies. On the llth ofMarch, he fell in with a very superiorforce under M. de Ternay ; but after hehad formed into a line, the enemy tookalarm, and escaped to avoid an engagement.In 1778, he was appointed acolonel of marines ; and, as commanderof the Monarch, third-rate, served, onthe 27th of July, under Lord Repel,in his encounter with M. d' Villiers.Towards the close of the year, he wasappointed to the Suffolk ; and, havingassumed the rank of commodore, proceededto join Admiral Byron in theWest Indies ; escorting thither, at thesame lime, a fleet of more than twohundred sail of merchantmen. Havingreached his destination, he took partonthe 6th of July, 1779, in the engagementwith the French squadronoff Grenada. He afterwards served inthis quarter, successively, under Rear-admiralDarker and Sir G. B. Rodney ;the latter of whom, in December, 1780,detached him, with the Vengeance,Magnificent, and Stirling Castle, inpursuit of three French frigates, whichhad been seen from the Morne, at St.Lucia ; and which, after a long chase,were taken by their pursuers. Inthe same year, he commanded theConqueror ; and displayed considerablegallantry, in Rodney's encounters withM. de Quicken. Having returned homein 1783, he was not afterwards engagedon active service. On the 10th of June,1786, he was created a baronet ; and,on the 24th of September, 1787, waspromoted to the rank of vice-admiralof the white. He died at his seat,Tending Hall, on the 26th of February,1790, in the fifty-eighth year of hisage. He was married, on the 18th ofMarch, 1759, to Sarah, the eldestdaughter of Bartholomew Barton, Esq.deputy governor of the bank of England,by whom he left issue.CHRISTIAN, (Sir HUGH Closure,)was born about 1736, and attainedthe rank of rear-admiral of thewhite some time previous to 1795. Hewas principally distinguished for hisservices in the West Indies, particularlyfor the assistance he rendered SirRalph Abercromby in the retaking ofSt. Lucia ; his share in which affair wasthus expressed in the official despatch :During the services which havebeen carried on in the island of St.Lucia, all the courage and every exertionof the army would have provedineffectual, if Rear-admiral Sir H. C.Christian and the royal navy had notstepped forward with the alacrity whichhas been so conspicuous in forwardingthe most arduous part of the publicservice ; to their skill and unremittinglabour is, in a great measure, owingthe success which has attended hismajesty's arms." In 1797, he returnedto England; and, as a reward for hisservices at St. Lucia, was appointedcommander-in-chief at the Cape ofGood Hope, where he died in 1798.RUSSELL, (THOMASMA/NAMARA,)was born about the year 1739 ; andhaving, after the death of his father,lost a considerable property, by thenegligence of trustees, entered thenavy when very young, and servedfor fourteen years, as a midshipman.Having at length attained the rank oflieutenant, he was employed, on theAPPENDIX.American coast, in various ships; and,in 1780, signalized himself on board theRaleigh, at the taking of Charlestown,in South Carolina. He was successivelypromoted to the ranks of commanderand post-captain, which latterhe attained on the 7th of May, 1781 ;and, being on a cruise in the Hussar,of twenty guns, captured a frigate, aprivateer, and some other vessels ofinferior consequence. On the 22nd ofJanuary, 1783, Captain Russell wassuccessfully imposed on by a Frenchfrigate, of thirty-eight guns ; which, byhoisting English colours over French,made him mistake her for a distressedprize to one of his majesty's ships ; butthe deceit being soon detected, anaction ensued, which ended in theFrench commander being compelled tostrike his colours. On the return ofCaptain Russell to England, he declinedthe honour of knighthood, on theground that his income was insufficientto sustain the rank that was offered.In 1790, he was ordered, in the Dianafrigate, to the Jamaica station, wherehe twice received the public thanks ofthe inhabitants for his conduct duringan expected insurrection among thenegroes. While serving in this quarter,he was detached, by Admiral Affect,to convoy a cargo of provisions, sent, asan act of humanity, from Jamaica tothe white people of St. Domingo. Hewas welcomed, with grateful joy ; and,as a testimony of the feeling of theinhabitants, was invited to a publicdinner, given, at Aux Cases, by thehouse of assembly. On this occasionhe asked, and obtained a promise, forthe release of one of his countrymen,then under sentence of death on acharge of supplying the blacks witharms ; of which, it appears, he was innocent.The assembly, however, onthe following day, refused to fulfil theiragreement ; declaring no promise madeafter dinner could be considered binding; but, after some further negociation,in which Russell threatened tokill a Frenchman for every hair on thehead of the murdered Englishman, hewas at length set at liberty. Havingperformed this act of humanity, he returnedhome in the Diana; and, beingsoon after put in command of the St.Albans, he was, on the llth of January,1796, nominated to the Vengeance, ofseventy-four guns, in which he waspresent at the taking of St. Lucia andTrinidad. Early in 1799, he servedfor a short time in the channel fleet ;and, on the 23rd of April, 1800, wasappointed to the Princess Royal, whichhe quitted, on his promotion to therank of rear-admiral of the blue, onthe 1st of January following. In 1803,he served, in the North Seas, under theorders of Lord Keith ; and, at thelatter part of the year 1804, was employedin blockading the ports of theTexel. On the 9th of November,1805, he was made vice-admiral ; and,about the year 1807, he was madecommander-in-chief of the North Seasquadron ; in which capacity he effectedthe reduction of Heligoland. On the12th of August, 1812, he became admiralof the blue ; and was afterwardsregularly promoted, until he becameadmiral of the white. He died onthe 22nd of July, 1824, in the eighty-fifthyear of his age ; having beenmarried about the year 1793. AdmiralRussell was employed in the serviceof his country a period of seventyyears, during which time he was presentin thirty-six engagements. Healways showed himself to be a braveand skilful officer ; and possessed, inaddition to the qualifications of a goodsailor, the manners and urbanity of afinished courtier. The following is anextract from a letter written to him byNelson, about the year 1803 : " Youare a pleasant fellow at all times; and,as Commodore Johnstonee said of GeneralMedows, I have no doubt but your companywould be delightful, on the day ofbattle, to your friends, but d d badfor your enemies. 1 desire, my dearRussell, you will always consider measone of the sincerest of the former."FREEMAN, (WILLIAM PeerWILLIAMS,) formerly Williams, wasadvanced to post rank on the 10th ofJanuary, 1771; and, during the warbetween Great Britain and her NorthAmerican colonies, proved himself avery efficient officer. In 1780, he wascaptain of the Flora, of forty-two guns;in which, on the 10th of August, hecaptured La Nymphe, after a desperateencounter. In March, 1781, he servedunder Vice-admiral Darby, in his expeditionfor the relief of Gibraltar;THE NAVY.and, on the 29th of May succeeding,being in company with the Crescent,commanded by the Honourable ThomasI'akenham, he gave chase to twoDutch ships which they had espiedoff the coast of Barbary. After anaction, maintained with great spirit fortwo hours and a quarter, the Castorsurrendered to Captain Williams; butthe Crescent, having been disabled, wasunder the necessity of striking hercolours to the Brille, the other shipbelonging to the enemy. By a manoeuvreof Captain Williams, she was,however, forced to sail off without herprize. After this encounter, he descried,on the 19th of June, two large frigatesbearing down upon him ; and, notwithstandingthe disabled state of his ships,he manifested an intention of fighting.It was, however, thought prudent,among the English officers, to separate ;and the Castor was retaken by theenemy, which also made prize of theCrescent. Captain Williams next commandedthe Prince George, of ninety-eightguns, in which he served, underSir Samuel Hood, at the reduction ofthe island of St. Christopher's, in themonth of March, 1782; and afterwardsunder Sir George B. Rodney, in hisengagements with the Count de Grasse,of the 9th and 12th of April following.He obtained a flagon the 12th of April,1794 ; and, on the demise of KingGeorge the Fourth, was senior admiralof the red. Some few years back, heobtained the royal license to assumethe name of Freeman. Admiral Freemanevinced, on all occasions, skill andgallantry in his profession ; and wasremarkable for being the oldest officerin the service at the accession of Williamthe Fourth, who appointed himadmiral of the fleet, as a mark of respectfor his long services.ONSLOW, (RICHARD,) was born inthe year 1741, and was the nephew ofArthur Onslow, the speaker of the houseof commons. Having become a midshipmanat an early age, he obtainedthe rank of lieutenant on the 17th ofDecember, 1758, and that of commanderon the llth of February, 1761.Being commissioned, in 1762, to theH umber, he convoyed the outwardbound fleet to the Baltic. He continuedto command several ships in successionuntil 1793 ; in which year, he was promotedto the rank of rear-admiral ofthe white, and to that of the red in1794. In the year following, he becamevice-admiral of the red ; and, in1796, he held, for a short period, theoffice of port-admiral of Portsmouth.In October, 1797, the English fleethaving fallen in with the Dutch squadron,he distinguished himself in theaction that took place, on the llth ofthe month, off Camperdown. Theengagement was commenced by him,and he succeeded in passing under thestern of the Dutch vice-admiral's ship,at considerable hazard, and caused itultimately to surrender. AdmiralDuncan, in his official despatches, observes:" My signals were obeyed withgreat promptitude ; and Vice-admiralOnslow, in the Monarch, bore down onthe enemy's rear in the most gallantmanner, his division following his example."Admiral Onslow was rewarded,on the 30th of October, 1797, with abaronetage ; besides which, he receivedthe thanks of both houses of parliament,and was presented with the freedomof the city of London, accompaniedwith a sword of the value of one hundredguineas. Subsequently to thisachievement, Sir Richard Onslow wasnominated a knight grand cross of theorder of the Bath ; and was likewisepromoted to the rank of admiral of thered, and made a lieutenant-general ofmarines. He died at Southampton, onthe 27th of December, 1818, agedseventy-seven.GARDINER, (Lord,) son of ColonelGardiner, of the eleventh regiment ofdragoons, was born on the 12th ofApril, 1742, and commenced his navalcareer on the 1st of May, 1755, onboardthe Medway, of sixty guns ;to which ship he belonged when shetook the Due aquitaine. The subjectof our memoir attained post rank in1766; and, three years after, was marriedto the only daughter of FrancisGale, Esq. of Iguana, in Jamaica.He was actively engaged in the WestIndies, on the breaking out of theAmerican war ; and, in November,1788, being in command of the Maidstone,he captured the Lyon, a Frenchship of forty guns, after an action ofseveral hours. He fought, also, in theAPPENDIX.battle with the French under Detesting;and being afterwards removed to theDuke, of ninety guns, greatly contributed,by his gallantry, to the victorywon, on the 12th of April, 1789, byAdmiral Rodney. Having returned toEngland, he was, in January, 1790,appointed a lord of the admiralty ; and,on the 1st of February, 1793, was promotedto the rank of admiral. In thebeginning of the same year, he wassent to the West Indies ; but returnedin September with a large fleet of merchantmenunder his convoy. On thememorable 1st of June, 1794, he commandedthe Queen, of ninety guns ;and, for his services on this occasion,was elevated to the rank of a baronet,and hit name was included in all thevotes of thanks, conferred by publicbodies, on the sharers in the gloriousvictory. He was likewise presented,by George the Third, with a goldchain and medal. In June, 1795, hewas present, under Lord Bridport, atthe attack of the French fleet off portL'L'Orient ; and had been appointed vice-admiralof the white a short time previouslyto the contest. In 1796, he wasreturned member of parliament forWestminster ; and having, in the sameyear, moved his flag to the RoyalSovereign, of one hundred and tenguns, soon after commanded a squadronemployed in the channel. On the 14thof February, 1799, he was made vice-admiralof the blue ; and appointedcommander-in-chief on the Irish coast,on the 30th of August following. Onthe 2nd of December, 1800, he wascreated a peer of Ireland, by the styleand title of Baron Gardiner, of Ut-together;and, a short time before hisdeath, he had the command of thefleet in the channel. He died at Bath,on the 30th of December, 1808, in thesixty-seventh year of his age ; and wassucceeded in his title by his eldest son,the Honourable Alan Hyde, late LordGardiner.COTTON, (Sir CHARLES,) the sonof a baronet, was born about 1746 jand, having entered the navy at anearly age, gradually rose in the serviceto the rank of full admiral, which heattained on the 28th of April, 1808.Previously to this time, he had receivedthe thanks of parliament for his gallantry;and after having obtained hisflag, Sir Charles Cotton served in thechannel fleet during the greater portionof the time when Earl St. Vincent wasits commander-in-chief, first as third,and afterwards as second, in command.During the interval he was thus employed,his conduct was so satisfactoryto his superior officer as to obtain fromhim the esteem of that distinguishedhero. When Portugal was in the occupationof the French, Sir Charles wasintrusted with the care of a squadron stationedoff Lisbon, where he distinguishedhimself by his kindness and compassiontowards the suffering Portuguese ; manyhundred distressed families of whomhe flowed to take refuge in his ships.He opposed, for some time, the conventionof Cintra, and thrice returned it toits projectors unexecuted ; declaring thatwhile thirty thousand English soldierswere in Portugal, he could not consentto subscribe a document so much infavour of a French army twice beaten.On his return to England, he was appointedcommander-in-chief in theMediterranean ; whence he returned,in 1811, for the purpose of assumingthe chief command of the channel fleet,and terminated his professional career.He died suddenly, on the 23rd ofFebruary, 1812, at Stoke, near Plymouth.Sir Charles Cotton, who hadthe reputation of an excellent commanderand a good man, was married,on the 27th of February, 1798, toPhiladelphia, eldest daughter of SirJoshua Rowley; by whom he had issuetwo sons and two daughters.KEATS, (SIR RICHARD GOODWIN,)was born in Devonshire, in 1750 ; and,having entered the navy, became lieutenantof the Ramillies, and was presentin that ship at the action between AdmiralRepel and Count D'Orvilliers,in 1778. He was afterwards actinglieutenant in the Prince George, man-of-war;in which ship the Duke ofClarence, then Prince William, commencedhis naval career as a midshipman; and of whom Lieutenant Keatshad the charge and instruction. Aboutthe year 1782, he was promoted to therank of commander, in the Rosettasloop ; and served, with great credit, onthe American station, during the remainderof the colonial war. In 1789,THE NAVY.he was made post-captain; and, afterhaving made several successful cruisesin various vessels, was appointed to theSuperb, of seventy-four guns, in whichhe destroyed a Spanish three-decker,off Gibraltar, without losing a singleman. In 1804, he was despatched toAlgiers, with a consul, whom he succeededin establishing most honourably,and thus put an end to the differencesthat had for some time subsisted betweenGreat Britain and that regency.On the 9th of November, he was appointedto one of the vacant colonel'sof royal marines. About the sametime, his ship received the flag of Sir J.T. Duckworth, who, after the battle ofCape Trafalgar, was appointed secondin command of the Mediterranean fleet,under Lord Collingwood, by whom hewas sent in quest of a squadron that hadsailed from France, with a view ofsuccouring the important colony of St.Domingo. For their conduct in theaction which followed, Captain Keats andthe other officers engaged, received thethanks of parliament, and the option ofa sword or vase, of the value of 100,voted by the committee of the PatrioticFund. On the 2nd of October, 1807,he was promoted to the rank of rear-admiral,and hoisted his flag in theSuperb, as commander of -a division ofthe fleet stationed in the Baltic, underSir James Saumarez. On the 31st ofJuly, 1810, he was promoted to therank of vice-admiral, in which capacityhe commanded the naval forces employedfor the defence of Cadizz, wherehe remained till the summer of 1811,when he proceeded to the Mediterranean,and hoisted his flag on board theHibernia, 'of one hundred and twentyguns, as second in command on thatstation. On the 20th of February,1813, he was named commander-in-chiefat Newfoundland, and governorof that colony, where his services, asaflag officer, terminated. He becamemajor-general of the royal marines onthe 7th of May, 1818, and governorof Greenwich Hospital early in 1821.Sir Richard Keats may, perhaps, bejustly esteemed one of the most distinguishedof the living naval characterswho have served in the long andarduous wars that began with theAmerican contest and ended with thedownfal of Napoleon. On the 27th of ]June, 1820, he married Mary, eldestdaughter of the late Francis Hurt, Esq.of Alderwesley, Derbyshire ; by whomhe has no issue.MONTAGU, (GEORGE,) eldest sonof Admiral John Montagu, was bornon the 12th of December, 1750, andeducated at the Royal Naval Academy.About the year 1767, he proceeded, inthe Preston, of fifty guns, to the Jamaicastation ; and, having attained therank of post-captain, on the 15th ofApril, 1773, was employed, at the commencementof the American war, inblockading the ports of Marblehead andSalem. After having captured theWashington, of sixteen guns, the firstvessel of war sent to sea by the Americanstates, he covered the embarkationof the army at the evacuation of Boston ;where, it is said, he was put in thestocks, for walking the streets on a Sunday.By way of retaliation, on the daybefore the place was abandoned, heinvited the mayor and aldermen to dinner,and ordered his boatswain to givethem a dozen lashes each. After havingassisted at the siege of New York,where his vessel, the Fowey, was stationed,by Lord Howe, as the advancedship, his health being much impaired,he returned to England; whence, in1779, he sailed, in the Pearl frigate ;and, although only ten of his crew hadpreviously served in a vessel of war, he,soon afterwards, succeeded in takingthe Santa Monica, a Spanish frigate,of thirty-two guns and two hundredand eighty men. He was next employedin the fleet sent out underRodney for the relief of Gibraltar;whence, on the capture of the Caracasconvoy, his ship, and the Africa, ofsixty-four guns, proceeded with theprizes to England. From thence hewent on a cruise off Bermuda ; and, onthe 30th of September, fell in with, andcaptured, Temperance, a French frigateof nine hundred tons burthen, with avaluable cargo. He returned, in 1782,to England ; and, in 1790, was appointedto the Hector, of seventy-fourguns; with which he, in 1793, accompaniedRear-admiral Gardner toBarbadoes, and was subsequently despatched,in company with the Hannibal,seventy-four, to reinforce thesquadron on the Jamaica station. InAPPENDIX.1794, he was promoted to a flag; andafter various services, was, in 1801,made a full admiral ; and, in 1803, appointedto the chief command at Portsmouth.He resigned this office in 1810 ;and was, in the same year, presented,by a large body of captains, with a pieceof plate, as a tribute of their respectand esteem. He died on the 24th ofDecember, 1829, at which time he wasa G. C. B., and left five children, byhis wife, who was the daughter andco-heiress of George Wrought, Esq.,of Wilmot, Wilts. The career of AdmiralMontagu was, if not very brilliant,at least of great service to his country,and highly honourable to his zeal andability.Colors, (Sir JOHN,) was bornabout the year 1750; and, having passedthrough the necessary grades of thenaval profession, attained the rank ofpost-captain. In 1779, he constituteda member of the court-martial assembledto investigate the conduct of Sir HughPalliser; and, in August of the sameyear, he commanded the Royal George,of one hundred guns, which served inthe channel fleet under Sir CharlesHardy. The British force was orderedagainst the combined fleets of Franceand Spain ; of which the English admiral,seeing the superiority in numbers,determined on acting only on thedefensive; but the allied fleets returnedinto port, without venturing on an attack.From this period, there are noparticulars regarding the career ofCaptain Colpoys, until 1795 ; in whichyear he was employed in the channelfleet, with the rank of rear-admiral, onboardthe London. He returned, onthe 16th of April, to Spithead, from acruise in the Bay of Biscay, where hehad made several prizes. He was soonafter a member of the court-martialconvened to inquire into the conductof Captain Molly, of the Caesar; andhe subsequently performed a similaroffice on the occasion of the trial ofAdmiral Cornwall*. He was, aboutthis time, advanced to the rank of vice-admiralof the blue. He continued toserve in the channel fleet on board theLondon, which ship was rendered conspicuousduring the mutinies at Spitheadand St. Helen's. On this occasion,he went on board the QueenCharlotte, with Admiral Gardner, toconfer with the delegates ; but did notsucceed in the object of his mission,which was, to obtain compliance witha proposal for reducing the men toobedience. Terms were at lengthagreed on, through the agency of LordBridport, and the men consented toput to sea; but, on arriving at St.Helen's, they began to suspect the sincerityof the government. A meetingof the delegates was ordered on boardthe London, which Admiral Colpoysopposed ; and having ordered the marinesto level their pieces at them, fiveseamen were killed. The whole crewof the London now turned their gunstowards the stern ; and threatened toblow all aft into the water, unless theircommanders surrendered. While theseamen were proceeding to hang LieutenantOver, for having given directionsto fire, Colpoys interposed, andnobly observed, that the lieutenant wasnot to blame, but himself only ; andthat he, himself, acted under ordersfrom the lords of the admiralty. Havingobtained these orders from the vice-admiral,they confined him for somehours to his cabin, as well as the otherofficers of the ship; and Colpoys, in afew days went on shore, with CaptainGriffith, at the request of the mutineers.By the interference of Lord Howe, thefleet was soon restored to discipline;and, in a short time afterwards, cheerfullysailed in pursuit of the enemy.The part which Vice-admiral Colpoyswas ordered to perform in this affair,created in him feelings of dissatisfaction,as he was desired to dischargea duty which he had not the means ofenforcing. He, therefore, retired fromactive service, and was invested withthe order of the Bath as a knight commander.On the death of Lord Hood,Sir John Colpoys was appointed governorof Greenwich Hospital ; an officewhich he held until the period of hisdemise, which took place, at that institution,on the 4th of April, 1821. Whenthat event happened, he stood third onthe list of admirals of the red.TROLLOPE, (Sir HENRY,) bornabout the year 1750, held the rank oflieutenant on the breaking out of thewar with Holland, and cruised mostsuccessfully, with the Kite cutter, inTHE NAVY.the channel. In 1781, he was investedwith post rank ; and, on the 4th ofSeptember, 1782, whilst in commandof the Rainbow, he took a Frenchfrigate of fifty guns, called La Hebe.The Rainbow being paid off in 1783,he purchased a seat in Wales, wherehe resided for some time, liberally dispensingthe fortune he had honourablyacquired. On the apprehension, however,of a rupture with Spain, he wascommissioned to La Prudente, fromwhich he was transferred, in succession,to the Hussar and Glutton. In the latter,while passing from Yarmouth, on the15th of July, 1796, to join a squadron atHelvoetsluys, he fell in with six frigates,a cutter, and a large brig, which hehad the courage to attack ; and, for hisgallantry, was rewarded, by the merchantsof London, with a piece of plateof the value of one hundred guineas.In 1797, he was left in the Russell,seventy-four, with two other ships,to watch the motions of the Dutchfleet in the Texel ; and took a distinguishedpart in the great victoryobtained over the Dutch fleet on thellth of October, off Camperdown; forhis conduct on which occasion, he receivedthe honour of knighthood. Onthe 1st of January, 1801, he was promotedto the rank of rear-admiral ofthe blue ; and has been progressivelyadvanced to that of admiral of the red.On the 20th of May, 1820, he wasinvested with the order of the Bath,as a knight commander. He was marriedto a lady named Best, about theyear 1782.BERKELEY, (GEORGE Cranfield,)brother of the late Earl Berkeley,was born in 1750 ; and, havingentered the navy, rose, with credit, tothe rank of post-captain, which heattained in 1780. In 1786, he wasappointed surveyor-general of ordnance;and, in 1792, he sailed in the Niger, forthe West Indies, as president of theboard of engineers, and commissionerfor inquiring into the frauds and abusescommitted in that quarter against thegovernment. He next acted in thechannel fleet under Lord Howe, as captainof the Marlborough, seventy-four ;and signalized himself in the memorablebattle of the 1st of June, 1794, for hisconduct on which occasion, he receivedthe thanks of parliament ; the medal ofmerit from the king; and the appointmentof colonel of marines, at theensuing promotion of flag officers. Inthe year 1795, he commanded theFormidable, of ninety-eight guns ; and,in 1798, was constituted commander ofthe sea fencibles, from Bosworth toBeachy Head, on the coast of Sussex.In the succeeding year, he was promotedto the rank of rear-admiral ofthe blue ; and, with his flag on boardthe Mars, seventy-four, was employedin the channel fleet, during the continuanceof the war, in blockading theports of Brest and Rochefort. Sometimeafter the renewal of hostilities,he went out, as commander-in-chief,on the Halifax station; and, whilethus employed, gave offence to theAmerican government, by firing on theChesapeake, where he suspected somedeserters from his own ship were concealed.In consequence of this affair,he was recalled ; and, on his return toEngland, he sat in parliament until1812, for the county of Gloucester, whichhe had represented from the year 1781.He married, in 1784, Emily Charlotte,daughter of Lord George Lennox, bywhom he had issue, two sons and threedaughters ; and died on the 25th ofFebruary, 1818; being, at the time ofhis decease, a knight grand cross of theorder of the Bath, admiral of the white,and lord-high-admiral of Portugal.THORNBOROUGH,(SirEDWARD,)born about 1754, was first lieutenant ofthe Falcon sloop, one of the ships thatcovered the attack made in 1775, onBunker's Hill, during the war with America.He was subsequently woundedin an unsuccessful attempt to bring outa schooner from Cape Maun Harbour;and, in 1780, assisted at the taking ofLa Nymphe, by the Flora frigate. Hewas made a commander for his conducton this occasion, and, in 1781, was promotedto the rank of post captain. Inthe following year, being chief officerof the Blonde frigate, he was wreckedwhile endeavouring to take a capturedship to Halifax, and the crews, beingenabled, by means of a raft, to reach adesolate island, underwent great privationfor two days, till they were pickedup by two American cruisers, and landednear New York, as a return for the kind-appendix.ness shown by Thornborough to his prisoners.He was subsequently appointedto the Hebe, the finest frigate in thenavy, and remained in it for six years ;during a portion of which time, PrinceWilliam Henry served on board aslieutenant. Captain Thornborough afterwardscommanded, in succession, theScipio, of sixty-four guns, and the Latona,of thirty-eight; in the latter ofwhich, at the commencement of thewar with the French republic, he tookseveral privateers belonging to theenemy. While serving under LordHowe, he espied, on the 18th ofNovember, 1793, a French squadron,to which chase was immediately given,and Captain Thornborough, who headedthe pursuit, was, at noon, so far a-headas to engage the enemy's frigates. Hewas prevented from cutting one of themoff by two French line-of-battle ships,which bore down on him with theirbroadsides, and he returned their firewith effect, though his own vessel, theLatona, sustained no injury. He wasassured, through Earl Howe, of thesatisfaction his conduct had given tothe lords of the admiralty, and a fewdays after the above event, he captured,in company with the Phaeton, a Frenchvessel, called La Blonde, off Ushant.In the following year, the Latona wasemployed, on the 1st of June, as one ofthe repeating frigates in Lord Howe'sengagement. Captain Thornboroughremoved, in the autumn following, intothe Robust, seventy-four, and was employedunder Sir J. B. Syren, in cooperationwith the French royalists.The Robust was then attached, forthree years, to the channel fleet, afterwhich it was again under the orders ofSir John Warren, and was employedin cutting off communication betweenFrance and Ireland. On the 12th ofOctober, 1798, Captain Thornboroughwas ordered to commence an actionwith a French force, consisting of LaHoche, of seventy-eight guns, eightfrigates, a schooner, and a brig, underM. Compare. Being ably supportedby Captain De Courcy, in the Magnanime,forty-four, he compelled theHoche to strike, after a spirited defenceof nearly four hours. He repaired,after this event, to Plymouth,and received, in common with the restof the squadron, the thanks of parliament.Early in 1799, he was appointedto the Formidable, ninety-eight, andnominated a colonel of marines. Inthe May following, he was employed,under Lord St. Vincent, in the Mediterranean,but joined the channel fleetin the autumn ensuing. He becamerear-admiral of the blue on the 1st ofJanuary, 1801; and commanded thein-shore squadron off Brest, alternatelywith Admiral Saumarez, until the cessationof hostilities. On the renewalof war, in 1803, he served in the NorthSeas with Lord Keith ; in 1806, he wasemployed off Rochefort; and, in 1808,in the protection of Sicily. In 1810,he returned home, and being appointedcommander in-chief on the Irish station,retained that post until 1813. On the2nd of January, 1815, he was constituteda K. C. B. ; and, in the course ofthe same year, was advanced to thechief command at Portsmouth. Heresigned this post in 1818, and hassince been made a knight grand crossof the order of the Bath, and an admiralof the white squadron. He hasbeen twice married ; and, by his firstwife, had several children. His secondlady, whom he married on the 4th ofDecember, 1802, and who died in December,1813, was the daughter of SirEdwin Jaques, of Gloucester.DE COURCY, (the HonourableMICHAEL,) the third son of John, thetwenty-fifth Lord Kingsley, attainedpost rank in the navy, in 1783; and,subsequently, became captain of theMagnanime; in which, among othercaptures, he took five French privateers;assisted at the taking of an enemy'sfrigate, mounting thirty-six guns ; andparticularly distinguished himself, onthe 12th of October, 1798, in the actionoff Ireland, under Sir J. B. Warren.In February of the following year, hewas appointed to the Canada; and, onthe 10th of April, 1801, the Mars havingbeen dismasted in a severe gale, hesucceeded in rescuing her, though theattempt had been previously made, withoutsuccess, by two other vessels. In1803, he was made commander of thePlantagenet, third-rate, in which hecruised, for a period, off the Irish coast;and then escorted, to a safe latitude, afleet bound for the East Indies. Onhis voyage back, he took charge of aTHE NAVY.quantity of ships that had sailed fromChina; and when he arrived in thiscountry, was presented, by the EastIndia Company, with five hundred guineas.He was next appointed to theSt. George, ninety-eight, on the 28th ofNovember, 1804 ; and served on theJamaica station until the 9th of Novemberof the ensuing year, when he wasadvanced to the rank of rear-admiral ofthe blue. In 1809, he commanded anarmament employed in the embarkationof the land forces, at Corunna ; and,for the ability he displayed, receivedthe thanks of parliament. Soon afterthis, he had the command in-chief of asquadron at the Brazils, from whencehe returned home, in 1812, havinggained the friendship of the king ofPortugal, who invested him with theorder of the Tower and Sword. Hebecame a vice-admiral on the 31st ofJuly, 1810; and admiral of the blue, onthe 19th of July, 1821. He was marriedon the 24th of October, 1786, to aMiss Blennerhasset, a lady of Kerry, bywhom he had issue ; and died on the22nd of February, 1824, at his seat,Stockton House, near Salts, Cornwall.BERTIE, (ALBEMARLE,) was bornon the 20th of January 1755, and havingentered the navy, was made a post-captainon the 21st of March, 1782,and served in the channel, on board theCrocodile. Being, in 1792, in commandof the Edgar, seventy four, he assistedin taking a French privateer of considerablevalue. In 1794, he removed tothe Thunderer, which formed part ofLord Howe's fleet, in the famous actionof the 1st of June; and, having beenemployed in the expedition to the Frenchcoast, under Sir B. Warren, he held thecommands, successively, of the Renown,the Windsor Castle, and the Malta. Inthe last of these ships, he was stationedoff St. Helens, in 1801, to examine allvessels entering Portsmouth ; and whileon this duty, the Malta caught fire, buthe obviated all danger, by the excellentorders he gave, and the coolness withwhich he acted. He became rear-admiralof the blue, on the 23rd ofApril, 1804 ; and, having been employedfor a time in the channel, was madecommander-in-chief of the Cape ofGood Hope. In 1810, with a fleet ofseventy sail, he proceeded to the Isle ofFrance ; and, the governor being forcedto surrender, it became a British colony,by treaty bearing date the 3rd of December.The booty found on the islandbecame the subject of legal litigationbetween Bertie and the HonourableRobert Stopford, who had succeededto the command of the Cape of GoodHope, before the surrender of the Isleof France ; and who claimed accordinglya share of the prizes. The dispute was,however, settled by Sir William Scott,in Admiral Bertie's favour. He wasmade vice-admiral on the 28th of April,1808; a baronet on the 9th of December,1812; and admiral of the blue, on the4th of June, 1814. He became a knightcommander of the Bath, in 1815; andwas admiral of the white, at his death,which happened on the 23rd of February,1824. He married, on the 1st of July,1783, a Miss Emma Heywood, bywhom he had three children.PURVIS, (JOHN CHILD,) was bornabout 1755, and served, in 1778, aslieutenant in the Invincible, on theAmerican station. He was next removedto the Britannia, from which hewas promoted to the command of theDue de Chartres, of sixteen guns, inwhich, on the 19th of August, 1782, hecaptured, off Cape Henry, L'Aigle, oftwenty-two guns, for which he wasmade a post-captain on the 1st of Septemberfollowing. In 1793, he formedpart of the British squadron in the portof Toulon; and, during a period of sixweeks, his ship was daily engaged withthe republicans of France, and, besidesbeing considerably damaged, sustained aloss of many men in killed and wounded.After this, he contributed towards the reductionof St. Fiorenzo, and Bastia; andon the 14th of March, 1795, was presentwith Vice-admiral Hotham, in his encounterwith the French fleet off Genoa,on which occasion, the Ca Ira, of eightyguns, surrendered to Captain Purvis.After the peace of Amiens, on the renewalof hostilities in 1803, he was constitutedcaptain of the Dreadnought,ninety-eight, attached to the main fleetunder Admiral Cornwallis. On the23rd of April, 1804, he was advancedto the rank of rear-admiral of the blue ;and on the 1st of June, 1806, hoistedhis flag on board the Chiffbne', in whichship he assisted, for two years and sevenAPPENDIX.months, in the blockade of Cadizz. Continuingto serve in behalf of Spain, hewas, early in the year 1810, engagedin blowing up the forts and batteriesalong the east side of the harbour ofCadizz. In a short time, and after othertrifling services, Captain Purvis returnedhome ; was made a vice-admiral on the25th of October, 1809, and on the 12thof August, 1819, became admiral of theblue, being the rank which he held athis decease. He was married, first, toMiss Garrett, daughter of Daniel Garrett,Esq., of Portsmouth, by whom hehad a son ; and, secondly, on the 2nd ofAugust, 1804, to Elizabeth, daughter ofAdmiral Sir Richard Dickson, Bart.KNOWLES, (Sir CHARLES HENRY,Bart.) son of a baronet, obtained therank of post-captain on the 2nd ofFebruary, 1780 ; and was afterwardsemployed in the San Miguel, of seventy-twoguns, as senior officer of thenaval armament at Gibraltar, where hethwarted the enemy in several endeavoursto recapture that important fortress.He returned home in 1783 ; and,in 1793, was appointed to the Daedalusfrigate, of thirty-two guns, which,having sustained some injury on hervoyage to Halifax, put into Norfolk, inVirginia, to refit, where she was blockadedby a French squadron. The greaterpart of the enemy put to sea on the 20thof April, 1794, but left a frigate and acorvette to watch the Daedalus. WhileSir Charles Knowles was preparing (notwithstandingthe powerful opposition hemust encounter) to proceed to Halifax,he was joined by the Terpsichore, ofthirty-two guns, which enabled him tosail without resistance. The Frenchmenfollowed them at first, as if inclinedto engage, but in a short time returnedto their original position. In 1795, theDaedalus was paid off, and Sir CharlesKnowles was commissioned, successively,to the Edgar, third-rate, and afterwardsto the Goliath. In the latter vessel heserved in Lord St. Vincent's memorablebattle of the 14th of February, 1797,for his services on which occasion hereceived a gold medal. On the 14th ofFebruary, 1799, he was made a flagofficer, and has now the rank of admiralof the red. Towards the latterend of May, 1820, he was nominated aknight grand cross of the order of theBath. On the 10th of September,1800, he married Charlotte, daughterof Charles Johnstonee, Esq. of Ludlow.BALL, (Sir ALEXANDER,) born inthe year 1756, was educated at a schoolin Northampton, from which he wentto France ; and entered the navy, about1768, in the Dolphin frigate. He attainedthe rank of post-captain sometimeprevious to 1798, at which time hewas employed in the blockade of Malta ;and, owing to the civil dissensions whicharose in the island, he was requested torestore tranquillity, by assuming thegovernment. A petition to the sameeffect, having been forwarded from theMaltese to Lord Nelson and the Kingof Sicily, Captain Ball took upon himselfthe permanent command. A shorttime after his landing, finding the placein a state of famine, and Sicily refusingto allow the exportation of its corn, hesent thither a lieutenant in the Alexander,to bring out, from the port ofMessina, a number of vessels ladenwith grain. He conducted the siegeof Valette, which surrendered on the20th of September ; and his success issaid to have been owing to the co-operationof the Maltese, over whom he possesseda wonderful influence. On the7th of January, 1801, he was rewardedwith the order of Ferdinand and ofMerit ; on the 6th of June, he wasmade a K. C. B. ; and, on the 23rd ofSeptember following, was appointed acommissioner of the navy. Sir AlexanderBall continued governor of Maltauntil his death, which happened on the25th of October, 1809. He had longenjoyed the friendship of Nelson andCollingwood ; the former of whom, in1798, said to him, " What do youexpect by going with me ? do you wishto get your bones broken ?" " I didnot, sir," replied Ball, "come into serviceto save my bones: I know youare going on a perilous service, andam therefore happy to go with you."During the subsequent tempest in theGulf of Lyons, Nelson so much admiredthe talents and greatness of mind ofCaptain Ball, that from that time, theutmost intimacy and mutual regardexisted between these officers. LordCollingwood, in his memoirs, says of SirAlexander Ball, " He cannot be replacedin Malta, nor is there a man in EnglandTHE NAVY.qualified to govern the Maltese, buthimself; they are all too little or toogreat."GAMBIER, (JAMES, Lord,) wasborn on the 13th of October, 1756;and, having entered the naval service,advanced, in 1778, to the rank of commander,on board the Thunder, bomb-vessel,in which he was taken prisonerby the French squadron, under theorders of the Count Detesting. Hesailed afterwards to North America, andserved at the taking of Charlestown ;and, in the year 1781, he captured anAmerican ship of war, mounting twentyguns. In 1793, he commanded theDefence, of seventy-four guns, whichformed part of the squadron under EarlHowe, and highly distinguished himselfby his heroism on the day of hislordship's memorable victory of the 1stof June, 1794. His next appointmentwas to the Prince George, of ninetyguns ; and, as a reward for his formerservices, he was, about the same time,made a colonel of marines. On the 1stof June, 1795, he was made rear-admiralof the blue, having been previouslynominated a lord of the admiralty,which office he retained until February,1801, when he hoisted his flag on boardthe Neptune, ninety-eight, as third incommand of the channel fleet. In April,1802, he was constituted governor ofNewfoundland, and commander-in-chiefof the naval armament stationed there.From this line of service he was transferredto the admiralty ; and, in May,1804, resumed his seat at the board.In 1807, he was appointed to the commandof the fleet against Copenhagen,which town he bombarded, and, inconjunction with Lord Cathcart, whoconducted the land attack, forced tocapitulate. His services on this expeditionwere rewarded with a peerage;and, on the 3rd of November following,he was created Baron Gambler, of Ever,in the county of Buckingham. In 1808,he was appointed commander-in-chiefof the main or channel fleet ; and, shortlyafterwards, destroyed part of the Frenchfleet in the Basque Roads. For hisconduct in this affair, he was, in consequenceof the representations of LordCochrane, brought to a court-martial, in1809, which gave him an honourableacquittal; and, he afterwards receivedthe thanks of both houses of parliamentfor his services on the occasionalluded to. In 1814, he was intrustedwith the superintendence of a commission,appointed to meet American envoysat Ghent, for the purpose of enteringinto a treaty of peace between GreatBritain and the United States; and, inJune, 1815, he was nominated a G. C. B.Lord Gambler was not only a gallantand skilful officer, but an active promoterof all measures tending to thebenefit of the service. He formed aplan for constructing a seventy-four, soas to give it the appearance, at a distance,of a large frigate ; and inventeda systematic course of signals, which,we believe, are now in use on boardhis majesty's ships. He has, for manyyears, been noted for his active countenanceof the Bethel Union, and otherinstitutions for the religious instructionof seamen, whose morals and conducthis exertions have tended materiallyto ameliorate. His lordship marriedLouisa, second daughter of DanielMatthews, Esq., of Felix Hall, in thecounty of Essex; but had no issue.Eagle, (SiR EDMUND,) nephewof Edmund Burke, the distinguishedstatesman, was born about the year1757, and, having entered the navy,became a post-captain in 1783, anddistinguished himself in various actions,particularly whilst forming part of thesquadron under Captain Pellew, in1794. At this time he was commanderof the Artois, with which vessel hecaptured the French frigate, La Revolutionary;for his conduct in whichaffair he was rewarded with thehonour of knighthood. He continuedin the Artois until the 31st of July,1797, when his vessel was destroyedby running on a sand bank, off Rochelle.In 1801, he was appointed to the Montagu,seventy-four, from which he wastransferred to the Juste, of eighty guns,in which he served until the peace ofAmiens. On the rupture which tookplace in 1803, he was invested with thecharge of the sea fencibles, fromBosworth to Beachy Head; an appointmentwhich he resigned in November,1805, being, on the 9th of that month,advanced to the rank of rear-admiralof the blue; and, early in 1S08, hewas nominated commander-in-chief atAPPENDIX.Guernsey. In July, 1810, he wasappointed a vice-admiral ; and, in1813, as governor of Newfoundland,he hoisted his flag on board the Antelope.On the occasion of the alliedsovereigns revisiting the fleet at Spithead,in the year 1814, he was highlydistinguished by the Prince Regent,who constituted him one of his navalaides-de-camp; and on the 2nd ofJanuary, 1815, he was made a knightcommander of the Bath. When hisroyal highness became regent, the admiralwas appointed to a post in theroyal household, and, on the accessionof George the Fourth to the throne,was constituted one of the lords ofthe bedchamber. He was esteemedan excellent and courageous seaman,and was a great favourite amongst hisofficers and those under his command.He was married, on the 16ih of August,1798, to the widow of John LucieBlackmail, Esq. of Craven Street, anddied on the llth of March, 1830, at hishouse, East Mouse, aged seventy-three.Landgrave, (WILLIAM, LordRadstock,) was born on the 9th ofJuly, 1758 ; and, having entered thenavy, served in the Mediterranean andWestern Seas in the station of a midshipman.Having attained post rank,we find him, about 1800, cruising, inthe La Prudente, off Cape Ortegal ;where, in company with the Licorne,he engaged a French frigate, called LaCapricieuse, which surrendered, afteran action that lasted for four hours.Early in 1781, he accompanied AdmiralDarby to the relief of Gibraltar, andcontributed towards the capture of aquantity of French transports, withtroops and stores on board, destinedfor the West Indies. On the prospect ofa rupture with Spain, in 1790, he wasappointed to the Majestic, of seventy-fourguns; and, in 1793, he proceeded inthe Courageux, seventy-four, with Vice-admiralHotham, to the Mediterranean.Not long after, he was appointed acolonel of marines ; and on the 4th ofJuly, 1794, was promoted to the rankof rear-admiral of the blue. He wasraised, on the 1st of June, 1795, to therank of vice-admiral ; and, in the succeedingautumn, proceeded to the Mediterranean,where he acted under SirJohn Jervis, and was present with thatadmiral in the memorable engagementwith the Spanish fleet off Cape St.Vincent, on the 14th of February, 1797.Not long subsequent to the victory, hewas appointed governor of Newfoundland,and naval commander-in-chiefon that station, in which capacity hecontinued to serve for several years.After having refused a baronetage, hewas made a peer of Ireland, on the29th of December, 1800, by the title ofBaron Radstock, of Castlewood, Queen'scounty; and, on the 29th of April, 1802,was made full admiral. On the 2nd ofJanuary, 1815, he was distinguished bythe order of the Bath, and made aknight grand cross. Lord Radstockwas married at Smyrna, in the year1785, to Cornelia, second daughter ofDavid Van Lennep, Esq., chief of theDutch factory there, by whom he hadissue several children. He died on the20th of August, 1825, and at his deceasewas admiral of the red, presidentof the Naval Charitable Society, commissionerof the Church and CorporationLand-tax ; a vice-president of the Asylum,and of the Mary-le-bone GeneralDispensary ; and also of many otherbenevolent institutions. Lord Radstock,as a naval officer, was always successfulin the undertakings intrusted to him;and in private life, he was zealouslyemployed in promoting institutions forthe amelioration of the condition of thepoor, and for the advancement of religion.His lordship was a great admirerof paintings, and a considerableportion of his personal property consistedof productions of some of thefirst masters. George the Third offeredhim a pension on account of his services,which he, however, waived, on conditionthat, at his decease, his eldest sonshould become entitled to 500 perannum.CARNEGIE, (WILLIAM, Earl ofNorthesk,) son of George, Earl ofNorthesk, was born about the year1758 ; and, when thirteen years ofage, entered the navy as a midshipman,on board the Albion. In 1781, heserved at the reduction of St. Eustatius;and, in the following year, after havingattained the rank of post-captain, returnedto England. In 1789, he marriedMiss Mary Rickets, niece of the EarlTHE NAVY.St. Vincent. In 1792, he succeeded tothe earldom of Northesk ; and, in 1796,was elected one of the representativepeers for Scotland. During the sameyear, he was employed with the Monmouth,sixty-four, in the North Sea,under Admiral Duncan, to whosesquadron, the spirit of disaffection,which had originated in the channelfleet, having spread, the Monmouthwas brought to the Nore by her crew ;and Lord Northesk was selected by themutineers to carry their demands to theking, tn 1803, he was commissioned tothe Blenheim ; and, in 1804, he hoistedhis flag as a rear-admiral, on board theBritannia, and served in the blockadeof Brest. In the following year, hewas detached, under Sir Robert Calder,to reinforce Admiral Collingwood, atCadizz ; and afterwards served, as thirdin command, at the battle of Trafalgar ;in which he completely dismasted aFrench ship, of eighty guns, and keptat bay three of the enemy's van, thatwere attempting to double upon Nelson'sship, the Victory, then muchdisabled, and hotly engaged with twoother vessels. In 1806, he was investedwith the insignia of the order ofthe Bath ; and he also received, on accountof his great services, the thanksof both houses of parliament, and ofthe city of London ; the freedom of thegoldsmith's company ; and a valuablesword from the inhabitants of the metropolis.On the 14th of June, 1814, hewas promoted to the rank of admiral ofthe white ; and subsequently becameadmiral of the red, and vice-admiral ofGreat Britain. Lord Northesk showedhimself, on all occasions, a commanderof great skill and bravery ; and thougha strict disciplinarian, was so warma lover of justice, that he would devoteseveral hours, if necessary, to patient investigation,before inflicting the smallestpunishment.COFFIN, (Sir ISAAC,) was born onthe 16th of May, 1759; and enteredthe service at the age of fourteen years,in the Gaspee brig, on the Americanstation. In 1778, he was promoted tothe rank of lieutenant, and appointedcommander of the Placentia cutter, andwas afterwards wrecked, in Le Person,on the coast of Labrador. In November,1779, he was nominated to the Adamant ;and, in the succeeding year, convoyeda fleet of merchantmen to New York.He was next employed on the Americancoast; and, while at Halifax, in July,1781, was advanced to the rank of commander.He was then, successively,appointed to the Avenger and Pacha-hunter;and being present in the latterduring the fire at the town of St. John's,made such great exertions to extinguishthe flames, that he was voted an addressof thanks by the house of assembly.About 1789, whilst in command of theThisbe, on the Halifax station, he wasbrought to a court-martial, for returninga false muster of his ship's company; apractice then in use, enabling youngofficers to serve their time at school orat home, without submitting themselvesto the usual routine of a naval education.For this he was, in the first instance,dismissed from the commandof his ship ; but the matter comingunder purview of the admiralty board,his name was altogether erased from thelist of naval officers. Irritated at suchtreatment, he entered into the service ofthe Brabant patriots; but the proceedingsof Earl Howe, and the other lordsof the admiralty, having been declaredillegal by the judges, he was reinstatedin the king's service, as a post-captain.In the year 1790, he was commissionedto the Alligator, of twenty-eight guns :and, while lying at the Nore, he rupturedhimself, by leaping into the waterto save the life of a man who had fallenoverboard. A similar accident occurredto him in 1793 ; and, on his recovery,he was intrusted with the regulationservice at Leith ; from October,1795, to October, 1796, he was residentcommissioner at Corsica; and, for twoyears after, he superintended the navalestablishment at Lisbon. In 1798, hewas intrusted with the "direction of thearsenal at Port Mahon,on the reductionof the island of Minorca. After otherservices, he was, on the 23rd of April,1804, made rear-admiral of the blue;and, on the 19th of May succeeding, wascreated a baronet. In April, 1808, hewas advanced to be a vice-admiral ; onthe 4th of June, 1814, he was appointedadmiral of the blue ; and, on the demiseof George the Fourth, held the samerank in the white squadron. In 1818,he was returned to parliament for Rochester,and represented that place until theAPPENDIX.year 1826. He was married on the 3rdof April, 1811, to Elizabeth Browne,only child of William Greenly, of TitleCourt, Herefordshire, Esq.DRUIlY,(WiLtiAMO'BRYEN,)bornabout the year 1760, in Ireland, attainedthe rank of post-captain on the18th of January, 1783, having previouslydistinguished himself in theAmerican war, and particularly in thebattle off Camperdown, under LordDuncan. During the peace that followed,he commanded the Spitfire,guard-ship, at Cork, but removed, successively,into the Trusty and the Powerful.On the 23rd of April, 1804, hewas promoted to the rank of rear-admiralof the white; became vice ofthe blue on the 28th of April, 1808, andon the 31st of July, 1810, was madeadmiral of the red. He held, at the lastmentioned period, the chief command ofthe fleet in the East Indies ; and with apart of his squadron, destroyed manyvessels belonging to the pirates by whomthe Persian Gulf was infested. In Septemberof the same year, he went on anexpedition against the Dutch settlementof Amboyna, which, after three days'fighting, surrendered to him on the 19th,notwithstanding the amount of its forceand the strength of its batteries. Heafterwards succeeded in taking severalother islands, and he captured a greatnumber of vessels having valuable cargoes.The trade with China havingbeen disturbed by the Dutch, he wasdespatched up the river towards Canton,but with strict orders not to proceedbeyond a certain point, nor, on any account,to attack the Chinese batteries.His forbearance, however, was hardlysufficient to master his bravery, and helonged, as he himself expressed it,to blow the d d tea dealers out oftheir nest!" for which purpose he hadalready advanced beyond the limitsprescribed, and was accordingly compelledto retreat within them. He, onthis account, experienced much mortification,which was increased by the Chinese,who, though not a gun had beenfired, put up a monument, as a memorialof what they termed a victory. Hedied at Madras, on the 6th of March,1811 ; and was buried on the followingevening, his funeral being attended bythe governor, and all the naval andmilitary officers at the residency. Hisprofessional career had been to himrather a source of honour than of profit,for he obtained no prizes of very considerablevalue. He was eccentric,both in dress and manner of living;and is said, at his dinner, to haveused but one plate, which he loadedwith every kind of food within his reachat the table. Such was his carelessnessin dress, that his nephew, a juniorofficer, once suggested to him that hisepaulette was unbuttoned, to which heangrily replied, "Why don't you buttonit then, ye hound ! What do ye supposeI keep you for?" He was, however, aman of the most benevolent disposition ;and in all the social relations, was theobject of general esteem. He marriedin early life, and had several childrenby, the daughter of General Vallancey,celebrated for his skill in the Celticlanguage and antiquities.WALKER, (JAMES,) entered thenavy about the year 1776. On the 18thof June, 1781, he was promoted to therank of lieutenant, and served in thePrincess Royal, a second-rate ; fromwhich he exchanged into the Torbay,seventy-four, then about to proceed toNorth America. He subsequentlyserved, successively, in the Champion,Winchelsea, Boyne, and Niger ; and,for his exertions at Lord Howe's victory,on the 1st of June, 1794, he wasadvanced to the rank of a commander.In 1795, he was appointed to theTerror bomb ; and, in June of the sameyear, assumed the temporary commandof the Trusty, fifty guns ; in which,after having convoyed five East Indiamento a safe latitude, he, against orders,assumed the charge of a large fleet ofmerchant vessels lying at Cadizz ; forwhich, through the interference of theSpanish government, he was broughtto a court-martial by the admiralty,and sentenced to be broke. He was,however, eight months afterwards, reinstatedin his rank, the Spanish ambassadorhaving received orders fromhis government to request that thetransaction might be forgotten ; and thelords of the admiralty being perfectlyconvinced of the laudable motiveswhich induced Captain Walker to thebreach of discipline. He was next appointed,successively, to the GarlandTHE NAVY.frigate, and to the Monmouth, sixty-four; in which he was present at LordDuncan's memorable engagement withthe Dutch fleet, on the 1 1 th of October,1797, and was closely engaged, for anhour and a half, with the Delft andAlkmaar, ships of the line; both ofwhich he compelled to surrender. Forhis gallant conduct on this occasion, hewas confirmed in the rank of post-captain,was honoured with the navalgold medal, and received the thanks ofparliament. He subsequently commanded,in succession, the Veteran,sixty-four ; Breaker, fifty-six ; PrinceGeorge, ninety-eight ; Prince, ninety-eight;and Isis, fifty guns: the last ofwhich formed part of Lord Nelson'sdivision at the battle of Copenhagen,on the 2nd of April, 1801, and tookan active part in the engagement. Inthe ensuing summer, he convoyed a fleetof merchantmen to Jamaica, and was,in 1803, employed in the Vanguard,seventy-four, at the blockade of St.Domingo ; and, while on that service,captured two French vessels. He wasafterwards present at the surrenderof the town of St. Marc ; which event,as well as the reduction of CapeFrancois, he greatly accelerated by hisexertions. On his return to England,he was appointed to the Thalia frigate,and, soon after, to the Bedford,seventy-four, which formed part of thesquadron that escorted the royal familyof Portugal from Lisbon to Rio Janeiro.On his arrival there, the Prince Regentrenewed, on his account, the ancientchivalric order of the Tower and Sword ;of which lie was made a knight commander,as an honorary recompense forhis unremitting attention during theirlong and tempestuous voyage. TheBedford was afterwards employed inthe blockade of Flushing, and otherservices, until September, 1814, whenCaptain Walker took the command ofa squadron which carried out the of the army sent againstNew Orleans. In 1814, he accompaniedthe Duke of Clarence to Boulogne, forthe purpose of bringing to England theEmperor of Russia and the King ofPrussia. After the peace, he commandedseveral third-rates ; was nominatedCab. in 1815; and advanced torear-admiral at the coronation of KingGeorge the Fourth. Admiral Walkerwas never intrusted with any very importantcommands ; but he appears tohave been a good seaman and a zealousofBcer.FAULKNER, (ROBERT,) was bornabout 1760, and early in 1777, was appointedto the Isis v commanded, inNorth America, by Captain Cornwallis,with whom he was subsequently transferred,successively, into the Bristol, theRuby, and the Lion. In 1778, he wasadvanced to the rank of lieutenant;and, on the 20th of December, in thesame year, was appointed to Rear-admiralRowley's flag-ship, the PrincessRoyal; and, about 1780, he returned toEngland. He had, by this time, gainedthe good opinion of Sir Peter Parkerand Admiral Rowley, both of whomspoke very highly of him in theirletters. On the 7th of April, 1782, hewas nominated to Vice-admiral Barrington'sflag-ship, the Britannia, inwhich he was engaged, on various services,till March, 1783, when he waspaid off; but on the 17th of April following,he was appointed to the Merlin.He continued to move from one ship toanother, and on the 22d of November,1790, was promoted to the rank ofcommander. On the 2nd of April,1791, he was appointed to the Plutofire-ship, of fourteen guns ; and, on the12th of June, 1793, removed into theZebra sloop-of-war, which, in 1794,formed part of Sir John Jervis's squadron,for the purpose of attacking Martini.The whole place, with theexception of Forts Bourbon and Royal,were reduced on the 16th of Marchandon the 17th, it was resolved tomake an immediate attempt to take thetown and Fort Royal by storm. CaptainFaulkner, accordingly, entered theharbour, through the fire of the batteries,and the flat boats having broughtoff some men to mount the walls, theenemy struck their colours to theZebra. The public despatches of SirJohn Jervis bear strong testimony tothe skill and intrepidity manifested onthis occasion by Captain Faulkner ; tothe expression of whose merit, the commanderin chief declared no languageof his would be adequate. After theaction, the Zebra was cheered by theship of the admiral, who directed theband to play " See, the conqueringAPPENDIX.hero comes," and embraced CaptainFaulkner publicly on the quarter-deck.He obtained post rank on the 20th ofMarch, and was appointed, successively,to the Undaunted, the Rose,and the Blanche frigates. In the lastship he headed a detachment of seamenagainst the strong fort of Fleur d'Epe'e,at the conquest of Guadaloupe. Theside of the mountain which the menhad to ascend was nearly perpendicular,and on reaching the top, in an exhaustedstate, he was attacked by two Frenchmen,one of whom was on the point ofstabbing Captain Faulkner, when twoof his own sailors flew to his assistance.On the 14th of July, he had, as aguest, on board the Blanche, PrinceEdward, Duke of Kent, with whom hehad, previously, been on terms of friendship.In December of the same year,being under the orders of Admiral Caldwell,he chased a corvette into the Bayof Deserta, where she anchored undera battery, but having silenced the fort,he brought her out a prisoner. Helikewise chased an armed schooner,laden with gunpowder, which hedrove on shore, near Fort Louis, Guam; but he afterwards got heroff, and sent her to St. John's, Antigua.His last exploit took place off Point aPere, where, on the 5th of January,1795, he fell in with La Pique, aFrench frigate, far superior in force tothat of his own vessel. An engagementensued, which had been carried onwith great spirit for some time, whenCaptain Faulkner, while in the act oflashing, a second time, the enemy'sbowsprit to his own ship's capstan,was shot through the heart by a Frenchman.La Pique, after a considerableloss, struck ; the action having continuedfor three hours subsequent tothe death of Captain Faulkner. Thedeath of this brave officer excitedmuch sympathy at home ; and, in thehouse of commons, on the 4th of April,1795, the present Earl Grey, Mr. Fox,General Smith, and Mr. Courteney,paid a very high tribute to the worthof Captain Faulkner. A monumenthas been placed to his memory in St.Paul's Cathedral. His death excitedat the time strong public interest ; andon the 6th of May following, an interludewas produced at Covent GardenTheatre, under the title of the death ofCaptain Faulkner. The subject of thismemoir was descended from a familydistinguished by their services in thenavy for a period of nearly two hundredyears.WOOD, (Sir JAMES Athos,) thethird son of a Scotch gentleman ofancient family, was born about 1760;and, having entered the navy whenyoung, was employed both by sea andland, during the war with the Americancolonies. He served, in 1776, in the defenceof Quebec; and assisted, in 1780,at the reduction of Charlestown. Healso took part in Rodney's memorableengagement with the Count de Grasse,on the 12th of April, 1782, on whichoccasion he acted as second lieutenantof the Anson. On peace being concluded,having been to reside for threeyears in the the South of France, hevisited the East Indies, and exploredthe greater part of the western coastof Africa. In 1793, he proceeded toBarbadoes, where, having offered hisservices to Sir John Jervis, he wasintrusted with the charge of severalvessels containing prisoners of war, andwas ordered to conduct them to Europe.Having, on his way, touched at St.Maloes, he was seized and thrown intocaptivity by the agents of Robespierre ;but being removed to Paris, and releasedon his parole, his exertions procuredthe liberation and exchange of manyprisoners. On his return to England, hewas advanced to be commander of theFavourite sloop, in which, baring cruisedfor a time in the channel, he sailed tothe West Indies, where he assisted inquelling the insurrections at St. Vincentand Grenada. He likewise took, in oneday, three French privateers, in theGulf of Paria; and, subsequently, threevessels of war, while on a cruise to thewindward of Grenada. Towards theclose of 1796, he suggested to Rear-admiralHarvey, a plan for the reductionof Trinidad; which, in Februaryof the year ensuing, was most successfullyadopted. Captain Wood wasnext promoted to the San Damask, aSpanish seventy-four, captured from theenemy ; and, on the 27th of March,he was confirmed in post rank by theadmiralty. He convoyed a large fleetof merchantmen to England ; and wasthen commissioned to the Garland,THE NAVY.employed at the Cape of Good Hope,under Sir H. C. Christian, by whomhe was despatched, with a small force,to cruise off the isles of Mauritius andBourbon. This squadron, however,receiving intelligence that two largeFrench frigates were advancing towardsMadagascar, went in pursuit ; and, onthe 26th of July, 1798, one of them,which proved to be a merchantman,having struck on a rock, Captain Woodsucceeded in saving her crew, masts,and rigging. He remained, for sometime,at Madagascar ; and, at length, asloop arrived, in which he sent hisprisoners to the Mauritius. He thenreturned with his crew to the Cape,whence he proceeded to England, andwas commissioned to the Acasta, inwhich he sailed with despatches for theMediterranean. He afterwards servedin the same ship, in the North Sea, andat Guernsey ; and was employed foreighteen months, off Brest, under AdmiralCornwallis. On the 2nd of October,he retook three prizes in the Bay ofBiscay, from a French privateer whichhe captured; and, about this period,submitted to Sir Thomas Trowbridge,a plan which might prove beneficial inthe event of a rupture with Spain, buthis suggestions were not acted on bythe admiralty. At the close of the year,1804, he was ordered with a convoy tothe West Indies, but was deprived ofhis ship, the Acasta, by Sir J. T. Duck-worth,who, being recalled, determinedon returning to England in that vessel,to which he appointed his own captain.Wood made a vain remonstrance, andwas compelled to return as a passengerin his own ship to England ; when hewas re-appointed to the Acasta, by theadmiralty board, who made a provisionagainst similar occurrences. He didnot, however, resume his command ;but being commissioned, in succession,to the Uranie and Latona frigates, heserved for a time in the channel ; andproposed to the admiralty, a plan forbringing out, from the Aix Roads, theships of the enemy's squadron. Hisproject was entertained, but not adopted;and he proceeded with a convoy to theWest Indies. On the 1st of January,1807, he was present in the Latona, assecond in command to Sir C. Brisbane,at the taking of Curator ; and received,in common with the other officers, agold medal. He afterwards blockadedthe Danish islands, which surrenderedin 1807 ; and assisted, in the Captain,seventy-four, at the reduction of Martinique.He subsequently was appointedto the Neptune, from which, in 1810,he removed to the Pompey, seventy-four; and, having been employed onthe Lisbon and channel stations, he continued,till the end of the war, in theMediterranean. He afterwards receivedthe honour of knighthood ; was made acompanion of the Bath, on the 4th ofJune, 1815; and, on the 19th of July,1821, became rear-admiral of the blue,from which he has since been elevatedto the same rank in the white squadron.Sir James Athos Wood combined thetalent to design, with the courage toexecute, undertakings highly valuableto his country's interests. His projectswere not always adopted, though by nomeans visionary ; but the consciousnesshe entertained of his own determinedenergy, rendered them, perhaps, morepracticable in his own eyes, than theymight have appeared in the eyes ofothers. Those of his suggestions'whichwere carried into effect generally succeeded; and, it is, therefore, but fair tosuppose, that others he proposed mighthave been acted on with equal advantage.COCKBURN, (GEORGE,) second sonof Sir James Cockburn, Bart., enteredthe navy, about the year 1775, as amidshipman, on board the Termagant ;and, afterwards, served in the Ariel, onthe East India station. In 1794, hebecame acting captain of the Inconstantfrigate; from which he removed,with post rank, to the Meleager; and,in the summer of 1795, joined thesquadron under Commodore Nelson,who honoured him with particularnotice in his despatches. Cockburn'snext appointment was to La Minerve, offorty-two guns, in which Nelson hoistedhis broad pendant on the 10th of December,1796; and, while proceedingwith the Blanche frigate, under hisorders, to evacuate Porto Ferrajo, fell inwith two Spanish frigates, the Sabinaand Ceres, of forty guns each. Theformer, after a long action, struck tothe Minerve ; but the unexpectedapproach of another frigate, the Matilda,of thirty-four guns, speedilyAPPENDIX.compelled the Minerve to abandon theCeres, and prepare for action with hernew antagonist; which, however, afterfighting for about half an hour, sheeredoff, and would, most probably, havebeen captured, had not a three-deckerand two other of the enemy's shipshove in sight. Nelson, in his officialletter, announcing this affair, observedto the commander-in-chief : " You are,Sir, so thoroughly acquainted withthe merits of Captain Cockburn, that itis needless for me to express them."He was subsequently employed onthe Mediterranean station; and, in thesummer of 1801, joined a squadron offrigates employed to cut off suppliesfrom the French troops at Elba. Whileon this service, he assisted at the recaptureof the Success, formerly a Britishfrigate, and the destruction of La Bra-votre,of forty-six guns, near Leghorn.In the summer of 1803, he conveyedthe British ambassador to New Yorkin the Phaeton frigate ; and, subsequentlycommanded, in succession, theHowe, Captain, Aboukir, and Pompey.In 1809, with the temporary rank ofcommodore, he served under AdmiralCochrane, at the reduction of Martinique;and, in the summer of thesame year, assisted, in the Belleisle, atthe bombardment of Flushing; which,principally owing to the perseveringattack of the flotilla under his orders,was compelled to surrender. In 1810,he was stationed at Cadizz, under SirRichard Keats, in the Implacable,seventy-four; on the 1st of August,1811, he became colonel of marines;and, in August, 1812, a rear-admiral.In the early part of 1813, he commandedthe Marlborough, seventy-four,on the North American station ; andsuccessfully attacked various towns andrepositories of stores, on the banks ofthe rivers at the head of ChesapeakeBay. On the 26th of June, in thesame year, he assisted in taking thecamp and fortified works at Hampton.In the following month, he obtainedpossession of two islands in NorthCarolina, and captured two small vesselsof war. In the begining of August,1814, he accompanied the expeditionwhich succeeded in taking the city ofWashington ; and which had, it issaid, been suggested by himself tothe commanders, General Ross andAdmiral Cochrane, both of whom, intheir despatches, acknowledged themselvesto have been much indebted, inthe conduct of the enterprise, to his adviceand assistance. He was employedin the unsuccessful attempt on Baltimore,in September, 1814; and, subsequently,did great damage to theenemy's towns, batteries, and shipping.In January, 1815, he was made a knightcommander of the Bath ; and, in thefollowing July, conveyed NapoleonBuonaparte to St. Helena, where heacted, tor some time, as commander-in-chief.On the 20th of February, 1818,he was made a knight grand cross ofthe order of the Bath; in the followingmonth, one of the lords of the admiralty; on the 12th of August, 1819,a vice-admiral ; and, on the 5th of April,1821, major-general of marines. Forashort period he represented Portsmouth,and, in 1820, became member forWeobly, in Herefordshire. Sir GeorgeCockburn has, in the commendations ofall the distinguished officers with orunder whom lie has served, beenhonoured with numerous proofs of hismerit as a coadjutor or a subordinate ;while the success of those expeditions,in which he held undivided command,sufficiently testifies the value of hisjudgment and his skill as an officer.LOUIS, (Sir THOMAS, Bart.) wasborn in 1760 ; and, having entered thenavy, distinguished himself in variousactions up to the time of the battle ofthe Nile, when he was a post-captain,and commander of the Minotaur. Hisservices in this engagement were ofsuch importance, that Lord Nelson,after being wounded, sent to him in theheat of the action, to desire an interviewwith him, that he might personallythank him for his assistance. " Farewell,dear Louis !" said the nobleNelson, " I shall never forget the obligationI am under to you for yourbrave and generous conduct; and now,whatever may become of me, my mindis at peace." Captain Louis, in commonwith the other captains of thefleet, received the thanks of parliament,accompanied by a gold medal, emblematicalof the victory ; and he was alsopresented with a sword by the city ofLondon. In the summer of 1799, hewas despatched, by Lord Nelson, toTHE NAVY.take possession of the Roman territory ;for the performance of which service hewas afterwards presented with the insigniaof the Sicilian order of St. Ferdinandand of Merit. In 1804, he wasraised to the rank of rear-admiral ; and,having hoisted his flag in the Leopard,commanded on the Boulogne stationduring the whole of that year. He nextserved in the Mediterranean, underLord Nelson; and, in 1806, assistedAdmiral Duckworth in destroying theFrench fleet off St. Domingo. Afterthis, he again received the thanks ofparliament ; was created a baronet ;and presented, by the committee of thePatriotic Fund, with a vase, valued at300, with an appropriate inscription.Towards the close of the last year, hewas detached, with a small squadron,to cruise off the Dardanelles; and, afterhaving accompanied Sir J. T. Duck-worththrough that strait, proceeded toAlexandria, in Egypt, where he diedafter a two days' illness, on the 16thof May, 1808. His remains weresent to Malta by the Bittern sloop,where they were interred, with thehonours of war, near those of GeneralAbercromby. His decease was muchlamented at the place of his birth ; and,at a public meeting of his fellow-citizens,a general mourning was resolved on ;an example that was followed by theinhabitants of Plymouth. This is asufficient testimony of his worth, bothas a public and a private character;while in the letters of Nelson that stillexist, Admiral Louis appears to greatadvantage, both as a man and navalofficer.MILNE, (Sir DAVID,) son of a merchantin Edinburgh, was born in May,1763, and in 1782, served in theCanada, seventy-four, forming part ofSir Samuel Hood's squadron when itwas attacked by the Count de Grasse,and it was also distinguished in thevictory obtained over the count, by SirG. B. Rodney, in the April following.The Canada also sailed, as part of thesquadron under Rear-admiral Graves,for England ; and was one of the onlytwo ships which reached home in safety.During the peace, Mr. Milne took employmentunder the East India Company;but, in 1793, he went to theWest Indies in the Boyne, of ninety-eightguns, the flag-ship of Sir JohnJervis, who advanced him to the rankof lieutenant. In this capacity, beingon board the Blanche, on the 5th ofJanuary, 1795, he was present in CaptainFaulkner's engagement with LaPique, which commenced about midnight,and continued for five hours withuninterrupted severity. LieutenantMilne assisted in boarding La Pique,after she had struck ; and, as a rewardfor his services, he was advanced, soonafter, to be commander of the Alarmfrigate ; in which he destroyed, offPorto Rico, on the 30th of May, 1795,the French corvette, Liberty, of twentyguns. After holding various commands,and having distinguished himself bymaking several captures, he was, inJune, 1814, made rear-admiral of theblue ; and afterwards acted as second incommand to Lord Exmouth, in theexpedition against Algiers. In thebattle which was fought on the 27thof August, 1816, his slip, the Impregnable,of ninety-eight guns, sustaineda more severe loss than any other inthe British fleet, having fifty menkilled, and one hundred and sixtywounded. The commander-in-chiefspeaks thus, in his official communications: " I have confided this despatchto Rear-admiral Milne, my second incommand, from whom I have received,during the whole service intrusted tome,the most cordial and honourablesupport." His lordship adds, " I trustI have obtained from him his esteemand regard, and I regret I had notsooner been known to him." In testimonyof his services on this occasion,he was invested with the orders of aknight commander of the Bath ; ofWilhelm, of the Netherlands ; and ofSt. Aquarius, of Naples. He soonafter hoisted his flag in the Leander,sixty guns, and proceeded to Halifax,where he continued for three years,the usual period. On the 28th of April,1821, he assisted at the ceremony oflaying the first stone of a monumentto the memory of the late Lord Melville.He was married, in 1804, toGrace, daughter of Sir AlexanderPages, Baronet ; after whose death, hewas united to Miss Stephen, daughterof George Stephen, Esq. of Grenada.Sir David Milne, on every occasion inwhich he was engaged, showed thatAPPENDIX.he possessed the highest qualificationsof a naval officer. When acting alone,he combined discretion with bravery ;and when co-operating with other ships,he generally contrived to render hisown individual services particularly prominent.He lias the rank of vice-admiralof the blue.MORRIS, (Sir JAMES Nicol,) theson of Captain James Nicol Morris,was born about 1764, and was present,in 1778, at the action off Sullivan'sIsland, in which he served by the sideof his father, who fell in the engagement.The son served, subsequently,in the Prince of Wales, and Barfleur,each of ninety guns ; but was, on the14th of September, 1780, promoted tothe rank of lieutenant, in which qualityhe served on board the Namur, in 1781 ;and was subsequently engaged, on the9th and 12th of April, 1782, in thebattle fought against Count de Grasse,by Sir George B. Rodney. The Namurwas, on these occasions, stationed secondin the line to the ship of the com-mander-in-chief, and Lieutenant Morrisreceived general praise for the gallantryhe exhibited. In 1790, he was raisedto the rank of commander, and wassoon after appointed to the Pluto, offourteen guns, on the Newfoundlandstation ; where, after a sharp engagementof fifteen minutes, he made prizeof the Latine, French privateer, carryingsixteen guns and seventy men.On the 7th of October, 1793, he wasmade post-captain of the Boston frigate ;and, in 1800, whilst commanding thePhaeton, he served on the coast ofGenoa, in conjunction with the Austrianland forces. When the French destroyedtheir magazines at Tasso, andretired to Port Maurice, he took twentysail of vessels loaded with corn; seizeda large depot of arms ; and galled theenemy's rear through several miles oftheir retreat. He distinguished himselfin several other subsequent engagements,and was present at the battle ofTrafalgar ; for his gallant conduct onwhich occasion, he was presented witha gold medal, and was included in thevote of thanks of both houses of parliamentOn the 31st of July, 1810,he was constituted colonel of marines ;and, on the 1st of August, 1811, rear-admiralof the blue ; in which capacityhe hoisted his flag on board the Vigo,as second in command in the NorthSeas, an appointment which he heldfrom the commencement of 1812, untilthe middle of the year ensuing. Duringa great portion of this period, he performedthe whole of the duties attachedto the commander-in-chief on thisstation, and his conduct, in the interval,had repeatedly called forth commendation; but he resigned, in consequenceof a vice-admiral having beensent out to take the chief direction ofaffairs, an office to which he had expectedhe would have been himselfappointed. On the 2nd of January,1815, he was made a knight commanderof the order of the Bath ; and,on the 12th of August, 1819, was advancedto the rank of vice-admiral.He was married, on the 25th of October,1802, to Margaret Sarah, seconddaughter of Thomas Somers Cocks,Esq. ; and died on the 15th of April,1830, at Marlow, in the county of Buckingham.He was an officer of greatskill and valour; and it was said, thequarter-deck of his ship was a schoolfor good-breeding, cheerfulness, andgentlemanly manners.FOLEY, (Sir THOMAS,) lieutenantof Admiral Digby's flag-ship, the PrinceGeorge, in which Prince William Henryserved as midshipman, became a commanderin 1782, and, in 1790, a post-captain.In 1793, he was appointed tothe St. George, second-rate, the flagshipof Rear-admiral (Jell, which, onher way to the Mediterranean, waspresent at the re-capture of a Spanishvessel, laden with specie, called the St.Jago. She also formed part of thesquadron of Vice-admiral Hotham, inhis skirmishes with the French fleet,on the 14th of March, and 13th ofJuly, 1795. Captain Foley, being nextappointed to the Britannia, first-rate,the flag-ship of Sir Charles Thompson,commanded heron the 14th of February,1797, in the engagement off Cape St.Vincent He was afterwards stationedoff Cadizz, in the Goliath, seventy-four,in which he went, in the following year,to reinforce Nelson in the Mediterranean.The Goliath led the Britishfleet at the battle of the Nile, andhaving anchored alongside the conquering,(the second ship in the FrenchTHE NAVY.van,) shot away her topmasts in thespace of ten minutes. Being left withCaptain Hood, to protect the Egyptiancoast, he brought out, with the boats ofthe Goliath, a French armed ketch,from under the guns of the castle ofAboukir, and he returned home in1799, his ship having been previouslyengaged in the blockade of Malta. Forthe part he took in the important victoriesof Cape St. Vincent and the Nile,he was presented with gold medals.In 1800, he had the command of theElephant, seventy-four, and was attachedto the main or channel fleetuntil the early part of the year 1801,when he was placed under Sir HydeParker. Having proceeded to the NorthSeas, he received the flag of LordNelson, with whom he was present, onthe 2nd of April, 1801, at the battle ofCopenhagen. In his official despatchesto Sir Hyde Parker, his lordship writesthus: " To Captain Foley, who permittedme the honour of hoisting myflag in the Elephant, I feel under thegreatest obligations ; his advice wasnecessary on many and importantoccasions during the battle." CaptainFoley returned to England in themonth of August following, and thethanks of parliament were voted tohim for his services. He was appointedcolonel of marines in October, 1807,and was advanced to the rank of rear-admiralof the blue on the 28th ofApril, 1808. He has been, from timeto time, further promoted ; and, at thedemise of George the Fourth, had theappointment of admiral of the blue.He was constituted commander-in-chiefin the Downs in 1811, a post which heheld until the termination of the war.On the 2nd of January, 1815, he wasmade a knight commander of the Bath;and, on the 6th of May, 1820, a knightgrand cross of the same order. On the31st of July, 1802, he was united toLady Lucy Anne Fitzgerald, fifthdaughter of James, first Duke of Leinster,by Lady Amelia Lennox, daughterof the second Duke of Richmond. SirThomas Foley justly enjoys the reputationof being a most meritorious officer,a distinction to which he is entitled byhis conduct on all occasions in whichhe has been employed. He had thehonour of serving in the most importantvictories of Earl St. Vincent andNelson, with the latter of whom hemaintained, for some time, an affectionatecorrespondence.TYLER, (Sir CHARLES,) attainedpost rank in the navy, on the 21st ofSeptember, 1790, and, in 1793, wascommissioned to the Meleager, of thirty-twoguns, in which he was employedat Toulon. He rendered signal serviceat the reduction of Corsica, for whichhe was promoted to the St. Fiorenzo, offorty guns, formerly one of the enemy'sships, which, having sunk, was broughtabove water chiefly by his exertions.In the autumn of 1794, he was transferredto the Diadem, sixty-four, andserved under Sir H. Hotham, in hisencounter with the French, on the 14thof March, 1795, offGourjon Bay. Soonafter this, he had the charge of a smallnaval armament in the Adriatic, and nextwas employed, off the Italian coast,under the orders of Nelson. While onthis service, he brought LieutenantFitzgerald, of the eleventh foot, to acourt-martial, for disrespectful conduct;and the offender was accordingly dismissedfrom the army. This trial setat rest the doubt that had been entertainedwhether military officers wereamenable to naval court-martials ; aquestion which, on this occasion, wasfinally determined in the affirmative.In 1796, Captain Tyler was commissionedto L'Aigle frigate ; and, aftertaking several privateers, was wreckednear Tunis, while in charge of despatchesfor Nelson. On his returnhome, he was appointed to the Warrior,seventy-four, which formed part of themain fleet; but, early in 1801, he wasemployed, for a short time, in theBaltic, under Sir Hyde Parker, andafterwards served till the peace ofAmiens, in the blockade of Cadizz. In1803, he was appointed to the commandof a district of sea fencibles ; and,in 1805, he was commissioned to theTonnant, of eighty guns, in which hefought, and was wounded, at the battleof Trafalgar. On the 28th of April,1808, Captain Tyler was made rear-admiralof the blue, and, shortly after,was appointed second in command atPortsmouth. In 1812, he was constitutedcommander-in-chief at the Capeof Good Hope, where he remaineduntil 1815; early in which year he wasAPPENDIX.made a knight commander of the Bath.He was subsequently promoted to beadmiral of the blue. Sir Charles Tylerwas married to Miss Pike, of Portsmouth,on whose death he was unitedto a lady, named Leach, of Pembroke.HOPE, (Sir WILLIAM JOHNS-TONE,)was born at Finchley, on the 16th ofAugust, 1766; and, entering the navyat the age often years, served on severalstations, successively, in the Weasle,Hind, Crescent, Iphigenia, and LucasHe was subsequently employedin the Portland, on the Newfoundlandstation ; and being appointed lieutenant,in October, 1782, he served in theDaedalus frigate, on the coast of Scotland,and the Incendiary, fire-ship. Hewas promoted June 9th, 1794, to therank of post-captain, in the Bellerophon,seventy-four, which was particularlydistinguished in Lord Howe'smemorable actions of the 28th and 29thof May, as well as the victory of the 1stof June ; and, fur his share in thesebrilliant affairs, Captain Hope was presentedwith a gold medal, by George theThird ; and, in common with the rest ofthe officers, received the thanks of parliamentIn February, 1798, he joined theKent, a newly-launched seventy-four,in which he was present with AdmiralDuncan, at the capture of the Helder,and at the surrender of the Dutchsquadron. Being the bearer of thedespatches announcing the latter event,he received the personal thanks of theking, with a purse of 500, and wassoon after presented, by the Emperor ofRussia, with the insignia of a knight ofMalta. In 1807, he was called to theboard of admiralty, but vacated his seatin 1809. He was appointed colonel ofmarines, August 1st, 1811 ; rear-admiral,August 12th, 1812 ; commander-in-chiefat Leith, November, 1813; K. C. B.,January 2nd, 1815 ; and re-appointedto the chief command at Leith, in thespring of 1816, which he retained untilSeptember, 1818. He was promoted tobe vice-admiral, August 12th, 1819;and, in January, 1820, he again becamea lord of the admiralty. In March, 1828,he was appointed treasurer of GreenwichHospital ; and, he subsequentlybecame one of the five commissionersfor the better regulation of that institution.Sir W. J. Hope was, for thirtyyears, a member of the house of commons,and represented the shire ofDumfries, during six parliaments. Thecharacter of Sir W. J. Hope as a navalofficer, was uniformly held in highestimation, on account of his considerablenautical skill and experience ; andalthough, on the numerous services inwhich he was employed, fortune neverfavoured him with any remarkableopportunity of signalizing himself, yethe invariably performed the dutiesintrusted to him with zeal and fidelity.PARKER, (RICHARD,) was born atExeter, about the year 1767 ; and, afterhaving received a decent education,served in the navy, until the conclusionof the American war. On his return home,he contracted a marriage, by which heobtained a small sum of money, but soondissipated it, and was afterwards imprisonedfor debt at Edinburgh. Afterhis release, he became a common sailor;and, being placed on board the fleet atthe Nore, on the breaking out of themutiny there, the seamen appointedhim their leader. His first act in thischaracter was to take down the flag ofthe Sandwich, ninety-eight guns, ofwhich he was a sailor, and to hoist ared one instead ; an example that wasimmediately followed by all the otherships. By the prudence, however, ofLord Howe, the revolt was soon putdown; and Parker having been secured,was tried by a court-martial, and condemnedto be hanged, which sentencewas carried into execution, on the30th of June, 1797. He behaved withremarkable firmness and composureduring his trial, and met his deathwith great resignation and tranquillity.In his defence he stated, that he enteredinto the views of the mutineers for thepurpose of checking the bad spirit thatthen prevailed; and that, conscious ofthe purity of his intentions, he wasenabled to await with calmness thedecision of the court. He, however,acknowledged the justice of his sentence; and, a few minutes previouslyto his execution, took a glass of wine,saying, " 1 drink, first to the salvationof my soul, and next to the forgivenessof all my enemies."Stafford, (Sir ROBERT,) thirdson of the Earl of Courtown, was bornTHE NAVY.in February, 1768, and obtained postrank in the navy in 1790. He commanded,successively, the Lowestoffe,the Aquilon, and the Phaeton ; in whichlatter vessel he took several prizes,under the orders of Lord Cornwallisand Sir J. B. Warren. He subsequentlyserved in the Mediterraneanand in the West Indies, under Nelson ;and was wounded, under AdmiralDuckworth, in the successful pursuit ofthe Rochefort squadron, off St. Domingo.After the battle, he proceededto Jamaica with the prizes; and sometimesubsequently, went with the expeditionagainst Copenhagen ; and participatedin the taking of the Danishfleet and naval stores by Lord Gambier.Captain Stopford was promoted to therank of rear-admiral of the blue on the28th of April, 1808 ; and, with a commandin the channel fleet, was stationed,with a small force, in the Basque Roads,in the year 1809, when the Frenchadmiral, Allemande, made his appearance.The Naiad, which had beendespatched off Ushant to acquaintGambier of the circumstance, madesignal that three strange sail were insight;on which Stopford's squadrongave chase, and succeeded in drivingthree French frigates ashore, near theSable d'Olonnes. He was afterwardsconnected with the attempt to destroythe French fleet in the Aix Roads;and, previously to Lord Cochrane'sarrival, had solicited permission to attack,with fire-ships, the enemy's fleetin the Basque Roads; and though hedid not conduct the enterprise, his skilfuldisposition of the boats procured forhim the praise of the commander-in-chief,and a vote of thanks from parliament.In 1810, he assumed the commandat the Cape of Good Hope ;and, afterwards, headed the navalsquadron in the reduction of Java.After this service, for which he receivedthe thanks of parliament, he returnedto the Cape of Good Hope ; and,early in 1813, proceeded thence toEngland in the President frigate. AdmiralStopford was constituted a colonelof marines, and elected member of parliamentfor Ipswich. On the 12th ofAugust, 1812, he was made a vice-admiral; and, on the demise of Georgethe Fourth, held the rank of admiral ofthe blue ; and, on the 2nd of January,1815, he was created a knight commanderof the Bath.BEAUCLERK, (Lord Amplius,)third son of the fourth Duke of St.Allan's, was born in 1768 ; and enteringthe naval service, on board theJackall, in 1 782, soon after served in theSalisbury, on the Newfoundland station.He, subsequently, accompanied CommodoreGardner to the West Indies,where he was appointed to act as lieutenantin 1789, and he obtained a confirmationof bis rank on his arrival inEngland. In 1793, he obtained therank of post-captain in the Nemesis;and afterwards, commanded, successively,the Juno, the Dryad, and theFortuneee ; in each of which he distinguishedhimself by his gallantry andskill. In the summer of 1810, hesuperintended the debarkation of a divisionof Lord Chatham's army, itsguns, &c., on the pestilential island ofWalcheren ; a service he executed withgreat skill and activity. He afterwardsassumed the government of Ampere,and the charge of the fleet and store-shipsin the Roompot, during the absenceof Sir Richard Strachan, thecommander-in-chief, with the army atFlushing. On his return from this expedition,his lordship, in the RoyalOak, resumed his station in the channel.Lord Melius Beauclerk was madecolonel of marines, July 31st, 1810;rear-admiral, August 1st, 1811; K.C. B.,January 2nd, 1815; F.R.S., in the sameyear; and vice-admiral, August 12th,1819. The professional career of thisnobleman, though not exhibiting anypeculiar features which would distinguishit from that of many other braveand meritorious officers, has beenperfectly unsullied, praiseworthy, andhonourable. His lordship's privatecharacter is above reproach, thoughtinged with some degree of eccentricityand roughness.SEYMOUR, (Sir MICHAEL,) wasborn on the 8th of November, 1768,and having entered the navy, served,successively, in the Merlin, the Portland,the Mediator, and the Ganges. In1790, he was appointed lieutenant of theMagnificent, which he quitted for theMarlborough, distinguished as one ofLord Howe's fleet, on the occasion ofAPPENDIX.the celebrated battle of the 1st of June,1794, in which Lieutenant Seymourwas wounded. He was soon after promotedto the rank of commander; andduring five years, in which he was employedin the Spitfire sloop, he captured,in the channel, six privateers, atransport, a French vessel, laden withstores, and several other prizes. On thellth of June, 1800, he was advancedto the rank of post-captain, and, havingbeen appointed to various frigates andships of the line, he, in 1808, servedunder Lord Gambier, in the AmethystThis vessel, mounting forty two guns,and carrying one hundred and sixtymen, fell in, on the 10th of November,with the Thetis, French frigate, havingon board a complement of four hundredand thirty-six men, one hundred and sixof whom were soldiers. She struck to theAmethyst, after a close action, whichcontinued from ten o'clock in theevening till twenty minutes after midnight.The English vessel, as well asthe French, was materially damaged,and the battle was bravely fought onboth sides. Captain Seymour, on hisreturn, received a gold medal from theking ; a piece of plate, worth one hundredguineas, from the Patriotic Fund ;and was presented with the freedom ofthe cities of Cork and Limerick. Onthe 6th of April, 1809, being still inthe Amethyst, he captured, after a twohours' close engagement, the Niemen,of forty-six guns, which had previouslyeluded a long chase, and sustained arunning fight, which lasted from half-pastnine at night until one in themorning. Captain Seymour was, inthe ensuing month, created a baronet,and was next employed in the Walcherenexpedition. On the 26th ofMarch, 1814, being in the Hannibal,a third-rate, he captured, after a shortpursuit, La Sultan, of forty-four guns,which had been already disabled. InJanuary, 1815, he was made a knightcommander of the Bath, and appointedto a royal yacht in a few years afterwards.He has issue several childrenby Lady Seymour, who is a daughterof the late Captain James Hawker, ofthe royal navy. Captain Sir MichaelSeymour has acquired a very high reputationfor skill and gallantry ; but inencounters with single ships he wasremarkably successful.THOMPSON, (Sir THOMAS Boulder,)was born in 1768, and becamea post-captain in the navy in November,1790, previously to whichtime he had distinguished himself bycapturing a French privateer of a verysuperior force. After serving underLords St. Vincent and Nelson, CaptainThompson, whilst in command ofthe Leander, was intercepted, off thewestern end of Gaza, near the Islandof Candia, by Le Generous, of seventy-eightguns. The English vessel, havingeighty below her proper quantity ofmen, besides having many woundedfrom the fleet, Thompson desired toavoid an action with a ship of suchsuperior force ; but being out sailed byhis opponent, an engagement ensued,which was carried on with great spiritfor several hours. At length, the Leander,being almost wholly disabled bythe superior advantage of the enemy,was compelled to strike her colours.Captain Thompson was wounded inthe action, and on an exchange of prisonerstaking place, proceeded to England,where hews honourably acquitted,on a trial for the loss of his ship, bycourt-martial. He received the honourof knighthood from the king, with apension of 200 per annum, and waspresented with the freedom of the city,in a gold box, by the citizens of London.In 1799, he was appointed to the Bellona,in which ship he served underLord Bridport, in the Mediterranean,and under Nelson, at the battle ofCopenhagen, where one of his legs wasshot off; a loss which he was compensatedfor by the thanks of parliament,and an increase of his pension to 500a year. He was soon after nominatedto the Mary yacht, and, in 1806, hewas appointed comptroller of the navy,an office which he resigned in February,1816, for the treasurership of GreenwichHospital. He also became a directorof the chest about the sameperiod. On the 2nd January, 1815, hewas made a knight commander of theBath ; and, on the 14th of September,1822, a knight grand cross of the sameorder. He represented, in parliament,for several years, the city of Rochester,but vacated his seat when he took uponhimself the office of treasurer abovementioned.His pension was fartherincreased, on the 27th of November,THE NAVY.1815, to an annual sum of 700. Hewas married, on the 25th of February,1799, to Miss Anne Raises, by whomhe had five children : three sons andtwo daughters. He died on the 3d ofMarch, 1828, at Hartshorn Manor-house,Hearts, aged sixty-two ; at whichperiod he was vice-admiral of the red,and a visitor of the West India navalschooLMany, (THOMAS,) was born about1770; and became a midshipman in thenavy in 1783. In 1790, he was employedunder Captain Vancouver withwhom he made a voyage to New Holland,and the north-west coast of America,in the ship Discovery, of whichhe became lieutenant. In 1796, beingpromoted to the rank of commander, hewas appointed to the Charon, of forty-fourguns ; and was employed in protectingmerchantmen sailing betweenCork and the Downs, and in conveyingtroops to Ireland during the rebellion.He was conspicuous for hisloyal conduct during the mutiny at theNore; and, after having been presentat the blockade of Havre de Grace,was, in 1799, appointed a post-captain.Shortly afterwards, he captured a valuableFrench schooner off the WesternIslands, and whilst accompanying aconvoy of merchant-vessels to Jamaica,attacked and destroyed, with a veryunequal force, the French brig, LaCurieuse. Having landed his prisonersat Barbadoes, he made for Martinique,from which island he conducted thetrading vessels in safety to Jamaica.On his arrival there, he was instructedby Lord Hugh Seymour to cruise inthe Mona passage; and, after he hadbeen in this station for some time, aSpaniard who had murdered his officer,came on board, from Porto Rico, andsolicited his protection. Indignant atthe request, he confined the culprit,and sailed for Aquadilla, where he disembarkedthe prisoner and deliveredhim up to the governor; at the sametime intimating, that as the Britishcolours disdained to protect a murderer,he sent him one, in the hope hewould meet the fate he deserved. InAugust, 1802, he was paid off, but inOctober following, Earl St. Vincent,then first lord of the admiralty, sent forhim, and observed, " I don't like to seean active officer idle on shore ; I thereforegive you the Africaine, one of thefinest frigates in the British navy."When the Africaine was completed, hesailed from the Nore, accompanied bya ship of inferior force, and proceededoff Helvoetsluys, where he was engagedfor about two years in blockading twolarge French frigates laden with troops.Whilst on this service, he seized onsixty ships belonging to the Dutchfishery, in consequence of the followingcircumstance. Having sent four boyswith a boat, for shrimps, they were firedupon by the French general; uponwhich, Captain Manby took the abovementionedstep, and sent a note to thegeneral, telling him, that as he hadprevented him (Manby) from havingshrimps to his turbot, so he would deprivethe general from having turbotto his shrimps. He subsequently commandedthe Uranie, and the Thalia;and previously to the death of Georgethe Fourth, was appointed rear-admiralof the blue.HEY WOOD, (PETER,) son of theseneschal to the Duke of Athos, enteredthe navy, at the age of thirteen, andsailed, soon after, in the Bounty. On theoccurrence of the well-known mutiny,he, being the youngest midshipman, wasconfined between decks, after the commanderand his adherents had beenturned off, in a small boat, from the vessel.He remained, with fourteen others,for about a year and a half, at Otaheite ;but the Pandora arriving at the island,on the 23d of March, 1791, he, togetherwith Mr. Stewart, a brother midshipman,made himself known to the captain,by whose orders, both were, totheir astonishment, placed in irons, andtreated with the utmost severity. Mr.Hey wood reached Spithead on the 20thof June, 1792, and took his trial inSeptember, when, notwithstanding hisprotestation, that he was ignorant of thedesign of the mutiny, and that he wasforced, against his will, to remain inthe ship, his neutrality was consideredtantamount to guilt, and sentence ofdeath was recorded. It was, however,accompanied by a strong recommendationto mercy ; and, in five weeks afterwards,he obtained a free and unconditionalpardon. Lord Hood, who hadpresided at his trial, now volunteeredAPPENDIX.to take him, as a midshipman, underhis own patronage, in the Victory.This offer was, however, declined; butHeywood, in May, 1793, renewed hisnaval career, by going the Bellerophon,seventy-four, commanded by his uncle,Commodore Pasley. After much activeand honourable service, he was, in1800, promoted to the command of theVulcan ; and, subsequently, to that ofthe Trincomalee, Trident, Leopard,and Dedaigneuse. H is post commissionwas confirmed by the admiralty, on the5th of April, 1803, and he remained onthe East India station chiefly employedin confidential detached services, andin ascertaining the latitudes and longitudesof the various ports in the EasternSeas, by which their geography hassince been materially corrected. Whilecommanding the Leopard, he wasordered to survey the coast of Ceylon,much of which was then wholly unknown,and the dangerous shoals calledthe Bassas. In 1805, he returned toEngland ; and, on his arrival, presentedall his charts to the admiralty,who published many of them with hisname. On the 18th of March, 1809,he received the thanks of the admiraltyfor his gallantry in an attack on threeFrench frigates, in Sable D'Olonne ;and, in April, 1810, he bore the remainsof Vice-admiral Lord Callingto England. He was then despatchedto Buenos Ayres ; and, in thesummer of 1813, sailed from SouthAmerica for England, in commission ofthe Montague, seventy four, and continuedin the command of that vesseluntil it was paid off, in July, 1815. Hemarried, on the 31st of the samemonth, Frances, only daughter ofFrancis Simpson, Esq. of Plan House,Stirlingshire.PARKER, (Sir PETER,) the son ofRear-admiral George Parker, havingentered the navy at an early age, servedin the capacity of midshipman, for sometime,under Lord Nelson. He attainedsuccessively the ranks of lieutenant andpost-captain, in the latter of which stations,he, in 1812, commanded the Menelausfrigate. While cruising on thecoast of Italy, being off the Bay ofOrbitello, he determined on cutting outa brig, and several smaller vessels,moored in the port of St. Stephen,within pistol-shot of the batteries. Havingprepared a launch, carrying onehundred and thirty seamen, forty marries,and an eighteen-pounder, heresolutely faced the fire from thecitadel, which was manned by fivehundred regular troops, and all the inhabitants.While his lieutenants pushedto the shore, he himself succeeded inboarding and carrying all the vessels.In 1814, still being in command of theMenelaus, he served on the NorthAmerican station, and sailed up theChesapeake, to destroy a camp establishedat Bella by the enemy. Helanded, on the 30th of August, 'with aparty of about one hundred and fortymarines, and, coming up to the forcewith which he was about to contend,found it to consist of five hundredmilitia, a troop of horse, and five piecesof artillery. He, however, gallantlycommenced the attack, but in a shorttime received a mortal wound from amusket-shot, on which he is said tohave smiled, and said to one of hislieutenants : " They have hit me,Pearce, at last, but it is nothing ; pushon, my brave fellows, and follow me ! "He advanced a few paces farther, continuingto cheer on his men, but soonstaggered under the rapid flow of bloodfrom the wound, and in a few momentsexpired. He was in his twenty-seventhyear when he died ; and had married,in 1805, a daughter of Sir GeorgeDallas. He had one son, who is thepresent Sir Peter Parker. Though hiscareer was short, it was eminentlyhonourable, few having achieved somuch within so short a period. Hisgallantry had excited such an enthusiasticattachment in his men, that oneof them, a sailor of the name of Sorrel,refused to quit his body for a moment;and, though the men who carried it tothe shore were occasionally changed,the man above-mentioned would notallow himself to be relieved of hisshare of the burden. The lines, commencing" There is a tear for all thatdie," were written on his death by hiscousin, the poet Byron.JURISPRUDENCE.HARCOURT, (SIMON, Viscount,)the only son of Sir Philip Harcourt,was born in 1660; and having completeda learned education at PembrokeCollege, Oxford, he became a studentof the Inner Temple, by which societyhe was called to the bar. He first distinguishedhimself by his defence ofSacheverell ; became a member of parliamentin 1690, and continued so untilhis advancement to the peerage. InJune, 1702, he was knighted, and madesolicitor-general to the queen ; and, inApril, 1707, attorney-general ; whichoffice, it is said, he sustained with greatdignity, but quitted it with greater, onthe 12th of February following, by avoluntary resignation. On the changeof ministry, in September, 1710, hewas restored to that employment, andmade recorder of Abingdon ; and onthe 18th of October, in the same year,he was appointed lord-keeper of thegreat seal; and next day nominatedone of the privy-council. On the 3rdof September, 1711, he was created apeer of Great Britain, by the title ofBaron of Stanton-Harcourt, in Oxfordshire.On the 7th of April, 1712, hewas elected lord high chancellor ; and,being in that office at the demise ofQueen Anne, was one of the lords ofthe regency till the arrival of Georgethe First ; four days after which, however,the great seal was delivered toLord Cowper. On the 24th of July,1721, he was created Viscount Harcourt;and, on the 25th of August, inthe following year, was called to thecouncil-board. During the king's absence,in visiting his German dominions,in 1723, 1725, and 1727, hewas nominated one of the lords justices,and died in the July of the last-mentionedyear. He had three wives ; buthad issue only by the first, Rebecca,daughter of Thomas Clarke, Esq., whobore him three sons and two daughters.Lord Harcourt possessed few prominencesof character ; he was honestand consistent, particularly in hisjudicial capacity; although, it is said,in his political principles, he waveredlatterly in his adherence to Harley, infavour of Walpole. " He was remarkable,"says Parker, " for nothing but hisabilities and integrity;" and SpeakerOnslow said he had greater skill andpower of speech than any man he everknew.BRODRICK, (ALAN, ViscountMidleton,) was born about 1660 ; and,having been called to the bar, becamethe king's Irish Serjeant at law as earlyas February, 1690. On the 6th ofJune, 1695, he was made king's for Ireland, and sat inthe first Irish parliament assembledunder Queen Anne, as member for thecity of Cork ; in which he was unanimouslychosen speaker of the Irishhouse of commons. In 1704, he wasremoved from the solicitor-generalship,through the influence of the Duke ofOrmond, whom he had offended; buton the 12th of June, he was appointedattorney-general for Ireland; and, inDecember, 1709, succeeded Sir RichardPine as chief-justice of the Irish courtof King's Bench. Upon the change ofministry, in 1711, he was removedfrom his situation ; and, in the followingparliament, he was again returnedas representative for the city of Cork,and again made speaker of the commons.On the accession of George theFirst, he was made lord high chancellorof Ireland, and a privy-counsellor,a dignity he had held under boththe preceding monarchs. On the 22ndof February, 1714, by privy-seal, and onthe following 13th of April, by a patent,setting forth his merits in the mostexalted terms, he was advanced to thedignity of an Irish peer, as BaronBrodrick, of Midleton, and took hisseat as such, in the Irish house of peers,on the following 12th of November.On the 20th of March, 1716, he wasconstituted one of the lord justices ofthe kingdom ; and, in the followingAPPENDIX.year, was created Viscount Midleton.In 1718, he visited England, where hewas elected a member of the Britishparliament, and continued so for theremainder of his life. He retired fromthe chancellorship in June, 1725, anddied, at Ballyallan, in the county ofCork, on the 29th of August, 1728. Hewas one of the most independent andpatriotic chancellors that Ireland everproduced ; and frequently offended boththe king and his ministers, by his determinedopposition to the wishes ofboth, when he could not conscientiouslycomply with them. " He was, however,"says Archdeacon Fore, " ostentatiousin his manner, and vehement inhis sentiments; but was, nevertheless, aman of great dignity and integrity."He was thrice married; but his onlysurviving issue were one daughter andone son.KING, (PETER, Lord,) the son of agrocer at Exeter, was born there in1669, and, for some time, served in hisfather's shop ; but having made himself,by private study, an excellentscholar, he attracted the notice of hisuncle, the celebrated Locke, at whosesuggestion he prepared himself for, andwas called to, the bar. In 1691, hedistinguished himself by publishing AnInquiry into the Constitution, Discipline,Unity, and Worship of thePrimitive Church, that flourished withinthe first three hundred years afterChrist, faithfully collected out of theextant writings of those ages ; and,shortly afterwards, rose to eminence asan advocate. In 1699, he was returnedmember of parliament for Beeralston,in Devonshire ; for which place he alsosat during the five succeeding parliaments.In 1702, he published, TheHistory of the Apostles' Creed ; in 1708,was made recorder of London ; and, in1714, lord chief-justice of the CommonPleas ; and, on the 5th of April following,was sworn in a privy-counsellor.On the 29th of May, 1725, he wascreated a peer of great Britain, by thetitle of Lord King, Baron of Oakham,in the county of Surrey ; and, on the 1stof June, in the same year, he was declaredlord high chancellor of England ;and was one of the lords justices forthe administration of the government,during the king's absence in Germany.On the 31st of May, 1727, he was againappointed one of the lords justices;and, on the demise of George the First,he was continued chancellor by his successor.The assiduity with which hedischarged the duties of his situationinjured his health, and induced him toretire from office in 1733; about eightmonths after which, he died, at his seatat Oakham, in Surrey. He was marriedto Anne, daughter of Richard Says,Esq., of Wolverton, in Glamorganshire;by whom he had issue four sons andtwo daughters. He was a man of thestrictest integrity ; although, accordingto Sir Egerton Bridges, he did notmake such a figure, as chancellor, as wasexpected from the character that raisedhim to it. The same authority adds,that more of his decrees were repealedby the house of lords, than those of anyother chancellor in the same space oftime. Although a rigid dissenter, heis said, while discoursing with the celebratedWilson, on the subject of subscriptionto articles of faith, by menwho do not believe in them, for thesake of preferment, to have justifiedtheir so doing, by observing, " Wemust not lose our usefulness fromscruples:" upon which, \Y his ton, whowas of the opposite opinion, asked hislordship, " if such prevarication wasallowed in the courts of law ?" " No,"replied his lordship. " Then," saidWhiston, " suppose God Almighty beas just in the next world as my lordchief-justice is in this where are wethen?"VINER, (CHARLES,) was born about1670 ; but the particulars of his earlylife are not known, although he probablycompleted his education at Oxford,and afterwards studied the lawin one of the inns of court. He iscelebrated as having been the author ofa general and complete abridgment oflaw and equity ; a work which appearedin twenty volumes, folio, in741-51 ; and, according to Blackstone,was the result of fifty years' labour. Hedied, at his house, at Aldyshot, on the5th of June, 1756; and left, by his will,about 12,000 to the University ofOxford, to establish a professorship,and endow such fellowships and scholarshipsof the common law in that universityas should be adequate to theJURISPRUDENCE.produce of his estate. This led to thefoundation of the celebrated Vinerianprofessorship, at Oxford ; to whichBlackstone was first appointed, and who,in that character, delivered the lectureswhich form his celebrated Commentaries.Mr. Viner's work, before alludedto, is spoken of, by Mr. Hargrave, (Co.Lit. q. a. in notes) as an immense bodyof law and equity ; and he recommendsit as a necessary part of every lawyer'slibrary. He, however, observes, itwould have been a still more usefulcompilation, if the author had been lesssingular, and more nice in his arrangementand method, and more studious toavoid repetition.RAYMOND, (ROBERT, Lord,) theson of Sir Thomas Raymond, was born"about 1670; and, after his call to thebar, became, successively, solicitor-general,attorney-general, and chief-justiceof the King's Bench in 1730,when he was raised to the peerage.He is, however, principally known asthe author of Reports of Divers SpecialCases in the Three Law Courts, fromthe twelfth to thirty-fifth of Charles theSecond, which appeared in 1696, andhave always been considered of thehighest authority, when quoted, by allsucceeding judges. He died in 1753,leaving one son to inherit his title,which is now extinct.TALBOT, (CHARLES, Lord,) eldestson of the Bishop of Durham, was bornin the year 1684 ; and, after an universityeducation, was called to the bar,where he soon became distinguished ;and, in 1717, was made solicitor-generalto the Prince of Wales. In 1719, hewas elected a member of the Britishparliament, for Gregory, in Cornwall;and sat in the two following parliamentsfor Durham. In 1726, he wasappointed solicitor-general to the king;in 1733, was made lord-chancellor ofGreat Britain, and, in the same year,was created a baron. In 1734, he waselected a governor of the Charter House ;and continued to sit as chancellor r, withgreat benefit to the nation, it is said,till the 14th of February, 1737, whenhe died at his house in Lincoln's InnFields. Lord Talbot is described ashaving added lustre to the peerage, tohis profession, and to his country ; andwas of the most virtuous principles, andof the most kind and amiable disposition." He was," observes SirJonah Barrington, " endowed with admirabletalents, which were improvedby a liberal and generous education,suitable to the dignity of his extraction ;and, applying himself to the study ofthe laws, advanced himself, by realmerit, without servility or the arts ofcorruption. He married Cecil, daughterand heir of Charles Matthews, Esq., ofCastle-y-Menich, in Glamorganshire;and left five sons, the eldest of whomis celebrated in Thomson's Seasons.FOSTER, (Sir MICHAEL,) the sonof an attorney at Marlborough, in Wiltshire,was born there in December,1689 ; and, after having completed hiseducation at Oxford, studied for, andwas called to, the bar, where he was solittle encouraged, that he shortly afterwardsretired to his native town. In1720, he acquired much credit andnotoriety by the publication of hiscelebrated letter to the protestant dissenters; and having removed, sometimeafterwards, to Bristol, he practisedthere with such success, that, in 1735,he was made recorder of that city. Inthe same year, he published An Examinationof the Scheme of ChurchPower, which gained him high creditas a civilian, and is said to have formedthe ground-work of Bishop Gibson'sCodex. In 1736, he was made a serjeantat law; and, in 1745, a judge ofthe King's Bench, in which office hecontinued until the day of his death,which took place on the 7th of November,1763. He was a man of considerabletalent and worth, and washeld in great esteem by his friends andcontemporaries. In addition to theworks mentioned, he was the author ofsome Reports, published after his death.A short time before his death, whilstgoing the Oxford circuit, he is said tohave charged the grand jury in thefollowing laconic style : " Gentlemen,the weather is extremely hot, I amvery old, and you are very well acquaintedwith your duty practise it."He was married in 1725, but left noissue.STRANGE, (Sir JOHN,) was bornin London, in 1696; and, having beenAPPENDIX.called to the bar, so distinguished himself,that, in 1736, he was made ;and, in 1739, appointedrecorder of London. Having resignedboth these offices, in 1742, he was presentedwith a patent of precedency ;and, in 1749, made master of the Rolls,which he continued until the time ofhis death, in May, 1754. He was aman of great virtue and integrity ; butis principally known to the legal world,as the author of Strange's Reports, towhich great deference is paid in allthe courts. He married Susan, eldestdaughter, and co-heir, of EdwardStrong, Esq. of Greenwich, Kent, bywhom he left two sons.HE\VITT,(J AMES, Viscount Clifford,)the son of a mercer, at Coventry, wasborn there in 1709, and served his timeto an attorney, but afterwards went tothe English bar, and soon acquired arespectable practice. In 1766, he becamea member of parliament for Coventry; in the same year, was appointeda judge of the King's Bench ; and, in1767, made chancellor of Ireland, andraised to the Irish peerage. In 1781,he was made a viscount; and, afterhaving realized a fortune of 150,000,died at Dublin, on the 28th of April,1789. By the length and value of hisservices as chancellor of Ireland, hemuch raised the dignity and importanceof that office, which had previouslybeen considered of such little value,that, at the time it was offered to him,it had been refused by several men ofeminence, as beneath their acceptance.He married, first, a daughter of Dr.Williams, Dean of Worcester, by whomhe had issue, four sons ; and, secondly,Ambrosia, daughter of the Rev. CharlesBayley, by whom he had one son andtwo daughters.WILMOT, (Sir JOHN Early,)was born at Derby, in August, 1709,and received his education at Westminsterand Cambridge, where he wasremarkable for his studious and retiredhabits. In 1732, he was called to thebar, where he displayed great abilities ;but such was his diffidence, that herefused the appointments, successivelyoffered him, of king's counsel, andking's serjeant; and, in 1754, withdrewinto Derbyshire. Whilst in the country,he was, without his knowledge, madeone of the judges of the King's Bench,which he consented to be, only for thesake of his family. In 1766, he wasappointed chief-justice of the CommonPleas ; and, on the day previously toLord Camden's resignation of the greatseal, that nobleman told him it wouldbe in his possession tomorrow. He,however, refused the chancellorship;and, in 1770, gave up his situation onthe bench, accepting, at the same time,with reluctance, a trifling provision inthe shape of an annuity. He died, athis house in Great Ormond Street,where he had resided for thirty-sevenyears, on the 5th of February, 1792.He was a man of singular probity,modesty, and humility ; which were,however, not more conspicuous thanhis profound knowledge, extensivelearning, and brilliant and enlightenedmind. He refused the chancellorshipno less from conscientiousness than diffidence,thinking the political wouldinterfere too much with the judicialduties of that situation.Bancroft, (EDWARD,) born in1720, was called to the common lawbar ; where, after many years of application,he attained the rank of king'scounsel. Having obtained a seat inparliament, he was made chief-justiceof Chester ; in possession of which officehe died, on the 20th of November,1796, at Northampton. He was also,at the period of his decease, member ofparliament for Salts. " This veteranof the bar," observes a writer in theGentleman's Magazine, for 1796, "wasan extraordinary example of industryand perseverance. Many years, he hadhardly practice enough to support himselfwith the severest economy, andthought of relinquishing the law indespair; but, in time, his good senseand knowledge of the law excited confidence,and, till his hearing wasaffected, he was one of the most successfulof its professors, particularly incases where legal opinions were requisite."YORKE, (CHARLES, Lord Mordent,)second son of Lord-chancellor Hard-wicked,was born in 1723, and receivedhis education at a school at Hackney,and at the University of Cambridge.JURISPRUDENCE.Having been called to the bar, histalent and eloquence soon recommendedhim to the notice of his profession, andearly produced him a considerable shareof business. On the alarm of a designedinvasion from France, in 1743,he composed and published, in the beginningof 1745, a most excellent work,entitled, Some Considerations on theLaw of Forfeiture for High Treason :occasioned by a Clause in the late Actfor making it Treason to correspondwith the Pretender's Sons, or any oftheir Agents, &c. ; which was afterwardsrepublished, in 1746 and 1748,with improvements. In 1747, he wasappointed, together with his brotherJohn, joint clerk of the crown in Chancery,and soon after he became attorney-generalto the Princess of Wales ; and,during the same year, he was chosenmember for Relate, and continuedso until his advancement to the peerage.On the 3rd of July, 1751, hesucceeded Mr. Goddrell, as solicitor tothe East India Company; and, continuingto advance in his profession,on the 6th of November, 1756, he wasappointed solicitor-general ; which posthe held till the 27th of December,1761, when he was promoted to thatof king's attorney-general. In 1763,he quitted office, received a patent ofprecedency, and was shortly afterwardsmade recorder of Gloucester. In 1770,he was made a peer, and prevailedon, by the king, to desert his formerparty, and accept the seals, on the resignationof Lord Camden ; but theodium he had incurred by this stepso preyed on his spirits, that he diedsix days after his acceptance of them,on the 22nd of January. It has beenreported, that he terminated his ownexistence by cutting his throat; but thiswas, a short while ago, publicly andpositively denied by one of his sons, inthe Sun newspaper. He was a man ofgreat sensitiveness, knowledge, andliberality of mind ; and " his death,"says Adolphus, in his History, " wasconsidered highly prejudicial to theinterests of the nation." He was fondof literature and poetry, and wrote asmall portion of the Athenian Letters,published by his brother Philip.HARRINGTON, (DAINES,) fourthson of the first Lord Barrington, wasborn about 1724; and, after havingcompleted his education at Oxford, wascalled to the bar, and appointed, successively,marshal to the high court ofAdmiralty, and secretary to GreenwichHospital. He was afterwards appointedrecorder of Bristol, a Welch judge, andsecond justice of Chester ; which posthe resigned in 1785, and retired to hischambers in the Inner Temple, wherehe died, on the 14th of March, 1800 ;the pall at his funeral being borne byLord Stowell, and other eminent men.He distinguished himself both as a legaland literary character, and wrote severalworks, the principal of which are,Observations on the Statutes, chieflythe more Ancient, &c. ; An Edition ofGrotius, with the Anglo-saxon versionof King Alfred, and an English translationand notes ; Tracts on the probabilityof reaching the North Pole ;besides several papers in the Transactionsof the Royal and AntiquarianSocieties, of both of which bodies hewas a fellow.EYRE, (JAMES,) a connexion of thePembroke family, was born at Wiltshire,in 1724 ; and having been educatedat Winchester, removed to MertonCollege, Oxford. Having graduated atthe university, he became a law student; and soon after, having beencalled to the bar, he purchased thesituation of a city counsel. He was,however, but little known, until calledon to act as deputy for Sir WilliamMorton, the recorder of London, whowas prevented, by ill health, from performingthe duties of his office. Mr.Eyre gave so much satisfaction in hisnew capacity, that, on the death of therecorder, which took place in 1762, hewas appointed to the vacant post, andthus obtained, at the bar, a patent ofprecedence. He performed his dutiesfor some time without molestation ; but,on the occasion of the famous remonstranceto the throne being proposedand carried, in the common council, herefused, in his character of recorder,to present it to the sovereign. For hisconduct, with respect to this circumstance,a vote of censure was passedon him, and he was resolutely attackedby the opposition party, in speeches,caricatures, and pamphlets. He was,however, rewarded by government, inAPPENDIX.1772, with a judgeship in the Exchequer,of which court, he, in 1787,became the chief baron. In 1792, hewas made first commissioner of thegreat seal ; and, in the following year,received the honour of knighthood,being, about the same time, removedto the court of Common Pleas, of whichhe was appointed chief-justice. Hehad also been made a privy-counsellor,about the same time ; and he died,holding these offices, on the 6th of July,1799, at Buncombe, in Berkshire. Lordchief-justice Eyre was well skilled inthe law, and his judgments were generallydistinguished by their candourand sagacity. His apprehension wasremarkably quick ; but, though he soongained an insight into a case, he neverinterrupted counsel in their arguments.He endeavoured to keep his mindwholly free from prejudice, and invariablyfounded his decisions on thestrictest justice, so that unsuccessfulparties often acknowledged his impartiality.Though the views he took ofa cause were, for the most part, correct,he was not bigotted to his first formedopinions ; which he willingly gave up,when proved by argument to have beenerroneous. His recorded decisionsshow that he possessed considerablelearning, and an understanding of greatvigour : they are couched in occasionallyvery eloquent language, and the reasoningthey contain is convincingly forcible.In private life, Judge Eyre appears tohave possessed many excellent qualities.DALRYMPLE, (Sir DAVID, LordHailes,) was born in Edinburgh, in 1726,and after having received his educationat Eton, studied civil law at the Universityof Utrecht. In 1748, he wascalled to the Scottish bar; in 1766, wasappointed one of the judges of thecourt of session ; and, in 1776, succeededhis father-in-law, Lord Coal-son,as a commissioner of the justiciary,by the title of Lord Hailes. He diedon the 29th of November, 1792, leavingbehind him a most estimable character,both for private virtues and publicintegrity. He was known to the principalliterati of the day, and carried ona correspondence with Dr. S. Johnson,who had a high respect for him. Hisprincipal work is entitled " The Annalsof Scotland, from the accession of MalcolmCanoe to the accession of theHouse of Stewart," but he was theauthor of several others, consistingchiefly of new editions and translationsof old works. He was twice married:first, to a daughter of Lord Coalition;and, secondly, to a daughter of LordKilkerran, each of whom bore him adaughter.Wolverton, (BARRY, Lord Avon-more,)was born in Ireland, in 1736, andafter having finished his education atTrinity College, Dublin, was called tothe Irish bar, in 1764. After somestruggles, he rose rapidly into repute,and, in 1776, having been elected amember of the Irish house of commons,he took the popular side in politics,and became a powerful opponent togovernment. He, however, soon afterwardschanged his sentiments, for whichhe was rewarded with the attorney-generalship,and chief baronship of thecourt of Exchequer, in Ireland, duringthe Portland administration. In 1795,he was made an Irish peer, by the titleof Baron of Avonmore; a viscount in1800; and died on the 19th of August,1805, leaving three sons and a daughter.Lord Avonmore was a man of warmand benevolent feelings, which he gavevent to in an equal degree in privatelife, in the senate, or on the bench.In his judicial capacity he was too proneto be led away by his extreme sensibility;and, during the progress of acause, would alternately be inflamedwith indignation and softened to tears.He possessed much learning and ability ;and was the intimate friend of Curranand others, who often made sport ofhis unsuspiciousness, and simplicity ofheart, which were almost infantine. Itwas a saying of his, that he would putno trust in a Kerry-man ; giving, asareason, the following anecdote :Whilst attending the Tralee assizes,I was employed in a single half-guineacase, in which I failed ; and a day ortwo after, as I was travelling alone onthe road to Cork, I was waylaid bymy clients, reproached for my want ofskill, and forcibly compelled to refundthe fee."WOLFE, (ARTHUR, Viscount Kil-warden,)eldest son of John Wolfe, Esq.of Kildare, in Ireland, was born onJURISPRUDENCE.the 30th of January, 1739; educatedat Trinity College, Dublin; and havingbecome a member of an inn of court,commenced practising at the Irish bar,where he rapidly rose into eminence.He also distinguished himself as amember of the Irish parliament, wherehe had to contend, among others, withFlood and Grattan. In 1787, he wasappointed solicitor-general for Ireland ;having, on the 3rd of July, in the yearpreceding, been created Baron Kil-warden.In 1789, he obtained the officeof attorney-general ; and became, in1798, lord chief-justice of Ireland. In1800 he received the title of ViscountKilwarden; and, in 1802, was madevice-chancellor of the University ofDublin. On the evening of the 23rd ofJuly, 1803, while proceeding to attenda meeting of the privy-council, hiscarriage was stopped in St. ThomasStreet, Dublin, and himself, and hisnephew who accompanied him, wereassassinated, by being stabbed withpikes in different parts of their bodies.A reward of 1000 was offered, by thelord-lieutenant, for the discovery of themurderers. He was sixty years of ageat the time of his death ; and, it issaid he always dreaded he should fallas has been described, on account of thenumerous threats he received in anonymousletters. He was, however, a manof firm mind, and had not been guiltyof any acts of injustice likely to haveirritated, beyond an ordinary degree,the minds of" the populace. It is relatedthat, on one occasion, when an attorneyhad been arrested on suspicion of treason,he refused to allow the examinationof the papers belonging to theaccused; which, he maintained, were theprivate property, not of the lawyer, butof his clients. His humanity and forbearancewere as prominent as his senseof justice; and, in his last moments, heis said to have expressed his desire thata fair and impartial trial should beallowed to his murderers. He was aneloquent speaker, and advocated, withgreat ability, the measures which led tothe Union. He served in the Dublincorps of volunteers, in 1800, with Floodand Grattan, by whom he was held inthe highest estimation. He married, onthe 3rd of January, 1769, Anne, daughterof William Buxton, Esq. by whom hehad issue, three sons and two daughters.SCOTT, (JOHN, Earl of Clonmeli,)was born in Ireland, on the 8th of June,1739; and, whilst at school, happeningto render a small service to young(afterwards Lord) Carleton, he was sent,by that nobleman's father, to TrinityCollege, Dublin ; and, by his assistance,was called to the Irish bar. He quicklyrose to repute, and became a memberof the Irish house of commons ; in1774, he was made solicitor, and, in 1777,attorney-general of that country, whichhe remained till 1782. In 1784, he wasappointed king's prime sergeant, andchief-justice of the King's Bench, whichhe held jointly with the office of clerk ofthe Pleas, in the court of Exchequer;and, on the 10th of May, of the sameyear, he was created an Irish peer, asBaron Erlsfort. In 1789, he was furtherraised to the dignity of Viscount Clon-melt ; and, in 1793, received an earldomin the Irish peerage. He died in May,1798, leaving a fortune of 22,000 perannum ; of which, however, the greaterportion was acquired by the bequests ofrelations, and fortunate purchases ofestates. Lord Clonmeli was an advocateand politician of great ability ;and, in addition to his talents, possessedmany amiable and ennobling qualities.He never forgot the friendship of LordCarleton ; and when that nobleman wasalmost a bankrupt at the bar, he immediatelysettled upon him 300 a year,until his success should enable him todowithout it. " His skill," says theauthor of Historic Anecdotes, " wasunrivalled, and his success proverbial.He was full of anecdotes, though not themost refined : those in private society henot only told, but acted ; and when heperceived that he had made a very goodexhibition, he immediately withdrew,that he might leave the most lively impressionof his pleasantry behind him."The same author, however, accuses himof being avaricious and ostentatious ;and says that he was " Half liked, halfreprobated ; too high to be despised, andtoo low to be respected." He also relatesthat his conduct, on one occasion,was so arrogant to the bar, that hethought proper to apologize to it,through the medium of the newspapers.He was twice married : first,to a sister of the Earl of Llandaff; and,secondly, to a daughter of P. Lawless,Esq. ; by each of whom he had issue.APPENDIX.CARLETON, (HUGH, Viscount,)was born, at Cork, in Ireland, on thellth of September, 1739; and, afterhaving completed his education atTrinity College, Dublin, was called tothe Irish bar. His success was, at first,doubtful ; but, in 1779, he was appointedsolicitor-general for Ireland, whichsituation he retained until the appointmentof the Duke of Portland as lord-lieutenant.In 1787, he was made chief-justiceof the Common Pleas, in Ireland ;in 1789, created Baron, and, in 1797,Viscount Carleton. He, afterwards,retired from the bench, and sat in theBritish house of lords, as one of the representativepeers of Ireland. He wason the point of being murdered, in 1803,by the mob who killed Lord Kilwarden,the object of their fury being LordCarleton, for whom they mistook theformer. He had incurred the odium ofthe populace by the trial and condemnationof the two counsellors, Sheers, towhom he had been left guardian bytheir father. He was remarkable forhis lugubrious and hypochondriacal disposition; which induced Curran toobserve that his lordship was plaintiff(plaintive) in every cause that camebefore him. He was twice married jbut had no issue by either union.BURGH, (WALTER Hussy,) wasborn in Kildare, in 1742 ; and, afterhaving completed an appropriate education,was called to the Irish bar, in1769. In the course of three years,he came into large practice ; and, underthe patronage of the Duke of Leinster,became a member of the Irish commons,at an early period of his professionalcareer. In 1777, he was appointedprime Serjeant, and continuedso until 1779; when, siding with thepopular party, respecting the questionof a free export trade, he secondedMr. Grattan, and resigned his gown.In 1782, it was, however, restored tohim ; and, in the same year, he wasmade chief baron of the Irish Exchequer,and is said, shortly afterwards, tohave declined a peerage. He died onthe 24th of September, at Armagh, andwas buried near his wife, of whom heis said to have been excessively fond,in the cemetery of St. Peter's Church,Dublin; leaving an only son, elevenyears of age, and three daughters. Hewas one of the most upright, honourable,and patriotic men, that Irelandever produced. Sir Jonah Barringtonspeaks of him as the most amiable andeloquent man that ever appeared onthe stage of politics; and both hisfriends and opponents had an enthusiasticadmiration of his character, whichwas equally illustrious at the bar, onthe bench, and in the senate.GLENBERVIE, (DOUGLAS Sylvester,Lord,) was born in Scotland,on the 24th of May, 1743, and completedhis education at the University ofAberdeen, where he was distinguishedboth as a scientific and classical scholar.He studied medicine at first, but afterwardsforsook it for the profession ofthe bar, where he obtained a considerableshare of practice and a silk gown.In 1789, he married a daughter ofLord North, through whose influencehe was returned to the British parliament,and was appointed secretary tothe lord-lieutenant of Ireland. He became,subsequently, a commissioner ofthe treasury, joint paymaster of thearmy, chief commissioner of woods andforests, and a peer, under the title ofBaron Glenbervie, to which dignity hewas raised in 1800; he gave evidence,at her trial, in favour of the queen ofGeorge the Fourth; and died in May,1823. He distinguished himself as anauthor, by the publication of a valuabletreatise on Cases of controverted Elections,in four volumes ; and, a translationof the first canto of the Ricciardetto ofFortinguerea, with notes, and an introduction.WOOD, (Sir GEORGE,) the son of aclergyman, was born in Yorkshire, in1743, where he was articled to anattorney, under whom he evinced suchsuperior abilities, that he was recommendedto study for the bar. to whichhe was afterwards called by the societyof the Middle Temple. Previous to thisevent he had distinguished himself, as achamber counsel, by his ability as aspecial pleader ; and, in that capacity,had several pupils of future eminence ;among whom was Lord Erskine. In1802, he appears to have been in parliament,for the borough of Haslemere, andvoted with the majority on Mr. Pitt'scelebrated triple assessment bill. In 1807,JURISPRUDENCE.he was knighted, and made a baron of theExchequer, which situation he resignedin 1823, and died in the July of thefollowing year, leaving, it is said, a fortuneof near 300,000. Baron Woodpossessed talents of no very brilliantorder, either as an advocate or judge.He was dull, plodding, and technical,although, at the same time, blunt, andhonest; and, was promoted to the benchmore for his useful, than his vigorousor shining qualities. He, however, hadan acute perception of the truth of acase; and, in one instance, because itwas not sufficiently proved to his mind,he saved a prisoner, after a capital convictionon a charge of murder, fromexecution.WOODDESON, (RICHARD,) the sonof the Rev. Richard Wooddeson, thecelebrated master of the grammar-school,at Kingston-upon-Thames, wasborn there on the 15th of May, 1745.After having been, for some time, underthe tuition of his father, he removed toOxford, where he graduated M. A. ; andobtained a common law scholarship onthe Vinerian foundation. In 1771, hesucceeded to a college fellowship; and,in 1772, failed in obtaining the deputyVinerian professorship, but was appointedto it shortly afterwards, and held it forthree years. In 1776, about which timehe was called to the bar, he succeeded toa Vinerian fellowship ; and, in 1777, waselected, after a sharp contest with Mr.Rooke, to the Vinerian professorship;and, in the same year, took his degreeof D.C.L. He held this situation, withgreat credit and ability, for sixteen years ;during which time he was made a commissionerof bankrupts, and a bencherof the Middle Temple, and published awork, entitled, Elements of Jurisprudence,treated of in the preliminarypart of a Course of Lectures on theLaws of England; and another, calledA Systematic View of the Laws ofEngland, as treated in a Course ofVinerian Lectures read in Oxford, dedicatedto the king. In 1808, whilst hewas at Brighton, a fire breaking out inhis house in Chancery Lane, during hisabsence, the whole of his property wasdestroyed, including a valuable library.He died unmarried, in an infirm state,on the 29th of October, 1823, leavingbehind him various sums to severalcharitable institutions, and to the collegewhere he had been bred. Dr.Wooddeson was a man of great erudition,independently of his legal knowledge; and passed much of his time withAkenside, and other eminent men ofletters of his day. He was principallydistinguished as a chamber counsel ;and, is said to have been styled, byLord Ellenborough, one of the bestsurviving lawyers of the old school. Inprivate life he was amiable and charitable,and much respected and esteemed.ARDEN, (RICHARD PEPPER, LordAlvanley,) was born in Cheshire, in 1745,and having completed his education atCambridge, where he obtained a wran-eldership,and graduated M. A., was calledto the Chancery bar in 1769. Havingtaken chambers in the same house withPitt, he became intimate with that celebratedstatesman; and, in 1782, wasappointed solicitor-general, and electedmember of parliament for the boroughof Newton, in the Isle of Wight. Atthis time, his professional reputationstood very high ; and, such was his influencein parliament, where he joinedthe ministerial party, that it is said hewas able to strengthen whichever sidehe took, with six additional votes. In1784, having been previously knighted,and made chief-justice of Chester, hewas returned member of parliament forMarlborough, in Yorkshire, through theinterest of Richard Wilbraham Bootle,Esq., M. P., whose daughter he thisyear married; and, in 1788, throughthe zealous friendship of Mr. Pitt, hesucceeded Lord Kenyon, as master ofthe Rolls. In the year 1790, he wasreturned to parliament for the boroughof Hastings; vacating which in April,1794, he was immediately after returnedfor the city of Bath. In 1801, he succeededLord Eldon, as lord chief-justiceof the Common Pleas; on which occasionhe was raised to the peerage, as LordAlvanley, of Alvanley, in Cheshire, bya patent dated the 22nd of May, having,for some time, been a privy-counsellor.He died, at his house in Great GeorgeStreet, Westminster, after a short illness,on the 19th of March, 1804, and wasburied on the 26th, in the Rolls Chapel,Chancery Lane. Lord Alvanley was aman of considerable ability, both as alawyer, and politician; and was muchAPPENDIX.admired for his conduct in eithercharacter. As a speaker, he was distinguishedby wit, spirit, and intelligence;and, in his judicial capacity, hissentences, even in the most difficultcases, gave universal satisfaction. Inprivate life, he was amiable and entertaining,and appears to have passedthrough life without creating an enemy,excepting Lord Thurlow, who entertaineda great aversion towards him,and vainly endeavoured to obstruct hispromotion.ADAM, (WILLIAM,) the son of anarchitect, was born at Leith, in 1746;and, after having received a liberaleducation, was called to the bar, anddistinguished himself, both there andin parliament, by his superior abilities.During a debate in the house of commons,he took offence at some expressionsuttered by Mr. Fox; and aduel taking place in consequence, heshot that statesman in the groin ; butareconciliation subsequently took place.About 1807, he was appointed lord-lieutenantfor Kinrosshire, chancellorand keeper of the great seal, and counsellorof state to the Prince of Wales inScotland. In 1809, he defended theDuke of York against the chargesbrought against him in the house ofcommons, respecting Mrs. Clarke ; and,in 1813, us counsel for the East IndiaCompany, declared his opinion that itwas a corporation under a charter independentof any act of parliament. In1815, he was appointed lord chief commissionerof the Scotch jury court ; thedudes of which office he discharged formany years with great ability. Hewas a man of great legal knowledgeand oratorical skill, and was employedin almost all the election cases of importancethat occurred during his time.MACDONALD, (Sir ARCHIBALD,Bart.) the son of a baronet, was bornin 1746, and educated at WestminsterSchool ; at which, he used to observe, ifhe had learned any good, it was allwhipped into him. In 1764, he waselected from thence to a studentship atChristchurch, Oxford ; soon after which,he entered himself of the society of Lincoln'sInn. In 1768, he proceeded tothe degree of B. A. ; was called to thebar in 1770 ; took the degree of M. A.in 1772 ; in 1777, was elected memberof parliament for Hindon, in Wiltshire ;and, in 1778, he married a daughter ofthe Marquess of Stafford. In the sameyear of his marriage, to which he owedall his future advancement, he was madea king's counsel ; and, in 1780, returnedto parliament for Newcastle-undermine,and appointed a Welsh judge.In 1783, he was appointed solicitor, andin 1788, attorney-general; and, inFebruary, 1793. was raised to thechief baronship of the Exchequer, andsworn in a privy-counsellor. In 1813,he retired from the bench, with apension and baronetcy, and died inMay, 1826, leaving two sons and twodaughters. Asa lawyer, Sir Archibaldwas little distinguished ; " and whilstin the court of Chancery," says hisbiographer in the Gentleman's Magazine," presented the singular spectacleof an attorney-general with an emptybag." He was, however, an able judge ;and the only drawback on his naturalgood qualities, both public and private,was his warmth of temper ; the violenceof which he displayed, one evening, inthe house of commons, by accusingLord North of'being a lazy, indolent,evasive, shuffling, plausible, artful,mean, confident, cowardly, poor, pitiful,sneaking, and abject creature.ERSKINE, (HENRY,) brother of thelate Lord Erskine, was born at Edinburghin 1746, and called to the Scotchbarn 1768. In 1782, he was appointedlord-advocate of Scotland ; and, shortlyafterwards, became a member of parliament; which situations he lost on thedemise of the Marquess of Rockingham,but was subsequently reinstated in both,and made a dean of the Faculty. In1812, he retired from the bar, in consequenceof ill health, and died, aftermuch suffering, on the 8th of October,1817. He was a man of great powerand ability as an advocate ; and wasconsidered, for many years, the leaderof the Scotch bar. " In his profession,"says the writer of a biographical sketchof his life, which appeared in the MorningChronicle, " all his wit was argument,and each of his delightfulillustrations a material step in his argument."In private life, he was muchbeloved ; and at table, was a witty andcheerful companion. He wrote severalJURISPRUDENCE.epigrams and bon-mots ; among whichthe following is the best :On that high bench where Kenyon holds his seat,England may boast that truth and justice meet ;But in a northern court, where Pride commandsthe chair.Oppression holds the scales, and judgment's lost inAyr!"DALLAS, (Sir ROBERT,) was bornabout 1748; and, having been called tothe bar, obtained considerable practiceat nisi prius. He was one of the counselfor Warren Hastings, and was employedbefore committees on contestedelections ; his abilities in which gainedhim a silk gown. In 1802, he wasreturned as member for St. Michael's,in Cornwall ; but resigned his seat onbeing appointed a Welsh judge, in 1805.He was, however, returned, afterwards,to the same parliament, for the districtburghs of Kirkcaldy, Inkhorn, &c.In 1813, he was appointed one of thepuisne judges of the court of CommonPleas ; and, on the 5th of November,1818, he was made chief-justice of thesame court, and sworn in a privy-counsellor.In November, 1823, he resignedhis situation, in consequence of illhealth, and died in the December of thefollowing year, leaving several childrenby his wife, who was a daughter ofColonel Jardine. He was a very amiableman, and much respected by thebar, who regretted his retirement fromthe bench, with reference to his character,both as a judge and a gentleman.As a senatorial speaker he didnot often distinguish himself; but, onone occasion, made a very able and remarkablespeech in favour of ministers,ending with these words: " We aregoing to war," he said, " for Malta !but not for Malta only, but for Egypt !not for Egypt only, but for India! notfor India only, but for the integrity andsecurity of the British empire ! for thecause of justice, faith, and freedomthroughout the civilized world!"WILMOT, (JOHN Early,) sonof the chief-justice, was born at Derby,in 1748, and received his education atWestminster and Oxford, where he obtaineda fellowship of All Souls' College.H, at first, studied under Doctor(afterwards Bishop) Warburton, for thechurch ; but afterwards, imbibing apartiality for the law, he came to thebar; a step, which his father called,quitting a bed of roses for a crown ofthorns." In 1776, about five yearsafter his call, he was returned to parliamentfor Tiverton, in Devonshire ; and,taking part with the opposition, attackedthe ministerial party in a pamphlet,denouncing the continuance ofwar. In 1781, he was appointed amaster in Chancery; and, in 1782,was commissioned, in conjunction withothers, to inquire into the distribution ofthe sums destined for the relief of theAmerican loyalists. In the followingyear, he spoke on the subject in parliament;and, in reply to Mr. Fox's condemnationof the large sums expendedon the American sufferers, declaredhe would share with them his lastshilling and his last loaf." In 1784,and the parliament which followed in1790, he sat as member for Coventry,and supported the views of Mr. Pittduring every session. He was particularlyhostile to the French revolution ;and, by his exertions, obtained the distributionof a fund, under the sanctionof parliament, in behalf of the emigrantsfrom that country. In 1804, he retiredaltogether from public life; and,devoting himself to literary pursuits,published, shortly afterwards, a life ofhis father, and also of Bishop Hough.Previously to this, he had written ATreatise on the Laws and Customs ofEngland; and, in the year of his death,which occurred in June, 1815, printedAn Historical Review of the Commissionrelative to the American Loyalists.He was a man of the most uprightand unimpeachable character,both public and private; and, in theformer, was equally distinguished forhis learning and eloquence. He wastwice married : first, to the onlydaughter of S. Sainthell, Esq., by whomhe had one son and four daughters, whosurvived him ; and, secondly, in 1793,to Miss Hallam, by whom he had twochildren, who died in their infancy.Feare, (CHARLES,) was born inLondon, in 1749; and, after havingcompleted his education at WestminsterSchool, became a student of the InnerTemple, but with no intention, at thetime, of being called to the bar. Onthe death of his father, however, heAPPEN DIX.commenced practice as a chamber counsel,and conveyancer; and refused toaccept his paternal legacy, saying, tohis relations, who pressed him to receivehim, "No; my father, by taking suchuncommon pains with my education,no doubt meant it should be my wholedependance." His professional success,however, was, at first, frustrated by histaste for experimental philosophy; andit was not until after he had lost a considerablesum, by the failure of one ofhis speculations, that he was called tothe bar, and devoted himself wholly tolegal pursuits. In 1769, he publishedA Geographical Chart of Landed Property; and, in 1772, his celebratedwork, On Contingent Remainders andExecutory Devises, which procured himboth fame and fortune. He published,subsequently, Observations on the Statuteof Enrolment of Bargains and Sales ;and an Essay on Consciousness ; butis said latterly to have neglected hisprofession, and to have amused himselfwith mechanical and philosophicalstudies, which involved him in pecuniarydifficulties, and embittered theclose of his life, which terminated onthe 21st of January, 1794. Mr. Fearewas a man of an amiable and intelligentcharacter ; and, but for his thoughtlessness,and carelessness of his worldlyinterest, would, doubtless, have attainedto the highest honours in his profession.As a legal writer, however, hetakes his stand among the most eminent;and it is almost incredible, thata man, dying at the age of forty-five,should have left behind him such aprofound and elaborate work as hisEssay on Contingent Remainders.PIGOTT, (Sir ARTHUR,) the friendof the late Sir S. Romilly, and the instructorof several of our most eminentjudges, was born in the year 1750;and, having received a learned education,was called to the bar about 1771.He commenced practice in the Islandof Grenada, of which he became ; and, returning to England,attracted the notice of LordNorth, who employed him as one ofthe commissioners for investigating thepublic accounts, and procured him aseat in parliament, and a silk gown.In 1784, he was appointed solicitor-generalto the Prince of Wales ; and,about the same time, became a verypopular advocate at Westminster, andon the circuit. Having, however, inthe course of a cause, attacked an attorneywith undue severity, he was left,in the common law courts, without abrief, which induced him, in 1793, toremove into the court of Chancery,where he soon attained fame and practiceIn 1802, on the death of LordNorth, he became a follower of Mr.Fox ; and, during the brief administrationof that statesman, was knighted,and held the office of attorney-general.He subsequently became counsel to theBank of England, and continued toattend court until within a few yearsof his death, which took place at EastBourn, in Sussex, on the 6th of September,1819. As a lawyer, he wasone of the most intelligent and profoundof his day ; and, as an advocate,was clear and impressive, having therare merit of compressing his case intoa small compass, without exhibitingany deficiency in argument. As asenator, he distinguished himself onmany important occasions, particularlyon the impeachment of Warren Hastingsand Lord Melville ; in the lattercase, assisting his friend, the late Mr.Whitbread, with great ability, in thequality of one of the managers of thecommons. He had been married upwardsof forty years, and left a widow ;and, in private life, is represented ashaving been an amiable and polite man.Bennington, (CHARLES,) wasborn in Hertfordshire, in August, 1751;and, after a private education, was, in1768, placed under Mr. Morgan, aspecial pleader, whom he materiallyassisted in his digest of the Laws ofEngland. In 1778, he was called tothe bar ; and, in 1787, was made serjeantat law ; and, soon after, deputyjudge of the Marshalsea court. Hewas subsequently elevated to the rankof king's Serjeant; in 1813, was electedrecorder of Colchester; but the mayor,who swore him in, not being mayor,de jure, Serjeant Runnington wasobliged to resign. In 1815, he was appointedchief commissioner of the courtfor the relief of Insolvent Debtors, whichhe* resigned in 1819; and, two yearsafter, died at Brighton, on the 18th ofJanuary, 1821. As a lawyer and aJURISPRUDENCE.pleader, Serjeant Runnington had severalsignal opportunities of showinghis eminence. He was counsel for Mr.Fox, in his action against the highbailiff of Westminster ; and he arguedthe great cause of the corporation ofLynn against that of London, andsucceeded in reversing the judgment ofthe court of Common Pleas ; and wasone of the counsel for Sir FrancisBurdett, in his action against thespeaker of the house of commons. Hewas twice married : first, in 1777, to thesister of Sir Samuel Shepherd, by whomhe had a son and daughter ; and,secondly, in 1782, to Mrs. Wetherell,widow of Charles Wetherell, Esq. ofJamaica. Serjeant Runnington hasedited and published the followingworks: Sir Mathew Kale's History ofthe Common Law, two volumes, octavo;Gilbert's Law of Ejectment; Ruffled'sStatutes at large, four volumes ; andthe History, Principle, and Practice ofthe Legal Remedy by Ejectment, andthe resulting action by Mesne Process.Carnally, (LEONARD,) was bornat Dublin, in 1752 ; and being left anorphan, at an early age, came to London,and, by the aid of his pen, obtainedmoney enough to enter himselfa student of the Middle Temple. Whilststudying his profession, he superintendedthe publication of several magazines,became editor of the PublicLedger, and wrote a small piece for thestage. On his call to the bar, he commencedpractice in Ireland; but notsucceeding, he revisited London, wherehe engaged himself, for some years, inliterary pursuits; but returned afterwardsto Dublin, and became distinguishedfor his abilities in crown law.He died on the 15th of February, 1820.In connexion with his profession, hepublished, in two volumes, octavo, TheRules of Evidence on Pleas of theCrown ; and, in two volumes, TheJustice of Peace of Ireland. He wroteseveral theatrical productions ; the principalone of which was acted at CoventGarden, under the title of Robin Hood.Mr. Carnally's person, according to SirJonah Barrington, was ludicrous in theextreme. " He was very short," saysSir Jonah, " and nearly as broad aslong; his legs were of unequal length,and he had a face which no washingcould clean : he wanted one thumb, theabsence of which gave rise to numerousexpedients on his part ; and hetook great care to have no nails, as heregularly, every morning, ate the growthof the preceding day." He possessed,however, a fine eye, and by no meansan ugly countenance ; a great deal ofmiddling intellect; a shrill, full, goodbar voice; great quickness at cross-examination,with sufficient adroitnessat defence ; and, in Ireland, was thevery staff and standing dish of the criminaljurisdiction. He was so dirty inhis person, that he was excluded fromthe circuit mess ; and, in order to bringhimself upon a level with his brotherbarristers, he tried to provoke theminto a duel, and at length prevailedupon Sir Jonah Barrington to go outwithhim ; which so delighted him, that,although wounded in the duel, he afterwardsbecame a staunch friend of SirJonah, and used to say, " his shot hadbeen his salvation."PLUMER, (Sir THOMAS,) was bornabout 1752 ; and, having completedhis education at University College,Oxford, where he graduated M. A.in 1778, and B. C. L. in 1783, wascalled to the bar, and soon distinguishedhimself as an advocate. Hiserst important case was that of ArthurO'Connor, for treason; and he subsequentlydefended Warren Hastings,and Lord Melville ; in which cases hedisplayed so much ability, thai he wasafterwards appointed king's Serjeant,and a Welsh judge. In 1807, he succeededSir Samuel Romilly as solicitor-general; and, in the same year, wasknighted, and returned to parliamentfor a borough in Wiltshire. In 1813,he was raised to the newly institutedoffice of vice-chancellor ; and, in 1818,was made master of the Rolls ; whilstholding which office he died, in March,1824, and was buried in the RollsChapel. Sir Thomas Plumer was aman of great professional talent andacumen ; and, according to the authorof the Biographical Index to the Houseof Commons, was better acquaintedwith the law, as applied to elections,than any other person in the kingdom.In parliament he shone but little,being averse to party measures : hewas a sound classic; and, whilst atAPPENDIX.college, had the reputation of beingone of the best scholars amongst theunder-graduates.LAWRENCE, (FRENCH,) was bornat Bristol, about 1755, and commencedhis education at the grammar-schoolof that town, whence he was removedto Winchester College; and, subsequently,to Corpus Christii College,Oxford", where he obtained a fellowship,and graduated M. A. in 1781, andin October, 1787, took the degree ofD. C. L. Having, in the mean time,been admitted a practitioner at Doctors'Commons, he soon rose to great eminenceas a civilian ; and, by his literarytalents, as a political writer, attractedthe notice of Mr. Burke, through whoseinfluence, he was retained as one ofthe counsel against Warren Hastings,and returned afterwards to parliamentfor the borough of Peterborough. Hesubsequently became regius professorof civil law in the University of Oxford,chancellor of that diocese, andjudge of the Cinque Ports, and diedof consumption, in 1809. Dr. Lawrencepossessed a profound and extensiveknowledge of his profession :his abilities, however, were more solidthan shining; and, in parliament, hehad no pretensions to the fame oforatory, although his speeches werealways characterized by good sense.Mr. Whitbread, during the debates onthe orders in council, took occasion tosay, " Now Dr. Lawrence is dead, I amsure there is no one in this house butwill do justice to his memory ; let usacknowledge, with one common voice,that we have lost a man whose like weshall not soon see again." He wasmuch attached to Mr. Burke, who lefthim his executor, and an edition ofwhose works he had a great share inediting. Dr. Lawrence was one of theauthors of the Probationary Odes; andwrote a volume of Remarks on theApocalypse, besides a few articles inthe Annual Register.LENS, (JOHN,) the son of a land-steward,at Norwich, born on the 2ndof January, 1756, was educated at thegrammar-school of his native city ; and,on one occasion, while bathing, wassaved from drowning, by one of hisschool-fellows. Having removed toEton, he was transferred to St John'sCollege, Cambridge, in 1775, where heattained the degree of B. A. in 1779 ;and, soon after, became fourth wrangler,as well as first chancellor's medallist.Having become a student of Lincoln'sInn, he was called to the bar in 1781,in which year he proceeded M. A., andcommenced practice, in the court ofKing's Bench, as a barrister. He graduallyrose into reputation on thewestern circuit, from which he retired,in 1817, and was presented, on theoccasion, with a silver inkstand, by hisprofessional brethren. Having attainedthe dignity of serjeant, he practisedin the Common Pleas, and being madea lay fellow of Downing College, wasappointed counsel of Cambridge University.He soon after became a king'sserjeant ; and, subsequently, succeededto the office of king's ancient serjeant,the highest rank at the bar, after that ofthe king's attorney or solicitor-general.During the illness of Lord Ellenbo-rough, Mr. Lens acted as a judge, onthe western circuit ; and gave generalsatisfaction, by his performance of theduties belonging to that important character.Towards the last two or threeyears of his life, he was attacked by amalady that obliged him to undergo asevere surgical operation, which gave anirrecoverable shock to his constitution,and he died on the 6th of August, 1825,at Ride, in the sixty-ninth year of hisage. So much was he esteemed atCambridge, that on being chosen universitycounsel, he was warmly solicited,by all parties, to become their representativein parliament; but he uniformlydeclined complying with their request,from a diffidence in his powers; aground, upon which, it is said, he morethan once refused a judgeship; thoughit has been erroneously stated, that hesuffered from a disappointed ambition,in not attaining that honour. In earlylife, he was an admirer of the principlesof Fox, to which he always adheredwith the strictest consistency. He issaid to have been offered, by the PrinceRegent, the office of attorney-general,and, subsequently, that of chief-justiceof Chester ; in both cases with a promisethat he should pledge himself tono particular line of conduct; but hemodestly declined the proffered elevation.His speeches had no pretension toJURISPRUDENCE.oratory, though distinguished occasionallyby force and elegance of language.He was a profound lawyer ; and, butfor his diffidence in his powers, wouldhave probably reached the highesthonours of his profession. In taste, hewas excessively refined; and never forgot,in the advocacy of a cause, themanners of a gentleman. In 1818, hemarried the widow of John Nares, Esq.whom he survived five years.LAWRENCE, (Sir Sudden,) wasborn about 1758; and, after receivingan education at St. Paul's School, wasremoved to St John's College, Cambridge,where he graduated B. A., in1771, became seventh wrangler in themathematical tripos, and .was soon afterelected a fellow of his college. In 1774,in which year he took the degree ofM.A., he was called to the bar; andgradually rose in his profession, till1794, when he was appointed a judgeof the court of King's Bench, andknighted. In 1808, he removed to theCommon Pleas, but, from ill health, resignedthe judicial office altogether, in1812 i and died on the 8th of July, 1814.His legal knowledge and talents wereconsiderable, as was his learning, bothclassical and mathematical ; and fewmen were more justly esteemed by theprofession, and by his friends and contemporariesgenerally. He had a greattaste for the fine arts, and had madea valuable collection of pictures, bothancient and modern. He committed asingular act of generosity by a codicilin his will, which directed that hisexecutors should pay the plaintiff inacertain cause, against whom, hethought, an unjust verdict had beengiven, the amount of costs that hadbeen incurred by him.Powder, (FRANCIS,) of Romancatholic family, bora in Ireland, aboutthe year 1760, received a classical education,which he completed at the Universityof St. Omens. Having gone toEngland, and become a student of theMiddle Temple, he was called to thebar, and became eminent as a conveyancer.The disabilities preventing Romancatholics from pleading havingbeen removed, he went to the Chancerybar, and would have acquired considerablepractice, had he not been retardedby a misunderstanding with the chancellor.He, however, became eminentas a legal writer, and published, in1784, an Investigation of the NativeRights of British Subjects. In 1789and 1790, he sent forth a work on thebeneficial consequences of enrollingdeeds, to which was added, the draftof a bill on the subject, to be introducedinto parliament. He also wroteseveral other legal works; and, in July,1793, the honorary degree of D. C. L.was conferred on him by the Universityof Oxford. In 1794, he published aHistory of the British Empire, fromMay, 1792, to the conclusion of thefollowing year, in two pamphlets, againstMr. Pitt; and, in the same year, he sentforth his Friendly and ConstitutionalAddress to the People of Great Britain.In 1808, appeared his Historical Viewof the State of Ireland, from the Invasionof Henry the Second, to the Union in1801, a work which he appears to havewritten under the patronage of the government; but it not having answeredtheir views, he attacked the ministry inapreliminary preface. In 1813, a prosecutionwas instituted against him, atthe Li iibrd assizes, at the suit of a Mr.Hart, connected with the government,who obtained a verdict of j5,000; toavoid the payment of which, Mr. powderfled to France, and, having settledin Paris, became a professor to the Scots'College, in that city. He died thereonthe 2nd of April, 1829. He was aman of acknowledged talent; but, in hisworldly affairs, was somewhat improvident.In politics, he was a staunchWhig, and was much opposed to Mr.Pitt's policy. He was married ; andhad, by his wife, one son and severaldaughters; one of whom became, bymarriage, the Countess of Dundonald.EVANS, (Sir WILLIAM DAVID,) wasborn at Liverpool, about 1760 ; and,after receiving a classical education,which he completed at one of the Englishuniversities, became a student ofLincoln's Inn, by which society he wascalled to the bar. He afterwards practised,for some time, as a chamber counselat his native town, and distinguishedhimself as a writer on legal subjects.He afterwards received the appointmentof recorder of Bombay, upon whichoccasion he was knighted, and in pos-appendix.session of which appointment he died,on the 4th of December, 1821. Hisliterary productions are, a sixth editionof Salkeld's Reports of Cases adjudgedin the King's Bench, with large additions,in three volumes, octavo ; Essayson the Action for Money lent and received; on the Law of Assurances ;and on the Laws of Bills of Exchangeand Promissory Notes ; A GeneralView of the Decisions of Lord Mansfield,in Civil Causes; and a few others.JACKSON, (HANDLE,) was bornabout 1763, and completed his educationat Exeter College, Oxford, wherehe took the degree of B. A., and thatof M. A., in 1793. Having become astudent of Lincoln's Inn, he was calledto the bar by that society, and soonacquired considerable reputation as anadvocate. He, however, obtained hisprincipal fame in that character, asparliamentary counsel for the EastIndia Company, and also for the corporationof London ; in which capacity hedistinguished himself on several occasionsbefore both houses of parliament.His principal speeches have been published; and, according to the author ofPublic Characters, they evince a greatdegree of legal knowledge, and displaymuch eloquence.Hillock, (Sir JOHN,) son ofTimothy Hullock, of Bernard Castle,Durham, was born there, in 1764; and,having received a liberal education, becamea member of Gray's Inn ; bywhich society he was, in due time,called to the bar, when he commencedpractice in the courts of Westminster.He soon acquired reputation, and becamea leader on the northern circuit.He was, in 1816, made a serjeant at law ;and he presided, with great ability, onthe celebrated commission of lunacyrespecting the Earl of Portsmouth. In1823, he became one of the barons ofthe Exchequer ; an office which he heldtill the time of his death, an event thatoccurred suddenly, while he was on theOxford circuit. He arrived in Abingdon,on the 28th of July, 1829, in goodhealth ; but, in the course of the followingnight, Sunday, experienced an attackofthe cholera morbus, that broughton an illness which terminated hisexistence on the Tuesday following. Ahigh panegyric was passed on his privateand judicial character, by his colleague,Baron Vaughan, in the latter'scharge to the grand jury of Worcester.As an advocate, Sir James Hullockalways judiciously enforced the strongpoints of an argument, and invariablyacted with the strictest and most resoluteregard to his client's interest.On one occasion, while pleading a cause,he, contrary to his instructions, produceda deed which appeared to havebeen forged by his client's solicitor,and was immediately ordered, by thejudge, to give up the instrument, thatit might be impounded, and made thesubject of a prosecution. Mr. Hullockrequested, before this was done, hemight have leave to inspect it ; and, onits being handed to him, positively refusedto restore it, saying, he shouldnever be happy again, if a fatal resultshould have arisen from his indiscretion.Mr. Justice Bayley, who presided,declined taking decisive measurestill be had consulted with theassociate judge; and the deed was,during the delay, delivered up to theparty who forged it, by whom it wasdestroyed immediately. In politics, hewas a consistent supporter of Tory principles; and, at the time of the passingof the bill for catholic emancipation,discontinued his intercourse with manyof his former friends, who were inducedto abandon their hostility to themeasure. As a judge, he was humaneand courteous, with a sound knowledgeof the laws, which he administered withthe strictest impartiality. His privatecharacter was irreproachable ; and hewas a kind benefactor to the poor inthe neighbourhood of Barnard Castle,where, during the summer months, hegenerally resided. He published, in1792, the Law of Costs: and, in 1797,the Law of Costs in Civil Actions andCriminal Proceedings ; of which, in1810, appeared an edition in twovolumes. He was married many yearspreviously to his death, but had nochildren.EAST, (Sir EDWARD HYDE,) wasborn on the 9th of September, 1764;and, having received a learned education,became a member of one ofthe inns of court, and was called tothe bar, where he became principallyJURISPRUDENCE.distinguished as a reporter ; and, inthat character, published, in conjunctionwith Mr. Dartford, his celebratedKing's Bench Reports. In 1802, hepublished A Treatise on the Pleas ofthe Crown; and, in 1811, A Report ofthe Case of Sir Francis Burdett andRight Honourable Charles AbbottIn 1813, he was knighted, and appointedchief-justice of the supremecourt, at Fort William, Bengal; and,on the 25th of April, 1823, he wasmade a baronet, and chief-justice ofCalcutta. His fame rests chiefly on hisReports ; than which, none are consideredof higher authority. He was,however, an excellent judge ; and issaid to have exercised his functionswith great skill and impartiality.Barley, (Sir JOHN,) the son of aclergyman, was born in Northamptonshireabout 1765 ; and, having receiveda classical education, went to St. John'sCollege, Cambridge, to complete hisstudies ; where he graduated with distinction,and obtained a fellowship.Having previously become a student ofone of the inns of court, he commencedspecial pleader; and was long eminentas such before he received his call tothe common law bar, where he soonacquired considerable repute. In 1789,he published a Short Treatise on theLaw of Bills of Exchange, Cash Bills,and Promissory Notes; besides which,he edited a fourth edition of the Reportsof Lord Raymond, corrected,with marginal notes, and additionalreferences. In 1800, he was made aSerjeant; and, together with SerjeantBest, now Lord Wynford, had, for along time, the leading business in thecourt of Common Pleas. In 1809, hewas knighted, and appointed one of thejudges of the court of King's Bench,where he has acquired the reputationof being one of the best common-lawlawyers on the bench ; and, on the retirementof Lord Ellenborough, it wasexpected he would have been raised tothe office of chief-justice. He is mostdeservedly esteemed, both in publicand private life, as an upright, intelligent,and most amiable man. In additionto the works already mentioned,he published, in 1816, The Book ofCommon Prayer, with Notes; in which,according to the Monthly Repertory,his doctrines are ultra-orthodox, andhis arguments, as a theological controversialist,unsupported either by soundjudgment or deep research. In thePercy Anecdotes, he is said to havemade the following observations respectinga trial for the warranty of ahorse : " Take my advice, gentlemen,"said he, " and accommodate matters ofthis kind, if possible ; for men, in general,lose more than 25, in bringing anaction on the warranty of a horse, evenif they win ; and such is the danger,from the evidence common in caseslike this, that justice is no security ofsuccess to a man. I perceive that thegentlemen below me do not approve ofmy doctrine ; but the truth must be toldsometimes."SIMEON, (Sir JOHN, Bart) the sonof a solicitor at Reading, in Berkshire,was born about 1765 ; and, after receivinga classical education, was calledto the bar, and soon acquired a reputationas a Chancery barrister. In 1796,however, he greatly increased his legalpractice, by the publication of his excellentTreatise on the Law of Elections;about which time, he was appointedrecorder of his native place ; acircumstance that, in the followingyear, opened to him the representationof the borough, for which he was electedto parliament in 1797. Having generallyvoted on the ministerial side, hewas, some time after the commencementof his parliamentary career, appointeda master in Chancery ; and, in1811, was nominated one of the commissionersfor managing the privateproperty of George the Third. In 1815,he was made a baronet, and died inFebruary, 1824. He was a man of themost amiable domestic habits, esteemedin all the private relations of society, andunimpeached in his public character.He married Rebecca, eldest daughterof John Cornwall, Esq., of TendonHouse, Middlesex, an opulent Russianmerchant, by whom he had three sonsand three daughters.ROBINSON, (Sir CHRISTOPHER,)the son of the Rev. William Robinson,was born in 1766 ; and, having receiveda classical education, went to MagdalenCollege, Oxford, where he graduatedB. A. in 1786, M. A. in 1789, and D. C. L.APPENDIX.in 1796. Having, in the meantime, enteredhimself a member of Doctors'Commons, he commenced practice inthe Ecclesiastical and other courts,where he acquired a considerable reputation,both as an advocate, and as areporter and writer on maritime law.In 1799, he published a Report of thejudgment of the High Court of Admiralty,on the celebrated Capture ofthe Swedish Convoy; and between thatyear and 1808, he added six volumes ofReports of Cases argued and determinedin the same court. In 1800, he producedhis translation of the Consulatedel Mare, relating to the law of prizes ;and, in the following year, he publishedCollectanea Maritima, being a collectionof Public Instruments tending to illustratethe History and Practice of PrizeLaw. In 1809, when he received thehonour of knighthood, he was appointedking's advocate-general in the court ofAdmiralty ; at the head of which courthe was placed, on the retirement ofLord Howell, and where he still presides.He is also a privy-counsellor,and one of the college of doctors of law,Doctors' Commons.HART, (Sir ANTHONY,) is said tohave been born at St. Kit's, in theWest Indies, in the year 1767, and tohave been educated at a dissentingacademy in England, with a view tothe office of pastor. He accordinglysettled at Norwich, in Norfolk, as anUnitarian preacher; but, altering hisviews, in favour of the law, he becamea student of the society of the MiddleTemple, by which body he was calledto the bar, and of which he afterwardsbecame a bencher. After being lormany years a distinguished practitionerat the Chancery bar, he obtained a sinkgown ; and rose into such esteem, forthe urbanity of his manners, and thegreat practical legal knowledge he possessed,that he succeeded Sir JohnLeach, in the office of Vice-chancellorof England, in April, 1827 ; and receivedthe honour of knighthood onthe 30th of the same month. A shorttime after, he succeeded Lord Manners,in the chancellorship of Ireland, anoffice of which he exercised the functionswith great ability. As a lawyer, hepossessed unwearied patience, caution,and discrimination ; and gave greatsatisfaction by the impartiality and integrityof his judgments. He wasaverse to party politics; and was, inprivate life, amiable and respected ;and, at the time of his death, left awidow and one daughter.NOLAN, (MICHAEL,) was born inIreland, about 1770 , and, having completedhis education at Trinity College,Dublin, came over to England, andentered himself a student of Lincoln'sInn, and was called to the English barby that society. He acquired somepractice and reputation as an advocate,and ultimately obtained a silk gown ;but he is principally known as a legalauthor, in which character he publisheda volume of Reports of Cases relativeto the office of Justice of Peace ; athird edition of Strange's Reports; and,A Treatise of the Law for the Reliefand Settlement of the Poor, in twovolumes. He subsequently became aWelsh judge, and was chief-justice onthe Brecon circuit, at the time of hisdeath, which took place in 1828. Mr.Nolan was a man of considerable talent,both as a scholar and lawyer ; and wasone of the few instances of an Irishlawyer succeeding at the English bar.He was in parliament for a few sessions,but took no part in the proceedings,either as a politician or debater.ADOLPHUS, (JOHN,) was bornabout 1770 ; and, after having beensent to the island of St. Christopher's,returned to England, where he servedhis time to a solicitor; and, at the expirationof his an ides, in 1790, wasadmitted an attorney. He next turnedhis attention to the bar; and, whilststudying for that profession, distinguishedhimself, as a debater, at theAthenian Society. On being calledto the bar, he attended the commonlaw courts, and the sessions at the OldBailey, where he attained considerablecelebrity, his assistance being almostalways employed in cases of importanceand notoriety. He has also distinguishedhimself by his conduct, inseveral important cases in WestminsterHall ; and was intrusted with the defenceof Castlewood, which, thoughfailing in his point, he managed withgreat skill and eloquence. As anauthor, he is known to the public byJURISPRUDENCE.his Biographical Memoirs of the FrenchRevolution; The British Cabinet; Historyof the Reign of George the Third,from the Accession to the year 1783 ;History of France ; and, Political Stateof the British Empire : all of whichdisplay considerable intelligence, industry,and research, and a style ofsuperior elegance. His professionalabilities consist in the tact and acutenesswith which he always manages acause; but his great warmth of temper,and occasional grossness of language,will prevent him from ever becominga popular or leading advocate.MONTAGUE, (BASIL,) the son ofLord Sandwich, by Miss Ray, was bornabout 1772; and, after having receiveda liberal education at the Charter House,became a student of Lincoln's Inn, bywhich society he was called to the bar.He early commenced his career as awriter on legal subjects; and, in 1801,he produced his Summary of the Lawof Set Off, with an Appendix of Cases,argued and determined in the Courtsof Law and Equity, in one volume,octavo; in 1804-5, he published, infour volumes, A Digest of the BankruptLaws, with a Collection of theStatutes and of the Cases ; a workwhich reached three editions, andbrought him into immediate notice, andconsiderable practice in the managementof bankrupt causes. About thesame time, he was appointed, by LordErskine, a commissioner of bankrupts ;and, sometime afterwards, printed apamphlet on Bankrupt's Certificates.In 1813, appeared his Inquiries respectingthe Alteration of the Law of Copyright;and, in 1815, his Law of Partnership.Besides being a legal author,he has published three volumes of TheOpinions of different Authors on thePunishment of Death ; and also editedThe Debates in Parliament on a Billfor Abolishing the Punishment of Deathfor Stealing in a Dwelling-house. Mr.Montague is principally distinguishedfor his skill in bankruptcy cases, althoughhe also possesses no inconsiderabletalent in matters of equity. In privatelife, he is said to be amiable and eccentric; and, among other peculiarities,occasionally abstains from animal food,and rejects the use of knives and forks,as unnatural and degenerating.PULLER, (Sir CHRISTOPHER,) theson of a merchant, was born in London,about 1772, and was early sent to Etonfor his education ; whence he was removedto Christchurch, Oxford, wherehe was contemporary with Canning, towhom alone he was second in classicalcelebrity. In 1793, he gained theunder-graduate's university prize, forthe best Latin verses on the subject ofLitfii Scenic, which is given, it is said,in the true spirit of the Roman poets ;and comprises an address to Athens,animated descriptions of the excellenciesof the tragic and comic writers ofGreece, and a finely conceived eulogiumon Shakespeare. After having graduated,with success, at Christchurch, heobtained a fellowship at Oriel, in thesame university, and soon after enteredhimself a student of Lincoln's Inn, andassiduously applying himself to the studyof his profession, he, in 1796, undertook,in conjunction with his friend, Mr.John Bernard, now Justice Banquet,to report the cases argued and determinedin the courts of CommonPleas and Exchequer chamber; a task,in which they were assisted by thecountenance and patronage of thesuccessive Chief-justices Eyre, Eldon,Alvanley, and Mansfield; the two first,it is said, having corrected *all theirjudgments. In 1800, he was called tothe bar, and, in a short time, rose toeminence, both on the Oxford circuitand at the Worcester and Staffordquarter sessions ; and at Guildhall,where his city connexions procured himpractice connected with mercantilecauses. In 1822, having acquired ahigh reputation as an advocate generally,he was made a king's counsel ;and, in the summer of the followingyear, the chief-justiceship of Bengalbeing offered him by Mr. Wynne, thethen president of the board of controul,he accepted the offer, trusting his naturallygood constitution would resistthe effects of the climate of India, andwas knighted as such. He embarkedfrom England in the month of November,and arrived at Calcutta in the Aprilfollowing (1824); where, after a briefresidence of five weeks, he fell a victimto the fever of the country. " For hisdomestic relations," says his biographerin the Gentleman's Magazine, l< he wasabove all praise ; and as a lawyer, heAPPENDIX.was distinguished by the strictestprinciples and the most honourableconductTINDAL, (Sir NICHOLAS CONYNG-HAM,) the son of an attorney, was bornabout 1777 ; and, after receiving a classicaleducation, was sent to completeit at Trinity College, Cambridge, werehe became eighth wrangler, and firstclassic of his year, and obtained a fellowship.Having become a student ofLincoln's Inn, he was, by that society,called to the bar ; where, although intrustedwith a tolerable share of practice,he remained in comparativeobscurity, until the commencement ofthe proceedings against Queen Caroline,in which he acted, with great ability,as junior counsel. He subsequentlyentered parliament as member for thegovernment through of Harwich ; andhaving, up to that time, supported themeasures of government, he was, in1826, knighted, and made solicitor-general.On the formation of the newministry, in May, 1827, he was returnedmember of parliament for theUniversity of Cambridge ; and, shortlyafterwards, voted for the catholic reliefbill, by which he brought on himselfthe odium of many of his constituents.Before, however, another election couldtake place, he was appointed chief-justiceof the Common Pleas, a situationhe continues to hold with greatimpartiality and ability. He did not attainmuch reputation at the bar, havingneither the mental nor physical requisitesfor the formation of an advocate.As a lawyer, however, he is wellknown for his capacious intellect, soundjudgment, and cool and deliberate reasoning;and few are more fitted forthe judicial station than himself. Hemarried early in life, and is already awidower, with several children.SHADWELL,(SirLAUNCELOT,)wasborn in Yorkshire, about 1778; and,having received a good education, hewas sent to St. John's College, Cambridge,where he graduated B. A., becameseventh wrangler, and obtaineda fellowship. Having entered himselfof Lincoln's Inn, he was called to thebar, by that society, in 1803, and commencedhis practice on the northerncircuit, where he acquired a respectablepractice ; and, on his becoming a memberof the Chancery bar, became thebest junior of his time. He was subsequentlypresented with a silk gown ;and, in 1826, was returned to parliamentfor Ripon, in Yorkshire ; butvacated his seat in the following year,on his appointment to the vice-chancellorshipof England; on which occasionhe was knighted, and sworn in aprivy-counsellor. Sir Launcelot Shadwellis by no means so distinguished avice-chancellor as many of his predecessors; but his judgments, upon thewhole, are considered able and satisfactory.In private life, he is cheerfuland convivial, and is said to be particularlyfond of skating and bathing;to enjoy which, he rises early, winterand summer.PHILLIPS, (CHARLES,) was born atSligo, in Ireland, in the year 1788 ; and,after having received the rudiments ofeducation in his native town, becamea student of Trinity College, Dublin,where he afterwards graduated. Hethen proceeded to England, and havinggone through the necessary studies, wascalled to the Irish bar about 1812, wherehe distinguished himself by a peculiarstyle of eloquence, which caused him tobe employed in several important casesof seduction and adultery. His addresseson these occasions gained himgreat notoriety and applause; and, in1817, he printed his principal speechesin one volume, the sale of which wasextensive. He subsequently came tothe English bar; but his success therehas been so indifferent, that he hasrather retrograded, than advanced, inpopularity. On one occasion, Lord (thenMr.) Brougham gave a severe blowto the style of Mr. Phillips's eloquence,by commencing a reply to him, withafter the horticultural speech of mylearned friend." He is, however, anadvocate of no inconsiderable talent;and sustains no small reputation as aman of letters, in which character hehas published some poems of merit,and a Life of Curran.MEDICAL SCIENCE.MAPLETOFT, (JOHN,) was bornat Margaret Inge, in Huntingdonshire,on the 15th of June, 1631, and educatedunder Dr. Busby, at Westminster School,where he became a king's scholar, andwas elected thence, in 1648, to TrinityCollege, Cambridge. In 1651, he tookhis degree of B. A.; and, in 1655, thatof M. A. In 1658, he was appointedtutor to the son of Algerian, the lastEarl of Northumberland, with whom hemade a tour in France and Italy. Onhis return to England, he commencedth study of medicine ; and, in 1667,took his degree of M. D. In 1670, heaccompanied Lord Essex to Denmark ;and, after having attended the LadyDowager Northumberland to France,was chosen, in March, 1675, professorof physic, at Gresham College. In thesame year, he became a fellow of theRoyal Society ; and, in the next, washonoured by Dr. Sydenham's dedicationto him, of a work which he hadtranslated into Latin for that celebratedphysician, entitled, Observations medicalcirca Morborum acutorum Historianet Duration. In the autumnof 1679, he resigned his professorship,and married a Miss Knightly. Soonafter, he turned his attention to thestudy of divinity ; took doctor's andpriest's orders in 1682 ; and was appointed,by Lord Griffin, rector ofBraybrooke, in Northamptonshire. In1684, he accepted the office of lecturerof Ipswich, and, in the following year,removed to London ; where, withouthis knowledge, he had been electedvicar of St. Lawrence Jewry, and lecturerof St. Christopher's. In 1689,on the occasion of a royal visit to Cambridge,he took his degree of D. D. ; in1701, became one of the incorporatedmembers of the Society for Promotingthe Gospel in Foreign Parts ; and, in1707, was appointed president of SionCollege, to which he had been a liberalbenefactor. In 1710, being then eightyyears old, he retired from the pulpit,and sent to each of his parishioners acopy of a work which he had written,entitled. The Principles and Duties ofthe Christian Religion. He never endeavoured,says Ward, in his Lives ofthe Gresham Professors, to advancehimself higher in the church, that hemight avoid the suspicion of having leftone profession, and taken up another,to enrich himself and his family. AlthoughSydenham ascribes to him greatqualifications for a physician, he seemsto have been diffident of his medicalabilities himself, and never prescribedfor any of his family after he had enteredinto holy orders. He was a memberof the Society for Promoting ChristianKnowledge; one of the directors ofGreenwich Hospital ; and, besides theworks already mentioned, producedseveral moral and theological essays,and a collection of Greek and Latinsentences. Ward says, that he was notonly a very polite scholar, but wroteLatin elegantly, was a great masterof the Greek, and understood well theFrench, Spanish, and Italian languages.His death occurred on the 10th ofNovember, 1721.DUNCAN, (DANIEL,) was born atMontauban, in Languedoc, in 1649, andcommenced the study of physic underBarbeyrac, at Montpellier; where, in1673, he took his degree of M. D.Shortly after, he removed to Paris,where he became of such repute, that,in 1677, he was appointed physician-generalto the army before St. Omens.About this time, he received letters ofnoblesse, and published a work, entitled,Explication Nouvelle et Techniquedes Actions Animales. In 1679,he came to London, and produced aLatin edition of the same work. In1681, at the request of his patron,Colbert, he returned to France, wherehe soon after published a work, entitled,Chymie Naturelle, which became extremelypopular, and reached a secondedition in 1687 ; during which year,appeared his Histoire de 1' Animal. OnAPPENDIX.the death of Colbert, he proceeded toMontauban ; whence, about 1690, hewas driven, by the persecution thenraging against the Protestants ; and,after passing some time at Geneva,fixed his abode at Berne ; where, besidesan extensive practice, he obtained ananatomical and chemical professorship.In 1699, he went to Cassel, as domesticphysician to Philip, Landgrave of Hesse;and, by his liberality to the FrenchProtestants at that place, obtained theappointment of physician to the royalhousehold, at Berlin ; whither he removed,in 1702. By the advice ofIioerhaave, he soon after published, atRotterdam, in French, and subsequently,at London, in English, a workon the Abuse of Hot Liquors, Tea,Coffee, and Chocolate. In 1703, he removedto the Hague, and printed aLatin edition of his Chymie Naturelle.'In 1714, he settled in London, wherehe continued during the remainder ofhis life, which terminated on the 30thof April, 1735. He had made a vow,that if he should attain the age ofseventy, he would devote the remainderof his days to the gratuitous service ofthose who might seek his advice ; and,accordingly, after that event had takenplace, he declined receiving fees, althoughthe loss of a large sum, by theSouth Sea scheme, in 1721, would haverendered them by no means unacceptable.In allusion to this circumstance,he used to say, " The poor are my onlypaymasters now; they are the best Iever had ; their payments are placedin a government fund that can neverfail ; my security is the only king thatcan do no wrong."Neil, (JAMES.) a native of Scotland,was born on the 27th of March, 1673;and, after having studied medicine, atthe most celebrated schools on the continent,delivered lectures on anatomy,with great success, at the Universitiesof Oxford and Cambridge, the latter ofwhich conferred on him the degree ofM.D. In 1698, he published a work,entitled, The Anatomy of the HumanBody Abridged ; which, though takenprincipally from Cowper, and intendedonly for the use of his pupils, passedthrough many editions. In 1703, hecommenced practice at Northampton ;and, in 1700, communicated to theRoyal Society, of which he was a fellow,An Account of the Death and Dissectionof John Bayley, reputed to have beenone hundred and thirty years old. In1708, he produced An Account ofAnimal Secretion, the Quantity ofBlood in the Human Body, and MuscularMotion. Of this, he also printeda Latin version, with a Medicine StaticsBritannica appended ; and, in 1717,reprinted the original, under the titleof Essays on Several Parts of the AnimalEconomy, with an additional essay,concerning the force of the heart indriving the blood through the wholebody, which led him into a controversy,carried on in the PhilosophicalTransactions, with Dr. Turin. Afterhaving obtained considerable reputationas a physician and medical writer, hedied at Northampton, of a cancer inthe mouth, on the 16th of July, 1719.DOUGLAS, (JAMES,) an eminentsurgeon, accoucheur, and teacher ofanatomy, was born in Scotland, aboutthe year 1675. The celebrated WilliamHunter, on quitting Cullen, residedwith him for some time as house pupil ;and the great Haller speaks of several ofhis anatomical preparations as havingbeen made with much art and ingenuity.Pope and Dr. Haywood speak of himas an enthusiastic collector of the variouseditions of Horace. He contributedvarious papers to the PhilosophicalTransactions, and published the followingworks, most of which possess considerablemerit: De Are humanoTractatus ; Biographia comparativeSpecimen ; Bibliography AnatomiesSpecimen ; A Description of the Peritoneum,&c. ; A History of thelateral Operation for the Stone ; ADescription of the Lily of Guernsey;and A Description and History ofthe Coffee Tree. At the time of hisdeath, which occurred in 1742, heappears to have been a doctor ofmedicine, fellow of the Royal Society,and reader of anatomy to the Companyof Surgeons.Lobe, (THEOPHILUS,) was born onthe 17th of August, 1678, and originallydestined for the dissenting pulpit ; but,abandoning theological for medical studies,he obtained a Scotch diploma, andpractised in London with considerableMEDICA L SCIENCE.success. He also obtained much celebrityby his professional publications ; themost important of which are, A Treatiseof the Small Pox ; Rational Methods ofCuring Fevers, deduced from the Structureof the Human Body ; MedicalPractice in Curing Fevers ; PracticalTreatise of Painful Distempers, withsome effectual methods in curing them ;A Treatise on Dissolves of the Stone,and on curing the Stone and the Goutby Aliments, which went throughseveral editions, and was translatedinto Latin and French j Letters relatingto the Plague, and other ContagiousDistempers ; and, A Compendium ofPractice in Physic. He was also theauthor of several papers in the Gentleman'sMagazine, and of a few religioustracts, published shortly before hisdeath, which occurred at his residencein Bagnio Court, London, in May,1763.Turin, (JAMES,) was born in 1684,and elected a Fellow of Trinity College,Cambridge, in 1711. He practisedas a physician in the metropoliswith great success ; became physicianto Guy's Hospital, and at the time ofhis death, which occurred in 1750, waspresident of the College of Physicians.He acted for many years as secretaryto the Royal Society, and publishedseveral essays in the PhilosophicalTransactions, which, in 1732, he printedcollectively, under the title of PhysicsDissertations. These involvedhim in controversies with Neil,Stone, Robins, and Michellotti. Amonghis other labours were an edition ofVarennes's Geography, undertaken atthe request of Sir Isaac Newton, inwhose defence he had engaged in adispute with Pemberton ; and twopieces in support of the practice ofinoculation. He also made some interestingexperiments, the result of whichhe communicated to the Royal Society,as to the specific gravity of humanblood; and acquired great reputationfor the skill and acuteness with whichhe applied mathematical science tophysiological subjects.CHAPMAN, (EDMUND,) a surgeonand accoucheur of considerable talent,who, after having practised for sometimein the country, settled in London.and discovered the secret of Chamberlen'sforceps, of which he published anaccount in 1732, in A Treatise onMidwifery. He thus became a greatbenefactor to the human race ; for noone, at least in this country, had previously,since the time of Chamberlen,been able to discover the mode ofconstructing the important instrument,to the invention of which that eminentaccoucheur had laid claim. He is saidto have sold the secret at Amsterdam ;but died without revealing it in England.Even Mauriceauau, from whose works hehad derived much of his knowledge ofmidwifery, had in vain attempted toascertain how it was made ; and thisvaluable instrument might still havebeen unknown to the profession, butfor the talent or good fortune of Chapman; who also distinguished himself asthe advocate of the midwives againstDouglas, in a pamphlet published in1737, entitled A Reply to Douglas'sShort Account of Midwifery in London.He appears to have been remarkablyskilful as a practitioner; butnotwithstanding his merits, few particularsof his life are to be found, andneither the dates of his birth or deathare recorded.SHAW, (Sir PETER,) a medicalauthor and practitioner of considerabletalent, of whose early history, however,but little is known. He was most probablyknighted by George the Second,to whom he acted as physician inordinary for some years ; and afterhaving accompanied that monarch, onseveral occasions, to Hanover, was permittedto resign in favour of his son-in-law,Dr. Richard Warren. Amonghis literary labours were, a New Practiceof Physic, which passed throughseven editions; Inquiry into the Virtuesof the Scarborough Spa Waters ; ChymicalLectures, a valuable and scientificwork, afterwards translated into French ;A Portable Laboratory ; Essays on ArtificialPhilosophy ; Abridgments of Boyleand Lord Bacon ; an edition of the Dispensatoryof the Edinburgh College ofPhysicians ; translations of Hoffman onmineral waters, Strath's Chemistry, and,in conjunction with Ephraim Chambers,Boerhaave's Elementa Chinese. Hewas chosen F. R. S. in 1755, and diedon the 15th of March, 1763.APPENDIX.Money, (MESSENGER,) was bornin 1693, and after having practised forsome time at Bury, became familyphysician to the Earl of Godolphin,and, by that nobleman's interest, physicianto Chelsea College ; where, foragreat number of sears, he amusedhimself by telling those who, hayingbeen promised the reversion to hispost, came to inspect the residence andgrounds, that they would certainly diebefore him. The truth of these predictions,at length, produced such aneffect, that for a long period beforehis demise, which took place in 1788,no application had been made for theplace. He despised all the modernimprovements in the theory and practiceof his profession, in which, however,he appears to have been very successful.He also wrote some able papers in theMedical Transactions, and Gooch'sMedical and Chirurgical Observations.He was married early in life, and hadone daughter, to whom he left the bulkof his property. On the day beforehis death he wrote a letter to a surgeon,named Foster, in which he bequeathedhis body to that gentleman for dissection." Though he was intimate,"says a writer in the European Magazine,with Lord Chesterfield, he had noneof his politeness; and though in thedaily conversation of wit and beauty,he wore off but little of the morosenesswhich clouded his deportment, by theirexample."PEMBERTON, (HENRY,) a nativeof London, was born in 1694, andstudied medicine, at Leyden, under thecelebrated Boerhaave ; and anatomy, atParis. On his return to England, heattended St. Thomas's Hospital, forsome time ; and, after having againvisited Leyden, in 1719, for the purposeof taking his degree of M. D., he establishedhimself, as a physician, in themetropolis ; but his practice appears tohave been very limited, owing to thedelicate state of his health. In 1728,he was elected professor of physic atGresham college ; and, in that capacity,delivered a course of lectures on chemistry,which were subsequently published.He revised and improved thePharmacopeia of the College of Physicians; and, at the request of thatbody, undertook A Translation andImprovement of the London Dispensatory.Besides these, he produced severalother works, the most importantof which were, Epistola ad amicus deCoterie invents, demonstrating in whatmanner Cotes's theorems by ratios andlogarithms might be done, by the circleand hyperbola; View of 'Sir IsaacNewton's Philosophy ; On the Alterationof the Style and Calendar ; Observationson Poetry, especially the epic,occasioned by Glover s Leonidas ; OnReducing Weights and Measures toone Standard ; and, A Dissertation onEclipses. He assisted his friend, Sir IsaacNewton, in preparing for press a newedition of bis Principia; and Dr. Mead,in writing A Treatise on the Plague,and in editing Cowper on the Muscles.He was also the author of an immensenumber of papers, on scientific subjects,communicated to the Royal Society,and carried on a controversy with Dr.Turin, (who wrote under the signatureof Philalethes Cantabrigiensis,) in apublication entitled, The Works of theLearned. He was evidently a man ofgreat erudition and industry; but hiswritings, though clear, are too labouredand diffuse. He died in 1771.RUTTY, (JOHN,) was born atDublin, of Quaker parents, in 1698,and such, says Chalmers, were thereligious impressions of his youth, thathe seems, at various times, to haveconsidered the acquisition of humanlearning as a crime. About 1719, hecommenced a course of medical duties,which he finished at Leyden, where,he observes, his object was all physicand nature; no grace. In 1723, hecommenced practice, and, in the followingyear, settled as a physician, atDublin, where his practice and reputationsoon became considerable. In 1751,he published A History of the Riseand Progress of the People, calledQuakers, in Ireland, from 1653 to1750; shortly after, an Essay onWomen's Preaching ; in 1756, AMethodical Synopsis of Mineral Waters,which, according to his own account,involved him in a controversyfor three years ; in 1770, A ChronologicalHistory of the Weather andSeasons, and of the prevailing Diseasesin Dublin, &c. ; and, in 1772, A NaturalHistory of the County of Dublin. HeMEDICAL SCIENCE.was also the author of Observations onthe London and Edinburgh Dispensatoriesand Materia Medica Antiqua etNova, repurgata et illustrate, bothposthumously published ; and A SpiritualDiary and Soliloquies, which hisexecutors were compelled by a clausein his will, to print. It is scarcelypossible, says the authority beforecited, to read it or characterise it withgravity, being a series of pious meditations,perpetually interrupted withrecords of too much whiskey, piggishor swinish eating, and ill-temper. Hewas, however, it is said, a man of greattemperance and forbearance, ratherexemplary than blameable, as well asavery useful and learned physician.His death occurred on the 27th ofApril, 1775.NICHOLLS, (FRANK,) the son of abarrister, was born in London, in theyear 1699, and removed, in 1714, fromWestminster School to the University ofOxford, where, after having filled theoffice of anatomical reader, and takenthe degree of M. A. he proceeded to thatof M. D. in 1729. He then commencedpractice in Cornwall, whence he soonremoved to London, and rapidly attainedconsiderable celebrity in his profession.His lectures, it is said, wereattended not only by a large class ofpupils, but by a great number ofsurgeons, physicians and apothecaries.His reputation was much increased byhis successful mode of treating themilitary fever; and at length, afterhaving read the Gulstonian lectures in1734 and 1736, delivered the Harveianoration in 1739, and succeeded, in 1748,to the office of chirurgical lecturer tothe College of Physicians, of which hehad been admitted a member in 1732,he was appointed, in 1753, physicianto George the Second, of whose lastillness and death he published an account.His other works consist of asatire, entitled, The Petition of theUnborn Babes to the Censors of theRoyal College of Physicians, which isattributed to the circumstance of a juniormember having been chosen one ofthe elect in preference to himself; CompendiumAnatomico-ceconomicum, inwhich he makes several hypotheticalpropositions relative to the action ofthe muscular fibres, the evacuation ofthe bladder, the motion of the heart,&c. ; De Anima Medica, in which heattempts to support the notion of Helmontand Stahl, that a vital soulor principle acts spontaneously andrationally in the preservation of health,and the cure of diseases ; and De MotuCords et Sanguinis, illustrated by engravings,in which he endeavours toestablish " a succession and synochrismof motions in the heart different fromthat laid down by Harvey ;" and atract against man-midwifery. He alsocommunicated to the Royal Society, ofwhich he was a fellow, an account of adisease, in which the pulmonary veinhad been coughed up ; Observations onthe nature of Aneurisms, in which hecontroverted the opinion of Dr. Freindon that subject ; and several otherpapers. He was particularly eminentfor his skill in making anatomical injections,and is said to have invented erodedpreparations of the viscera. He died atEpsom, on the 7th of January, 1778,leaving issue by his wife, a daughter ofDr. Mead, whom he had married in 1743.BLACKWELL, (ALEXANDER,) theson of a stocking dealer, at Aberdeen,after having received a liberal educationat that place, studied physic, under thecelebrated Boerhaave, and took hisdegree of M. D. at Leyden, though,according to Dr. Pulteney, he is said,by some, only to have assumed the titleof doctor after his successful attendanceon the king of Sweden. On his returnto Scotland, failing to procure practiceas a physician, he proceeded to London,where, after having acted for some timein the capacity of corrector at a printingoffice, he commenced printer himself.In 1734, he became bankrupt, and wasthrown into prison, where he remained,until his wife had earned sufficient toprocure his release, by the painting ofplants, an art in which she was patronisedby Sir Hans Sloane and Dr. Mead. Afterhaving made an unsuccessful attemptto obtain the situation of secretary tothe Society for the Encouragement ofLearning, he became superintendent ofthe works belonging to the Duke ofChances, at Canons. In 1740, hewent to Sweden, where he obtainedan allowance for superintending theexecution of a mode of draining themarshes, originated by himself; andAPPENDIX.also practised his profession with muchsuccess, until apprehended on a chargeof being concerned in a plot against thegovernment, for his alleged share inwhich, notwithstanding his protestationsof innocence, he was beheaded, on the9th of August, 1748. He is describedas having been a man of great classicalattainments, and good abilities, butsomewhat flighty, and a little conceited.According to Pulteney, he wrote a treatiseon agriculture, and took some partin a curious herbal, containing cuts offive hundred plants used in medicine,published by his wife, in 1739.LEVETT, (ROBERT.) a native ofHull, became, early in life, a waiter ata coffeehouse in Paris, where, by theassistance of some surgeons who hadformed a favourable opinion of hisabilities, he was enabled to pursue thestudy of medicine. It is uncertainhow he passed the middle part of his 'life, but about the year 1750, he tookup his abode with Dr. Johnson, towhom, however, he was indebted fornothing more than house-room, hisshare in a penny loaf at breakfast, andnow and then a dinner on a Sunday.Although his medical knowledge isstated to have been by no meansinconsiderable, his patients consistedchiefly of the lower class of tradesmen,many of whom rewarded him with meatand strong liquors, instead of money.Johnson observes, that had they allmaliciously combined to do so, hewould have burst, like the dragon in theApocrypha, through repletion ; or havebeen scorched up, like Portia, by swallowingfire. He unfortunately marrieda woman of bad character, who, subsequentlyto their union, was tried at theOld Bailey, for theft, but, much to hisdisappointment, acquitted. On this occasion,he said of the barrister by whomshe had been defended, " I alwaysconsidered that man my friend; butthis behaviour of his has proved thecontrary." His power of perceptionwas quick, and his memory retentive;his figure middle-sized and meagre; andhis countenance " swarthy, adust, andcorrugated." In an elegy on his death,which occurred in 1782, written by Dr.Johnson, he is described as having beenofficious, innocent, sincere, and of everyfriendless name the friend.SHORT, (THOMAS,) a native ofScotland, settled early in life as a physicianat Sheffield, whence, after havingenjoyed an extensive practice for severalyears, he removed to Rotherham, wherehe died in November, 1772. He wasthe author of A Memoir on the NaturalHistory of Mineral Waters ; A Dissertationon Tea ; Natural History ofthe Mineral Waters of Yorkshire,Lincolnshire, and Derbyshire ; A GeneralChronological History of the Air,Weather, Seasons, Meteors, &c., for thespace of Two Hundred and Fifty Years ;Discourses on Tea, Sugar, Milk, madeWines, Spirits, Punch, Tobacco, &c. ;New Observations, Natural, Moral,Civil, Political, and Medical, on Billsof Mortality; Comparative History ofthe Increase and Decrease of Mankindin England and several CountriesAbroad; and some other works. Althoughblunt, irritable and eccentric, heis said to have been generally esteemedon account of his professional abilitiesand moral worth.WATSON, (HENRY,) a native ofLondon, was born in 1702, and afterhaving served an apprenticeship to oneof the company ot barber-surgeons,attended with such assiduity at thehospitals in the Borough, that he wasselected to fill, successively, the officesof demonstrator and teacher of anatomyat those institutions. He subsequentlybecame surgeon to the Middlesex Hospital,to the Westminster Infirmary, andin 1761, to the Westminster Hospital.His death, which occurred in October,1793, is said to have been accelerated byan alarm of fire in the neighbourhood ofhis residence, he being at that time inavery infirm state, owing to an attackof paralysis. He had been twice married,but left no issue. His productionsconsist of papers communicated to theRoyal Society, of which he was a fellow;to the London Medical Memoirs ; andto the Medical Observations and Inquiries.Among these, was ah accountof Dr. Maty's illness, and of the appearances,on dissection ; in drawing upwhich, he appears to have been assistedby Dr. Hunter ; and an account, with adescriptive plate, of absorbents in theurinary bladder; which, however, wereafterwards discovered to be veins, connectedwith the corpus spongiosumMEDICAL SCIENCE.urethra. He scrupulously adhered tothe costume of the profession, as hefound it on commencing his career : alarge curled wig, full cuffed coat, witha number of buttons, a cocked hat, anda cane. He appears to have been aman of sound judgment, and a goodanatomist, but was somewhat deficientin energy as an operator. For a considerableperiod he acted as one of theexaminers at Surgeons' Hall, in whichcapacity, according to Jesse Foote, " henever contracted the frowning brow, toconfound the diffidence of youth ; butby the placidity of his demeanour, soliciteda display of the knowledge theypossessed." Other writers describe himas having been accomplished as well aslearned ; kind, and communicative ofthe information he had acquired, tothose with whom he was intimate, butparticularly averse to general society.Battle, (WILLIAM,) was born atMercury, in Devonshire, in 1704, andremoved, in 1722, from Eton to King'sCollege, Cambridge, where he proceededto the degree of M. A., andobtained the Craven scholarship. Hehad a strong inclination to enter thelegal profession, which, however, hispecuniary circumstances prevented himfrom gratifying; and he turned hisattention to physic. On becomingproperly qualified, he commenced practiceat Cambridge, whence, after havingrisen to some repute, he removedto Oxbridge, and thence to London,where his emoluments soon rose to theamount of 1.000 per annum. In1749, he published an edition of Isocrates; and, in the following year, beingthen one of the censors of the college,took so active a part against Dr. Schom-berg, that a poem appeared, entitledThe Battled, in which he was thusdescribed :First Santos came, deep read in worldly art.Whose tongue ne'er knew the secrets of his heart ,In mischief mighty, tho' but mean of size,And like the tempter, ever in disguise.See him with aspect grave, and gentle tread,By slow degrees approach the sickly bed ;Then at his club, behold him altered soon,The solemn doctor turns a low buffoon.In 1751, he published three parts, andin the following year, a fourth, of awork, called De Principiis AnomaliesExpectations in Coll. Reg. Medico-rum.About this time, he establisheda private mad-house, near Islington, andwas shortly afterwards appointed physicianto St. Luke's Hospital. In 1757,he published a Treatise on Madness, inwhich his censure on Dr. Monro, provokeda reply from one of that celebratedphysician's sons, which exposedBattie to the temporary ridicule of hisprofessional brethren. In 1762, hepublished, Aphorisms de cognoscendiset grandis Morbis nonnullis ad principiaAnimals accommodate ; and, inthe next year, was examined respectingprivate mad-houses before the committeeof the House of Commons. Hedied of a paralytic stroke, on the 13thof June, 1776, leaving three daughters,by his wife, whom he had married in1738, and who is mentioned in theDuncan, for having abused Pope, in apiece called The Mock aesop.Dunham, (JOHN,) a native ofDevonshire, and a fellow of the EdinburghCollege of Physicians, afterhaving studied at Leyden, under Boer-have,commenced the practice of physicat Plymouth, where he realised aconsiderable fortune, and died in theyear 1768. His works consist of observationsde sere et Morbis Epidemics,in three volumes, the last of whichwas edited in 1769, by his son ; Observationson Anatomy ; A Dissertationon the malignant ulcerous Sore-throat;several communications onpathology and morbid anatomy, tothe Royal Society, of which he was amember ; besides his celebrated Essay onFevers, which in a short period passedthrough several editions, and was translatedinto French and German. Sometimeafter, an English physician atLisbon, having attributed the recoveryof the Queen of Portugal from a dangerousillness, under his treatment, tothe doctrines laid down in the work inquestion, which he had succeeded inapplying successively to her majesty'scase, the king ordered it to be translatedinto Portuguese, and forwarded a magnificentcopy of the version to Huxham.In 1776, the whole of his works werepublished by Reached, at Vienna ; and,it is said, they have also been incorporatedas a portion of the collected LatinMedical Classics, at Leipsic. His Frenchbiographer asserts, that his Essay isAppendix.even superior to that of Cullen, on thesame subject ; but the English medicalcritics do not go to the extent of thiseulogy, on account of his practicehaving been too much influenced bythe ancient humoral pathology. Hegave but few prescriptions in his works ;being, it is said, of opinion with Hippocrates,that a physician who knows adisease, cannot be at a loss for the formof his remedy. One of his prescriptions,popularly termed Huxham's tincture ofbark, has been admitted to the LondonPharmacopoeia, and an antimonial winewas formerly sold under the authorityof his name.WALL, (JOHN,) a native of Worcestershire,was born in 1708, and in1726, was elected from the grammarschool, at Worcester, to a scholarship atMerton College, Oxford, of which, in1735, he became a fellow. Shortly after,having graduated in physic, he commencedpractice at Worcester, and signalisedhimself by discovering the medicinalqualities of the Malvern waters,of which he published an account. Tohis experiments on the clay fojind nearWorcester, is also attributed its extensiveuse in the manufacture of porcelain.He designed the frontispieces tothe first edition of Hervey's Meditations,and presented a good picture,executed by himself, to Oriel College,Oxford; but the talent displayed inthese productions, by no means justifiesthe assertion of one of his admirers,that if he had not been one of the bestphysicians, he would have been thebest painter of his age. He proceededto the degree of M. D. in 1759, anddied at Bath, whither he had gone forthe benefit of his health, on the 27thof June, 1776. His son, Dr. MartinWall, published a collection of his medicaltracts at Oxford, in 1780.BROWNE, (Sir WILLIAM,) the sonof a physician, was born in 16U2 ; and,after having taken his degree of M. D.at the University of Cambridge, settledat Lynn, in Norfolk, where he obtaineda very extensive practice. About theyear 1750, he removed to the metropolis; and, some time after, receivedthe honour of knighthood. He alsobecame president ot the Royal Collegeof Physicians; and, in that capacity,rendered himself so conspicuous by hiszealous opposition to the claims of thelicentiates, that he was personated onthe stage by Foote, in a piece calledThe Devil upon Two Sticks; but hisgood-humour was so imperturbable,that, after having witnessed the performance,he wrote a^ complimentaryletter to Foote, on the'accuracy of theresemblance, and furnished the actorwith his own muff, in order that theapparent identity might be more perfect.He was so invulnerable to satire,that, while living at Lynn, he nailed apamphlet, ridiculing his eccentricities,on the door of his house, where all whopassed might read it. When eightyyears old, he went to Watson's, inCornwall, dressed in his richest suit, toshew himself to the lord mayor; and,on being told how well he looked,attributed his good health to his havingneither wife nor debts. He had beenmarried, but survived his lady ; anddied, leaving one daughter, on the 10thof March, 1774. He was the authorof Translations, or Imitations of certainOdes of Horace; An Harveian Oration;A Vindication of the Royal College ofPhysicians ; and a great number oflively pieces, in prose and verse, whichhe collected and published, under thetitle of Opuscula Varia. He foundeda scholarship at Penthouse, where hewas educated ; and, by his will, hedirected three gold medals, value fiveguineas each, to be given yearly for aGreek ode, in imitation of Sappho ; aLatin ode, in imitation of Horace ; andthe best Greek and Latin epigrams, theproduction, respectively, of under-graduatesof Cambridge.WINTRINGHAM, (Sir CLIFTON,)the son of a physician at York, was bornin 1710, and received his education atTrinity College, Cambridge, where hetook his first medical degree in 1734,and, shortly after, settled in London.In 1742, he was elected a fellow of theRoyal Society ; and, in 1749, proceededto the degree of M. D. About the sameperiod he was appointed chief physicianto the Duke of Cumberland ; in 1759,physician-general to the forces ; and,in 1762, chief physician to the king, bywhom he was then knighted, and, in1744, created a baronet. He also becamea fellow of the Royal College of PhysicSCIENCE.clans at London, and of that at Paris.His death took place at his house atHammersmith, on the 9th of January,1794. His publications consist of AnExperimental Inquiry concerning someparts of the Animal Structure, of whicha second edition appeared in 1777; AnInquiry into the Ability of the Vesselsof the Human Body, and, De Morbisquibus dam Commentaries, &c., of whicha German translation soon after appeared.He also published the worksof his father, in two volumes, and anedition, with annotations, of Mead'sMonica et Precepts medica. With thebest classical authors he appears tohave been profoundly acquainted; andhe is said to have possessed a puretaste, great medical skill, and a mostadmirable disposition.BRACKEN, (HENRY,) a native ofLancaster, after having received therudiments of an ordinary education,was apprenticed to Dr. Worthington, ofWigan, under whom he evinced verysuperior abilities. At the expiration ofhis apprenticeship, he entered himself apupil at St. Thomas's Hospital, in London,whence he removed to Paris, andsubsequently to Leyden, where hestudied under Boerhaave, and took hisdegree of M. D. On his return to Englandhe commenced practice at Lancaster,and in a short time, his name wasknown all over England. About 1746,he was charged with abetting the rebels,and thrown into prison, but was dischargedwithout trial, there appearing tohave been no foundation whatever forhis arrest After having been twice mademayor of Lancaster, he died there inNovember, 1764. Although describedas having been loyal and religious, hismoral character was decidedly bad. Hewas addicted to drinking, and smuggling,which he called gambling withthe king, and horse-racing. Whenremonstrated with, by his wife, on hisfondness for the turf, he used to lay hiscane once or twice gently across hergown skirts, and exclaim, " Nanny,Nanny, who makes the pot boil?" As aphysician, he was remarkably simple inhis method of practice ; but condescendedsometimes to prescribe by the urinal,saying, as an apology, that " ignorantpeople should be dealt with a good dealin their own way." He could not forbearprophesying to his friends, theresult of his patients' cases ; and, as hispredictions were generally correct, hedid great violence to the feelings ofinvalids, who often heard from report,that the doctor had said "they weresure to die." He was extremely liberal,generous, and charitable; and, notwithstandingthe extent of his practice, onlyleft behind him 1,200. He publisheda Treatise on Farriery, which wentthrough several editions; the Traveller'sPocket Farrier, and a treatise on thetrue seat of the Glanders in Horses. Healso wrote several tracts on Midwifery,the Small Pox, the Diseases of the Eye,and the Stone; many of which appearedin the magazines and newspapers, and-some,probably, in the memoirs of theLondon Medical Society; on the establishmentof which, Dr. Fothergill wroteto request his assistance. "It will be alwaysa pleasure," writes that celebratedphysician to the subject of our memoir,to hear from Dr. Bracken; for whoseabilities I have long had a great esteem,and who has laboured more successfullyfor the improvement of medicine, thanmost of his contemporaries."Cunningham, (Sir RICHARD,)was born some time near the commencementof the eighteenth century,and rose to great reputation as a medicalwriter, and practitioner in theobstetric art. He was a fellow of theRoyal College of Physicians of London,and of the Royal Society, and acted asphysician to George the First and hissuccessor, one of whom created him abaronet. His death took place between1660 and 1670. He was the author ofArtis Obstetricarise Compendium, &c. ;An Abstract of Midwifery ; The Symptoms,Nature, Causes, and Cure of theFebricula, commonly called the Nervousand Hysterical Fever, which wentthrough two editions, and some minorworks.TEMPLEMAN, (PETER,) was bornon the 17th of March, 1711. He receivedthe rudiments of education atthe Charter House, and completed it atTrinity College, Cambridge, where hegraduated B. A. with distinguished reputation.His first inclination was tothe study of divinity, which he afterwardsrenounced for that of physic;APPENDIX.and went to Leyden, where he attendedthe lectures of Boerhaave, &c. and remainedfor two years. Shortly afterhis return to London, he commencedpractice as a physician ; but was notvery successful, owing, says Hutchinson,to an indolent, inactive disposition, andan aversion to associating with thevarious herds of pert, insipid, well-bred,impertinent, good-humoured,malicious gossips, that are often foundso useful in bringing a young physicianinto practice. In 1750, he becameacquainted with Dr. Fothergill ;in conjunction with whom, and Dr.Coming, he endeavoured, but withoutsuccess, to institute a medical societyfor the procuring of the earliest intelligenceof every improvement in physicfrom every part of Europe. About thistime, he writes to a friend, " Dr. Meadhas very generously offered to assistme with all his interest for succeedingDr. Hall at the Charter House, whosedeath has been for some time expected.Inspired with gratitude, I have venturedout of my element, (as you willplainly perceive,) and sent him anode."In 1753, he published the first,and in 1754, the second, volume of awork, called Curious Remarks andObservations in Physic, Anatomy, Surgery,Chemistry, Botany, and Medicine,extracted from the history andmemoirs of the Royal Academy ofSciences at Paris. It did not meet withthe encouragement it deserved, whichinduced him to discontinue it ; his originalintention being to have completedit in twelve volumes. In 1757, he publishedhis translation of Norton'sTravels ; and, in the same year, editedSelect Cases and Consultations inPhysic, by Dr. Woodward. He wasalso the author of Practical Observationson the culture of Lucerne turnips,&c. ; and of a paper in the PhilosophicalTransactions, On a Polypus atthe Heart, and a Schirrhous Tumour ofthe Uterus. In 1760, he resigned hissituation of keeper of the reading-roomat the British Museum, to which hehad been appointed in 1753, for thesecretaryship of the newly institutedSociety of Arts ; and, in 1762, he waselected a corresponding member of theRoyal Academy of Sciences of Paris,and also of the (Economical Society atBerne. His death occurred in 1769.DIMSDALE, (THOMAS,) the son ofan apothecary, was born at ThereonVernon, in Essex, in 171 1. After havingobtained a knowledge of pharmacy,under his father, he became a pupil atSt. Thomas's Hospital; and, in 1739,married the daughter of NathanielBrasses, Esq., member of parliament forHertford, having commenced businessas a surgeon in that town some yearspreviously. In 1744, on the death ofhis wife, in order to alleviate the griefwhich that event caused him, he volunteeredhis medical assistance to theBritish army, under the Duke of Cumberland,with whom he continued tillthe surrender of Carlisle. In 1746, hemarried again, and received so large afortune with his wife, that he retiredfrom practice, till his family becomingnumerous, he resumed it, and took thedegree of M.D. in 1761. In 1766, hepublished a work, entitled, The PresentMethod of Inoculating for theSmall Pox, which went through twoeditions, was translated into all thecontinental languages, and procuredhim an invitation from the EmpressCatherine of Russia, to inoculate herselfand her son, which he did in 1768.For this service, he was rewarded bythe empress with the sum of 12,000,an annuity of 500 per annum, theappointment of actual counsellor ofstate and physician to her imperialmajesty, and the rank of a baron of theRussian empire, to descend to his eldestson. He also received the miniaturepictures of the empress and her son,and was invited by the former to resideas her physician in Russia, which hethought fit to decline. While at Peters-burghand Moscow, he inoculated severalpersons there ; and before returningto England, had an audience atSans Souci, with Frederick the Third,King of Prussia. In 1776, he publishedThoughts on General and PartialInoculation ; and, in 1778, Observationson the Introduction to thePlan of the Dispensary for GeneralInoculation, which involved him in acontroversy with Dr. Lettsom. In1779, he lost his second wife, by whomhe had seven children, but he afterwardsmarried a third time. In 1780,he was elected member of parliamentfor Hertford ; and, except for the reliefof the poor, declined practice. In theMEDICAL SCIENCE.following year, however, he consentedto visit Russia once more, where he inoculatedthe emperor and his brotherConstantine. In 1781, he printed hisTracts on Inoculation, in which hegives an account of his mission toRussia. The tracts were not sold, butliberally distributed by the baron, whoalso gave a practical proof of his zealfor inoculation, by opening at Hertforda house, under his own direction, forthe inoculation of all ranks of personswho chose to come there. In 1790, heresigned his seat in parliament, andretired to Bath, whence he again returnedto Hertford, and died there onthe 30th of December, 1800. He washeld in much esteem, both for histalents and general virtues, and diedmuch regretted. His works on inoculationspread his fame all over Europe ;and though their importance is muchdiminished by the discovery of Jenner,they still remain useful and valuable.Some time previously to his death, heestablished, in conjunction with hissons and the Barnard, a banking-housein Cornwall, which still existsunder the firm of Barnard, Dimsdale,and Dimsdale. He was a fellow of theRoyal Society, and a member of theBath Agricultural Society.RUSSELL, (ALEXANDER,) a nativeof Edinburgh, after having taken hisdegree of M. D. in that city, removed, in1735, to London, and, about 1740, becamephysician to the English factory, atAleppo, where, having attained greatreputation by his skill and success, hewas consulted by Franks, Jews, by the Turks; who, saysDr. Fothergill, forgetting that he was anunbeliever, remitted of their usual contemptfor strangers, and not only beheldhim with respect, but courted his friendship,and placed unlimited confidencein his opinion. He became the friendand adviser of the Pacha, who neverrefused to pardon a criminal at hisintercession. On such occasions, hewould tell the culprit " that, in hisopinion he certainly deserved death,but that he durst not order it, for theEnglish doctor had insisted on mercy."Returning to England, in 1755, at thesuggestion of his friend, Dr. Fothergill,he composed, and shortly after published,A Natural History of Aleppo,containing some important observationsrelative to the plague, which have,possibly, observes the author of theBiographia Medica, tended to checkthe progress of that dreadful scourge.After having acted, for about nineyears, as physician to St Thomas'sHospital, he died in 1768, and not in1770, as stated in all the biographicalsketches of him, except that by Dr.Lettsom. He appears to have beenhighly respected for his professionaltalents and excellent disposition. Thereputation of St. Thomas's Hospitalwas considerably increased by his lectures,and he is said to have been anactive member of the Royal andMedical Societies, to each of whichhe communicated several importantpapers.BROMFIELD, (WILLIAM,) a nativeof London, was born in 1712, andcommenced practice as a surgeon at avery early age. In 1741, he gained considerablereputation and emolument bydelivering lectures in anatomy and surgery; and, a few years after, in conjunctionwith the Rev. Mr. Madam, foundedthe Lock Hospital, to which, on itsestablishment, he was appointed surgeon,and in aid of its funds, procuredJasper Mayne's comedy of The CityMatch, with alterations by himself, tobe acted at Drury Lane Theatre. Hewas subsequently appointed one of thesurgeons to St. George's Hospital, andin 1761, became surgeon to QueenCharlotte, whom he had accompaniedto England. In 1770, he restricted hisemployment at the Lock to consultations; and, shortly after, abandoning themore fatiguing part of his private practice,retired to a mansion in ChelseaPark, where he died, on the 24th of November,1792. In performing an operation,according to Pearson, in his Life ofHey, no accident, however unexpected,could dismay him. The same writerstates, that Bromfield's mind was neitherscientific nor cultivated; that hewas devoid of the modesty and simplicityusually attendant on great mentalpowers ; that his manner was roughand blustering; and that he affected tobe a wit, but was often coarse, and notunfrequently obscure ; yet, continuesour authority, he was possessed of realkindness and humanity, and had he'APPENDIX.been less careless of giving offence bythe freedom and harshness of his censures,he would have been regarded asapleasant and entertaining companion.His works are valuable for their practicalremarks, but being encumberedwith crude and obsolete theories, andwritten in a style neither perspicuousnor agreeable, they have fallen intoalmost total neglect. They consist ofChirurgical Cases and Observations, intwo volumes; which, though containingmuch judicious practice and valuablematter, did not, says one of his biographers,answer the expectations ofthe public, and were accordingly attackedin a pamphlet by an anonymouswriter, said to be Mr. Justamond ; AnAccount of the English Nightshades,which he had found unsuccessful in thecure of scrofula, upon himself; Thoughtsconcerning the present peculiar methodof treating Persons inoculated for theSmall Pox, in which he attacked theSutlonian practice of exposing patientsto the open air in the midst of winter;and some minor pieces.CADOGAN, (WILLIAM,) was bornsome time in the year 1712, and receivedhis education at Oriel College,Oxford, where he took his degree ofdoctor of physic, in 1755. His first publicationappeared in 1750, containingdirections for the nursing and managingof children, which were adopted by themanagers of the Foundling Hospital,and, by degrees, became general. In1764, he published his Dissertations onthe Gout, and all Chronical Diseases ;a work which was written in a verypopular style, and speedily went throughseveral editions. Although founded onthe doctrines of Boerhaave and Sydenham,it was attacked by a host ofwriters; none of whom, however, hethought fit to answer. Dr. Johnsoncalls it " a good book in general-but afoolish one in particulars ; it is Cheyne'sbook," he observes, " told in a" newway ; and there should come out sucha book every thirty years, dressed inthe mode of the times." Dr. Cadoganwas a fellow of the College of Physicians,and, which is by no meansusual, spoke two Harveian orations ; theone in 1764, and the other in 1793.His death took place in 1797.Monroe, (JOHN,) the son of Dr.James Monro, was born at Greenwich,in Kent, on the 16th of November,1715. After having received a classicaleducation at Merchant Taylor's School,he removed, in 1723, to St. John'sCollege, of which he became a fellow.Being appointed, in 1743, through theinfluence of Sir Robert Walpole, to oneof the Radcliffe travelling fellowships,he visited the principal cities on thecontinent. At Leyden he prosecutedhis medical studies, under the famousBoerhaave, and, on his return to England,in 1751, commenced practisingas a physician ; the degree of M. D.having been bestowed on him by theUniversity of Oxford, during his absence.In the same year he was appointedcolleague to his father, whomhe succeeded, in 1752, as physician toBridewell and Bethlehem Hospitals.In 1753, he married a Miss Smith, bywhom he had six children, three ofwhom, only, survived him. In 1758,he published a pamphlet, under the titleof Remarks on Dr. Battie's Treatiseon Madness, in which he vindicatedhis father's treatment of that disorderagainst the attacks of Dr. Battie, andadded many judicious remarks on itscauses and cure. In 1783, he suffered aparalytic stroke; the strength of his constitution,however, enabled him to overcomethe shock, and he resumed his professionalduties, which he continued toperform until 1787, when, his son beingappointed assistant at the hospital, heretired to Hadley, near Barnet, wherehe died, on the 27th of December, 1791.As a physician, Dr. Monro was principallydistinguished for the success ofhis practice in cases of insanity ; " inwhich branch of the medical art," saysone of his biographers, " he attained toa higher degree of eminence, than waspossessed by any of his contemporaries."Excepting his reply to Dr. Battie, hewrote no work on insanity, madnessbeing, in his opinion, a subject to beunderstood no otherwise than by personalobservation. He communicatedmany notes and remarks on Shakespeareto Mr. Stevens, and afforded materialassistance to Mr. Struts, as to theearly engravers, of whose works he hadformed a valuable collection. Thoughwarm in his temper, he is said to havebeen much admired for the refinedMEDICAL SCIENCE.gentleness and elegant modesty of hisdeportment.SHARP, (SAMUEL,) was born about1715 ; and, after having studied underCheselden, and at Paris, settled inLondon, where he was appointed surgeonto Guy's Hospital, and soon obtainedan extensive practice and highreputation. In 1739, he published ATreatise on the Operations of Surgery,with a Description and Representationof the Instruments ; and an Introductionon the Nature and Treatment ofWounds, Abscesses, and Ulcers ; a workwhich was translated into several foreignlanguages, and, in the course of a fewyears, went through six editions. In1749, he was made a fellow of theRoyal Society, and a foreign memberof the Academy of Surgery, at Paris.In 1750, he published A Critical Inquiryinto the Present State of Surgery;a work equally valuable, and whichattained the same popularity, as theformer. In 1765, he went abroad forthe improvement of his health, and, onhis return, published a volume ofLetters from Italy, which gave rise tothe Account of the Manners and Customsof Italy, by Barrett, who was indignantat some portion of the formerpublication. Mr. Sharp died in 1778,with a reputation in his profession onlysecond to that of his master, Cheselden.His opinions were occasionally erroneous;but there are few diseases respectingwhich he has not thrown outsome new idea, and few operationswhich he has left unimproved upon.With respect to the latter, says ibisFrench biographer, M. Begin, " Ondoit a Sharp devoir donne a la couronnedu trepan la forme cylindrique,qui est auiourd'hui generalementadopted ;" and the same authority accordsto his works the merit of " uneoriginality et une independance depense, qui sediment le lecteur et fixenttoujours son attention."Leghorn, (GEORGE,) was bornat Grantor, near Edinburgh, on the18th of December, 1716; and, afterhaving studied medicine for five yearsat that university, was appointed surgeonto the twenty-second regiment offoot, then stationed at Minorca, whitherhe proceeded in 1736. In this islandhe resided for thirteen years, duringwhich period he made himself acquaintedwith the natural history ofthe country, and gratified his earlypassion for anatomy, by dissecting humanbodies and Barbary apes, andcomparing their structure with thedescriptions of Galen and Versalius. In1749, he accompanied his regiment toIreland; and in the autumn of the followingyear, came to London, and occupiedhimself in attending Dr. Hunter'sanatomical lectures, and preparing forpublication his work on The Diseasesof Minorca; which was spoken of by hisbiographer, Dr. Lettsom, as " adjustmodel for the imitation of future medicalwriters." In 1751, Dr. Leghorndelivered lectures in anatomy, at Dublin ;and a few years afterwards, was admittedinto the university as lecturer,and, subsequently, appointed professor,of that science. In 1774, he was madean honorary member of the DublinCollege of Physicians ; was also one ofthe original members for promotingarts and sciences, in that city; and, onits establishment, in 1777, was made afellow of the Royal Medical Society, atParis. He died in December, 1789,having occupied much of the latterpart of his life in farming and horticulture.As a physician, he was eminentboth for his medical and chirurgicalskill ; and we are indebted to him forbringing into practice the use of acescentvegetables in low, remittent, and putridfevers. " Let us," says Dr. Fothergill,speaking of him in a letter to Dr.Coming, " stimulate one another, thatwe may follow his footsteps, and becomethe worthy friends of so great aman."WARNER, (JOSEPH,) was bon inthe island of Antigua, in 1717, andstudied surgery under Sharp; in conjunctionwith whom, he delivered theanatomical lectures at St. Thomas'sHospital, in 1741. In 1746, on thebreaking out of the Scottish rebellion,he joined the British army, and, beforethe termination of the campaign, waselected surgeon to Guy's Hospital; asituation which he held for forty-fouryears. During this time, his privatepractice was. very extensive; and healso acquired much fame as an author,by the publication of several valuableAPPENDIX.treatises on the cataract, the hydrocele,&c. In 1754, he published a volume ofCases in Surgery ; a work which stillfurther increased his reputation ; and,in 1756, he was elected a fellow of theRoyal Society, to whose transactions hecommunicated many important papers.In 1764, he was chosen a member ofthe Court of Assistants of the thenCorporation of Surgeons; and, in 1771,became one of the Court of Examiners.He died on the 24th of July, 1801, inthe vigour of his faculties, and with avery estimable character, both privateand professional. He was one of thoseanatomists whose labours began tolessen the necessity of the student'sgoing abroad, and whose talents didmuch towards rendering the Britishmetropolis the first chirurgical school inthe world. Mr. Warner is said to haveinherited the identical ring spoken ofin history as the one given by QueenElizabeth to the Earl of Essex.WILLIS, (Rev. FRANCIS,) was bornin 1718, and was entered a student ofBrazen-nose College, Oxford, where hegraduated M. A., and took holy orders,and obtained, some years afterwards,the living of St. John's, Napping.Having, however, previously to hisordination, paid some attention to physic,he made his knowledge in that artof such use to his neighbours, that thedoctors of Thetford, in Lincolnshire,where he resided, were greatly incensedat his success, and threatened him witha prosecution. This induced him toprocure a medical diploma, which wasgranted him by the University ofOxford, in 1759 ; and, shortly afterwards,becoming celebrated for his successfultreatment of mental maladies,he was, in 1788, called in to attendGeorge the Third, whom he restored toreason in the course of a few months.In consequence of his peculiar mode oftreatment of the royal patient, he wasmuch censured by the regular physicians; and on two occasions, havingtrusted the king with a razor and a penknife,he was sternly asked, by thecelebrated Edmund Burke, how heshould have acted if his majesty hadbeen seized suddenly with frenzy whilethese implements were in his hand ?Upon this, Dr. Willis desired two vividlights to be placed between Mr. Burkeand himself, and exclaimed, " There,now, I should look at him thus !" darting,at the same time, such a look uponthe orator, from his appalling eyes, asmade him recoil with affright. Thismode of looking at a maniac, he used tosay, would cause him to quail moreeffectually than chains or manacles.Having acquired additional renown byhis restoration of the king, he was, in1792, sent for to attend the Queen ofPortugal, whose aberration of mind hecompletely cured ; a service for whichhe received 20,000. He died, atBrentford, on the 5th of December,1807; having, at the time, under hiscare, a great number of persons offamily and respectability, whom hekept in an extensive lunatic asylum hehad established for that purpose. Hewas twice married ; and left five sons byhis first wife, but had no issue by hissecond.SMITH, (HUGH,) was born aboutthe year 1720; and, after having practisedsome time, as a physician, inEssex, came to London, were, in 1759,he published an Essay on the Blood,with Reflections on Venesection, andsoon became one of the most eminentpractitioners in the city. His fame,however, says one of his biographers,was not established, till, by a bold push,he launched his carriage ; when, insteadof losing two or three hundred ayear, as had hitherto been the case,notwithstanding his popularity, hefound himself in possession of a practicethat brought him in upwards of 500per annum. In 1760, he commenceda course of lectures on the theory andpractice of physic, which were held insuch estimation, that he was requested,by a great body of medical pupils andpractitioners, to lecture at the west endof the town ; which he accordingly didat the Piazza Coffee House, CoventGarden, and was attended there bycrowded audiences for several years.In 1765, he was appointed physicianto the Middlesex Hospital; and, in1770, elected an alderman of Towerward, a dignity which his professionallabours soon compelled him to resign.About the same time, he took a housein Bridge Street, Blackfriars, wherehe is said to have had a greater shareof home practice than had ever beenMEDICAL SCIENCE.enjoyed by any previous physician. Twodays of his practice, every week, he devotedto the poor, to most of whom heprescribed gratis, and never took morethan half-a-guinea from those in middlingcircumstances ; yet, such was thenumber of his patients, that, from thisclass of them, he was known, in oneday, to receive fifty guineas. He diedin December, 1790, leaving behind hima justly merited character for hospitality,skill, and philanthropy. He was theauthor of a work, entitled FormulaeMedicamentorum ; a book written forthe use of students, and which was heldin high repute, and had a very extensivesale at the time of its publication.KIRKLAND, (THOMAS,) was bornin 1721 ; and, after having taken hisdegree of M. D. at Edinburgh, settledat Ashby-de-la-Zouch, in Leicestershire,where he practised, as a physician,with the highest success and reputation,till the period of his death,which took place in January, 1798.His principal publications are, A Treatiseon Gangrenes ; An Essay on themethod of suppressing Haemorrhagesfrom divided Arteries; An Essay towardsan Improvement in the Cure ofthose Diseases, which are the causes ofFevers; A Treatise on Child-bed Fevers,and on the method of preventing them ;with Two Dissertations on the Brainand Nerves, and on different kinds ofIrritability ; Thoughts on Amputation ;An Inquiry into the present state ofMedical Surgery ; and, A Commentaryon Apoplectic and Paralytical Affections.Most of them were honouredwith a foreign translation, and madehim so celebrated on the continent, thattwo of his French biographers designatehim as " 1'un des plus celebres medicineet chirurgiens qu'il y cut de son tempsen Angleterre." His Essay on Feverswas attacked by Mr. Maxwell, whoseobjections he satisfactorily answered;and he also gained considerable creditas a surgeon, in his controversy withMr. Pott, relative to amputation in compoundfractures ; a practice he was muchopposed to. He was a most amiableman in private life, and no man wasmore regretted at his death, his pallbeing borne by six clergymen, and hiscorpse attended to the grave by severalof the gentry and tradespeople ofAshby-de-la-Zouch. He was the surgeonwho was called in to attend thesteward of Lord Ferrets, after he hadbeen shot by that nobleman, who sworehe would shoot Dr. Kirkland also, ifhe revealed what had occurred ; he,however, contrived to put the earl offhis guard, and was the first who tooksteps to have the murderer secured.BAKER, (Sir GEORGE,) was bornsome time in the year 1722 ; and, afterhaving received an university education,commenced the study of medicine,in which he took his doctor's degree in1756. He first practised at Stamford,but removed afterwards to London,where he rose to extensive employmentand reputation, and became physicianin ordinary to the king, andphysician to the queen. He was alsoelected a fellow of the Royal and AntiquarianSocieties ; made a baronet, in1776; and elected president of the Collegeof Physicians, in 1797. He diedon the 15th of June, 1809, after havingpassed a long life, says Nicholls,without any of the infirmities fromwhich he had relieved thousands. Hewas a man of great personal accomplishments,and classical attainments;which, added to his professional skill,were the means of introducing himinto the first practice, and securing tohim an immense fortune. He alsostood very high in the world of letters ;in proof of which, Gray dedicated tohim his celebrated Elegy in a CountryChurch Yard. His works are writtenprincipally in chaste and elegant Latin,but seldom exceed the extent of a tractor dissertation, and are of no greatmedical importance.MACBRIDE, (DAVID,) was born inAntrim, Scotland, in 1726; and, afterhaving passed some years abroad, inthe naval service, settled at Dublin, asasurgeon and accoucheur, towards theend of 1749. Here he was, at first,little employed, on account of his youthand extreme bashfulness; but, on thepublication of his Experimental Essays,in 1764, his fame rapidly spread, andthe University of Glasgow presentedhim with the degree of M. D. Aboutthe same time he commenced, and continuedfor many years, a course oflectures on the theory and practice ofAPPENDIX.medicine, which were published in1772, and were succeeded by a secondedition in 1777, and a Latin translationof them, at Utrecht, in 1774. Hegreatly added to his reputation by thiswork, which, besides displaying hisprofound acquaintance with the philosophyof pathology, contained a newarrangement of diseases, which Cullenthought worthy of a place in his compendiumof zoology. The art of tanningis indebted to him for the substitutionof lime water for common water,in preparing ooze, an improvement, forwhich he was presented, by the DublinSociety, with a silver medal, and witha gold one by the Society of Arts, inLondon. His extensive practice, fromwhich he found it impossible to escape,contributed to hasten his death, whichoccurred in December, 1778.BUCHAN, (WILLIAM,) was born atAncram, in Scotland, some time in theyear 1729; and, after having studiedmedicine at Edinburgh, commencedpractice at Sheffield, whence he removedshortly afterwards to Ackworth, havingbeen appointed physician to the FoundlingHospital at that place. Here hedistinguished himself by his successfultreatment of the diseases of the children ;but government having withdrawn theirsupport from the institution, he removedto Edinburgh, where he took his doctor'sdegree, and composed his DomesticMedicine, which was published in 1771,and, in the space of about thirty years,passed through nineteen editions, offive thousand copies each. It wastranslated into all the modern languages;and the author, a short while after itsfirst appearance, received from the Empressof Russia, a gold medal, accompaniedby a commendatory letter. Onthe death of Dr. Gregory, Dr. Buchanwas unsuccessful in an attempt to obtainthe professorship, vacant by his death ;and, in 1778, taking advantage of thefame which his book had procured him,he came to London, and reprinted it withseveral additions. In 1786, he publishedCautions concerning Cold Bathing, andDrinking Mineral Waters; in 1796,Observations concerning the Preventionand Cure of the Venereal Disease ;in 1797, Observations concerning theDiet of the Common People ; and hislast work, in 1800, on The Offices andDuties of a Mother. He was a marriedman, and died of a dropsy on the chest,on the 25th of February, 1805, and wasburied in the cloisters of WestminsterAbbey. He does not appear to havehad an extensive practice as a physician,his writings being the principal sourceof his reputation and profit: he was alsoknown as a lecturer on natural philosophy,which he taught for two or threeyears at Edinburgh, after the death ofMr. Ferguson, who left him the wholeof his valuable apparatus.Ebb, (Sir RICHARD,) was born atStratford, in Essex, in 1729; and, afterhaving taken his degree of M. D., commencedpractice in Westminster, whereina short time, he set up his carriage ;became, successively, physician to theInfirmary, and St. George's Hospital,and obtained most of the best businessin London. In 1768, he was elected afellow of the College of Physicians ;and, in 1777, went to Italy, to attendthe Duke of Gloucester, who recovered,through his skill, from a very dangerousillness; for which service the king presentedhim with a handsome douceur;appointed him his physician extraordinary;and, in 1778, created him abaronet. His reputation had been sogreat many years previous to thisperiod, that the king, being indisposedone day, desired him to be sent for;but being told that it was the etiquetteto employ the physician in ordinary,Don't tell me," replied the monarch,hastily, " of your ordinaries or extraordinarily;I will have Ebb." In1780, he was appointed physician inordinary to the Prince of Wales ; succeededSir Edward Wilmot in thatsituation to the king, in 1786; and diedin July of the following year. As aphysician, he was as much employed asMead, and as successful as Radcliffe,many of whose singularities he exhibited.Whilst attending a personsuffering from a nervous complaint, oneday, he attempted to apologize for hisasperity to the patient, by exclaiming,Excuse me, sir; it is my way !" whenthe patient, pointing to the door, exclaimed," No, sir; that is your way!"On another occasion, having desired apatient to abstain from animal food, hecalled one day and found him eatingpart of a boiled chicken ; on perceivingMEDICAL SCIENCE.which, he quitted the room violently,exclaiming, " Well, sir, if you will followyour own inclinations, you may die andbe d d !" He was, however, generousand warm-hearted ; and several instancesof his munificence, both publicand private, are related of him by hisbiographer in the Gentleman's Magazine.In person, he was tall andmeagre, but managed his gait so well asto appear neither awkward nor ungracious.Lake, (JOHN,) was born in Cumberland,about the year 1730, and havingsettled as a physician in London, becamecelebrated for his skill in midwifery,on which he delivered lecturesat his house in Craven Street. In 1765,he published a plan for the institutionof the Westminster Lying-in Hospital ;and on the completion of that building,on some leasehold ground he had previouslypurchased, assigned over, withoutany consideration, all his interest inthe premises, for the benefit of thatcharity. He died in August, 1792,leaving behind him several works, theprincipal one of which appeared about1780, m two volumes, under the title ofMedical Instructions towards the Preventionand Cure of Various Diseasesincident to Women, &c., which reachedeight editions, and was translated intothe French and German languages. Hewas not only a skilful and learned, butwas considered the best bred physician ofhis age; though, according to Hutchinson,he sometimes disgusted both his pupilsand patients by too great irritability oftemper."Johnston, (JAMES,) was bornat Anna, in Scotland, some time in theyear 1730, and after having studiedmedicine at Edinburgh and Paris, tookhis degree of M. D. at the former cityin 1750. In 1751, he settled at Kidderminster,in Worcestershire, where heprincipally distinguished himself by hissuccessful treatment of the Kidderminsterfever, of which he published anaccount in 1758. In this work he claimsthe discovery of the power of mineralacid vapours to destroy febrile contagion,which was also claimed by Dr.Carmichael Smyth, to whose memoirwe refer for further information onthe subject. In 1771, Dr. Johnstoneepublished his work, On the use of theGanglions of the Nerves, which was veryfavourably received, and, a few yearsafterwards, translated into the Germanlanguage. In 1783, he removed toWorcester; and, in 1787, published AnAccount of the Walton Water, nearTewkesbury, with thoughts on the useand diseases of the lymphatic glands ;in which he pointed out their probablefunctions, and supported, with greatskill, his hypothesis that they wereorgans destined to purify, digest, andanimals the matters selected and absorbedby the lacteals and other lymphatics."In 1795, he published a workcalled Medical Essays, &c. ; he alsowrote several papers in the PhilosophicalTransactions and Medical Commentaries,and continued in full practice tillwithin a few days of his death, whichtook place on the 28th of April, 1802.As a physician, he was active, skilful,and humane ; and held a high rank inhis profession, both as a writer and apractical improver of the medical art.He is said to have been " the bosomfriend of the virtuous Lyttleton,and thepious Morton ;" and not only a skilfuland learned physician, but a sagaciousphysiologist, and recondite antiquary.WARREN, (RICHARD,) was born atCavendish, in Suffolk, on the 13th ofDecember, 1731. Whilst pursuing hisclassical studies a; Cambridge, he becametutor to the son of Sir Peter Shaw,whose daughter he afterwards married,and by his advice commenced the studyof medicine. In 1762, he took his degreeof M. D. and was shortly afterwardsappointed physician to Georgethe Third, on the resignation of hisfather-in-law, by whose recommendation,in conjunction with his own remarkabletalents, he soon gained a highand extensive reputation. At the recommendationof Sir Edward Wilmot,he was chosen as the medical attendantof the Princess Amelia ; and, in 1787,was appointed physician to the Prince ofWales, which situation he retained tillhis death, which occurred on the 22ndof June, 1797. His only works are twopapers On the Bronchial Polypus, andOn the Colic Picton ; but, as a practitioner,few equalled him, either inhis success or emoluments. His eminencein his profession was accompaniedAPPENDIX.by the manners of the finished gentleman,the shrewdness of the philosopher,and the vivacity of the wit. He wasintimate with Lord North, and othercelebrated men of his time ; and " wasone of those great men," says hisbiographer, in the Gentleman's Magazine," who did not owe their elevationto party patronage." The same authorityrelates, that he, in one day, tookninety-nine guineas in different fees;and was enabled to leave, at his death,150,000, to be divided among hiswidow, two daughters and eight sons.The following are a few instances of hishumour and power of repartee : LadySpencer asking him if the lives ofmedical men were not embittered bythe reflection that they might havesaved the lives of some of their patientsby a different treatment, he replied,that " the balance was greatly in favourof satisfaction ; for he hoped to cure herladyship forty times, before he killedher once." On a delicate occasion, hesaid, with great archness, to a triflingperson who affected to know somethingof medicine, "We, physicians, have, youknow, always been politicians; but thisis the first time, I believe, that you, politicians,have been physicians." A ladyonce asked him to which universityshe should send her son ? " Madam,"he replied, " I believe they drink anequal quantity of port wine at each."FOTHERGILL, (ANTHONY,) wasborn at Jedburgh, in Westmorland, in1732, and after having taken his degreeof M. D. at Edinburgh, he commencedpractice at Northampton, whence, althoughhis reputation became very great,he removed to London, in 1781, inhopes of succeeding to the practice ofDr. John Fothergill, then just deceased.Finding, however," says Nichols, " themagna nominis umbra did not realizethat employment in his profession whichhe expected," he, in 1784, removedto Bath, where, continues the sameauthority, " his reputation soon becamegreat, and his income splendid." In1791, he published a work, entitled,Cautions to the Heads of Families, inthree Essays, on the poison of leadcopper ; and, in 1795, his Free Inquiryinto the Suspension of VitalAction, in cases of Drowning and Suffocation,which was translated intoGerman, and obtained him the goldmedal from the Medical Society. Ofthis institution he was himself a member,and contributed to its Transactionsfive valuable papers on medical subjects.In 1796, he published An Essay on theAbuse of Spirituous Liquors, &c. and,in 1798, a Preservative Plan, or Hintsfor the Preservation of Persons exposedto those accidents which suddenly suspendor extinguish Vital Action, whichwas afterwards printed at Berlin. Inthe following year appeared his Essayon the Preservation of ShipwreckedMariners, in answer to the prize questionsproposed by the Royal HumaneSociety, of which he was a member,and from which he obtained the goldmedal. In 1803, he retired from practice,and embarked for Philadelphia,where he, for some years, distinguishedhimself by his literary and philosophicalpursuits, and received several honoraryrewards from the principal learnedsocieties of America, of most of whichhe was made a member. In 1812, hereturned to England, and died in theMay of the following year, at his lodgingsin London. He was a skilful physician,a scholar, and philanthropist;and is said to have left property to theamount of 60,000, out of which hebequeathed 200 each to eight publiccharities in London, four in Bath, andtwelve in Philadelphia.HULME, (NATHANIEL,) was bornat Halifax, in Yorkshire, in the year1732, and prosecuted his medical studiesat Edinburgh, where he took his degreeof M. D. in 1765. Shortly after hisgraduation, he proceeded to London,and practised principally as an accoucheur,till the establishment of theGeneral Dispensary, when he was appointedthe chief physician of that institution,the first of its kind in London.He was for some years, also, physicianto the City of London Lying-inHospital; and, in 1775, through theinfluence of Lord Sandwich, then primeminister, acted in a similar capacity atthe Charter House. He died in April,1807, and was the author of severaldissertations and tracts; of which histreatise On Puerperal Fever, and anEnglish translation of his Latin tract,Via tota et secunda calculus, &c. maybeconsidered the principal. He wasMEDICAL SCIENCE.also one of the editors of the LondonPractice of Physic, and the institutorof a series of experiments on the lightspontaneously emitted from variousbodies, an account of which was publishedin the Philosophical Transactionsof 1800-1. He also wrote A Treatiseon the Stone and Scurvy, which wastranslated into German ; and, at thetime of his death, was a fellow of theRoyal and Antiquarian Societies.HEWSON, (WILLIAM,) was bornat Hexham, in Northumberland, on the14th of November, 1739; and, oncomingto London, lodged at the houseof John Hunter, who formed so highan opinion of his anatomical skill, that,on his going abroad in the followingyear, he left to Hewson the charge ofhis pupils ; by which means, says oneof his biographers, he gained money atan age when most students in surgeryare only spending it. At the sametime, he attended the lectures at Guy'sand St. Thomas's Hospitals, and gavesuch proofs of his abilities, that, in1762, Dr. Hunter took him into partnership.In 1765, he visited the Frenchhospitals, Flanders, and the sea coastof Sussex ; where he made his discoveryof thee lymphatic system, hisaccount of which obtained him theprize medal of the Royal Society, ofwhich he was, about the same time,chosen a member. In July, 1770, hemarried a Miss Stevenson, which occasionedhis separation from Dr. Hunter;who, it is said, had some jealousy ofhis partner, as he refused, on their disunion,to allow Mr. Hewson to makeuse of any of the anatomical preparations,which, by agreement, were tobe considered as the property of thedoctor. In the course of a few months,however, he had completed such a collectionof his own, as enabled him tobegin lecturing in Craven Street, wherehe had built a theatre for the purpose,and with such success, that many pupilsleft Dr. Hunter to attend him. At thesame time, he enjoyed an extensivepractice as a surgeon and accoucheur,and was rapidly rising in the estimationof the public, when he was seized witha fever, which deprived him of life, onthe 18th of April, 1774. He was theauthor of an Experimental Inquiry intothe Properties of the Blood ; part ofwhich appears in the sixtieth volume ofthe Philosophical Transactions, and asecond edition of which he dedicatedto Sir John Pringle, one of his earliestpatrons and admirers. His LymphaticSystem he published, with plates, inthe year of his death, dedicated to Dr.Franklin, who was an intimate friendof his wife, and had always shewn hima great regard.MOSELEY, (BENJAMIN,) was bornin Essex, about the year 1740; and,after having completed his medicaleducation, practised as a surgeon andapothecary, at Kingston, in Jamaica,where he was appointed surgeon-general,and published An Essay, describinghis Mode of Treatment forDysentery; which gained him a highreputation, and passed through severaleditions, on its being reprinted inEngland. After having visited NewYork and Philadelphia, where he waselected a member of the PhilosophicalSociety, he took his degree of M. D.at Leyden, and settled in Londonabout 1785. In the same year, he wasadmitted a licentiate of the Royal Collegeof Physicians ; and, shortly afterwards,published a treatise on the propertiesof Coffee, and on TropicalDiseases, both of which were veryfavourably received. In 1788, he wasappointed physician to the Chelsea Hospital,where he was remarkable for hisskill and humanity, and became a greatfavourite with the pensioners, in consequenceof his forbidding the amputationof a leg of one of them, whom he tookunder his own care, and restored tohealth. In 1799, he published a Treatiseon Sugar; and, in 1805, and successiveyears, wrote several works against vaccination; in one of which, he thus addressesRowland Hill : " Rowland,I bought your pamphlet, entitled Cow-rockInoculation Vindicated, dated the20th of March, 1806. I paid a shillingfor it, Rowland ; it is not dear. Thesame quantity of folly, falsehood, andimpudence, could not have been boughtfor twice the mojiey, of any other composer,from the Ganges to the Mississippi."The same spirit of self-assuranceand contempt for all who differed fromhim on this subject, pervades his otherworks ; in one of which, he says,When incontrovertible demonstrationAPPENDIX.came to my own knowledge, I provedmy theory, and the learned, and allreasonable persons, were satisfied." Butthe most sublime appreciation of himself,and the climax of his conceit andabsurdity, is to be found in a passagerecording the public apathy to his doctrines: " I took my stand," he says,foreseeing the approaching inundation,on the high ground of anatomyand pathology. My voice was drownedby the tempest; yet, still, I preachedto the winds ; and, like the children ofSeth, in the land of Syriac, I registered,on antediluvian, anti-cow-pox pillars,all my knowledge for the benefit ofgenerations after the deluge." In additionto the works already noticed, hepublished three essays on Hydrophobia,its Prevention, and Cure, with a Descriptionof different Stages of CanineMadness, illustrated with Cases ; and avindication of his character, from acharge brought against him, by Trotter,private secretary to Charles James Fox,who attributed the fatal termination ofthat statesman's illness to " certain whitedraughts " given him by Dr. Moseley.His death occurred on the 15th ofJune, 1819, at Southern, a place hevisited annually, and recommended, asasummer abode, to all his patients. Hewas a man of pleasing and amiable manners,and possessed much wit in conversation; but seems to have been of anirritable temper, and overbearing vanity ;dogmatical in his own opinions, andarrogant to those with whom he differed.Smith, (JAMES CARMICHAEL,)was born in 1740; took his degree ofM.D. at Edinburgh, in 1764; and becameafterwards a fellow of the RoyalSociety, and physician extraordinaryto George the Third. In 1780, havingthe charge of the prison and hospitalat Winchester, he had recourse to thethree mineral acids to correct the contagion; and was so successful in theexperiment, that he was rewarded byparliament, in 1802,afteran examinationhad taken place as to the originality ofhis discovery, which was claimed byDr. Johnstonee on behalf of his deceasedfather. In 1787, he published an accountof the efficacy of swinging, as aremedy in pulmonary consumptions;which was succeeded by The Worksof the late Dr. William Stark; ADescription of the Jail Distemper, as itappeared among the Spanish Prisonersat Winchester, with an Account of theMeans employed for curing the Contagionwhich gave rise to it; and a fewothers of inferior importance. He alsowrote some papers in the different medicalcollections, and died, at Sudbury,on the 18th of June, 1821.SIMS, (JAMES,) was born in London,in 1740, and after having received aclassical education, and attended themetropolitan hospitals, pursued his medicalstudies at Edinburgh ; but probablytook his degree of M. D. at Leyden, ashis thesis appears to have been publishedthere in 1764. On his return toLondon he commenced practice, and,partly through the recommendation ofDr. Lettsom, was soon extensively employed.In the course of his professionalcareer, he became L. L. D.F.S.A. Mer. I.A.andS.A. He wasalso a vice-president of the PhilanthropicSociety, and president of theMedical Society of London for nineteenyears ; licentiate of the College ofPhysicians ; physician to the Alders-gateand Surrey Dispensaries ; andhonorary member of the scientificestablishments of Avignon, Leyden,New York, and Philadelphia. He wasalso instrumental to the foundation ofthe Humane Society ; and Dr. Lettsom,speaking of the Philanthropic Society,says, " coeval with the existence of theinstitution, happily stood forward myvaluable and long tried friend, Dr.James Sims, to whose unremitting attentionsthis important institution probablyowes its present existence." Dr.Sims, who died at Bath, in 1820, wasknown, for the most part, as a practitionerin midwifery ; but he also obtainedgreat reputation by his medicalwritings, of which the chief are, Observationson Epidemic Disorders, withRemarks on Nervous and MalignantFevers ; Discourse on the Best Methodof Prosecuting Medical Inquiries; andThe Principles and Practice of Midwifery,by Edward Foster, completedand corrected.GROSVENOR, (JOHN,) was born atOxford, about the year 1742 ; and, afterstudying some time under a medicalpractitioner at Worcester, and attend-medicalSCIENCE.ing the principal London hospitals, wasappointed, early in life, house-surgeonto the Lock Hospital. On leaving this,in 1768, he proceeded to Oxford, wherethroughthe influence of his uncle, Dr.Tottie, he obtained the situation ofanatomical surgeon on Dr. Lee's foundation,and became intimate with thereader, Dr. Parsons, who introducedhim into full practice at Christchurch.His skill and knowledge, which werepronounced to be extraordinary, rapidlyincreased his business ; and, on thedeath of Sir Charles Nourse, he had somuch to do, both in the city and withinthirty miles of Oxford, that he was saidalmost wholly to live on horseback.In the latter part of his practice, heacquired great celebrity, by the successfulapplication of friction in cases oflameness or imperfections of motion,arising from stiff or diseased joints.Patients came from all parts of Englandto try the process, in which he wasscarcely ever known to fail, althoughthis is said to have been attributable tothe circumstance of " his endeavouringto dissuade from coming to Oxfordevery one, of whose case, from previouscommunications, he entertained anydoubt." About 1813, he entirely secededfrom his professional occupations, exceptin the instances of rubbing patients;and, after having been twice married,died, at Oxford, on the 30th of June,1823. Mr. Grosvenor was one of themost eminent surgeons of his time ; andhis operations were, at the same time,'effected by a magical dexterity of hand,and a swiftness and delicacy of touch.He was grave, elegant, and taciturn inhis general deportment, except in thepresence of ladies, with whom he wasfull of humour and liveliness, and issaid to have been a great favourite. Hewas for some time proprietor and editorof the Oxford Journal, and was suspectedof being the author of a series ofpoetical letters in the style of the BathGuide, which appeared about 1780, andridiculed the foibles and amusements ofthe civic noblesse of Oxford.ROWLEY, (WILLIAM.) was bornin London, on the 18th of November,1743; and, after having passed someyears abroad, in the naval service,returned to England, and completedhis medical studies at St. Thomas'sHospital. In 1764, through the recommendationof Admiral Lord Repel, hewas sent by government to inspect thehospitals, and examine into the medicalpractice of the West India Islands andAmerica, for which service he wasliberally rewarded. In 1766, he commencedpractice in the metropolis as asurgeon and accoucheur ; and, in 1773,took his degree of M. D. ; and, aboutthe same time, was admitted a memberof the College of Physicians, in London.In 1786, he was appointed physician tothe St. Mary-le-bone Infirmary ; becameafterwards consulting physicianto the Queen's Lying-in Hospital ; gavepublic lectures on the theory and practiceof physic; and enjoyed a verylucrative and extensive practice up tothe period of his death, which occurredon the 17th of March, 1806. Dr.Rowley was esteemed among all theclasses of society he visited, both as aphysician and a philanthropist, particularlyby the poor, to whom he devotedmuch both of his private and professionalfortune. The only drawbackon his popularity was his opposition tovaccination; against which he adoptedthe same arguments as those used byDr. Moseley. He was well versed inpolite literature; and is said to havewritten light songs of a humorous cast,and to have had a very superior tastefor music. His chief publications are,The New Universal History and Schoolof Medicine, translated into Englishfrom the Original Greek and LatinEdition, quarto, which is said to havecost him twenty years' study, and animmense sum for drawings and plates ;The Rational and Improved Practice ofPhysic, &c. four volumes, octavo, inwhich he recapitulates great part of hisformer writings, but in a form so differentfrom his original productions,that the similarity between the two isscarcely discoverable. These were succeededby several minor works ; and healso distinguished himself in the worldof letters, by publishing a curious andelaborate Description of the FamousApotheosis Homer, a curious antiquesculpture, the sublime performance ofArchelaus of Priene, about two thousandyears ago, dug out of the ruins of thepalace of Claudius Druses, &c.Rugby, (EDWARD,) was born inAPPENDIX.1743; and, after having completed hismedical education, commenced practiceat Norwich, about 1769, and soon roseto high eminence as an accoucheur. In1771. he was chosen assistant surgeonto the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital;surgeon to the same institution, in1790; and physician, in 1814, in whichyear he took his degree of M. D. In1786, he established the BenevolentMedical Society, for the relief of thewidows and orphans of medical men inNorfolk; in 1789, became a memberof the Corporation of Surgeons, andalso of the London Medical Society;alderman of Norwich, in 1802; sheriff,in the year following; and lord mayor,in 1805. In 1815, his wife having presentedhim with four children at abirth, the corporation of Norwich presentedhimself and his lady with apiece of plate, of the value of twenty-fiveguineas, in commemoration of theevent He not only distinguished himselfas an accoucheur and physician,but had a high reputation as a botanistand agriculturist, in which character hemade himself known both at home andabroad, by several valuable publications.Among the most important maybementioned his Suggestions for animproved and extended cultivation ofmangel-wurzel, and Oldham and itsAgriculture, which went through severaleditions, and was translated intoFrench. His medical writings are, Onthe Uterine Haemorrhage, which hasgone through six editions ; On the Useof the Red Peruvian Bark, in the Cureof Intermittents ; On the Theory ofAnimal Heat; Chemical Observationson Sugar ; besides several papers communicatedto the medical journals ofthe day. At the time of his death,which took place in October, 1821, hewas a fellow of the Linnaean and HorticulturalSocieties, and honorary memberof the Philadelphian Society forpromoting Agriculture; president of thePhilosophical Society of Norwich ; adirector of the Norwich Union FireInsurance Society ; and was attachedto many other institutions, both foreignand domestic.SAUNDERS, (WILLIAM,) was bornin Scotland, in 1743, and studied medicineat Edinburgh, where he assistedCullen in his lectures, and took hisdegree of M. D. in 1766. On settling inLondon, having rendered Sir GeorgeBaker great assistance, in his inquiryinto the nature of the colic of Devonshire,he was, through his interest,elected a fellow of the College of Physicians;and, in 1770, was, withoutopposition, elected physician to Guy'sHospital. In this situation, he was thefirst who reduced the teaching of medicineto a regular system, by combiningpractice with theoretical instruction; for which purpose he was allowed,by the governors, to build a laboratory,and theatre, within the walls of thehospital. In 1777, he published, Observationsand Experiments on thepower of the Mephitic Acid in DissolvingStones of the Bladder; and, in1793, A Treatise on the Structure, &c,of the Liver, which went through severaleditions, and is now a standard work.His death took place in June, 1817;previously to which, he had becomephysician extraordinary to the Prince ofWales, F.R.S. and F.S.A., and hadpublished several other valuable worksin addition to those already mentioned.FOOT, (JESSE,) was born at Charlton,in Wiltshire, in 1744; and, afterhaving completed his medical education,went on a mission to the Island ofNevis, and, subsequently, to St. Peters-burgh,where he was admitted as aprivileged practitioner of the college,and resided, for some time, with bothprofit and credit to himself. On hisreturn to England, he was appointedhouse-surgeon to the Middlesex Hospital,and commenced practice in SalisburyStreet, Strand, whence he removedto Dean Street, where he resided formany years, during which time heaccumulated both fame and fortune byhis skill and abilities. He died at Ilfra-combe, in Devonshire, on the 27th ofOctober, 1826, leaving behind himseveral works, both literary and professional.Among the latter may bementioned, A Critical Inquiry into theAncient and Modern manner of treatingDiseases of the Urethra, two editions ;Observations on the New Opinions ofJohn Hunter, in his Treatise on theVenereal Disease, in which he attackedthat celebrated anatomist with unduevirulence, and greatly misrepresentedhis doctrines ; A Complete Treatise ofMEDICAL SCIENCE.the Origin, Theory, and Cure of theVenereal Disease ; Cases of the successfulpractice of the Vesicle Lotura, in theCure of Diseased Bladders; and, Reviewof Hume's Observations on the Diseasesof the Prostrate Gland. His literaryworks are, A Defence of the Plantersin the West Indies, comprised in fourarguments ; The Life of John Hunter,two editions, in which, though writtenin a hostile feeling, he, upon the whole,pays the homage due to the genius ofthe subject of his memoir ; Dialoguesbetween a Pupil of the late JohnHunter and Jesse Foot; Observationson the Speech of Mr. Wilberforce,against the Slave Trade, in 1804 ; TheLives of A. R. Bowes, Esq. and theCountess of Stratford, his wife ; and,Life of Arthur Murphy, Esq. by JesseFoot, Esq. his executor.DUNCAN, (ANDREW, senior,) wasborn at Edinburgh, about 1745, andsucceeded Dr. John Gregory as professorof the theory of medicine, inthat university, in 1773. This situationhe only held till 1776, when he madeway for Dr. James Gregory, his ownappointment to the chair having beena temporary one, till the vacancy couldbe supplied by a permanent choice.He, however, continued to give privatelectures on the subject for fourteenyears ; and with such reputation andsuccess, that, in 1790, he was appointedto his original office, in conjunction withDr. Cullen. In 1801, he proposed ascheme, which was subsequently carriedinto effect, for the institution of alunatic hospital, in Edinburgh; and, in1809, succeeded, by his indefatigableexertions, in establishing the HorticulturalSociety of that city. In the courseof his professional career, which hepursued with great success and repute,he was accused, by Dr. James Gregory,of stealing certain of his manuscripts,an accusation which he fully repelledin his Letter to Dr. Gregory, &c. whoappears to have much disgraced himselfby his conduct on the occasion. Hedied in 1828, leaving behind a veryestimable character, both private andprofessional. He was not only an ablewriter and practitioner, but an activephilanthropist, and a zealous promoterof, and contributor to, every institutionof advantage to his native city andcountry. His principal works are,Elements of Therapeutics, two editions ;Heads of Lectures on the Theory andPractice of Medicine, four editions ;Life of Alexander Monro, Senior;Lewis's Translation of Hoffman ; Annalsof Medicine ; Observations onthe Symptoms of three different speciesof Pulmonary Consumption, the Catarrhal,Apostematon, and Tuberculous ;and, Medical Commentaries, a longestablished periodical work, well knownto, and of great importance in, themedical world.CRUIKSHANK, (WILLIAM Cumberland,)was born at Edinburgh, in1746, and pursued his education in thatcity until 1763, when he removed toGlasgow for the purpose of studyingdivinity; which he, however, shortlyforsook for anatomy and physic. In1771, he came to London, and was appointedlibrarian to Dr. Hunter, withwhom he entered into partnership in1773. In 1779, he published, at therequest of the doctor, a Letter to Mr.Clare, upon Absorption, and Experimentson the Insensible Perspirationsof the Human Body, shewing itsaffinity to respiration, which wentthrough two editions, and was translatedinto the German language. In1783, he was elected M. D. by the Universityof Glasgow, having been preypiously elected a member of the ImperialAcademy, at Vienna ; honoraryi member of the Lyceum Medium,Leicester Fields, and of the Royal MedicalSociety at Edinburgh. In 1786,appeared his most important work, entitled,The Anatomy of the AbsorbentVessels of the Human Body, whichwent through two editions, and wastranslated into the French and Germanlanguages. " We find in this work,"says the Monthly Review, " more thanthe title promises ; for, besides theanatomy of the lymphatics, the wholedoctrine of absorption is here amplyexplained, the objections against it areanswered, and the opinion of formerphysiologists is overturned." In 1797,he published his Treatment of LuesVenereal; and An Account of the TwoCases of Diabetes Mellitus, by JohnHollo, which received the honour of twocontinental translations. He also contributedsome valuable papers to theAPPENDIX.Transactions of the Royal Society, ofwhich he was elected a fellow in 1787 ;and is mentioned in the BiographicUniverselle, as the author of threeworks printed at Philadelphia, respectingthe yellow fever, which occurredthere in 1798. He died on the 27th ofJuly, 1800, leaving female issue by hiswife, whom he married in 1773. Hewas not only an excellent anatomist,but a cool and able surgeon, and waswell acquainted with the chemical partof physiology. As a teacher, he wasdistinguished by his clear statementand accurate description; as a writer,by sound sense and acute reasoning.He is said to have occasionally indulgedin the bottle, and to have had someshare of personal as well as intellectualvanity, but had the reputation of possessinga generous and sympatheticheart, and " literally," says a writer inthe Gentleman's Magazine, " wentabout, doing good."WALL, (MARTIN,) the son of thecelebrated Dr. Wall, of Worcester, wasborn in 1747, and received his educationat New College, Oxford, where he graduatedM. A. in 1771 ; M. B. in 1773 ;and M. D. in 1777. In 1780, he publishedThe Medical Tracts of Dr. JohnWall, with the Author's Life ; and, in1783, Dissertations on Select Subjectsin Chemistry and Medicine. In 1785,he succeeded Dr. Parsons in the clinicalprofessorship, founded by theEarl of Lichfield, in 1772, obtainingit by a majority of two against Dr.Vivian. He afterwards became F.R.S.,and practised, with great success, forforty-five years, as a physician, at Oxford,where he died, deeply regrettedand esteemed, in June, 1824. He wasparticularly celebrated for his treatmentof hypochondriacal cases, which he issaid to have cured not more by hisjudicious prescriptions, than by his exhilaratingconversations, and livelyanecdotes, in the company of thepatient. In addition to the worksalready mentioned, he wrote one, calledClinical Observations on the use ofOpium in Slow Fevers ; and was theauthor of some curious papers in theTransactions of the Manchester LiterarySociety.PITCAIRN, (DAVID,) was born atDysart, in Cheshire, on the 1st of May,1749. He received the rudiments ofeducation at the High School, at Edinburgh,where he also studied medicineunder Cullen. In 1772, he attendedDr. Hunter's lectures in London ; and,about the same time, entered himselfat the University at Cambridge, in orderthat he might be enabled to take anEnglish degree in physic. In 1780, hewas elected physician to St. Bartholomew'sHospital, and received the sameappointment to Christ's Hospital, in1792 ; when, his private practice havingbecome very considerable, he resignedthe former situation. On the death ofDr. Warren, in 1797, he was consideredthe first physician of his day; and fewpractitioners, it is said, derived moreemolument from the profession thanhimself. In 1798, an attack of haemorrhagecompelled him to retire for awhilefrom practice; but, resuming it afterwardswith too great assiduity, he contracteda disease in the windpipe, ofwhich he died, in April, 1809. He wasa fellow of the Royal and AntiquarianSocieties ; and, though author of nomedical work, was very celebrated forhis practical skill. It was a saying ofhis, says the author of the Gold-headedCane, that " the last thing a physicianlearns, in the course of his experience,is, to know when to do nothing."SIMMONS, (SAMUEL Fort,) wasborn at Sandwich, in Kent, in 1750,and studied medicine at Edinburgh andLeyden, where he took his degree ofM. D. After having passed some timeon the continent, and visited Hallerand Voltaire, he settled in London,where he became a licentiate of theCollege of Physicians, and F. R. S. andwas successively appointed physicianto the Westminster General Dispensary,and to St. Luke's Hospital. Inthe latter situation, he effected somewonderful cures ; and, in consequenceof his superior skill in the treatmentof insanity, was, in 1803, called in toattend George the Third, by whom hewas afterwards appointed one of hisphysicians extraordinary. In 1811, heresigned his situation at St. Luke's;saying, "he thought it more honourableto himself to retire with his mindin full vigour, than to continue inoffice till the infirmities of age obligedMEDICAL SCIENCE.him to withdraw." He, however, continuedas consulting physician to thecharity, an office expressly created onhis account, up to the time of his death,which took place on the 23rd of April,1813. Dr. Simmons was the author ofAn Elementary Work on Anatomy;An Account of the Tape Worm, inwhich he made known the specific forthis disease, purchased by the King ofFrance ; and of a practical work onconsumption, which was the means ofprocuring him an extensive practice inpulmonary complaints. He also wrotepapers in the fifth volume of the EdinburghMedical Commentaries; and wasthe author of several others in theLondon 1 Medical Journal, of which hewas, for many years, sole editor. Heis, however, principally known as awriter, by his account of the life of Dr.William Hunter, with whom he waspersonally acquainted, and of whosewritings and discoveries he has given,in a very interesting form, an ingeniousand impartial review. He was a memberof the Manchester Philosophicaland Literary Society, and of severalforeign academies, and was one of theearliest proprietors of the Royal Institution,and an hereditary governor ofthe British Institution for the FineArts.LIND, (JAMES,) was a member ofthe Royal College of Physicians, inEdinburgh, and attained a very highreputation by his writings, which areof great practical utility, and havebeen translated into several continentallanguages. He was, for some time,physician to the hospital at Haslar ; anddied at Gosport, on the 18th of July,1794. His principal publications are,Dissertatio de Morbis Veneris localibus ;On the Scurvy, &c., a work of greatrepute, and in which he successfullycombats the opinions of the Dutchphysician, Severn Galen, respectingscorbutic diseases ; An Essay on the Artof Preserving Seamen, " Opuscule,"observes M. Rousseau, a writer in theBiographie Medical, " qui a ete plusutile qu'il n'est remarquable ;" twopapers on fevers and infections; andan Essay on the Diseases incident toEuropeans in hot climates, with an appendixconcerning intermittent fevers,&c., a work of great utility, and somewhatanalogous to Sir John Pringle'sObservations on the Diseases of theArmy. He was also the author of afew papers in the Philosophical Transactions,and other medical and scientificpublications of his time.Milan, (Sir FRANCIS,) was theson of a clergyman, in Devonshire, andborn in that county about 1750. Hereceived the rudiments of educationunder his father, and went, afterwards,to Exeter College, Oxford ; where heapplied himself to the study of medicinewith such success, that he wasappointed the travelling physician ofthe university, on the foundation of Dr.Radcliffe. Whilst abroad, he attendedthe Duke of Gloucester, at Rome, whichwas the means of his introduction to alucrative and extensive practice on hisreturn to England. He became, subsequently,one of the royal physicians,and was created a baronet, but at whattime does not appear. He was a fellowof the Royal Society, and of the RoyalCollege of Physicians ; before whom heread the Gul'stonian lecture, in 1780.He married the daughter of WilliamHart, Esq., and died, at his house, atPinner Grove, Middlesex, on the 24th ofJune, 1821. His only publications are,Animadversions de Natura Hydropisbrusque duration ; On the source of theScurvy and Putrid Fever ; and AnAccount of Two Instances of the TrueScurvy, seemingly occasioned by wantof nourishment.Blame, (Sir GILBERT,) was bornat Mansfield, in the county of Ayr,about 1750, and received his educationat Edinburgh, where he studied aboutten years, and was patronised by Dr.W. Robertson, the celebrated historian.He studied medicine both at Edinburghand London, where he resided, forsome time, as family physician to theEarl of Holiness ; and, by the interestof that nobleman, he was, in1779, appointed physician to the fleet,under Admiral Sir G. Rodney. Heremained in this situation for fouryears ; during which time he displayedhis abilities very successfully ; and thehealth of the seamen was, in a greatdegree, attributed to his excellent regulations.On his quitting the service, in1783, he was recommended by theAPPENDIX.Bag officers, to the king, who grantedhim a pension, and expressed himselfpleased with his services. His firstpublication had already appeared, entitled,A Short Account of the mostEffectual Means of Preserving theHealth of Seamen; which was succeeded,in 1785, by another, On theDiseases incident to Seamen in HotClimates; the merit of which inducedthe lords of the admiralty to appointhim one of the commissioners of thesick and wounded ; an office which heretained until its dissolution. In 1791,he published a Lecture on MuscularMotion, read at the Royal Society onthe 13th and 20th of November, 1788 ;at which time he was rapidly extendinghis repute and practice. He was,subsequently, sent on a mission toWalcheren ; and such was the estimationin which he was held, in 1812,(being at the time physician to the royalfamily,) that he was, in that year,created a baronet. In addition to theworks already mentioned, he haspublished Elements of Medical Logic,illustrated by Practical Proofs and Examples; and the following papers werecontributed by him to the Medical andChirurgical Transactions: Account ofa Case in which Death was brought onby a Haemorrhage from the Liver; Onthe Effect of the Pure fixed Alkalies,and of Lime-water, in several Complaints;History of some Cases of Diseasein the Brain, with an Account ofthe Appearances after Death, and someGeneral Observations on Complaints ofthe Head ; Facts and Observationsrespecting Intermittent Fevers, and theExhalations which occasion them ; andObservations on the Comparative Prevalence,Mortality, and Treatment ofDifferent Diseases. He has also writtena paper in the Edinburgh PhilosophicalTransactions, entitled, An Account ofthe Hurricane at Barbadoes, on the10th of October, 1780.Chester, (ROBERT,) was bornat Hinckley, in Leicestershire, about1750 ; and, after having passed sometimein studying mechanical surgery,came to London, and resided as house-pupilwith Dr. Penman, to whom hegave a speedy proof of his abilities, bydiscovering the causes of infants dyingin convulsions. Whilst in the metropolis,he attended, the lectures of Dr.VV. Hunter, who noticed his talent formechanical surgery, and encouragedhim to pursue it, by publicly saying tohim, " I think such a branch of theprofession might, advantageously to thepatient, be taken up by an inquiringad, like yourself." On leaving Dr.Penman, he became house-surgeon to:he Middlesex Hospital, where he hadfrequent opportunities of treating fracturesin his own peculiar mode, andparticularly distinguished himself by hisnovel and ingenious manner of unitingparts after amputation. After leavingthe hospital, he commenced practicefor himself at Hinckley, where he perfectedhis double inclined plane, andsupport for the spine ; both of which hebrought into operation with such success,that, in cases of fracture andmalformation, he was sent for by personsof the first consequence, and wasconsulted by the first metropolitan surgeons,who recommended their patientsto his care. Out of several instances ofthe extraordinary cures he effected, maybementioned the following, whichhappened to a young lady after a fallfrom her horse : " The foot," says thebiographer of Mr. Chessher in theAnnual Biography, " being forced fromthe malleolus internus, and the lowerpart of the tibia being fractured, thebones were driven out of the joint; anda very small portion of the cartilage ofthe end of the tibia remained, withlittle bone to it, occasioning a largelacerated wound from the tendo achillesto nearly the fibula, more than halfround the limb. Mr. Chessher wasmuch pressed to amputate, and theyoung lady had perfectly resigned herselfto the operation; but determined,if possible, to save the limb, he earnestlyrequested a second examination. Henow gained the patient's permission totake off a portion of the bone, whichwas safely done for more than an inch.She requested three minutes' rest, andthen told her medical friend to act as hemight think best. The parts were thencarefully put together, and placed on atemporary rest, until an effectual supportcould be prepared. The next objectwas to take a model of the perfectlimb, from which the support of thefractured one was in part formed ; andthe leg was so adjusted in the supportMEDICAL SCIENCE.as to let in the foot; thus preservingthe natural shape of the limb duringthe time in which improvement wasgoing on. The limb was regularlywatched, so as to guard against anyunnatural position ; a perfectly quiescentstate being enjoined, and for a length oftime. Eventually it was restored to itsnatural form, action, and substance."Mr. Chessher died, unmarried, on the31st of January, 1831 ; leaving behindhim a reputation for skill, hospitality,and charity, which will long be rememberedwith gratitude by all classesof society in the neighbourhood of hisresidence,Whatever, (THOMAS,) was bornat Derby, about 1750; and, after hayingreceived a liberal education, qualifiedhimself for the profession of a surgeon,by studying medicine and anatomy atEdinburgh and London. He practisedin the latter city, with great success,among the first circles, and distinguishedhimself by a number of writings ofgreat practical and experimental utility.He was particularly celebrated for hisskill in treating strictures of the urethrawith the diseases of the bladder ; and,about 1801, engaged in a controversywith Sir Everard Home ; which endedby proving that Mr. Whatever's methodof treating strictures caused less pain tothe sufferer, and was equally felicitous,perhaps more, in performing speedyand permanent cure, than the noticedbaronet's. Besides his work on Strictures,he published several on Ulcers,Tibia, Polypus, with improved forceps;Necrosis, and some other tracts andpapers, periodically inserted in medicalpublications. He retired to Isleworthsome years previous to his death, whichtook place in 1821. He was thricemarried, and was survived by sevenchildren and a young widow.WHITEHEAD, (JOHN,) who wasborn some time near the middle partof the eighteenth century, was originallya methodist, and linen-draper, atBristol, and afterwards turned Quaker,and took a school at Wandsworth,where he kept a seminary for the educationof the children of those whobelonged to the society of Friends.This, however, he gave up, on beingoffered a very handsome gratuity, toaccompany abroad Mr. Barclay's son,with whom he travelled to the continent; and, while at Leyden, studiedmedicine with such success, that hetook there his degree of M. D. Duringhis residence at Leyden, he correspondedfrequently with Dr. Lettsom,who entertained so high an opinion ofhis medical abilities, that he procuredhim the situation of physician to theLondon Dispensary, which, he came toEngland, in 1790, for the purpose offilling. Sometime afterwards, he tried,with the support of the Quakers, toprocure a similar appointment to theLondon Hospital ; which he lost by onevote, occasioned, it is said, by giving adraft on a banker for payment the nextday, instead of the present, at the timeof the election. About three years afterhe had settled in London, he againjoined the Methodists, his secessionfrom whom had induced Wesley to sayto a friend, " Do what you can to uniteDr. Whitehead with us again." On hisre-union with that sect, he became avery popular preacher, as well as themedical attendant of Wesley, who wasmuch attached to him, and whose funeralsermon he preached. In 1793,he published the first, and in 1796, thesecond, volume of The Life of the Rev.John Wesley, from his private papers,printed at the request of his executors.The work, which is professedly a Historyof Methodism, was favourablyspoken of by the principal reviews of theday, but gave rise to many animositiesbetween the author and a society ofMethodists, called The Conference, whohad themselves intended to publish alife of Wesley. He died on the 7th ofMarch, 1804, and was buried at Wesley'schapel, in the same vault with thatcelebrated man. He was held in generalesteem, and his death, says a writer inthe Gentleman's Magazine, made agreat impression on the minds of thepublic. A singular story is told respectinghim, by the daughter of Wesley,who, whilst dangerously ill, dreamedthat a pious man had been and prayedby her; and that, from that moment,she mended, and began to recover.Dr. Whitehead, whom she had neverseen before, visited her about threemonths after this, when, on his entrance,she immediately fainted ; and,on coming to, declared that he was the5 SOAPPENDIX.person she had dreamed of. The doctor'sastonishment was not less than herown, as he had actually retired from aparty of friends, to offer up prayersfor her recovery, the moment he hadreceived intelligence of her illness.JACKSON, (ROBERT,) was bornsome time in the year 1751 ; and, about1774, went out to Jamaica, where hedistinguished himself by his successfulpractice of cold affusion in fever. In1778, he served, as regimental surgeon,under the British army in America; andpractised, afterwards, at Stockton-spondees,in Durham, till 1793, when hewas appointed surgeon to the third regimentof foot. After having served forsome years abroad, and taken his degreeof M. D., he was appointed to takecharge of the medical department in theWindward and Leeward Islands, wherehis various reforms in the practice ofhospitals, and his improved method oftreating the yellow fever, obtained himthe highest approbation of government,and, on his return to England, a pensionof 200 per annum. He died inApril, 1827, leaving behind him severalworks, which entitle him to a high rankinthe class of medical writers. Amongthe most important may be mentionedOn the Fevers of Jamaica, &c. ; AnOutline of the History and Cure ofFever, Endemic and Contagious, octavo;A System of Arrangement and Disciplinefor the Medical Department ofArmies, octavo ; and, An Exposition ofthe practice of refusing Cold Water onthe Body, as a Cure for Fever.PEARSON, (GEORGE,) was born atRotherham, in Yorkshire, some timein the year 1751 ; and, after havingstudied medicine at Edinburgh andLeyden, took his degree of M. D. atthe former place, and practised at Doncastertill 1784, when he settled inLondon, and was shortly afterwardschosen physician to St. George's Hospital; and, in 1791, a fellow of theRoyal Society. In 1783, he publishedObservations and Experiments for investigatingthe Chemical History of theTepid Springs of Buxton; and, ATranslation of the Table of ChemicalNomenclature, proposed by De Guyton,&c., with some Observations on theNew System of Chemistry, in 1794,which went through two editions. In1795, he published Experiments andObservations on the constituent partsof the Potato Root; and, in 1798, AnInquiry concerning the History of theCow 1'ox ; and, The Substance of aLecture on the Inoculation of the CowPox; and, during the years 1802, 1803,and 1804, wrote three works on the subjectof Inoculation and Vaccination. In1805, he published, A Communicationto the Board of Agriculture, on the useof Green Vitriol, or Sulphate of Iron,as a Manure ; and, On the efficacy ofParing and Burning depending partlyon Oxyde of Iron. Between the years1791 and 1814, he contributed ten papersto the Philosophical Transactions ;the first of which was entitled, Experimentsand Observations to investigatethe composition of James's Powders,the constituent parts of which he discoveredto be antimony and phosphateof lime. In addition to the reputationhe acquired by his writings, he gainedhigh note as a practitioner and lecturer,and took an active part in the diffusionof vaccination, and is mentioned as thefounder of the Original Vaccine Institution,in 1799 ; though, by a referenceto our memoir of Jenner, it will beseen, his conduct on the vaccine questionwas not altogether laudable. Hedied on the 9th of November, 1828,leaving behind him two daughters, anda high reputation, both as a medicaland scientific man. He was remarkablefor an almost fatherly attention to hispupils, and for delivering his lecturesin a manner plain, comprehensive, andimpressively energetic ; being, at thesame time, argumentative, and occasionallywitty and eloquent. When ata loss in what language to express himself,he would keep taking his spectaclesoff and on, repeating the last sentencetill he was ready to proceed, when hislanguage became fluent and animated,and he would continue without pausing,and generally terminated his lecture byabruptly exclaiming, " but more of thissubject tomorrow, gentlemen." Inprivate life he was much respected forhis benevolence and hospitality, and issaid to have been not only a soundscholar, but an entertaining and jocosecompanion. When rallied by his friendsfor the assiduity with which' he followedhis profession during his latter years,MEDICAL SCIENCE..581he used to say, "I know I am growingold ; but I have made up my mind todie in harness."CLINE, (HENRY,) was born in 1751,and rose to great eminence in his profession,both as a practical and operativesurgeon. He was for some time one ofthe surgeons of St. Thomas's Hospital,and by his talents as a lecturer, greatlyincreased the reputation of its schoolof anatomy and surgery. He becameF. R. S., and had the first surgicalpractice in London, his patients, bothin rank and number, exceeding thoseattended by any other practitioner ofhis day. He died at his house inLincoln's Inn Fields, on the 2nd ofJune, 1827, with a character for virtuesand abilities which few have attained.As a surgeon he was equally remarkablefor his acuteness in discovering disease,his caution and prudence in judgingof it, his skill in the treatment of it, andthe confidence with which he inspiredhis patients, particularly under an operation,in which his mildness and self-possessiontook away much of the fearattending it. He possessed a livelyimagination, and strong intellectualfaculties, and in countenance and deportmentevinced the same kindness andbenevolence of disposition that prevailedin his heart and actions.RING, (JOHN,) was born in 1752;and, after having studied surgery underPott, became a member of the RoyalCollege of Surgeons, and of the MedicalSocieties of London and Paris, and roseto high reputation in his profession.He particularly distinguished himselfby his zeal for the extension and improvementof vaccination, in supportand defence of which, he wrote severalworks. The most important are, ATreatise on the Cow-Pox, containingthe History of Vaccination; An Answerto Dr. Moseley, containing a Defenceof Vaccination ; An Answer to Mr.Godson and to Mr. Birch, on the samesubject; and, A Rowland for an Oliver,in answer to Dr. Moseley. He wasalso the author of Reflections on theSurgeons' Bill ; A Treatise on the Gout;and, Account of a new method oftreating the Dropsy. Mr. Ring alsoattained considerable fame in the literaryworld as a poet, particularly byhis Translation of the Works of Virgil,partly original, and partly altered fromDryden and Pitt, a work of great merit,and having much of the spirit andelegance, without any of the grossness,of Dryden. He wrote, also, a fewother poems, and died in December,1821, highly esteemed and regretted.WOODVILLE,(WiLLiAM,)wasbornat Cockermouth, in Cumberland, sometimein the year 1752 ; and, after havingreceived a suitable education, took hisdegree of M. D. at Edinburgh, in 1775.He first practised at Denbigh, but afterwardsremoved to London, and becamephysician to the Middlesex Dispensary.In' 1790, he published the first part,which was afterwards completed, in fourquarto volumes, of a work, entitled,Medical Botany; and, in 1791, succeededDr. Archer, as physician to theSmall-Pox Hospital. In 179G, he publishedthe History of the Small-Poxin Great Britain, &c. a valuable andimportant work, but of which the firstvolume only appeared, the discovery ofDr. Jenner rendering, in the author'sopinion, the appearance of a secondvolume unnecessary. Being at firstdoubtful respecting the efficacy of thevaccine virus, he engaged in a controversywith Jenner ; the result of whichproving favourable to the latter, Dr.Woodville devoted all his energies tothe diffusion of vaccination, and wasthe first who introduced it into generalpractice in the metropolis. He died atthe hospital, in March, 1805 ; and,shortly after his decease, an eulogiumon his character was spoken by Mr.Highborn, who observed, " Who, thathas felt the benefits of vaccination, willnot teach their children, and theirchildren's children, to bless the nameof Woodville, when they bless the nameof Jenner ?" The characteristics of hismedical genius were judgment, caution,and prudence ; and his researches inthe science of his profession were onlyconducted with a view of benefiting,by his discoveries, his fellow-creatures.It was said of him, that he fell a victimto the drinking of ardent spirits; butthis is called, by his biographer, in theEncyclopaedia Britannica, " an unfoundedcalumny ;" and, indeed, thereappears to have been no ground whateverfor the assertion.APPENDIX.GREGORY, (JAMES,) was born atAberdeen, in 1753; and, after havingtaken his degree of M. D. and passedtwo years abroad, was appointed professorof the theory of physic, in theUniversity of Edinburgh, in 1774. In1790, he succeeded to the practicalchair, on the death of Dr. Cullen ; andis said, for thirty-one years, to have sustainedand increased the celebrity whichthe eminence of his predecessor hadconferred upon the office. He died onthe 2nd of April, 1821, and was honouredat his funeral by the attendance of alarge procession of upwards of fivehundred persons of distinguished talentand respectability ; the lord provost andcouncil of the city of Edinburgh, andthe Royal Medical and Physical Societies,forming a principal part. Hischief publication is entitled, ConspectusMedicinae Theoretical ; and "became,"says his biographer in Blackwood'sMagazine, " a work of standard reputationover all Europe ; not only inconsequenceof the scientific meritswhich it possessed, but the singularfelicity of classical language with whichit was written." As a physician, hischaracter was of the highest eminence ;and it is said that the city of Edinburghowed much both of its national andacademical prosperity to his celebrity.He drew pupils from all parts of theworld ; and his scientific merits procuredhim a seat in the Institute ofFrance, a distinction rarely conferredby that country on foreigners. He wastwice married ; and was not only muchesteemed in private life, but also courtedby persons of the first eminence andconsideration in the country. In additionto his other distinctions, he wasa fellow of the Royal College of Physicians,F. R. S., and honorary memberof the Royal Medical and PhysicalSocieties of Edinburgh.AUSTIN, (WILLIAM,) was born atWotton-underside, in Gloucestershire,on the 28th of December, 1754. Hewas originally destined for trade, buthaving evinced great classical abilities,was sent to the University of Oxford,and in 1779, came to London, andstudied physic and surgery. His proficiencyin the latter caused Mr. Pottto say to a friend, " I shall not livelongenough, but you will see Austinat the head of his profession." On hisreturn to Oxford, he graduated M. A.;in 1781, he published an examination ofthe first six books of Euclid's Elements ;and shortly afterwards gave lectures inmathematics, during the temporary absenceof the regular professor. In 1783,he took his degree of M. D. ; and, in1785, was appointed professor of chemistry,in which science he is said tohave acquitted himself to the satisfactionof the university, to the advantageof the pupils, and to the improvementof the science itself. In 1786, havingbeen appointed physician to St. Bartholomew'sHospital, he left Oxford,much regretted by the inhabitants, who,according to his French biographer,firent tous leur efforts pour 1'empecherdealer se fixer dans la capitale." Whilstat the hospital, he gave lectures onchemistry, conjointly with those deliveredby him on the theory and practiceof physic. He also made somechemical experiments, an account ofwhich appears in the Transactions ofthe Royal Society for 1787 and 1789.He also took great pains in the investigationof the nature of concretionsformed in animal bodies, and made theresult of his inquiries the subject ofhis Gulstonian lectures, before the Collegeof Physicians, in 1791, in whichyear he published them as a treatiseOn the origin and component partsof the Stone in the Urinary Bladder.He died on the 21st of January, 1793,leaving behind him a high reputationboth as a medical and scientific man.In his youth he is said to have beenremarkably robust and active, and tohave been in the frequent habit ofwalking fifty miles per day withoutfeeling the least fatigue.Leighton, (JOHN,) was bornabout the year 1755 ; and, after havingcompleted his medical education, becamea surgeon in the guards. On relinquishingthis appointment, he waselected demonstrator of anatomy in theBorough Medical School, the characterand reputation of which was muchraised by his abilities. He afterwardssucceeded Dr. Skeete, as lecturer onphysiology to the same establishment,and became, subsequently, the coadjutorof Dr. Bowden ; in conjunction withwhom he gave lectures on midwifery,MEDICAL SCIENCE.and was, for many years, considered themost able teacher of that art in Europe.ie was also, for some time, physiciano the Eastern Dispensary ; but resignedthe appointment in consequenceof the extent of his practice, some timebefore his death, which took place inMarch, 1823. His works consist ofpapers printed in the Medical Com-centuries, and the Transactions of the[loyal Society, of which he was a"fellow, and are as follow : The Historyof Two Cases of the FracturedOlecranon; An Attempt to Ascertainthe Powers concerned in the act ofVomiting; A Case of Original Deafness;Experiments made on the Laryngealand Recurrent Branches of the EighthPair of Nerves; An Experimental Inquiryconcerning the Reproduction ofNerves; and An Experimental Inquiryconcerning Animal Impregnation.WARE, (JAMES,) was born at Portsmouth,in 1755, and was apprenticed toa surgeon in that town, where he acquiredmuch surgical skill and experiencefrom the numerous cases thatcame under his notice. From Portsmouthhe removed to St. Thomas'sHospital, in London ; and, after havingremained there two years, was appointeddemonstrator under Dr. collision,the professor of anatomy in theUniversity of Cambridge. In 1777,he entered into partnership with Mr.Wathen, a celebrated metropolitan surgeon,with whom he continued until791, when he commenced practice onhis own account. Previously to this, hehad made his name favourably known tothe medical world, by his work, printedin 1780, under the title of Remarkson the Ophthalmia, Psorophthalmy,and Purulent Eye, which went throughseveral editions, and established hisfame as an oculist ; in which characterhe became celebrated for extractingthe cataract, with a success that hasrarely been equalled. After this time,he contributed to the different medica!journals several ophthalmic works; andm 1801, communicated to the RoyaSociety, of which he was a fellow, acase similar to that related by Cheseldenof a youth, about seven years of agewho, if' not born blind, was deprived osight by the end of his first year, anrecovered it by undergoing an easy ansimple operation." His last publicationappeared in 1813, under the title of)observations relative to the Near anddistant Sight of Different Persons, andwas inserted in the Philosophical Transactions.Mr. Ware was the founderand first promoter of the school for theindigent blind ; and was, in many otherrespects, the private friend and com-"barter of the poor. He died, in April,1815, leaving a large family by hiswife, whom he married in 1787, andwho was the daughter of Robert Maitland,Esq. a merchant of considerableeminence in London.CURTIS, (JOHN,) was born atAlton, in Hampshire, in 1755 ; and,after having received his education atthe Quaker-school, at Burford, in Oxfordshire,was apprenticed to his brotherWilliam, the celebrated botanist, thenpractising as a surgeon. On the expirationof his apprenticeship, he attendedthe lectures of Mr. Cline andDr. Fordyce, and settled, afterwards, atUxbridge, where he married a MissDavis, and rose to extensive practice.He did not take his degree of M. D.until a few years before his death, whichtook place in August, 1829. As aphysician, he was celebrated for hisskill in the treatment of fevers; and,although he is said to have prided himselfon his attachment to the doctrinesof the old school, was the first to introducevaccination in his neighbourhood.He was well versed in natural history ;and, in his favourite pursuit of ornithology,had made himself so well acquaintedwith British birds, that hecould distinguish, by its note, any birdwithin hearing. He had a great taste,also, for British zoology, and was aconsiderable contributor to the ZoologicalGardens and Museum.WILLAN, (ROBERT,) was born onthe 12th of November, 1757, at Sed-burgh,in Yorkshire, and studied medicineat Edinburgh, where he took hisdegree of M. D. in 1780. After havingpractised a short time at Darlington, heremoved to London ; and, in 1783, wa:appointed physician to the PublicDispensary, in Carey Street. In 1785,he was admitted a licentiate of theRoyal College of Physicians ; on whichoccasion he distinguished himself byAPPENDIX.addressing some congratulatory Greekverses to the board of censors. In1786, he delivered lectures at the dispensary;and, at a subsequent period,received as his pupils several youngphysicians, whom he initiated intopractice by allowing them to attend thepatients of the institution under hissuperintendence. In 1789, he communicatedto the London Medical Societyhis classification of terms relative toeruptive diseases, which procured himthe Fothergillian medal. About thesame time, he was elected physician tothe Finsbury Dispensary; and", in 1791,was chosen a fellow of the Society ofAntiquaries, to which he communicatedseveral curious papers. In 1808, appearedthe fourth and last part of hiscelebrated work on Cutaneous Diseases,illustrated by a variety of coloured engravings.Four orders, characterizedby the appearance of pustules, vesicles,tubercles, and spots, remain unpublished,though he was induced, in 1806;to anticipate, in a degree, the order ofvesicles, by publishing a treatise OnVaccine Inoculation ; in which he refutedthe charge brought against thatpractice of exciting cutaneous eruptions.In 1809, he was elected F.R.S.; afterwhich, his health beginning to decline,he was compelled to quit England forMadeira, where he died in April, 1812.In addition to the works already mentioned,he left behind him severalmanuscripts, and was the author ofvarious papers in the Medical Commentaries,and in the London MedicalJournal, and published a work entitledThe History of the Ministry of JesusChrist, combined from the Narrative ofit in the Four Evangelists. Such washis assiduity in his profession, that heis said never to have quitted the metropolisfor thirty years ; and he isdescribed by his biographer, Dr. Bateman,not only as an able physician, butan accurate and classical writer, and amost amiable and intellectual man.SCOTT, (Helens,) was born atDundee, some time between the middleand latter part of the eighteenth century.He received his medical educationat Edinburgh ; and, after havingtaken his degree of M. D., went out tothe East Indies, where he acquired thehighest reputation as a physician, andbecame first member of the medicalboard at Bombay. About 1811, hereturned to England, in the possessionof a large fortune, which he had acquiredsolely by his industry and abilities.In his scientific character, hecorresponded with Sir Joseph Banksand Dr. Beddoes, and was the authorof several communications, which sufficientlyproved his profound knowledgeboth of chemistry and medicine.As a physician, his authority was consultedthroughout the whole of BritishIndia ; but he is more particularlyknown in England as the author of thepractice of exhibiting, both internallyand externally, the nitric, nitre-muriatic,and other acids, in syphilitic andhepatic maladies ; from the use of whichremedies, pathology and therapeuticshave derived some important advantages.He died on his voyage to NewSouth Wales, on the 16th of November,1821.HOME, (Sir EVERARD,) the son ofa surgeon, was born in Scotland aboutthe year 1760. Having become a pupilof John Hunter, he soon developedtalents of no ordinary character ; and,on his commencing the active duties ofhis profession, rapidly rose into practiceand reputation. In 1813, he was madea baronet, by George the Third, towhom he had previously been appointedsurgeon ; and he also filled the situationsof senior surgeon to St. George'sHospital ; professor of surgery andanatomy of the Royal College of Surgeons;and president of the RoyalSociety. At the conclusion of theGeorgian era, he was also king's ,and resided, in hisofficial capacity, at Chelsea Hospital.He was not only one of the principaloperative surgeons of his time, but alsoone of the most eminent and voluminouswriters on matters relative to his profession.Besides having contributednearly one hundred valuable papers tothe Transactions of the Royal Society,he published A Dissertation on theproperties of Pus; John Hunter's Treatiseon the Blood, &c., with a life of theauthor ; Practical Observations on theTreatment of Strictures in the Urethra ;Practical Observations on Ulcers in theLeg; Observations on Cancers ; PracticalObservations on the Diseases of theMEDICAL SCIENCE.Gland; and Lectures on ComparativeAnatomy. All of these works are of afirst-rate order, and have gained a highcelebrity, both at home and abroad.HALL, (ROBERT,) was born in Scotland,in 1763 ; and, after having passedsome years at Jamaica, in the naval service,took his degree of M. D. at Edinburgh,and came to London, where hedistinguished himself as the author ofseveral papers in the London and othermedical journals, and was occasionallyemployed as the editor of works of asimilar description. He also publisheda translation of Spallanzani on the Circulationof the Blood, and one ofGuyton Moreau on the Means ofPurifying Infected Air and Arresting theProgress of Contagion. Not long aftertheir publication, being defrauded, bya supposed friend, out of the principalpart of his property, he was compelledto abandon his professional hopes, andto accept the situation of an army surgeon.After remaining in this capacityfor nearly twelve years, he was appointedsurgeon to the sea and land expeditionthen about to proceed for theexploration of the Niger ; but the combinedeffects of a dreadful injury he hadreceived from a fall, and of the climateof Senegal upon his health, having endangeredhis life, he was obliged to besent to Madeira, whence he proceededto England, and died there, after agradual decline, in 1824. His principalworks are, Treatises on the Cow Pox,On the Plague and Pestilential Fevers,On Hydrophobia, On the Chicken Pox,Essay on the Influenza, with manyothers, most of which are to be foundin the London Medical and PhysicalJournal, between the years 1800 and1810. Many of his papers are printedalso in the New Medical and PhysicalJournal; all of which are valuable andoriginal, and, with his other works, entitlehim to no inconsiderable rank as amedical philosopher. His Vindicationof Dr. Johnstonee's Claim to the Discoveryof Mineral Acid Fumigationsmust not be omitted, as it settled thepretensions of Guyton Moreau, and Dr.Carmichael Smyth, who both claimedpriority in the discovery.Knight, (Sir WILLIAM,) wasborn in Devonshire, of humble parents,and commenced the study of medicineat Plymouth, under the superintendenceof Dr. Each. His pupil, after havingmade himself, with great rapidity,master of a great share of medicalknowledge, proceeded to attend thehospitals in London ; and subsequentlyremoved to Edinburgh, where he prosecutedhis professional studies until1806. He then returned to London ;and, in 1810, accompanied the Marquessof Wellesley to Spain, at the earnestrequest of that nobleman. On his reestablishinghimself in London, Dr.Knightonon soon acquired an extensivepractice and reputation ; and, in the shortspace of three years, became a leadingphysician. In 1812, he was appointedphysician in ordinary to the PrinceRegent, who shortly after created hima baronet, and treated him with suchkindness and favour, that Sir William,at the express desire of his royal patient,gave up his public practice, in order todevote himself more fully to the prince.Sir William was subsequently appointedkeeper of the privy purse ; and, up tothe conclusion of the Georgian Era,continued to be a great favourite withhis illustrious patron.LATHAM, (JOHN,) the son of aclergyman in Cheshire, after havingcompleted his academical education,studied at Oxford ; and, at the age oftwenty-three, commenced practice asaphysician at Manchester, where heshortly afterwards was appointed physicianto the infirmary. He retainedthis situation for three years ; and, atthe expiration of that time, removedto Oxford, where he took his degreeof M. D., and practised for a shortperiod, previously to his settling inLondon. On establishing himself inthe metropolis, he published a pamphleton a New View of Gout and Rheumatism,which gained him great reputation,and caused him to be very generallyconsulted in those diseases. Hisfirst public appointment in the metropoliswas that of physician to the MagdalenHospital ; and he subsequentlywas elected to the same office, successively,at the Middlesex and St. Bartholomew'sHospitals. In 1787, hewas appointed, by the College of Physicians,head of the committee formodernizing their Pharmacopeia ; andAPPENDIX.about this time," says the author ofPublic Characters, " a remarkable circumstanceoccurred, which so materiallycontributed to increase his private practice,that he was obliged to resign hisoffice as physician to St. Bartholomew's.Shortly after this, he published a work,entitled, Facts and Opinions respectingthe Diabetes; and, on the resignationof Sir Lucas Pepys, was elected presidentof the Royal College of Physicians.Dr. Nathan also acted asphysician extraordinary to George theFourth ; and, at the conclusion of theGeorgian Era, continued to enjoy ahigh reputation and extensive practice.He is also the author of some works onornithology ; has communicated severalvaluable papers to the Linnaean andPhilosophical Transactions ; and is afellow of the Royal, Antiquarian, andLinnaean Societies.Tierce, (Sir MATTHEW,) wasborn in Ireland, and received the rudimentsof his education in that country.Having chosen the medical profession,he came to London, where he prosecutedhis studies with great ardour, andacquired the friendship of several distinguishedphysicians and surgeons.On quitting the metropolis, he obtainedthe appointment of surgeon to theGloucestershire militia, the colonel ofwhich, the Earl of Berkeley, introducedhim to the Prince of Wales, who appointedhim physician to his household.About the same time, Mr. Tiercetook his degree of M.D.; and, in 1806,obtained a license to practise withinthe jurisdiction of the London Collegeof Physicians. In 1808, he married aMiss Jones; and shortly afterwards distinguishedhimself by his efforts towardsthe establishment of a vaccineinstitution in the county of Sussex.He also contributed towards the foundationof a Dispensary for the IndigentSick, and an Infirmary for general purposes,at Brighton. At this town, hewas constantly in attendance upon thePrince Regent, by whom, as a rewardfor his services, he was created abaronet. In 1820, when George theFourth was seriously indisposed, SirMatthew attended him, and successfullyperformed an operation which hadbeen strongly opposed by several othereminent medical men. This proof ofhis skill and knowledge raised his reputationconsiderably, and he has sincesettled in the metropolis, where he hasan extensive practice among the highercircles of society.Twins, (DANIEL,) a native ofLondon, received the rudiments of hismedical education in that city, andwent to complete it at edinburgh,where he took his degree of M.D. Hereturned to London, with the intentionof settling there ; but, before commencingactive practice, he occupiedhimself in writing the Medical Articlesfor Gregory's Encyclopaedia. On thedeath of Dr. Kennedy, at Aylesbury,he removed to that town, and practisedthere nine years ; during which periodhe published, in 1803, Modern Medicine;and, in 1810, Observations onFever. He subsequently returned toLondon, and obtained the appointmentof physician to the City Dispensary,on the resignation of Dr. Walker ; andafterwards was elected to the NewFinsbury and Central Dispensary. In1818, Dr. Twins published ModernMaladies, and the Present State of Medicine,the Anniversary Oration deliveredbefore the Medical Society ofLondon. He is also the author ofseveral papers in various scientific journals,and has attained a large share ofprofessional reputation by his coursesof lectures on the theory and practiceof medicine, and on the materia medicaand pharmacy.CLARKE, (CHARLES MANSFIELD,)was born in May, 1782 ; and, afterhaving studied medicine under Drs.Fordyce and Baillie, became a memberof the College of Surgeons, and served,during two or three years, in the army.On settling in London, he delivered, inconjunction with his brother, Dr. John,a course of lectures on midwifery, andwas, some time afterwards, appointed aF. R. S. and a member of the RoyalCollege of Physicians. In his professionalcharacter, Mr. Clarke ranksin the very highest grade, and enjoys,probably, a more extensive practicethan any other practitioner; a rewardonly proportioned to his acknowledgedtalents and unremitting industry. Inprivate life, he is esteemed by all whoknow him ; his conduct being chasSCIENCE.racterized by universal kindness andhumanity.Ellison, (JOHN,) was born inthe county of Surrey, and studied medicineat the University of Edinburgh,where he took his doctor's degree. Hisinaugural thesis, the subject of whichwas inflammation, he treated in such askilful manner, as to call forth the warmapprobation of the examining professor.The reputation he soon gained formedical knowledge may be conceivedfrom the fact of his being elected, withoutany solicitation on his part, one ofthe presidents of the Royal MedicalSociety. On his return to London, heattended the principal hospitals, andmade himself well acquainted withanatomy. In 1810, he entered himselfas a fellow commoner of Cambridge,at which university he subsequentlytook his medical degrees. He is theauthor of a work on the Diseases ofthe Heart ; and of several articles inthe London Medical Gazette, and theLancet ; but his chief publication ishis translation of Blumenbach's Systemof Physiology. To this, he has addedmany learned notes, and a chapter onthe variety of the human species, and,with much ingenuity, attempts to provethat no physiological fact is at variancewith the doctrines of Scripture.MAYO, (HERBERT,) son of Dr.Mayo, physician to the Middlesex Hospital,was born in London, on the 3rdof April, 1796 ; and, after having studiedmedicine under Mr. Wilson, Sir CharlesBell, and Mr. Abernethy, removed toLeyden, where he took his degree ofM. D. and practised with great successas a surgeon. On his return to England,he held, for one year, the situationof house-surgeon to the MiddlesexHospital; and, shortly afterwards, receiveda diploma from the London College,and built a private theatre inBerwick Street, where he soon distinguishedhimself by his lectures onanatomy. In 1825, he continued them,in conjunction with Mr. Brodie, at Dr.Hunter's school, in Great WindmillStreet, where he remained until his appointmentof professor of anatomy andpathological anatomy to King's College.In the year last mentioned, hemarried a daughter of S. J. Arnold,Esq. ; in 1826, was elected surgeon tothe Middlesex Hospital; in 1827, becamea fellow of the Royal Society ;and, in 1828, was appointed professorof anatomy and surgery to the RoyalCollege of Surgeons. His works, inaddition to several contributions todifferent periodical journals, are, ASeries of Folio Plates, illustrating theMinute Structure of the Brain ; Outlinesof Physiology ; Anatomical andPhysiological Commentaries ; and ACourse of Dissections. The most importantof these is his Outlines onPhysiology ; a most valuable work, andwhich was thus characterized by Dr.Gooch, in a letter to the author : " Ihave been looking over nearly all thesystems of physiology in existencewithin the last month or two, and I havemet with nothing comparable to it inconciseness, perspicuity, and purity ofstyle."MATON, (WILLIAM GEORGE,) wasborn in Somersetshire, and commencedhis medical studies under the celebratedbotanist, Dr. Pulteney. Havingfinished his classical education at Oxford,the subject of our memoir attendedthe hospitals both in London and Edinburgh;and on settling in the formercity, he was elected a member of theRoyal College of Physicians ; and,shortly afterwards, appointed physicianto the Western Infirmary. This situation,the duties of which he performedfor many years, with considerableability, introduced him into a largecircle of practice, and so extended hisreputation, that he obtained the appointmentof physician in ordinary tothe queen of George the Third. Healso formed one of the committee forrevising the Pharmacopoeia of the Collegeof Physicians; and the materiamedica, which was his department,affords considerable proofs of his qualificationsfor such an undertaking. Asan author, Dr. Maton has evinced considerableability, by his Observationsrelative to the Natural History, PicturesqueScenery, and Antiquities ofthe Western Counties of England ; hisLife of Linnaeus ; various papers in theArchaeological, and the Philosophical andLinnaean Transactions ; and in his Lifeof Dr. Pulteney. He is also the authorof several periodical contributions to theAPPENDIX.stock of medical knowledge, " which,"says the author of Public Characters,at once manifest the discrimination ofthe philosopher, and the characteristicsof a mind well stored by reading andresearch."CARLISLE, (Sir ANTHONY,) is anative of Wellington, in Durham; andreceived his medical education in thecounty town, under Mr. William Green,the leading surgeon of the place.During his apprenticeship, he showeda taste for philosophical and mechanicalstudies ; and, after reading a descriptionof Montgolfier's balloon, he amusedhimself with making a fire balloon, thefirst ever seen in the county of Durham.On coming to London, Mr. Carlislestudied under Dr. Baillie, Mr. Hunter,Mr. Cruikshank, and Dr. G. Fordyce;and, in 1792, he was appointed surgeonto the Westminster Hospital. In thefollowing year, he became a fellow ofthe Linnaean Society; of the RoyalSociety, in 1800 ; of the HorticulturalSociety, in 1812; and of the GeologicalSociety, in 1820. He was now appointedsurgeon extraordinary to theking ; was shortly afterwards knighted ;and, in 1829, he was made president ofthe Royal College of Surgeons. SirAnthony is distinguished for his investigatingturn of mind, and is, on thewhole, considered an able surgeon;though his practice is not adequateto his reputation. In private, he is-spokenof as an agreeable and entertainingcompanion ; and his conversationabounds with genuine andinteresting anecdote. He is the authorof Disorders of Old Age, 8vo. ; TwoHungarian Orations, to., 1820 ; secondedition, 1825 ; a Letter to Sir GilbertBlame, on Blisters, 1826: and has writtenessays, letters, and pamphlets on medicaland philosophical subjects, to thenumber of forty-three.END OF VOL. II.