THEGEORGIAN ERA:MEMOIRSOF THE MOST EMINENT PERSONS, WHO HAVEFLOURISHED IN GREAT BRITAIN,FROM THE ACCESSION OF GEORGE THE FIRST TO THEDEMISE OF GEORGE THE FOURTHIN FOUR VOLUMES.VOLUME IV.POLITICAL AND RURAL ECONOMISTS;PAINTERS, SCULPTORS, ARCHITECTS, AND ENGRAVERS;COMPOSERS; VOCAL, INSTRUMENTAL, ANDDRAMATIC PERFORMERS.LONDON :VIZETELLY, Cranston AND CO. FLEET STREET.MDCCCXXXIVriZETELLY, Cranston, AND CO.FR1NTE11S,FLEET RTBEET.SiftiCONTENTS.POLITICAL ECONOMISTS.PagePageSO4t iBell Andrew *Penn William .'2835Price, RichardCobbett WilliamRicardo, David .Denham, Sir James Stewart1724Sadler, Michael ThomasSenior, William NassauSmith, AdamSmith Charles42Spence WilliamMcCulloch, John R.Tatian, William .Malthus, Thomas RobertMillar JohnWakefi eld,' EdwardWest Sir EdwardYoung, Sir WilliamRURAL ANDDOME47247Sic ECONOMISTS.Lawrence JohnLondon, John Claudius .470471Mattocks William Alexander475Marshall, William48Miller, PhilipCoke Thomas W T williamParkinson, Richard473475Repton, HumphreyRumford, Count474Sinclair, Sir JohnSomerville, Lord471Stewart, Sir Henry472lull, Jethro.CONTENT S.PAINTERS,Page.Aikman, William 481Allan, David 492Barker, Robert 493Barret, George 484Barry, James 98Beaumont, Sir George Rowland 494Beechey, Sir William 106Bird, Edward 132Blake, William 113Bone, Henry 107Bonington, Richard Parker 160Bourgeois, Sir Francis 494Boyne, John 495Brooking, 483Burnet, James 496Cipriani, John Baptist 484Copley, John Singleton 83Cosway, Richard 93Dawe, George 136Edridge, Henry -. 496Edwards, Edward 488Etty, William . 150Farington, George. 494Fuseli, Henry 90Gainsborough, Thomas 73Gilpin, Sawney 485Girtin, Thomas 132Hamilton, Gavin 491Hamilton, William 493Harlow, George Henry. 147Haydon, Richard Benjamin 141Hayman, Francis A 482Hearne, Thomas 492Highmore, Joseph 58Hobday, William Afield 129Hogarth, William. 60Hone, Nathaniel , 485Hoppner, John 115Hudson, Thomas. 481Humphrey, Ozias 101Ibbetson, Julius Caesar 493Jackson, John 135Jervas, Charles 479PageKauffman, Angelica 489Kirby, John Joshua 483Kneller, Sir Godfrey 57Lawrence, Sir Thomas 122Leslie, Charles Robert 159Liversege, Henry 161Loutherbourg, Philip James de 490Martin, John 156Morland, George 119Mortimer, John Hamilton 95Moser, George Michael 482Northcote, James 103Opie, John 117Owen, William 125Pars, William 491Parry, William 491Penny, Edward 482Raeburn, Sir Henry 110Ramsay, Allan 64Reynolds, Sir Joshua 68Richardson, Jonathan 479Robson, George Fennel 15'JRomney, George 76Runciman, Alexander 487Sandby, Paul 75Scott, Samuel 4S1Seymour, James . 481Shee, Sir Martin Archer 127Smith, George 482Stanfielcl, Clarkson MStothard, Charles Alfred". 143Stothard, Thomas 109Stubbs, George 483Thornhill, Sir James 480Turner, James Mallard William 134West, Benjamin 86Wheaten, Francis 493Wilkie, David 139Wilson, Richard 66Wootton, John 480Wright, Joseph 485Wright, Richard 486Zoffany, John 486fCONTENTS.ScullPagetorsPageProcter, ThomasRoubiliac, Lewis FrancisDarner, Anne Sermon .Scheemakers, Peter.Thorn, JamesLocatelli John BaptistARCHITECTS.501 TVfvlne. Robert503Edwards William501Wilkins, WilliamWren, Sir ChristopherWyatt JamesWyatville Sir JeffreyKent WilliamENGRAVERS., 212 Varro FrancisRyland William WynneBerry WilliamScott, John .Boydcll JohnSharp, WilliamCooke GeorgeSherwin, John KeysEarlom, RichardStrange, Sir Robert .Hall JohnStrutt, Joseph .Holloway, ThomasLiar MatthewLowry, WilsonWoollett, WilliamWorledge, ThomasPine John .COMPOSERS.530 Ann MichaelAlcock, JohnArne, Thomas Augustine6 CONTENTS.Avison Charles !PagePEIHorsley, WilliamPageAyrton Edmund .Barrett John .! * .Jackson WilliamBates, NoahBattishill, JonathanBishop, Henry RowleyBoyce WilliamKelly, MichaelKent, JamesKing Charles . .Close, F. JLa Trobe, Christian IgnatiusAlcott John WallMarsh JCianchettini, PiuClayton, Thomasdementi, MuzioClifton, John CCreighton, Robertfrost WilliamCrotch WilliamPepusch, John ChristopherCutler, William HenryDarnley, John PelhamDibdin CharlesSmith, John ChristianEssex, TimothyStorace Stephen .Stevenson, Sir John AndrewHague CharlesWellesley, Thomas ForbesWebbe, SamuelHarrington, HenryWebbe, SamuelHart, JosephWeldon, JohnHawes, WilliamHayes, PhilipHaves, WilliamWhitfield John ClarkeWhitaker JohnInformers.VOCALBannister, CharlesBillington, ElizabethBland Mrs.Beard, John . , . , .CONTENTS.Carew MissPageTAIC P3G8Pearman WilliamPagePeterborough, Countess ofPhillips, HenryCooke Thomas .Sapio MrGrafton MissSecond Mary. . "' '"Smith Charles . .Taylor, EdwardWaylett Mrs . .Paton, MariannePERFORMERS.InstrumentBabelll William tKialmark, E.Bennet, WilliamMiller EdwardChalloner, Neville ButlerMori NicholasCorbett WilliamParke William ThomasParke JohnCramer John BaptistePinto ThomasCramer WilliamCrossdill, JohnPurkis, JohnDubourg MatthewRandies Elizabeth . .Depuis, Thomas SaundersEager, JohnRussel WilliamShuttleworth, ObadiahTesting, Michael ChristianGow NathanielWesley CharlesWhite, JohnDramaticAbingdon, FrancesBaddeley SophiaPerformers.Betty W 7 william Henry WestGibber TheophilusClive CatherineCobham, ThomasCooke, T PBellamy, MrsCooke, George FrederickCONTENTS.Crawford, AnneDavenport, Mary AnnPage372PageMellon Miss556561Dowton, WilliamO'Neill, MissOrger MrsOxberry, WilliamParsons, William .Pope MariaFawcett, JohnFitzhcnry, MrsPowell WilliamPritchard HannahHue, Alexander ,charley, John PrintHazard WilliamShuterr, Edward .*MSmith, WilliamKean, EdmundKelly Frances Mariakemble, CharlesKemble, Mrs. Charles422Walker ThomasKemble, George StephenKemble, John-^Wallack James MWest Mrs ., .Knight, EdwardWewitzer, RalphWilkinson TateLewis William ThomasWilks, RobertIxL'iston jfl r nWoodward HeartMacklin CharlesYates Mrsmacready, William CharlesPOLITICAL,RURAL, AND DOMESTICECONOMISTS.POLITICAL ECONOMISTS.WILLIAM PENN.THIS eminent legislator, the son ofAdmiral Sir William Penn, knight, anddescended from an ancient family in thecounties of Wilts and Bucks, was bornin the parish of St. Catherine, London,in the year 1644. He received thefirst part of his education at a school inChigwell, Essex, and, after some furtherinstruction under a private tutor,was, in 1660, entered a gentleman-commonerof Christchurch College,Oxford. His conduct at the universitygave a favourable specimen of whatmight be expected from a character sofirm and conscientious. Having imbibedreligious impressions very strongly, herelinquished manly sports and recreations,though naturally addicted to them,and joined some other students inprivate meetings for devotional exercises.The heads of his college, at first,fined him for this mark, as they calledit, of a sectarian spirit ; and, as Pennpersisted in his course, dismissed himfrom the university. He was then onlyseventeen years of age, and his fatherwas so much incensed at seeing himreturn home under such unpropitiouscircumstances, that, after a severe remonstrance,he turned him out of doors.In the hope, however, of reclaiminghim, he tried milder measures, one ofwhich was to send him on his travels.He returned to England, after havingpassed two years in France, and had sofarjustified his father's anticipations, asto have become, in that time, an accomplishedand fashionable young man. Hehad even grown such a skilful swordsman,that, it is said, he disarmed a person jwho had assaulted him in the streets of jParis.Shortly after his return, he was en jtered a student of Lincoln's Inn, and icontinued his legal pursuits in themetropolis till compelled to leave it, bythe plague. In 1666, he went intoIreland, to superintend the managementof one of his father's estates. In thiscountry his former sentiments began torevive ; and, having become a hearer ofthe discourses of one Loe, whosepreaching had formerly affected him,he, at length, openly joined the fraternityof Quakers. In 1667, at one of theirassemblies in Cork, he was apprehended,and carried to prison ; but hewrote such an excellent letter on thesubject, to the Earl of Orrery, that hisliberation speedily followed. His father,at the same time, recalled him home,and, convinced of the unalterable sentimentsof his son, no longer opposedthem. He, however, could not forbearstipulating, that Penn would, at least,consent to stand uncovered in the presenceof the king, the Duke of York,and himself; and the subject of ourmemoir having, after due consideration,refused this, was again banished hisfamily. In this situation, he lived partlyon the charity of friends, and partly onprivate supplies from his mother. Atlength, his father, whose prejudices wereunable to overcome the affection andrespect he could not but feel for hisson, received him home again ; and,when he was imprisoned for attendanceon the meetings of his sect, usedsecretly his influence to restore him tofreedom.In 1668, he published a tracs, entitled,Truth Exalted ; and appearing,about the same time, as a preacher aswell as a writer among the Quakers,he was committed to the Tower. Herehe wrote his most famous work, NoCross no Crown ; a discourse, shewingPO L I T I C A L ECONOMISTS.the nature and discipline of the HolyCross of Christ. He followed up hisrelease by a visit to Ireland ; and afterhaving procured, by his application togovernment, an order for the liberationof all the Quakers in that countryconfined for their religion, returned toLondon. The Conventicle Act, whichpassed soon afterwards, did not abatethe zeal of the Quakers, who, whendriven from their meeting-houses, heldassemblies in the streets, at whichPenn was one of the most prominentpreachers. The result was his committalto the Old Bailey, together with aperson named Mead ; and the record oftheir trial presents a memorable instanceof prejudice and tyranny. The prisonerswere treated with abuse, the jury intimidated,and the recorder had thebrutal audacity to express his regret atthe non-existence of a Spanish Inquisitionin England. The firmness, however,of one of the jurymen disappointed theprosecutors in the result of the trial ; hewould only find Penn" guilty of speakingin Gracious Street;" and as that verdict,in which the whole jury ultimatelyacquiesced, could not be received, theypronounced an acquittal of both prisoners.Penn conducted himself withsuch firmness on the occasion, that, afterhis trial, he was fined for contempt ofcourt; nor does it exactly appear howhe was liberated from the confinement,by which his refusal to pay the fine wasfollowed. It was in this year, 1670, thathis father died, fully reconciled to him,and leaving him an estate of considerableannual value. Acknowledging, in hislast moments, his admiration of theconscientious motives which had actuatedhis son, and feeling, perhaps, lat hehad acted wrong in having endeavouredto bias them, he called him to his bedside,and said, " Son William, let nothing inthis world tempt you to wrong yourconscience." He afterwards added, " Ifyou and your friends keep to your plainway of preaching, and your plain wayof living, you will make an end of thepriests to the end of the world."Continuing to preach, and writecontroversial tracts, among which maybementioned his Caveat against Popery,in refutation of a charge of his attachmentto that religion, Penn was, in1671, again committed to prison. Duringhis confinement, which lasted sixmonths, he composed various treatisesin defence of his sect, and drew up anaddress to parliament, complaining ofthe rigour of the Conventicle Act. Onhis release, he visited Holland andGermany, in the capacity of missionary ;and, in 1672, he married the daughterof Sir William Stringent, and settled atRickmansworth, in Hertfordshire. Arelaxation of rigour against the Quakersnow took place, but controversies werestill carried on, with a virulence whichgave frequent employment to the penof the subject of our memoir. Withthe celebrated Richard Baxter, one ofhis antagonists, he also held a publicdisputation, of six or seven hours' continuance,in which Penn had, at least,the advantage of temper and moderation.It was not till the year 1675, thatPenn's connexion with the NorthAmerican colonies took place. This wasin consequence of the right to a moietyof the province in New Jersey beingvested in him as" co-trustee with twoothers, for payment of the debts ofone Billings, a Quaker. Other circumstances,however, led to his visitingAmerica, as will presently be seen.In 1677, Penn made another tour onthe continent, in company with RobertBarclay, and other distinguished Quakers.Their principal object was aconference, to which they had beeninvited, by Elizabeth, Princess Palatine,Abbess of Hei vortex, and, in general,to advocate the cause of Quakerism,which, at this time, was expected tospread in the protestant parts of Europe.On his return, he published a veryinteresting account of this mission; and,finding his fraternity molested underthe penal statutes which were levelledagainst popish recusants, he presenteda petition to parliament in their behalf'.He was twice examined before a committeeof the House of Commons, and aclause for the relief of his brethren waspassed ; but before it could get through,the lords, a dissolution took place.When the discovery of another popishplot agitated the nation, Penn publishedvarious tracts on the subject, in whichhe recommended a reliance upon Providence,and improvement of life, as thebest security against danger.We now come to one of the mostimportant events in the life of Penn.WILLIAM P E N N .His father had died a creditor of thecrown to a considerable amount, and asthis formed great part of his owninheritance, he made application togovernment for a settlement of theclaim. In discharge of the whole, hereceived a grant, to himself and hisheirs, of all that tract of land lying onthe west side of the Delaware, whichhad formerly belonged to the Dutch,and was called the New Netherlands.He was, at the same time, constitutedabsolute proprietor and governor of thisdistrict, the name of which he immediatelyaltered to Pennsylvania. He thenpublished his patent, with a descriptionof the country, and an invitation tosettlers, which was followed by hisFrame of Government, or FundamentalConstitutions, in forty-four articles. Oneof them was, that " any government isfree to the people under it (whicheverbe the frame) where the laws rule, andthe people are a party to those laws."His fundamental law with respect toreligion was, that all persons in theprovince who acknowledged a creator,upholder, and ruler of the world, andheld themselves obliged, in conscience,to live peaceably and justly in society,should in no way be molested or prejudicedfor their religious persuasion orpractice ; nor be compelled to frequent,or maintain, any religious worship,place, or ministry whatever. Thelegislative and executive power was tobe vested in a governor, a provincialcouncil, and a general assembly; andthe governor, though perpetual presidentof the council, was only to havea treble vote.In August, 1682, he set out to visithis colony, which, on his arrival, hefound to consist of English, Dutch, andSwedish settlers, all of whom receivedhim with every testimony of good will.The first acts of the general assemblywere to accept the form of government,to naturalize all the foreigners, and tovote Prim, as proprietor, a duty uponcertain goods imported and exported,which he, however, declined to accept.He then purchased lands from thenatives, and, after commencing thebuilding of his capital, Philadelphia, andsettling various affairs in his colony,quitted it for England, in the summerof 1684. On the accession of Jamesthe Second, Penn availed himself of hisformer friendship with that prince, toprocure the release of no less thanfourteen hundred and eighty of hisQuaker brethren. This was followedby an address of thanks from thatbody to the king, which was deliveredby Penn, who added a complimentaryspeech on the occasion. Thecharge of popery, to which we have beforealluded, was, in consequence, madeagainst him, and obtained credit to suchan extent, that, among others, Burnetand Tillotson put faith in it. In a verymild, but eloquent, letter, to the latterof these prelates, he completely refutesthe imputation ; and Tillotson,in consequence, wrote to ask his pardon,for his unfounded credulity. His attachmentto King James, however,continued still to be suspected, afterthe Revolution, and he was, in consequence,more than once arrested, and,for want of proof, discharged. Torender his liberty less precarious,therefore, he retired into privacy, fortwo or three years, during which hewrote, besides other works, his Reflectionsand Maxims relating to theConduct of Life, and his Key, &c. todiscern the Difference between theReligion professed by the Quakers, andthe Misrepresentations of their Adversaries,&c. The deprivation of hisgovernment of Pennsylvania was afurther consequence of his attachmentto the deposed James, but the mediationof his friends procured its restorationin 1693. In 1691, appeared his BriefAccount of the Rise and Progress ofthe People called Quakers, which wasmuch read, and has gone throughseveral editions. He was, at the timeof its publication, actively employed inpreaching, and continued to hold forthfor several subsequent years, in variousparts of England and Ireland.In 1696, two years previously towhich he had lost his first wife, hemarried a second, the daughter ofThomas Callowhill, of Bristol ; and, in1699, embarked with his family for hiscolony, with the intention of passingthere the remainder of his life. Thereception he met with was such as toincrease his desire of staying ; but anattempt which was making in Englandto reduce all the proprietary governmentsto regal ones, caused him toreturn to that country, in 1701. On hisPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS.arrival, however, he found the measurehud been abandoned; and the accessionof (seen Anne, shortly afterwards, whorespected him as the ancient friend ofher father, left him nothing further tofear on the head of discountenance atcourt, where he now became a frequentand welcome visitor. But he was notlong to remain quiet ; a law-suit, inwhich he was involved, brought himinto pecuniary difficulties; and complaintsagainst his government atPennsylvania came over so frequently,that he began to think of parting withhis right to the crown. The infirmitiesof age, too, were creeping fast uponhim, and, for the benefit of his health,he removed to a seat at Rushcomb,near Twofold, in Buckinghamshire.He was here seized with apoplecticfits, in 1712, and from this time agradual decay of his faculties took place,which, at length, ended in perfect imbecility.He died, in July, 1718, leavingseveral children, and was buried atJordan, near Beaconsfield.The character of Penn has beensufficiently illustrated in the precedingmemoir. Whether there were any realground of blame in his administration,it is difficult to decide; but it is wellknown, that Pennsylvania speedily becameone of the most flourishing of theNorth-american colonies, and that itstill ardently reveres the memory of itsfounder. In other respects, we haveseen, that he was firm, consistent,tolerant, and independent. Burnet callshim "a vain-talking man ;" and adds,"he had such an opinion of his ownfaculty of persuading, that he thoughtnone could stand before it: though hewas singular in that opinion ; for hehad a tedious, luscious way, that wasnot apt to overcome a man's reason,though it might tire his patience."Party-spirit, and vanity, have undoubtedlyinfluenced Burnet in thisestimate: Penn has, perhaps, laid somefoundation for the colouring of it, byhis prolixity, and self-display, in portionsof his writings ; but his actions,so far from partaking of the characterhere attributed to them, were invariablythose of a mild and calm, but honestand resolute spirit.ANDREW FLETCHER.TL HIS eminent political writer, sonof Sir Robert Fletcher, was born inScotland, in the year 1653. He waseducated under the celebrated Dr.Gilbert Burnet, and, after having passedsome years abroad, returned home, andwas appointed a commissioner for EastLothian in the Scotch parliament, whenthe Duke of York was lord-commissioner.By his opposition to the arbitrarymeasures of the court, he renderedhimself so obnoxious, that he found itprudent to retire to Holland; and,shortly afterwards, his estates wereconfiscated, and he was declared anoutlaw, for not appearing to a summonsof the lords of the council. He ventured,however, to advise, in person, onthe measures which were in consultationamong the friends of liberty, in 1683,and returned to the continent withoutmolestation. In 1685, he again cameto England, as a partisan of the Dukeof Monmouth, who was, however, soon| compelled, by an unfortunate circumstance,to dispense with his services.Fletcher, upon some emergency, havingmade use of the horse of a countrygentleman, the latter, instead of acceptingthe excuse of the occasion,violently abused the subject of ourmemoir, and, at the same time, shooka cane over his head. Fletcher was aman of breeding, and nice honour; and,exasperated a 1 " being thus treated by arude and vulgar man, which the ownerof the horse appears to have been, drewa pistol, and shot him dead.This act of murderous revenge raiseda great outcry against him, andwas followed by his immediate departurefor Spain, where he underwent avariety of perils, which have beennarrated, not without a mixture of romance.On his arrival in Hungary,he volunteered his services in the waragainst the Turks, in which he displayedgreat valour and military skill. JustANDREW FLETCHER.before the Revolution, he joined theScottish refugees in Holland; and, afterthat event had taken place, returned tohis own country, and resumed possessionof his estate; but, says Cunningham,in his History-of Great Britain,he would not do it by any law buthis own, and that without askingleave of kings or parliaments. As amember of the convention for thesettlement of the new government inScotland, he acted with the same independentspirit, and shewed himself amost disinterested and zealous assertorof the liberties of the people.In 1698, he published, together, twopolitical pieces, entitled, respectively,A Discourse of Government with Relationto Militias, and Two Discoursesconcerning the Affairs of Scotland. Hisjealousy of kings is strongly apparentin the first, in which he has broughtforward many forcible observations, toprove how essential it is, towards thelimitation of a monarchy, for the peopleto keep the power of the sword in theirown hands. The second of these pieceswill hardly be thought to proceed froma lover of liberty, containing, as it does,a proposal of providing for the poor bydomestic slavery. When the bill wasbrought into the Scotch parliament forasupply to the crown, he proposedvarious limitations of the prerogative,which were received into the Act ofSecurity, and passed, through his exertions,into a law. They were, however,rendered nugatory by the union, ameasure which he vehemently opposed,as subversive of the interests of Scotland.His speeches on the subject wereparticularly spirited and forcible; and,if eloquence could have carried hispoint, he must have succeeded. Healso published, in 1706, A State of theControversy between United and SeparateParliaments, in which he displayedthe usual characteristics of allhis writings ; great learning, a style atonce elegant, energetic, and perspicuous,and a knowledge of every thingrequisite to form the complete politician.He died in London, in 1716. Hischaracter has been ably sketched byMackay, who said of him, whilst Fletcherwas still living, " He is a gentleman,steady in his principles, of nice honour,with abundance of learning ; brave asthe sword he wears, and bold as a lion ;a sure friend, but an irreconcilableenemy : would lose his life readily toserve his country, and would not do abase thing to save it. His thoughts arelarge as to religion, and could never bebrought within the bounds of anyparticular sect; nor will he be underthe distinction of Whig or Tory, sayingthese names are only used to cloak theknavery of both parties." His publications,and some of his speeches, willbe found in a volume, published in1732, under the title of The PoliticalWorks of Andrew Fletcher, Esq., and hislie has been written by Lord Buchan.HENRY HOME, LORD KAMES.THIS nobleman, the son of GeorgeHome, of Kames, in the county ofBerwick, descended from a noble family,was born in 1696, and educated athome, under a private tutor. He subsequentlystudied law, at the Universityof Edinburgh, where he was apprenticedto a writer of the signet, but didnot serve the whole of his time, inconsequenceof his determination to gotothe bar, to which he was called in1724. His studies were not confined tohis profession ; for, besides improving hisclassical education, he devoted himself,with success, to mathematics, ethics,and metaphysics, and carried on a correspondencewith the celebrated AndrewBaxter and Dr. Clarke, relating tothose subjects. His deficiency as anorator formed some impediment to hisprofessional employment ; but of hislegal learning and the acuteness of hisgenius, he afforded proof by a numberof successive publications, which gainedhim great reputation ; and, in 1752,procured him the appointment of ajudge of session, when he assumed thetitle of Lord Kames. The writingswhich he had given to the world previousto this period, were entitledPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS.Remarkable Decisions of the Court ofSession, from the year 1716, down to1728; Essays upon several Subjects"n Law; The Decisions of the Courtof Session, from its Institution to 1741,abridged and digested under properheads, in the form of a Dictionary ;and Essays upon several Subjects concerningBritish Antiquities; which lastlie composed, whilst in a country retreat,during the troubles that agitatedScotland, in 1745 and 1746.In 1752, he published a work entitledEssays on the Principles of Moralityand Natural Religion, in which heendeavoured to establish general principlesof action, in opposition to thosemetaphysicians who deduce all actionsfrom some single principle. It wasreceived with considerable applause,but subjected the author to many attacks,in consequence of his havingmaintained the doctrine of philosophicalnecessity. He next produced, in succession,his Historical Law Tracts, andPrinciples of Equity; and a valuablework for young persons, entitled AnIntroduction to the Art of Thinking.In 1762, his Elements of Criticism appeared,in three volumes, a work thathas since passed through several editions,with increasing approbation ; andwhich, though open to some objections,from which new theories areseldom free, has decidedly contributedto the improvement of the art onwhich it treats. In 1765, he publisheda pamphlet on the progress of Flax-husbandry,in Scotland; and in 1774, hisSketches of the History of Man, in twoquarto volumes, a publication next inmerit and importance to his Elements ofCriticism. The work, however, whichentitles him to a place in the presentclass of writers was not published till1776, when it appeared under the titleof The Gentleman Farmer; being anattempt to improve Agriculture, by subjectingit to the test of Rational" Principles.Agriculture had, for some timepreviously, been with him a favouritepursuit; and both theory and experiencehad suggested to him the ideas containedin The Gentleman Farmer. "In this performance,"says a writer in The MonthlyReview, " almost every branch of the"armer's business is discussed ; nor areall of them treated with equal skill andjudgment. The book, nevertheless,contains so many useful precepts, theresult of experience, that it may beconsidered, on the whole, as a valuableaddition to the general stock of agriculturalknowledge." The last work of thesubject of our memoir, entitled LooseHints upon Education, chiefly concerningthe Heart, appeared in 1781, theyear previous to his death, which occurredon the 27th of December, 1782.The character of Lord Kames wasestimable in every point of view, and noone had a larger circle of friends andadmirers. He was a delightful companionto the latest hour almost of hisexistence ; and is said to have beenunable to restrain the vivacity of hisnatural spirits, even on the bench. Hewas particularly fond of the society offemales, whom he addressed in a styleof innocent gallantry, though not quitecompatible with his judicial dignity.His biographer, Lord Woodhouselee,describes him as a greater friend torevealed religion than his writingswould lead his readers to suppose : hewas certainly a warm assertor of thewisdom and goodness of the Creator ;and some sparks of literary jealousy,with a little partiality to flattery, arethe sole defects which have been pointedout in one who appears to have beenhabitually pious, and a constant friendto morality. He was married, in 1741,to a Miss Drummond ; and his wife,having a very expensive predilection forold china, he put a will into her hands,in which he had left her nothing butthe collection of her favourite article,of which, from that time, she grew lessenamoured. Besides the works abovementioned,Lord Kames was the authorof The Statute Law of ScotlandAbridged, with Historical Notes; RemarkableDecisions of the Court ofSession, from 1730 to 1752; Elucidationsrespecting the Common and StatuteLaw of Scotland; Select Decisionsof the Court of Session ; a paper onthe advantages of shallow ploughing,which, with two others, was printed inThe Edinburgh Philosophical Transactions.SIR JAMES STEUART Dunham.SIR JAMES STEUART Dunham.1 HIS eminent writer on politicaleconomy, the son of Sir James Stewart,Bart., of Goosetrees, in Scotland, andsolicitor-general for that kingdom, washorn at Edinburgh, on the 10th ofOctober, 1713, and was educated atNorth Berwick, in East Lothian, andthe university of his native city. Herelie studied law, with a view to followingit as a profession ; but, shortly after,having been called to the bar, he wentabroad, and remained on the continent,for five years. In 1740, he returnedto Scotland, and again made his appearanceat the bar; but his sentimentsin favour of the Pretender, with whomhe had formed an intimacy, when atHome, gave a tone to his speeches thatrendered his success, as an advocate,impossible. Under this impression,he retired to his seat in the country,where he employed his pen in behalf ofCharles Edward ; and, on the failure ofthat prince's attempt to place himselfupon the throne, in 1745, Sir James, notbeing included in the bill of indemnity,went over to France, and resided atSedan, till 1754, when he removed toFrankfort-on-the-Main. His exile wasnot passed in idleness ; he applied himselfwith great assiduity to the studyof finance ; and, in 1757, published, atthe town last-mentioned, A Vindicationof Newton's Chronology, written inFrench. In the same year, he removedto Tubing, in Germany, and therepublished, in the language of thecountry, A Treatise on German Coins;which was followed, in 1761, by a Dissertationon the principles of Money,as applied to the German Coin. Henext proceeded to Antwerp and Spa ;and, whilst at the latter place, becamean object of suspicion, in consequence ofsome letters being wrongly addressed tohim, and he was, in consequence, forsome time a prisoner. On an assurancethat he should remain unmolested, herepaired to Edinburgh, in 1763, andsoon after settled at Coldness ; but itwas not till eight years afterwards thathe received a full pardon under thegreat seal. In was in the retirement ofthe latter place that he put the lasthand to his celebrated Inquiry into thePrinciples of Political Economy, thework, it is said, of eighteen years' diligentand laborious research. Directinghis attention to the improvement ofthe county in which he resided, hepublished, in 1769, under the name ofRobert Trame, Considerations on theInterests of the County of Lanark, andhad the satisfaction of seeing many ofhis suggestions publicly adopted.In 1771, he offered his services to theEast India Company, in considering themost likely means" for regulating thecoin in their various settlements ; and.at their request, in the following year,printed the result of his labours, in atreatise, entitled The Principles ofMoney, applied to the present state otthe Coin of Bengal. He died, from theeffects of a mortification, on the 26th ofNovember, 1780. In 1800, appeared,in six volumes, octavo, an account of hislife and worKs, which, in addition tothose before-mentioned, consisted of APlan for introducing the Uniformity ofWeights and Measures : Observationson Beattie's Essay on Truth ; CriticalRemarks on the Atheistical Falsehoodsof Mirabeau's System of Nature; and ADissertation concerning the Motive oiObedience to the Laws of God.Sir James, who was married, in 1742,to a daughter of the Earl of Weiss,and left one son, appears to have beenhighly amiable in all his private relations,as well as being an active andspirited promoter of whatever bethoughtconducive to the public good. Of histalent in pleading, a remarkable instanceis recorded. Having brought anaction against Judge (commonly calledLord) Armiston, he pleaded his owncause, with such extraordinary eloquence,that Lord Arrniston camedown from the bench, and defendedhimself at the bar. As a writer, he possessedconsiderable ability. Respectingthe merits of his Inquiry into the Principlesof Political Economy, considerablePOLITICAL ECONOMISTS.difference of opinion has prevailed ; andDr. Adam Smith used to say, that heunderstood Sir James's system betterfrom his conversation than from hisvolumes. This sarcasm will, however,lose its force, if we consider thathe who uttered it was the rival andcompetitor of the subject of our memoir,who had to treat of a matter, at thattime, no less uncommon than difficult ;and in endeavouring, therefore, to pleaseas well as to instruct, it is not to bewondered at that he should have falleninto many defects.THOMAS Downfall.THOMAS Downfall was born inLincolnshire, about the year 1720, andeducated at Trinity College, Cambridge,where he graduated B.A., in 1743. In1745, he was appointed secretary to thecommissioners of trade and plantations ;and, in 1753, he went out to America,as secretary to Sir Dangers Osborne,Bart., whom he succeeded in his officeof lieutenant-governor of New Jersey,in 1755. The information he renderedgovernment, with respect to the colonies,recommended him to promotion ;and he was, in 1757, appointed captain-generaland governor of MassachusettsBay. He resigned this situation in twoyears, and resumed his government ofNew Jersey, whence he was removedto that of South Carolina, which heheld till 1761, when he was recalled athis own request. Upon his arrival inLondon, he was appointed director-generalof the office of control, withthe rank of colonel in the army, underthe command of Prince Ferdinand,in Germany, where he remained till1763. In 1765, he was elected a fellowof the Royal Society; and, at thegeneral election of 1768, was returnedto the British parliament, for theborough of Gregory, in Cornwall. Herehe strenuously opposed the measures ofthe British cabinet with respect toAmerica, and made his first oratoricalessay against the bill for suspending thelegislature of New York; during thedebate on which, he declared " that itwas a fact, of which the house ought tobe apprised in all its extent, that thepeople of America, universally, unitedly,and unalterably, are resolved not tosubmit to any internal tax imposedupon them by any legislature in whichthey had not a share by representativesof their own election." This timelywarning he followed up by othersequally cogent and explicit; and hisseveral speeches, made at this importantcrisis, which were all printed byAlmon, in his Parliamentary Register,may be said to form an invaluablecomment upon the mistaken policy ofthe times. He had, the year previouslyto his entering parliament, (1767,) publishedthe first edition of his Administrationof the Colonies, a work whichat once placed him on high groundas a financier. Some parts, observedthe Critical Reviewer, " particularlywith regard to paper currency, arerational and practicable, and deserve themost serious attention of government."In this edition he urged the necessityfor appointing a distinct state-secretaryfor the colonies, which he had the gratificationof seeing afterwards done ; healso particularly recommended a revisionof the trade laws and the navigationacts ; and gave, as a reason for adoptinga paper currency, that it was impossiblefor the colonists and merchants to createa silver currency, even if they werepermitted to trade with France andSpain. This work at once becamepopular, and, in a short space of time,went through numerous editions.In 1772, he printed an ironical pamphlet,entitled Considerations on theIndignity suffered by the Crown, andDishonour brought upon the Nation, bythe Marriage of his Royal Highness theDuke of Cumberland, with a Subject ;after which, he printed and circulatedamongst his friends, but never published,Observations on his own BreadBill. In 1776, he addressed his Letterto Adam Smith, being an Examinationof several points of Doctrine, laid downTHOMAS Downfall.in his Inquiry into the Nature andCause of the Wealth of Nations ; thiswas followed, during the same year, byhis memoir, entitled Drainage and Navigation;and, at the same time, he publishedhis Topographical Designation ofsuch parts of North America as are containedin the annexed Map (that ofLewis Evans, corrected and continuedto 1775) of the middle British colonies,&c. At this time he was the representativeof the borough of Minehead,in Somersetshire, for which he had beenreturned at the general election of 1775;and as such, delivered a variety ofspeeches on all questions relative toAmerica.At the general election of 1780 heretired from parliament, though he continuedhis connexion and friendshipwith Almon ; and removed from Richmond,to his seat, Everton House,in Bedfordshire, where he devotedhimself principally to antiquarian andliterary pursuits. In 1782, he publishedA Treatise on the Study of Antiquities; and having, in that year,addressed A Memorial to the Sovereignsof America, followed it up, in 1783, byTwo Memorials, with an explanatorypreface. He, at the same time, printedA Memorial, addressed to the Sovereignsof Europe and the Atlantic ;and, in 1786, printed, in the fifty-sixthvolume of The Gentleman's Magazine,his Proposal for founding Professorshipsfor Architecture, Painting, andSculpture. In the same volume appearedhis Answer to a Letter on theJutae, or Vii; and, in 1787, he published,in one volume, quarto, Noticesand Description of the Antiquities of theProvincia Romana of Gaul, now Provence,Languedoc, and Dauphine ; withdissertations on the subjects, of whichthose are examples ; and an appendix,describing the Roman Baths andThermae, discovered, in 1784, at Baden-weller.In 1795, he printed, in quarto,Descriptions and Explanations of theRemains of some Roman Antiquities,dug up in the City of Bath ; with anengraving of the same, from a drawingmade on the spot ; and, in the sameyear, he produced his AntiquarianRomance ; endeavouring to mark aLine, by which the most ancient people,and the processions of the earliestinhabitants of Europe, may be investigated; to which was annexedsome Remarks on the learned Whitaker'sCriticisms. In 1796, he printed,(first published in The Cambridge Chronicle,in the form of letters,) Considerationson the Scarcity and High Pricesof Bread Corn and Bread, at theMarkets, suggesting the Remedies. Hedied, during his residence at Bath, onthe 25th of February, 1805 ; accordingto some, in the eighty-fifth, to others,in the eighty-third, year of his age,having no issue, though he had beentwice married : first, in 1765, to thewidow of Sir Revered Falkner;secondly, in 1784, to Mrs. Astell, ofEverton House, Bedfordshire.Governor Powell, in every stationthrough life, seems to have sustained ahigh character for ability, zeal, andrectitude of conduct. He was the truefriend of America, without sacrificingwhat was due to the dignity of themother country ; and as such, he is saidto have lived upon terms of sincerefriendship with Dr. Franklin, andother distinguished scientific, literary,and political characters, in both countries.Aided by a liberal education,and a constant cultivation of it duringa long series of years, his mind,naturally vigorous and comprehensive,amassed an uncommon fund and varietyof knowledge, as a financier, politician,political and domestic economist, andan antiquarian writer; though, in allof these characters, it is observed, hemay be said to have entertained somesingular opinions.In speaking of the fourth edition ofhis great work, The Administration ofthe Colonies, The Critical Review, of1768, observes, " it would be very easyto shew how much our author has misappliedhis classical reading in otherinstances ; but, in the publication beforeus, he has proved that he possessesqualifications far more valuable to thepublic than those of scholarship orclassical learning. The proposal drawnup by him and Mr. Franklin, for apaper currency, and the disquisitionson the state of the American trade," itis added, " with other articles, must belasting monuments of his abilities as acolonial magistrate and financier." Inaddition to the works before-mentioned,he published several others relating toantiquities, both separately, and in thePOLITICAL ECONOMISTS,Archaeological the Antiquarian Society,of which he was a member. TheGentleman's Magazine also containsseveral of his contributions, besidesthose already specified; and an anonymousEssay concerning the Nature "ofBeing, and A Treatise on Old Age, hasbeen likewise attributed to him.Richard PRICE.THIS eminent moral, political, andmathematical writer, was born atTynton, Glamorganshire, on the 22nd ofFebruary, 1723. He was the son of adissenting minister, and was educatedwith a view to that profession himself,first at the grammar-school of Neath,and afterwards at two private academies,in Wales, and a third, in London, wherethe learned Mr. Eames was principaltutor. To this last he was removed byhis uncle, in 1740, in which year hisfather's recent death was succeeded bythat of his mother. He was left with avery slender provision, in consequence,it is supposed, of having given hisfather offence, by differing from him respectingthe principles of Calvinism, ofwhich old Mr. Price was a strict follower.His attempts to instil them into themind of his son produced doubts andinquiries in reply; and finding, oneday, the subject of our memoir poringover a volume of Clarke's Sermons,the incensed parent snatched it away,and threw it into the fire. As mightbe expected, this only had the effect ofstimulating the curiosity it was intendedto check, and a more ardent course ofstudy and inquiry, on the part ofRichard, was the consequence.On leaving the seminary last-named,where he remained about four years,Mr. Price became domestic chaplain toa gentleman of the name of Stratified,at Stoke Newington In this situationhe remained nearly thirteen years, inthe course of which period, he frequentlyofficiated for Dr. SamuelChandler, and other eminent dissentingministers, in London and its neighbourhood.In 1757, he married a MissBlondel, with whom he settled atHackney: but, in the following year,removed to Newington Green, as pastorf a congregation there. About thesame lime, he made his first appearanceas an author, in A Review of the principalQuestions and Difficulties inMorals ; particularly those relating tothe Original of our Ideas of Virtue, itsNature, Foundation, Reference to theDeity, Obligation, Subject Matter, andSanctions. In this work, he contendsthat our perceiving and determiningpowers, concerning actions, is referableto the understanding; and not, as Dr.Hutcheson has maintained, to a moralsense ; and argues the necessity ofadopting his theory, in order to establishthe important corollary, thatmorality is eternal and immutable, notthe arbitrary production of any power,human or divine, but equally everlastingand necessary with all truth andreason. It was altogether a very masterlyproduction, and such as to obtainthe admiration of the most eminentphilosophers of the day.In 1763, he was chosen afternoonpreacher to the congregation in PoorJewry Street, London ; and, about thesame time, was elected a fellow of theRoyal Society. In 1767, he considerablyadded to his fame, both as a divine andphilosopher, by his Four Dissertations :1. On Providence ; 2. On Prayer ; 3. Onthe Reasons for expecting that VirtuousMen shall meet after Death in a stateof Happiness; 4. On the Importance ofChristianity, the Nature of HistoricalEvidence and Miracles. In the lastdissertation, he has taken a very masterlyand argumentative view of thenature and grounds of the regard dueto experience and to the evidence oftestimony, in answer to what Mr.Hume has advanced on this subject, inhis Essay on Miracles. The whole hasbeen frequently printed, and ranksamong the most popular of his works.In 1769, the University of Aberdeenspontaneously created him Did. ; and,in the following year, he was chosenpastor of the congregation at the Gravel-pitMeeting, Hackney ; and, at theRICHARD PRICEsame time, transferred his afternoonservices from Jewry Street to NewingtonGreen. Jn 1771, he published his Observationson Reversionary Payments;on Schemes for Providing Annuities forWidows, and for Persons in Old Age ;on the Method of calculating the Valuesof Assurances on Lives ; and on theNational Debt, &c. The last waswritten with a view of exposing theruinous tendency of the numerous societiesthat were in existence at thetime, for the benefit of age and widows.It had the effect of checking the systemto a great extent, and became so popular,that, in twelve years, it reached afourth edition, which the author publishedin two volumes, with muchadditional matter. Some of his statementsgave rise to much controversy,and those intended to support his hypothesisof the decreasing population ofthe kingdom, have been proved to beerroneous ; but, in other respects, thework is regarded as one of the mostcomplete extant in political arithmetic.In 1772, he published An Appeal to thePublic, on the subject of the NationalDebt, which very speedily reached athird impression.One of his most famous political performancesappeared in 1776, entitledObservations on the Nature of CivilLiberty, the Principles of Government,and the Justice and Policy of the Warwith, America. It was considered thebest'work, in exposition of the injuriouspolicy pursued by this country towardsAmerica, that had appeared ; and, withinless than two years, eight editions wereprinted. The author had the furthersatisfaction or receiving, from the com-mon-council of London, in testimonyof their approbation of his observations,the freedom of the city in a gold box.The work was not, however, withoutopponents, of whom the chief partdeserved no answer ; but, as a fewseemed to have rather mistaken, thanperverted, his sentiments, he thoughtfit to reply to them, in 1778, under thetitle of Additional Observations, &c.,and, at the same time, he published ageneral introduction to both pieces, anda supplement. In 1778, appeared AFree Discussion of the Doctrines ofMaterialism and Philosophical Necessity,in a correspondence between Dr.Price and Dr. Priestley ; great metaphysicalacuteness and skill were employedon each side of the question,and it is to the honour of the disputants,in a point upon which theyheld the most opposite views, that bothdisplayed an uncommon complacencyand candour to the end of the controversy.In 1779, Dr. Price wrote an introductionto The Doctrine of Annuities,by his nephew, Mr. Morgan, and, in thecourse of it, addressed some observationsto the Society for Equitable Assuranceon Lives and Survivorship. Of these,the Society subsequently availed itself,and it was also indebted to the subjectof our memoir for a variety of valuablesuggestions which he made to it, andparticularly a new method of keepingaccounts. His next publication wasAn Account of the Progress from theRevolution, and the Present State, ofPopulation in England and Wales, withan appendix, containing remarks onMr. Eden's account of the population,&c. in his letter to Lord Carlisle. Itappeared in 1780 ; and, on Lord Shellbecoming prime minister, ourauthor was consulted by him in theformation of a scheme for dischargingthe national debt, which was introducedto the house of lords, but abandoned ona change of ministry. An account of itwas published by Dr. Price, in 1783, inatreatise, entitled The State of thePublic Debt, &c., in which he lays itdown as a fundamental principle, that,in paying off debts with any given surplusappropriated to that purpose, theirbearing a high, rather than a low, interestis a particular advantage. Dr.Price was also consulted by Mr. Pittupon the subject of the national debt ;and out of three plans, which he submittedfor its reduction, that ministeradopted the one which formed thefoundation of that established by thelegislature, in 1786, though no acknowledgmentwas made of its origin.In 1784, he published Observationson the Importance of the AmericanRevolution, and the Means of makingit useful to the World ; in which, amongother advice, he recommends theAmericans to refrain from engaging inforeign commerce. It was diffuselycirculated in America, and much readat the time, both there and at home.In 17S6, in which year he removed toPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS,Hackney, in consequence of the deathof his wife, he published a volume ofsermons on the Christian doctrine, asreceived by the different denominationsof Christians, &c. The Semi-Ariandoctrine is that adopted by himself;but a spirit of toleration to all sectsbreathed throughout the volume, in theconcluding part of which are somesermons in counteraction to Hume's posthumousdialogues, equally admirablefor their Christian temper and masterlyarguments. In his discourse on thelove of our country, delivered on the4th of November, 1789, at the meetinghouse,in the Old Jewry, to the societyfor commemorating the revolution inGreat Britain, &c. Dr. Price, made someremarks on the French revolution, whichprocured him many oppugners amongthose opposed to that event. The mostable and the most virulent of them wasthe celebrated Edmund Burke, who, inhis Reflections, treated our author withridicule and contempt, and accusedhim of exulting in the sanguinary outragesof the French populace. Dr.Price made his defence in a prefaceto an edition of the above discourse,in 1790, which was, upon the whole,satisfactory.Dr. Price was, for several years, oneof the managers of the estates devisedto charitable purposes, by Daniel Williams;and during the application ofthe dissenters to parliament, from 1772to 1779, for relief from subscription, hewas chosen one of their committee.He was one of the few who would notconsent to a declaration of faith in theScriptures, as the means of obtainingtheir desired object, on the ground ofits implying an acknowledgment of theauthority of the civil magistrate inmatters of conscience. In 1783, thedegree of LL.D. was conferred uponhim by Yale College, in Connecticut,and he was subsequently elected afellow of the Philosophical Societies atPhiladelphia and Boston. He died,from the effects of a disorder whichcaused him the most acute suffering,on the 19th of March, 1791 ; and wasfollowed to the grave by many distinguishedpublic characters, with everytestimony of respect and regret.As a political and moral philosopher,Dr. Price must ever rank among themost candid and perspicuous, as well asthe most distinguished, of his day. Inprivate life, it is impossible to conceivea more amiable character. To almostevery one who knew him, his conductwas marked by some particular trait ofkindness and generosity. The smallportion which his father left him hedivided between his two sisters, withthe exception of a few pounds to paythe expenses of his journey to London.As in early life," says a writer in TheEncyclopaedia Britannica, " he was anaffectionate and generous brother, inold age he was a loving and attentivehusband." His wife, who, for a longtimebefore her death, was almostwholly helpless, found, during the lastyears "of her life, hardly any enjoyment,except in a game of whist ; and, thoughour doctor disliked cards as a waste oftime, and never touched them on anyother occasion, to amuse her he wouldsit down every evening to a card-table,and play till it was late, with acheerfulness and good-humour, whichcharmed every person who had thehappiness of viewing him in that endearingsituation.He suffered himself to be interruptedat all hours by any one who requiredhis assistance or "advice, which wasfrequently sought in matters relating toannuities and life assurances, and forwhich he would never accept remuneration.He regularly devoted a fifth partof his annual income to charitable purposes,and disposed of it in a mannerequally unostentatious and judicious.Unconscious of his own excellences,and almost of his celebrity, he carriedabout him a modest dignity of mannerapproaching to humility. His countenancewas pleasing and intelligent, hisperson short and slender, but muscular,and generally marked by a stoop, whichhad grown upon him from a habit ofdeep thought. Mrs. Charon, who hasdrawn his character, in her Miscellanies,under the name of Simplicity, concludeswith the following sentence : " with aperson ungraceful, and with mannersunpolished by the world, his behaviouris always proper, easy, and respectable ;as free from constraint and servility inthe highest company, as from haughtinessand insolence in the lowest. Hisdignity arises from his humility ; andthe sweetness, gentleness, and franknessof his manners, from the realADAM SMITH.goodness and rectitude of his heart,which is open to inspection, in all thefearlessness of truth, without any needof disguise or ornament."Besides the works already mentioned,Dr. Price published several sermonson particular occasions, and contributeda variety of papers to The PhilosophicalTransactions, from the year 1763 to1786.ADAM SMITH.ADAM SMITH, the son of the comptrollerof the customs at Kirkaldy, inScotland, was born there on the 5th ofJune, 1723, a few months subsequentto his father's decease. When aboutthree years old, he was carried offfrom his uncle's house by a party ofvagrant tinkers, from whom, however,he was soon recovered. He receivedthe rudiments of education at thegrammar-school of his native place,where he displayed an extraordinarypassion for books, and great powers ofmemory. He was sent to the Universityof Glasgow, in 1737 ; and, in 1740,to Baliol College, Oxford, where heremained seven years. He then resided,for some time, with his mother,but without any fixed plan of life,having abandoned the church of England,for which he had been destined,when placed at Oxford. In 1748, heremoved to Edinburgh, and, duringthat and the following year, read lectureson rhetoric and the belles lettres,under the patronage of Lord Kames.In 1751, he was elected professor oflogic in the University of Glasgow;but, in the following year, he wasremoved to the chair of moral philosophy,which he held thirteen years,and used, it is said, to look back uponthat period, as the happiest and mostuseful one of his life. His lectures, inboth these professorships, were of themost masterly kind ; but no part ofthem has been preserved, except whathe himself published in his two principalworks, the first of which, entitled,The Theory of Moral Sentiments, appearedin 1759, and met with generalapprobation. To this, he afterwardsadded, A Dissertation on the Originof Languages, and on the DifferentGenius of those which are Originaland Compounded. The reputation whichthese works acquired him, and hispopularity as a professor, induced Mr.Charles Townshend to engage him, in1763, to become travelling tutor to theyoung Duke of Buccleugh, whose motherMr. Townshend had lately married.This opportunity of extendingthe ideas he had already formed respectingpolitical economy, was gladlyseized by Mr. Smith, who resigned hisprofessorship, and, in 1764, left England,with his pupil, for the continent.Before quitting Glasgow, he called togetherhis former pupils, and returnedthe fees he had received from each;observing, that, as he had not completelyfulfilled his engagement, hewas resolved that his class should betaught that year gratis; and, at hisdeparture, he left the remainder of hislectures, to be read for their benefit byone of the upper students.After remaining abroad three years,in the course of which he becameacquainted with Necker, D'Alembert,and other eminent writers, he returnedto .Scotland, and passed the next tenyears of his life in almost uninterruptedretirement, with his mother, atKirkaldy. How well his time had beenemployed, during his retreat, he gave aproof, in 1776, by the publication ofhis celebrated Inquiry into the Natureand Causes of the Wealth of Nations, awork recognised, throughout Europe,as the most profound and perspicuousdissertation of the kind that has everbeen produced. " His illustrations,"says a writer in The European Magazine," are chiefly borrowed from thevaluable French collection, Sur les Artset Metiers; but the arrangement is hisown; and as he has both carried hisdoctrines to a greater length, and fortifiedthem with stronger proofs, thanany of his predecessors, he deservesthe chief praise, or chief blame, ofpropagating a system, which tends toPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS,confound national wealth with nationalprosperity." About two years after thepublication of this work, he was appointeda commissioner of the customslor Scotland, having passed much of theintermediate period amur the firstsociety in London. In 1778, however,he returned, in consequence of theabove appointment, to Edinburgh ; and,in 1787, he was chosen lecturer of theUniversity of Glasgow. He was indebtedfor the situation first mentionedto the influence of the Duke of Buck; and, on his obtaining it, heoffered to resign the annuity of 300per annum, which had been grantedhim by his noble pupil, who, however,refused to discontinue the allowance.The death of Dr. Smith's mother, in1784, and that of his cousin, in 1788,contributed, with the infirmities of age,to frustrate his subsequent literaryprojects; and he died, broken in healthand spirits, in July, 1790. A few daysbefore his decease, he gave orders todestroy all his manuscripts, with theexception of some detached essays,which were left to the care of hisexecutors, and were published, in 1795,in one volume, quarto.Of his intellectual gifts and attainments,of the originality and comprehensivenessof his views, the extent,variety, and correctness of his information,the fertility of his invention, andthe ornaments which his rich imaginationhad borrowed from classicalculture, Dr. A. Smith has left behindhim lasting monuments. With all histalents, however, he is acknowledgednot to have been fitted for the generalcommerce of the world, or the businessof active life. His habitual abstractionof thought rendered him inattentive tocommon objects ; and he frequentlyexhibited instances of absence, whichhave scarcely been surpassed by thefancy of Addison or La Bruydre. Itis related of him, that, whilst conductinghis patron, Charles Townshend,to see the different manufactures ofGlasgow, particularly a flourishing tan-yard,he stopped on a plank placedacross the tanning-pit, to discuss hisfavourite topic, the division of labour,when he suddenly fell headlong intothe nauseous pool; an accident which,for some time, threatened fatal consequences.Dr. Smith was a man of benevolentdisposition and simplicity of character,which, however, was not free from theimputation of infidelity. Among othercauses for this, has been assigned hisintimacy with Hume ; his publicationof whose life was accompanied by suchremarks on the opinions of the deceased,as made it apparent his ownwere similar, with respect to revealedreligion. Bishop Home addressed ananonymous letter to him in consequence;and whether this circumstance,observes Dr. Aikin, had any effect insuppressing any further desire to appearin print, can only be conjectured,but he sent nothing afterwards to thepress, except some additions to hisTheory of Moral Sentiments.ADAM FERGUSON.L HIS eminent writer on moral philosophy,and moral and political science,was born at Logierait, in the Highlandsof Perthshire, on the 20th of June,1723. He was the son of a presbyterianclergyman, and received his educationat the grammar-school of Perth, or,rather, under the master of that seminary; and at the University of St.Andrew's, which he entered in theautumn of 1738. He soon obtained abursary, and took his degree of M. A.in May, 1742, without having addedmuch to his previous acquirements, inconsequenceof the indifferent abilitiesof the university professors, and ofthe little emulation that existed amongthe students. Being intended for thechurch, he was sent to the DivinityHall at St. Andrew's, in the Novemberof the year last-mentioned ; and heafterwards studied theology, for abouteighteen months, under Professors Gownand Coming.In 1745, he was selected by LordJohn Murray, colonel of the forty-adamFERGUSON.second Highland regiment, as his militarychaplain, to qualify him forwhich office he received ordination, onthe 2nd of July, 1745, although he hadnot studied divinity the full period ofsix years. He remained with theregiment until. 1757, in which year hesucceeded the celebrated David Hume,as keeper of the Advocates' library,but resigned that office in the followingyear. In 1759, he was elected professorof natural philosophy in theUniversity of Edinburgh ; though wearetold, by his biographer, he had notmade physical science the principalobject of his inquiries, nor, indeed, hadhe studied it much more than mostyoung men do, in the common courseof academical instruction. Five monthsof preparation, however, enabled himto qualify himself for this office, theduties of which he performed in sucha manner, as to render the study ofnatural philosophy more interestingthan it had been commonly considered.About 1762, he founded the societyknown by the name of The Poker, forthe purpose of procuring from governmentthe establishment of a militia inScotland. To forward its views, hewrote a satirical pamphlet, entitled,The History of Sister Peg. His firstpublication, however, if we except aprinted sermon, was A Defence of theMorality of Stage Plays, at the time ofthe literary controversy that took placerespecting Home's tragedy of Douglas.A number of pamphlets were written onthe same side of the question, but Mr.Ferguson's was admitted, by the oppositeparty, to be " the only piece onthat side that was written with anytolerable degree of discretion."In 1764, he was elected professor ofmoral philosophy at Edinburgh, andentered on his duties, says his biographer,with a degree of spirit andactivity, from which the most splendidresults were to be anticipated. Hislectures, which drew a numerous andapplauding auditory, were delivered, asfar as the expression was concerned,extempore ; he had previously delineated,and committed to paper, thegeneral plan of his course, but hadresolved not to write a system of lectures.About a year after his electionto the chair of philosophy, he publishedhis Essay on the History of CivilSociety, a work which received theunanimous suffrage of the literary world.In a letter, dated the 10th of March,1767, Mr. Hume, congratulating ourauthor on its success, says, " I have metwith nobody that had read it who didnot praise it. Lord Mansfield is veryloud to that purpose in his Sundaysocieties. I heard Lord Chesterfieldand Lord Littleton express the samesentiments ; and, what is above all,Cell, I am told, is already projectinga second edition of the same quartosize." The style, as well as the matter,was also praised by the poet Gray, whoobserves, that there are uncommonstrains of eloquence in Mr. Ferguson'sEssay, and not one single idiom ofhis country in the whole work. LordShelburne approved so highly of thepublication, that he expressed a desireto patronise the author, and offered toprocure him some appropriate appointmentat one of the English universities,after having been informed that thegovernment of West Florida, which hislordship had some thoughts of conferringon Ferguson, would not be considereda suitable appointment. None other,however, was proposed ; and the professor,shortly after, married, and tooka farm in the parish of Currie, where, ata considerable expense, he gratified histaste for agricultural and horticulturalpursuits.In May, 1774, he set out for Geneva,to take charge of Charles, Earl ofChesterfield, whose tutor he had beensolicited to become, by the guardians ofthat young nobleman. The connexion,however, was dissolved in the course ofthe following year, on which Mr. Fergusonreturned to Edinburgh, wheretohis astonishment and mortification,he found that the chair of moral philosophywas declared vacant by thetown-council, though they had previouslyappointed, at his desire, adeputy to perform the office. Hisfriends, Dr. Robertson, Blair, and Black,indignantly remonstrated against thisproceeding, and applied to the courtof session in behalf of Mr. Ferguson,who was, though not without muchexertion, reinstated in his office. Heappears to have felt and expressedhimself strongly on this occasion, andconcluded a letter to a friend, havingreference to it, with the following pas-politicalECONOMIST!sage : " The fools and knaves are nomore than necessary to give otherssomething to do."Literary and agricultural pursuitscontinued to occupy the leisure, if itmay be so called, of Mr. Ferguson, formany years. The progress of theAmerican war called his attention tothe study of politics about 1776, inwhich year he published some Remarkson a Pamphlet, lately published by Dr.Price, entitled, Observations on theNature of Civil Liberty, &c. He alsocommunicated his views, from time totime, to Sir William Pulteney, andother members of parliament ; and, onthe determination of government tosend out commissioners to quell thedisorders in the colonies, he was appointedsecretary to the commission.He was, in consequence, absent fromEdinburgh during the session of 1778and 1779; but his duties were scarceless efficiently performed by Mr. DugaldStewart. In 1780, Mr. Ferguson wasseized with an attack of apoplexy,which, however, had no permanent'effect either upon his bodily or mentalfaculties. But he now thought it expedientto cease lecturing without the useof notes ; and he, therefore, commencedwriting out a course of instruction, tobe read during the remainder of hisincumbency. At the same time,, hewas busily employed in bringing to acompletion his celebrated work, TheHistory of the Progress and Terminationof the Roman Republic, whichappeared, in 1783, in three volumesquarto. This work has been translatedinto several modern languages, and hasbeen justly described as one, which notonly delights, by the clearness of itsnarrative, and the boldness of itsdescriptions, but instructs and animates,by profound and masterly delineationsof character, as well as by the philosophicalprecision with which it tracesthe connexion of events. It is written,continues his biographer, in that tone ofhigh-minded enthusiasm, which, if itcan only snatch from oblivion whateveris noble and generous, in the recordof human actions, regards the graces ofstyle as objects merely of secondaryaccount, and is chiefly studious of impressingthe lessons of wisdom, whichmay be gathered from the survey ofdistant ages.In 1784, Mr. Ferguson resigned thechair of moral philosophy to Mr.Dugald Stewart, and was himself conjoinedin the professorship of mathematicswith Mr. Mayfair, in order toentitle him to retain his professor'ssalary. He now proceeded to revisethe notes of his lectures on ethics andpolitics, and, in 1792, published them,under the title of Principles of Moraland Political Science, in two volumes,quarto. Among the modern writers,those to whose suggestion he appears,in this work, to have been most indebted,are, Shaftesbury, Hutcheson,Montesquieu, and Adam Smith. Thework has been blamed for the verypartial notice which it offers of theimportance of religious principle ; itabounds, however, in passages of greatbeauty on the subject of a future state,and shows an anxiety, on the part ofthe author, to establish the foundationsof natural theology. After its publication,Mr. Ferguson visited the continent,where he was elected a memberof the Academy of Berlin, and otherlearned societies. He passed the winterof 1793 at Rome ; and returned to Scotlandin the following year, with the intentionof spending the remainder of hisdays in rural retirement. For this purpose,he fixed upon Halliards, in ManorWater, where he remained fourteenyears ; but, at the expiration of thatperiod, his sight and hearing having,in a great measure, failed, he removedto St. Andrew's, that he might, morefrequently, enjoy the conversation ofhis friends. Here he gradually declinedin all but his intellectual faculties, inthe full vigour of which he died, on the22nd of February, 1816, in the ninety-thirdyear of his age, leaving threesons and three daughters.The private character of Mr. Fergusonwas irreproachable ; ins mannerswere easy and elegant, and perfectlythose of a man of the world, thoughby no means unbecoming the dignityof a philosopher. With his intimatefriends, he was full of fascinatinggaiety and refined humour. If he wasimpatient of any thing, it was of contradiction; and of assumed superiority,he could rarely forbear testifying hiscontempt. \Ve have his own authorityfor suggesting, th.it he was indebtedfor his easy and diijiiii'.ea maiitu-r, lessJOHN Miller.to his intercourse with polished societythan to his frequent excursions in thewilds of Athol. " Jf I had not been inthe Highlands of Scotland," he says,I might be of their mind who thinkthe inhabitants of Paris and Versailles,the only polite people in the world. Itis truly wonderful to see persons ofevery age and sex, who never travelledbeyond the nearest mountain, possessthemselves perfectly, perform acts ofkindness with an aspect of dignity, anda perfect discernment of what is properto oblige. This is seldom to be seen inour cities, or in our capital ; but a personamong the mountains, who thinks himselfnobly born, considers courtesy asthe test of his rank. He never saw asuperior, and does not know what it isto be embarrassed. He has an ingenuousdeference for those who haveseen more of the world than himself;but never saw the neglect of othersassumed as a mark of superiority."In addition to the works beforementioned, Mr. Ferguson published apamphlet on the Militia; Analysis ofLectures on Mechanics ; Analysis ofPneumatics and Moral Philosophy ; abiographical account of Dr. Black, andInstitutes of Moral Philosophy. Thislast went through three editions in theauthor's life-time, and has been translatedinto French, German, and Russian,and used as a test book in severalforeign universities.JOHN Miller.JOHN Miller was born in the parishof Shotts, Lanarkshire, of whichplace his father was minister, in 1735.He received his education at the gram-mareschalof Hamilton and the Universityof Glasgow, whither he removedin 1746. He was at first destined forthe church, but his inquiring mindhaving led him to doubt the proprietyof subscription to articles of faith, herenounced the church for the bar. Onthe termination of his studies at theuniversity, where he had acquired theesteem of Dr. Adam Smith and theother professors, he entered the familyof Lord Kames, as tutor to his son, andderived much improvement from hisintercourse with that eminent lawyer.About the same time, he became acquaintedwith the celebrated DavidHume, in whose metaphysical opinionshe coincided, though differing from himin his political principles. Hume entertainedso much regard for the subjectof our memoir, that he intrusted tohim the education of his nephew.In 1760, Mr. Millar passed advocate,and had not long commenced practising,before he was considered one ofthe most rising young lawyers at thebar. Having, however, no pecuniaryresources of his own, and being aboutto marry, he gave up ail his prose actsof ambition, for the acceptance of thej professorship of law at Glasgow, towhich he was appointed in 1761. Hislectures at the university soon procuredan unusual accession of students; thenumber of whom, from only four or five,his reputation, in a few years, increasedto no less than forty. The coursewhich he delivered upon governmentwere particularly popular. He adoptedthe rule established by his predecessor,of lecturing in English, instead of Latin,spoke extemporaneously, and atthe conclusion of his discourses, explainedthe difficulties or objectionsproposed by his pupils, in a free conversation.His proper business wasto comment upon the institutions .andprecedents of Justinian, to which hesubjoined a course of lectures on jurisprudence,and employed thrice a weekin lectures on government, and twicea week upon the law of Scotland. Inamore private way, he was equallydistinguished for the zeal, and celebratedfor the success, with which heinstructed his private pupils, of whom hehad a number in his own house. Onthe formation of the Glasgow LiterarySociety, he became one of its principalmembers, and, at their meetings, wasa frequent antagonist of the eminentmetaphysician, Dr. Reid.in 1771, our author first made himselfknown as such, by the publicationPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS.of a treatise on the Origin of the Distinctionof Ranks, being a view of thechanges produced on the several relationsof society, by the gradual progressof civilization and improvement. Itwas received with applause both athome and abroad, went through severaleditions, and was translated intoFrench. In 1787, appeared his HistoricalView of the English Government,from the settlement of the Saxonsin Britain, to the accession of the Houseof Stuart. This work displays muchresearch into the remote period of theBritish government, and contains manyadmirable political disquisitions, which,though too profound to be popular,have received the commendations of allthe most distinguished writers. Thestyle has been also highly praised, andhis biographer, Mr. Craig, observes,"perhaps it would be impossible to finda sentence which can require a secondperusal to be distinctly understood."Mr. Millar was a warm supporter ofthe Whigs, and it was, probably, saysDr. Aikin, in consequence of his jealousyof authority, that, in the limiteddegree in which he still followed theprofession of an advocate, he made itaconstant practice to appear at thecircuits as counsel for criminals. Onthese occasions, few pleaders, it is said,surpassed him in the acuteness withwhich he examined evidence, and rheforce with which he addressed the feelingsof juries. He took an active partin all meetings for the abolition of theslave trade, and incurred much odiumby his avowed approbation of theFrench revolution. The summer of thelast years of his life were passed at asmall farm called Whiteness, and subsequentlyat a seat called Millheugh,where he devoted himself to literaryand rural pursuits. He died of a violentpleuritic attack, in May, 1801. He lefta large family, and several manuscripts,from which in 1803, were printed, intwo volumes, his posthumous works.The habitual character of Mr. Millarhas been thus summed up by one whowidely differed from him: "no littleideas of private interest, no narrowviews of advantage or emolument, sunkhim to the level of party politicians ;but firm, resolute, and decided, he was,from first to last, the enlightened andmanly defender of what he conceived tobe the rights and liberties of mankind'*JOHN CARTWRIGHT.JOHN CARTWRIGHT, the thirdson of William Cartwright, Esq. ofMarkham, Nottinghamshire, was bornthere on the 28th of September, 1740.At the age of five, he was sent tothe grammar-school of Newark, andafterwards to Heath academy, in Yorkshire;but, owing to the inefficiencyof his instructors, he made but littleprogress at either. His vacations,and a considerable portion of hischildhood, were spent under the roofof John, Viscount Tyrconnel, who hadmarried his father's sister, and washis godfather. This somewhat eccentricnobleman was a Whig of the oldschool, and from him the subject of ourmemoir would seem to have imbibedhis political principles. On his leavingHeath school, it was the wish ofhis relations that he should be bredup to agricultural pursuits, in orderthat he might assist in the managementof the family estate ; " but under acontemplative exterior," says his neice,a desire for more active employmentwas springing up in his mind ; and asEurope was at that time filled with theglory of the great Frederick, who wasraising to the rank of an independentnation an insignificant province of theGerman empire, he was seized With adesire of joining Frederick's army, as avolunteer." He accordingly left hishouse privately with this intention, butwas overtaken, at Stamford, by hisfather's steward, and persuaded to return; though a writer in the BiographieContemporains, has positivelyasserted, that he served several years inthe King of Prussia's army. The navybeing at length fixed upon for him as aprofession, he joined, in the summer of1758, the Essex, commanded b> CaptainJOHN Cartwright.Walter Stirling; and, about a monthafter, was at the taking of Cherbourg.He was next removed into Lord Howe'sship, the Magnanime ; and, duringSir Edward Hawke's engagement withthe French admiral, Constans, on the20th of November, 1759, he commandedfour lower deck guns andtwenty-six men, of whom thirteen werekilled by his side, he himself escapingwith only a slight graze from a splinter.In 1762, he was appointed lieutenant onboardthe Wasp, employed in cruising inthe Bay of Biscay ; and, whilst holdingthat rank, from 1763 till the 14th or'May, 1766, he had the command, first,of the Spy, and, afterwards, of the overbornecutter. In the latter year, hewas made first-lieutenant of the Guernsey,on the Newfoundland station,where he officiated as deputy-surrogatewithin the districts of Trinity and ConceptionBays ; and, subsequently, adeputy-commissary to the vice-admiraltycourt. In the February of 1769,he was appointed to the Antelope ; and,in the following year, sailed for England.Here he joined Lord Howe'sship, the Queen, which being orderedto Spithead, as guard-ship, Mr. Cartwrighttook the opportunity of visitinghis home. During this period of leisure,he employed himself in writing apamphlet On the Rights and Interestsof Fishing Companies, which is said tohave supplied the Honourable DainesBarrington with matter for his workon the possibility of approaching thenorth pole. In 1772, he drew up aplan for the perpetual supply of oakfor the British navy, of which manyconnected with the government approved,and the late Bishop Douglas issaid to have observed, " We are nothonest enough for such plans as these."On his first launching into politics,he seems to have had some dread ofthe consequences ; for he says in aletter to Burke, dated August, 1774,My Letters on American Independenceare now in the press. As a republicationof them," he adds, " may possiblybe displeasing to government, I do notwish, at present, to be known as theirauthor. I am not afraid of the law,but should be glad of advancement inmy profession." He, however, subsequently,avowed himself the author, inaletter to Lord Howe, declining, frominc'iple, that nobleman's invitation toaccept a command, under him, against:lie Americans. It appears, also, thattie might have obtained a command inthe army of the United States ; but,though he wished well to Americanindependence, he refused to bear armsagainst his own country. This conductprocured him some popularityin England, with those who were favourablydisposed to the colonists ; and,in July, 1776, two years previous towhich he had been appointed a majorin the Nottinghamshire militia, he waspresented with the freedom of the townof Nottingham. In this year, he wrotehis first production on parliamentaryreform, which, with the exception ofsome pamphlets by Earl Stanhope, issaid to be the earliest work on thesubject. It was entitled, Take yourChoice ; and, to a second edition of ithe added, The Legislative Rights ofthe Commonalty Vindicated ; in whichhe advocates equal representation as aright, and annual parliaments as asecurity for the preservation of thatright. This, probably, was the originof the Radical reformer ; and he seemsto have followed his principles with anunexampled tenacity. On the 2nd ofApril, 1777, he presented to the kingan address, recommending peace withAmerica, and proposing the union hehad before suggested in his Letters onAmerican Independence.In 1778, he made an unsuccessful attemptfor the representation of Nottinghamshire; and, in 1779, he was activelyemployed in his military capacity, hisregiment being encamped at South SeaCommon, when the British fleet retreatedinto harbour before the combinedfleets of France and Spain. Uponthe spur of that occasion, he is said tohave formed a plan of defence, unitingnaval and military operations, whichhad the unqualified approbation of boththe Duke of Richmond and GeneralDebbeig. In the spring of 1780, heco-operated with several noblemen andliterary men of eminence, in the formationof a society for constitutional information,and was employed to drawup their declaration of rights ; on thepublication of which, Sir William Jonessaid it ought to be written in letters ofgold. The major used also to take greatpleasure in relating that the immortalPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS.Chatham, in the presence of GeneralOglethorpe, emphatically exclaimed, onperusing it, " Ay, this is right ; thisis very right !" It was followed by ThePeople's Barrier against undue Influenceand Corruption; and, shortlyafterwards, he married Anne Katherine,eldest daughter of Samuel Dashwood,Esq. of Well Vale, in Lincolnshire. In1781, he corresponded with the deputiesof the famous London Convention, onthe inequality of the representation ;and, in the same year, submitted a planto Lord Howe, for raising the RoyalGeorge, which was approved, but neveracted on.In 1783, he was in close correspondencewith Mr. Pitt, respectingreform ; and, during the same year, heobtained a meeting of the county of Nottingham,and published A NottinghamshireFarmer's Address to his BrotherFreeholders. In 1786, he became acquaintedwith Mr. Wilberforce, withwhom, Mr. Clarkson, &c. he, in 1787,took a zealous part in furtherance ofthe abolition of the slave trade. In themidst of his political pursuits, he paidmuch attention to agriculture ; and,having removed to a large estate, atBrotherhood, near Boston, in Lincolnshire,he cultivated his land in such amanner as to obtain a favourable mentionby Mr. Young, in his Annals ofAgriculture. In 1789, he was offeredthe government interest in his favour,as candidate for the representation ofEast Retort, but his declaration, thathe had no political gratitude," causeda withdrawal of the proffered patronage.As might be expected, the Frenchrevolution called forth a public expressionof his sentiments in its favour,and subsequently led to his dismissalfrom his regiment, on which occasionhe addressed a letter of remonstranceto the Duke of Newcastle, the lord-lieutenantof the county. He also incurredsome danger by taking anactive part in the formation of some ofthe popular societies, instituted atthe period preceding Home Tooke'strial, on which he gave evidence, thatwent far to compromise his own safety.In 1795, he published his Commonwealthin Danger, in which he advocatedthe necessity of vote by ballot,in the same zealous manner as he hadpreviously done universal suffrage andannual parliaments. This work waswritten in answer to the celebratedArthur Young's Example of France,a Warning Voice to Britain; whichthe major declared " the most dishonestof all the books he had ever read." In1796, he wrote The ConstitutionalDefence of England, Internal and External,addressed to the Freeholders ofthe County of Lincoln ; by some ofwhom he was invited, but declined, tostand for Boston. In 1797, he publishedhis Appeal, or the English Constitution,which was very popular, andsoon reached a second edition.During the scarcity of 1800, hearingthat the people in Sheffield had threatenedto rise and seize all the grain inhand, he rode post, from Nottingham,to that place; and, finding a party ofthe irritated people in a barn, hepassed the whole night with them, andsucceeded in persuading them to returnto their homes. In the same year,also, he drew up his ideas upon theconstruction of a temple of naval celebration,then agitated by the country,and which the late president of theRoyal Academy is said to have declared," would immortalize the nameof its author." The succeeding tenyears of his life he employed in oneunceasing struggle for parliamentaryreform ; devoting, almost daily, in somewayor other, his mental and personalexertions to the cause. During 1812and 1813, he made a tour of some partsof Leicestershire, Warwickshire, Yorkshire,&c. for the purpose of propagatinghis principles on the subject, inconsequenceof which, he obtained theepithet of the " Itinerant Apostle."During his progress, he was arrestedand taken before a magistrate, at Huddersfield; by whom, he says, he was dismissed,after admitting, " that petitionsto the house of commons were foundin my possession." These were petitionsfor reform, of which he appears to haveprocured, in the face of much opposition,not less than two hundred andninety-two ; signed, altogether, byabout two hundred thousand persons.He was equally successful during atour in Scotland ; and his efforts in thisand other ways, in the cause of radicalism,are said to have excited thosepopular commotions, which produced,for awhile, the suspension of the habeasJOHN CARTWRIGHT,corpus act. Mr. Canning was one ofthose who feared, whilst affecting todespise him; and in the same brutalspirit with which he spoke of "therevered and ruptured Ogden," disgracedhimself by designating MajorCartwright as " the old heart in London,from which the veins of sedition inthe country were supplied."In April, 1819, he made an unsuccessfulattempt for the representationof Westminster ; and, in the sameyear, took an active part in the electionof Sir Charles Wolsey to parliament,as member for Birmingham ;by way, as he termed it, " of sendinga petition in form of a living man,instead of one on paper or parchment."He subsequently took such ashare in the discussions which followedthe Manchester riots, as led to hisindictment, with others, for conspiracy.He was found guilty, and, being broughtup for judgment, on the 1st of June,1821, was sentenced to pay a fine of100, when he produced, in court, alarge canvass bag, out of which heslowly and deliberately counted ^100in gold, observing that he believedthey were all good sovereigns." Hewas one of Queen Caroline's mostzealous defenders ; espoused the causeof the Greeks, in a pamphlet ; andentertained, at his own house, thewives of the two Spanish generals,Q,uiroga and Diego. In 1823, hepublished The Constitution Producedand Illustrated ; a surprising work for aman of eighty-four ; and, about thesame time, he caused several thousandmedals to be struck, at Birmingham,illustrative of what he considered thefive elements of the genuine polity ofEngland. The execution of Diego, inthe latter end of this year, affected himdeeply; he circulated a handbill throughLondon, calling upon the friends ofliberty to wear mourning in honour ofhim ; and endeavoured to raise a publicsubscription for a monument to hismemory, according to a design of hisown, which was refused admittance tothe exhibition at Somerset House, solelyon account of the subject. The major'shealth now began seriously to decline ;and after trying, without benefit, theair of Hampstead, he died at his house,in Burton Crescent, on the 23rd ofSeptember, 1824; five days before hiseighty-fifth birth-day. He was buriedat Finchley ; but one mourning coachfollowing him to the grave, accordingto his desire.Of his personal appearance, in latterlife," says his niece, " an idea may beformed from the portrait at the head ofthe first volume of his memoirs, engravedby Henry Meyer. It would bedifficult, however, for any person whonever saw him, to imagine the calm butdignified expression, the deep thought,and habitual benignity of his countenance;still more impossible would it beto paint him, as he appeared, when anyinstance of cruelty and oppression, orof treachery to the sacred cause offreedom, roused his indignation, andcalled forth the lightning of his eyes."In stature he was about five feet teninches, his figure was finely proportioned,his features regular, and theform and colour of his eye is described,by his niece, as " most beautiful." Thesame authority tells us, that he neverchanged the make of his clothes tosuit the fashions of the day; that hewas dignified and graceful in his deportment,and had so much the air andmanners of a gentleman, that a younglady once remarked, "If I had seenMajor Cartwright begging, and in rags,I must instinctively have curtsied tohim." In the early part of his life,field sports were his favourite amusements,and he took active exercise tothe last. During winter and summer,he never rose later than six, and frequentlyat an earlier hour, when hewould light his own fire. He made arule of never denying himself either tofriends or strangers at home, and observedequal courtesy in his epistolaryintercourse ; so that Cobbett said ofhim, in the thirty-third volume of hisRegister, " he was, of all men, the mostaccessible, and answered a hundredletters in a week, with the punctualityof a counting-house, by way of episodeto his other labours." Hazlitt, in hisessay on the subject, has classed themajor among " people with one idea;"but, so far from this being the case, heappears to have understood both landarid naval architecture, agriculture, andmilitary tactics, and to have given someproofs of his skill in each. " Hazlitt,however," said a foreigner, on readingthe above essay, "is perfectly right,POLITICAL ECONOMISTS.Major Cartwright having certainlyone idea which engrossed him, but inwhich were comprehended all the bestinterests of mankind." But whatevermight have been the contractions ofhis mind, his heart took in all thesympathies of human nature ; and wehave seldom perused a more pleasinganecdote than that which records himto have been found, by Lady Astrachan,on his first visit to her house, playing atbears with her children. In the courseof his life he saved, by his own personalexertion, no less than four individualsfrom drowning; and such was hisabhorrence even of insensibility ofheart, that he dismissed his servant forgoingto see an execution ; observingthat he could not live, with pleasure,under the same roof with any one whocould have pleasure in seeing hisfellow-creatures put to death." Uponthe whole, a man of more unblemishedcharacter, private worth, and publicconsistency, has seldom appeared ; andhis bitterest enemies have foundnothing to accuse him of, except thatpatriotic zeal, stigmatized as " politicalfrenzy."His numerous writings may not, perhaps,display the literary facility whichmarks the more refined, but less candid,productions of some authors ; but theyshow a manly and straightforward wayof thinking, which there is no mistaking,and which bears the self-evidentstamp of an honest, vigorous, and independentmind. They have beeneulogised by some of our first writers ;and Cobbett (no flatterer) called themthe production of a man "having amind which it was impossible to bewilder,and a heart of such integritythat nothing could shake." The celebratedGilbert Wakefield, speaking ofthe major's Constitution Produced andIllustrated, says, " it will alone handhis name to posterity, with their applauseand gratitude. It is, in myestimation, his ' last best work,' andproves, to mathematical demonstration,the soundness of his intellect, and theaccuracy of his judgment." It is, atall events, some proof of the justness ofhis views, that many of them, visionaryand republican, as they once used to betermed, have been adopted, and thatgreat part of the nation have alreadybegun to talk of adopting them in theirfullest extent.JEREMY BENTHAM.HIS celebrated philosophical writeron legislation, and political and domesticeconomy, is brother of the lateRussian general, Sir Samuel Bentham,and son of an attorney, in Red LionStreet, Houndsditch, where he wasborn, on the 15th of February, 1747-8.He was, says his friend and biographer,Dr. Southward Smith, a precociouschild; at the age of five, he had readRapin's History of England, acquireda knowledge of musical notes, andplayed on the violin. Such too wasthe contemplative turn of his mind,and the clearness and accuracy withwhich he observed everything thatcame under his notice, that he had, atthis time, acquired the name of " thephilosopher," amongst the members ofhis family. He had read Telemaque,in French, at the age of seven ; and,at eight, was placed at WestminsterSchool, where he soon became distinguished.He was admitted, in hisfourteenth year, of Queen's College,Oxford ; where he is said to haveengaged in public disputations in thecommon-hall, and excited, by theacuteness of his observations, the precisionof his terms, and the logicalcorrectness of his inductions, the surpriseand admiration of all who heardhim. At sixteen, he proceeded B.A. ;and, at twenty, M. A.; being theyoungest graduate who, at that time,(1767,) had been known at either of theuniversities.Being destined for the legal profession,he attended the celebratedVenetian lectures of Sir William Blackstone,having previously become astudent of Lincoln's Inn. " By thecommand of a father," he says, in hisIndications respecting Lord Eldon,JEREMY BENTHAM,I entered into the profession ; and,in the year 1772, or thereabouts, wascalled to the bar." He then practised,for awhile, in the courts of equity,and acquired some reputation by theability he there displayed. Someabuses, however, with which he bex-atneacquainted in the office of the mastersin Chancery, soon disgusted him withhis profession, and he obtained hisfather's permission to abandon it. " Ifound it," he observes, " more to mytaste to endeavour to put an end tothese abuses, than to profit by them."His first printed work appeared in 1776,under the title of A Fragment onGovernment, professing to be an examinationof Blackstone's Commentarieson that head ; in 1778, hepublished his View of the Hand LabourBill; and, in 1780, appeared his Principlesof Morals and Legislation. In1785, he went to Paris, for the thirdtime ; and afterwards, by way of Italy,Greece, and Turkey, on a visit to hisbrother, at Crechoff, in Russia ; wherehe is said to have written his treatiseon The Usury Laws. In 1787, waspublished his Defence of Usury, shewingthe impolicy of restraints laid onpecuniary bargains; a work describedby a writer in The Edinburgh Review,as " unanswered and unanswerable ;and not less admirably reasoned thanhappily expressed." In 1789, appearedhis Introduction to the Principles ofMorals and Legislature ; and, in thefollowing year, having conceived theidea of making convicts useful, he madethat design public in The Anglican,or Inspection-House, in two volumes,octavo, in which he developed the planthat has since been partially adoptedin the Penitentiary, at Millbank.The death of his father, in 1792,put Mr. Bentham in possession of afortune, which enabled him to bestowexclusive attention to his favouritesubjects; and, in that year, he printedhis Truth versus Ashhurst, &c. ; and,in 1795, Supply without Burthen, orEscheat vice Taxation ; to which heprefixed his Protest against Law Taxes.The great work, however, by whichhis name became celebrated throughoutEurope, was fated to appear in a foreignlanguage. It was published in French,at Paris, in three volumes, octavo, inthe year 1802, under the title of Traitede Legislation Civile ; having beenedited and translated into that languageby the late M. Guienne Dumont, aSwiss gentleman of considerable learning,talents, and notoriety. A copy ofthis work, it is said, having been soonafter presented to Buonaparte, byMonsieur (now Prince) Talleyrand,the emperor pronounced a high eulogiumupon it, and declared it " Uneoeuvre de genie." His next workswere, A Plea for the Constitution ; ScotsReform Considered, with respect tothe Regulations of the Courts ofJustice ; and, in 1812, another of hisworks, in two volumes, octavo, wastranslated into French, and publishedin Paris, by M. Guienne Dumont, underthe title of Theorie des Peines et desRecompenses. This was followed bya tract On the Law of Evidence ;Swear not at All ; Table of Springs ofAction ; and Chrestomathia : Part 1 ;Explanatory of a proposed School forthe Extension of the New System ofInstruction to the higher Branches ofLearning, 1816. Part 2, being an Essayon Nomenclature and Classification ;including a critical examination of theEncyclopaedia Table of Lord Bacon,1817.In the year last-mentioned, he publishedhis Plan of Parliamentary Reform,in which he has enlisted heartilyin the cause of universal suffrage, butina manner to make few converts.He next published, in succession,Papers relative to Codification, andhis Church of England's; which latterbrought down upon him no small shareof odium, from the free manner inwhich the subject was handled. From1819 to 1827, several productions of hispen continued to appear at intervals ;and, in the latter year, Mr. Mill published,from the manuscripts of JeremyBentham, The Rationale of JudicialEvidence, specially applied to EnglishPractice, in five thick volumes, octavo.Few persons have excited moregeneral regard by their virtues, ormore solid fame by their writings, thanMr. Bentham. He is, perhaps, lessappreciated in his own country thanabroad ; yet the day is not probably fardistant, when he will be mentioned withthe same admiration in England as heis now in France. To his writings,though, in a great measure, their opera-politicalECONOMISTS.tion has been unseen, may be attributedthat extensive and still extendingchange in the character of reformingopinions, which has led to the enlightenedviews now taken of constitutionalquestions, and to the consequent practicaleffects. A writer in The NewMonthly Magazine has not unaptly remarked,that "a knowledge of' his worksis a key which unlocks all the mysteriesof social and political government."The excellence and hospitality of hisprivate character has been experiencedand attested by some of the most eminentmen of the present century. " If".says the celebrated Bristol, in 1793,the reader has ever endeavoured topicture in his imagination those raremen whom Heaven sends upon theearth to console mankind for theirsufferings, and who, under the imperfectionsof the human form, conceal thebrightness of an ethereal nature, suchmen, for example, as Howard orBenefit, he may perhaps conceivesome idea of my friend Bentham.Candour in the countenance, mildnessin the look, serenity upon the brow,calmness in the language, coolness inthe movements, imperturbability unitedwith the keenest feelings ; such are hisqualities." He is an excellent linguist jand is said to have devoted twelvehours a day sometimes to study, butseldom less "than eight or ten. He hasnever been married ; and some havegone so far as to *ay that his physicalpassions never permitted him to be inlove. Major Parry, in his Last Daysof Lord Byron, gives the followingdescription of Mr. Bentham's appearance,on a visit which he paid to him.His appearance," says the major,"struck me forcibly. His white, thinlocks, cut straight in the fashion of theQuakers, and hanging, or rather floating,on his shoulders; his garmentssomething of their colour and cut ; andhis frame rather square and muscular,with no exuberance of fl sh, made upa singular-looking, and not inelegant,old m ui. Me welcomed me with a fewhurried words, but without any ceresny, and then conducted me intos-veiul rooms, to-view me isis ammoniamater 1 of war O e vtiyi-d. "ii u;i> nearly filled withand another with unboundworks, which, i understood, v.vu- thsown composition. Theformer, he said, furnished supplies."The major then gives a ludicrous accountof his habit of running in thestreets, and his fears lest he, the major,should be taken for a mad doctor, theattendant amanuensis for his assistant,and Mr. Bentham for his patient, justbroke those from his keepers. " Heexulted," it is said, "in his activity;and inquired particularly if I had^everseen a man so active at his time of life.I could not answer 'No'" says themajor, " while I was almost breathlesswith the exertion of following himthrough the crowded streets." " Emperors,"says the major, " have soughtto do him honour ; but he was too wiseto encourage their advances beyondwhat was good for mankind. TheEmperor Alexander, who was afraid ofhis legislation, sent him a diamondring, which the philosopher, to his immortalhonour, returned, (saying, orsomething to that effect) that his objectwas not to receive rings from princes,but to do good to the world." Besidesthe works already named, he is theauthor of numerous productions, bothin French and English ; and is a considerableshareholder in the propertyof the celebrated Westminster Review,to the pages of which he has largelycontributed, as well as to those ofYoung's Annals of Agriculture. Hisfirst writings are said to have appearedin letters to a newspaper, on theaffairs of Europe, and to have producedan answer from George the Third, inThe Hague Journal, which was repliedto with such force and ability, that theking never forgot it. When the billfor the establishment of a anglicanprison had passed both houses ofparliament, the king, on taking thepen to sign it, asked who it was thathad undertaken this scheme : " Mr.Bentham, of Lincoln's Inn," was thereply ; when his majesty, exclaiming,"Bentham!" put down" his pen, andnever gave his assent.I he chief fault of Mr. Bentham'sstyle is its obscurity, and yet no manthinks with more simplicity; his ideasure.-euted themselves to him withoutlabour, and lie was probably moresolicitous about the expression of them,than the manner in which they shouldie expressed.WILLIAM COBBETT.WILLIAM COBBETT.WILLIAM COBBETT, the son ofa small farmer, who resided in theneighbourhood of Farnham, in Surrey,was born there on the 9th of March,1766, and spent his boyhood in thelabours of the field. His father, it issaid, taught him and his brothers toread and write, and gave them a tolerableknowledge of arithmetic. Aboutthe autumn of 1782, being on a visitto a relation who lived near Portsmouth,he endeavoured to get takenon board a ship as a sailor ; but thecaptain to whom he applied, suspectinghe had not the authority of his parents,refused to receive him. He had, however,acquired a spirit for rambling,which was nut to be checked, and, insteadof returning home, went to London,and engaged himself, as copyingclerk, to an attorney, in Gray's Inn.After about eight or nine months, hefound this occupation irksome enoughto induce him to proceed to Chatham,where he enlisted in a regiment boundfor Nova Scotia. Before starting, however,he remained at Chatham a year,during which he learnt by heart Lowth'igrammar, acquired a considerable additionof knowledge on various othersubjects, and, by his good conduct, roseto the rank of corporal.Having reached Nova Scotia, heProceeded with his regiment to Newbrunswick, where lie staid six years ;and, notwithstanding his adherence tostudy, performed his military dutieswith such regularity, that he was advancedto the rank of Serjeant major.At this time, it was his constant habit,as he himself says, to rise about fouro'clock in the morning, and, havingdressed himself ready fur parade, withhis sword lying before him on his table,ready to be buckled on, he pursued hisstudies till the sound of the trumpetwarned him to the ground ; and thuslaid the foundation of that knowledgeby which he acquired such notorietyin after life. In the winter of 1791, hisregiment was relieved, and he returnedto England, where, on his own solicitation,he obtained his discharge, whichwas accompanied with testimonialssigned by the celebrated Lord EdwardFitzgerald. He married early in thefollowing year; and having, while inNew Brunswick, witnessed the mostbarefaced peculation, determined tobring the offenders to punishment, withwhich view he demanded a court-martialon them. Finding, however, that everyobstacle was purposely thrown in hisway, he abandoned his design ; and onthis circumstance, says his biographer,in Public Characters, " the grossestcalumnies have been raised againsthim." In March, 1792, he went toFrance, for the purpose of perfectinghimself in a knowledge of the languageof that country ; and from thence,in the following October, he passedover to New York, in America ; fromwhence he travelled to Philadelphia.Here he opened a bookseller's shop,commenced author, under the nameof Peter Porcupine, and at once madea display of those extraordinary powersof style and intellect that have renderedhis name so celebrated. Hispen was chiefly directed against theattacks made upon England by theapplauders of the French revolution ;and, among others, he lashed Dr. Rushwith such severity, that an action wasbrought against him for libel, and averdict found in the doctor's favour forfive thousand 'dollars, as damages. In1800, he returned to England, andcommenced bookseller in Pall Mall ;published his works in twelve volumes,for which he obtained an immensenumber of subscribers ; and establisheda daily newspaper, designated ThePorcupine, which he soon, 'however,discontinued. He then set on foot hisfamous Political Register, in which hecommenced by attacking the Addingtonadministration with the utmost energyand effect. He denounced the treatyof Amiens as dangerous and disgraceful; and refusing, in consequence, toilluminate his house in celebration ofthe event, it was furiously attacked bythe mob. The sale of his Register,however, became so extensive, that itsPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS.proceeds enabled him, not only to assistmany of his poorer relations, but alsoto purchase a considerable estate atMotley, in Hampshire, where he thenfixed his residence, and engaged inagricultural pursuits.In 1809, he took a conspicuouspart in the discussion of the desperatefinancial shifts to which, says ColonelNapier, in the third volume of hisHistory of the War in the Peninsula,ministers then resorted ; not perceivingthe ruin attending a full payment, incoin of sterling value, of debts contractedin a depreciated paper currency.The celebrated writer, WilliamCobbett, he adds, " did not fail, however,to point out this very clearly ; andsubsequent experience has confirmedhis views." Ministers finding the subjectof pur memoir a continual thorn intheir sides, sought with impatience anopportunity of crushing him ; and, in1810, an opportunity occurred whichsuited their purpose. In that year, partof a German regiment having beenemployed in flogging some of the localmilitia" at Ely, Cobbett denounced theproceeding, in a tone that enabled governmentto procure a criminal information,upon which he was prosecuted foralibel, sentenced to two years' imprisonmentin Newgate, and to pay a fineof 1,000. Although, says his biographer,in The Encyclopaedia Americana,the fine was paid by a subscriptionamong his friends, he subsequentlypetitioned the king to restore him thefine. During his confinement, he continuedto write with his wonted spiritand perseverance, one of the chiefobjects of his attack being the bankpaper system. In 1816, he changedhis Register into a twopenny pamphlet,when the sale is said to have risen tothe unprecedented number of one hundredthousand, whilst the ministerssmarted severely under what theyaffected to despise as Twopenny Trash.To put a stop to it, however, theyprocured the passing of the famoussix-acts ; through fear of the operationof which, Cobbett paid another visit toAmerica, in 1817. He still, however,continued to publish his Register atintervals; and, on his return to England,in 1819, took a very active partonthe side of the late Queen Caroline ;and made an unsuccessful attempt toprocure his return to parliament forCoventry. He also added to his notoriety,in consequence of his havingbrought over from America the bonesof, as he had denounced him in 1797,the " infamous Tom Paine." Thiscreated a schism between himself aridThe Times Newspaper, which hasnever been allayed.He now took a farm at Kensington;and, renewing his attention toagriculture, attempted to grow severalplants and trees indigenous toAmerica, and to introduce into Britishdomestic economy Indian corn, asastaple commodity. To further hisviews, he published a Treatise onCobbett's Corn ; printed a number ofhis Register upon paper made fromthe husks ; and established depots forthe sale of flour and bread made fromcorn of his own growth. The project,however, failed ; and, not finding hisagricultural notions likely to becomeeither so popular or so profitable as hispolitical, resigned his farm. In 1829,he published his Advice to Young Menand Women ; and, about the sameperiod, delivered, at the Mechanics'Institution, and, afterwards, in varioustowns of England, a course of lectureson political economy, by which hegained considerable profit and applause.In 1825, appeared one of his most popularworks, The History of the ProtestantReformation in England andIreland, which was translated intoFrench and Italian, in consequence ofits apparent bias in favour of the papalsystem. His next publications we're,The Emigrants' Guide, in Ten Letters,addressed to the Tax-payers of England ;Cobbett's Poor Man's Friend; an Addressto the Journeymen and Labourersof England and Wales, Scotland andIreland, on the Causes of their presentMiseries; Cottage Economy; and VillageSermons. He is also the author ofA Grammar to teach Frenchmen theEnglish Language, which is the standardbook, in French schools; Marten'sLaw of Nations, translated from theFrench ; English Grammar, in Lettersto his Son ; A Year's Residence inAmerica, and twenty volumes of ParliamentaryDebates.As a writer, Cobbett is among themost forcible and original this countryhas produced. His views are, perhaps,ROBERT OWENmore searching than profound; but noone demonstrates a proposition withmore powerful simplicity. Despisingthe elegancies, and sometimes the proprieties,of language, he neverthelesswields his pen with all the might of agiant's club, and all the keenness of aDamascus blade. When he is vituperative,it may be compared to the effectof a plough or a harrow : he lacerateswithout mercy, and wounds with allthe roughness and indifference of thoseinstruments. One of his most powerfuland favourite weapons of speechis repetition : what in others wouldbecome tautology, is in him but theacquisition of strength. By one authorityhe has been called the sledgehammerwriter ; and Mr. Hazlitt compareshis pen to a flail, with which,besides beating all around him, hedeals himself an occasional blow. Thereis, however, much to be disgusted withinhis style ; and a revolution in thefeelings, as well as the tastes, of humannature must take place, before posteritywill excuse the coarseness of his phrases,when he writes under the impulse ofstrongly excited feelings. His workshave unquestionably done more to openthe eyes of the poorer classes of thiscountry to their political condition,than any previous or subsequent publications; and many beneficial measureshave, in consequence, been wrung fromgovernment.In private life, he is said to be estimable,though the coarse spirit of hiswritings becomes occasionally visible inhis conduct.ROBERT OWEN.ROBERT OWEN was born at New-town,Montgomeryshire, in the year1771. We are unacquainted with thecalling of his father, or where his sonwas educated. He received, probably,no further instruction than was necessaryto fit him for a mercantile life,which he commenced at Stamford, inLincolnshire, after he had been a shorttime in London. On his return to themetropolis, he entered the establishmentof Messrs. Flint and Palmer, ofthe Borough ; went from thence toManchester ; and, turning his attentionto cotton-machinery, engaged in thatbusiness, first on his own account, andafterwards as superintendent of Mr.Drinkwater's establishment at Manchester,and at Northwich, in Cheshire,in which occupation he remained threeor four years.He then became a partner withMessrs. Mouton and Sarti, of Manchester,in a cotton-spinning business;built the Charlton Mills, and commenceda new firm in partnership withMessrs. Borroclaile and Atkinson, ofLondon, and Messrs. Barton and Co.,of 'Manchester. In conjunction withthese gentlemen, he subsequently purchasedthe mills and establishment ofMr. Dale, at New Lanark, whosedaughter became the wife of the subjectof our memoir on the 30th ofSeptember, 1799. On a dissolution ofpartnership taking place, the whole propertyof the firm, which comprehendedthe entire village of New Lanark, wasput up to sale, and purchased by Mr.Owen, on behalf of himself, Mr.Walker,Mr. Jeremy Bentham, Mr. WilliamAllen, Mr. Joseph Fox, and Mr. JosephForster, who held among them thirteenshares. Mr. Owen retained five ; and,besides the profits arising from them,was appointed superintendent of theestablishment, with a salary of 1,000per annum. He immediately set aboutmodelling a plan for the government ofthe community thus brought under hiscontrol, which amounted in numberto about two thousand five hundredpersons. His grand doctrine is, thatthe character of individuals is formedexclusively by the circumstances whichsurround them ; and that, consequently,by improving the latter, the former, bothmorally and intellectually, will be improvedin proportion. How far hisprinciples will bear the investigation hehas invited, we shall not now discuss ; butnone can doubt the benevolence, thoughthey may suspect the practicability, ofhis views. Of his settlement at "NewPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS.Lanark, M. Julien, the editor of TheRevue Encyclopedia, gives a veryfavourable account, in a narrative of histour through England, from which ashort extract may not be uninteresting :The houses of the colony," saysM. St. Julien, " are of a simple, butelegant structure ; some contain a numberof chambers, or small separateapartments, fir one or two workmen,or lor a family ; others, in their upperstories, have magazines of provisions ofevery description ; and the lower partsare shops, open certain hours of theday, where each workman or familymay obtain credit till it reaches theamount of the sum due for a month'slabour; and, in case of the birth of achild, illness, &e. occasional advancesare made. Besides two vast buildingsfor the workmen, &c. and the largeseparate house, which serves for amagazine, there are three others, noless, remarkable for their regularityand neatness, on the right of theavenue. First, a manufactory, sixstories high, for spinning and differenttrades; then a beautiful house, witha spacious court before it, for childrenof both sexes, with halls for instruction,exercises, and prayer. A little furtheron, close to a canal that communicateswith the Clyde, there is a house building,intended for a common kitchen andrefectory for the unmarried workmen,for such as have no relations with them,and for others indiscriminately. Theinfirmary, with a physician and surgeonattached, has thirty-eight patients,out of two thousand three hundredindividuals, including three hundredand fifty children, of whom the colonyconsists." After stating other particulars,he adds, " the employment oflime is measured at seven hours forsleep ; half an hour for prayers anddevotions ; half an hour for dressing andtoilette ; ten hours for learning in theclasses, or for labour in the looms, &c. ;and six hours for meals and bodily exercises,or recreations. There is nospecial mode of religious instruction ;and individuals of all persuasions, asMethodists, Anabaptists, Independents,Quakers, &c. may be found; and theSundays are appropriated to devotion,tranquillity, and repose." It will beseen that this kind of establishment isi not so original as has been supposed ;it resembles those of the Moravian;and the Jesuits, when their orderflourished, had similar institutions,with the omission of women arid femalechildren.Mr. Owen first excited public noticeat a dinner given to Joseph Lancaster,at Glasgow, in 1812, when he deliveredan address, in which he commented onthe pernicious effects of machinery,and adverted to the immense amountof human labour which was therebysuperseded. He soon after publishedhis Observations on the Effect of theManufacturing System; with Hints forthe Improvement of those parts of itwhich are most injurious to Health andMorals. The most important of hisworks appeared in 1813, entitled ANew View of Society ; or, Four Essayson the formation of the Human Character,preparatory to the developmentof a plan for gradually ameliorating thecondition of mankind. In this publication,which he was at great pains tocirculate in every part of the civilizedworld, he attempts to establish his fundamentalprinciple, " that any generalcharacter, from the best to the worst,from the most ignorant to the mostenlightened, may be given to any community,even to the world at large, bythe application of proper means ;" andfurther, that " the will of man has nopower whatever over his opinions ; hemust, and ever did, and ever will, believewhat has been, is, or may be impressedon his mind by his predecessors,and the circumstances which surroundhim."On the 14th and 21st of August, 1817,he presided at two meetings held at theCity of London Tavern, when he deliveredan address that made a verypowerful impression, and caused greatexcitement at the time. His chiefattack was directed against mechanism,which he denounced as the greatestcurse to humanity, under the existingarrangements of society ; but that itmight become the greatest blessingunder the new form of things which hewas about to introduce. He was listenedto with great attention at these andother meetings, till he thought properto put forth a paper condemnatory offaith, when, as the writer of a recentwork observes, " the crowds that beforesurrounded him departed, andROBERT OWEN.nothing could induce the large majorityof mankind to listen to any propositionsconnected, however remotely, with hisname." Still his zeal was unabated ;and, in the course of one month, hepurchased, at a cost of ^1,500, no lessthan twenty thousand newspapers containingreports of these meetings, forthe purpose of sending them to variousparts of the world. In 1818, he visitedthe continent ; and, after going overFellenberg's establishment at Howl,in Switzerland, delivered his memorialsto the congress assembled, at that time,at Aix-la-chapelle. In these memorials,he stated their general results,the substance of which was, that theperiod was arrived when the meanswere become obvious, by which, withoutforce or punishment of any kind, thewants and desires of every human beingmight be more than satisfied, and therising generation surrounded with suchcircumstances as would form them intoany character that society might predetermine.Any defect that may appearin such character he would attribute tothe inexperience of the parties whoattempt to put those invaluable principlesinto practice ;" but concludes,already the principles and consequentpractice are placed beyond the powerof human assault. It will be found thatsilence cannot now retard their progress,and that opposition will give increasedcelerity to their movements."In the spring of 1819, Mr. Owenmade an unsuccessful attempt to obtaina seat in parliament, and shortly afterwardspublished his Address to theWorking Classes. In the same year,the Duke of Kent presided at two meetings,convened by Mr. Owen, at theFreemason's Tavern, and concurred,with the Duke of Sussex and others,in a resolution that a subscription of100,000 should be raised for carryinginto effect the suggestion of the committee,the substance of whose reportwas, that they had met several timesunder the presidency of the royal chairman,and had further examined Mr.Owen's plans. That the concurrenttestimony of all who had visited NewLanark convinced them of the efficacyof the plan there in operation for thepromotion of the comfort and moralityof the persons in that establishment.That, though Mr. Owen's proposed plandiffered from that pursued at NewLanark, still it so far resembled it asto induce the committee to recommendthe foundation of a single establishmentas an experiment. A sufficient sumwas subscribed to enable the parties topurchase five hundred acres of land atMotherwell, near Hamilton, but it wasultimately resold, and the design abandonedfor the want of further pecuniaryassistance. In 1823, Mr. Owen visitedDublin, where several public meetingstook place, at which he found his viewslistened to with profound interest. Inthe course of one of his addresses, heexhibited a brass plate, showing thedifferent development of the humanattributes under the existing state ofsociety, and that which he proposed toestablish. In the former, he makesexcitability, imagination, and self-lovepreponderate; in the latter, strength,courage, perception, reflection, andjudgment. He also represented the gradationsof society by eight metal cubes ;making it appear, if we adapt his calculationto the census of 1811, that thefirst division, consisting of the royalfamily, the lords spiritual and temporal,&c., did not, in point of numbers,amount to more than a six thousandthpart of the whole population, whilst theworking class comprised three-fifthsof it ; and, what he denominatespaupers, vagrants, idle and disorderlypersons, criminals, &c., nearly a tenth.In 1824, Mr. Owen proceeded to theUnited States, for the purpose of purchasingof Mr. Rape his settlement atNew Harmony ; but in this plan hisscheme has proved abortive, owing, ashesays, to the inexperience of the conductors,and not to any natural defectin the community. After publishinghis Declaration of Mental Independencein July, 1826, he left New Harmonyfor England, where he has been sinceengaged in giving lectures, and organizingequitable exchange bazaars.The foregoing sketch of Mr. Owen'sviews is sufficient to show that they areworthy of more attention than has yetbeen accorded to them, or, we fear, everwill, unless taken up upon principlesless liable to misinterpretation thanthose which Mr. Owen holds forth ashis basis. That a change in the feelingsand opinions of man, as influencinghis social conduct, is, comparativelyPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS,speaking, as much wanted now as whenthe scheme of gospel morality was firstpropounded, Mr. Owen is, perhaps, notthe only one who has discovered ; butfew will therefore concur with him,that faith is the source of existing evil,though assenting to his favouritedoctrine, that charity is the only bondby which co-operation can be effected,and that, without it, all creeds are butas sounding brass and a tinklingcymbal." In this respect, the mostorthodox Christian may go the lengthof Mr. Owen ; for St. Paul himself hasdeclared charity to be the. grand touchstoneof religious sincerity. Withrespect to the formation of our character/or, and not by, ourselves, we shall notbe expected, in a work like the present,to enter into a lengthened controversywith Mr. Owen ; but the conclusionhe deduces from his doctrines is toodangerous to be passed over in silence.Having stated that we are the creaturesexclusively of circumstance, and not ofchoice, he proceeds to strip man of thepower of acting or judging for himself,and acquits him, consequently, of allaccountability to his Creator for hisconduct or opinions. Vice, it has beenjustly contended, is not likely to bechecked by the promulgation of anopinion so flattering to its inclinationsas this, whether true or false ; nor willsuch a doctrine stand more chance ofadoption because, as is believed to bethecase, Mr. Owen has diffused it inthe hope of inspiring charitable judgmentsand feelings between man andman. The operation of circumstanceshas been more than once hinted at inthe sacred writings as a reasonable aswell as a revealed ground for our obedienceto the precept, " judge not, lestye be judged;" but neither Scripture norphilosophy has confounded the temptationto an action with the action itself.The wretch, whom famine tempts tosteal a piece of bread, cannot pleadnecessity as his excuse ; for necessity,to mean anything at all, means an inevitableconsequence; and, undoubtedly,theft is not the inevitable consequenceof hunger: it may be the probable oneunder certain circumstances, but to callthat inevitable, which wants the consentof an agent to carry it into effect, inevery case, and is possible to be avoidedin any one, is a solecism both in languageand philosophy. " Necessity,"says Bishop Butler, in his unanswerablechapter upon that subject, " as muchrequires and supposes a necessary agent,as freedom requires and supposes a freeagent, to be the former of the world."Mr. Owen's favourite dogma of the injusticeof punishment is confuted in asingle passage by the same profoundreasoner. " It is said," observes thebishop, " that what, upon suppositionof freedom, would be just punishment,upon supposition of necessity, becomesmanifestly unjust ; as if the necessity,which is supposed to destroy the injusticeof murders, for instance, wouldnot also destroy the injustice of punishingit." Another objectionable featurein Mr. Owen's plans is the power ofdissolving the marriage state at the willof either party, children being no barto the separation, as, from the secondyear of their birth, they are to belongto the community. Much might besaid to prove the ill effects of weakeningdomestic ties, and the licentiousand unchaste notions which this stateof things would in time give rise to.Sir James Mackintosh, in his Dissertation,in The Encyclopaedia Britannica,attributes to these causes, in a greatmeasure, the chief convulsions of theRoman empire.With respect to the moral and intellectualimprovement which might beeffected by surrounding youth withfavourable circumstances, no doubt canbe entertained ; but how far continuousand uniform results in character wouldbe produced, or whether such an uniformitywould be, on the whole, beneficialto mankind, is yet, perhaps, to bedetermined. If all things were in suchPlenty that there could be no want, ormen were so benevolent as to providefor the wants of others as much as fortheir own, there would, says Hume, inneither case, be any justice, becausethere would be no need for it. " But itis evident," observes Sir James Mackintosh," that the same reasoning is applicableto every good affection, andevery right action. None of them couldexist, if there were no scope for theirexercise. If there could be no offences,there could be no placability. If therewere no crime, there could be no mercy.Temperance, prudence, patience, magnanimity,are qualities of which theROBERT OWEN.4Jvalue depends on the evils by whichthey are respectively exercised."Having thus taken a review of Mr.Owen's principles, a word or two remainsto be said upon his plans, whichhave been treated with a silence andcontempt by the literary world in general,which neither they nor their propounderdeserve. Not one encyclopaedia,in its elaborate articles uponsociety and political economy, containseven the mention of his name ; and hisviews have been either wholly overlooked,or summarily dismissed, by theprincipal reviewers. The infant schools,established upon the plan of that atNew Lanark, have been found to succeed; and as far as the experiment ofhis new order of society has been triedat Lanark, it seems to promise favourableresults as a whole. In adoptinghis plans, there is no necessity foradopting his principles ; for his communityat New Lanark, in their firstaddress to him, declared their persuasionof the truths of Christianity, andtheir determination to abide by them ;and Mr. Owen, in his answer, observed,Knowing the importance of religiousliberty and perfect freedom of opinion,I have ever been anxious to secure themto each of you equally." His benevolentand disinterested intentions havebeen proved by the sacrifice of almostall his fortune ; by the devotion ofhis time to the promulgation of hisviews ; and by the courage and firmnesswith which he has advocated them inthe face of ridicule, prejudice, arrogance,and contempt. A man who proposesa plan of modelling society insuch a manner as to produce universalhappiness, deserves, at least, attention ;and, having persisted in his scheme fortwenty years, with something like experiencein his favour, is not to bedismissed as a visionary or enthusiast,until his theories have been shown tobe utterly impracticable by somethingmore convincing than sarcasm andabuse.Another cause, however, besides thegeneral hostility to Mr. Owen's plans,is said to exist in the isolation of Mr.Owen himself from those who entertaincongenial sentiments. He has beendescribed as " the most intelligent andbenevolent of dictators, but no co-operator."He is said to consider noone qualified to co-operate with, butall under, him ; and that, until the publicare determined to study the principlesand carry them into practice,independently of any name or of anyindividual, their great benefits to humanitymust still be deferred. " There isa peculiarity in his personal character,"observes the author of Hampden inthe Nineteenth Century, (one of thewarmest admirers of Mr. Owen's theory)which may have prevented him fromderiving assistance from those who, inconsequenceof long continued attentionto the subject, were best qualified toaid him. Successful above all his contemporariesin detecting the real causeof distress, and in developing the trueprinciples of society, and seldom findingcongeniality of opinion, he concludedthat no one was competent tothe subject but himself, as no one besideshad had the same experience inpractice. The consequence of thisimpression was an apparent egotism,notwithstanding his sincere disavowalof the desire of fame, in the advocacy ofa system, which professes to lose sightof the individual in the species, and torecognise no one apart and distinctfrom the rest. It has also led to a disregardof the most intelligent in society,and driven from him those who,from their acquirements and meritedreputation, might, after studying thesubject, have been greatly instrumentalin spreading a knowledge of truth farand wide."POLITICAL ECONOMISTS.JOSEPH LANCASTER.JOSEPH LANCASTER was born,in 1771, of Quaker parents, to whichsect he himself belongs. He madehimself known by delivering lectures,in various parts of England, on education,according to a peculiar plan ofhis own, as he stated ; but of whichDr. Bell, of Madras, may, with morepropriety, be called the founder. Itconsisted in teaching by mutual ormonitorial instruction ; so that the boys,in fact, became each other's instructors.Sand-writing, and syllabic spelling, aretwo principal ingredients of the system;the former of which Dr. Bell first gotthe idea of from a Malabar school. Ithas, in fact, been long in use among theoriental nations ; and neither Dr. Bell,therefore, nor the subject of our memoir,can be said to have made a newdiscovery. Each, however, has themerit of bringing it into practice, withvarious improvements ; though it isscarcely fair towards Dr. Bell, to callthat the Lancastrian system, in which,if a claim to originality be admittedat all, Dr. Bell's is, unquestionably, thestronger. A writer in The LondonEncyclopaedia has thus stated thequestion of the comparative economyof the two schools. " Dr. Bell introducedthe knowledge of sand-writingand syllabic spelling, which Mr. Lancasterconfessedly borrowed from him.Mr. Lancaster having first opened alarge school, introduced the economicaluse of slates, in many cases wherepaper books were necessarily used atMadras. Mr. Lancaster also inventeda large card, with the letters and shortwords printed thereon ; one of which,stuck against the wall, serves the wholeclass to read from ; whereas, Dr. Bellprefers that each child should have asmall card of its own, which it maylook at and con over at its pleasure.Many of Dr. Bell's schools use the largecards, many of Mr. Lancaster's thesmall ones ; a few Bibles and Testamentsare admitted to be as necessary inMr. Lancaster's schools as in Dr. Bell's.So that, in fact, the two schools are nowon a perfect equality as to expense."Mr. Lancaster certainly has thecredit of having used the most zealousand active exertions to establish asystem of education, which, by whatevername it may be proper to call it,is undoubtedly one of the most brilliantof our modern discoveries, and may benow regarded as established. In hisattempts to introduce it in this country,he received encouragement from thehighest personages in the kingdom, withthe sovereign at their head, and succeededin founding numerous schools.The first one which he opened was inthe Borough, in 1803 ; and, in thesame year, he published the first editionof his Improvements in Education, inwhich he acknowledges his obligationsto Dr. Bell, and regrets that he was notacquainted with the beauty of his systemtill somewhat advanced in his plan."If I had known it," he says, "itwould have saved me much trouble, andsome retrograde movements." In thepublic papers, however, he took all themerit of the invention to himself, whichgave rise to a controversy between hisown friends and those of Dr. Bell ; butthe subject of our memoir had becomethe prominent character on the canvass,and was considered " the necessary,indeed the only instrument, throughwhom the new system could be carriedinto practice."Upon Mr. Lancaster's embarking,however, in an extensive school establishment,at Tooting, on his ownresources, he met with such little encouragement)as compelled him to giveit up ; and ultimately, in disgust, toquit England for America, where hehas diffused a knowledge of his planwith great success. His works uponthe subject, besides that above-mentioned,are A Letter to John Forster, onthe best means of Educating and Employingthe Poor in Ireland ; Appeal toJustice in behalf of some Poor Children ;Outlines of a Plan for the Educationof Children ; Account of his Plan forthe Education of Children ; and hisReport on the Progress of his Plan,from the year 1793 to 1812.L) A V I U 11 1 C A R D O .DAVID RICARDO.DAVID RICARDO, the third son ofan eminent Jew stock-broker, was bornin London, on the 19th of April, 1772.He received the first part of his educationin Holland, and, after completingit in England, was taken into hisfather's counting-house. His studies atthis time, comprised little more thanreading, writing, and arithmetic ; buthe subsequently made himself master ofthe mathematics, and obtained a partialknowledge of chemistry, geology, &c.When a boy, he was remarkable forsolidity of judgment and steadiness ofcharacter, and was employed by hisfather in many important transactionslong before he attained his twenty-firstyear. At this age he married a Christianlady, and became a convert fromJudaism, in consequence of which hewas driven from his father's house, andforced to seek his own livelihood. Hisindustry and ability soon renderedhim successful, and not only procuredhim a competency, but enabled him torealize a handsome fortune. It was nottill he was somewhat advanced in life,that he engaged in political economy,to which his attention was first attractedby a perusal of Adam Smith'sWealth of Nations. His connexionwith the Bank, and his knowledge ofits immense transactions, led him toreflect upon the subject of the currency; to endeavour to account for thedifference of value that existed betweenthe coin of the realm and banknotes; and to ascertain from whatcauses the depreciation of the latter arose.Having committed his views to paper,he exhibited the manuscript to the lateeditor and proprietor of The MorningChronicle, Mr. Perry, who urged himto allow its appearance in his paper.To this, after some time, he consented ;and his productions were accordinglygiven in the shape of letters, signed R.,the first of which appeared on the 6thof September, 1810. The interest theyexcited induced him to publish them,shortly after, in the shape of a pamphlet,On the Depreciation of the Currency,which elicited numerous replies. Thequestion was next taken up as one ofgreat national importance, and by thelate Mr. Homer in particular, who obtainedthe appointment of the famousbullion committee, the result of whoselabours was the confirmation of Mr.Ricardo's doctrines. He was next inducedto assist in the investigation ofthe affairs of the Bank of England, inwhich Mr. Grenfell had engaged ; andthe result was his masterly Exposition,with a proposal for an economical currency,on which subject he addresseda letter to Mr. Perceval, then chancellorof the exchequer, who, however,declined following his advice. Hisnext productions were, An Essay onthe Influence of a Low Price of Cornon the Profits of Stock, and his celebratedPrinciples of Political Economyand Taxation, which at once placedhim in the first rank of writers on thatsubject.He entered upon a new sphere oflife, on becoming member of parliamentfor the borough of Worthington,in Ireland, in 1819; and, in all financialquestions, was listened to, by both sidesof the house, with the deepest attention.He died, highly respected, at his seat,Catacomb Park, Gloucestershire, on thellth of September, 1823, leaving awidow and seven children. His losswas sensibly felt in parliament, wherehis original and enlightened views, andhis able manner of explaining them,had created a revolution in the doctrineof political economy highly beneficialto the country. The system of Mr.Ricardo, though it has been opposedwith great force by Mr. Malthus andothers, has not been shaken ; and awriter in The New Monthly Magazinehas not, perhaps asserted too much, insaying, that " After every allowancehas been made for its deficiencies instyle and arrangement, The Principlesof Political Economy and Taxation isthe most original, profound, and trulyvaluable philosophical work, that hasappeared since the publication of TheWealth of Nations, by the erudite Dr.Smith."POLITICAL ECONOMISTS.THOMAS ROBERT MALTHUS.THOMAS ROBERT MALTHUS,the son of Daniel Malthus, Esq., ofAlbury, near Guilford, was born aboutthe year 1775, and received a liberaleducation, which he completed at Jesus'College, Cambridge, where he obtaineda fellowship, and proceeded to the degreeof M.A., having previously enteredinto holy orders. The work, which laidthe foundation of his fame, his Treatiseon Population, &c., first appeared,anonymously, in 1798, and createdno little sensation in the world, fromthe peculiar character of the doctrinesit promulgated. Conjectures as tothe author were put an end to in1803, when a quarto edition of thework appeared, with the name of Mr.Malthus affixed, and obtained a rapidcirculation, especially amongst thewealthy classes of society. " It became,indeed," says the author of thePublic Characters, " the Bible of therich, the selfish, and the sensual." Ofthese Mr. Malthus obtained many admirers,and even some of the learnedbecame proselytes to his doctrines,whilst others regarded them as odiousand impious. In 1807, he published aletter to S. Whitbread, Esq., on hisproposed bill for the amendment of thepoor-laws; and, in 1813 and 1817, somepamphlets in defence of the East IndiaCompany's establishment at AylesburyCollege, of which, on its institution in1813, he had been appointed professorof history and political economy. In1814, appeared his Observations onthe Effects of the Corn Laws, and of aRise or Fall in the Price of Corn, onthe Agriculture and general Wealth ofthe Country. It was succeeded, in thefollowing year, by An Inquiry intothe Nature and Progress of Rent, andthe Principles by which it is regulated ;Grounds of an Opinion on the Policy ofrestricting the Importation of ForeignCorn; and Additions to the Essay onthe Principles of Population. Theseworks all attempt to support the favouritetheory of Mr. Malthus, thatpoverty and misery are caused by overpopulation.The doctrine of Mr. Malthus is indirectopposition to that of all precedingwriters, and in particular of Dr. AdamSmith, who contends, in his Wealthof Nations, that it is impossible for thehuman species to multiply beyond themeans of subsistence. Mr. Malthus notonly denies the impossibility, but attemptsto prove that this over increasehas already taken place, and is the causeof that vice and misery, so prevalentin the older countries of the world.Having come to this conclusion, he proposesthat a law should be made forbiddingparish assistance to children,both legitimate and illegitimate; andinsists upon it, as the duty of the superiorclasses, to withhold all increase ofthe comforts of the poor, lest it shouldencourage them to marry. The followingodious passage, in his first publication,gave such offence, that he thoughtproper to expunge it in the subsequenteditions of his work: "A man, who isborn into a world already possessed, if hecannot get subsistence from his parents,and if society do not want his labour,has no claim of right to the smallestportion of food, and, in fact, has nobusiness to be where he is. At Nature'smighty feast there is no vacant coverready for him. She tells him to begone,and will quickly execute her ownorders."His principles, however, remain unaltered,and have been advocated bymany influential writers, particularlysome in The Quarterly Review; though,in Number Seventy-five of that publication,some remarks will be found onthe subject, which are decidedly anti-carthusian.Mr. Malthus is there consideredas one who has but " contrivedto revive and elevate into popularity atheory originally broached by a philosophicalinfidel of the seventeenth century."And again, " we are enabled topronounce, upon evidence which cannotbe disputed, that whatever increase mayhave taken place in the population ofIreland within the last two hundredyears, the produce raised in that countryfor subsisting them has increased in aTHOMAS ROBERT MALTHUS.much greater ratio." Some able writershave, in more direct terms, attacked histheory, among whom we may mentionMr. Sadler and Mr. Wayland. Mr. Millmakes an assertion, which has certainlynot yet been contradicted by facts,that the statements respecting the rateof procreation, in different countries,will be found to be either suppositionswith respect to matter of fact, uponthe conformity of which suppositionsto any real matter of fact we canhave no assurance ; or statements offacts, of such a nature as prove nothingwith regard to the points in dispute.If this be so, Mr. Malthus's theory becomesuntenable at once ; for all hisreasoning proceeds upon the suppositionof the rate of procreation being, atsome period or place in the argument,established, and upon " the conformityof the suppositions of the system, toreal matters of fact." Mr. Malthus'sreasoning, that an increase of peopleshould always follow, and never precede,an increase in the produce cf the soil,.when applied," observes Mr. Wayland,to a manufacturing society, appearsto be tantamount to saying, that an increasein the number of backs shouldalways follow, and^never precede, anincrease in the manufacture of coats;whereas, surely, a previous increase ofwearers and consumers is absolutelynecessary to the respective productionof further food and raiment."Our readers need not, perhaps, betold, that the checks which Mr. Malthusopposes to the exuberant power of productionin nature, are resolvable intomoral restraint, vice, and misery ; thelatter including poverty, wars, diseases,famine, pestilence, &c. The former hecalls a preventive, and the latter a positivecheck. Whether or not Mr. Malthusbe correct in his principle of thetendency of society to over-population,it is quite clear, that the manner inwhich he proposes to check it is neitherconsonant to the notions or feelings ofmankind; and may therefore justly becalled unnatural. " Of all the speculationsof the political economists,"observes the author of Hampden in theNineteenth Century, " for removingthe ills of society, there is not one thatappears so extravagant as that of supposing,that the people will forego, inaddition to their other privations, thecomforts of domestic society. To impartto them sufficient information totake even the comparatively comprehensiveview of the subject of the economiststhemselves, would give them thatinsight into the actual structure of society,which would lead to its subversiontoo speedily to admit of the careful substitutionof a better : that an individualwill, under some circumstances, refrainfrom marriage for the sake of otherenjoyments, daily experience convincesus ; but to suppose that millions ofpeople will consent to an unnatural abstinence,which, after all, would proveno remedy to themselves, for the accommodationof a fractional portion ofthe community, and to prolong the existenceof that monopoly of which theyare the greatest victims, it is difficult toimagine."The divine command to " increaseand multiply," has been denouncedby Mr. Malthus as a mandate for thedestruction of our own happiness ; and,instead of its being better to " marrythan burn," he has discovered that it isbetter to burn than marry. The productionsof nature, if we are to believeMr. Malthus, are destined only for theselect few, whose wealth can furnishland enough to rear them ; and thepassions of mankind are to be gratifiedby all but the poor, the uneducated,and the laborious. This appears to usafrightful theory, and calculated tolead to a state of things far moreshocking and appalling, than couldeven belong to what Mr. Malthus callsover-population ; for it seems to claimthe right of checking the evil, by eitherleaving the poor and helpless to perish,or adopting such means of preventionas are contrary to the known constitutionof nature, and the ordination ofnature's God. Such a system we cannotbut consider an imputation uponthe wisdom of the Deity, and an attackupon the privileges and happiness ofman.Mr. Malthus, notwithstanding hisapparently odious view of population,is said to be kind and benevolent. Hewas married, a short time since, to thedaughter of the Hew. Dr. White, ofHampstead ; but we are not aware if hehas any issue.RURAL AND DOMESTIC ECONOMISTS.JETHRO TULL.THIS distinguished father of Britishagricultural improvements, was of anancient family in Yorkshire, and wasborn about 1680. After being educatedat one of the English universities, hebecame a student of the Temple, andwas called to the bar ; but, instead ofcommencing practice, made the tour ofEurope, and, in every country throughwhich he passed, was a diligent observerof the soil, culture, and vegetable productions.On his return to England, hemarried, and settled on a paternal farm,in Oxfordshire, where he engaged inagricultural pursuits with such zeal,that his health became endangered, andhe was compelled to visit the continentfor its recovery. After passing threeyears in France and Italy, duringwhich he continued his observations onhis favourite subjects, he returned toEngland, and, with an impaired fortune,settled on a farm of his own, nearHungered, in Berkshire. He nowdetermined, in spite of all opposition, tocarry into effect, what he termed, hishorse-hoeing method of culture; and,notwithstanding the stupidity of someof his workmen in constructing theinstruments, and the wickedness ofothers in destroying them, he finallyattained his object. He succeeded inraising crops of wheat, in the samefield, without dunging, for thirteen yearstogether, equal in quantity and superiorin quality to those of his neighbours,who pursued the ordinary course ; andthus demonstrated the truth of his owndoctrine, that labour and arrangementwould supply the place of dung andfallow, and would produce more cornat an equal or less expense. The neighbouringgentlemen, in consequence,prevailed upon him to publish thetheory of his husbandry, illustrated bya genuine account of the result of it inpractice; and accordingly, in 1731, hePrinted his first work, A Specimenonly, which was followed, in 1733, byhis Essay on Horse Hoeing Husbandry,in folio ; a work of so much reputation,that it was quickly translated intoFrench, by Du Camel. From this periodto that of his death, which occurred onthe 3rd of January, 1740, he continuedto make various improvements in hismethod of cultivating wheat, and topublish, at different times, answers tosuch objections as had been made to hisnew husbandry, which appear to havebeen neither few nor liberal. The personswho wrote against him on thisoccasion, indeed, seem to have beendeserving of the appellation bestowedon them by a celebrated agriculturalnobleman, "who, in an advertisementto a posthumous publication of Mr.Francis Forbes, which endeavoured torevive the ideas and practice of Mr.Tull, speaks of the individuals in question,as " those literary vermin thatare as injurious to the agriculture ofEngland, as the fly is to our turnips."As the first Englishman, if not thefirst writer, ancient or modern, whoattempted, with any tolerable degree ofsuccess, to reduce agriculture to certainand uniform principles, Mr. Tull isentitled to honourable commemoration.The benefits since derived from hisimprovements, among which may bementioned the invention of the drillplough, show that his theories deservedmore attention than they met withduring his life time. " He carriedploughing," says a writer in The Gentleman'sMagazine, " to so great perfection,that he has, in some degree,rendered Cato's third direction (sterncorare), manuring, almost unneces- JROBERT BAKEWELL,say." " Many, however," he adds,grudged leaving so large intervalsbetween the ridges of corn as Mr. 'fullproposed." Besides other editions ofhis writings, one has been printed bythe celebrated William Cobbett, includinga memoir of his life. Mr. Tullleft a son, who was an excellent mechanic,and was the first who introducedpost-chaises and post travelling intothis country, for which he obtained apatent, in 1737. He also obtained apatent, in 1741, for a sedan-chair, tocarry one or two persons one hundredmiles per day, and projected variousother schemes, but died in prison in 1764.ROBERT BAKEWELL.THIS celebrated experimental farmer,the most successful, perhaps, ever knownin England, was born at Dishley Grave,in Leicestershire, about the year 1725-6.He was bred a farmer, and resided on,and conducted, the Dishley farm duringhis father's lifetime ; after whose decease,which happened about 1760, he commencedthat course of experiments bywhich he procured such extensive celebrity.He first turned his attention tothe improvement of the breed of cattleand sheep; and, having remarked thatdomestic animals produced others possessingsimilar qualities to themselves,he made excursions into different partsof England, Ireland, and Holland, forthe purpose of inspecting the variousbreeds. His next step was to select andpurchase the best of all sorts ; and thisselection, the result of several years'experience, was the original stock fromwhich he afterwards propagated his own.Soon after 1760, he sold his sheep, byprivate contract, at not more than twoor three guineas each ; and, for a fewseasons, let his rams at not more thanfifteen shillings, or a guinea ; as the fame,however, of his breed extended, hegradually advanced his prices, till, in1770, he let them for twenty-five guineasa season ; and, at last, a singleone, called the Two-pounder, fetchedthe enormous sum of a thousand guineasand upwards. He was particularly successfulin his efforts to improve thebreed of sheep, known as the Dishley,or new Leicestershire ; as also that oflong-horned cattle, and strong horses ofthe black breed, suitable to harness forthe army. These last became so muchin request, that his stallions fetched ahundred guineas and upwards for aseason ; and he had the honour, someyears before his decease, to exhibit hisfamous black horse to the king andmany of the nobility, in the courtyardof St. James's. Both his sheepand horned cattle became celebrated forthe fineness of their bones and flesh, thelightness of the offal, their dispositionto quietness, and, consequently, to matureand fatten with less food thanother sheep of equal weight and value.In a word," says his biographer, " nocompetitor ever had the temerity to viewith him in his horses and cattle ; andhis sheep continue universally unrivalled,notwithstanding the competitionexcited at various times by motivesof interest or envy."During the latter part of his career,he employed himself in the improvementof pigs, and the cultivation of thebest winter food for cattle ; and he hadlikewise the credit and gratification ofintroducing into practice the floodingof meadows. He died on the 1st ofOctober, 1795 ; and is spoken of as aman of equal intelligence, benevolence,and humanity. The last he particularlydisplayed in his kind treatment of animals; which, as far as lay in his power,he always protected from the barbaritiesof drovers and butchers. Notwithstandingthe high encomiums that have beenpassed upon him, as an agriculturaleconomist, some writers have doubtedwhether his exertions either benefitedhimself or the public ; and it has beensarcastically said of his improvementsin breeding cattle and sheep, that theyhad enabled him " to make meat too fatfor anybody to eat, and too dear foranybody to purchase :" none, however,have denied him the credit of greatintelligence and ingenuity. Young, inhis Annals of Agriculture, has enteredRURAL AND DOMESTIC ECONOMISTS.fully into the merits of his plans andimprovements; and speaking of trialsgoing on, he says, of his breed of sheep,"as to profit, the great object, I havenot a doubt but Mr. Bakewell's breedis, without exception, the finest in theworld." In proof of this, it is, perhaps,worth while to mention the high priceswhich were given at a leading auctionfor stock bred from Mr. Bakewell's.At Mr. Fowler's sale, in Oxfordshire,one article of his live stock, the hornedcattle, sold for a value equal to the feesimple of his farm, and fifteen headalone of bulls and cows sold for 2,464,or at the rate of 164 each.THOMAS Coggan.THOMAS Coggan, the son of anapothecary, was born at Powell, Northamptonshire,on the 8th of February,1736. After having received the rudimentsof education at his native village,he was placed under the tuition of Dr.Aikin, at Kibworth, in Leicestershire,where he remained about three years,and acquired a tolerable share ofclassical knowledge. He was educatedfor the office of a dissenting preacher ;but, being unable to obtain a regularcall, or invitation, he, about 1758,proceeded to Amsterdam, where, inconjunction with the Rev. ThomasPierson, he became pastor of a presbyterianchurch, under the patronageof both the English and Dutchgovernments. From Amsterdam heremoved to Southampton, whence, afterpreaching nearly two years, he returnedto the former place, married thedaughter of a rich Dutch merchant,resigned his ministry, and proceeded,with the intention of studying medicine,to Leyden. Here he applied himselfassiduously to acquiring a knowledgeof the different branches of physic,particularly the obstetric art ; and, in1767, obtained the degree of Med.,having published his inaugural thesisunder the title of Dissertation de Patient.Animi, vi et modo agent.Afier practising as an accoucheur,with great success, for some years, inHolland, he came to London, and tooka house in the city, and shortly afterwardsbecame acquainted with Dr.Hawes, in conjunction with whom hefounded the Royal Humane Society.This institution was established on thesame basis as that of the DrenkelengenSociete in Amsterdam, the rules andregulations of which were renderedinto English by Mrs. Cogan. In 1780,her husband resigned his business toDr. Sims, revisited Holland, and tookthe splendid mansion of the Earl ofRochford, at Zulestein, where he dwelttill the commencement of the Bataviarepublic. He then returned to England; and, some time after 1794, tooka farm at South Wraxall, near Bath,and was soon considered as one of thebest and most celebrated farmers inSomersetshire. He also became a memberof one of the agricultural societies,and obtained several cups and medals,as premiums for his improved practice.About the same time he also publishedA Philosophical Treatise on the Passions;An Ethical Treatise on the samesubject ; and two Theological Disquisitions,in one of which he denies " theeternity of hell torments." In 1805,in consequence of several personshaving been drowned in the river Avon,he instituted the Bath Humane Society; and, in the same year, he relinquishedaltogether the pursuit ofagriculture ; of which he was heardafterwards often to observe, " that, butfor the support of the king and thebeggar, he would never have turnedfarmer." After the death of his wife,he passed much of his time in London ;but, removing, for change of air, tothe house of his half-brother, nearWalthamstow, he died there on the 1stof February, 1817.Dr. Cogan was a man of lively andagreeable manners ; a sincere, but liberalChristian ; and was as practicallytolerant in his acts, as he was ingenuousand candid in his writings. In person,he was short and fat, and had ratheran eccentric appearance, from his devotionto the Dutch costume, which heARTHUR YOUNG,was unwilling to relinquish. His lastwork was published, in 1817, under thetitle of Ethical Questions, or Speculationson the Principal Subjects of MoralControversy: a subject to which hedevoted much of the latter portion ofhis life, and his manner of treatingwhich procured him a high reputationas a moral philosopher. His account ofthe proceedings of the Royal HumaneSociety, which he edited 'for the firstsix years after its establishment, wascharacterized, by Dr. Lettsom, as containing" a splendid display of mentalvigour in maturity of age, affording, atthe same time, a pleasing instance ofthe influence of benevolence maintainingmental activity, and of philanthropy,which, by communicating placidity ofmind, prolongs its energies."On his death being reported to theRoyal Humane Society, the court resolvedthat it " receives information ofthe death of Dr. Cogan with feelings ofthe deepest regret for his loss of themost unfeigned respect for his memoryof admiration of his talents, so usefullyand meritoriously devoted for thegood of his fellow-creatures and ofgratitude for the numerous and importantservices rendered by him tothis society." Besides the works beforementioned, Dr. Cogan published hisRhine, or a Journey from Utrecht toFrankfort ; and a translation of theworks of Professor Camper.ARTHUR YOUNG.THIS celebrated agricultural economist,the son of a clergyman, was bornat Bradfield, in Suffolk, on the 7th ofSeptember, 1741. Having little prospectof paternal inheritance, he was, afterreceiving a tolerably good education, apprenticedto a wine-merchant, at Lynn,in Norfolk ; an occupation, however,which did not prove congenial to hisfeelings. Being resident in a countyrecently improved by the introductionof turnip husbandry, he soon caught thespirit that there prevailed ; was smittenwith a love of agriculture ; and, havinglost his father, in 1761, determined tocommence farmer on a small estate, inhis native county, which had become thejointure of his mother. The speculationfailed; and, after involving his familyin much expense, he quitted the roofof his mother, under no very agreeablecircumstances. Speaking of this periodof his life, in his Autobiography, heobserves, " I began my farming careerupon lands, when young, eager, andtotally ignorant. Trusting to a bailiff,who, I conceive now, merited no confidence,either for honesty or skill, itwas not surprising that I squanderedmuch money, under golden dreams ofimprovement." Although nearly ruinedin the pursuit of agriculture, he wasyet unwilling to renounce it; but, atthe same time, he resolved to combineeconomy with industry and perseverance.He accordingly became the occupierof Sandford Hall Farm, in Essex;the possession of which, however, hewas soon obliged to resign, togetherwith a small deposit, from the nonperformanceof a friend's promise toadvance him a loan. He then travelledthrough various parts of England,and, in the course of his journey,acquired much valuable agriculturalinformation ; but finding no land tosuit him elsewhere, at length took afarm near North Mimes, in Hertfordshire.He was again unfortunate :Both I and my bailiff," he says,were deceived in the soil, from seeingit in a season uncommonly favourable.But after-years shewed it in a truelight. I know not what epithet to givethe soil : sterility falls short of the idea.A hungry, vitriolic gravel. I occupied,for nine years, the jaws of a wolf. Anabob's fortune would sink in the attemptto raise good arable crops uponany extent in such a country." Hehad previously published his Farmers'Calendar; and, having now returnedto Bradfield, resolved, in future, tomake more use of his pen than hisplough. Before publishing, however,he made a survey of some parts of Ireland; and, whilst there, was employedby Lord Gainsborough, whose estatesRURAL AND DOMESTIC ECONOMISTS.he considerably improved. On quittingthis country, he observes, " I have butone word to say : To Ireland I am notin debt."Shortly after his return to Bradfield,he lost his mother; and, by previousagreement with his elder brother,he took possession of the paternalestate, and again resumed his agriculturalexperiments. He had thegood fortune, about the same time, tobe benefited by several family bequests; though, he says, he lost histranquillity, by commencing gentleman,instead of sinking into the merefarmer. In 1784, he commenced hisgrand national work, The Annals ofAgriculture, published in monthly numbers,and comprising a variety of papersfrom his own pen, as well as that ofseveral contributors, amongst whom wasGeorge the Third, who wrote underthe signature of Ralph Robinson, ofWindsor. During the progress of thiswork, he made an agricultural excursioninto the south of France, in companywith the celebrated Duke de laRochefoucault ; and, having repeated hisvisit to that country in 1789, published,on his return, the result of his observations,in one quarto volume. In 1793,he made an agricultural survey ofYorkshire ; and, on the establishmentof the Board of Agriculture, he wasappointed secretary, with a salary of500 per annum. He performed theduties of his office with the most indefatigablezeal, and continued to use hispen, till an affection of his eyesightended in total blindness, in 1811. Hedied, somewhat suddenly, on the 20thof February, 1820. He was survivedby one son, having previously lost adaughter.The name of Arthur Young holdsone of the most distinguished places inthe history of rural economy ; and noone has made his knowledge, in thisbranch of science, more subservient tothe prosperity of his own country.Among other services, England is indebtedto him for the extension of thebreed of fine-woollen sheep ; by whichpur woollen manufacturers have been,in part, relieved from a dependence onthe Merino breed. Abroad, as well asat home, the labours of Young havebeen appreciated: the agricultural societiesof almost every capital foreigntown sent him their diplomas; andhe was also an honorary member ofthose of the principal metropolitan townsin England, besides being a fellow ofthe Royal Society. In addition to thework before-mentioned, he published,besides his Travels in France, whichwere translated into Russian, by commandof the Empress Catherine, TheExpediency of a Free Export of Corn ;Proposals to the Legislature, for Numberingthe People; Rural Economy,containing the Memoirs of a celebratedSwiss Farmer; Political Arithmetic;The Question of Wool stated ; and TheExample of France a Warning to Britain.His Annals of Agriculture havebeen printed in forty-five volumes ; andin the fifteenth will be found an interestingaccount of his life, by himself. Forthe credit of Young, and the honour ofFrance, it should be stated, that theDirectory, upon the motion of Carnot,ordered a translation to be made of thewhole of the agricultural works of theformer, and an edition of them accordinglyappeared in twenty octavovolumes.THOMAS WILLIAM COKE.THIS distinguished agriculturist, adescendant of the great Lord Chief-justiceCoke, and son of Penman RobertsCoke, Esq., was born in Norfolk,about the year 1748. He was educatedat Eton; and, on the demise of hisfather, in 1776, succeeded to the vastfamily estates, with the splendid mansionof Holkham. About the sametime, he came into parliament, as therepresentative of his native county, andearly distinguished himself as an uncompromisingopponent of the war withthe American colonies. Shortly afterthe accession to, office of the Earl ofShelburne, in 1783, he gave a death-thomasWILLIAM COKE.blow to the power of that minister andhis cabinet, by moving his celebratedaddress to the king on the state of thecountry ; and a change in the governmentfollowing, he warmly supportedthe brief rule of Lord North and Mr.Fox. When these were supplanted byMr. Pitt, he made and carried a motion,declaring " the continuance of thepresent ministers in office to be anobstacle to the formation of a vigorousadministration." Mr. Pitt, however, kepthis ground ; and, dissolving parliament,in the spring-tide of his popularity,"observes Wilson, in his BiographicalIndex to the House of Commons, " Mr.Coke, notwithstanding his great stakein the county, lost his election for Norfolk."He was again returned, however,in 1790 ; and, soon after, tookoccasion to oppose the additional dutyon malt, proposing, by way of substitute,a tax on dogs. In "1791, heproposed an amendment to the addressto the king, tending to avert a war withRussia, which was lost; and, in 1796,he supported the views of Mr. Fox, inthe celebrated motion for censuring thethen ministers, for having, unconstitutionally,advanced money to the Emperorof Germany and the Prince ofConte, without the consent of parliament.During the same year, he broughtin, and carried into a law, a bill forprotracting the legal time for the commencementof shooting ; and, in thefollowing year, gave his strenuoussupport to the celebrated motion of thepresent Earl (then Mr.) Grey, for areform in parliament. At the generalelection, in 1802, himself and his colleague,the late Sir Jacob Astley, werereturned to their places, after severeopposition on the part of the late Mr.Bingham and the Honourable ColonelWodehouse, son of Lord Wodehouse.At the election, which followed theappointment of the Fox and Grenvilleministry, in 1806, Mr. Coke successfullyunited his interest with Mr. Bingham ;but their election being declared void,on a petition against it, Mr. Coke wassubsequently returned to parliament forDerby. After its dissolution he againsat for Norfolk, and continued to be oneof the most popular members of thehouse of commons, until 1815, whenhis sentiments and vote in support ofthe corn laws gave great offence. Thepeople of Norwich were, in particular,exasperated; and, in passing throughthat city, his carriage was broken topieces, and he narrowly escaped withhis life. He subsequently advocatedthe cause of Queen Caroline, catholicemancipation, the repeal of the test andcorporation acts, parliamentary reform,and the abolition of slavery. Some ofhis enemies asserted, that he had declaredhe would oppose all ministerialmeasures, whilst the Tories held power,right or wrong;" and that he couldreturn whomsoever he pleased for thecounty of Norfolk. This last reportobtained him the soubriquet of " KingCoke;" and, upon a contest ensuingfor the representation of the county,many that had supported his interesttook the opposite side, and the Wodehouseparty succeeded in returning amember, in the person of Mr. EdmundWodehouse. It is less, however, as apolitician, and one of the most distinguishedand independent commonersof this country, that Mr. Coke isknown, than as an agriculturist. Hisliberal encouragement of the breed ofsheep, and the growth of wool, hasbeen felt and acknowledged in England,Scotland, and Ireland ; and themagnificent display of cattle, at theHolkham sheep-shearing, may be saidto constitute an era in the annals ofagriculture. When he came to hisestates, it is said, he found them composedof stubborn and unproductivesoils ; but by the adoption of drill-husbandry,of irrigation, of the methodsof transplanting grasses, &c., he hasrendered them a perfect garden. Young,in his Survey of Norfolk, speaking ofMr. Coke, says, " He has expendedabove 100,000 in farm-houses andoffices, and all of them erected in a verysuperior style."He has been twice married: first, in1775, to Jane, sister of the late LordOverborne, by whom he had threedaughters; and, secondly, about 1824,when upwards of seventy-years of age,to Lady Anne, daughter of the presentEarl of Albemarle, by whom he hasseveral sons. By the latter match heincurred much ridicule, though, it issaid, on both sides, to have been oneof affection. George the Fourth, whenPrince of Wales, says a writer in TheMonthly Magazine, "was exceedinglyRURAL AND DOMESTIC ECONOMISTS.fond of Mr. Coke, and paid frequentvisits to Holkham. His Royal Highnesswas accustomed to live in thegreatest familiarity with him, and usuallysaluted him with the grateful salutationof ' My brother Whig!' Hisroyal highness was then a subject:Mr. Coke continues one, and is still aWhig." In private, Mr. Coke is universallyand deservedly esteemed.BENJAMIN THOMPSON, COUNT RUMFORD.BENJAMIN THOMPSON, the sonof parents in the middle station of life,was born in Rumford, New England,in the year 1752. The abilities whichhe displayed at a very early age, hisparents seem to have been unable tocultivate at their own expense; andhis education was, therefore, superintendedby a professor of natural philosophyin the American University ofCambridge, who had noticed the talentsof the boy. Under this gentleman,young Thompson made such rapidprogress, that he was enabled to becomean instructor himself at an unusuallyearly period. The profits he thusgained were soon exchanged for a comfortableindependence, which he acquiredby marriage ; and, shortly afterwards,he obtained the rank of majorin the militia of his provincial district.He took part with England, in herstruggles to check the efforts of thecolonies for independence ; and, by hislocal knowledge, rendered such serviceto government, that, on his coming tothis country, soon after the commencementof the war, he was appointed toan office under Lord George Germaine,the chief minister in the Americandepartment. The same nobleman senthim, towards the close of the contest, toNew York, where he raised a regimentof dragoons, and was made a provinciallieutenant-colonel. In 1784, he returnedto England ; received the honourof knighthood in the same year ; and,for some time, acted as one of the undersecretaries of state.During a tour on the continent, hebecame acquainted with the Prince ofDeux-ponts, afterwards King of Bavaria,and, by him, was recommendedto the reigning elector palatine, whotook him into his service at Munich,and treated him with great consideration.Here he introduced various usefulreforms; among others, the employmentof the numerous beggars in themetropolis, and other parts of Bavaria,upon a plan in carrying which intoexecution, he displayed great firmnessand perseverance. As a reward for hisservices, the elector decorated him withseveral orders, raised him to the rankof lieutenant-general, and ennobled himby the title of Count Rumford. Aftertwo visits to England, in 1795 and1796, he finally quitted Munich, in1799, and passed several of the succeedingyears in this country, employed,principally, in making experiments relativeto the domestic use of fire, andthe construction of chimneys, &c. Theresult was, a very great improvementin the construction of grates and fireplaces,according to a contrivance whichmay be said to have immortalized himin the annals of domestic economy,under the name of the Rumford sieve.In 1802, the count visited Paris ; and,in the summer of the following year,made a tour in Switzerland and Bavaria,in company with the widow ofthe celebrated Lavoisier. This lady,herself a votary of science, he married,on his return to the French metropolis ;but the union was speedily followed bya separation. Count Rumford, however,though he disliked the Frenchpeople, found his health so much benefitedby the climate, that he only removedfrom Paris to Auteurs, a distanceof four miles, and the site of a very delightfulhabitation ; where he lived, inastate of comparative seclusion, for therest of his life. The King of Bavariastill continued to him his pension of1,200 a year; and, in consequence,when that sovereign joined the coalitionagainst Napoleon, the count wouldhave been ordered to quit France, butfor his retired habits. He still, however,gave his attention to science ;SIR JOHN SINCLAIR.and, in the few visits he made to Paris,displayed his faith in the accuracy ofsome of his experiments, in a verypeculiar manner. Having discoveredthat more heated rays are thrown outfrom a dark body than a light one, hewalked about the metropolis in winter,clad completely in white ; and immediatelyfollowed up the publication of apaper in the Moniteur, on the advantagesof broad wheels, by driving aboutParis in a carriage upon that construction.These eccentricities, and an obstinate,unyielding disposition, whichinvolved him in frequent disputes withthe French men of science, were probablythe causes that separated himfrom social intercourse during the latteryears of his life. He died of a fever,in August, 1814, from the effect ofwhich he might have recovered, butfor the extreme abstemiousness of hishabits of living.In person, Count Rumford was abovethe middle size, with a dignified andpleasing expression of countenance, anda mildness in his manner and tone ofvoice. Though by no means a man oflearning, his acquirements were considerable; and he had greatly improved,in general knowledge, by theliterary circles to which his reputationintroduced him in London and Paris.As a man of science, few have displayedmore ingenuity and facility in theircontrivances and experiments, or haveprojected them for such useful ends.His own experiments, however, werenot the only ones by which he soughtto benefit the cause of science. Hetransferred to the Royal Society, ofwhich he was a member, as well as ofthe National Institute, 1,000 ; the interestof which was to be applied, everysecond' year, as a premium to the authorof the most important discoveryon the subject of heat and light, madepublic in any part of Europe, duringthe preceding two years. He also suggestedthe plan, and greatly assisted inthe formation, of the Royal Institution.His writings consist of four volumesof Essays, Experimental, Political,Economical, and Philosophical, whichhave been translated into various languages;and a variety of papers, in therespective Transactions of the RoyalSociety and the French Institute.SIR JOHN SINCLAIR.SIR JOHN SINCLAIR, the son of agentleman of fortune, in the county ofCaithness, Scotland, was born in 1754,and received his education at the high-schooland university of Edinburgh.Having obtained some knowledge ofcivil law, under Professor Millar atGlasgow, he enrolled his name as amember of the College of Advocates ;but coming into the possession of alarge paternal inheritance, he turnedhis attention to politics, and, in 1780,was elected member of parliament forhis native county. He was stronglyopposed to the American war, and toMr. Fox's India bill ; and, before theend of the session, published severalworks that displayed many just andoriginal notions on the politics of theday. His treatise on the subject of areform in parliament produced a particularsensation, and gave rise to severalanswers, the best of which is said tohave been written by Lord Camelford.In 1783, appeared his Hints on the Stateof Our Finances ; which had the merit,or, as some may think, the demerit, ofbeing the first publication asserting theample resources of the nation. In thefollowing year, he produced his Historyof the Public Revenue of the BritishEmpire, in two volumes quarto, towhich he afterwards added a third volume,and of which several editionswere published. On the dissolution ofparliament, he stood a contested, butunsuccessful, election for the Scotchburghs of Kirkwall, and was, in consequence,furnished with a seat by Mr.Pitt, who, in August, 1786, also procuredhim a baronetcy. In the followingyear, he printed his work on the Lawsof Elections for Scotland; and duringthe great contest on the subject of theregency, in 1789, he joined the oppositionin supporting that measure. HisRURAL AND DOMESTIC ECONOMISTS.conscientious hostility to this, and somesubsequent views of government, in referenceto a war with France, offendedthe minister to whom he owed hisplace, and who shewed his displeasure,by procuring Sinclair's removal fromthe chair of the Board of Agriculture,of which he had been appointed thefirst president. He had been for sometimetrying to establish, under his ownsuperintendence, a society for the improvementof agriculture ; but, havingapplied for an allowance from governmentto support it, the sum of j3,000a-year was granted, and the wholebecame a government job. In 1790,appeared his Report on the Subject ofShetland Wool ; and, at the generalelection of that year, he was a secondtime returned member of parliamentfor Caithness ; which, with the exceptionof one session, when he sat forPetrified, in Hampshire, he continuedto represent until 1812. He thenretired from parliament, in favour ofhis son ; and, about the same time,was appointed receiver-general of thecustoms for Scotland, a situation hecontinued to hold for several years.Besides the works before-mentioned, heis the author of Observations on theScotch Dialects; a Statistical Accountof Scotland ; An Account of the Originof the Board of Agriculture ; Essayson Various Subjects ; also Hints onLongevity ; Code of Health ; on theCause of Blight; on The Husbandry ofScotland; The Code of Agriculture;and several political and agriculturaltreatises of minor importance. SirJohn Sinclair has the merit of having,in the above very useful and ingeniouspublications, opened the way to manyimportant and beneficial results in financialand agricultural science. Whilstin parliament, he seldom spoke ; butsome of his speeches, which have beenpublished on particular occasions, shewthat when he rose to address the house,no one could express himself more tothe purpose.Sir John Sinclair married, first, in1776, Sarah, daughter of AlexanderMaitland, Esq., of Stoke-lexington,by whom he has issue one survivingdaughter; and, secondly, in 1788,Diana, youngest daughter of Alexander(late Lord) Macdonald, and sister ofthe present lord, by whom he has sixsons and six daughters.PAINTERS.PAINTERS.SIR GODFREY KNELLER.THIS distinguished artist was born atLubeck, in Germany, in 1648, wherehis father was an architect, and chiefsurveyor to the city. He was at firstdestined for a military life, and sent toLeyden to learn mathematics and fortification; but having developed a tastefor painting, was permitted to pursue itas a profession. He received his firstlessons in the art under Roland Rembrandt,at Amsterdam ; and, in 1672,he visited Italy, where he became apupil of Carlo Marattiti, and particularlystudied the works of Titian and hannibalCaracci. During his residence atVenice, he was employed by severaleminent personages, and obtained highreputation by his pictures. The finestof these, at this time, were his historicalpieces ; but not finding the emolumentcommensurate with the fame whichthey procured him, he graduallyabandoned this line for portrait.Painters of history," he is recordedto have said, " make the dead live, anddo not begin to live themselves till theyare dead. I paint the living, and theymake me live." Mercenary, however,as this sentiment may appear, we cannotbut concur in the judgment ofWalpole, that the treasure left to posterityby one who transmits the likenessof all the eminent persons of his age, isgreater than if he had multiplied Madonnas,and decorated palaces withimaginary triumphs and strained allegories.Kneller came to England, with hisbrother, John Zachary, in 1674, andsoon found extensive employment andpatronage. Among his early sitterswere the Duke of Monmouth andCharles the Second, who, together withVOL. IV.the nobility to whom the painter wasintroduced, admired his performancesso highly, that he determined to fix hisresidence in this country. His risingfame was viewed with jealousy by Lely,on whose death, in 1680, he was appointedking's painter ; and, shortlyafterwards, was sent to take the portraitof Louis the Fourteenth. Thedeath of Charles took place duringKneller's absence ; but, on his return,he found an equally munificent patronin James the Second. While this monarchwas sitting for his portrait, as apresent to Pepys, the landing of thePrince of Orange was announced, whenthe artist, in some confusion, laid downhis brush. " Go on, Kneller," said theking, coolly ; " go on and finish yourwork : I wish not to disappoint myfriend Pepys." The royal favour wascontinued to Kneller on the accessionof William the Third, who sent him topaint the plenipotentiaries at Ryswick ;and, on his return, knighted him, andmade him gentleman of the privy-chamber.For this monarch he alsopainted the portrait of the Czar Peter.He was still the court painter underQueen Anne, for whom he took a portraitof the Archduke Charles, afterwardsemperor, for which he wasrewarded by the title of hereditaryknight of the empire. He completedhis career of honour in the reign ofGeorge the First, who made him abaronet, and was the last of ten sovereignswho sat to him. Sir Godfreydied in October, 1723, and was buriedin Westminster Abbey, under a splendidmonument, by Rysbrach, with aninscription by Pope. Indeed, all theeminent poets of the day were hisPAINTERS.eulogists ; and Dryden, whom hepainted, thus addressed him :S.ich are thy pictures, Kneller, uch thy skill,That Nature seems obedient to thy will,Comes out and meets thy pencil in the draught,Lives there, and wants but words to speak thethought.Kneller was unquestionably a painterof high merit, as well as reputation,though the rapidity with which hecould earn money has led him into ahasty and careless style in too many ofhis pictures. Where he has put forthall his powers, the freedom and natureof his draughts approach closely toVandyck ; his colouring is lively, true,and harmonious, and his dispositionjudicious. His heads are remarkablygraceful ; but in bestowing too exclusiveattention upon this part, he has omittedto vary the attitudes or actions of hisfigures with the care of which they areworthy. He has also the fault of Lely,in giving such a sameness of expressionto his countenances as almost to resembleeach other. His principal worksare at Hampton Court ; but he is saidhimself to have given the preference tohis Converted Chinese, at Windsor.In private life, Sir Godfrey is representedas munificent in his mode ofliving, full of humour and repartee,extremely vain, and licentious in conversation,especially upon religioustopics. His vanity may be excused,considering that he was courted bykings and sung by poets ; and hisblasphemous and voluptuous jests willexcite little astonishment, when it isrecollected that he received his firstencouragement in the court of a profaneand witty debauchee. Such a manwas not likely to speak very reverentlyof his Creator or very humbly of himself." Dost thou think, man," he said,one day, to his tailor, who proposed hisson for a pupil; " dost thou think, man,I can make thy son a painter ? No ! GodAlmighty only makes painters." Overhearinga low fellow cursing himself,he exclaimed, in wonder, " God d nyou, indeed ! He may d n the Dukeof Marlborough, and perhaps Sir GodfreyKneller ; but do you think he will takethe trouble of d king such a scoundrelas you ?" With low wit, however, he possessedthe finest sense of what is calledthe polite. When asked by Louis theFourteenth what mark of the royal esteemhe should wish to receive, Knellermodestly answered, that he should feelhonoured if his majesty would condescendto sit to him for a quarter of anhour, that he might execute a drawingof his face for himself. Sir Godfrey hada country house near Hampton Court,where he acted as a magistrate, and it isrecorded, to his honour, that he exercisedhis authority with less attention tothe letter of the law than to the dictatesof humanity.JOSEPH Highborn.JOSEPH Highborn, the son of acoal merchant, was born in the parishof St. James, Garlickhithe, London, onthe 13th of June, 1692. Evincing anearly inclination for the art of painting,it was intended that he should be putapprentice to his uncle, who was to King William ; but,for some reasons, which none of hisbiographers state, he changed his purpose,and was articled to an attorneyin 1707. This occupation was so littlesuited to his taste, that, in about threeyears, he began to form a resolution ofindulging his natural disposition to hisfavourite art, and accordingly spentall his leisure hours in drawing "anddesigning, and in the study of geometry,perspective, and architecture. He alsoattended Mr. Cheselden's lectures onanatomy, and entered himself of thePainter's Academy, in Great QueenStreet, then under the direction of SirGodfrey Kneller, who took particularnotice of him, distinguishing him by thename of " the young lawyer." At theexpiration of his clerkship, in 1714, heforsook the law altogether ; and, in thespring of the following year, commencedartist by profession. Aboutthis time was published Dr. BrookTaylor's Linear Perspective, with theprinciples of which excellent but intricatesystem, Mr. Highmcre imme-JOSEPH Highborn,painted ; a taskfew artists could, at that time, havereadily achieved. His reputation andbusiness rapidly increased, and inducedhim, in 1723, up to which period he hadresided in the city, to remove to Lincoln'sInn Fields. On the revival of theorder of the knights of the Bath, in1725, he was engaged by Mr. Price, tomake the drawings for his prints, whichled to his employment, by severalnoblemen, in his capacity of portraitpainter. Among other knights of theorder whose portraits he painted, wasthe Duke of Richmond, attended by histhree esquires, with a perspective view ofHenry the Seventh's Chapel; a very fineperformance. George the First sentfor him, shortly afterwards, to paint theportrait of the Duke of Cumberland,which has been engraved in mezzo-tintoby Smith.In 1732, Mr. Highmore visited thecontinent in company with Dr. Pembertonand Mr. Benjamin Robins. Hewas much delighted with the works ofRubens, at Antwerp, and also with thesplendid gallery of pictures collected bythat artist, at Dusseldorf. During anexcursion to France, in 1734, he hadthe gratification of seeing Cardinal dePolignac's famous group of antiquestatues, the court of Lycomedes, thenjust brought from Rome, but afterwardsbought by the King of Prussia, anddestroyed at Charlottenburg, by theRussians. Among his sitters, in 1742,were the Prince and Princess of Wales,whom he painted for the Duke of SaxeGotha. For the same court, he subsequentlypainted the portrait of theQueen of Denmark. In 1744, he wasemployed in making a set of designsfrom the novel of Pamela, which wereengraved, and published by subscription,in the following year. About the sametime, he drew the portraits of Dr. Young,and General Wolfe, then a boy ofeighteen, said to be the only original portraitsof these two eminent men. On thefirst institution of the Academy of Painting,he was elected one of the professors;but his numerous avocations inducedhim to decline the honour. In 1754,he published A Critical Examination ofthe Paintings, by Rubens, on the Ceilingof the Banqueting House at Whitehall,in which architecture is introduced, sofaras relates to perspective ; togetherwith the discussion of a question whichhas been the subject of debate amongpainters. In the solution of this question,he proved that Rubens, and severalother eminent painters, were mistakenin the practice, and Mr. Kirby andother authors, in the theory, of perspective.Mr. Highmore relinquishedhis professional pursuits in 1761 ; and,after having disposed of his collectionof pictures by auction, retired to Canterbury,where, laying down the pencilfor the pen, he closed a useful andhonourable career, on the 3rd of March,1780, in his eighty-eighth year.Among the painters of his timeMr. Highmore stood deservedly preeminent,though, long before his death,this country had given birth to artistsby whom his works are completelyeclipsed. Yet that his abilities weregreat, many of his pictures, the tints ofwhich have been compared, for durability,to those of Rubens and Vandyck,sufficiently attest. Among his historicalpictures may be mentioned, Hagarand Ishmael, a present to the FoundlingHospital ; The Good Samaritan ;The Finding of Moses ; The Gracesunveiling Nature ; and The QueenMother of Edward the Fourth, with heryounger Son, in Westminster Abbey.He painted more family pieces thanany one of his time. His knowledgeof perspective was great, and his ideaof beauty, when he indulged his fancy,of a superior order. Many of his bestportraits were painted from memory,both as to likeness and execution. Histalents, as an artist, were, on the whole,certainly more than respectable, andnot unworthy of the eulogy of Mr.Hawkins Browne, in his poetical epistleon Design and Beauty.Mr. Highmore's name, also, standshigh as an author. His chief work isentitled Practice of Perspective, on theprinciples of Dr. Brook Taylor ; inwhich he not only evinced his scientificknowledge of the subject, but removed,by its perspicuity, the only objectionthat has been made to the system ofDr. Taylor. His other publicationsare: Observations on a Pamphlet entitledChristianity not founded on argument;and, Essays, Moral, Religious,and Miscellaneous, with a translation,in prose, of Mr. Browne's Latin poemon the Immortality of the Soul. OfPAINTERS.these Dr. Hawkesworth observes, " theydo the author great credit ; they arenot excursions of fancy, but efforts ofthought, and indubitable indications ofan active and vigorous mind." To TheGentleman's Magazine he communicated,Remarks on some Passages inMr. Webb's Inquiry into the Beautiesof Painting ; and, A Natural and ObviousManner of constructing SunDials, deduced from the situation andmotion of the earth with respect to thesun, explained by a scheme.Mr. Highmore was survived by ason and a daughter, but lost his wifein 1750, after an union of thirty-fouryears. A strong constitution andhabitual temperance kept him in goodhealth to the last ; and he was able t<>take exercise on horseback till within*a short period of his death. His privatecharacter was amiable and exemplary." No man," says his biographer," had more clearness andprecision of ideas, or a more ardentdesire to know the truth, and, whenknown, conscientiously to pursue it.With strong passions, ever guided bythe strictest virtue, he had a tender,susceptible heart, always open to thedistresses of his fellow-creatures, andalways ready to relieve them."WILLIAM HOGARTH.WILLIAM HOGARTH, or Hogarth,as he was sometimes called, was bornin London, on the 10th of December,1697. His father, who had come fromWestmoreland to the metropolis inhopes of obtaining literary employment,worked, for some time, as a correctorof the press, and also kept a school ;but lived and died, it appears, in a stateof embarrassment. The subject of ourmemoir, therefore, having, as he says,had before his eyes the precarioussituation of men of classical education,left school, at his own desire, at aboutfourteen, and was apprenticed to EllisGamble, an eminent silversmith, inCranbourne Street He had previouslyshown some taste for designing, in themanner in which he used to decoratehis school exercises ; and, during hisapprenticeship, he demonstrated bothability and ambition to excel as anartist. Nature was his model from thefirst ; imitation from the best mastersbeing regarded by him as " little morethan pouring water out of one vesselinto another." The customary formsof study he also disdained, though itwas no less, perhaps, from constitutionalidleness than from his own propernotions, that his short-hand way ofacquiring knowledge, as Allan Cunninghamexpresses it, was resolvedupon. His plan was, instead of copyingwith his pencil, to trace with hiseye, and after fixing forms and charactersin his mind, to try the effect ofsuch a mode of application, by conveyingthe impress of his memory to thecanvass. " For this purpose," he says,I considered what various ways, andto what different purposes, the memorymight be applied, and fell upon onemost suitable to my situation and idledisposition; laying it down first as anaxiom, that he who could, by any means,acquire and retain in his memory perfectideas of the subjects he meant todraw, would have as clear a knowledgeof the figure as a man who can writefreely hath of the twenty-five letters ofthe alphabet and their infinite combinations."In 1718, he left Mr. Gamble, and enteredhimself of the Academy for Design,in St. Martin's Lane, where he studieddrawing from the life. For some yearshis chief mode of obtaining a livelihoodwas by engraving arms and crests, andfurnishing cuts for various publicationsof the time. His first engraving whichattracted notice, was a satirical piece,entitled The Taste of the Town, executedin 1724, and was so successfulthat it gave rise to several piracies.He next engraved a set of plates for anedition of Hudibras, which, howevergood in themselves, are, when contrastedwith his subsequent performances,strikingly inferior. He hadnow attained the use of the brush, aswell as the graver, but was so far fromWILLIAM HOGARTH.being acknowledged as a painter,* thatan upholsterer refused to pay him forsome designs for tapestry, on the groundof his having discovered Hogarth to beanengraver, who, in consequence, lostan action which he subsequently broughtagainst his employer. This occurredin 1727 ; and, as he says, he could dolittle more than maintain himself untilhe was near thirty, we may concludehe had as yet acquired but little fame,and less profit. Under these circumstances,his marriage, in 1730, with thedaughter of Sir James Thornhill, thenserjeant-painter to the king, gave greatoffence to his wife's father, who lookedupon this alliance with Hogarth as adegradation to his family. The talents,however, of Hogarth, ultimately produceda reconciliation between him andSir James ; though, before this tookplace, the latter is said to have remarked,on being shown the first partof The Harlot's Progress, that the manwho could produce such works, couldmaintain a wife without a portion.After his marriage,. Hogarth commencedpainter of small conversationpieces, from twelve to fifteen incheshigh, which succeeded for a few years ;but it was still, he tells us, " a kind ofdrudgery ;" and adds, " as I could notbring myself to act like some of mybrethren, and make it a sort of manufactory,to be carried on by the help ofback grounds and drapery painters, itwas not sufficiently profitable to paythe expenses of my family." He appears,however, to have obtained considerabletemporary employment as aportrait painter ; though his prices,which his pride probably prevented himfrom entering in his memoranda, aresupposed to have been very low. Inthis department of his art he was notpopular : he took accurate, but, if wemay use the expression, unfortunatelikenesses ; no one could fail to markthe resemblance, but every one feltthat Hogarth would be the last personto whom they would choose to sit.The calm contemplative look," asMr. Cunningham has well observed,the elegance of form without the graceof action, and motionless repose approachingto slumber, were not forhim, whose strength lay in kindlingfigures into life and tossing them intobusiness." For this reason he succeededtolerably well in his portrait ofGarrick, as Richard the Third, whichbrought him j200; a sum, he says,more than any English artist everbefore received for a single portrait."In 1734, he published The Harlot'sProgress, in a series of six plates, whichwere beheld with admiration andwonder ; and on account of the fidelityof the portraits of the infamous ColonelCharters, and others, excited universalinterest as well as applause. His reputationwas now suddenly but firmlyestablished ; and his vanity increasedwith his fame, if we may judge fromthe following passage found among hismemoranda: "I entertained somethoughts," he writes, " of succeeding inwhat the puffers in books call the greatstyle of history painting ; so that, withouthaving had a stroke of this grandbusiness before, I quitted small portraitsand familiar conversations, and, with asmile at my own temerity, commencedhistory painter, and, on a great staircase,at St. Bartholomew's Hospital,painted two Scripture stories ThePool of Bethesda, and The GoodSamaritan, with figures seven feet high.These I presented to the charity ; andthought they might serve as a specimento show that, were there an inclinationin England for encouraginghistorical pictures, such a first essaymight prove the painting them moreeasily attainable than is generally imagined."The above paintings werefinished in 1736; both were deficientin dignity, and their chief meritwill be found in some coarse, thoughoriginal, conceptions, totally unsuitedto the character of either subject. Hissubsequent efforts, in this way, wereabsolute failures ; and his painting ofSigismundaa is described, by Walpole,as " more ridiculous than any thinghe ever ridiculed." Sir RichardGrosvenor, who was to have purchasedit for 400, refused to receive it; amortification which Hogarth never forgotThe Harlot's Progress was followedby The Rake's Progress, whichmade a greater comparative addition tothe fame than the pocket of Hogarth,who at length applied to, and obtainedfrom, parliament, an act for recognisinga legal copyright in designsand engravings, and restraining copiesof such works from being made with-painters.out consent of the authors. His nextproductions, in succession, were, TheSleeping Congregation, Southwark Fair,Modern Midnight Conversation, andThe Enraged Musician, which last appearedin 1740. They were followedby his Four Times of the Day, and TheStrolling Actresses ; the paintings ofwhich, together with those of TheHarlot's Progress and The Rake'sProgress, making nineteen altogether,he offered for sale, by a sort of auction,on the 25th of January, 1745, when thewhole produced him but 427 : 7*.For the six paintings of his next admirableproduction, The Marriage a laMode, which he sold in 1750, he receivedonly one hundred and tenguineas; while', at the same time,such sums were being lavished uponFarinelli, the opera singer, mat thevain creature, says Allan Cunningham,exclaimed, " There is but one God andone Farinelli !" The series of his Marriagea la Mode were subsequentlypurchased, by Mr. Angerstein, for onethousand guineas, and now form partof the National Gallery.In 1747, appeared his twelve scenesof Industry and Idleness, which aresaid to have had a beneficial effectupon the London apprentices ; and, asHogarth tells us, sold more rapidly atChristmas than any other time. Theywere followed by a design called TheRoast Beef of Old England ; a satire onthe French nation, in revenge for thetreatment he had met with during avisit to Calais, where, being discoveredsketching one of the gates, he wasseized as a spy, and sent back to England.Next came The Four Stages ofCruelty, and The March to Finchley,which latter was intended to be inscribedto George the Second, whoseems to have appreciated neither thecompliment nor the skill of the artist.Beer Street and Gin Lane, Franceand England, The Cockpit, and TheElection, in four scenes, were his nextperformances ; all of which maintainedthe high reputation of our artist. In1753, he published a work, in whichhe had been assisted by Dr. Hotly,entitled The Analysis of Beauty, writtento prove that the undulating linepervades every thing that is beautiful,both in art and nature. He hadpreviously given some hint of this ideain a painting of himself, by etchingupon the palette he represented himselfholding, a winding line withthis motto, " Line of Beauty andGrace." The work was virulently attacked,and Wilkes and others deniedthat it was the composition of Hogarth ;but amidst all the outcry raised againstit, it was allowed to be full of geniusand originality, and to contain manysensible and useful observations, if notfully establishing the theory of itsauthor. Bishop Warburton wrote avery complimentary letter to Hogarth,respecting this publication ; and thecelebrated painter, West, used to speakof it as a work of the highest value toevery one studying the art. It wastranslated info German and Italian ;and upon its appearance at Augsburg,the author was elected a counsellor andhonorary member of the Imperial Academyof that city.In 1757, the subject of our memoirwas made serjeant-painter to the king,an appointment which probably inducedhim to publish, in 1762, a politicalprint, entitled The Times, in whichPitt and Temple, the friends of Wilkesand Churchill, were satirized. Thisdrew from the two last all the venomof which their pens were capable, theformer making The North Briton thevehicle of his rancour. Hogarth wasadvised by his friends to take no noticeof these attacks, but he felt them tookeenly not to retort with his pencil,and he accordingly produced a portraitof Wilkes, of which the artist himselfhas truly observed, " the ridiculous wasapparent to every eye. A Brutus asaviour of his country with such anaspect was so arrant a farce, that,though it gave rise to much laughter inthe lookers-on, it galled both himand his adherents." With respect toChurchill, he patched up a print of himin the character of a bear ; a productionwhich, like the lines' of Churchill, displayed,though not in an equal degree,more venom than wit, and inducedLord Orford to say of both, " Neverdid two men of abilities throw mudwith less dexterity." Hogarth's nextwork was a satirical print against themethodists, entitled, Credulity, Superstition,and Fanaticism, executed m amanner that showed his powers werein no way diminished. His last per-WILLIAM HOGARTH,france was a piece entitled Finis,the Bathos, or the Art of Sinking inSublime Painting. He is said to havehad a presentiment that this was hislast work, and when the design of theplate was complete, he said, looking atit, " So far so good ; nothing remainsbut this ;" and then, sketching theresemblance of a broken palette, continued," Finis the deed is done allisover." It is said that the satire ofChurchill tended to hasten his death ;and certainly, Churchill, with equalinsolence and brutality, triumphantlyadverted to the possibility of such aneffect; but it seems that the merit ofembittering the last days of this inimitableartist belongs chiefly to Wilkes.Hogarth, whose health had been on thedecline for some months previously,left his summer residence, at Chadwick,on the 25th of October, 1764, and diedon the following day, from a suffusionof blood among the arteries, at hishouse in Leicester Square. He wasburied in the churchyard of Chadwick,under a tombstone which bears aninscription written by Garrick. Hiswidow had the copyright of his platessecured to her by act of parliament fortwenty years ; but she outlived theperiod of her right, and was at lengthso reduced, that, two years before herdeath, she received a pension of 40from the Royal Academy.Hogarth's person was rather belowthe middle size ; he had a high forehead; a bright, shrewd, and intelligenteye ; and a countenance altogetheropen and pleasing. He was of a cheerfultemper, and loved mirth and company; combined sense and humour inhis conversation ; was ardent in hisfriendships, and also in his resentments.He cared not whom he offended by hispencil, and was not choice in his selectionof words to those who eitherinjured or insulted him. West, thepainter, calls him a strutting, consequentiallittle man ; and Nichols describeshim as one whose manners weregross and uncultivated, and whosesocial ambition aspired no higher thanto shine in a club of mechanics. Thetwo accounts are somewhat paradoxical,but the greater probability of truth is inthe former ; as Hogarth kept his carriage,was vain of his abilities, was admittedto the table of Horace Walpoleand others, loved dress and good order,and frequently spoke of his early hardshipsin contrast to his subsequentcondition, with an air of triumph andself-importance. In his relation ofhusband, brother, friend, and master(he was never a father), Ireland speaksof him as kind, generous, sincere, andindulgent; in diet he was abstemious,but in his hospitalities, though devoid ofostentation, liberal and free-hearted ;not parsimonious, yet frugal. Of hisabsence of mind, an anecdote is told byNichols, which has obtained generalbelief: Calling, one rainy day, in hiscarriage, on the lord mayor, Beckford,(in the conflagration of whose residence,at Fonthill, the original paintings ofThe Harlot's and Rake's Progress wereconsumed), he came out at a wrongdoor, forgot that he had a carriage, and,after in vain seeking for a hackneycoach, returned home wet to the skin.The same authority also tells us, thathe would sometimes turn his chairround as if he had finished eating, andas suddenly would re-turn it arid fallto his meal again." From Nichols, also,Hogarth's biographers have quoted thefollowing instance-of .his vanity : Onbeing told that Mr. John Free, the anatomist,had asserted that Greene was aseminent a composer as Handel, he observed," That fellow, Free, is alwaysshooting his bolt absurdly one way oranother. Handel is a giant in music;Greene only a light Lorimer-kind ofcomposer." " Ay," said his informant,but, at the same time, he declared youwas as good a portrait painter as Van-dick."" There," added Hogarth,"he was right ; and so, by G ! I am ;give me my time, and let me choosemy subject."Hogarth possessed a very retentivememory, and therefore seldom copiedon the spot any object that struck himas worthy of remark ; sometime., however,when a singularly grotesque orabsurd countenance presented itself, hewould sketch it at the moment withsuch materials as were immediatelyat hand, or in the absence of any,upon his thumb-nail. On an occasionof this sort, he produced a reconciliationbetween two disputants ata tavern, by instantly sketching theludicrously rueful countenance of oneof them who had received a blow fromPAINTERS,a quart pot; and the figure of thewoman spirting brandy into the eyes ofanother, introduced into his ModernMidnight Conversation, was also takenon the spot The following anecdotesare too characteristic to be omitted,though the latter has been likewise relatedof Sir Peter Lely and Sir GodfreyKneller : Being employed by4t noblemanto paint a portion of the walls ofa staircase with the subject of Pharaohand his host drowned in the Red Sea,he set to work and painted the wholespace red ; and upon demanding payment,was refused, because he hadproceeded no further than to lay hisground. " Ground," said he, " thereis no ground ; the colour is the Red Sea,Pharaoh and all are drowned ; the seacovers them, and you can see nothingof them." An extremely ugly persononce sat to him for his portrait, whichhe made so like, that the sitter washimself disgusted at the accuracy of theresemblance ; and having refused topay for it, Hogarth wrote to him, sayingif the money was not forthcomingwithin three days, he should dispose ofit, with the addition of a tail and otherappendages, to a wild beast man as ashow. This had the effect he desired,for the money was immediately paid,and the picture was subsequently burnt.Upon the same principle, perhaps,that he would have refused Crabbe thetitle of a poet, Walpole ascribes slendermerit to Hogarth as a painter ; yet nonewill now deny, that, in his peculiarstyle, Hogarth excelled all otherpainters. He is not to be estimated bythe deviations from his natural track :what his genius achieved, and not whathis ambition attempted, demands theattention of posterity. His pieces havebeen all justly called " lectures of morality;" and for this reason alone theywill always stand conspicuously andhonourably apart from the mass of picturesthat appeal to the imaginationwithout touching or improving theheart. He may be said, observes Dr.Aikin, to have created an entirely newspecies of painting, which may betermed the moral comic. His worksare certainly not so much studies for theprofessional artist, as for the searchersinto life and manners, and the votariesof true humour ; but Hogarth was notthe less a painter for that. The writer,indeed, who questions his right to thistitle, has, perhaps, more than all others,confirmed it by the following sensibleand accurate estimate, with which weshall conclude our memoir : " Whenthe Flemish painters attempt humour,"says Walpole, " it is by making adrunkard vomit ; they take evacuationsfor jokes ; and when they make ussick, they think they make us laugh.The views of Hogarth were more generousand extensive ; mirth colouredhis pictures, but benevolence designedthem ; he smiled like Socrates, thatmen might not be offended at his lectures,and might learn to laugh at theirown follies."ALLAN RAMSAY.THIS artist, son of the celebrated poetof the same name, was born at Edinburgh,in the year 1713. He began tosketch at twelve years old, as appearsby a letter from his father to Smiler,the painter, in 1736. " My son Allan,"writes the author of The Gentle Shepherd,"has been pursuing his sciencesince he was a dozen years auld : waswith Mr. Hyffidg, in London, for sometime,about two years ago ; has sincebeen painting here like a Raphael : setsout for the seat of the beast beyond theAlps within a month hence, to be awaytwo years. I'm sweet (loth) to partwith him, but canna stem the currentwhich flows from the advice of hispatrons and his own inclination." Allanleft Edinburgh in June, 1736 ; and,after having studied three years atRome, under Soliman and Imperial,returned to Scotland, and commencedportrait painter. One of his best performances,about this time, was theportrait of . archibald, Duke of Argyle,in his robes as lord of session, now inthe Exchange at Glasgow.After he had been some time atALLAN RAMSAY.Edinburgh, Mr. Ramsay removed loLondon, where he met with powerfulfriends and extensive patronage. Hisprincipal friend was the Earl of Bute,by whose recommendation of him tothe Prince of Wales, he was appointed topaint the portrait of his royal highness,and those of several persons belongingto the court. Reynolds, though there waslittle to fear from such a competitor, didnot think Ramsay a contemptible rival,and took particular pains with a fulllength, which he was painting aboutthis time, saying, in allusion to a pictureof the same size, by Ramsay, ofthe Earl of Bute, " I wish to show legswith Ramsay's Lord Bute." Thesatire of Churchill, and the pencil ofHogarth, the latter of whom tried topun him down under the name ofRamus-eye, disconcerted Ramsay butlittle, and proved no obstacle to hissuccess. His fame and his profit dailyincreased ; and he is said to haverealized no less than 40,000, evenbefore his appointment of painter to thecrown. The use he made of it washighly honourable to him ; he paid hisfather's debts, and settled a pension onhis sister Janet. A second journey toRome increased his admiration of thestyle of the great Italian masters ; andhe recreated himself by paying a visitto Edinburgh, where he establishedthe Select Society.On the accession of George the Third,Ramsay felt the influence of royalpatronage in the most gratifyingmanner. He was appointed portraitpainter to the court, on the death ofShackelton, in 1767, though some saythat Shackelton was removed to makeway for him, and died of a brokenheart on hearing that Ramsay waschosen in his stead. Reynolds, too,was in the height of his popularity,but, being no favourite with the king,Ramsay had no fears of being supplantedin that quarter. He was nowso fully employed, that he was obligedto call in the aid of five assistants, towhom he intrusted the various parts o)his pictures with the exception of thehead, such was the rage to have a portraitpainted by his hand. Among thepictures which he painted by royalcommand, were several of the king andqueen in their royal robes, as presentsto foreign ambassadors. He generallyworked upon them at the palace, theking being fond of seeing him at his:canvass, and of conversing with him asheproceeded. He was occasionallydesired to set up his easel in his majesty'sdining-room ; and it is relatedthat, when the king had finished hisusual allowance of boiled mutton andturnips, he would rise, and say, " Now,Ramsay, sit down in my place and takeyour dinner." His first portrait of thequeen was completed at his own studio,whither all the crown jewels and regaliawere sent to him ; in consequence ofwhich, sentinels were posted, day andnight, in front and rear of his house.Ramsay was also a man of letters aswell as an artist, and it was less in thecharacter of the latter than of ,theformer, that he made a third journey toRome, shortly after his appointment tobe king's painter. He employed himselfchiefly in examining and copyingthe ancient Greek and Latin inscriptionsin the corridors of the Vatican ; or, touse the words of Fuseli, he " was smitwith the love of classic lore, and desiredto trace on dubious vestiges thehaunts of ancient genius and learning."He had already made himself known,at home, as the author of many ingeniouspieces on history, politics, andcriticism, since published under thetitle of Investigator; and he acquiredcredit by a pamphlet on the subject ofElizabeth Canning, which exposed thereal truth of that story. An accidentwhich he met with some time afterhis return to London, was the meansof putting a check to his still flourishingpractice. Happening to read the accountof a fire in which several liveswere lost, he was so touched with thecalamity, that he rose up on the moment,and desired his servants andpupils to follow him, that he mightshow them the way of escaping undersimilar circumstances to those of whichhe had just been reading. Taking aladder, he proceeded with it to the loftdoor, where he mounted, and, on arrivingat the top, exclaimed, " Now Iam safe, I can escape along the roofs ofthe adjoining houses." He then turnedto descend, but his foot unfortunatelyslipping, he fell and dislocated his rightarm. He was, at the time, employedon a picture of the king, for the Exciseoffice, but contrived to finish it byPAINTERS.holding up his right arm with his left ;and, what is more extraordinary, bothhe and others declared it to be thefinest portrait he had ever painted. Hishealth not mending, he resolved to quithis profession for a time, and removeto Rome, whither he accordingly proceeded.He set out on his return toEngland in the summer of 1784, butreached Paris with difficulty, and diedthere of a fever, in August, in theseventy-first year of his age.Ramsay was of the middle size, wellmade in his person, and intelligent inhis look. He was elegant in his manners,a most agreeable companion, anda steadfast friend ; quick in his temper,and somewhat passionate, but easilyappeased. He was an accomplishedmodern scholar; and Dr. Johnson saidof him, " You will not find a man inwhose conversation there is more instruction,more information, or moreelegance, than in Ramsay's." Dr.Johnson's passion for tea was notgreater than Ramsay's, who had such adislike to wine, that even the smell, itis said, of a bottle of claret, was toomuch for him.As an artist, he has the merit ofhaving succeeded in the style he attempted; he confined himself to theplacid and contemplative, and displaysenough of nature and taste in his picturesto warrant the observation ofWalpole, that if he did not achieve afirst-rate name, it was for want of subjectsrather than of genius. Northcote,in his Conversations, speaks of himas follows : " There was Ramsay, ofwhom Sir Joshua used to say, that hewas the most sensible among all thepainters of his time; but he has leftlittle to show it His manner was dryand timid : he stopped short in themiddle of his work because he knewexactly how much it wanted. Nowand then we find tints and sketches,which show what he might have been,if his hand had been equal to his conceptions.I have seen a picture of hisof the queen, soon after she was married; a profile, and slightly done, but itwas a paragon of elegance. She had afan in her hand : Lord, how she heldthat fan! It was weak in execution,and ordinary in features, but the farthestpossible removed from anything likevulgarity. A professor might despiseit ; but, in the mental part, I have neverseen anything of Vandyke equal to it.I should find it difficult to produce anythingof Sir Joshua's that conveys anidea of more grace and delicacy."The following anecdote is told ofRamsay, during his residence at Rome :Whilst he was being conducted overthe School of Art, by the president ofthe Roman Academy, and looking atthe drawings of the students, the presidenthinted that England had nothingof a similar kind to compare with them.Ramsay indignantly replied, " Well,sir, I will show you how we draw inEngland," and immediately wrote toone of his pupils, Davie Martin, to cometo Rome with his drawings. On theirarrival, Ramsay arranged them inorder, and invited the president andhis scholars to inspect them ; when, hesays, " the Italians were confoundedand overcome, and British skill wastriumphant."RICHARD WILSON.RlCHARp WILSON, son of therector of Pieces, in Montgomeryshire,was born about the year 1713; and,probably, received his education underhis father's roof. Of the early periodof his life, however, nothing is positivelyknown, except that the taste he developedfor drawing induced his relation,Sir George Wynn, to take himto London, and place him with anobscure portrait painter of the name ofWright. This profession he himselffollowed until his thirty-sixth year ;when having acquired sufficient meansto visit Italy, he proceeded thither forthe purpose of improving himself in hisart, in which he had as yet acquiredbut little distinction. His talents soonprocured him notice ; and, meeting, atVenice, with a Mr. Lock, was carriedRICHARD WILSON,by that gentleman to Rome, where afortunate accident led to a completechange in the character of his productions.Waiting rather long, onemorning, for the appearance of Zuc-corelli, he amused himself by paintinga scene, taken from the window of theartist's room. Zuccherelli, upon entering,expressed his astonishment at the performance,and asking Wilson if he hadstudied landscape, received a reply inthe negative ; " then," said he, " I adviseyou to try, for you are sure ofsuccess." Another circumstance, bywhich this was followed, confirmed thejudgment of Zuccherelli, and determinedthe future career of Wilson. Vernet,the celebrated French painter, coming,one day, into the painting-room of thesubject of our memoir, was so struckwith a newly-finished landscape, thathe proposed to exchange for it one ofhis own. To this Wilson gladly agreed,and had the additional satisfaction ofhearing that his-picture was dailypointed out for admiration in the exhibitionroom of Vernet ; who used tosay to his English visitors, whenthey applauded his own performances," Don't talk of my landscapesalone, when your countryman, Wilson,paints so beautifully."Thus encouraged, he remainedabroad six years, during which timehis fame drew to him several pupils;and, before his departure from the continent,his portrait was painted, andpresented to him, by Mengs. On hisarrival in London, he was, at first,patronised by men of rank and taste ;and his pictures of Niobe, and AView of Rome, the former of whichwas purchased by the Duke of Cumberland,and the latter by the Marquess ofTavistock, gained for him the reputationof the ablest landscape painter of hiscountry. Caprice, however, soon losthim public estimation ; and, his geniusnot being sufficiently rewarded by thefew who were able to appreciate it, hesought and obtained the place oflibrarian of the Royal Academy. Ofthis appointment the profits were butsmall, yet they exceeded probably thosehe got by his pictures, which he nowhad the mortification of seeing supersededby the comparative daubs of Smithand Barret, who were making largefortunes, whilst Wilson was sendinghis works to the pawnbrokers, or compelledto paint a picture, as it is said hedid his Ceyx and Halcyone, for a pot ofbeer and the remains of a Stilton cheese.He subsequently made sketches forhalf-a-crown, and was compelled toremove to a residence as mean as hisprice. " His last retreat in this wealthycity," says Allan Cunningham, " was asmall room somewhere about Totten-hamCourt Road ; an easel and abrush, a chair and a table, a hardbed, with few clothes, a scanty mealand the favourite pot of porter, were allthat Wilson could call his own." Towardsthe close of his life, however, hislot was ameliorated by the possessionof a small estate, in Wales, which beinherited on the death of his brother,and whither he retired to spend theremainder of his days. The estate wassituated at Colomondie, near Llanveris,in Denbighshire; and here Wilson died,in May, 1782.In person, our artist was above themiddle size, possessing a robust andalmost corpulent frame, with a redblotchy face, and large head. Neither hisspeech nor his manners were polished;and he was sometimes peevish and morose; but his language was always thatof truth and candour; and his conversationabounded with information andhumour. Of his readiness and spiritin resenting an insult, the followinganecdotes are told : Sir Joshua Reynolds,who is said to have regarded himwith jealousy, having proposed, at ameeting of the academy, the health ofGainsborough, as the best landscapepainter, Wilson, of whose presence SirJoshua was not aware, added, aloud,"and the best portrait painter too."Being told that Zoffani, in his satiricpicture of the Royal Academy, had representedhim with a pot of porter athis elbow, he selected a stout stick, anddeclared he would give the caricaturista good cudgelling ; which the latter,however, had the prudence to avoid, bypainting out the offensive part. Of hisabilities as a painter, he was far fromvain, but would never suffer his owntaste to be controlled by that of others;and, on one occasion, when some one,commissioned by the committee of taste,told him he must imitate the lighterstyle of Zuccherelli, if he hoped for theirgood opinion, he returned a con-painters.tempestuous and indignant answer, whichlost him their future patronage. Hewas sensible of his own genius, and ofits superiority to that of some of hismore fortunate contemporaries : " Youwill live," he once exclaimed to SirVV. Beechey, to see great prices givenfor my pictures, when those of Barretwill not fetch one farthing." Wilsonused few colours, but one brush, andworked standing, and aimed rather atproducing bold effects, than correct andelaborate delineations. His conceptionsare poetic and noble, yet so happilytrue to nature as to delight both therustic and the scholar ; the peculiarharmony and lustre that pervade hiscompositions have seldom been exceeded;and, in aerial effect, he, perhaps,justly considered himself without arival. Among his most beautiful performancesare, The Death of Niobe ;Phaeton ; Morning ; Celadon andAmelia ; Apollo and the Fawn ; Meleagerand Atalanta; Cicero at his Villa;Temple of Bacchus ; Adrian's Villa ;Tomb of the Horatio and Curate ;Castle of Dines Bran ; and NymphsBathing. Fuseli, in forming an estimateof the powers of Wilson, makesthe following comparison between himand the prince of Italian landscapepainters : " Claude, little above mediocrityin all other branches of landscapepainting, had one great prerogative-sublimity; but his powers rose and setwith the sun ; he could only be serenelysublime or romantic. Wilson, withoutso great a feature, had a more variedand more proportionate power ; he observedNature in all her appearances,and had a characteristic touch for allher forms. But though in effects ofdewy freshness and silent eveninglights, few equalled, and fewer excelledhim, his grandeur is oftener allied toterror, bustle, and convulsion, than tocalmness and tranquillity. Figures, itis difficult to say which of the two introducedor handled with greater infelicity."It is hardly fair, however,to draw a parallel between two artistswhose styles, it is admitted, were sodifferent. It should be observed, thatWilson painted the same subject threeor four times, which has given rise to asuspicion of the originality of some ofhis works.SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.THIS celebrated artist, one of theeleven children of a clergyman, wasborn at Plympton, in Devonshire, onthe 16th of July, 1723. It is not, perhaps,worth stating (what, however,most of his biographers record), that, bysome mistake or other, he was baptisedJoseph instead of Joshua. Under hisfather, who was head of the grammar-schoolat Plympton, he received hiseducation ; but, not having a very strictmaster, he made but little progress inclassical study. He was intended forthe medical profession, and was, consequently,discouraged in the early tastewhich he displayed for drawing; buthaving made himself acquainted withThe Jesuits' Perspective, he produceda drawing so admirably illustrative ofits rules, that his father declared " itwas wonderful," and left him to followhis own inclinations. He was accordingly,in October, 1741, sent to London,and placed under the care of Hudsonthe portrait painter, a man of morepopularity than genius, and in whoseemploy he continued about two years.Their separation is said to have beenaccelerated by Hudson's jealousy of hispupil, who had not only made somecopies from Guercino, which were takenfor originals, but had executed a portraitof a female servant in the house,in so masterly a manner, that it obtainedmore applause than all the otherpictures in Hudson's gallery.Reynolds returned home in 1743;but, instead of applying himself to hisprofession, mixed in company to a degreewhich he afterwards regretted. In1745, he took a house at PlymouthDock, and commenced portrait painter ;but, though his likenesses were tolerablygood, too much of Hudson's stylewas apparent. Almost all his sitterswere drawn with one hand in the waist-sirJOSHUA REYNOLDS.coat, and the other holding a hat ; butone of his employers wishing the hatto be upon his head, such, it is said,was the force of habit in Reynolds, thathe sent home the portrait with one haton the head, and another under thearm. Among his sitters at Plymouthwere the beautiful Miss Chudleigh,afterwards Duchess of Kingston, andCaptain (afterwards Lord) Keppel ; andwhen the latter was appointed commodoreon the Mediterranean station, heinvited the subject of our memoir toaccompany him. After making a shortstay at Lisbon, Algiers, and Minorca,where he painted most of the officersin garrison, and received a severewound in his face, by. being carried overa precipice, whilst riding a horse thathad taken fright, he proceeded by wayof Leghorn to Rome. " Here," saysNorthcote, " his time was employed insuch a manner as might have beenexpected from one of his talents andvirtue. He contemplated with unweariedattention, and ardent zeal, thevarious beauties which marked thestyle of different schools and differentages. He copied and sketched in theVatican such parts of the works ofRaphael and Michael Angelo as hethought would be most conducive to hisfuture excellence; and, by his well-directedstudies, acquired that grace ofthinking, to which he was principallyindebted for his subsequent reputationas a painter." It should be observed,however, that he preferred the studyof nature to that of the finest masters ;and refused, therefore, many of theoffers made to him by travellers, ofcommission to make copies. " WhilstI was at Rome," he says, " I was verylittle employed by travellers, and thatlittle I always considered as so muchtime lost." Before leaving the " eternalcity," he painted an admirable likenessof himself, and a sort of parody onRaphael's School of Athens ; but soonrelinquished subjects of this kind, lestit might corrupt his taste as a portraitpainter. We ought not, perhaps, toquit this part of our memoir, withoutquoting Sir Joshua's own interestingaccount of his feelings on first beholdingthe works of Raffaelle, in theVatican. " It has frequently happened,"he says, " as I was informedby the keeper of the Vatican, thatmany of those whom he had conductedthrough the various apartments ofthat edifice, when about to be dismissed,have asked for the works ofRaffaelle, and would not believe thatthey had already passed through therooms where they are preserved; solittle impression had those performancesmade on them. One of the firstpainters now in France once told me,that this circumstance happened tohimself, though he now looks uponRaffaelle with that veneration whichhe deserves from all painters and loversof the art. I remember very well myown disappointment when I first visitedthe Vatican; but on confessing myfeelings to a brother student, of whoseingenuousness I had a high opinion, heacknowledged that the works of had the same effect upon him,or rather, that they did not producethe effect which he expected. Injusticeto myself, however, I must add, thatthough disappointed and mortified atnot finding myself enraptured with theworks of this great master, I did notfor a moment conceive, or suppose, thatthe name of Raffaelle, and those admirablepaintings in particular, owedtheir reputation to the ignorance andprejudice of mankind; on the contrary,my not relishing them, as I was consciousI ought to have done, was one ofthe most humiliating circumstances thatever happened to me. I found myselfin the midst of works, executed uponprinciples with which I was unacquainted:I felt my ignorance, andstood abashed."He returned to England, in October,1752, and shortly afterwards took ahouse in St. Martin's Lane, where hispaintings soon excited the envy of hisbrother artists. The freedom of hisconceptions, and the splendour of hiscolouring, were considered as hereticalinnovations : Hudson exclaimed, " Reynolds,you don't paint so well as whenyou left England!" Another artistpointed out the difference of his stylefrom that of Lely, and a third madean invidious comparison of his workswith those of Kneller. Public attentionwas first called to Reynolds by a verystriking portrait which he had paintedof Commodore Keppel ; but the partialityof fashion to one Liotard, a foreigner,delayed for awhile the popu-PAINTERS.laity that was awaiting him. Patronsat length began to smile upon him :Liotard, whose pictures were accurate,but cold and tame resemblances, wasdeserted and forgotten; whilst thesitting-room of Reynolds, who now removedto Newport Street, was dailycrowded. " The force and felicity ofhis portraits," says Northcote, " notonly drew around him the opulenceand beauty of the nation, but happilygained him the merited honour of perpetuatingthe features of all the eminentand distinguished men of learning thenliving."In 1754, he was introduced at thehouse of the Misses Dotterel, in NewportStreet, to Dr. Johnson, whoseattention he attracted by an observationwhich the doctor declared could onlyhave emanated from the mind of a manwho thought for himself. The conversationamongst the ladies turned uponthe death of a friend, to whom theyowed obligations : " You have, however,the comfort," said Reynolds, " of beingrelieved from the burthen of gratitude."This remark was considered by thecompany as selfish, but Johnson declaredthat it was true to nature : andfrom this time an intimacy sprung upbetween them, which lasted throughlife. In a few years, his businessbecame so extensive, that he found itexpedient to employ several personsin the preparation of his draperies andback-grounds ; and, in 1761, he removedto Leicester Square, and set uphis carriage, on the panels of whichwere painted allegorical representationsof the seasons. His sister, whoresided with him, thinking it too gaudy,expressed as much: "What!" he exclaimed," would you have me keep acarriage like an apothecary's?" Thefurniture of his house shewed the samelove of splendour ; and he was anxiousthat it should be seen ; accordingly, hegave elegant dinners and conversazione,to which Burke, Garrick, Goldsmith,Johnson, and other literary men, werealways invited. In 1762, he visited hisnative county, for the benefit of hishealth, and, some time after his return,was enrolled among the members of theLiterary Club, on its establishment byJohnson, in 1764. His income was, atthis time, jg6,000 per annum ; and AllanCunningham hints, that his " heavypurse and hospitable table," caused hiselection to the club above-mentioned ;a supposition which the known independenceof Johnson, who probablyproposed him, completely refutes. Itcan only be attributed to the sincerefriendship which the author had for thepainter, or the former, in writing to thelatter, on hearing of his illness, wouldnever have said, " If I should lose you,I should lose almost the only manwhom I can call a friend."On the establishment of the RoyalAcademy, in 1768, Reynolds was madepresident, and, in the same year,knighted. It is said that he refused tobelong to the institution, until assuredof receiving this honour, and, with hisusual caution, he certainly took time toconsider his acceptance of the presidentship.The duties of the office,however, he performed with a laudablezeal, voluntarily imposing upon himselfthe task of delivering a course of lecturesto the students. They consistedof fifteen, all replete with the soundestprinciples, and the most useful information.Of tht-ir merit he thought lessthan his hearers : a nobleman tellinghim that he read his discourses in solow a tone as almost to be inaudible, hereplied, " That was to my advantage."If Barry's judgment be correct, Reynoldsspoke the truth ; for the former,when professor of painting at the academy,being asked by the latter whyhis were not ready, replied, fiercely,If I had only, in composing my lectures,to produce such poor mistakenstuff as your discourses, I should havemy work done, and be ready to read."In 1773, the subject of our memoirvisited Paris, and, on his return, wascreated LL.D. by the University ofOxford, having been previously admitteda member of the Royal, Antiquarian,and Dilettanti Societies. Hewas also elected mayor of his nativetown ; and on being chosen a memberof the Academy of Florence, painted,according to custom, -a portrait of himselffor the institution, which advancedthe reputation of English art abroad.In 1780, and some succeeding years, hewas engaged in a series of allegoricalfigures, and a picture of The Nativity,for the New College at Oxford. This,instead of occupying the place forwhich it was designed, was sold forSIR JOSHUA REYNOLDStwelve hundred guineas, to the Dukeof Rutland, and was destroyed in:he conflagration of Revoir Castle. In1783, Sir Joshua visited some of thecontinental galleries; and, in the sameyear, published Mason's translation ofDu Frenzy's Art of Painting, withnotes by himself, which display muchsagacity, and knowledge of his art. In1784, he succeeded Ramsay as king'spainter ; and, in the following year,executed, among other pictures, TheInfant Hercules strangling the Serpents,for the Empress of Russia, who rewardedhim with a note of thanks in her ownhand, a gold snuff-box bearing herportrait, and fifteen hundred guineas.His next performances of celebrity were,Puck, Macbeth and the Witches, andThe Death of Cardinal Beaufort, paintedfor the purpose of furnishing engravingsto Alderman Boydell's edition of Shakspeare.In July, 1789, up to which periodSir Joshua had, with the exception ofa slight paralytic stroke in 1782, enjoyedalmost uninterrupted health, he felt asudden decay of sight in his left eye.Whilst finishing the portrait of theMarchioness of Hertford, says AllanCunningham, " he laid down the pencil,sat a little while in mute consideration,and never lifted it more." Thoughhis friends read to him, and flockedround him, and he appeared cheerful,his spirits declined ; and a circumstanceshortly afterwards occurred which wasnot calculated to raise them. In a contestbetween Bonoini and Fuseli forthe office of associate to the academy,he took the part of the former in soearnest a manner, that the success ofFuseli caused him the most bitter mortification.He wrote a letter, resigninghis station as president, and was onlyprevented from doing so by the mostabject entreaties of the academicians,and a message from the king himself,requesting him to continue in his office.He carried his original intention intoeffect, however, in 1790, when he tookleave of the students, in an address, inwhich he expressed his enthusiastic admirationof Buonarotti, saying, " Ishould desire that the last words whichI should pronounce in this academy,and from this place, might be the nameof Michael Angelo." After his secessionfrom the academy, he offered tosell to it, at a low price, his collectionof pictures by the great masters, oncondition that a gallery should be purchasedfor them; but the offer, much:o his mortification, was declined. Tohis partial loss of eyesight was nowadded an enlargement of the liver, thefatal effects of which he contemplatedwith composure, amid the assurances ofhis friends that he would recover. " Ihave been fortunate," he said, " in longstood health and constant success, and Iought not to complain. I know thatall things on earth must have an end,and now I am come to mine." Hedied on the 23rd of February, 1792,and was buried by the side of SirChristopher Wren, in St. Paul's Cathedral,where a statue has since beenraised to his memory, by Flaxman. Hisfuneral was attended by many of thecarriages of the nobility ; and the pallwas supported by three dukes, twomarquesses, and five other noblemen.In conformity with his own maxim,that an artist who marries is ruined,Sir Joshua died a bachelor. In person,he was rather under the middle size,with a florid complexion, round, bluntfeatures, and, altogether, a pleasingcountenance. His manners were thoseof the polished gentleman ; and, aidedby a naturally prudent and cautiousdisposition, he was seldom betrayedinto rudeness, or even warmth of expression: nor is there reason to supposethat malevolence formed any part ofhis concealed anger, though somewhatof contempt, as well as dignity, mightbe sometimes traced in his forbearance.His servants describe him, according toAllan Cunningham, as having been hardand parsimonious ; never thinking thathe had enough labour out of hisdependents, and always suspecting thathe overpaid them. On the other hand,Johnson and Burke, the latter of whomhas written a very eloquent eulogiumon Reynolds, represent him as openand generous, and endowed with allthe social and hospitable qualities.Both accounts are, in some measure,true: he offered his servant ,\ 00 perannum for the money he took at hisdoor during the practice of wails'giving; while to Gainsborough, whoasked only sixty guineas for a picture,he gave one hundred; and so manyother instances of his liberality arePAINTERS.recorded, that it is impossible not toconsider him, on the whole, as a generousand benevolent man.As an artist, Sir Joshua has distinguishedhimself by his portraits, historicalpaintings, and lectures ; whichlast, notwithstanding the contempt someartists professed to regard them with,were sufficiently important to be sometimesattributed to Burke, and sometimesto Johnson. No one, however, nowdisputes that they form one of the mostvaluable legacies ever bequeathed toart : Sir Thomas Lawrence justly characterizedthem as " golden precepts,which are now acknowledged as canonsof universal taste." There is no realfoundation for the report, that SirJoshua received any assistance in theselectures, beyond the advice and hintsof his literary friends, to whom hemay have submitted them for inspection.In portrait painting, hefar surpassed all his English predecessors,and is justly said to have combinedthe mellowness of Titian, thesimplicity and delicacy of Vandyck,and the force and splendour of Rembrandt.To effect so happy a union,he studied these and other great masterswith unwearied diligence ; yet, inhis pictures, Nature is so fascinatinglyimagined, that the eye is never offendedby art. In drawing the naked figure,he never attained to facility ; but in theease and elegance of his forms, andthe beauty and adaptation of his draperies,he has never been excelled. Hisadmiration of Michael Angelo has beenalready mentioned ; but it is said that,though he always spoke of Michael, heread and dreamt of Raphael. Of thesecrets of his colours, he was jealous inthe extreme, and never revealed themto his pupils. His numerous experiments,however, relative to colouring,led to equal defects with his excellencesin this branch; and his deficiency ofknowledge in the chemistry and mechanismof colours, have left some of hispictures in a faded state, that becameat length a kind of mark of his productions.Of his attempts in this part ofhis art, he has himself said, " I triedevery effect of colour ; and by leavingout every colour in its turn, shewedevery colour that I could do without it.As I alternately left out every colour, Itried every new colour, and often, as iswell known, failed." He was less successfulin history than portraits ; thoughit must be confessed, that many of hispictures, in the former branch, exhibitgreat breadth of light and shade,richness of colour, and admirable managementof the chiar-oscuro ; and ingrandeur of composition, and force ofexpression, his Ugolino and Death ofCardinal Beaufort are excelled by noperformances of English artists. Thecelerity of his touch may be judged offrom the fact that, from the opening ofthe Royal Academy till 1790, he exhibitedno less than two hundred andforty-four pictures. Among his mostadmired portraits may be mentionedthose of Burke, Gibbon, Dr. Johnson,Goldsmith, Horace Walpole, &c. ; andamong his historical and poetical subjects,The Death of Dido, Cymon andIphigenia, The Fortune Teller, Garrickbetween Tragedy and Comedy,Muscipula, Mrs. Siddons as the TragicMuse, and The Holy Family.The following anecdotes have beentold of Reynolds. Hearing that anartist of considerable merit scarcelydared to leave home, for fear of beingarrested, he called at his house, andfinding that only 40 were requiredto relieve the artist from his difficulties,presented him with a donationof ^1100. Perceiving, one morning, bythe newspaper, that a man who hadrobbed his negro servant had been capitallyconvicted, he sent to inquire intothe condition of the criminal, whom henot only humanely supplied with foodand clothing, but obtained a commutationof his sentence to transportation forlife, through the intercession of Mr.Burke, who was then in office. Necessariesfor leaving the country were alsosupplied to the convict at the expense ofSir Joshua. After was elected Mayorof Plympton, he painted his ownportrait for the town-hall, and sent itdown with a request to Sir WilliamBelford, to have it placed where it shouldhave a proper light. This the latterconsented to do, in a letter, assuringSir Joshua that it was placed, in orderthat its excellences might be seenmore readily, beside a very bad portrait; to which letter he replied, thatthe picture which was so much despised,was one which, in early life, he hadhimself painted. Whilst Mrs. SiddonsTHOMAS GAINSBOROUGH.was slung to him as the Tragic Muse,he painted his name on the border ofher robe, which the actress conceivingto be a piece of classic embroidery,went near to examine, and discoveringwhat it really was smiled at the compliment; upon which Sir Joshua,bowing, observed, " I could not losethis opportunity of sending my namedown to posterity on the hem of yourgarment." It was his custom, accordingto Smith, to take great quantities ofsnuff whilst painting; and the sameauthority relates, that during the timehe was engaged in painting the largepicture of the Maryborough family atBlenheim, the duchess ordered a servantto bring a broom, and sweep upSir Joshua's snuff from the carpet.When the man, however, entered theroom for that purpose, Sir Joshua desiredhim to let the snuff remain tillhe had finished his picture, observing,that the dust raised by the broomwould do much more injury to hi ; picture,than the snuff could possibly doto the carpet.In the capacity of author, Sir Joshuais known as the writer of some notes toJohnson's edition of Shakespeare, andof Numbers Seventy-five, Seventy-nine,and Eighty-two "of The Idler.THOMAS GAINSBOROUGH.THOMAS GAINSBOROUGH, theson of a clothier, was born at Sudbury,in Suffolk, in the year 1727. Whilst atschool he paid more attention to drawingthan to his books, and sometimesforged his father's hand writing for thepurpose of obtaining a holiday, whichhe used to devote to his favourite pursuit.When the deception was first discoveredby his father, he declared " thatTom would come to be hanged ;" buton being shewn the sketches his son hadproduced during these stolen hours, heexclaimed, with delight, " The boy willbe a genius !" Gainsborough's juveniletaste was akin to that of his matureryears; nothing of the picturesque inrural life escaped his pencil, from itsmost fanciful to its most simple characteristics.In the course of these earlystudies a ludicrous circumstance occurred; whilst sketching in his father'sgarden, he caught the eyes of a manpeeping wistfully over the wall at thepears on an adjacent tree, and whobeing subsequently accused of an intentionto steal the fruit, was confoundedand terrified by Gainsborough's productionof his likeness, to shew himhow he looked in the situation abovedescribed. Our young artist afterwardsmade a complete painting of this samerustic, which obtained for him greatapprobation, under the name of TomPeartree's Portrait.According to Edwards, the subject ofour memoir received his first instructionsfrom Gravely, the engraver; butall his biographers agree in stating, thathe studied under Hayman, in London,where he remained from his fourteen intill his eighteenth year. He then returnedto Suffolk, and married a younglady of the name of Margaret Burr,who possessed j 200 per annum, and wassaid to be a natural daughter of one ofour exiled princes. He then took ahouse at Ipswich, where he found afriendly, but troublesome and ostentatious,patron in Governor Thickness,by whose advice he, in 1758, removedto Bath. Here Thicknessee, who waswell known, proposed that his portraitshould be painted, by way of decoy-duck;but Gainsborough, choosing "torely more upon his own merit than thegovernor's popularity, declined beingindebted to the latter for the chance ofemployment. This produced a remonstrancefrom Thicknessee, but it wasaddressed to one of too much independenceas well as genius, to have theintended effect, and a gradual dissolutionof their intimacy consequentlytook place, though their intercoursewith each other does not appear to havealtogether ceased.Whilst at Bath, Gainsborough gainedconsiderable reputation, employment,and profit, as a portrait painter ; and onhis proceeding to London, in 1774, hewas not long in becoming a formidablePAINTERS.rival to Sir Joshua Reynolds. He wasemployed by the king, and the rest ofthe royal family ; and the portraitswhich he executed of them and otherdistinguished personages, were scarcelyless admired than those of the illustriousartist just mentioned. Somelikenesses, however, he found a difficultyin taking, and particularly wherehis sitters assumed looks which appearedforeign to the natural expression of theircountenances : among others, the portraitsof Foote and Garrick, after repeatedand unsuccessful trials, he gaveup in despair, exclaiming, "Rot them foracouple of rogues! they have everybody'sfaces but their own." Thewealth and fame of Gainsborough increasedrapidly in the metropolis ; butthough his landscapes began to receivetheir full share of admiration, he stillfound portrait painting his most lucrativeemployment. Of his personal history,it is to be regretted that little moreis known than has been already told.His death, of which he had a strongpresentiment, was caused by a cancerin the neck, and took place on the 2ndof August, 1788. Sir Joshua Reynolds,between whom and himself there hadbeen a previous coldness, was with himin his last moments, and Gainsboroughhad just said to him, "ewe are allgoing to heaven, and Vandyck is of thecompany," when he expired.Gainsborough possessed a handsomeperson, was graceful and fascinating inhis manners, had a liberal hand, and agenerous heart, and was no less a warmfriend than a cheerful and witty companion.His conversation did not embracea great variety of topics, but whateverhe touched upon he treated in themost delightful manner ; and, thoughbut little acquainted with books, is saidto have written letters in a style whichmight have been thought a close imitationof Sterne. He was passionatelyfond of music ; and, though he neverhad patience to learn his notes, playedtolerably well upon several instruments,every variety of which he took a pleasurein seeing scattered about his house.Smith, the biographer of Nollekens, tellsus, that he once found Colonel Hamiltonplaying so exquisitely on the violin toGainsborough, that he exclaimed, whilsttears of rapture rolled down his cheek,Go on, and 1 will give you the pictureof the Boy at the Stile, which you haveso often wished to purchase of me." Noprice appeared too great to him for aninstrument to which he took a fancy.To Mrs. Thicknessee he said, one evening,after hearing her play upon a ," I love it so much, that Iwill willingly give an hundred guineasfor it." It has been said, however, thathe only intended this as a delicate modeof assisting Thicknessee, to whom moneywas, at the time, acceptable. Anotheranecdote, related by Jackson, is thelast we have space for on this subject.Gainsborough, who had seen a theorbo,finely painted by Vandyck, concludedit must be a fine instrument; and hearingof a German professor who possessedone, he called upon him for thepurpose of purchasing it, when the followingdialogue took place : ' I amcome to buy your lute name yourprice, and here's your money." " Icannot sell my lute." " No! not foraguinea or two? but you must sellit, 1 tell you." "My lute is worthmuch money : it is worth ten guineas."Ay, that it is : see, here's themoney." So saying, he took up theinstrument, laid down the price, wenthalf way down the stairs, and returned.I have done but half my errand : whatis your lute worth if I have not yourbook ?" " What book, Master Gainsborough?" " Why, the book of airsyou have composed for the lute." " Ah !sir, I can never part with my book."Pol ! you can make another at anytime: this is the book I mean ; there'sten guineas for it : so, once more, goodday." He went down a few steps, andreturned again. " What use is yourbook to me, if I don't understand it?and your lute ! you may take it again,if you will not teach me to play on it.Come home with me, and give me thefirst lesson." " I will come tomorrow."You must come now !" " I mustdress myself." " For what ? you arethe best figure I have seen to-day."I must shave, sir." " I honour yourbeard." " I must, however, put on mywig." " D n your wig ! your capand beard become you. Do you think,if Vandyck was to paint you, he wouldlet you be shaved ?"As an artist, we cannot better conveyan idea of the merit of Gainsborough,than by borrowing the ideas of SirPAUL Sandy.Joshua Reynolds, who has introduceda critique of his talents in his FourteenthAcademical Discourse, by saying,If ever this nation should producegenius sufficient to acquire us thehonourable distinction of an Englishschool, the name of Gainsborough willbe transmitted to posterity, in the historyof the art, among the very firstof that rising name." Gainsboroughpursued his art with all the enthusiasmof a lover, and was always seeking toattain improvement. He loved painting,perhaps, ' with less rapture thanmusic, but he cultivated it with moreassiduity and constancy. Whenever hewalked out, he copied anything remarkablethat struck him; and whenhe met persons, whose character of facepleased him, would send them to hishouse, and pay them for their attendance.His management of light andcolours reminds one of the Flemishschool ; but the means he took to produceeffects, were perfectly original, asmay be seen in the rude, and apparentlyrandom and unmeaning, scratches, whichhe has made to conspire to a harmoniouswhole. His portraits were notfinished with all the pains of which theywere worthy ; but in accuracy of resemblance,they are exceeded by none. Hislandscapes and fancy pictures, whetherconsisting of single figures, or small rusticgroupes, are Nature herself, and Natureas we see her in our country ; thepastoral beauties of which afford a classof subjects for the painter, that are to befound in no other. Among his most celebratedcompositions may be mentioned,the Blue Boy and the Cottage Door, inthe possession of Lord Grosvenor; theCottage Girl, with her Dog and Pitcher,the Shepherd's Boy in the Shower, andthe Woodman and his Dog in the Storm,This last, for which he could not obtainone hundred guineas in his life-time,though a most beautiful composition,was sold by his widow, for five hundredguineas, to Lord Gainsborough, whosehouse, together with the picture, wassubsequently destroyed by firePAUL Sandy.THIS eminent artist was born atNottingham, in the year 1732; and,coming to London, at the age of fourteen,became a pupil in the drawing-roomat the Tower, where he studiedabout two years. At the expiration ofthis period, he was selected as thedraughtsman to attend Mr. DavidV\ watson, in his survey of the north andwest parts of the highlands of Scotland.His principal employment was in drawingplans, but he also found time todesign several sketches, from which hemade a number of small etchings, thatwere subsequently published by MessrsRyland and Bryce. Sandby used totell a ludicrous story of an accidentwhich happened to him in the highlands.He was standing, with twofiends, watching the operations of?one highland lasses, who were engagedin what is termed " a groundwash." Not perceiving our artist andhis companions, the women, in themidst ot their occupation, began todance about, and commit sundryvagaries ; in which, considering theshortness of their petticoats, they wouldnot, probably, have indulged, had theybeen aware" of the presence of malespectators. The scene at length becameso ludicrous, that Sandby and hisfriends broke from a giggle into a roarof laughter ; at the sound of which thewomen were thrown into confusion,and ran off in various directions. Someof them, however, more bold or indignantthan the rest, filled severallarge buckets with water, and stealing,unperceived, towards the threestrangers, deluged them with the contents.The remainder of the womennow came up, and assailed the drenchedintruders with such hooting and cries,that the latter took to their heels, andgladly made their escape.Soon after his return from Scotland,Sandby passed a short time with hisbrother, at Windsor, and made a greatnumber of drawings of views in theneighbourhood, which were purchased,at a liberal price, by Sir Joseph Banks.PAINTE RS.He, soon after, accompanied Sir Josephin a tour through North and SouthWales; ana was employed, by SirWatkin Williams Wynne, to sketch themost interesting picturesque scenery ofthat country. On the establishment ofthe Royal Academy, in 1768, he waselected one of the "original members;and, in the same year, was appointedchief drawing master to the RoyalAcademy, at Woolwich, which officehe held till his death. He was subsequentlyselected by the king to instructall the young princes in drawing ;and he also had a large circle of pupilsamong the first families in the kingdom.Sandby at first practised in what istermed " body colours," but his subsequentprocess was as follows : hefirst drew his outlines, chiefly withpen and ink, then sketched the distanceswith lead pencils, laid in theshadows with Indian ink, and washedthe colours over the whole. Thismethod, which soon superseded theformer, went by the names of washed,tinted, or stained drawing. He alsointroduced into this country the art ofengraving in aqua-tinta, and carried it toa degree of perfection unknown before.The publication of The Copper-plateMagazine, by Parsley, the bookseller,was the means of bringing our artist intovery high repute. The magazine was,at first, chiefly filled with engravingsfrom French pictures, but an engravingof Sandby's being inserted, it was somuch admired, that Kearslev immediatelylaid aside all foreign productions,and employed Sandby alone.Meantime his drawings were eagerlysought after by all the connoisseurs ofthe day, and no collection was consideredcomplete without some of them.He died, at his house, in Haddington,on the 7th of November, 1809, highlyrespected by a large circle of friendsHis industry," says one of his biographers," was as remarkable as hisgenius ; the number of his drawingsdisseminated through the cabinets ofthe amateurs of the arts is immense.To particularise any of his productionswould be throwing a degree of neglecton those that we omitted. Their meritis of a superior kind ; and the sceneryhe delineates is, in many cases, notmerely an address to the eye, but anappeal to the mind. The towering,though almost tottering battlements ofthe baronial castle, display dignity inruins, and show the instability of humangrandeur. The mouldering fragmentsof the ivy-mantled abbey, venerableeven in decay, must bring to our recollectionthe reverential awe with whichthey were ever contemplated. Theviews that he has taken of our modernmansions are, generally speaking,picturesque, and invariably correct.They will be to future ages what theancient ruins, before-mentioned, are tothis, a mirror of things that were.The landscapes which he has designedfrom fancy, beam with taste and talent.We believe he has occasionally paintedin oil, but never have seen any ot hisproductions in this walk, except apicture from Gray's poem of The Bard,which, we were told, was painted at anearly period of his life, and which hasgreat merit''GEORGE ROMNEY.GEORGE ROMNEY, the son of acarpenter and cabinet-maker, was born,at Backside, near Dalton, in Lancashire,on the 15th of December, 1734.He was of a serious and sedate dispositionin youth ; but learnt little atschool ; whence he was taken, in hiseleventh year, and put to his father'sbusiness. He now showed a greatpassion for mechanics, an enthusiasticfondness for music, and no inconsiderableskill in wood-carving; employmentswhich, says Flaxman, " led hisinquisitive mind to contemplate theprinciples of mathematical science, andto acquaint himself with the elementsof architecture." Whilst addicted tothese pursuits, he was also carrying on,in conjunction with a watchmaker ofthe name of Wilkinson, a series ofalchemical experiments. They wereboth sanguine as to the result, arid were,GEORGE ROM KEY,one day, in momentary expectation ofseeing the contents of their crucibletransmuted to gold, when their furnace,with all it contained, blew up. Thisoccurrence took place at the house ofV "wilkinson, who had been called awayfrom his operations by his wife ; againstwhom, Romney tells us, her husbandconceived, in consequence, such anantipathy, that he quitted her for ever,and associated with another woman ;an " evil example," says Hayley, inhis life of the subject of our memoir,which was not without its influenceon Romney in a future day." Howeverthis may be, he now determined torenounce alchemy, and return to morerational projects.The biographers of Romney differ asto the circumstances which first inducedhim to think of becoming anartist. His son attributes it to a perusalof Da Vinci's Treatise on Painting,illustrated by many fine engravings,Hayley, to a habit of consuming histime in sketching his fellow-workmen ;whilst Cumberland describes him asachild of nature, who had never seenor heard anything that could elicit hisgenius or urge him to emulation ; andwho became a painter without a prototype."According to an anecdote, relatedby himself, his genius would seemto have been a natural gift. Havingseen in church, one day, a man with avery peculiar countenance, he mentionedthe fact, on his return home, tohis parents. They desired him todescribe the man, which he did soskilfully, with a pencil, that they immediatelyrecognised, and named, theperson he meant. Thus encouraged, hebegan to draw frequently, and his performancesindicated such genius that aninstructor was procured for him, in theperson of one Steele, then residing atKendal. To him Romney was apprenticed,at the age of nineteen, onpayment of a premium of twentypounds. He learnt little, however, fromhis master, besides the preparation andmixing of colours ; Steele being, thougha man of some talent, idle, extravagant,and too fond of dress and company topay much attention to his pupil. Hemade use of Romney's assistance in anelopement, with a young lady of fortune,to Gretna Green ; an affair which,accusing to Hayley, so worked uponRomney's sensibility as to bring on afever. With some affectation, the sameauthority ascribes also to his sensibility,and " the gratitude of a lively convalescent,"a precipitate union with ayoung female who attended upon himduring his illness. His marriage tookplace on the 14th of October, 1756; theobject of his affection, whose name wasMary Abbot, being, as his son states, inthe same rank of life with his father,and respectably connected. In answerto the rebuke of his parents on theoccasion, Romney wrote, " If you considerevery thing deliberately, you willfind it to be the best affair that everhappened to me; because, if I havefortune, I shall make a better painterthan I should otherwise have done ; asit will be a spur to my application, andmy thoughts being now still, and notobstructed by youthful follies, I canpractise with more diligence and successthan ever." He certainly applied himselfmost zealously to his art, but themotives of his exertions soon began toappear in a light very unfavourable tohis character as a husband.Adopting the most lenient constructionthat can be put upon the statementsof two very partial biographers,it seems that Romney not only felthis union as a bar to his professionalsuccess, but displayed this feeling tohis wife in such a manner that musthave at once dispelled all her dreamsof conjugal happiness. " The terrorwhich Romney felt," says Hayley, " ofprecluding himself from those distanthonours, which he panted for in hisprofession, by appearing in the worldas a young married man, agitated theambitious artist almost to distraction ;and made him resolve, very soon afterhis marriage, as he had no means ofbreaking the fetters which he wildlyregarded as inimical to the improvementand exertion of genius, to hidethem as much as possible from histroubled fancy. The return of hismaster from his nuptial excursion, andhis sudden removal from Kendal toYork, which took place in a few daysafter the marriage of his apprentice,afforded a most seasonable terminationto this excruciating conflict in the mindof Romney. Being thus removed fromthe object of his inquietude, he graduallyrecovered the powers of his ex-painters.ing anecdote has been told. Whenthe artist, in his sixty-fifth year, visitedthe north of England, in search of ahouse, he went over one, advertised forsale, called Garfield. In the gallery ofthis residence was a solitary painting,which, attracting thir attention of ourartist's son, who accompanied his father,he asked the owner by whom it waspainted: " By the famous Romney, sir,"was the reply.Romney was twenty-seven years oldwhen he determined on seeking hisfortune in London. A daughter had,at this time, been added to his family,from whom he now thought fit to part :leaving behind him j70 for their support,and taking with himself 30.He arrived in the metropolis in March,1762, and took apartments in DoveCourt, near the Mansion House ; wherehe exhibited such pictures, as hethought likely to procure him patronage.For one of these, The Death ofWolfe, he was awarded, in 1763, thesecond prize of fifty guineas from theSociety of Arts. This decision in hisfavour, however, being objected to, bya person said to be Sir Joshua Reynolds,who gave the preference to a pictureby Mortimer, Romney, in the end,received only twenty-five guineas,whilst the larger sum was given toMortimer. If we are to credit Hayley,Romney acknowledged the justness ofthis decision ; but with which, from thelanguage of his son on the occasion,he would not seem to have been verywell pleased. His filial biographerascribes the interference of Reynolds tojealousy of his father; and, moreover,says that his merits were such as tofurnish Reynolds with grounds for sucha feeling. However this may be,Reynolds and Romney were neverfriends ; and the former had certainlyno high opinion of the works of thlatter. Garrick, one day, speaking ofCumberland to the president, said, " Hehates you, Sir Joshua, because youdo not admire the painter whom heconsiders as a second Corregio." " Whois that?" replied Reynolds. "Why,his Corregio," answered Garrick, " isRomney."Our artist, however, was daily risingin fame, and his sitters became of sofashionable a class, that he found itexpedient to remove from the city toextraordinary mind; a mind of exquisitesensibility, and of towering faculties,but unhappily distracted with a tumultuarycrowd of ambitious and apprehensiveconceits." Of this miserableapology for " a young married man,agitated almost to distraction," only becausehe is restrained from sacrificing,to his own selfishness, a young marriedwife, the reader cannot but perceiveboth the heartlessness and folly, withoutbeing told that Hayley himself " hadsome experience in the art of escapingfrom the sacred duties of wedlock."The son of the artist, however, deniesthat his father wished to live separatelyfrom his wife ; and proves, by somecircumstances, that he had an affectionfor her ; but with this statement mustbe taken the fact, that Hayley was notonly requested by Romney to draw upan account of his life, but was alsosupplied with materials, and everywherespeaks as from authority; tosay nothing of the evident partialitywith which he writes. The conductof Romney, however, will sufficientlyspeak for itself, in the course of ourmemoir.On his return from York to Kendal,he freed himself from the indentures,under which he was about to go toIreland, by a payment of ten pounds,and commenced portrait painting on hisown account. He was then twenty-threeyears old ; and, to use the wordsof Hayley, "had not only a dutifulwife, but an infant boy, to attach himto a domestic establishment." Thegentry of Westmoreland soon gave himemployment, and, in general, encouragedhis efforts with liberality. Inone of his pictures, the portrait ofColonel Morland, of Coppelthwaite, inhis shooting dress, he introduced a dog,which has been pronounced, by artists,not unworthy of Sneers. At this time,he also tried his hand, with success, onsome cabinet-sized compositions ; suchas, Lear wakened by Cordelia ; Learin the Storm, tearing off his Robes ;A Landscape, with Figures ; A Quarrel ;A Chaldean Piece, &c. These, withothers, were exhibited by him, in theTown Hall of Kendal, preparatory tohis disposing of them by a lottery ofeighty tickets, at the price of half-a-guineaeach. With reference to TheLandscape, with Figures, an interestEO K G K H OM N E Y.Charing Cross. He had not been longsettled before he determined on a visitto France, not so much for improvement,as for the purpose of obviatingthose prejudices, which he found toexist in the minds of many of his sitters,against artists who had not studiedout of England. The benefit he hadderived from this visit was displayed,on his return, in a portrait of SirJoseph Yates, one of the judges of thecourt of King's Bench, which showedthat the artist had studied with carethe works of Rubens. Soon after, in1765. he obtained, from the Society forthe Encouragement of Arts, their premiumof fifty guineas for his picture ofThe Death of King Edward, but forwhich, he was much mortified to find,he could not procure a purchaser. Henow removed to Great Newport Street,and was daily rising in reputation andfortune. " lie had a fine studio," saysAllan Cunningham, " and a well replenishedhouse ; the success of his pencilbecame visible throughout all hisestablishment ; and London rang fromside to side of the prodigy, who, inhistorical works, promised to equal thegreat masters of lily; while, in portrait,he seemed to be in a fair way ofrivalling Sir Joshua himself. One fortunatework contributed largely to thisblaze of success ; a picture of Sir GeorgeWarren and his lady, with a little girlcaressing a bullfinch, was so full ofnature and tenderness, that all whosaw it went away admiring, and spreadthe praise of the artist far and near."Romney was in his thirty-ninth year,and making annually, by his profession,nearly 1,200, when the same motivesthat had induced him to visit France,suggested to him the policy of studying,for a short time, in Italy. For thiscountry, he set out, in March, 1773,accompanied by Humphrey, the miniaturepainter, and arrived in Rome,on the 18th of June. Two pictureswhich he painted here deserve to bementioned : a naked female, in thecharacter of a wood nyrnph, andProvidence brooding over Chaos. Thefirst is of great beauty, and, in everyrespect, a meritorious performance ; butProvidence brooding over Chaos, affordedso mythological an idea ofthe Deity, that it was afterwardsknocked down at an auction, under thename of Jupiter Plutus. At Venice,he painted the head of the celebratedWorsley Montagu, in which he imitatedthe style of the great Venetianmasters with surprising success. Hereturned to England, in June, 1775 ;and, finding that sitters came to himmore eagerly than before, removed, atChristmas, to a spacious house in CavendishSquare. The patronage of fashion,to a still greater extent, followed thischange of residence, and he became soformidable a rival of Reynolds, that asort of party war was carried on betweentheir respective supporters. Theartists themselves beheld each otherwith the most hostile feelings, which thezeal of mutual friends only served toincrease. Reynolds was told that LordThurlow had said " there are two factionsin art, and I am of the Romney faction ;"whilst Romney was informed that SirJoshua only spoke of him as " the manin Cavendish Square." During thisrivalry, Romney painted some of hismost masterly pictures; and, in oneyear, he earned nearly 4,000, by portraiturealone. Among his performances,of this period, we may mention,the children of Earl Gower (now Marquessof Stafford), representing threeyoung ladies, with a little boy dancing,and the eldest daughter playing a tambourine; the Countess of Albemarleand her son, with dogs ; the childrenof Lord Echo (now Earl of Weiss) ;the Beaumont family; Master 'andMiss Cornwall ; Sir James Harris; SirHyde Parker, a whole length; AnIndian Chief; Lady Craven; ColonelJohnes, of Haford, and his friends;Lord Stanley and Lady Charlotte;Mrs. Drawbridge and child, a wholelength and recumbi nt ; and Master andMiss Clavering, with dogs. This lastpicture is one of his most celebratedand beautiful compositions, and his sonnot unaptly says of it, " would that afew such pictures as this were placedin the British Institution, that Romneymight have a fair chance withReynolds !"When the plan of the ShakspeareGallery was commenced by the Boy-dells,they employed Romney to paintfor the collection ; but though hesketched several, he only completedtwo pictures, The Tempest, and TheInfant Sliakspeare attended by theV A 1 N T fc K S .Passions. They were not unworthy ofthe collection for which they were designed,though his departure from theoriginal design of The Tempest wasnot for the better. He had, in the firstsketch, represented Prospero, Miranda,and Caliban, with a shipwreck in theback ground; but some one telling himthat a composition with only threefigures was not strictly historical, heexpelled Caliban, and brought theshipwreck into the foreground. Thehead of Prospero, in this picture, is aportrait of Hayley, who had suggestedhis own as more appropriate than thatof an English nobleman recommendedto the artist by Lord Thurlow. Thedeath of Reynolds, in 1792, so far fromdiminishing, still more excited theambition of Romney; who now struckout some magnificent designs, of which,however, the growing decay both of hismental and bodily faculties, preventedhim from finishing but a very smallnumber. The state of his mind, atthis time, will be best understood froma letter which he wrote to Hayley, inFebruary, 1794. " I had formed aplan," lie says, ' of painting the SevenAges, and also of the Visions of Adamwith the Angel, to bring in the floodand the opening of the ark, whichwould make six large pictures. Indeed,to tell you the truth, I have madedesigns for all the pictures, and verygrand subjects they are. My plan is,it I live, and retain my senses andsight, to paint six other subjects fromMilton ; three where Satan is the Hero,and three from Adam and Eve, perhapssix of each. 1 have ideas of themail, and, I may say, sketches ; but, alas !I cannot begin them for a year or two ;and, if my name was mentioned, Ishould hear nothing but abuse, andthat I cannot bear. Fear has alwaysbeen my enemy ; my nerves are tooweak for supporting anything in public."An excursion to the Isle of Wight,relieved his mind from temporarydespondency, but a restless desire forchange, and the hasty formation ofdesigns, which he as rapidly abandoned,showed that he was still far from tranquil.He amused himself, for sometime,in planning a new studio anddwelling-house, at Hampstead, towhich he removed, in the year 1797, toall outward appearance, still vigorousboth in mind and body. He nowmeditated the execution of some ofthose sublime ideas, to which he wascontinually reverting in his epistles toHayley and others, and in his conversationswith his friends. But these hewas never destined even to begin ; hehad not many times waved the brushover his canvass before he was attackedwith a swimming in the head, and aparalytic numbness in his right hand.Hayley visited him, for the last time,in April, 1799, and had the grief ofperceiving that his friend's increasingweakness of mind and body affordedonly a gloomy prospect for the residueof his life.Whilst in this state of infirmity,Romney had the mortification to findhimself comparatively neglected by hisfriends, whilst his reputation, for whichhe had sacrificed a life of domestic happiness,was being rapidly eclipsed bythat of Lawrence, Beechey, and otherrising artists. His gloom and his weaknessincreased daily, and he now,for the first time since he had quittedher at Kendal, thought of returning tohis wife, and passing, in her society, theremainder of his days. It seems thathe had only twice before visited her inthe course* of thirty years ; yet, evennow, this admirable woman receivedhim with a kind and hearty welcome."He retired to Kendal," says Hayley,(and these words of Hayley are themost severe and eloquent reproach ofhis friend's conduct, in this respect,that can be penned) "when he hadthe comfort of finding an attentive,affectionate nurse, in a most exemplarywife, who had never been irritated toan act of unkindness, or an expressionof reproach, by his years of absence andneglect." Such happiness, as one passingthe remainder of his life by hisdomestic fireside, under these circumstances,could enjoy, was Romney's ;but imbecility still gained ground uponhim. The arrival of his brother, ColonelRomney, from India, so muchagitated him as to complete the subversionof his mental faculties ; and he,soon alter, breathed his last on the 15thof November, 1802.The person of Romney was, uponthe whole, prepossessing ; and his character,if we except one fatal blot uponit, for which charity in vain seeks toGeorge ROM KEY.discover a reasonable excuse, far fromunamiable. Its prominent feature wassensibility, to which, if we may creditHayley, we are to attribute, in hisfriend, all his virtues and all his faults.Such an excuse for the desertion of hiswile, though the only one offered, istoo ludicrous to be entertained ; a manquitting, in youth and hope, the womanhe has just espoused, from no bettermotive than " an extreme sensibilityrespecting professional eminence," andreturning to her in age and sickness,proclaims himself, by the first act, aselfish and deliberate villain ; and, bythe last, a disappointed and wretcheddriveller. But he had his good pointsin other respects : he was kind, upright,and generous ; and his purse and hisheart were alike opened to the tale ofdistress. To young artists he was particularlyencouraging and indulgent;and he was one of the first to perceivei he dawning genius of Flaxman. " Ialways remember," says that eminentsculptor, " Mr. Romney's notice of myboyish years and productions withgratitude ; his original and strikingconversation, his masterly, grand, andfeeling compositions, are continuallybefore me ; and I still feel the benefitsof Iris acquaintance and recommendations."He has been accused of beingilliterate, and certainly his educationwas not of the highest order ; but hispictures betray no want of learning ; and,perhaps, there is some truth in AllanCunningham's remark, that " Romneyhad, somehow or other, educated himselfmuch better than ninety-nine outof a hundred, in any university in theworld, ever were or will be." Cumberlandgoes so far as to say that Romney'sconversation was coarse and vulgar,from his being shut out from intercoursewith the titled and the great ; butneither the one nor the other is the fact.Timidity and reserve might have kepthim from going often into society, or ofsaying much in company ; but lie hadtoo many titled sitters to be unacquaintedwith polite breeding; and thathis conversation was neither coarsenor vulgar in those moments when itwas most likely to be so, if at ail, wehave the authority of Cumberland himself.' When in company with his intimates,"says Cumberland, " he wouldgive vent to the effusions of his fancy,and harangue, in the most animatedmanner, upon the subject of his art,with a sublimity of idea, and a peculiarityof expressive language, that wasentirely his own, and in which educationor reading had no share. Thesesallies of natural genius, clothed innatural eloquence, were perfectly original,very highly edifying, and entertainingin the extreme. They wereuttered in a hurried accent, an elevatedtone, and very commonly accompaniedby tears, to which he was by constitutionprone." Romney had as muchsensitiveness as sensibility, and occasionallymanifested a proportionate degreeof pride and weakness. A strangerhad only to suggest an alteration in oneof his pictures, and he would eithermake it, or relinquish the picture altogether.Garrick, being introduced tohim, one day, by Cumberland, foundhim at work upon a large family picture." Upon my word, sir," saidDavid, sneeringly," " this is a very regular,well-ordered family ; and that isa very bright rubbed mahogany tableat which that motherly good lady issitting ; and this worthy gentleman, inthe scarlet waistcoat, is, doubtless, avery excellent subject (to the state, Imean, if these are all his children), butnot for your art, Mr. Romney, if youmean to pursue it with that successwhich 1 hope will attend you." Romneywas cut to the quick by thisraillery, but he altered his picture ; tootimid to hazard his own merits againstthe opinion of one so influential asGarrick. A more violent feeling wassometimes called forth in him, by thecomparative neglect of his historicalcompositions; and he was with difficultyprevented from tearing to pieces someof them which he thought the publicdid not sufficiently appreciate. Nordid the extensive patronage which heenjoyed, as a portrait painter, reconcilehim to this neglect; that which broughthim bread was not, in his idea, the bestmeans of procuring him fame. In oneof his letters to Hayley he says, " Thiscursed portrait painting, how I amshackled with it! I am determined tolive frugally, and cut it short as soon asI can."It may seem strange that Romneynever became a member of the RoyalAcademy ; but, in all probability, hisPAINTERS.Pride and sensibility deterred himom either wish or effort to becomeone of a body of men, with SirJoshua Reynolds for their president.As an artist, Romney is, according toFlaxman, the first of all our paintersfor poetic dignity of conception. Fuseliaccounts for his success, by saying,that " he was made for the times, andthe times for him;" whilst anothercritic observes, that " he was made forbetter times than those in which helived." Upon the whole, he seems tomerit the eulogium of Flaxman : " Fewpainters," says he, " have left so manyexamples in their works of the tenderand delicate affections ; and several ofhis pictures breathe a kindred spiritwith the Sigismundaa of Corregio. Hiscartoons, some of which have unfortunatelyperished, were examples of thesublime and terrible ; at that time perfectlynew in English art. As Romneywas gifted with peculiar powers forhistorical and ideal painting, so his heartand soul were engaged in the pursuitof it, whenever he could extricate himselffrom the importunate business ofportrait painting. It was his delightby day, and study by night ; and forthis his food and rest were often neglected.His compositions, like thoseof the ancient pictures and basso-relievos,told their story by a singlegroupe of pictures in the front ; whilstthe back ground is made the simplestpossible, rejecting all unnecessary episodeand trivial ornament, either ofsecondary groupes, or architectural division.In his compositions, the beholderwas forcibly struck by the sentiment atthe first glance ; the gradations andvarieties of which he traced throughseveral characters, all conceived in anelevated spirit of dignity and beauty,with a lively expression of nature in allthe parts. His heads were various :the male were decided and grand, thefemale lovely: his figures resembledthe antique the limbs were elegantand finely formed ; his drapery waswell understood, either forming thefigure into a mass with one or twodeep folds only, or, by its adhesion andtransparency, discovering the form ofthe figure, 'the lines of which werefinely varied with the union or expansionof spiral or cascade folds,composing with, or contrasting theoutline, and chiaro-scurf. Few artists,since the fifteenth century, have beenable to do so much in so many differentbranches ; for, besides his beautifulcompositions and pictures, which haveadded to the knowledge and celebrityof the English school, he modelled likea sculptor ; carved ornaments in woodwith great delicacy; and could makean architectural design in a fine taste,as well as construct every part of thebuilding." It is to be observed, however,that the harmony of Romney'spictures was often interrupted by theintroduction of crude, discordant coloursin the back grounds, without theirbeing blended or broken into unisonwith the hue of the principal figures.He was inferior to Reynolds in beautyand grace, but in power of expressionhe far surpassed him, and was muchmore happy in his choice of historicalsubjects. In art, Reynolds may excelhim, but not in simplicity ; in a word,Romney strove to touch the heart,Reynolds to please the eye, and bothadmirably succeeded. Allan Cunninghamsays, he was deficient in imagination; but gives no other reason for hisassertion, than the fact of Romney'sleaving incomplete several of his compositions,for want of a living model.But this continued to be his practice,after he had procured from Italy asplendid collection of casts from theantique, which amply supplied his wantsin this respect. " No picture, however,"says the artist's son, " was set asidefrom any difficulty in the art itself. Icould mention several causes whichcontributed to produce those vast heapsof unfinished portraits that obstructedthe passage to his gallery. The chiefwere, the poverty, or the meanness,of the parties to whom the picturesbelonged. I have known ladies' portraits,amounting in value to a thousandguineas, remain unfinished manymonths for want of a model with finehands and arms. Some portraits wereabandoned, in consequence of crim.con. ; but more frequently a less flagrantvice led to the same result."The most beautiful of Romney'scompositions is considered to be hisOphelia, from Shakspeare, a picturewhich, for expression and pathos, hasseldom been surpassed. His Titaniaand An Indian Votaress, and Titania,JOHN SINGLETON COPLEY.Puck, and The Changeling, charm inanother way ; and shew that LordThurlow must have taken but a veryimperfect view of our artist's genius, insaying to him, " Romney, when youpaint Shakspeare, for heaven's sake,read him." In the following pictures,the celebrated Lady Hamilton was hismodel: Circe; Iphigenia; St. Cecilia;Sensibility ; a Bacchante ; Calliope exposedwith her Child; The Spinsters ;Cassandra ; Calypso ; Magdalene ; Joanof Arc; The Scythian Priestess, andseveral others. Among hisportraits are, Flaxman modelling theBust of Hayley ; the Dukes of Richmond,Portland, and Grafton ; EarlsDerby, Westmoreland, and Chatham ;Lords Westmoreland, Thurlow, Melville,and Ellenborough ; the Archbishopsof Canterbury, York, andDublin; Bishops Porteus and Watson;Warren Hastings ; William Pitt; LadyAugusta Murray; Mrs. Fitzherbert;Mrs. Jordan ; Mrs. Billington ; the poetCowper; Thomas Paine, &c.JOHN SINGLETON COPLEY.JOHN SINGLETON COPLEY wasborn at Boston, in America, on the 3rdof July, 1737, or, as" some say, in theyear 1738. Before he was eight yearsold, he displayed a fondness for drawing; and, at that early age, would absenthimself from his family circle, forseveral hours together, to gratify hispropensity for sketching martial figuresin charcoal, on the walls of an unoccupiedroom. Like West, he had nomodel but nature, and was entirely self-taughtin his art ; yet some of his pieceswhich he executed at Boston, and, to usehis own words, " before he had seen anytolerable picture," were unsurpassedby his later productions* A portrait ofhis half-brother, Harry Pelham, describedas a boy and a tame squirrel,was sent over by him to England, in1760, for exhibition at the Royal Academy,and was much admired, thoughthe artist's name was, at the time, unknown.By the year 1767, he appearsto have acquired considerable reputation; sufficient, indeed, to induce someof his friends to invite him to settle inLondon. To one of them he writes,I would gladly exchange my situationfor the serene climate of Italy, or eventhat of England ; but what would betheadvantage of seeking improvementat such an outlay of time and money ?I am now in as good business as thepoverty of the place will admit. Imake as much as if I were a Raphaelor a Corregio ; and three hundredguineas a year, my present income, isequal to nine hundred a-year in London.With regard to reputation, you are sensiblethat fame cannot be durable wherepictures are confined to sitting-rooms,and regarded only for the resemblancethey bear to their originals. Were Is; re of doing as well in Europe as here,I would not hesitate a moment in mychoice ; but I might, in the experiment,waste a thousand pounds and two yearsof my time, and have to return, baffled,to America." These considerations,arid the care of a sick mother, whom hewas unwilling to leave, induced him toremain at Boston for seven years longer.In 1774, however, he left America, andproceeded, by way of England, forRome, where he arrived in August.He afterwards visited the Venetian andFlemish schools ; copied the beautifulCorregio, at Parma ; and returned toLondon, with the intention of settlingthere, in the latter end of the year1775. Being joined by his wife andchildren, he took a house in GeorgeStreet, Hanover Square, and was introduced,by West, to the Royal Academy,of which he was admitted an associatein 1777. Whether he obtained manysitters, his biographers do not informus ; but his historical paintings soonrendered his name famous, and procuredfor it, in 1783, the honourableaddition of R. A.His first and most popular historicalcomposition was The Death of the Earlof Chatham, for which he is said tohave refused one thousand five hundredguineas. Being advised to exhibitit, he hired a room near the RoyalA 1 N T E K S .Academy ; in consequence of whicha quarrel took place between himand Sir William Chambers, who objectedto the exhibition on the groundof its being injurious to that of theRoyal Academy, then about to open.Copley, though not treated in the mostcourteous manner on the occasion, removedhis picture to another room ;aod, shortly afterwards, caused an engravingto be made from it by Bartonof which two thousand fivehundred impressions were sold in a fewweeks. Some of his brother artists seemto have been jealous of his success, forareport was now spread that he hadfraudulently detained from his subscribersthe early impressions to which theorder of signatures entitled them ; butthis calumny was proved to the publicto be unfounded. The Death of MajorPierson on the Island of Jersey wasCopley's next historical production, nowin the possession of Lord Lyndhurst.The story which the painting representsis admirably told ; " the canvass," touse Allan Cunningham's words, " isstamped with true life and heroism ;there is nothing mean, nothing little :the fierce fight, the affrighted women,the falling warrior, and the avengingof his death, are all there."In 1790, he was employed, by thecommon-council of the city of London,to proceed to Hanover, and take theportraits of the four Hanoverian officerswho commanded regiments under GeneralElliott (afterwards Lord Heath-field),at the siege of Gibraltar, for thepurpose of incorporating them in alarge picture, which he was also commissionedto paint for the city, of thesiege and relief of Gibraltar. The mostprominent characters in this composition,which occupied a panel twenty-fivefeet long, and twenty-two feet anda half high, are Lord Heathfield, SirRobert Boyd, Sir William Green, theHanoverian officers, and about eightothers. It was hung in the councilchamber of Guildhall, and excited greatattention at the time. The figures havebeen charged with being formal andstiff, and the perspective is said to befalse ; yet, upon the whole, it is a grand,though by no means the artist's best,composition. Copley now contemplateda painting of The First Installation ofthe Order of St. Patrick ; but findingsome difucalty in getting some of theknights t-j sit to him, he relinquishedthe idea for one which drew more uponhis imagination : this was The Arrestof the Five Members, by Charles theFirst, in the House of Commons ; oneof his most interesting and effectiveperformances. The period of timechosen is when the king, having demandedif Hampden, Pym, Hollies,Hazelrig, and Strode were present, isthus answered by the speaker : " I have,sir, neither eyes to see nor tongue tospeak, in this place, but as the house ispleased to direct me." A letter fromLord Ferrers, in relation to this picture,is too curious to be omitted :Lord Ferrers' compliments to Mr.Copley ; he cannot form any judgmentof the picture ; but, as money is scarce,and any one may make eight per cent.of their money in the funds, and particularlyin navy bills, and there is somuch gaming, he hopes he'll excuse hisvaluing his picture in conformity tothe times, and not think he depreciatesin the least, from Mr. Copley's justmerit ; but if he reckons fifty-sevenfigures, there are not above one-thirdthat are capital, but are only heads, oralittle more ; and, therefore, he thinks,according to the present times, if hegets 900 for the picture with theframe, after the three other figures areput in, and it is completely finished,and he has the power of taking a copy,it is pretty near the value: that is whatvery few people can afford to give forapicture. However, if Mr. Copleywould undertake to do a family piecefor him with about six figures, aboutthe size of the picture he has of Mr.Wright's, with frame and ali ? he wouldagree to give him a thousand guineasfor the two pictures."Copley's next popular production wasa representation of De Winter's defeatby Admiral Duncan ; and he alsosketched, but did not finish, a pictureon the subject of Nelson's fall atTrafalgar. From the works which hecontinued to send to the exhibition, hewould appear to have been much employedin portraiture. Among his sitterswere the Earl of Northampton,Baron Graham, Viscount Dudley andWard, Lord Sidmouth, the Prince ofWales, &c. His last work was a portraitof his son, now Lord Lyndhurst,.JJOHN SINGLETON COPLEY.I painted in 1ft 14. He died suddenly,on the 9th of September, in the followingyear.As an artist, Copley's chief meritconsists in his colouring and drawing ;but, like West, he is deficient in naturalwarmth ; and, if the judgment of AllanCunningham is to be relied on, has thefault of uniting much stateliness withlittle passion. In addition to the picturesalready specified, we may mention,as favourable specimens of hispowers, The Youth rescued from aShark, The Resurrection, and Samuelreproving Saul for sparing the Peopleof Amalek. Mr. Copley's private characterwas that of a gentleman, in thebest sense of the word. He was fondof books, particularly historical andpoetical ones ; and preferred readingthe works of Milton to taking exercise,or any other recreation, after he wastoo fatigued to continue at his easel.From an account given of him in ajournal of one Carter, who travelledwith him from London to Rome, hewould seem to have had some peculiaritiesboth in manners and dress.Of his personal appearance and habits,after he had settled in London, hisbiographers have furnished no account ;and we must, therefore, content ourselveswith the following ludicrousdescription of him by Carter, at thetime of his visit to Italy : " He had onone of those white French bonnetswhich, turned on one side, admit of| being pulled over the ears: under thiswas a yellow and red silk handkerchief,with a large Catherine wheel Ilam-j beamed upon it, such as may be seenupon the necks of those delicate ladieswho cry Malton oysters : this flaredhalf way down his "back. He wore ared-brown, or rather, cinnamon, greatcoat,with a friar's cape, and worsted| bindings of a yellowish white ; it hungnear his boots, out of which peeped hisheels : under his arm he carried thesword which he bought in Paris, anda hickory stick with an ivory head.Joined to this dress, he was very thin,pale, a little pock-marked, prominenteyebrows, small eyes, which, afterfatigue, seemed a day's march in hishead."The following anecdote of Copleyand one of his customers is ludicrousenough : The latter having had a familypiece painted for him, in which wereintroduced his wife and seven children,he said to the artist, " It wants but onething, and that is the portrait of myfirst wife, for this one is my second."But," replied Copley, " she is dead,you know, sir : what can I do ? she isonly to be admitted as an angel." " Oh,no ! not at all," was the answer of theother ; " she must come in as a womanno angels for me." Copley compliedwith his request, and had been for someweeks in expectation of seeing thegentleman return, when, one day, hewalked in with a strange lady onhis arm, and thus addressed him :"copley, 1 must have another castof your hand ; an accident befel mysecond wife ; this lady is my third, andshe is come to have her likeness includedin the family picture." Theartist accordingly introduced the likeness,but when it was finished, thelady insisted that her predecessorsshould be painted out. This, too, asthe anecdote goes, was done by Copley,who had, at last, to bring an action forthe portraits he had obliterated.Copley's picture of The Death ofLord Chatham gave occasion to a veryinteresting and entertaining trial. Afterhaving paid liartolozzi two thousandguineas for an engraving of it. he jwished to publish another at a moremoderate rate, and engaged Mr. Declareto execute it for the price of 800.Not thinking the work done in a propermanner, he refused to pay for it, and anaction was, in consequence, broughtagainst him by Declare for 580, thebalance due to him. Fourteen eminentartists deposed one way as to the meritof the engraving, and fourteen theother; Bartolozzi, on behalf or theplaintiff, declared the piece was wellexecuted : West, Beechey, and others,asserted, on behalf of the defendant,that he could not publish it withoutmaterially injuring his reputation.When Bartolozzi was called into thewitness box, he produced his own engraving,and whilst comparing it withDeclare's, by desire ot Erskine, whowas cross-examining him, that eminentadvocate thus addressed him : " Doyou see, sir, in your own, the youngerson of Lord Chatham, in a naval uniform,bending forward, with a tear inhis eye, and a countenance displayingPAINTERS.the agony of an affectionate son on beholdinga dying lather ? and do yonnot see in the other, an assassin with ascar upon his cheek, exulting over thebody of a young man whom he hasmurdered ? In the one, you observethe late minister, a thin, ,genteel-looking young man ;in the other, a fat, round-faced, grim-visagednegro. In the one, the Archbishopof York appears in his truecolours, as a dignified and venerableprelate ; in the other, his place isu.-nrped by the drunken parson inHogarth's Harlot's Progress. In theone, the Earl of Chatham is supportedby his son-in-law, Lord Stanhope afigure tall, slender, and elegant ; anddoes not the other offer to view a short,sturdy porter of a bagnio, lugging homean ale lecher, who had got mortaldrunk." Notwithstanding, however,these observations, a verdict was givenagainst Mr. Copley.BENJAMIN WEST.BENJAMIN, the son of John andSarah West, members of the Societyof Friends, was born at Springfield, inPhiladelphia, on the 10th of October,1738. He was the tenth and youngestson of his mother, who was delivered ofhim prematurely, in consequence of ashock she had received from the violentpreaching of one Recover. His fatheraugured auspiciously of his son's futurecareer from this circumstance, andit was not long before the natural bentof his genius for drawing developeditself in a very decided manner. Whenonly seven years of age, he was left, forafew moments, to watch the sleepinginfant of his eldest sister, and seeing itsmile, he was so struck with the beautyof its countenance, that he immediatelydrew its portrait in red and black ink.With the same materials, he drewbirds, fruits, and flowers ; and shewingthem, about a year afterwards, to aparty of Indians, was by them, in return,taught to use the bow, and howto prepare the red and yellow colourswith which they stained their weapons.His mother added indigo, and he nowattempted to paint ; but being unable toobtain a camel's hair brush, he formedone out of hair from the tail of a favouritecat The nakedness of that part of theanimal being observed, the subject ofour memoir explained the cause, andwas shortly afterwards presented, byone of his cousins, with a regular set ofcolours and brushes, some preparedcanvass, and proper oils. This acceptablegift was accompanied by sixengravings, from two of which he struckout an idea of his own, and became soabsorbed in the composition, that forseveral days he forgot to attend hisschool, and only joined his family atmeals. Under these circumstances, hismother went to seek him in his garret,with displeasure in her looks, but onbeholding the canvass on which he wasat work, kissed him, in a transport oiaffection, and declared she would immediatelygo, and obtain pardon for hisabsence from school. Sixty-seven yearsafterwards, this picture was seen byMr. Gait, in the same room with thesublime painting of Christ Rejected;and, on that occasion, he says, " thepainter declared to him, that there wereinventive touches of art in his first andjuvenile essay, which, with all his subsequentknowledge and experience, hehad not been able to surpass."In 1747, he accompanied his cousin,before spoken of, to Philadelphia, wherean artist of the name of Williams, struckwith his original talent, shewed West asmall collection of his own paintings.On beholding them, he burst into aflood of tears, and being asked, immediatelyafterwards, what books he read,answered, " the Bible and the Testament."" I will send you two otherbooks," replied Williams, " which youwill like much :" and West shortly afterwardsreceived a present of the works ofDu Frenzy and Richardson. These heread with eagerness, and returned homeso full of becoming a painter, that, foratime, every other profession appearedto him contemptible. He was,some time afterwards, invited by one ofiBENJAMIN WEST.his-schoolfellows to get up behind him,and have a ride on horseback : " I willride behind nobody," was his reply :and when up, on his companion sayinglie intended to be a tailor, West leapeddown, exclaiming, " Then you mayride alone ; I will not ride with onewilling to be a tailor."His first performances that producedhim any profit were groupes in ink,chalk, and charcoal, on panels, whichhe sold for a dollar each. These wereso much admired by Mr. Flower, ajustice of Chester, that he took him forafew weeks to his own house, whereWest met with an English governess,who read to him the beauties of theGreek and Latin poets, which stronglyarrested his imagination. Whilst residingwith Mr. Flower, he painted theportrait of Mrs. Ross, a very beautifulwoman, with such fidelity, that he obtainedseveral other sitters ; and hewas also very successful in the compositionof a picture of The Death ofSocrates. He was at this time aboutfifteen years of age, but so imperfectlyeducated, that a Dr. Smith undertookto become his instructor. This gentleman,instead of grounding his pupil inclassical learning, cultivated his fancy,with a view to the profession for whichhe was designed, and West, in consequence,ever remained an unletteredman. A fever attacking him aboutthis time, he was troubled by the appearanceof several figures flitting abouthis bed-room ; and discovering the delusionto arise from reflection, by meansof a hole in the window-sitter, uponthe principle of the camera obscura,he constructed one of these machineshimself, and was much astonished tofind he had not produced an originalinvention.He now returned to Springfield,when his parents requested the wholebody of the Quakers of the town todecide upon the propriety of their son'sbecoming an artist; that profession beingcontrary to the tenets of the Society ofFriends. A meeting was accordinglycalled, and young West being introduced,received permission to followthe bent of his genius, in a very impressiveaddress. " God hath endowed,"concluded the speaker, " with the richgifts of a superior spirit this youth,who has now our consent to cultivatehis talents for art. May it be demonstratedin his life and works, that thegifts of God have not been bestowed invain, nor the motives of the beneficentinspiration, which induces us to suspendthe strict operation of our tenets,prove barren of religious or moraleffect." Accordingly, after having, forashort time, served" as a soldier underGeneral Forbes, and witnessed the deathof his mother, West removed to Philadelphia,in 1756, and commenced portraitpainter. His price, at first, wasonly half-a-guinea for a head ; yet hisown frugality, and the number of hiscustomers, soon enabled him to save alittle money. After a short period, herepaired to New York, and from thenceback to Philadelphia, for the purpose ofsailing to Leghorn, in a vessel belongingto his friend, Mr. Allen. One ofhis sitters at New York was a gentlemanof the name of Kelly, who, atparting with him, had put into hishands a letter of recommendation,which, on presenting at Philadelphia,he found to contain an order for thepayment of fifty guineas, as '' a presentto aid in his equipment to Italy."He arrived in Rome, on the 10thof July, 1760, with letters of introductionto some of the most eminentinhabitants. His appearance excitedgreat interest among them, and allwere anxious to see the effect whichthe stat-lies and paintings of the " eternalcity" would have upon the youngAmerican. On the celebrated Apollobeing shown to him, he started back,and exclaimed, " A young Mohawkwarrior!" which he explained by saying,that he had often seen the Mohawksstanding in the exact attitude of theApollo, and pursuing, with an intenseeye, the arrow which they had just dischargedfrom the bow. The drawingswhich he had brought with him excitedlittle attention, and he, therefore, requestedLord Graham to sit for hisportrait, which, when finished, wasplaced in the gallery of Crespigni, thename of the artist being kept secret.The performance was admired by allwho beheld it ; and whilst some wereascribing it to Mengs, and others tonames of equal eminence, West waspointed out to the company, and Mengscoming in, shortly afterwards, said tohim, " Young man, you have no A I N T E H S .casion to come to Koine to learn topaint."His success being communicated toMr. Allen, of Philadelphia, whilst atdinner with Governor Hamilton, bothdeclared he was an honour to hiscountry ; and as he was the first thatAmerica had sent out to cultivate thefine arts, he should not be frustrated inhis studies, for the want of money. Hewas at this time ill, at Leghorn, of afever ; and on his recovery, makingapplication for the last 10 at hisagents, was told by one of the partnersthat he was instructed to give himunlimited credit, and that he couldask for what sum he pleased. He resolved,therefore, to follow the adviceof Mengs, in visiting Florence, Bologna,and Venice; he then returned to Rome,and after having exhibited an originalpicture of Cymon and Iphigenia, andanother of Angelica and Medora,started for England, having been previouslyadmitted a member of theAcademies of Florence, Bologna, andParma. He arrived in London, on the20th of June, 1763, and was immediatelyintroduced to Sir Joshua Reynolds,Dr. Johnson, Burke, and otherartists and savant of eminence. He hadcome to this country with no intentionof remaining; but finding the field openfor hi-topical composition, he resolvedto try his success in that line, and tookapartments in Bedford Street, CoventGarden. His exhibition of the picturesjust mentioned, together with one ofI'ylades and Orestes, and a portrait ofGeneral Monckton, brought some distinguishedvisitors to his rooms, andthe Marquess of Rockingham offeredhim 700 a-year, to embellish hismansion in Yorkshire with historicalpaintings. This, however, West declined;and having married, on the2nd of September, I765 a young lady,to whom he had been previously engaged,and who had come over fromAmerica for the purpose of being unitedto him, he determined to prosecute hislabours in England, in dependenceupon public patronage. His love ofserious subjects procured him employmentfrom several eminent divines;and Dr. Drummond, Archbishop ofYork, not only gave him a commissionto execute a picture of Agrippinalanding with the Agnes of Germanicus,but, on ics completion, attempted toraise a subscription of 3,000, to enableWest to devote himself entirely to historicalpainting. Failing in this, thearchbishop waited upon the king, whodesired an interview with the artist.and a sight of the Agrippina abovementioned.After viewing it a shorttime, his majesty said, " There isanother noble Roman subject the departureof Regulus from Rome wouldit not make a fine picture?" Westanswered, that it was a magnificentsubject. " Then." said the king, " youshall paint it for me ;" and turning to thequeen, said, " The archbishop madeone of his sons read Tacitus to Mr.West, but I will read Livy to himmyself, that part where he describesthe departure of Regulus :" upon whichhe took up the book, and read thepassage.Whilst he was engaged on this picture,a dispute occurring among theIncorporated Society of Artists, ofwhich body he had been chosendirector, as to the manner in whichtheir accumulated funds should be laidout, he resigned his office, and communicatedhis reasons to the king. Hismajesty then expressed his readiness topatronise any association calculated topromote the real interests of the art,and a plan was accordingly drawn upupon which, with some alterations bythe king's own hand, the Royal Aca"-deny was established; and, in' the firstexhibition that took place The Departureof Regulus shone conspicuous.His next celebrated work was TheDeath of Wolfe, painted in the moderncostume, a variation from the ruleshitherto observed in historical pictures,which called forth much censure.West's answer to the king, who askedhim his reasons for thus deviating fromthe usual course, is strongly indicativeof his good sense and taste. " When itwas understood," were his words, " thatI intended to paint the characters asthey actually appeared on the scene,the Archbishop of York called on SirJoshua Reynolds, and asked his opinion; they both came to my house todissuade me from running so great arisk. I remarked, that the event to becommemorated happened in the year1758, in a region of the world unknownto the Greeks and Romans, and at aBENJAMIN WES Iperiod of time when no warriors whowore their costume existed. That thesubject I had to represent was a greatbattle fought and won, and that thesame truth which gives law to the historianshould rule the painter. Thatif, instead of the facts of the action, Ishould introduce fiction, how could Ibe understood by posterity ? I admittedthat classic dress was certainly picturesque; but, by using it, I should lose insentiment what i gained in externalgrace. That I wanted to mark theplace, the time, and the people ; and todothis that I must abide by truth.They left me, and when 1 had finishedthe picture, returned. Sir Joshuaseated himself before the work, andexamined it minutely for half an hour,then, rising, said to the archbishop,West has conquered : he has treatedhis subject as it ought to be treated : Iretract my objections. I foresee thatthis picture will not only become one ofthe most popular, but will occasion arevolution in art'" Upon which hismajesty observed, " that he wished hehad known these reasons before, forr.hat the objection had been the meansof Lord Grosvenor's getting the picture,bin that West should make a copyof it for him."Besides this, he soon afterwards receivedan order to paint for the king,The Death of Epaminondas, Segestusand his Daughter before Germanicus,and other historical pictures. His nextcommission was for a set of seven largepictures, illustrative of the reign of Edwardthe Third, and one of St. Georgej vanquishing the Dragon, all of whichI were placed in St. George's Hall, atj Windsor, and rank amongst the artist'sinert successful compositions. A moreextensive field was now opened to hisimagination, in a series of thirty-sixscriptural pieces, which his majesty,after consulting with several divines,ordered him to paint for the decorationof the Royal Chapel. During the progressof this work, which occupied hima considerable time, he took portraitsof the chief part of the royal family ;and, in 1792, he succeeded Reynolds aspresident of the Royal Academy. Itwas the wish of the" king to make anight of him on this occasion, butWest declined the honour, observing,to the Duke of Gloucester, that he hadearned greater eminence by his pencilthan knighthood could confer uponhim. He added, however, that a permanenttitle might have been a desirableobject, had he possessed alarger fortune, but the hint was notfollowed by the offer of a baronetcy.In 1801, after the commencement ofhis majesty's illness, West was informedthat the pictures in progress for theRoyal Chapel were to be suspended.On'the recovery, therefore, of his illustriouspatron, he addressed him in a veryspirited letter ; and an interview immediatelyafterwards taking place betweenhimself and his majesty, the latterdismissed him with a shake of the hand,saying, " Go on with your work, West ;go on with your pictures, and I willtake care of you." The final blow,however, which the king's reason subsequentlyreceived, put an end to.West's performances at Windsor ; andcalling shortly afterwards to receivepart of the allowance of jgl,000 perannum, for which he had been accustomedto draw, he was told that it hadbeen stopped.With feelings which savoured somewhatof disgust, he took the opportunityafforded by the peace of Amiens, ofvisiting Paris, and, whilst there, received,according to his own account,very distinguished notice. " WhereverI went," he says in one of his letters,men looked at me, and ministers andpeople of state were constantly in mycompany. 1 was, one day, in the Louvre ;all eyes were upon me ; and I couldnot help observing, to Charles Fox,who happened to be walking with me,how strong was the love of art, andadmiration of its professors, in France!"The complacent simplicity, which couldthus imagine the public attention to beexclusively directed towards himself,when there is no doubt the greatobject of interest was the great statesmanwho accompanied him, is sufficientlycharacteristic and amusing. Onhis return to England, some cabals inthe Royal Academy induced him toretire from the chair, to which, however,after it had been, in the meantime,filled by Wyatt, the architect, he wasspeedily re-elected. He now endeavouredto form a national associationfor the encouragement of historicalworks ; but the successive deaths ofPAINTERS.Pitt, Fox, and Perceval, from whom hehad expected assistance, rendered abortivea design, which has since givenbirth to the British Institution, one farinferior to that contemplated by West.In 1802, he commenced painting aseries of large pictures from Scripture,the first of which, Christ Healing theSick, was intended as a present in aidof the funds for building an hospital inhis native town. The governors of theBritish Institution, however, offeringhim three thousand guineas for it, heconsented to sell it, on condition of hisbeing allowed to make a copy of it tosend to America. His next workswere, Death on the Pale Horse,Christ Rejected, The Crucifixion, TheDescent of the Holy Ghost, The Ascension,The Inspiration of St. Peter,and several others, all of immense size.After having passed a blameless andtemperate life, the subject of our memoirdied on the llth of March, 1820;twenty-seven months subsequent to thedeath of h's wife. He was buried inSt. Paul's Cathedral, whither his remainswere accompanied by a numberof distinguished noblemen, ambassadors,and artists.In person, West was somewhat belowthe middle size, of a fair complexion,and firmly and compactly built. Hissparkling eyes indicated more vivacitythan he really possessed, as to the lasthe retained the sobriety and sedatenessof manner peculiar to his sect. By hisliberality he is said to have impairedhis fortune, and the student alwayshad the assistance both of his purse andhis talents. He was somewhat superstitiousin regard to his own destiny ;and, from the circumstances of his birth,had a conviction that he was predestined,by his works, to contribute to theadvancement of piety. He was vain ofhis own reputation, but totally freefrom envy ; and so unostentatious, that,as Allan Cunningham has observed,the very calmness and moderationwith which he carried himself, wassomething provoking to his brotherartists." As a painter, he is more celebratedfor gracefulness of execution, andharmony of colouring, than for boldnessof design, and freedom of touch. No manwas more daring in his choice of subjects,but his imagination was not alwaysequal to the sublime flights which suchsubjects required. Too much studyis visible in his works ; every thingis correct, chaste, and pleasing ; butinstrength and variety of character,they are, for the most part, deficient.His Death on the Pale Horse, however,Penn's Treaty with the Indians, Deathof General Wolfe, and the Battle of LaHogue, are, upon the whole, some of thebest historical compositions ever producedby the English school ; and, inthe opinion of Sir Thomas Lawrence,unequalled at any period below theschools of the Caracci. His sketchesdisplayed "both vigour and expression,and that of Death on the Pale Horse issaid to have been superior to thefinished picture on the same subject.HENRY FUSE LI.THIS gifted genius, who chose to callhim-elf Fuseli, was the son of JohnGaspard Fuesli, an artist of some eminenceat Zurich, where Henry was born,about the year 1739 or 1741, thoughthe date was fixed by himself in 1745.Being destined for the church, he madegreat progress in classical study ; butthis, instead of fitting him for divinity,increased his naturally poetic imaginationand taste for the fine arts, his predilectionfor which was first excited byviewing a collection of Michael Angelo'sprints in his father's possession. Ofthese he made several copies, and, bythe sale of some of them to his schoolfellows,filled his pockets with money,with which he purchased a red silkcoat, and walked about Zurich till thelaughter of his companions inducedhim to throw it off, and declare hewould never wear anything fine again.On his removal to the Humanity Collegeof his native town, he contracted afriendship with the celebrated Lavater ;studied English and German literature,translated Shakspeare into the latterlanguage ; and composed a few originalHENRY FUSELI.poems. He also, in conjunction withJuavater, composed a pamphlet againstan oppressive magistrate, which had theeffect of bringing the party to justice,and redress to those he had injured.Having taken the degree of M. A.,Fuseli left Zurich, in company withLavater, and visited Vienna and Berlin.Here the two friends studied underSulzer, till the subject of our memoirwas advised, by Sir Robert Smith, theEnglish ambassador, to come to thiscountry. At parting with him, Lavaterpresented him a card, on which waswritten, in German, " Do but the tenthpart of what you can do ;" saying, as hegave it to him, " Hang that up in yourbed-head, obey it, and fame and fortunewill be the result." He arrived in Londonin 176.3, and soon afterwards becametutor to a young nobleman, whomhe accompanied to Paris. On his return,he wrote essays and critiques forthe reviews, and translated Winkle-man'swork on painting and sculpture.He continued, however, still to usehis pencil ; and showing some of hissketches to Sir Joshua Reynolds, thatartist said to him, " Young man, wereI the author of these drawings, andoffered 10,000 a-year not to practiseas an artist, I would reject the proposalwith contempt."Thus encouraged, he gave up allthoughts of the church, though a livinghad been offered' him ; determined todevote himself to painting; and, accompaniedby Armstrong, the poet, setout for Rome. His conduct in thiscity was characterized by an enthusiasticadmiration of Michael Angeloand Raphael, little short of delirium :he lay whole days on his back, contemplatingthe ceiling of the SistineChapel, the work of the former, anddrinking in, as it were, inspiration fromthe sight ; and is said to have frequentlystarted from a reverie with the exclamationof " Michael Angelo !" He leftItaly in 1778; and, after passing sometimeat his native place, returned toEngland in the following year, andsoon rose into note by the fine conceptionswhich he successfully transferredto his canvass. A paintingwhich he exhibited of The Nightmare,in 1782, produced a great sensation;and the publisher of a print from itmade 500, whilst Fuseli only receivedtwenty guineas for the original.Not long afterwards, he happened tobe dining at the table of AldermanBoydell, when the idea of forming aHesperian Gallery was started, andFuseli ardently proffered his services.The most remarkable of the picturesexecuted by him for this collection wasfrom Hamlet; the ghost in which hedrew with an almost supernatural effect.Francesca and Paolo, and two subjectsfrom the Oedipus of Sophocles, werehis next performances which attractedattention. In 1788, he was elected anassociate of the Academy ; and, in 1790,an academician : and, in the formeryear, he married. His wife is said tohave been a young woman who hadserved him as a model ; but her conductwas highly exemplary in the situationto which he elevated her. Sheappears to have had some little causefor jealousy of her husband during theperiod of his acquaintance with the celebratedMary Woolstonescraft, thoughindiscretion seems to have been theextent of the conduct of either party.Mr. Allan Cunningham, however, hasthought fit, in his memoir of Fuseli,to stigmatize the conduct of the lady,as ridiculous, crazy, and vicious ; epithetswhich will appear sufficientlyunjust and ill-judged to any one whohas taken a less narrow view of humannature. We shall say nothing more ofthe intimacy between the subject ofour memoir and Mary Woolstonecraft,as, in our third volume, will be founda memoir of the latter, where all necessaryparticulars are mentioned.In 1790, Fuseli commenced upon aseries of designs from Milton, which heexhibited, in 1800, to the number offorty-seven, under the title of The MiltonGallery. The majority of them werein all respects worthy of the subject,and in those where he was not equallyhappy, he failed rather from extravagancethan poverty of imagination.Among the best may be mentioned,The Lazar House, The Night-hag, andThe Rising of Satan at the touch 01Ithuriel's Spear. He was next employedupon a set of drawings for a largeedition of Shakspeare, for which hereceived 250 ; and he subsequently,in conjunction with Stall, furnishedsketches for an edition of The NewTestament. Of the latter performancenPAINTERS,he said, " there was only one good thins;among them all, and I suspect I paintedit: but Stall may have the merit, iflie likes, for it was not much." In 1793,he wrote a criticism in The AnalyticalReview upon Cowper's Homer; a workto which he had voluntarily and gratuitouslysupplied many valuable emendations.In J799, he succeeded Barryas professor of painting to the RoyalAcademy, and delivered a course oflectures, which were received with vehementapplause. Six of them wereprinted, On Ancient Art, Modern Art,Invention, Composition, Expression,and Chiaro-scurf. In 1804, he wasmade keeper to the Academy ; and, in1805, he gave to the world a newedition of Pilkington's Dictionary ofPainters, to which he made several additions,but has been accused of unjustlydepreciating the merits of some of ourbest artists, among whom were Hogarthand Gainsborough. In 1807, the studentsof the Academy presented himwith a silver vase ; and, in 1817, he waspresented with the diploma of the firstclass in the Roman Academy of St.Luke's. He continued to paint andexhibit a number of pictures as long ashecould hold the brush, and did sountil within a short period of his death,which took place, whilst he was on avisit to Lady Guilford. at Putney Hill,on the 16th of April, 1825.In person, Fuseli was short and thin ;he had a high forehead, brilliant andpenetrating eyes, and a look full of thatsarcasm and ardent imagination whichformed such peculiar features of hischaracter. Lavater. in a description ofhis physiognomy, has the following remarkson Fuseli : " The forehead, byits contour and position, is more suitedto the poet than the thinker. I perceivein it more force than gentleness ;the fire of imagination, rather than thecoolness of reason. The nose seems tobe the seat of an intrepid genius. Themouth promises a spirit of applicationand precision, and yet it costs theoriginal the greatest effort to give thefinishing touch to the smallest piece.Any one may see, without my tellingit, that this character is not destitute ofambition, and that the sense of his ownmerit escapes him not." As Lavaterwas personally intimate with Fuseli,more, perhaps, m.iy be attributed to hisknowledge of the man, than to his skillin physiognomy. There was, certainly,much in Fuseli to confirm this description; he was petulant, persevering,ardent, and impetuous ; almost disdainingto use gentleness or persuasion ofmanner. It he had the worst of anargument, he had recourse to sarcasm ;and in such moments he cared notwhat he said or whom he attacked. Hewas an enthusiast in his art, and vehementlydecried the pursuit of it formercenary motives ; though he condescendedto execute one or two commissionshimself, he always spoke of themwith indignation, considering them asfetters upon genius. In his own idea, henever painted up to his own imagination; he would eye his pictures longafter he had considered them finished,and finding out something that mightbe improved, alter it accordingly. Hispencil, like his temper, had little to dowith the quiet and serene ; and, indeed,the sublime and terrific were so muchhis element, that he used to be called,painter in ordinary to the devil. Hedeclared that Nature was inferior tothe splendid fictions of such a fancy asMichael An ;elo ; and when he foundhis own restrained by her, wouldexclaim, " D n Nature ! she alwaysputs me out." To repeat all the oathshe used to utter in the moments ofanger or excitation, would shock theleast fastidious reader ; but, in theanecdotes which follow, the mannerin which he uses certain ungentleepithets, is too characteristic to beomitted : Hearing a noise, one day,in the Academy, he inquired whence itproceeded. " It is only those fellows,the students, sir," said one of theporters. " Fellows !'' exclaimed Fuseli ;1 would have you to know, sir, thatthose fellows may, one day, becomeacademicians." He had scarcely saidthis, when, hearing the noise increase,he opened the door, and suddenly burstin upon them, vociferating, " You areaset of d d wild beasts, and I am yourb d keeper." He once came out ofthe council-room in a furious passion,but alter having been a short time inhis room, and grown cool, he was aboutto return, when he found his doorlocked. Upon this, frantic with rage,he hallooed out to the porter, " SamSam Dowager ! they have locked meRICIIAHD COS WAY.in, like a b d wild beast : bringcrow-bars and break open the door."Sam, however, whom former experiencehad taught how to act on this occasion,whispered through the key-hole, " Feelin your pocket, sir, for the key." Ondoing so, he found the key, and unlockingthe door, said, with a loudlaugh, " What a fool ! never mindI'll to the council, and soon show themthey are greater asses than myself."A student, one day, showing him apicture, which he boasted of havingfinished without using a crumb of bread,he replied, " All the worse for yourdrawing ; buy a twopenny loaf and rubit out." To his brother artists, he wasequally severe, and in particular toNorthcote, who had offended him bywriting against him when he offeredhimself as keeper. Northcote, one day,asked him how he liked his picture ofThe Angel meeting Balaam and hisAss. " Vastly," he replied ; " you arean angel at an ass, but an ass at anangel." The same artist requested anopinion of his Judgment of Solomon.I like it much," said Fuseli ; " theaction suits the word .Solomon holdsout his fingers like a pair of open scissorsat the child, and says, < Cut it :'I like it much." When Fuseli, however,exhibited his picture of Herculesdrawing his arrow at Pluto, Northcotedid not forget to retort upon him. Theformer inquired how tire latter liked it.I like it much," was the reply; " itis clever, very clever ; but he'll neverhit him." A person, one day, callingupon the subject of our memoir, hoping,like Paul Pry, " that he did not intrude."'' You do intrude," growledFuseli. " Do I ?" said the visitor ;then, sir, I will come tomorrow, ifyou please." " No, sir' he replied,don't come tomorrow, for then youwill intrude a second time : tell meyour business now."Fuseli's genius as a painter was of asingular order. No English artist hadever exhibited so much imaginativepower : its effect, both on the professorsof art and the public, was startling;and as " there is but one step fromthe sublime to the ridiculous," he hasbeen censured by critics of colder fancies,for extravagance. There may besome justice in this ; but the merit ofa daring originality, which, though itspurned at restriction, and thereby incurredthe hazard of absurdity, frequentlysoared to the very heights ofthe sublime, cannot be denied to him.In the gloomy poetry which prelatessome ot his dark and original conceptions,he has never been surpassed ;and he is scarcely less alone in thepeculiar hues and sombre majesty ofhis colouring. The asperities of' histemper may have operated against theappreciation of his talents during hislife-time; but it is certain that, at thepresent day, his admirers are not numerous,nor has his style been adoptedby subsequent artists ; it therefore remainsfor posterity to decide on themerits of one, who, whatever mighthave been his faults, was certainly remarkablefor his originality, and faroutstripped his own age in boldnessof design and vigour of execution.His literary abilities were varied andextensive ; and his command of theEnglish language was, for a foreigner,wonderful. He was not onlyan excellent classical scholar, but, besidesLatin and Greek, could speakFrench, German, Danish, Dutch, Icelandic,and Spanish ; so that, takingEnglish into account, he could, as heused to say, ' % let his folly or his fury getvent through nine different avenues."Besides his lectures, he wrote a collectionof Aphorisms on Art, and aregular history of painting as far asMichael Angelo.RICHARD Conway.RICHARD Conway was born in theyear 1740, at Tiverton, in Devonshire,and received his education under hisfather, who kept the public school ofthat place. For " the idle pursuit ofdrawing," as his father termed it, '* lieneglected his studies at a very earlyage, and continued to do so in defiancePAINTERS.both of admonition and chastisement.His talents were, however, encouragedby his uncle, mayor of the place, and aneighbouring gentleman, named Heard,who undertook to provide him with themeans of becoming an artist. Accordingly,at their joint expense, he wassent, in his fourteenth year, to London,and placed under the care of Hudson,the portrait painter, but removed subsequentlyto Shipley's Drawing Academy,in the Strand. Here, one account representshim as a sort of fag to thestudents, and rather as a protegethan a pupil of Shipley ; but this factis by no means well authenticated.However this may be, such was hisprogress in his profession, that, in thecourse of a few years, he obtained noless than five premiums from the Societyof Arts.On commencing business for himself,he was chiefly employed in fancy miniatures,and " free subjects for snuff-boxesfor the jewellers," by which hegained considerable profit. The gracefuland pleasing manner in which he drewhis miniatures, speedily added to thenumber of his female sitters, and hewas not long in acquiring-both affluenceand popularity. The former he increasedby the judicious purchase andsale of old paintings, and the latter bygiving splendid entertainments to histitled customers, among whom was thePrince of Wales. In 1771, he waselected royal academician, and shortlyafterwards exhibited some poetical porewhich were much admired :among them were, Rinaldoand Armada,A Lady and her Son in the charactersof Venus and Cupid, and Madonna andChild.One of the principal events of Cos-way'slife was his marriage with MariaHatfield, a native of Italy, but of Englishparentage, possessed of a fine tastefor the arts, a beautiful person, andintelligent mind. Several of her paintingswere exhibited at the Academy,and her beauty and talents were, forsome time, the' talk of the fashionableworld. Her health obliging her to visitFrance, she was accompanied by herhusband to Paris, where he painted theDuchess of Orleans, and other personsof distinction. Before he quitted theFrench capital, he offered as a gift tothe king some splendid cartoons ofJulio Romano, for which he had previouslyrefused a large price fromRussia, and, in return, he was presentedwith four beautiful pieces of the Gobelinstapestry.Cosway's last place of abode in Londonwas in Stratford Place, OxfordStreet, which he fitted up in a style ofsingular magnificence. Smith, who givesan elaborate description of the furniture,observes, that " many of therooms were more like scenes of enchantmentpencilled by a poet's fancy,than any thing before displayed in adomestic habitation." Here he continuedto entertain his visitors, and toflatter his sitters and himself, until aparalytic stroke deprived him of the useof his right hand. His subsequentcareer was marked by singularitieswhich appertain rather to anecdote thanbiography. He maintained his love ofdress and gaiety to the last, and diedon the 4th of July, 1821.In person he was small, but wellshaped, and, from his portrait, wouldseem to have been handsome ; but so farfrom this having been the case, Smithasserts that he was " not much unlikea monkey in the face." In allusionto this supposed similitude, some onewhom he had offended, stuck on thedoor of his house, to which the figure ofa lion happened to be attached, the followinglines :When a man to a fair for a slio-.v hri gs a lion,Tis usual a monkey the sign-post to tie on ;Hut here the old custom reversed is seen,Tor the lion's without, and the monkey's within.The unpleasing appellation, however,might have been in ridicule of hisdress, which was foppish in the extreme.His generosity and profusenesswere great drawbacks on his fortune,and it is said that he gambled awaygreat part of his money. Nevertheless,he was envied by many of his brotherartists, among whom he used to go bythe name of the " maccaroni miniature-painter;"and a pictorial lampoon ofhim appeared, entitled, " Billy Dimplesitting for his Picture." Of the singularitiesto which we have alluded,an anonymous writer thus speaks:Richard Cosway was not the man toflinch at an ideal proposition. The agreeableand the true with him were one.He believed in Swedenborgianism ; hebelieved in animal magnetism ; he hadJOHN HAMILTON MORTIMERconversed with more than one personof the Trinity ; he could talk with hislady at Mantua, through a fine vehicleof sense, as we speak to a servant downstairsthrough an ear-pipe." Someanecdotes related of him go to confirmthe above account, and, among others,the following one : Once, whilst at thedinner of the Royal Academy, Coswayturned to one of his brethren, and said,Pitt, while he lived, discouragedgenius ; he has seen his error now ; hepaid me a visit this morning, and said,Cosway, the chief fault 1 committedon earth was in not encouraging yourtalent.' " " Ay, that was merely to sootheyour vanity," said his friend; " for Pitt,after he had seen you, called on me,and said, Now, mark ! Cosway willtell, at your dinner to-day, that I waitedon him, and expressed contrition fornot having employed his talents; don'tbelieve one word he says, for he willtell nothing but his own absurd in-mentions'"The reputation of Cosway, as an artist,has survived him, but none, probably,will venture to pronounce it permanent.His miniatures have all thesober softness of the Italian school, andare full of grace and elegance, but wantdignity, depth, and character. Fewdrew more accurately the human figure,or could apparel it more tastefully; butwhilst he painted the person, he "forgotthe mind. He used the brush withgreat rapidity, and would boast, inthe equivocal language of Allan Cunningham," that he had despatched,during the day, twelve or fourteensitters."JOHN HAMILTON MORTIMER.JOHN HAMILTON MORTIMERwas a native of Eastbourne, in Sussex,where his father, said to be a linealdescendant of Mortimer, Earl of March,carried on the business of a miller, andwas subsequently a collector of customs.He was born in the year 1741, accordingto Allan Cunningham ; but, in Bryan'sDictionary of Painters, the date of hisbirth is placed two years earlier. Heimbibed a taste for art by frequentvisits to the painting-room of his uncle,a sort of itinerant artist, in whose companyyoung Mortimer soon learnt to.-ketch from nature, with tolerablefidelity. His father saw some of hisdrawings, and, thinking it prudent toallow him to follow the bent of hisgenius, placed him as a pupil under thethen celebrated Hudson. Mortimersoon discovered that his master was amere dauber, from whom he shouldlearn little ; and finding his vulgarityequal to his ignorance, he quitted hisstudio for that of Price, a very celebratedcolourist in those days. Hismost profitable studies, however, werein the Duke of Richmond's gallery ofantique figures; his " dead school," asheused to call it ; the shores of Sussexhaving been his living one. Here heattracted the friendly notice of Cipriani,who recommended him to the duke insuch terms as induced his grace tomake Mortimer an offer of entering onhis establishment, for the purpose ofpainting the galleries, walls, ceilings,&c. of some of his houses. Our artist,however, preferred following the bentof his own ideas, to the profitable suggestionsof his intended patron, andpolitely declined the offer. His drawingsfrom the Richmond gallery gainedhim several premiums from the Societyfor the Encouragement of Arts, and hewas, soon after, admitted a member ofthe private academy in St. Martin'sLane, where, according to Edwards, heacquired very considerable knowledgeof the human figure, which he drew inastyle superior to most of his contemporaries.His first step to reputation has beendifferently stated ; some ascribing itto his picture of Edward the Confessorseizing on the Treasure's of hisMother; others, to his representationof the battle of Agincourt, uponthe panel of the king's state carriage,which his majesty ordered to be takenout and preserved. His Edward theConfessor, we should observe, was thecomposition to which we Leave alluded,in our life of Romney, as being preJP A I .\ T L Kferret to that artist's Death of Wolfe.Sir Joshua Reynolds declared this tobe inferior to the former performance ;and the Society of Arts, following hisopinion, decreed their premium of fiftyguineas to Mortimer. There was nodifference of opinion, however, withrespect to his merits, when he producedhis large picture of St. Paul convertingthe Britons, for which he was unanimouslyvoted the Society's premium ofone hundred guineas. It excited greatattention when exhibited in SpringGardens, and was so manifestly superiorto all the surrounding works, thatit was a general observation, " We havenow got an historical painter of ourown." The picture subsequently becamethe property of Dr. Bates," whopresented it to the' church of ChippingWy combe, in Buckinghamshire.Of Mortimer's portraits we have noaccount, though he painted several.None of them, probably, contributedmuch to his fame ; for, though he generallysucceeded in seizing the character,he took no pains to preserve it in hiscolouring. To use the words of Edwards,he seemed not over fond of thatbranch of painting; so that some of hisproductions of this kind were not sopleasing as those of some of his contemporaryartists, who were yet muchinferior to him in talent. Some of hisheads, however, drawn in white andblack crayons, the size of life, are executedin a very masterly style : hecould here dispense with colours, andhe succeeded accordingly.The events of Mortimer's private life,up to this time, are not much to hiscredit : he paused in a very dissolutecareer, on his marriage with JaneThursel, the daughter of a farmer, inthe neighbourhood of Foxtoire, and,soon after, painted, and exhibited, apicture, called The Progress of Vice ; thefruits, it is said, of his own experience.It was succeeded by another, calledThe Progress of Virtue, which foundfew admirers; and it was sarcasticallyobserved, with reference to the firstwork, which drew crowds, but no purchasers,that the town thought with thepoetVice is a monster of inch hideous mien.That, to be hated, needs but to be Men.As a designer, Mortimer was in greatrequest among booksellers and churchmen; the former employed him toillustrate several of the poets, the latterto design the elevation of the brazenserpent in the wilderness, for the greatwindow of Salisbury Cathedral, andthe cartoons for the stained glass windowin Brazen-nose College, Oxford.His designs were, in general, superiorto his paintings ; for after the first effortof his fancy, his touches grew cold andtame, and in attempting to expand, heonly obliterated his ideas.About the year 1775, at which timehe was residing in Norfolk Street, Strand,he was advised by his friend, Dr. Bates,to remove, for the benefit of his health,to Aylesbury, in Buckinghamshire.His mind and body were much invigoratedby this temporary retirement,whilst the patronage of the noblemenand gentlemen of the neighbourhood,to whom he was introduced, considerablyincreased his finances. Duringhis absence from London, he paintedworks to the amount of 900, and returnedhome " no longer the gay andgraceless, but neither the athletic andthe active Mortimer." Weakened byearly excesses, his constitution sunkunder the effects of a fever, by whichhe was soon after attacked; and liedied on the 4th of February, 1779. Hehad been, a short time previously,elected, without solicitation, or expectation,a royal academician, by the especialgrant of the king, but he did nutlive to receive his diploma.The merits of Mortimer, as an artist,have given rise to .many conflictingopinions. He is disposed of very contemptuously,by Fuseli, who deniesthat his versatility was accompanied by-genius; excludes him from all claim toexpression ; and asserts, that the styleof his designs was neither ideal, northat of genial nature. This is toosevere ; and Fuseli, probably, wouldhave thought so, had he not beenstirred up to indignant contradiction byPilkington's inflated remark, to whichhis own forms a supplement, that Mortimer," by a judicious union of theideal with his observations on livingnature, gave such nobleness, truth, andinexhaustible vivacity to the countenancesof his figures, that in all hisnumerous paintings and drawings therenever appeared two that were notJOHN HAMILTON MORTIMER.different." Some attention, however,is due to this assertion ; for Mortimerstudied character very deeply, andgenerally from life ; and, certainly, thefollowing anecdote bespeaks an artistof more than ordinary solicitude, inrespect to the individuality of his per-donations. Being requested, by Ireland,to delineate, from Gray's line,Moody Madness laughing: wild amidst severest woe,he opened his portfolio, and, pointingto the principal figure in the eighthplate of The Rake's Progress, exclaimed," If I had never seen thisprint, 1 should say it was not possibleto paint these contending passions inthe same countenance. Having seenthis, which displays the poet's ideawith the faithfulness of a mirror, Idare not attempt it. I could only makea correct copy; a deviation from thisportrait, in a single line, would be adeparture from the character." Besidesthose already mentioned, thepictures on which Mortimer's reputationchiefly rests, are, his King John signingMagna Charta; The Origin of Health;The Tragic and Comic Muses ; Sixtusconsulting Erichtho, from Lucan ; TheIncantation; Northern and Rowena;and his Groupes of Banditti. These onlywant colours to render them worthy theschool of Salvator Rosa, to which Mortimermay be said to belong. He hadimbibed something of the style of thatgreat painter, from his wanderings amidthe romantic and rocky scenery ofEastbourne; and to his frequent observationsof the countenances of thesmugglers, by whom the place wasinfested, may be traced his fondness forthe ferocious and terrific in the formsof his heroes. This sometimes destroyedthe effect of his compositions ; for, bymaking too much muscular display onhis canvass, he developed rather thestrength of the gladiator, than the courageof the hero. He was, perhaps, ledinto this error by a desire to shew hisminute knowledge of anatomy, which,according to Pilkington, was such, thathe could draw, with a common pen andink, and with the most critical exactness,the human skeleton in any attitude, andafterwards, with a different colouredink, clothe it with muscles. Everyobject in nature, he tells us too, was soimpressed on his imagination, that henever used, nor had occasion for, anarchetype, and that he rivalled naturein every department of his art from hisimagination only. He did not, however,trust all to his imagination ; forthe same authority says, that " beforehe attempted any work of importance,he always devoted some time to theperusal of that author who could givehim the most information ; and, indeed,his conversation frequently teemedwith allusions to the politest writers,expressed in the most forcible terms."Upon the whole, Mortimer possessed,in the mental sense of the word, greatpowers as an artist; and had his finedrawing, and wonderful ease and freedomof touch, been combined with anythinglike depth of colour, and consistencyof execution, he would, in allprobability, have reached a rank towhich few of his contemporaries couldaspire.With respect to Mortimer's privatecharacter, we have already hinted thatit was not the most reputable, previousto his marriage. His delight was inmidnight revels, wrestling, and cricket-matches;and though generally victorin his athletic contests, he seldom consentedto quit the bottle, till it hadbecome his master. Whilst staying atBrocket Hall, the seat of Lord Melburne,he got up suddenly from acarousal at midnight, and, with the aidof his assistant painter, dragged one ofhis lordship's fish-preserves in the park,and left all the fish gasping on the bankin rows. When Lady Melburne remonstratedwith him, he declared thather beauty had so bewitched him, heknew not what he was about. Such aman was not likely to retain the patronageof the great, and Lord Melburnewas not, probably, the only noblemanwhose regard he lost by his loose conduct.Mortimer was ambitious of being abeau as well as a rake; how he succeeded,the following description ofhim, when dressed for an eveningparty, will show: "He entered theroom in a scarlet-labelled coat, withlarge gill buttons, the size of a half-crown; a white satin waistcoat, embroideredwith .sprigs of jasmine ; a pair ofblack satin small-clothes, with Bristol-stoneknee-buckles ; a pair of Scott'sliquid-dye blue silk stockings, withPAINTERS,Devonshire clocks ; long quarteredshoes, with large square buckles, whichcovered the whole of his instep downto his toes ; a shirt with a frill andruffles of lace ; his hair pomatumand powdered, with an immense toupee,three curls on a side, and tied up witha tremendous curl behind."JAMES BARRY.JAMES BARRY was born in Cork,on the llth of October, 1741. Hisfather was originally a builder, but atthe time of the birth of James, commandeda trading vessel between thecove of Cork and England. He wentwith him to sea; but preferring theamusement of drawing to the occupationof a sailor, he ran away fromthe ship, and was ultimately sent backhome. Here he is said to have coveredthe walls, floors, and furniture, withsketches in black and red chalk; andon his being placed at school, sat upwhole nights drawing, and spent all hispocket-money in pencils and candles.He was, at this early age, remarkablefor his stubborn and solitary disposition,for affecting singularity of dress, andfor preferring the company of the oldand educated to that of the young andgay. His schoolfellows stood in a sortof awe of him, and, in consequence ofhis very rapid proficiency in learning,considered him a prodigy. He wasearly initiated into the catholic religion,at the instigation of his mother,who was herself of that persuasion,though her husband was a protestant.At the age of fifteen, the subject ofour memoir had made sufficient progressin drawing to be employed tomake designs for a small volume oftales, published by a bookseller in Cork.He subsequently painted in oil colours,aeneas escaping from the burning ofTroy, a dead Christ, and other scripturalpieces ; but his most successful essay wasin a picture representing the traditionaryconversion of a king of Castel bythe eloquence of St. Patrick. Withthis work he went to Dublin, and sentitfor exhibition to a public collection,where it was so much admired, that,upon his presenting himself as theartist, every one looked at him withincredulous surprise. Somewhat mortified,he burst into tears, and hastenedout of the exhibition room, but wassoon followed and encouraged by thecelebrated Edmund Burke, who hadwitnessed what had occurred. Betweenhim and Barry an immediate friendshipcommenced, and an anecdote illustrativeof their intimacy deserves relation atthis stage of our memoir. Whilst inthe heat of argument together, Barryquoted, in support of his views, a passagefrom the Essay on the Sublime andBeautiful, then recently published anonymously.Burke affected to treat theperformance as slight and unsubstantial."What!" said the other, " do you callthat a slight and unsubstantial workwhich is conceived in the spirit of natureand truth, is written with such elegance,and strewn all over with therichness of poetic fancy ? I could notafford to buy the work, and transcribedit, every word, with my own hand."Burke could not help smiling, and acknowledgedhimself the author. " AreVou, by !" exclaimed Barry, at thesame time embracing him, and holdingout the copy which he had made of thework. His sudden success in Dublin as apainter was sufficient to transport himbeyond the bounds of prudence; and returninghome, one evening, from a partyof flattering companions, he took outhis purse, by the side of the Liffey, andcursing his own easiness of temper, andthe money that had tempted him to atavern, threw his cash into the river.A friend, to whom he afterwards relatedthis circumstance, replied, " Ah, Barry !man, you threw away your luck ; younever had either gold or good temperto spare afterwards."In his twenty-third year he came toLondon, and was introduced to SirJoshua Reynolds, and others, who alispoke highly of his abilities, but foundmuch to be disgusted with in his sullenand fiery temper. Being advised tovisit Rome, he was generously furnishedJAMES BARRYwith the means by Burke, who undertookto supply him with an annual sumduring his absence abroad. He remainedin Italy about five years ; a considerableportion of which appears, fromhis correspondence with Burke, to havebeen passed in bickering with his brotherartists. The works of Titian hadthe greatest share of his admiration,but his taste was no less fastidious thanhis temper was precipitate ; he sawmany defects, which none else did,in Raphael and Michael Angelo ; anddeclared that " Rubens, Rembrandt,Vandyck, Teniers, and Shaken, werewithout the pales of his church." Whilstat Rome, he is said to have been on thepoint of infidelity, when the perusal ofButler's Analogy of Religion fixed hisbelief unalterably, though he remaineda catholic, and became, subsequently,a bigotted one. He pursued no regularmethod of study, and painted only twooriginal pictures whilst abroad ; and onhis preparing to return to England, appearsto have felt some misgivings as tohis future success. " Oh ! I could behappy," he says, " on my going home,to find some corner where I could sitdown, in the middle of my studies,books, and casts after the antique, topaint this work and others, where Imight have models of nature whennecessary, bread and soup, and a coatto cover me ! I should not care whatbecame of my work when it was done ;but I reflect with horror upon such afellow as I am, and with such a kind ofart, in London, with house-rent to pay,duns to follow me, and employers tolook for. Had I studied art in a mannermore accommodated to the nation, therewould be no dread of this."On his arrival in London, he paintedVenus rising out of the Sea; and, afterwards,Jupiter and Juno. Both werevery beautiful productions ; but notfinding this style of composition meetwith patronage, he took, for the subjectof his next picture, The Death of Wolfeat the Battle of Quebec. This wouldprobably have obtained unanimous applause,had not Barry's disdain of anythingordinary induced him to representthe combatants on both sides in astate of nudity, which totally destroyedthe merit of the picture as a historicalcomposition. He was so much offendedby the remarks made upon it by themembers of the Academy, of which hehad recently become an associate, thathe never sent another work to their exhibition.About a year afterwards, hewas acutely mortified at the refusal ofthe Bishop of London to allow the introductionof paintings into St. Paul's ;a matter which, he says, " he had longset his heart upon," and in which hewas to have had a considerable share.The sentiments which he entertainedupon this occasion gave rise to hisInquiry into the Real and ImaginaryObstructions to the Progress of Art inEngland ; a work in which he successfullyrefutes the theory of Winkleman,that the climate of this country unfittedits inhabitants for attaining to higheminence in the arts. He denouncesour antiquarians and connoisseurs withgreat virulence, and bitterly inveighsagainst the success of portrait paintersas inimical to the progress of historicartBarry now determined to give theworld his own idea of the style to whichhe was devoted ; and, accordingly,offered to adorn the great room of theSociety of Arts with a series of historicalpaintings, at his own expense. Thismagnificent offer being accepted by theSociety, he commenced his task in 1777,and finished it in 1783. The performanceconsisted of six pictures :The Story of Orpheus; Harvest Home,or Thanksgiving to Ceres and Bacchus;The Victors at Olympia ; Navigation, orthe Triumph of the Thames ; The Distributionof Premiums by the Societyof Arts ; and Elysium, or the State ofFinal Retribution. These were, uponthe whole, splendid compositions, andraised Barry's reputation to a very highpitch ; but some extravagances wereobservable, which did not escape theridicule of those who disliked the artist.A young lady, after looking for sometimeat the Elysium, said to him, " Theladies have not yet arrived in thisparadise of yours." " Oh ! but theyhave, madam," said the painter, with asmile; "they reached Elysium sometimeago ; but I could find no place sofit for creatures so bright and beautifulas behind yon very luminous cloud:they are there, and very happy, Iassure you."On the completion of this work, hepublished an able dissertation on thePAINTE RS,subjects he had chosen, containingsome morose sarcasms against hisbrother artists, which called forth aletter in reply, supposed to be from thepen of Burk. During the progress ofthe above pictures, Barry was frequentlyin great pecuniary distress ; to remedywhich, the Society of Arts presentedhim with two donations of fifty guineaseach, a gold medal, and, lastly, twohundred guineas. They also permittedhim to exhibit his pictures to the public,by which he gained ,.500 ; and a subscriptionfor a set of engravings of them,etched with his own hand, subsequentlybrought him an additional 2QO. Withthese sums he secured to himself anincome of 60 per annum ; and having,in 1782, been appointed professor ofpainting to the Academy, he was placedbeyond the reach of want, if not inentire independence.His continual invectives against theacademicians, at length, lost him hisprofessorship ; having been robbed of alarge sum in his apartments, he imputedthe theft to them, and afterwardsPublished his celebrated letter to thedilettante Society ; in which he accusedthe members of the Academy ofdissipating its funds, and proposed that,in future, their votes should be givenon oath. On the appearance of thisletter, in 1797, the whole Academy, withthe exception of Nollekens, arrayedthemselves against him ; and he was,in consequence, dismissed from hisstation of professor, and his nameerased from the roll of academicians.Neither his fame nor fortune sufferedmuch from this circumstance, for theEarl of Buchan set on foot a subscriptionfor him, which soon amounted tojgl,000. An annuity of correspondingvalue was purchased of Sir RobertPeel ; but Barry only lived to enjoy ittill the commencement of 1806, in whichyear he died, on the 22nd of February.Sir Robert Peel gave .200 to pay forhis funeral, and to raise a tablet to hismemory in St. Paul's Cathedral.In person, Barry, who used to Describehimself as " a pock-pitted, hard-featuredlittle fellow," was below themiddle size, with a grave and satiricalcountenance, which alike added sweetnessto his smile and fierceness to hisanger. His sour temper and impatienceof contradiction alienated from him thesympathies of those who were disposedto conciliate him ; and even the ardentfriendship of Burke was at last chilledinto reserve, though never to indifference.This generous man had alwaysforseen the unhappy condition towhich Barry's temper would reducehim. Writing to him at Rome, he says,in an almost prophetic spirit, " Gentlemenwill avoid your friendship, for fearof being engaged in your quarrels : youwill fall into distress, which will onlyaggravate your disposition to furtherquarrels : you will be obliged, for maintenance,to do any thing for any body :your very talents will depart for wantof hope and encouragement, and youwill go out of the world fretted, disappointed,and ruined." With all hismoroseness and fierceness, he had somegenerous qualities. Notwithstandingthe mutual dislike between himself andReynolds, who once said to Bacon, thesculptor, " If there be a man on earth Iseriously dislike, it is that Barry," thelatter, after the death of Sir Joshua,went to the Academy, and pronounceda glorious eulogium upon him as anartist and a man. His many faults,too, were accompanied by an independentand honest spirit, that, in ourestimation, outshines all the worldlyf races of a Reynolds or a Lawrence,n his greatest distresses he kept out ofdebt, and refused to borrow money ifit were offered him ; and, when someone advised him, for the sake of appearance,to take a better house, hire aservant, and set up a neat establishment,he replied, " The pride of honestyprotests against such a rash speculation."His abode and costume havebeen described by Southey, who visitedhim at his apartments in Castle Street.He wore, at that time," says thelaureate, " an old coat of green baize,but from which time had taken all thegreen that incrustations of paint anddirt had not covered. His wig was onewhich you might suppose he had borrowedfrom a scare-crow ; all round itthere projected a fringe of his own greyhair. He lived alone in a house whichwas never cleaned ; and he slept on abedstead with no other furniture than ablanket nailed on one side." An anecdoteis told of Burke's coming to dinewith him at this abode, when Barryhaving spread the table-cloth, andO Z I A S Humphrey.placed some steaks on the fire, put apair of tongs into the hands of Burke,saying, " Be useful, my dear friend,an't look to the steaks till I fetch theporter."In Barry's earlier and more prosperousperiod of his career, a story istold of him, not much to his credit.Being with Nollekens, at a coffee-houseat Rome, he walked off with the hat,rather a shabby one, of that artist,leaving his own, which was a gold-lacedone, in its stead. Nollekens, on receivinghis own hat, inquired the reasonof the exchange. " Why, to tell youthe truth, my dear Joey," answeredBarry, " I fully expected assassinationlast night, and I was to have beenknown by my gold laced hat." It is,however, by no means improbable thathe spoke these words in jest, and witha view to impose upon the well-knownweakness of Nollekens.If a contempt of everything triflingand common in art, an enthusiasticadmiration of the antique, and an imaginationwild, daring, and sublime, beattributes of a great artist, Barrywas one of the greatest this countryhas produced. Had he condescendedto exert his powers on subjects offamiliar interest to this country, heprobably would have attained thepopularity he merited ; but confusinghis mind with imaginations he hadneither time nor talent to realize, heseldom produced grandeur without obscurity,and thus failed in detaining theattention which his works were calculatedto seize. He sketched a varietyof subjects, but, comparatively, executedfew. A short time before his death,he had commenced on a series of subjects,taken from Milton's ParadiseLost, and had finished Pandora, or theHeathen Eve, as the first of a set intendedto exemplify the progress oftheology. Among his best picturesmay be mentioned a cabinet one ofMercury inventing the Lyre, Philoctetesin Lemnos, a portrait of Burke,Strategic, and Chiron and Achilles,purchased by Mr. Palmer at the rate oftwenty guineas per figure.OZIAS Humphrey.OZIAS Humphrey, descended froman ancient and honourable family of thetime of Edward the Third, was born atHoniton, in Devonshire, on the 8th ofSeptember, 1742. After having completedhis education at the grammar-schoolof his native town, he was sentto London, and placed in Shipley'sdrawing academy, in the Strand. Healso studied in the Duke of Richmond'sgallery, and was making great progressin drawing, when the death of his fatherrecalled him to Honiton. He next becamethe pupil of Mr. Samuel Collins, aminiature painter of some eminence atBath, with whom he stayed two years,at the expiration of which period hismaster removed to Dublin. Humphreyagain returned home, and, after remaininga short time, " requested hismother," says Smith, " to furnish himwith a guinea, observing that he hadresolved, with that small sum, to beginthe world." With this sum he proceededto Exeter, where he employed himselfin sketching from nature ; but how longhe remained here, or whether, as Smithasserts, he again visited London, is uncertain.He took up his residence atBath, in 1762 ; and, indeed, it wouldseem, from the statement of his biographerin Bryan's Dictionary, that hehad settled in that city immediatelyafter the departure of Collins, with aview of succeeding to his master'spractice. However this may be, hefollowed the profession of a miniaturepainter at Bath for about two years,and quitted it, to come to London, in1764.Here he was introduced to Sir JoshuaReynolds, who, upon hearing fromwhat county he came, and that hismother was a lace-maker, exclaimed,Born in my county, and your mothera lace-maker! why, Vandyck's motherwas a maker of lace ;" at the same timeadding that he should be welcome tocopy any of his Vandyke. " Or, perhaps,"said he, " you had better allowPAINTERS.me to lend you some of mine ; as theyare better suited, by their dress, toanswer your present purpose." Thekindness of Reynolds did not stop here :when Humphrey brought him a miniatureof his famous head of King Learin the Storm, he called it a beautifulcopy, and, insisting upon purchasing it,asked him his price. Humphrey, findinghe would not accept it as a present,named three guineas ; but Reynoldsreplied, " That is too little : I shallgive you five ; and let that be your pricefor such a picture." In 1766, he exhibited,at Spring Gardens, a portrait,in miniature, of John Meaning, the well-knownmodel of the Royal Academy,which was universally admired, andcontributed much to the artist's reputation.The king purchased it at theprice of one hundred guineas, and Mr.Humphrey was soon after employed topaint a large miniature of the queen,with other branches of the royal family.In 1768, he took a house in King Street,Covent Garden, where he remained,practising his profession with almostunexampled success, till 1771. Duringthis time, says Smith, " he fell sincerelyin love with the daughter ofJames Payne, the architect, at that timeliving in St. Martin's Lane; though she,poor girl, was obliged, by her father'sshuffling, sordid, and dirty conduct, tomarry Tilly Kettle, the portrait painter,who practised his art in Old BondStreet. In consequence of this shamefultreatment of himself and the girl ofhis heart, Mr. Humphrey resolved toleave his house and go abroad : hetherefore sold off all his householdfurniture, reserving his plate, which henever parted with ; and, for a shorttime, in 1772, took lodgings at theGolden Head, the usual sign of artists,in Great Newport Street ; and, on the20th of March, 1773, accompanied byRomney, the painter, left London forRome."This is quaint and circumstantialenough ; but his other biographers givedifferent reasons for his departure thanthat of a broken heart. In the year1772, says one of them, a fall from hishorse gave his head so violent a shock,and impaired his whole nervous systemso much, that he was unable to pursuehis profession with the same efficacythat he had hitherto done. To renovatehis health, then, and with a viewof improving himself in his profession,he left England, in 1773, and, accompaniedby Romney, proceeded to Rome.He resided there four years, duringwhich time he practised painting in oil,a process of which he had previouslypossessed but an imperfect knowledge.On his return to London, in 1777, hetook a house in Ratione Place, andcontinued to paint miniatures, chieflyin oil, with undiminished success, till1785. In that year he embarked forIndia, where he visited the courts ofMoorshedabad, Benares, and Lucknow,and painted several large miniatures ofprinces, nabobs, rajahs, and other personsof distinction. He returned toLondon in 1788; and, in 1790, waselected a member of the Royal Academy.By this time his sight was somuch affected, that he was obliged torenounce miniature painting, and taketo crayons, in which he had made someprogress whilst in Italy. His success,in this line of art, was such as to placehim at the head of all other artists ; andthe extent of his employment was proportionateto his merits. The utterfailure of his sight, however, soon compelledhim to renounce his professionaltogether, which he did in the year1797, his last productions being portraitsof the Prince and Princess ofOrange. He died at his lodgings, inThorough Street, on the 9th ofMarch, 1810, and was buried in St.James's Chapel, in the HampsteadRoad.Of the private character of Humphrey,little or nothing has been said by hisdifferent biographers. We have beenfavoured with a few particulars by oneof his friends : He was almost dwarfishin person, but had a great sense of hisown importance, which was considerablyheightened by his sojourn in India.Walking through Hanway Street, oneday, a tall stout drayman, in passing,pushed him off the pavement, whenHumphrey, drawing himself up to hisfull height, in a manner that renderedhis diminutiveness ridiculously conspicuous,exclaimed, his eyes flashingfire and his cheeks swelling with rage,By G d, sir ! I'll annihilate you."Amongst others who had claims on theNabob of Ascot, Humphrey preferredone to a very large amount, as mayJAMES NORTHCOTE.be conceived from the fact that anagent of government offered, on his ownresponsibility, to liquidate it for thesum of 10^000. Humphrey, however,pompously refused to accept anythingless than his whole demand, and, inconsequence,lost the whole.The following anecdotes have beentold of him by Smith : He was nofavourite with Nollekens, but agreedto accompany Mr. William Peltier, themezzo tinto engraver, to the house ofthat eccentric sculptor, to request permissionfor him to engrave a plate fromhis celebrated bust of Fox. Nollekens,having bluntly asked him what couldInduce him to expect any favour, exclaimed," What, you? you, who arealways crying up Flaxman here andFlaxman "there, and coddling close toaim at councils ; you know very wellthat you told me, Mr. Townley, andMr. Owen Cambridge, that you thoughtFlaxman the greatest sculptor that hadever lived; you know very well you did.I told Mrs. Nollekens what you saidwhen I came home from Mr. Blundell's ;you said the same to him of the great Mr.Flaxman : do you think I can like it ?"Mr. Humphrey replied that he had nevermade those observations to offend him,but that he certainly was still of the sameopinion, and wished him a good morning.Whilst on a visit to Mr. Udney,of Haddington, being informed that theStadtholder was coming to view thegallery of pictures there, he exclaimed,Heaven preserve me ! you don't sayso ; then I'll go and take a nap, that Imay be brilliant in the evening." Byoversleeping himself, however, he missedthe Stadtholder, though his first inquiry,on being awoke, was if the Stadtholderwas come. " Come, sir ?" replied theservant ; " Lord bless ye ! why he hasbeen gone these six hours." Callingupon West, one day, whilst he waspainting his beautiful picture of Achilles,he exclaimed, bending his knees, andthrowing his shoulders back, " Hoighty-toity ! what have we here ?" " Sir,"said West, " this is epic." " Heavenpreserve me !" responded Humphrey,you don't say so : how do you do,Mrs. West?" and taking a seat by thefire, took no further notice of thepicture.As an artist, Mr. Humphrey possessedconsiderable genius ; he designed withtaste and correctness, and his colouring,especially in his miniatures and crayonpaintings, is universally rich and harmonious.Hayley, in his life of Romney,pays a poetical compliment to his merits ;and Owen Cambridge has, among otherlines in honour of him, the following:But Humphrey, by whom shall your labours be told,How your colours enliven the young and the old ?JAMES NORTHCOTE.JAMES NORTHCOTE, the son of awatchmaker, was born at Plymouth,on the 22nd of October, 1746, and receiveda very imperfect education fromthe minister of the dissenting meetinghouse,which his parents attended.What Homer is to the learned, he tellsus, Jack the Giant-killer was to him ;it was the first book he ever read, and,in after-life he said he never looked intoit without his eyes filling with tears.At an early age he was apprenticed tohis father, but found the repairing ofwatches an irksome task in comparisonwith the labours of his pencil, in whichhis ambition to excel arose from thefame of Sir Joshua Reynolds, then muchtalked of in Devonshire. On his makinga visit to Plymouth, Northcote attendeda public meeting where the great artistwas present, and derived much satisfactionfrom touching the skirt of hiscoat. The subject of our memoir wasa watchmaker in the day, and apainter in the evening, when he madedrawings and portraits, which were applaudedby his friends and neighbours.At length, in 1771, Dr. Judge havingintroduced him to Sir Joshua Reynolds,the latter consented to receivehim as his pupil, and Northcote accordinglycame to London, and commenceda regular course of professional study.He laboured with zealous diligence, andamong other favourable specimens ofhis abilities during his apprenticeship toPAINTERS.Sir Joshua, produced such an accuratelikeness of one of the female servants,that a macaw, which had a great antipathyto her, ran at the picture withfury, and bit at the face.lie left Reynolds with the assurancethat he had been found one of his mostuseful scholars; and proceeding to Devonshire,painted portraits at ten orfifteen guineas, for about a year. Hethen set out for Italy ; passed threeyears at Rome, and returning to England,in 1780, took lodgings in OldBond Street, and commenced historyand portrait painter. The pictureswhich he sent to the exhibition attractednotice, and the Shipwreck ofCaptain Engle field , with eleven of hiscrew, exhibited in 1784, was universallyadmired. The number of hissitters beginning to increase, he nowtook a house in Clifford Street, wherehe lived with that strict economy, simplicityof dress, and eccentricity ofmanners, for which he subsequently becameremarkable. In 1786, he paintedseveral historical pictures, of which theTwo Princes murdered in the Towerobtained the greatest approbation. Itformed part of the Shakspeare Galleryof Alderman Boydell, who next requestedNorthcote to try his hand onthe Death of Wat Tyler. " I said," theartist relates, "that I could make nothingof it ; but as soon as Boydell was gone,and I was left to myself, the whole thenseemed to unfold itself naturally." Theperformance was successful ; the colouringrivalled that of Reynolds, and thesubject was both conceived and executedin a masterly style. It met with applause,which so transported Northcote,that Fuseli said, " Now, Northcote willgo home, put an extra piece of coal onhis fire, and be almost tempted to drawthe cork of his only pint of wine." Hehad been previously admitted an associate,and, in 1787, he was made amember, of the Academy, in consequenceof the excellence of his twopictures of the Burial of the murderedPrinces in the Tower, and Arthur andHubert.In 1791, he removed to ArgyleStreet, and gave more attention to portraitpainting than hitherto ; but hissarcastic observations, and ill-furnishedroom, kept many sitters away, whom hisfame was sufficiently established to procurehim. In 1796, he exhibited at theAcademy a series of ten pictures, showingthe story of the Modest Girl andthe Wanton Girl, founded on Richardson'sPamela. They added little tohis reputation ; and, indeed, he foundhimself completely eclipsed by Hogarthin this style of composition. The comparisonswhich the world made infavour of his predecessor nettled North-cote,and he ever afterwards spoke ofHogarth with a sneer. In 1813, hepublished The Life of Sir Joshua Reynolds; valuable only as a record of thesayings of that great artist, the stylebeing hard and inelegant, and the subjectnot always treated with candour.His One Hundred Fables, original andselect, with illustrations, publishedseveral years afterwards, gained himmore reputation ; as also did Titian andhis Times, by which it was shortly followed.In both of these works, however,he is' said to have been muchassisted by Hazlitt; and, in the latter,there are certainly marks of anotherhand than Northcote's. In the meantimehe continued to work at his easel;but, excepting a head of Sir WaiterScott, and of Godwin, a St. Francis,Argyle asleep, visited by his enemy inprison, and the Vulture and the Snake,had produced little worthy of notice uptothe time of the conclusion of theGeorgian era.The character of Northcote, is notone to be dwelt upon with pleasure;penuriousness, ill nature, selfishness,and conceit, seem prominent features ;little, indeed, is recorded of him that isestimable, and much that is otherwise.He is said never to have been in love ;if the contrary were the fact, parsimonygot the better of passion, for he used tocall women wasters of money and time,though he loved to converse with them.With his asperity, however, Northcotepreserved his independence : the Dukeof Clarence, one day, brought the youngRoscius to him to sit for his portrait;and whilst the artist was in the act ofpainting, touched the collar of hisgown, and his grey locks, exclaiming,You don't devote much time to thetoilette, I perceive." "Sir," said North-cote,turning round, with indignation,I never allow any one to take personalliberties with me : you are thefirst who ever presumed to do so, ana IJAMES NORTHCOTE.beg your royal highness to recollectthat 1 am in my own house." It shouldbe added, that the duke, who used tospeak of Northcote as a d d honest,independent, little old fellow, called onhim, the next day, and apologized in sonoble and condescending a manner, thatthe subject of our memoir, in tellingthe circumstance to a friend, added,I could, at that moment, have sacrificedmy life for him : such a prince isworthy to be a king." George theFourth, when Prince of Wales, havinghad some conversation with Northcote,which his royal highness spoke of withpleasure to Sir Joshua Reynolds, thelatter asked our artist what he knew ofthe prince. " Nothing," answeredNorthcote. " Nothing, sir! why, hesays, he knows you very well." " Pooh !"said Northcote, " that is only his brag."The personal character of Northcote,has, no doubt, considerably influencedthe judgment of those who have pronouncedan opinion on his works. Aman, so confessedly unamiable in hismanners, could hardly have propitiatedthe goodwill of his brother artists, orobtained the suffrages of those persons,whose love of art had led them into hissociety ; hence, a caustic severity isobservable in the remarks of most of hiscritics, which evidently aims at depreciatingthe man, as well as the artist.He is thus severely handled by a writerin The Monthly Magazine, who is detailingthe process Northcote employedin forming the designs for his book ofOne Hundred Fables.Supposing he had to manufacture ahead-piece to a fable entitled The Cock,the Eagle, and the Pig,' he would firstcut out a cock, an eagle, and a pig, fromany engravings in his possession ; hewould then puzzle his brains in shiftingthem about on a bit of printed landscape,until he had got them into passable positions;his next feat was to paste themdown ; and if the groupe wanted anadditional rock, or a tree in the foreground,or a river, cloud, castle, wood,in the distance, he would rob anotherprint of the desired object, and plasterit upon his patchwork." The samewriter relates, that having a picture onhand, in which it was necessary to introducea tiger, he went to the Schoolof Painting for the purpose of stealingone from a picture by Rubens. Butthe students were copying the desiredanimal, and he could not accomplishhis purpose. Fortunately, however, thenext day 'fortunately,' said Northcote,the Princess Charlotte died ! and whilethe Academy was closed [to the students],in consequence of that event, Ihad an opportunity of tracing the tigerunperceived. It was a sheer piece ofcomplete luck. The princess seemed tohave been born for no other purposebut to die at that critical moment inmy behalf! Bless her !' " Nothing, thewriter continues, can be imagined moreopposed in style to his great preceptor'sworks, than those of Northcote; theyare deficient in the charms of colour,feeble in drawing, and, though free fromany glaring defects of character or composition,they fail to arouse the imagination,or to create any lasting effect onthe mind At the present day, thebest of his pictures would fail to gain apainter admission to the Academy. . . Inthe whole range of his works it would bedifficult to place one's finger upon anythinggood, and say, ' This is North-cote's.'No, no, Scissors was the man. Itis clear that, pictorially, he would notonly covet, but steal his neighbour's ox,or his ass, or anything that was his."With this estimate of the artist's abilitieswe are by no means disposed toagree. His chief fault is formality ofexecution, and several of his happiestconceptions appear to the best advantageas engravings ; but his style is forcibleand original ; he manages his lightsand shades with skill ; and displays aclear perception of character. Most ofhis subjects, it is true, seem like pictorialepisodes, as if they were detachedportions, cut out of a large painting;but then they are complete in themselves,and fully tell their own story.They are also judiciously conceived*;and it is not to be denied, that there isconsiderable originality and effect insuch a mode of treatment. On thewhole, although we may regret that solittle can be recorded, that is honourableto his character as an individual,we should be guilty of injustice, if wewithheld the admiration which is due tohis genius as an artist, or suffered ourestimate of his talents to be influencedby the prejudiced representations ofpersonal hostility.PAINTERS.SIR WILLIAM BeecherWILLIAM Beecher was born atBedford, in Oxfordshire, in the year1753. After having completed hiseducation, he was placed under aneminent conveyancer, at Stow, inGloucestershire, and afterwards cameto London, where he was articled to anattorney. His first master dying, hewas assigned over to Mr. Owen, ofTooke's Court, but was too impatientto stay out the term of his indentures,from which he procured his release in1772. A writer in a late publicationasserts, that Beechey left his masterwithout his consent, and hiding himselffrom his connexions, was at length discovered,by a friend, at a village alehouse,painting a sign for the owner,which still hangs over the door. Howeverthis may be, he, in the same year,commenced a student of the Royal Academy; and was induced to take thisstep, not only from an innate disliketo the profession he had abandoned,but from a love also of the art to whichhe now determined to devote himself.His good taste at once led him to selectthe works of Sir Joshua Reynolds ashis best models, and he was not longbefore his copies were succeeded byoriginals of no ordinary merit. Thefirst picture which he exhibited atSomerset House, was the ChevalierRushing and his family. We mayalso mention, among his early works,the portraits of Dr. Strachey, Archdeaconof Norwich, and his family, andportraits of the Duke and Duchess ofCumberland. These pictures gainedhim some reputation, but not sufficientto induce him to trust to the metropolis'alone for employment. He accordinglyremoved to Norwich, where he triedhis hand, with success, on small conversationpieces, after the manner ofHogarth. Some of these were exhibitedat Vandergucht's rooms, at theLyceum, where they were much admired; they would have been admittedinto the Royal Academy, but for thelarge size of the frames. At Norwichhe also painted the size of life, andgained so much reputation in this style,that he ventured to leave Norwich andsettle in London. His residence wasat first in Brook Street, and, subsequently,in Hill Street, Berkeley Square,and George Street, Hanover Square,where, we believe, he now resides.Persons of the first distinction flockedto his easel, and among his sitters werethe Duke of Montagu, Lord Maccartney,the Earl of Morton, Lord Cornwallis,Lord St. Vincent, &c., &c. He waselected an associate in 1793, and aroyal academician in 1797 ; having previouslybeen appointed painter to thequeen, and employed by both theirmajesties on several works. The principalof them were a whole length portraitof the queen, and portraits of allthe princesses, exhibited in the last-mentionedyear, and the grand pictureof the king at a review, attended bythe prince, the Duke of York, &c. Thisis a very masterly performance, andone of which it has been justly said, ithas not the air of a modern work, butcombines, with the fidelity of portrait,the interest and expression of a historicalpicture; two excellences thathave been seldom united. A portraitof his majesty, George the Third, obtainedfor him the honour of knighthood,and the appointment of painter tohis majesty.To specify all the numerous portraitspainted by Sir William, would beto name almost all the aristocracy ofthe kingdom. Omitting the invidioustask of selection from these, we willonly particularize his portraits of Missde Vise, in a straw hat, of Mr. JohnTrotter, of a Miss Rudd, and of MissWashington, in the character of a Bacchante,all remarkable for ease andelegance, and particularly noticed atthe time of exhibition by the criticsand artists. We should not, perhaps,omit to mention a portrait of LadyBeechey, with the youngest of eightchildren in her arms ; this is a charmingperformance, worthy both of theartist and his subject, herself no meanvotary of the canvass. She was a residentof Norwich, and the second wifeHENRY BONE.of our artist, whom she has broughtfifteen children : of them thirteen areliving; one of them is a lieutenant inthe navy, who accompanied CaptainParry in his early voyages of discovery,and is an artist of some celebrity.Several of Sir William's pictures havebeen engraved, and have been imitatedalso in enamel, by the eminent academician,Mr. Bone.As an artist, Sir William will, probably,be assigned a place next afterthat of Reynolds, whose competitor itwas his ambition to be, and not a merefollower, though an avowed admirer, ofhis style. He was encouraged to perseverein the original task which hehad chosen, by the celebrated PaulSandby, who was one of the first toperceive the talents, and foretell thesuccess, of the subject of our memoir.Sir William is not what Fuseli calls amere face painter ; his portraits, bothmale and female, are marked withcharacter and truth : in the latter class,indeed, the beauty of the generality ofhis sitters has deprived him of thepower of flattering.HENRY BONE.THIS celebrated enamel-painter wasborn on the 6th of February, 1755,at Truro, in Cornwall, of poor butrespectable parents, his father being acabinet chair-maker. His son was intendedfor the same occupation ; butremoving, when about twelve years ofage, with his parents, to Plymouth, hewas there bound apprentice in a Chinafactory ; the proprietor agreeing to takehim without premium or expense, inconsequenceof the talent he had displayedin the execution of a set ofplaying-cards. The establishment beingsubsequently removed to Bristol, Mr.Bone completed the term of his apprenticeshipin that city, in 1778 ; havinglatterly received from his employers aweekly stipend, for his attention insupervising the work of the otherapprentices, in the painting departmentof the factory. The industry,also, which has formed so conspicuousa feature in the life of Mr. Bone, particularlydeveloped itself during theperiod of his employment at Bristol.Although the hours at the factory werefrom six in .the morning until six atnight, he was accustomed to rise atfour o'clock, and, in company withanother apprentice, practise drawing,by copying prints, then publishing, afterdesigns by Cipriani ; the purchaseof which was BO small effort topersons of such narrow income. Norwere the two hours previous to hisregular occupation all that he devotedto improvement; for, the proprietorsof the factory allowing their best handsa certain sum for work done out of thetime allotted to business, he frequentlymade the total amount of his dailyoccupation to consist of from sixteen toeighteen hours. About a year afterthe expiration of his apprenticeship,the proprietors of the Bristol factoryfailing, the subject of our memoirdetermined to hazard his fortunes inthe metropolis. The generosity of anearly friend, Mr. Morris, who tenderedhis purse to an unlimited amount,removed all pecuniary obstacles, and,with the loan of five pounds, added toanother guinea, all he had been ableto save, he quitted Bristol, and arrivedin London early in the month ofAugust, 1778.The first employment in which heengaged, was that of enamelling, abusiness then much in vogue, and inwhich, although he was, as yet, unpractised,he soon made considerableprogress. It was at this time that hefirst conceived the idea, which he hassince so amply realized, of raising theart of enamel-painting from the merehardness and dry effect of China, to thefull depth and brilliancy of oil pictures.His first effort, in that branch of art,was a portrait of his wife, a descendantof Philip Vandermeulen, painter toWilliam the Third, and whom he marriedin 1779. This picture, which costhim considerable trouble, was executedduring his leisure hours, and was exhibitedat the Royal Academy in theyear 1 780. His next work was a portraitof himself, and was exhibited at thePAINTERS.same place, in 1782 : these efforts werethe more surprising, as Mr. Bone thenknew Petition and Zinc by name alone.About this time, finding the remunerationhe received for his labour as adevice painter inadequate to the supportof his family, then consisting of awife and two children, he determinedto commence business on his own account.By the superiority of his workhe was soon known to, and employedby, many of the principal jewellers inLondon, who afforded him constantoccupation, for about twelve years, as adevice painter, both in enamel and onivory. Some time in the year 1794, hewas introduced to Dr. Wolcot, moregenerally known as Peter Pindar, whowas immediately struck with the powersof the artist in enamel portrait ; an occupationwith which he still continuedto employ his leisure hours, and, fromtime to time, exhibited his productionsat the Royal Academy. It was by theadvice of this gentleman, that Mr. Bonewholly abandoned his occupation as afancy painter, and devoted himself tominiature and enamel. For severalyears subsequent to this period, it wasMr. Bone's custom to pay an annualvisit to his native county, where, by thekind introduction of Dr. Wolcot andothers, he was very generally employedin painting miniatures, and usually returnedto London with many commissionsto execute enamel copies after hisown works. The artist once venturedto suggest to his friend, that some personsin the west might not be muchinclined to attend to a recommendationof his, considering his satirical habits.Never mind," said Wolcot ; " somewill employ you for love, and some fromfear, so that it will be all one to you."The advance in public estimation ofthis eminent artist was now extremelyrapid. Having exhibited a portrait ofthe late Lord Clinton, the Prince ofWales immediately purchased it, andsent his commands for Mr. Bone toattend at Carlton House, where he wasreceived with the most marked condescensionand kindness. For severalyears his royal highness was the purchaserof all the artist's enamel pictures,which were not executed by commission; and, in 1800, he was appointedenamel painter to his munificent patron.On the 3rd of November, in the followingyear, he was elected an associate of theRoyal Academy ; on the 30th of June,1808, he was appointed enamel painterin ordinary to his majesty, King Georgethe Third ; and, on the 15th of April,1811, was elected a royal academician.He was subsequently appointed enamelpainter to the Duke of York,and to his majesty George the Fourth.Independently of the vast number ofsplendid copies after the old masters,executed by Mr. Bone, there are threecollections from his pencil which willprove lasting monuments to his fame.One of these is a series of portraits ofthe Russell family, from the period oftheir being ennobled in the reign ofHenry the Seventh to the presenttime; executed for the present Dukeof Bedford, a nobleman from whomthe artist has received many proofs ofthe most liberal patronage and personalkindness. The next series is that ofthe principal personages who supportedthe royalists' cause in the civil wars,painted for James Pickering Ord, Esq.,of Edge Hill, near Derby; and thethird, though first in point of time,a collection of eighty-five portraits ofillustrious characters in the reign ofQueen Elizabeth, copied from themost authentic pictures extant. Thismagnificent undertaking has occupiedthe leisure time of the artist for morethan twenty-five years, and has causedthe outlay of a very considerable sumof money.To those who have not witnessed theworks of this distinguished artist, it isimpossible to convey an idea of theirexquisite finish and fidelity, whilst thedurability of their colours, from thepeculiar process of the art, may bealmost said to be eternal. In thehands of Mr. Bone, whose unwearyingindustry and indomitable perseveranceovercame all difficulties, enamel paintinghas been carried to a degree ofperfection never before attained.Mr. Bone has had a very large family,but only five of his children survive;of these, three sons, Henry, Robert,and William, are artists. In person,Mr. Bone is above the middle stature,with a fine intellectual countenance,which is admirably portrayed in a bustof him by Chantrey, The integrityand amiableness of his private characterare acknowledged by all acquaintedTHOMAS STOTHARD.with him ; yet we have reason to knowthat the evening of his days is cloudedby the want of many of those comfortswhich, to an octogenarian, become indispensable; and of those attentions(from persons who, in more prosperoustimes, received the benefit of his adviceand shared the hospitality of his board)which are due to disinterested kindnessand unshaken friendship.THOMAS STOTHARD.THOMAS STOTHARD, whom somehave denominated the Shakspeare ofpainting, was born in Long Acre,London, on the 17th of August, 1755.He was brought up at Dulwich, andeducated at a school in Yorkshire,whence he was removed, at the age offourteen, to be apprenticed to a calicoprinter, in Spitalfields. Before the termof his apprenticeship expired, his masterdied ; but being a favourite with hiswidow, he employed his spare hoursin making drawings for her, which sheplaced over her mantel-piece. Herethey were accidentally seen by a gentleman,who, struck with the abilitymanifested in their execution, showedthem to a publisher, and, through him,our young artist was engaged to makedrawings for the booksellers. We havebeen unable to ascertain the subject ofhis first design, but such is said to havebeen its merits, that when Sir JohnHawkins requested Sir Joshua Reynoldsto design a frontispiece forJuggle's Latin play of Ignoramus, thelatter declined, adding, " There is ayoung artist of the name of Stothard,who will do it much better than I can ;go to him."Mr. Stothard has furnished designs foralmost all the embellished works thathave appeared in this country within thelast half century. In one or the otherof them, he has attempted every style ;and whether in the pastoral, the historic,the humorous, the pathetic, or thesublime, he has displayed, with success,the versatility of his genius. To exemplifythis, we have only to mention hisdesigns for Robinson Crusoe, bloomfield'sPoems, Don Quixote, Gil Bias,The Pilgrim's Progress, The Novelist'sMagazine, Bell's British Poets, &c. &c.and his illustrations of Milton, Shakspeare,and Spenser. His picturesfrom Auld Robin Gray, and the Childrenin the Wood, have a pathos that cannotfail to affect the spectator who possessesany sensibility ; whilst those who canrelish the humorous, will find theirbroadest ideas of it realized by lookingat his Rival Ladies, Scaramouch andthe Swiss Officer, and the Spectator'sClub, which have not been equalled byany of the same class of compositionssince the days of Hogarth.The largest painting which Mr.Stothard has executed, is the grandstaircase in the Marquess of Exeter'smansion at Burleigh, commenced byhim in the year 1798, and completedduring the summer months of foursuccessive years. The subject of thepainting is Intemperance, illustrated byvarious groupes, of which the principalis that of Marc Antony and Cleopatra,surrounded by sylphs, bacchanals, &c.Let those," says a critic, " who affectto despise the English school of painting,compare this sublime production,not only with the sprawling saints ofVerrio and Laguerre, that deform theceiling, but with the best works of asimilar character, and then say, hadsuch a painter lived in the time of theMedici, how would his works be nowappreciated ?" The Fates Champ&lresof Stothard are among his most happyproductions ; the beauty, joy, and serenity,that pervade them, have neverbeen so exquisitely embodied. Nothingis offensive to the most fastidiousimagination ; innocence of looks andrefinement of feeling, are identified inall his personages, be they never so gay,or never so bewitching. His females,it has been truly observed, possess ailthe loveliness of form that would captivatea stoic, and all the sacredmodesty of deportment that wouldmake the libertine blush, and lead himto repentance.Of more than three thousand plates,which have been engraved from thefive thousand designs, which he is saidPAINTERS.to have made, the most celebrated are,The Battle of Seringapatam ; The FourPeriods of a Sailor's Life ; the prints toThe Pilgrim's Progress ; The Death ofCaptain Faulkner; The Pilgrimage toCanterbury ; The Shield of Wellington,etched by the artist himself; and theProcession of the Flitch of Bacon, acharming and delightful picture of conjugalfelicity. His picture of TheCanterbury Pilgrims was a commissionfrom Mr. Crone, who exhibited it atEdinburgh, with a view of procuringsubscribers to an engraving which heintended to make from it. Not a singlename was tendered after a fortnight'sexhibition, when Mr. Jeffrey, happeningto become a visitor, he was at oncestruck with the beauties of the picture,and, in a very short time, procuredsuch a number of subscribers as toinduce him to put the engraving inhand. Before the print, however, wasfinished, not only the proprietor, butthe two engravers, Louis and PhilipSchiavonetti, who were also employedupon it, died; and it was, at last, completedby Mr. James Heath. The picturewas strongly applauded by the firstartists of the day ; West and Turnerwere foremost in bearing testimony toits merits. Mr. Stothard's most recentperformances are, a number of vignettedrawings, for Mr. Rogers' poem ofItaly. Mr. Stothardhas passed the ageof threescore and ten, without havingsustained any diminution of a justly-meritedreputation, or, indeed, if wemay judge from his late performances,of the powers by which his fame hasbeen caused. The melancholy circumstancesunder which he lost his talentedson, the painter of the MonumentalEffigies of Great Britain, some yearssince, was a great blow to his happiness ;but he has no small consolation forthis severe domestic calamity, in therespect and esteem of a numerous circleof friends and admirers. He is said tobehold with peculiar delight, and to retaina perfect remembrance of, objectsof animated nature : his feelings, onthese occasions, may be conceived fromthe fact that he has been seen, by afriend, watching the birds at Brooke'srepository, in the New Road, till thetears have trickled down his cheeks.Stothard's faces," says a writer inThe Spectator Newspaper, " breatheinnocence and happiness ; his figuresare instinct, with grace ; his scenes areArcadian, the beau ideal of pastoralbeauty. He pictures a world where allisserene, peaceful, and smiling ; inhabitedby beings of unearthly goodness,gentleness, and tenderness. His designsare a combination of natural lovelinessand simplicity, with the elegances ofartificial life, blended with poeticalrefinement, and exquisite taste. Thesentiment, however feebly manifested,redeems them from insipidity or affectation.Venerable old man ! if theperceptions of thine outward senses arebut glimmering, thou hast a world ofsweet imaginings within ; and if thytrembling hands have but retraced theforms it portrayed in its days ofvigour, we are yet charmed anew withthy graceful creations. May thy righthand never forget its cunni ng,or drop thepencil from weakness, while thou livest!"SIR HENRY RAEBURN.'Finis eminent artist, who may beconsidered the founder of the residentschool of Scottish painting, was born atStourbridge, near Edinburgh, and nowa portion of that city, on the 4th ofMarch, 1756. Whilst yet a child, helost both his parents; his father, whohad been a respectable manufacturer,being succeeded in his business by hiseldest son, William. By him the subjectof our memoir was sent to school,and, at the age of fifteen, apprenticedto an eminent goldsmith in Edinburgh.During the progress of his education,he had displayed no sign of genius forthe art in which he afterwards becameso distinguished, excepting in hisstriking superiority to the other boysin delineating figures on a slate orcopybook. His taste, however, is saidto have been altogether spontaneous,without lesson or example, and withouthis even having seen a picture.He first tried his hand in paintingSIR HENRY RAEBURN.Illminiatures, and with such success as toexcite the wonder of his acquaintancesand of his master, v/ho took him tosee some pictures by an artist of thename of Martin, which he viewedwith equal delight and admiration.Continuing to paint miniatures, hebegan to be so much employed as tofind it worth his while to quit histrade, upon an understanding that hismaster should receive part of his earnings.Before the term of his apprenticeshiphad expired, he commencedpainting in oil on a large scale,and, for this purpose, borrowed severalpictures from Martin to copy. Thisartist, who did not assist him in anyother way, accused him of selling oneof the copies ; in consequence of which,Auburn indignantly refused any furtheraccommodation from him. Henow gradually relinquished miniaturepainting, and, at the expiration of hisapprenticeship, commenced portraitpainter by profession. His marriage witha lady of some fortune, in his twenty-thirdyear, did not alter his views ; onthe contrary, he became more ambitiousof professional success, and removed toLondon for the purpose of further improvement.Being introduced to SirJoshua Reynolds, that eminent artistgave him the encouragement of whichhe thought his works worthy ; and notonly advised him to pass some time inItaly, but volunteered to furnish him,if it had been required, with pecuniaryassistance for that purpose. Mr. Raeburnaccordingly set out for Rome, and,after having occupied two years instudying the Italian masters, returnedhome in 1787, and established himselfin George Street, Edinburgh.He soon came into full practice, andMartin, finding himself compelled toretire, Mr. Raeburn had the field ofportrait painting entirely to himself,and thenceforth maintained it, unrivalled.Martin, it seems, did not giveup the contest without a struggle ; andin the same spirit which made himaccuse Raeburn of selling one of hiscopies, he now declared that " the ladin George Street painted better beforehe went to Rome." In a few years,Raeburn became so celebrated in hisprofession as to be called the Reynoldsof the North ; and he had the honourof painting almost every distinguishedScotsman. It was not, however, till1814, that he was admitted an associateof the Royal Academy ; and beingelected a royal academician in the followingyear, he paid a visit to Londonon the occasion, where he was warmlywelcomed by Wilkie and other eminentartists. Not long after, he was chosena member of the Imperial Academy ofFlorence, of the Academy of NewYork, and of the Academy of Arts inSouth Carolina, and a fellow of theRoyal Society of Edinburgh. After hehad become a royal academician, hisexhibitions at Somerset House weremore frequent than before, and obtainedso much notice as to induce in himsome thoughts of establishing himself inLondon. Upon this point he consultedSir Thomas Lawrence ; and thoughRaeburn," observes Allan Cunningham," never expressly said it, he sometimes,I am hold, seemed to insinuate,in conversations at his own fireside,that the president of the Royal Academyhad been no loser by his absence fromthe field of competition." In theautumn of 1822, when the king visitedScotland, Mr. Raeburn received thehonour of knighthood ; and on the following5th of October, a grand dinnerwas given to him by the artists ofEdinburgh. In the summer of 1823,he was appointed portrait painter to hismajesty for Scotland ; an honour whichhe survived but a few days, dying,after a week's illness, on the 8th ofJuly, in the same year. He was survivedby his lady and one son. TheRoyal Institution for the Encouragementof the Fine Arts in Scotland, helda meeting on the 10th of July, atwhich the Society expressed their regretthat the season of the year, and othercircumstances, prevented them fromattending publicly his funeral ; and, ata meeting of the Royal Academy ofLondon, on the 16th, Sir ThomasLawrence " expressed his high admirationfor the talents of the deceased, andhis unfeigned respect for the high feelingand gentlemanlike conduct whichhad conferred a dignity on himself andon the art which he professed. Hisloss had left a blank in the Royal Academyas well as in his own country,which could not be filled up."Before we enter on a discussion ofSir Henry's merits as an artist, itPAINTERS.may be as well to enumerate someof his principal works. His chiefportraits were those of Sir Walter Scott,Mr. Keith, of Gravestone, the celebratedDugald Stewart, Professor Play-fair,Francis Homer, Lord FrederickCampbell, Dr. Macnab, Mr. Macdonald,of St. Martin's, Sir John Hay,Bart., Lord Glencoe, Lord Douglas, Dr.Hope, Sir John Douglas, James Watt,Dr. Market, Francis Jeffrey, HenryMackenzie, Honourable Henry Erskine,Lord Meadow-bank, John Jennie,Chantrey, the sculptor, &c., &c. Of SirWalter Scott, he painted two portraits ;the last, but a short time before hisdeath. Of the first, which representsSir Walter at full length, sitting onsome fragments of Gothic masonry,with two favourite greyhounds at hisside, an engraving was made ; inreference to which, Allan Cunninghamtells a ludicrous anecdote. " The successof this attempt," he says, " wastold me by the artist in these words, onthe day the print was published :The thing is d d, sir! gone-sunk! Nothing could be more unfortunate! When I put up my Scott forsale, another man put up his Molyneux.You know the taste of our Londonbeer-suckers : one black bruiser isworth a thousand bright poets : theAfrican sells in thousands, and theCaledonian won't move : a dead loss,sir gone d d ! won't do ! "Sir Henry Raeburn possessed, in aneminent degree, the requisites for afirst-rate artist. His likenesses werestrikingly indicative of the character aswell as of the features ; and these hehad the art of delineating under theirmost pleasing and dignified aspect,without the introduction of any idealtouches or departure from the strictesttruth. A natural penetration, aidedby the most agreeable conversationalpowers, always enabled him to drawout the mental characteristics of hissitters, and his hand was no less readyin transferring the expression of them tohis canvass. In this manner he mademany friends ; his agreeable mannersand ' intelligent conversation seldomfailing to make a very pleasing impressionon the majority of those whosat to him. His manner of paintinghas been thus described by one of hisfriends who came for his portrait :He spoke a few words to me in hisusual brief and kindly way evidentlyto put me into an agreeable mood, andthen, having placed me in a chair on aplatform, at the end of his painting-room,in the posture required, sat uphis easel beside me with the canvassready to receive the colour. When hesaw all was right, he took his paletteand his brush, retreated back, step bystep, with his face towards me, till hewas nigh the other end of the room jhe stood and studied for a minute more,then came up to the canvass, and, withoutlooking at me, wrought upon itwith colour for some time. Havingdone this, he retreated in the samemanner, studied my looks at that distancefor about another minute, thencame hastily up to the canvass, andpainted a few minutes more. I had satto other artists ; their way was quitedifferent : they made an outline carefullyin chalk, measured it with compasses,placed the canvass close to me,and looking me in the face almost withoutceasing, proceeded to fill up thesame with colour. They succeeded bestin the minute detail Raeburn best inthe general result of the expression ;they obtained, by means of a multitudeof little touches, what he found bybroader masses ; they gave more of theman he gave most of the mind. Imay add that I found him well informed,with no professional pedantryabout him ; indeed, no one could haveimagined him a painter till he took upthe brush and palette."These high qualifications were accompaniedby a profound knowledge ofhis art in all its minor points. The wholestyle of his execution was bold, free,and open ; his drawing was correct, hiscolouring rich and deep, his lights well-disposed,and the accessories, withoutbeing divested of their character ofsubordinates, were always treated withelegance and spirit. He drew animalswith peculiar felicity, particularly thehorse ; so that his equestrian portraitsare considered his best performances.What other artists could only achieveby repeated trials, his firm and suretouch enabled him to execute at once ;and hence Sir Thomas Lawrence isreported to have said that, though hereceived a higher price for his pictures,he was worse paid for his time thanWILLIAM BLAKE.Raeburn. One rule, from which SirHenry never deviated, and to which heascribed the genuine and natural characterof his pictures, was, never to copyany object whatever from memory.The elevation and dignity of stylewhich he always maintained, has beenattributed to his exclusive acquaintancewith the Italian masters.Sir Henry Raeburn understood somethingof sculpture and architecture aswell as painting ; indeed, he had, atonetime, conceived the idea of makingthe former branch of art his profession.Had he done so, there is little doubtbut that he would have become eminent ;at least if we may judge from a smallmedallion of himself, executed just afterhis return from Rome. Of his taste inarchitecture he has left a proof in thesuburb at Stourbridge, raised andplanned by him ; and which, since itsunion with the new town of Edinburgh,has been called RaeburnviUe. Suchwas his fondness for architecture, that,in a picture by Allen, of the eminentmen of Edinburgh, he is representedtracing the foundation-plans of his newtown with his wet forefinger upon thetable. He had also a passion formechanics and hydrodynamics ; andthough, as one of his biographers observes,he had not acquired that knowledgeof geometry and analysis whichis requisite to the profound study ofthese branches of knowledge, yet hehad obtained a practical acquaintancewith them which is not often possessedby the general reader. Not very congenialwith his other tastes, was a predilectionfor dabbling in law. " Of allour clients," his professional adviseris represented as saying, " he was themost enthusiastic, and, at the sametime, the most acute and shrewd. Hedearly loved a ganging plea, and smiledto see difficult cases arise which promiseda new case. He was, as Prior says ofanother matter, a great lover of thatsame :' but do not misunderstand me ;the subject of these observations desiredto oppress no one, and never waged warbut for his own right, and to keep hisplans free from blemish, perfect as hehad laid them down."Sir Henry Raeburn possessed a talland commanding person, with a nobleand expressive countenance. He excelledat archery, golf, and other Scottishexercises ; was particularly fond offishing; and passed no inconsiderableportion of his time in making experimentsto discover perpetual motion.In private and domestic life, he wasequally esteemed ; but though muchcourted in society, he seemed alwayshappiest at home. His extensive informationand agreeable manners madehim a very desirable companion ; andhe seldom failed to enliven the social orconvivial circle, from the rich store ofanecdote which he had at command.To young artists his conduct was particularlykind and encouraging; to suchof them as asked his advice or assistance,whether acquainted with them ornot, he freely accorded it; and whenunable to give them his time in theday, would engage them to come tohim early in the morning.WILLIAM BLAKE.WILLIAM BLAKE, the son of ahosier, was born in Broad Street,Golden Square, on the 28th of November,1757. He was educated for hisfather's business, but, in consequence ofhis love for poetry and painting, hewas, at fourteen years of age, apprenticedto Biisire, the engraver. He servedhis master with diligence, attendingto the graver in the day time, and tohis favourite pursuits in the evening.About 1783. he married a youngwoman, named Katharine Butcher,and, shortly afterwards, entered intopartnership with a fellow-apprentice,and commenced print seller, in BroadStreet. A separation taking place, heremoved to Poland Street, where, tothe occupation of plate-engraving andsong writing, he added that of musicalcomposition. The first work which hepublished was entitled, Songs of Innocenceand Experience, consisting ofabout seventy designs, in which thePAINTERS.artist and the visionary were equallyconspicuous. Of his poetry, he alsogave some favourable specimens inthis publication ; and his love of thatart seems to have had a singular effecton his imagination. Not content withputting into verse his dreams, he declaredthat he held communion withthe dead, and that the spirit of hisfavourite brother, Robert, had appearedto him, for the express purpose ofadvising him in what manner to bringout the work just mentioned. Thespirit, he said, desired him " to writethe poetry, and draw the designs uponthe copper with a certain liquid (whichhe always kept a secret ;) then to cut theplain parts of the plate down with aquafortis,and that would give the whole,both poetry and figures, in the manner ofa stereotype." Blake followed this plan,and tinted both the figures and theverse with a variety of colours. His nextsuccessive productions were entitled,respectively, The Gates of Paradise,and Brazen ; the latter being a performanceof such extravagant originality,that even his wife, who could usuallyinterpret his most obscure meanings,declared she could not tell the importof this. It was published in 1794, atwhich time he was residing in Lambeth.Genius, however, of no ordinary character,was sufficiently visible in hisEfforts to make his name favourablyknown. Edwards, the bookseller, employedhim to illustrate Young's NightThoughts; and he, shortly afterwards,became intimate with Flaxman, thesculptor, and Hayley, the poet. At therequest of the latter, who had a houseat Pelham, in Sussex, he removed tothat place, for the purpose of makingengravings for the Life of Cowper.Whilst thus employed, he wrote someletters to Flaxman, in one of whichoccurs the following passage : " Andnow begins a new life, because anothercovering of earth is shaken off. I ammore famed in heaven for my worksthan I could well conceive. In mybrain are studies and chambers, filledwith books and pictures of old, whichI wrote and painted in ages of eternity,before my mortal life ; and those worksare the delight and study of archangels."After a residence of three years atPelham, he removed to South MiltonStreet, and, shortly afterwards, publisheda hundred designs, entitled,Jerusalem, which he thus announced :After my three years' slumber on thebanks of the ocean, I again display mygiant forms to the world." Some oaf thefigures are said to have been worthy ofMichael Angelo; but the performance,as a whole, was too obscure to becomepopular. His next work was the illustrationsof Blair's poem of The Grave,which were deservedly commended byFuseli, and had the merit of excitingboth sympathy and admiration. Thiswas followed by his Canterbury Pilgrimage,which, with his principal works, heexhibited at the ho se of his brother,in Broad Street, in 1809. One of hislatest, and, certainly, the best of hisperformances, was, A Series of Inventions,as he used to call them, for theBook of Job. They amounted totwenty-one, and were executed with asublime simplicity, and in a mannerworthy of the subject. He next drew,and engraved, two works, entitled,Prophecies concerning Europe andAmerica, containing, together, thirty-fiveplates: the design was sufficiently wildand obscure; the colouring and drawingin his best style. Blake continued tolabour to the last, with cheerfulness andenthusiasm, although, from want ofpatronage, he was latterly so poor, that,but for the assistance of friends, hewould have wanted a meal. Threedays before his death, he sat up in bed,to tint a favourite work of his, calledThe Ancient of Days, and, seeing h swife in tears, said to her, " Stay, Kate ;keep just as you are 1 will draw yourportrait for you have ever been anangel to me." He made an excellentlikeness of her, and died two days afterwards,on the 12th of August, 1828.Respecting the works of this extraordinaryman, no satisfactory conclusioncan be come to : by many they will becalled the productions of a madman ;and still more will regard them as theabortions, or, at least, the misconceptions,of genius. Had he condescendedto consult other models than thosepresented to him by his own ideas, hewould undoubtedly have risen to thehighest eminence in his art ; for hepossessed, in addition to a sublimeimagination, the most unwearied patienceand perseverance. In his mostJOHN Hopper.mystical pictures, there is somethingthat arrests the attention strongly,though, perhaps, both the subject andthe feeling it conveys are indescribable :he is extravagant, but still sublime ;fantastic, not ludicrous.As a man, he was esteemed andrespected by all who knew him : hewas somewhat touchy in temper, but hismanners were seldom other than gentleand unassuming. He was short instature, and slightly made ; had peculiarlydark and expressive eyes, and ahigh, thoughtful brow. He continueda visionary to the last, and bore hispoverty with the calmness of a philosopher,and the fortitude of a martyr.Were I to love money," he used tosay, " I should lose all power ofthought: desire of gain deadens thegenius of ran. I might roll in wealth,and ride in a golden chariot, were Ito listen to the voice of parsimony.My business is not to gather gold, butto make glorious shapes, expressinggodlike sentiments."A few anecdotes of Blake and hissupernatural acquaintances are too singularto be omitted in our memoir. Heboasted of a personal intimacy withHomer and Virgil, Dante and Pindar.Moses occasionally looked in upon him;and Milton once intrusted him with awhole poem of his ; but the communicationbeing oral, he could not giveit to the world. Among those whostayed long enough for him to taketheir portraits, were William Wallace,Edward the First, Corunna, Lais, andHerod ; all of whom he declared sat tohim in propria person. He wasengaged, one day, at his easel, when afriend entered : " Disturb me not,"said Blake, in a whisper, " I have onesitting to me." " Sitting to you !Where is he, and what is he ? I seeno one," exclaimed the astonishedvisitor. " But I see him, sir," answeredBlake, haughtily ; " there he is,his name is Lot you may read of himin the Scripture. He is sitting for hisportrait." The most extraordinary ofhis visitations is yet to be told. He wasfound by a friend, one evening, morethan usually excited, and, on beingasked the cause, said, " I have seen awonderful thing the ghost of a flea."And did you make a drawing ofhim ?" inquired his friend. " No, indeed,"he replied ; " I wish I had ; butI shall, if he appears again." He lookedearnestly into a corner of the room, andthen said, " Here he is ; reach memy things I shall keep my eye onhim. There he comes ! his eager tonguewhisking out of his mouth, a cup in hishand to hold blood, and covered with ascaly skin of gold and green :" andaccording to this description he drewhim. When asked how the apparitionsof his sages and heroes looked, heanswered, " They are all majesticshadows, gray and luminous, and superiorto the common height of men."JOHN Hopper.JOHN Hopper, said, though uponslender authority, to have been a naturalson of George the Third, was born inLondon, about the year 1759. His motherwas one of the German attendantsat the royal palace, and, as he wasbrought up and educated at the expenseof the king, the tory of his birth obtainedadditional credit. Having a melodiousvoice, he was made one of thechoristers of the Royal Chapel ; but howlong he sang there, or when he firstturned his attention to art, his biographershave not stated. He was a studentof the Royal Academy, and made suchrapid proficiency, that, in his twenty-fourthyear, he had already attainedsomething like reputation, by the superiormanner in which he, paintedheads. He gained critical approbation,by a portrait of Mrs. Jordan as the ComicMuse, and of a lady as a Bacchante,which were soon followed by his portraitsof the Duke and Duchess of York,the Prince of Wales, the Duke of Clarence,and of several of the nobility,both maje and female. Between thisperiod and his fortieth year, he continuedthe favourite painter of the day,had become a royal academician, andP Ante RS.attained no ordinary share of fame andemolument. The rise of Lawrence, whowas now becoming known, put a checkto the tide of his success, and gave birthto a rivalry between the artists, whichwas carried on with all the partisanshipthat had distinguished the factions ofReynolds and Romney. The king tookthe'side of Lawrence, the prince that fHappier; and as these two illustriouspersonages held different courts, anddifferent politics, Hoppner, for sometime,monopolized the Whigs and femalebeauty of Carlton House, while toLawrence fell the Tories, and the sedateladies of quality about St. James's andWindsor. " The more sober and homelyideas of the king," observes Williams,in his life of Lawrence, " were notlikely to be a passport for any portrait-painterto the vanity of ladies; andhence Mr. Hoppner, for a long time,almost monopolized the female beautyand young fashion of the country."Among the portraits which he paintedat this time were the Countess of Clare,the Honourable Miss Chetwynd, LadyAnne Hamilton, Lady Anne Langton,Countess of Oxford, Honourable Mrs.Edward Bouverie, Mrs. Whitbread,Lady Grenville, Lady Midday, MissCholmondeley, Lady Mulgrave, MissBirmingham, the Countess of Sutherland,the Bishop of Durham, Bishopof Carlisle, Duke of Grafton, LordGarden, Sir Arthur Wellesley, SirWilliam Scott, Lord King, Lord Hawkesbury,Sir Samuel Hood, Earl of Essex,Earl StVincVnt, Earl of Chatham, &c.Whilst Lawrence and Hoppner wererunning their race for fame, the latterobserved that, " the ladies of Lawrenceshowed a gaudy dissoluteness of taste,and sometimes trespassed on moral aswell as professional chastity." Whatevertruth there might have been in this remark,it only recoiled upon Hoppner,who was laughed at as being squeamish,"and lost such of his female sitters aswere more solicitous about a display oftheir own loveliness than of " the lovelinessof virtue."The life of this eminent artist was variedby few incidents. Upon the whole,he maintained his reputation to thelast; and if the number of his sitters decreased,he must have been more thancompensated by the friendship and commendationof his courteous and generousrival. As he drew near his end,he was often visited by Lawrence, whothus expressed himself upon the occasion: " You will be sorry to hear," hewrites to a friend, " that my most powerfulcompetitor he whom, only to myfriends, I have acknowledged as myrival, is, I fear, sinking into the grave ;I mean, of course, Hoppner. He hasalways been afflicted with bilious andliver complaints, and to these must begreatly attributed the irritation of hismind. But though I think he cannotrecover, I do not wish that his last illnessshould appear to be reported byme. You will believe that I sincerelyfeel the loss of a brother artist, fromwhose works I have often gained instruction,and who has gone by myside in the race these eighteen years."Mr. Hoppner did not long survive thedate of this letter. He died at his house,in Charles Street, St James's Square,the 23d of January ; and not, as AllanCunningham says, " in the beginning ofApril," 1810.The distinguishing character of Mr.Hoppner's style," says a writer inBryan's Dictionary, who quotes chieflyfrom the author of The Baviad, " is aneasy and unaffected elegance, whichreigns throughout all his works ; hisnaturally refined taste appears to havegiven him almost intuitively an aversionfrom everything which bordered onaffectation and vulgarity, and enabledhim to stamp an air of gentility andfashion on the most inveterate awkwardnessand deformity. This power ofimproving what was placed before him,without annihilating resemblance, obtainedhim a decided preference amongthe fairer part of fashionable society.The same qualities which rendered himso highly successful in his portraits ofwomen, did not, perhaps, afford himequal advantages in those of the othersex, in which strength and characterought to take the lead of almost everyother consideration. His portraits ofmen are generally, if the expressionmay be allowed, too civilized and genteelto be very striking and forcible ;and in his constant wish to representthe gentleman, he sometimes failed todelineate the man. To this observation,however, it must be acknowledged, thatmany of his best works form very splendidexceptions. In his portraits ofJOHN Opechildren he was peculiarly fortunate ;he entered completely into the infantinecharacter, and arranged his compositionsof this species with that unaffected easeand playful grace, which so pleasinglymark the early periods of human life.One great charm of his pictures arisesfrom the air of negligence and facilitywhich pervades them : their productionappears to have cost no effort; andthe careless boldness of his execution,equally removed from insipidity andhandicraft, stamps the seal of themaster on the most trifling of his performances.His colouring is natural,chaste, and powerful : and his tones,for the most part, mellow and deep ;his pencilling is rich and full, and hiscarnations fresh and transparent. Theabsorbing quality of his original pursuitsseldom allowed him to turn hisattention to the more elevated departmentsof the art." To this we may add,that Hoppner has left many landscapepieces behind him, not unworthy ofGainsborough ; and, indeed, the backgroundsof the portraits of the former,sufficiently shew his taste in this respect.His style in portrait painting resembledthat of Reynolds, for whose works hehad the highest veneration ; yet, thoughhe formed his pictures on similar principles,he introduced so many attractiveand original graces of his own, thatimitation was scarcely perceptible.Mr. Hoppner had several children :one of his sons became consul at Venice,and is honourably mentioned by Mr.Moore, in his Life of Lord Byron. Byhis private friends, the subject of ourmemoir was much esteemed; whilst hisconversational powers, and fascinatingmanners, made him a very desirableguest in company. His taste, however,for the humorous and whimsical wouldsometimes shew itself in the midst ofthe most serious discussions ; and thefollowing anecdote shews that he couldsometimes act the boisterous blackguardwith as much success as he did themirthful wit. Having gone with Edridgeand two other artists into the country,they put up at an inn, in the neighbourhoodof which a fair happened to begoing on. As they advanced towardsthe field, where it was being held,Listen," said Hoppner to his companions," you have always seen me ingood company, and playing the courtier,and, in fine, took me for a d d well-bredfellow, and genteel withal. A mistake,I assure you. I love low company,and am a bit of a ready-made blackguards!"Then giving his coat avulgar pull, twitching his neckcloth,knocking his hat awry, and putting on aface suited to his appearance, he rushedout into the mob of rustics, and in a momentwas " hail, fellow! well met" withthe lowest of them, He concluded hisfrolic by picking a quarrel with a brawnywagoner, to whom he presented half-a-guinea,after having soundly thrashedhim in a pugilistic encounter, from thevictorious termination of which he retiredamid the applause of the crowd.JOHN Pie.JOHN Poppy, or Pie, the son of acarpenter in the parish of St. Agnes,near Truro, in Cornwall, was born therein1761. At an early age he displayeda superior understanding, and beingsent to the village school, became thewonder of his instructors and playmates.It is said that at the age of ten he couldmaster Euclid, and at twelve set up anevening school, and taught writing andarithmetic. He had previously indicateda strong love fur art, to which hisattention was first called by seeing acompanion draw a butterfly. He copiedit with success; and. afterwards meetingwith the picture of a farm-house, wasnot content till he had procured canvassand colours, and produced from memorya tolerable resemblance of it. He thentried his hand at portrait, arid succeededin making so good a likeness of hisfather, that the latter began to regardhis son's preference of the pencil to thehammer will) less harshness than usual.He subsequently painted the portraitsof all his family ; and his talents atlength attracting the notice of theCelebrated Dr. Wolcot, then a physician,PAIN TE RS.at Truro, he was taken into his house,but in what capacity is doubtful. Thedoctor, however, encouraged and employedhis abilities ; sat for his ownportrait to him, and recommended himseveral sitters in the neighbourhood.At the age of nineteen he returnedhome in a handsome dress, with twentyguineas in his pocket; gave the moneyto his mother, and, avowing his intentionof commencing artist in London,proceeded immediately to the metropolis.He arrived in London on the25th of November, 1782, when he issaid to have been " a rude clownishboy, with lank, dark hair, and a greenfeather." He was placed, by Wolcot,to lodge with Hearne, the engraver, inSt. Martin's Lane, who finding himvisited as a sort of wonder, by manypeople of distinction, observed, that heought to be a little more fashionable inhis appearance. " No, no," repliedWolcot; " you may depend upon it,in this wonder-gaping town, that allcuriosity would cease if his hair weredressed, and he looked like any otherman ; I shall keep him in this state forthe next two years at least." The popularityof the " Cornish Wonder," as hewas called, was almost instantaneous ;the nobility flocked to his house in suchcrowds, that he jocularly observed toNorthcote, " He must place cannon atthe door to keep the multitude offfrom it."He now called himself Opie, insteadof Poppy (though we may here observe,that one of his biographers says theformer was his proper name) ; took ahouse in Orange Court, Leicester Fields,and studied hard to improve his style,in which he perceived many defects,though the public, as yet, saw none.He also acquired some knowledge ofFrench and Latin, and increased hisfortune by marrying a well-portioned,but ill-tempered, woman, from whomhe at length obtained a divorce. Healluded to this circumstance in one ofhis witty sayings, whilst passing St.Giles's Church, where his marriage ceremonyhad been performed. " I wasmarried at that church," he exclaimedto a friend of avowed sceptical opinions,who was walking with him ; " and I,"said his companion, " was christenedthere." " Indeed !" replied the painter,it seems they make unsure work atthat church, for it neither holds in-wedlocknor in baptism."Portrait painting was Opie's chiefoccupation on his first arrival in themetropolis, and, among others, he executedan admirable head of Charles Fox ;but it was his murder of James the Firstof Scotland, Jeptha's Vow, and other historicalperformances, exhibited by himat Somerset House, that obtained himan admission to the Academy in 1786.He was subsequently enrolled amongthe academicians ; and on the ejection ofBarry, he became a candidate for theprofessorship of painting, but yieldedit, without opposition, to Fuseli. It was,however, unanimously given to Opie,when Fuseli became keeper. In hisofficial situation, he delivered four lectureson design, invention, chiaro-scurf,and colouring. They were more to thePurpose than a previous course, whichehad delivered at the Royal Institution; and the late Bishop of Durhamobserved to him, after reading them,You were known before as a greatpainter, Mr. Opie ; you will now beknown as a great writer also."In his thirty-seventh year, he marrieda lady well known in the literary world,and in whom he found an intelligentfriend and companion. His popularity,but not his reputation, was diminished,when he was attacked by a lingeringand singular disease, accompanied bylong and frequent fits of delirium, inone of which he expired, on the 9th ofApril, 1807. After his body had undergonedissection, it was buried in St.Paul's Cathedral.Opie had a rough, peasant-like countenance,but a fine forehead and intellectualeye ; and, in general, wore a lookof melancholy, amounting almost tomoroseness. Though his manners werenot polished, they were neither vulgarnor ill-bred ; and no man seems betterto have understood how to mingleindependence with respect towards hisworldly superiors. He was totally freefrom weakness and vanity; possesseda most retentive memory, a fine senseof moral feeling, great strength andoriginality of mind ; and, to use thewords of his widow, " often made observations,originating in the nativetreasures of his own mind, which learningcould not teach, and which learningalone could not enable its possessor toGEORGE Norland.appreciate." Home Tooke said of Opie,that he crowded more wisdom into afew words than almost any man he everknew ; and Sir James Mackintosh gaveit as his opinion, that had he turnedhis powers of mind to the study of philosophy,he would have been one of thefirst philosophers of the age. It wassaid of him in his profession, that whilstmany painted to live, he lived to paint ;and that whilst others got forward bysteps, he proceeded by strides. Theonly taint, perhaps, upon his character,is a want of sufficient gratitude to hispatron, Dr. Wolcot, of which Opie seemsto have been guilty ; though it is said,in excuse for him, that Wolcot justlyoffended him by the manner in whichhe spoke to others of the obligationsunder which the artist lay to him.As an artist, his characteristics havebeen described by West in languagewhich will not admit of alteration.Having observed that Opie's conceptionof his subject was original, and his arrangementof it ideal, he proceeds;he painted what he saw in the mostmasterly manner, and he varied littlefrom it. He rather bent his subjectto the figure, than the figure to hissubject. That may be said of Opie,which can only be truly said of thehighest geniuses, that he saw Naturein one point more distinctly and forciblythan any painter that ever lived. Thetruth of colour, as conveyed to the eyethrough the atmosphere, by which thedistance of every object is ascertained,was never better expressed than bv him.He resigned himself unwillingly to fancy;yet examples are not wanting, both inhistorical subjects and in portraits, inwhich he added to the subject beforehim with felicity. His pictures possessed,in an eminent degree, whatpainters call breadth. They were deficientin some of the more refineddistinctions, which mark the highly-polishedworks of RafFaelle, Titian, andReynolds ; but they displayed so invariablean appearance of truth, as seemedsufficient to make a full apology, if ithad been wanted, for the absence of allthe rest."Besides his Lectures on Painting atthe Royal Academy, which were publishedafter his death, with a memoirby his widow, he wrote a memoir ofSir Joshua Reynolds, forWolcot's editionof Pilkington's Dictionary of Painters.GEORGE Norland.GEORGE Norland was born inthe Haymarket, London, on the 26th ofJune, 1763, and is said to have beenlineally descended from Sir SamuelMorland,an eminent mathematician andartist. His father was also a painter,and taught him the first rudiments ofhis art, for which he evinced a naturalpredilection as early as his fourth year.In his sixth, he obtained, for some of hisdrawings, the applause of the Societyof Artists, and was considered a prodigyby all who witnessed these infant specimens.Drawings from pictures andplaster-casts he was at first employedupon, and as these were purchased assoon as done, his father, who was inimpoverished circumstances, contrived,by a few indulgences, to keep his sonconstantly at work. For his copies hereceived half-a- crown, but his originalsketches, which consisted of such subjectsas Young Roger came tapping atDolly's window, &c., fetched from twoto five guineas.Young Morland, at length, becomingtired of so much labour and seclusionfor the sole benefit of his father, foundmeans to obtain both company andmoney for his own gratification. Theformer consisted of such boys as chancethrew in his way, and the latter heobtained by giving his father two picturesinstead of three, and disposing ofthe third privately. When he couldnot get out himself, he would let downthe picture from his window to some ofhis companions, with whom he wouldsteal out at night, and share the profitsat a public-house. The low habitswhich he thus acquired soon displayedthemselves, but his father, to secure hisson's services, not only left them unchecked,but encouraged him in drink-painters.ing and swearing, and pampered hisvanity by exhibiting him to his customersdressed in a green coat, buckskinbreeches, and top-boots with spurs.In this attire he went down to Mr.Angerstein's gallery at Blockhead, tocopy the painting of Garrick betweentragedy and comedy; but shunned allcommunication with Mr. Angerstein'sfamily, and spent all his leisure timewith the servants.Different accounts, it should be noticed,have been given of Morland'streatment at home : Russell, who isconfirmed by Fuseli, stating that heleft it in consequence of his father'savariciousness ; whilst Smith says thathe was turned out for his idleness.However this may be, he quitted hishome in his seventeenth year, andmade an excursion to Margate, wherehis talents procured him Some respectablesitters, whom he neglected forpot-boys, horse-jockeys, and pugilists ;and he returned to London little betterin pocket and much worse in mind.His fame, however, was rising, thoughmost of the productions which circulatedit were hastily dashed off, tofurnish the means for a debauch or tosatisfy an importunate creditor. Hispencil was not idle in the scenes hevisited, and his pictures, therefore, insome measure, relate the story of hislife. A friend once finding him at apublic-house, called The Cabin, seatedamong sailors and fishermen, observedto him, that he must have reasonsfor keeping such company. " Reasons,and good ones," he replied, holding upa sketch of the tap-room in which hehad been found ; " see, where could Ifind such a picture of life as that, unlessamong the originals of The Cabin ?"This has been considered as one of hisbest performances.On his return from Margate, he hadtaken lodgings at Kendall Green, nearHarrow ; but shortly afterwards, marryingMiss Ward, the sister of the painter,who, about the same time, became thehusband of Morland's sister, they agreedto take a house together in High Street,Marylebone. Disagreements, however,between the parties soon led to a separation,when the subject of our memoirremoved with his wife to Great PortlandStreet, and speedily relapsed intothose intemperate habits which he hadsufficient command of himself to layaside during the first month or two ofhis marriage.He painted his best pictures duringthe years 1790, 1791, and 1792; theyconsisted chiefly of rustic scenes, andwere executed with an ease and fidelitytruly surprising. His dissipation continuedto keep pace with, but did notimpair, his abilities; and though everystep he took was, in his imagination,dogged by a bailiff, he seldom restedwithout adding to the number andbeauty of his compositions. The picturedealers derived the chief profit ofhis labours; he was almost always attendedby one or the other of them,who, for the loan of a guinea, or thesame amount expended in liquor, wouldobtain from him pictures that producedthem fifteen or twenty times the sum.Those who employed him in particularcommissions, found it necessary to standby him and see them finished ; whenthis was not the case, the dealers wouldget them from him in an incompletestate, though aware of a portion of thestipulated price having been advancedby the artist's employers.Morland now lived at Haddington,and was affording, every day, new proofsof his coarseness, prodigality, andvanity. Of horse-dealers, as well as ,he was the companion anddupe ; his chief favourite was a debauchee,called Dirty Brookes ; and, onone occasion, being seen shaking hands,though somewhat reluctantly, with achimney-sweeper, to whom a pugilistictinman had introduced him, his friendswould afterwards accost him with"Sweeps, your honour!" He kept acollection of guinea-pigs, dogs, rabbits,and squirrels ; and, at one time, wasowner of eight horses, at an inn calledThe White Lion, of which he pointedthe sign. In fine, says Russell, " heheaped folly upon foley with such direrapidity, that a fortune of 10.000 perannum would have proved insufficientfor the support of his waste and prodigality."At length his love of horses and dressbegan to decline ; the dread of Bailiffsdrove him from place to place, and heis said, in the course of his fugitiveperambulations, to have maire himselfacquainted with every spot of secrecyor refuge within the tour counties whichGEORGE Norland.surround the metropolis. Whilst inconcealment at Hackney, he was suspectedof being a forger of bank notes;and on the mistake being discovered,the bank directors sent him a presentof 40. His wife had hitherto sharedhis distresses, and borne with hisindifference ; but his continued debaucheriesnow compelled her to quithim, and he was shortly afterwardsarrested and confined in the King'sBench Prison. Having obtained therules, he set up his easel, and workedfor customers upon the terms of " fourguineas per day with his drink." Whennot thus employed, he would paint apicture and send it to the pawnbroker's.On one occasion, he received back apicture, upon which three guineas hadbeen advanced, with a request that hewould repaint part of it that had beenobliterated by a fall. He did so in afew minutes, and then said tc his messengeron these errands, " There, goand tell the pawnbroker to advance mefive guineas more upon it ; and if hewon't, say I shall proceed against him ;the price of the picture is thirty guineas."The money was given. Sohighly, indeed, were his talents valued,that, necessitous and unprincipled as hewas, he once received an order to paintas many pictures as he pleased, at hisown price. The agent for the gentlemanwho gave the commission, afterpaying for several the price demanded,received, at length, a very small drawing,for which he thought too large asum was asked. His employer, however,wrote to him, " pay what isasked, and get as many others as youcan at the same price." In one of hisrambles, he painted a public-house signfor a dinner, and telling the circumstanceto one of his companions, thelatter immediately set off and purchasedthe sign for ten guineas.Morland having obtained his libertyby taking the benefit of the insolventdebtor's act, made no alteration in hishabits. The consequence was, that hisconstitution, naturally good, began togive way. A palsy struck him in histhirty-ninth year, from the effects ofwhich he only recovered to recur to thebottle; and he, at length, died, at aspunging-house in Air Street, on the29th of October, 1804. He left nochildren by his neglected wife, whoonly survived him a few days, dying, inall probability, of a broken heart.The character of Morland has beensufficiently developed in the course of thepreceding memoir, in our compilation ofwhich, we have in vain sought for anyredeeming trait. Sagacity and sensualitypredominated together in his countenance; his temper is said to have beenfretful and vindictive ; and he was asshameless, if not as heartless, as he wasvulgar and profligate. Of his geniusthere can be but one opinion ; and hisdiligence, or, rather, his rapidity, musthave been wonderful, if it be true, asrelated, that he has left behind him noless than four thousand pictures. Thestyle of them is well known to thepublic, and has justified the generalvoice in assigning to him the first placeamong the rural landscape and humble-lifepainters of this country.Form and colour," says a critic,seemed to spring spontaneously fromhis flowing pencil ; he tinged it in theradiance of sunshine, and the glow ofhealth ; his skies beamed life, his cottagesbreathed comfort, his rustics andanimals alike revelled in ease andhappiness. He must be considered asthe chosen painter of the swinish race:his pigs, divested of their concomitantfilth, no longer wallow in the nauseousbed instinct selected from nature'srefuse, but luxuriate in a genial couchof homely, but cleanly materials: theyare always models of their race; toapply the term poetical, would excitemirth ; yet, in truth, Morland investedthem with a delicacy retaining theircharacteristics which may puss forsomething more than a prosaic representation."PAINTERS.SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE.THOMAS LAWRENCE, the youngestof sixteen children, was born inBristol, on the 4th of May, 17C9. Hisfather had formerly been an attorney,but, a short time after the birth of thesubject of our memoir, appears to havekept the Black Bear Inn, at Devises.Thomas was taught little more than toread and write at a school, near Bristol,to which he was sent at the age of sixyears ; and though he subsequentlyreceived lessons from a dissenting clergyman,obtained, altogether, but ashallow education. Such was his skill.however, in taking likenesses, andspeaking passages of poetry, that visitorscame to the Black Bear, forthe express purpose of seeing the sonof the landlord, who used to introducehim with, " Gentlemen, herehe is ; will you have him recite fromthe poets, or take your portraits?"Among others, Garrick, Prince Hare,and Mrs. Siddons, admired his talentsfor recitation ; and several acknowledgedjudges of art spreading abroada report of his skill in drawing, hebegan to be considered a kind of prodigy,and a portrait of him wasengraved by Sherwin. At this time hewas only in his eighth year, and thesole assistance his taste had receivedwas in a visit to some of the neighbouringpicture galleries. At CobhamHouse he was lost during the tour ofthe apartments : when discovered, hewas standing opposite a picture byRubens, and sighed, as he quitted thespot, " Ah ! I shall never be able topaint like that!" This and others,however, he attempted to imitate ; and,if the judgment of Daines Barringtonis to be relied on, with great success.This boy," he writes, in February,1780, " is now nearly ten years and ahalf old ; but at the age of nine,without the least instruction from anyone,he was capable of copying historicalpictures in a masterly style, andalso succeeded amazingly in compositionsof his own, particularly that ofPeter denying Christ. In about sevenminutes, he scarcely ever failed ofdrawing a strong likeness of any personpresent, which had generally muchfreedom and grace, if the subjectpermitted. He is likewise an excellentreader of blank verse, and will immediatelyconvince any one that he bothunderstands and feels the striking passagesof Milton and Shakspeare."In the year above-mentioned, youngLawrence had removed with his latherto Oxford, where he is said to havebeen employed by all the learned ofthe university, and the wealthy andbeautiful of its neighbourhood. FromOxford he proceeded to Bath, where arapid increase of fame and practiceenabled him to raise his prices from aguinea to a guinea and a halt. A portraitwhich he drew of Mrs. Siddons, asZara, was particularly admired ; and heatlength, began to* be considered adawning genius, rather than a prematureprodigy. His inclination for the stagewas now checked by his father, who concerteda meeting, at which Bernard thecomedian and others received a displayof young Lawrence's abilities with suchcoldness, that he was induced to resignall thoughts of the sock and buskin.It was not until his seventeenth year,that Lawrence began to paint in oil,and one of his earliest pictures, in thismaterial, was a Christ bearing a Cross,nearly eight feet high. This style ofcomposition was not suited to hisgenius ; \\isforte was decidedly portrait,and of his qualifications for success, inthis branch of painting, no one seemsto have formed a higher, and, perhaps,more just, estimate than himself. Inone of his letters to his mother, aboutthis time, he writes, " I shall now saywhat does not proceed from vanity ;nor is it an impulse of the moment ; butwhat from my judgment I can warrant.Though Mr. Prince Hare'sstudies have been great, my paintingsare better than any I have seen fromhis pencil. To any but my own familyI certainly should not say this; but,excepting Sir Joshua, for the paintingof a head, I would risk my reputationwith any painter in London." HitherSIR THOMAS LAWRENCE.he came, in 1787, and, taking apartmentsin Leicester Fields, opened anexhibition of his works. In the sameyear, he removed his studio to JermynStreet; hired a house tor himself andfamily, in Duke Streets. James's; and,on the 13th of September, became astudent of the Academy. The foundationof his fame, in the metropolis, issaid to have been his portrait of MissFarren, afterwards Countess of Derby,notwithstanding the apparent improprietyof naked arms, with a wintercloak and muff, which the figure ofthe actress exhibited. This picture washung as a pendant to Sir Joshua Reynolds's whole length of Mrs. Billington,as St. Cecilia; and, at the privateexhibition, Sir Joshua is said to havetaken our artist by the hand, observing,You have already achieved a masterpiece,and the world will naturally lookto you to perfect that which I (pointingto his own picture) have endeavouredto improve." But, looking to Lawrence's,he added, with a smile, " 1 am not surebut you have deserved the prize."The graceful manners and pleasingaddress of Lawrence contributed notalittle to his success, though he is said,in the early part of his career, to havedisplayed an air of offensive affectationin company. Fuseli, with whom hespent much of his leisure, tells us, thathe used to recite passages from Milton,with a softness of voice, and gentlenessof manner, " very much like Belial, butdeucedly unlike Beelzebub." Howeverthis may be, admiration and patronageof his abilities daily extended, and, in1788, he was employed to paint portraitsof the queen and the PrincessAmelia. In 1791, he was elected, atthe request of George the Third, asupplemental associate of the RoyalAcademy; and, in 1792, succeededReynolds as his majesty's painterin ordinary. He now removed tosplendid apartments in Old Bond Street,and appointed his friend Farington hissecretary, with an allowance of 2Q perweek for domestic outlay, having previouslyundertaken to pay his parents300 a-year, besides defraying manyof his father's losses through unfortunatespeculations. This, coupled withhis profuse liberality and utter want ofeconomy, now involved him, notwithstandingthe very considerable profitswhich he derived from his profession,in pecuniary difficulties. It was a sayingof his own, at a late period of hiscareer, that " he began life wrongly, byspending more money than he earned ;thus incurring debts for which he hadbeen paying heavy interest."His exhibitions at the Academy, ofwhich he was admitted a member onthe 4th of December, 1795, called forthpraises and censures equally extravagant.Some compared him to MichaelAngelo, and exclaimed " A secondRaffaelle!" whilst others denounced himwith all the bitterness of rivalship, andwith all the virulence' of criticism.Antony Pasquin, whose real name wasWilliams, made him the particular objectof his attacks; and when Lawrence'spicture of Satan calling to his Legionsappeared, in 1797, declared that Satanmight be mistaken for a sign of TheSpread Eagle, and was so coloured asto convey the idea of a mad sugar-bakerdancing naked in the conflagration ofhis own treacle." Lawrence himselftells us, that his picture answered hissecret motives in attempting it " hissuccess in portraits would no longer bethoughtaccident or fortune." Criticism,however, whether just or unjust, had,at this time, little effect upon the popularityof our artist. The eminent inrank, beauty, fashion, and literature,continued to employ his hand, andmany, finding he could flatter with histongue as well as his pencil, eagerlyinvited his acquaintance, and freelyadmitted him to their domestic circles.Thus encouraged and admired, he involuntarilyacquired a habit of conversingwith his female acquaintance inamore engaging manner than was eitherconsistent with his own feelings, orwith a proper regard for those of others.But a more serious charge than that ofgallantry was at length brought againsthim, in consequence of his intimacywith the Princess of Wales, during herresidence at Blockhead. The commissionerswho were appointed, in1806, to inquire into the accusation,completely exculpated him ; but notcontent with this, he made oath beforea magistrate that his visits arose fromfriendship, and were platonic and pure.The circumstance, however, is said tohave lessened the number of his femalesitters for some years, though that ofPAINTERS.his male continued to increase, including,among others, the present EarlGrey, Pitt, Canning, Castlereagh, &c.In 1814, he visited Paris, whence hewas soon recalled, by the Prince Regent,to paint the portraits of such of theallied sovereigns as were in London atthat time ; and for these performances,he was, on the 22nd of April, 1815,honoured with knighthood. In 1817,he was invited to Claremont, to takethe portrait of the Princess Charlotte ;and, shortly afterwards, visited the continentfor the purpose of painting likenessesof the principal sovereigns, forthe gallery at Windsor. He also passedsome time at Rome, where he executedportraits of the Pope, Cardinal Gonsalvi,&c., and finished one he had begun inLondon, of Canova, said to be the finestof all his performances. On his returnto England, in March, 1820, he waselected to the chair of the Royal Academy,vacant by the death of West; onwhich occasion the king presented himwith a gold chain and medal of himself.The remaining years of SirThomas's life were devoted to his profession,and he used the brush tillwithin a few days of his death, whichoccurred at his house in Russell Square,on the 7th of January, 1830. He wasburied in St. Paul's Cathedral, and hisfuneral was attended by several of thenobility, the whole members of theRoyal Academy, and the carriages ofthe lord mayor and sheriffs. A fewdays previously to his decease, he hadbeen made a knight of the Frenchorder of the Legion of Honour, and hewas also LL. D., F. R. S., and a memberof the Academies of America, Florence,Venice, Turin, Bologna, and Vienna.Sir Thomas Lawrence was five feetnine inches high ; he had a well-shapedbody, an open and engaging countenance,a bold but finely-turned head,and a person altogether engaging. Hiseyes were peculiarly brilliant ; he hada melodious voice, and a winningsmile; and so little ungraceful was hisheartiest laughter considered, that someonesaid " his mirth might be set tomusic." He conversed with ease andaffability, but, except amongst his mostintimate friends, not always withoutaffectation and reserve. His mannerswere admitted, by George the Fourth,to be those of the high bred gentleman ;but notwithstanding this authority intheir favour, they appear to us to havesavoured somewhat of the petit maitre.Amid all his generosity and profusion,of which numerous instances are told,he exhibited traits of an opposite character.His house was meanly furnished;he seldom gave parties; wasscrupulous in exacting payment fromthose who borrowed his portraits to beengraved from ; and, " in truth," saysAllan Cunningham, " he was found bybooksellers and engravers to be, withallhis courtesy, extremely skilful inthe ancient art of bargain-making, andrather hard to deal with, for all hissoftness of speech." Under these circumstances,it is difficult to account forthe manner in which he dissipated theimmense sums of money which he receivedin the course of his unprecedentedlysuccessful and profitable career. Hehas himself denied that he was eitherextravagant or prodigal in the use ofmoney, and yet 'he was sometimeswithout sufficient to procure a day'smaintenance for his establishment.Upon the whole, therefore, the state ofembarrassment, in which he lived anddied, must be attributed to his involvementin early life on account ofhis lather ; the large sums laid out byhim in the purchase of sketches andpaintings of the old masters ; and to anindiscriminate bounty, which renderedhim incapable of keeping a shilling inhis purse, for which any one became asupplicant. He was reported, in private,to be a good actor and a tolerablepoet, and would sometimes indulge hissitters with a specimen of his abilitiesin each of these characters. Althoughhe died a bachelor, he professed attachments,real or imaginary ; but thereis reason to suppose, as one of his femaleacquaintances said, that " all hislove lay in talking." A story is told ofhis making an offer of marriage to thetwo daughters of Mrs. Siddons, andthat one of them, in consequence of hisdeceit, died of a broken heart. Thathe acted dishonourably on this occasion,has been admitted by those who givecredence to a modified statement of theabove circumstances; but they have beendenied altogether by some, though uponno other foundation than the fact ofLawrence's subsequent friendship withthe Kemble familyWILLIAM OWEN,As an artist, Sir Thomas Lawrencetanks among the first that this countryhas produced, and has justly been denominatedthe English Titian. WhenReynolds saw his earliest portraits, hesaid, " this young man has begun at apoint of excellence where I left off;"and West remarked of him, " he is notamere portrait painter ; he has invention,taste, rich colouring, and apower of execution' truly wonderful."Fuseli used to designate him as a mereface-painter ;" but, with a passionateoath, declared, that the eyes of hisportraits rivalled those of Titian. Lawrenceis undoubtedly little inferior toReynolds ; and, considering the advantagesderived by the latter in hisstudies abroad, may be said to havedeveloped, at least, equal genius. Inexpression and" colouring, he is surpassedby his predecessor ; but in thefreedom and elegance of his attitudes,and in all those minute and delicatetouches which nature asks from art,Lawrence is without a rival. His style,however, partakes, upon the whole,somewhat too much of the frippery andglitter of the modern Italian and Frenchschools ; and, with reference to his portraits,it has been justly said of him,His men are courtiers; his women,the slaves of fashion, glittering withjewels and meretricious ornaments,inhabitants of the emblazoned and exclusive boudoir; hischildren, the heirs of coronets and titles,the tools and pupils of the dancingmaster." In the course of his professionalcareer, he exhibited upwardsof three hundred portraits, and not oneof them can be justly stigmatized ascommon-place. Among his most celebratedportraits may be mentioned. Mrs.Siddons, Earl of Aberdeen, Blucher,the Marchioness of Stafford;, George theFourth, Miss Croaker, Lady Blessings,the Countess Gower and her child,Lady Georgian Agar Ellis and herchild, Lord Durham, Duke of Wellington,Henry Brougham, Curran, andthe poets Campbell, Moore, andSouthey. His Lady Lyndhurst andLady Salisbury are among the fewfailures which he made. A portrait ofhimself should not be omitted, whichwas sold, after his death, for fourhundred and seventy guineas. Hepainted few fancy pictures, but such aslie executed were much admired : hisJohn Kemble, as Hamlet, and a groupof the Baring family, are two of thebest pieces that have come from hiseasel. Sir Thomas painted standing,and was an enthusiast in his art, yethe would sometimes lay down hispencil to laugh or weep over a book,which he would occasionally requesthis sitters to read, lie took more painswith his portraits than has been generallysupposed, and many of them hewould allow no one but himself totouch, notwithstanding the assertionthat he generally trusted inferior handswith his back grounds. He is said tohave painted, without ceasing, on oneoccasion, for thirty-seven hours. Hewas engaged on the portrait of LordThurlow, and began at seven in themorning, painted all day and all night,and all next day till eleven in the followingnight.WILLIAM OWEN.WILLIAM OWEN, the son of abookseller, was born at Ludlow, inShropshire, in the year 1769. He waseducated at the grammar-school of hisnative town, and developed a taste forart, by drawing sketches of the sceneryround Ludlow, which attracted the attentionof the celebrated scholar, PayneKnight. By the advice of this gentleman,Owen was sent to London, at theage of seventeen, and placed under thecare of Catton, of the Royal Academy.It has, indeed, been said, that PayneKnight first discovered Owen in thecondition of a coach painter ; but thismistake arose, probably, from the factthat Catton was once a coach painter,though he had ceased to be so longbefore the period at which Owen becamehis pupil. Payne Knight's patronageof the subject of our memoirterminated upon his arrival in London ;PAINTERSa capriciousness, it is said, not veryunusual on the part of Mr. Knight.Nothing is said, by Owen's biographer,of the progress which he made underCatton ; concerning this portion of hislife, we are only told, by Allan Cunningham,that an exquisite copy of thePermit of Reynolds obtained the painterthe friendship of the president, and theadvantage of his instruction.In 1792, he exhibited, at SomersetHouse, the portrait of a gentleman, anda view of Bedford Bridge, Shropshire,which were received as favourablespecimens of his abilities. In the followingyear, he exhibited seven portraits; but, as no names were attachedto them, it does not appear whetherrank or fashion had yet condescendedto patronise iii. Seme fancy pictures,which he exhibited in 1796 "and 1797,obtained great applause ; particularly hisStudy of a Boy, Venus, a sketch, andThe Bacchante. In the latter year, healso considerably increased his risingfame as a portrait painter, by the portraitsof two sisters, named Leaf, theeldest of whom he, soon after, married.This step, and the loss of a large sum,about the same time, as surety for afriend, stimulated him to additional exertion,and made him anxiously look forsitters. He was fortunate in obtainingan accession ; and, in 1798, was able toexhibit no less than ten portraits, amongwhich were, the Lord Chancellor, afamily picture of Lady Hardwicke andLord" Boston, Lady Strange, anda very beautiful picture, a CottageChild, from Nature. The portrait ofWilliam Pitt, which he painted aboutthis time, fixed his fame and insuredhis future success. It was so muchadmired, and procured the introductionof the artist to so many distinguishedpersons, that he began to require amore extensive studio for the accommodationof his visitors and sitters,and, accordingly, removed to LeicesterSquare. " In his new studio," saysAllan Cunningham, " Owen carried onthe manufacture of portraits to a vastextent, during a period of twenty-sevenyears. Men of all ranks, and ladies ofall conditions, flocked to his easel.He rose early, wrought late; drew,painted, touched, finished, framed,packed ; and, when these were out ofthe house, fresh heads appeared. Themonotony was sometimes too much forhim. He has been known to turn aportrait from the easel, postpone thecoming of a dozen sitters, single outsome little happy theme, and, in thecourse of a week, clash it on the canvassin ail the truth and charm of natureembellished by art : this put him ingood-humour with himself and with hisdestiny ; and lucky was he who sat forhis portrait the next."On the 10th ,pf "February, 1306,Owen was made a member of the lto\alAcademy; and, in 1810, he \vas> appointedportrait painter to the Princeof Wales. His royal highness profferedto knight him, in 1813. butOwen declined the honour. In 1814,he proceeded, in company with Alcott,the landscape paint r, to Paris, for thepurpose of examining the splendidworks of art in the Louvre. Hisbusiness, at this time, was worth nearlyiC'3,000 a year, and his fame such as tosatisfy his most ardent expectations ;yet he used to complain that he hadbut few royal commissions, in comparisonwith Lawrence, Hoppner, andBeechey. " These fellows," he used tosay, "skim the cream, and leave me themilk." A friend, one day, consolinghim with Burns's lines,It's hardly in a body's powerTo keep at times from being sour,'lo see how things are sharedJust so," he replied ; " had Burnslived now, I would have painted hisportrait for writing these very words.Italy, I am sour, very sour, at timcj.Then Lawrence, with his low, sweetvoice, speaks of virtue and moral lovelinessto the king and queen, and theyorder more portraits; then Hoppner,whenever he seems at a loss for somethingto do, the prince, or some of hiswealthy companions, sit to him, andhelp him afterwards to sell the portrait;and then Beechey, he sits, with thefeathers of princesses fanning hisbrow ; and so they go on, and I gettheir leavings."He could not, however, complain ofa dearth of sitters for portraits; in thecourse of his career, he exhibited nearlytwo hundred, to say nothing of thenumber he painted which never metthe public eye. Those which attractedmost attention were, the Duchess ofSIR MARTIN ARCHER SHEE.Buccleugh, Cyril Jackson, Lord Grenville.Sir Victory Gibbs, the Bishop ofDurham, and the Marquess of Stafford.His reputation, however, had been asmuch, or perhaps more, enhanced bysome of his fancy pictures. Amongthese may be mentioned, The Beggar'sDaughter of Retinal Green, TheSleeping Girl, The School Mistress,The Beggars, The Girl at the Spring,Peasants resting by the Road Side, ACupid, The Fortune Teller and theLady, The Cottage Door, The Childrenin the Wood, The Boy and Kitten,and Warden Castle, Flintshire. Allof the above attracted universal admiration,at the time of their exhibition,and most of them had the additionalhonour of critical eulogy. After havingexpatiated on the beauties of his Peasantsresting by the Road Side, a writerof the day observes, " there is scarcelya painter in the Academy who canvie with this excellent artist in the forcewith which he relieves his objects,while he preserves the mellowness andharmony of his colouring and effect.Sir Joshua appears to revive in thispupil of nature. He, indeed, has morefirmness and precision of outline anddrawing than that famous painter, andequally captivates by his faithful delineationsof the lowly objects of humblelife." This is, upon the whole, just ;but, though Reynolds was but an indifferentdraughtsman, he excelledOwen both in grace of posture andharmony of colour.Though the studio of Owen was inLeicester Square, his family resided inArabella Row, Pimlico, till 1818, inwhich year he removed to BretonStreet. A paralytic attack, soon after,deprived him of the power of painting,and reduced him to such a state, that,for the last five years of his life, hecould only take exercise by beingwheeled from one room to another. Hisdeath, however, near as it was at hand,happened prematurely ; through themistake of a chemist, he was given adose of laudanum, instead of an aperientdraught, and died, in consequence, onthe llth of February, 1825.The private character of Owen waskind, hospitable, and good-humoured ;he possessed a vigorous mind, andspoke his thoughts openly and unreservedly; was manly, generous, andcourageous. When at school, he wasseverely stabbed, by one of his companions,in the thigh ; but had thefortitude to remain silent, in order tosave the perpetrator of the wound frompunishment. He was, in some respects,the very opposite of Lawrence, and didnot fail to express his dislike of themanners of that painter. Going to aparty, one evening, where a lady, ofblue-stocking repute in the world ofart, was present, he heard her asksome one, as he entered the room,Who is that ?" " It is Owen, madam."Owen, sir ! and who is Owen ?" " Oh !the new artist, madam, the famouspainter." "Owen and painter!" shearticulated, in a sort of mutter ; " Inever heard of him before!" Uponhearing which, Owen exclaimed, " Afemale Lawrence, by Jupiter!" andretired to the other end of the room.Of his merits, as an artist, we havelittle more to say ; to sufficient depth ofcolour, and power of light and shade,he joined freedom and boldness of style,and a lightness and elegance of touch,which a more laboured hand would,probably, have failed in attaining.SIR MARTIN ARCHER SHEE.THIS accomplished artist is the son ofMartin Shee, Esq., and was born atDublin, on the 23rd of December, 1770.His mother was the eldest daughterand eventually co-heiress of FrancisArcher, Esq., of the same city, and byboth parents he is honourably descended; belonging, on his father's side,to a branch of the ancient Milesianfamily of O'Shee, now represented bySir George Shee, Bart., of Dunmore,in Galway, and which claims descentfrom one of the kings of Minister, inthe third century. The subject of ourmemoir married, in his twenty-eighthyear, Mary, eldest daughter of JameslogPAINTERS.Power, Esq., of Youghall, in the countyof Cork ; and notwithstanding thisdomestic tie, which Sir Joshua Reynoldsconsidered so fatal to the reputation ofa young artist, has risen, by his talents,to a situation once filled by Sir Joshuahimself. He discovered a strong inclinationfor the fine arts at an earlyage, and obtained from the DublinSociety's Academy, when only twelveyears old, the three first medals fordrawings of figures, landscapes, andflowers. He acquired the first rudimentsof his art under Mr. Francis RobertWest, an eminent draughtsman ; and,before leaving Dublin, had acquiredgreat reputation by his portraits incrayons. He came to England inJune, 1788, and was introduced to thenotice of Sir Joshua Reynolds, andother distinguished persons, by the celebratedEdmund Burke. " I was, atthat time," says a writer in The SomersetHouse Gazette, " making a drawingin the plaster academy, SomersetHouse, and perfectly recollect the firstevening that Mr. Shee joined the studentsthere. He selected the figure ofthe Discobolus for his probationaryexercise, to procure a permanent student'sticket. I need not say that heobtained it, for it was acknowledged tobe one of the best copies that has yetbeen seen of that fine figure. I furtherremember that Mr. Wilton, the thenkeeper of the Royal Academy, was sopleased with the performance, that heexpressed a wish to retain it, and Mr.Shee, with that politeness which markedhis early career, presented it to theworthy old gentleman."Mr. Shee was elected an associate ofthe Royal Academy in 1798, and aroyal academician in 1800, in whichyear, he published a work entitled Elementsof Art, a poem, in six cantos,with notes and a preface, including strictureson the state of arts, criticisms, andpublic taste. In 1802, he visited Paris,where he was introduced to Buonaparte,and treated with marked attention byseveral members of the French Institute.In 1804, appeared his Rhymes onArt, or the Remonstrance of a Painter ;in 1809, his Letter to the President andDirectors of the British Institution,containing the outlines of a plan forthe encouragement of historical painting;in 1813, his Commemoration ofReynolds, a poem ; and, in 1824, histragedy of Alasco. This last is hismost celebrated literary performance,and created some sensation at the timeof publication, independently of itsmerits, in consequence of the licenser'srefusal to allow its being brought outupon the stage. Perhaps, after all,however, it is a better piece for thecloset ; being deficient in incident andvariety, though possessing many ofthe highest requisites of poetry. Itmay not be uninteresting to transcribesome of the passages which offendedMr. Colman ; they are certainly forcible,and the strength of them does not lieonly in the alliterations.Tyrants, proud lord, are never safe, nor should beThe ground is mined beneath them as they treadHaunted by plots, cabals, conspiracies,Their lives are long convulsions, and they shake,Surrounded by their guards and garrisons.But shall I reverence pride, and lust, and rapine .'No '. When oppression stains the robe of state.And power's a whip of scorpions in the handsOf heartless knaves, to lash th'o'erburtheued backOf honest industry, the loyal bloodWill turn to bitterest gall, and th'o'ercharged heartExplode in execration !His Rhymes on Art, and Commemorationof Reynolds, were very favourablyreceived, and contain linesequally meritorious for their just andliberal' sentiments and poetical conception.The Rhymes on Art not onlyabound in well-directed satire, butcompress, in a small compass, a greatportion of generally interesting matterand information.On the death of Sir Thomas Lawrence,in January, 1S30, Mr. Shee waselected his successor in the president'schair at the Royal Academy, and wasshortly afterwards knighted. Thischoice has, on the whole, given greatsatisfaction ; though some have objectedto its falling upon any other than ahistorical painter, forgetting what highpowers may be developed in portrait,and that something more than a mereartist is requisite for the station to whichSir Martin Archer Shee has been called.The president of the Royal Academy,it has been properly observed, shouldbe a person whose manners, as well ashis talents, qualify him to be a mediumbetween the court, the aristocracy, andthe profession. Sir Martin is both agentleman and an artist, and has the ,WILLIAM ARM FIELD HOBDAY.interest of everything connected withhis profession at heart.Among his principal pictures are : aportrait of his present majesty, whenDuke of Clarence, for the Town Hallof Liverpool ; the Earl of Sheffield, forthe province of New Brunswick ; GeneralSir John Keene, for Jamaica ; thelate Sir Thomas Munro, for Madras ;Sir Thomas Strange, for ChristchurchCollege, Oxford ; the Right HonourableThomas Spring Rice, for the Chamberof Commerce, at Limerick ; the lateMarquess of Hastings ; the late Dukeof Leinster; the Marquess Wellesley;General Sir Hussy Vivian ; theHonourable Charles Wynne, &c.The last of these is one of his finestperformances ; but in all of them he hasdisplayed great powers of pencil, anda rare combination of labour in minutiaewith breadth of effect in composition.His drawing is correct and vigorous,his colouring judicious and harmonious,and all his works may be said to bearthe stamp of superior mind and education.Sir Martin has the eloquence andanimation peculiar to many others ofhis gifted countrymen, but in him fancyis tempered by judgment and information.His zeal for the improvement ofthe fine arts we have before alluded to ;he considers them the vehicle of civilization; and, not more humorously thanjustly, attributes their languishing state,in the present utilitarian age, to theirinability to advance on a rail-road, or tobe worked by steam.WILLIAM Afield HOBDAY.WILLIAM Afield HOBDAYwas the son of a Birmingham-waremanufacturer, and born in that city,in the year 1771. When very young,he was placed with William Barney,the engraver, in London, who agreedto teach him drawing and painting, aswell as engraving. Being employed,however, more frequently with thegraver than the brush, he used to situp at nights to use the latter ; upon hismaster's discovery of which, a disagreementtook place between them,and Hobday left Barney before the expirationof his time. The manner inwhich the former became a student ofthe Royal Academy is characteristicand curious. Taking with him a portfolioof drawings, he knocked at thedoor of the Academy, and asked for thekeeper. Being introduced to Carling,who, at that time, filled the situation,he presented him the Discobolus, andimmediately obtained his student'sticket ; and, not long after, he wasadmitted to the Life Academy, wherehe studied assiduously.On leaving Barney, the subject of ourmemoir commenced portrait painter inwater-colours, in small and miniatures,in Charles Street, Middlesex Hospital.Success at once attended him ; numbersof the nobility and gentry became hissitters ; and, from such high connexion,and the genius he developed in hisearly paintings, he bade fair to becomeone of the most eminent artists of hisday. " He thus lived," says his biographer," amidst all that was brilliant andfascinating in society. Young, handsome,and engaging, his painting becamemore an amusement than a study,and he passed his time in a whirl offashion and revelry." This had an injuriouseffect upon his enthusiasm forart ; it grew less and less ; and, as ifto confirm the maxim of Sir JoshuaReynolds, that an artist is a ruinedman if he marries, he married. Hisambition, however, was not all at oncedamped ; and, on becoming a candidatefor the gold medal of the Academy, hemade such laudable exertions to obtainit, that Shee, who was also a competitor,said he should withdraw his ownperformance, if Hobday meant to sendin his picture. Hobday expressed hisintention to do so ; but being, unfortunately,called off to Birmingham, atthe moment, in consequence of thedangerous illness of his father, he wasunable to complete it in time, and Sheereceived the gold medal. He oftenalluded to this disappointment, aschecking all his future efforts in historicalcomposition ; and, indeed, fromPAINTERSthis time, be sank into a mere portraitpainter. The subject of the picture, inthe present case, was Coriolanus ; and,as executed by Hobday, showed considerablepowers of composition, gooddrawing, and no ordinary pretensionsto colour.From Charles Street, he removedto Holies Street, Cavendish Square,where his mode of living was so expensive,that, notwithstanding his largeprofits, and the liberal supplies whichhe continued to receive from his father,he was soon involved in difficulties.Still, however," says his biographer,he was not a man who would everretrograde, even if he saw before himan unfathomable yawning abyss ofmisery and destruction ; thus, deeperand deeper, incumbrances thickenedround him ; still forward !' continuedto be his cry." In the midstof his extravagant career, his fatherpaid him a visit ; and, being a plain,homely, country tradesman, almost,for a moment, lost his senses atthe costliness which he beheld aroundhim. Hobday, to hide the magnificenceof the chairs and settees, had coveredthem with flannel ; but his father, suspectinghis motives, took the coveringoff one of them, and discovered a displayof luxury and lavishness beyondall that he had yet seen. He expressedhis regret at such prodigality, andtelling his son that, in future, he mustexpect nothing more than the extent ofthe share which he intended to leavehim, in common with his brother, returnedto Birmingham. He had notbeen long gone before Hobday, recklessof consequences, plunged into freshschemes of extravagance. He commencedextensive alterations in hishouse, and built a most superb galleryand painting room, as if determined, atleast in magnificence, to eclipse hisbrother artists.For some years, it had been his customto pay an annual visit to Bath andBristol, and, in 1804, he went there asusual. The number of military men,who were, at that time, embarking, atthe latter place, for the seat of war,caused Hobday to be much employedin taking portraits and miniatures ofofficers ; and obtaining also numeroussitters among tha residents in the townand neighbourhood, he determined tosettle there himself. He, in consequence,sold his house, in Holies Street,at an immense loss, and removed toBristol, where he remained about fourteenyears, equally fortunate and extravagant.In his successful seasons,he seldom had less than six sitters aday ; his price for three-quarters beingtwenty guineas, and for a miniatureten ; yet such were his difficulties, thatat the end of the period above mentioned,he left Bristol, in the hope ofretrieving himself in London. He i - e-turned to the metropolis, in the year1817, and took, successively, WinchesterHouse, Broad Street, City, anda large house in Pall Mail, upon theoccupation of which he entered in 1822.But, though he obtained from Mr.Rothschild a thousand guineas for paintinga family picture, his reputation haddeclined ; and he was obliged to haverecourse to speculations, to procure theemoluments which his pencil nowfailed to bring him. He purchased, in1826, an exhibition, of the cosmoramicnature, called The Poecilirama ; andsold it, with all the disadvantages of afailure, in about two years afterwards.He next opened a gallery of picturesfor exhibition, and sale on commission ;but this scheme also failed, and endedin his being made a bankrupt, in 1829.The sale of his property did not yieldsufficient to allow of a dividend ; and,finding all hopes of retrieving his situationdestroyed, he returned, broken inhealth and spirits, to the residence of afriend, where he now lives in privacy;a singular example of early success inan artist, and a memorable one of thedisgraceful termination which awaitsimprudent genius, as well when tooreadily, as when too tardily encouraged.In person, Mr. Hobday is describedas short in stature, stout built, and ofa fine florid complexion, with an intelligentforehead, but rather heavyblue eyes. His manners, in his happiermoments, were extremely fascinating ;and it is some palliation of his extravagantcareer, that, in the course ofit, he was generous as well as prodigal.As an artist, his fame will be buttransient ; for, though he possessed abilitiesworthy of every cultivation, andindicating 'high promise, the efforts ofhis genius yielded too soon to the tideof success ; and he thus forfeited thatLDWAKI) BIRD.alliance with posterity, which, amid thestruggles of obscurity and indigence, hemight, perhaps, have insured.The best picture which Hobday everpainted is known as The Hermit ofTong, an individual, passing under thename of Carolus, who lived on the estateof Colonel Durant, in Staffordshire ; awork, said to be distinguished by a finesubdued brilliancy in the flesh, depthand transparency in the shadows, andgreat harmony of colouring in thewhole. Among his other pictures, wemay mention a full length portrait ofMiss Biggs, as Cora; a full length ofRichard" Reynolds, the Quaker andphilanthropist ; portraits of two childrenof Captain Ash worth ; portrait of Mrs.Farquharson, in which was a spaniel,excellently painted ; and a portrait ofDr. Jenner. A writer, in Arnold'sLibrary of the Fine Arts, says of Hobday'sstyle : " his manner was spirited,well drawn, and generally pleasing;but it would not bear examination : hewanted the easy race of nature andeye for colour ; while he preserved theresemblance, the character of the individualwas not marked ; it lackedelevation of feeling, which is the poetryof the art. His small portraits inwater-colours, and miniatures, weretastefully composed, and delicatelypainted ; these, certainly, are far preferableto his paintings in oil. It was hispractice, in water-colours, to make out,at first, the features in blue, with repetitionsof small lines, like miniaturepainting, afterwards heightened withcarmine and light red."EDWARD BIRD.EDWARD BIRD, the son of a carpenter,was born at Wolverhampton,on the 12th of April, 1772. He is saidto have sketched as early as his fourthyear; and, in his fourteenth, was apprenticedto a maker of tea-trays, atBirmingham. He embellished thesearticles with very superior taste andskill ; in proof of which the followinganecdote is told. When travelling,some years afterwards, in France, withseveral companions, a tea-tray becamethe subject of admiration, off whichthe party took tea, at Boulogne. All,excepting the subject of our memoir,expressed their astonishment at findingsuch trays in France, when Bird said'It was not made here ; it was madein Birmingham, for I painted it." Onthe expiration of his indentures, herefused some advantageous offers tocontinue in the trade he had practised ;and, feeling himself qualified for a higherbranch of art, he removed to Bristol,and opened a drawing school. In hisintervals of leisure, he made severalsketches and designs; and, at length,sent two pictures to the Bath exhibition,which were admired, and speedilypurchased at the price of thirty guineaseach. The subjects of them were, TheInterior of a Volunteer's Cottage, andClowns dancing in an Alehouse. Thefirst picture, however, which made hisname known, was one called GoodNews. This consisted of a groupe at analehouse. It was succeeded by TheChoristers rehearsing, and The Will ;the first of which was purchased by thePrince Regent, and the latter by theMarquess of Hastings. About this time,being introduced to West, the presidentof the Royal Academy, Bird consultedhim as to the propriety of placing hisname on the list of candidates for theassociateship. West replied, " If youhave no interest, do not put down yourname, unless you have sufficient philosophyto bear a rejection. At thesame time, your talent is worthy of thehonour you seek." Bird, however,though he had no interest, put downhis name upon the list, and, to thehonour of the Academy, was electedan associate. He was, shortly afterwards,admitted a member of theRoyal Academy ; and, about the sametime, he produced his Chevy Chase,generally considered the best of hisperformances. It was purchased, bythe Marquess of Stafford, for threehundred guineas ; and the same noblemangave five hundred for Bird's Deathof Eli, which the artist is said to havePAINTERS,painted for 100, on a commission fromthree gentlemen of Bristol. The BritishInstitution thought so highly of thiswork, that they presented Bird withtheir premium, amounting to threehundred guineas.In 1813, he was introduced to thePrincess Charlotte, who appointed himher painter, and said of him to Mr.Murphy, by whom he was introduced,Mr. Bird is a very well-bred man,he has a natural politeness about him."He had hitherto confined his pencil toludicrous and humble subjects, such asThe Gipsey Boy, The Young Recruit,Game at Put, The Village Politicians,&c. ; but, after a few visits to London,he resolved to try historical composition.He, accordingly, produced TheBurning of Ridley and Latimer, TheFortitude of Job, The Death of Sophia,and several pieces from Scripture ; buthis reputation gained little or nothingby the attempt. The subject of his lastpicture was The Embarkation of Louisthe Eighteenth for Paris, in which hedesigned to introduce the likenesses ofcertain important personages politicallyconnected with the events of the period.The court of the French king gavehim all the assistance he asked, but hisapplication to the titled personages ofhis own country was, for the most part,received with such coldness or neglect,that he was unable to complete hispicture. His death, which is said tohave been hastened by this disappointment,took place at Bristol, on the 2ndof November, 1819.Bird was somewhat below the middlesize; he had a look of intelligence andsimplicity, expressive eyes, and a particularlypleasing smile. Liberality andbenevolence were conspicuous featuresin his character, which was also adornedby all the quiet virtues of domesticlife. As an artist, he was only great inhis paintings of humble life ; in these,his figures are the very reflections ofnature, notwithstanding the poeticfeeling he has contrived to infuse intothem. It was his practice to sketch,on the spot, any original looking personagethat caught his eye, and, afterwards,to fill it up from memory.A fascinating match girl, whom hemet in the streets of London, was oneof the many subjects that presentedthemselves to him in this manner.He painted her in three days, and soldthe work for thirty guineas. A writer,in Blackwood, says of this artistHe was naturally so amiable, that itwas long ere his irritability and sensitivenesshad any injurious effect uponhis mind. He was simple-hearted andmodest, but he had never any greatstrength of character; and it is from thatinfirmity, rather than any extraordinaryinnate vanity, that success, unexpectedsuccess, and the flattery of friends, weretoo much for him ; and, of late years,disease made sad havoc in every powerwithin him : the vanity, which, if notafterwards created, must have beendormant the greater part of his life, wasmade active, at the very time he was lessable to resist it. His circumstances, soout of keeping with his merits, so oftenheld up to his eye, then willing tobehold them, made him peevish. Yet,even in his very last days, sometimesall his amiableness would break out innatural lustre gentle, serene, and affectionate; and, as if ashamed of, andunequal, from debility, to a contraryconflict, I have often" seen him thenburst out into tears."THOMAS GIRTIN.JL HIS eminent artist, who has beentermed the Canaletti and Wilson ofwater-colours, and was only prevented,by premature death, from attainingthe highest rank in his profession,was born on the 18th of February, 1775.He drew at an early age ; but, to quotehis own words, " other boys, at tenortwelve, who amused themselves, oridled in the same way, drew quite aswill as himself." Girtin was, for sometime,a pupil of Naves, and, togetherwith Turner, and other young artists,formed one of the coterie" that met, oncertain evenings, at the house of Dr.Munro, to stuiiy from his celebratedcollection of drawings. In this mannerhe obtained an accuracy of eye andiTHOMAS GIRT IN.mastery of hand which soon fitted himto try his powers in drawing fromnature. He did not go far for his subjects; the ruins of the Savoy Palace,near Somerset House, and the shoresof Lambeth and Chelsea, were thespots in which he first made himselfa topographical draughtsman and a colourist.He afterwards visited the lakesof Cumberland, and some parts ofScotland and North Wales ; and, duringthis tour, painted the only two landscapesin oil, which he ever executed.On his return to London, the breadthand grand simplicity of his style, ledmany amateurs to take lessons of him ;thinking they could easily acquire whatappeared to have been easily achieved.In his twenty-third year, Girtinexhibited, in Castle Street, Leicesterquare, A Panoramic Picture of St.Paul's, and the buildings east andwe-st, as seen from the lofty roof of theAlbion Mills, then situated at the entranceof Blackfriars Bridge, on thesouth side of the Thames. This wasuniversally admired by all judges ofart, and may be considered the originalof that species of scenic representation,which Mr. Barker and others have sincebrought to such perfection. In 1802,he visited the continent, in hopes ofchecking the progress of a pulmonarycomplaint, brought on by an irregularcourse of living. He was married atthis time ; and, according to the testimonyof his surviving relations, hadcontracted more regular habits, at theperiod of his departure from England.His constitution was, however, too farimpaired, to be much benefited bychange of climate ; and he died, shortlyafter his return, on the 9th of November,in the year above-mentioned.As a painter, he appears to havebeen considered one of the greatestgeniuses of the age; but his habits andmanners, though he used to be calledHonest Tom Girtin," were not themost moral or respectable. A naturalshyness induced him to shun the companyof the well-bred, and he thusformed many unworthy companion-ships.He preferred taking his passagein a collier, when he was on his way tothe north ; and delighted in drinking,smoking, and jesting with the crew.When travelling by land, he always wentinto the kitchen of the inn for refreshment;and, like Morland, he generallytook sketches of the scenes he visited inthe course of his peregrinations.As an artist, Girtin has the merit, inconjunction with Sandby and Turner,of having given much of that importanceto the art of water-colour painting,which it has lately obtained in thiscountry. Turner and himself were thefirst who used the three primitivecolours in laying in the chlaro-scuro oftheir subjects"; a plan, which they subsequentlyimproved, by laying the localcolour of each object at once and thusproduced those rich and splendid compositionsthat almost vied, in generaleffect, with oil-colour paintings. Butof the merits of this artist we cannot,perhaps, give a better idea than byquoting the remarks of a writer in TheLibrary of the Fine Arts, relative tothe rise and progress of water-colourart He observes : " Before that newepoch in water-colour art, which originatedwith Girtin and Turner, theutmost that had been attempted withtransparent colour, just prepared, insubjects of romantic scenery, was therepresentation of distant mountains inathin vapour, and all the other largefeatures, advancing towards the foreground,in timid, undefined washes, ofsemi-aerial tint. Indeed, the most admiredworks of Cozens affected nothingmore than a grayish sort of cJiiaro-scurf, wrought into harmony bywashes, merely intimating, the hues ofnature. Girtin, restrained by none ofthe fancied capabilities of watercolours,at once struck out a daringstyle, determined to imitate what hesaw ; and thus, by the energies of hisoriginal genius, perceiving that certainoperations of the sun upon the cloudsthrew the vastness of a whole mountain,that occupied the entire distance, undera deep and solemn mass of gloom, hegave it in his picture accordingly ; andthereby clothed his composition withthat awful sublimity of effect whichstamped the scene with the majesty ofnature." To this we may add, that,notwithstanding the boldness andbreadth of execution, which characterizethe works of Girtin, he devotedmuch care and labour to his finelycoloured compositions, which were byno means the off-hand productionssome have imagined them to be.PAINTERS.JAMES Mallard WILLIAM TURNER.THIS eminent artist was born aboutthe year 1775, and, like Girtin, laid thefoundation of his future excellence bystudying the collection of Dr. Munro, acelebrated amateur in the art of watercolourdrawing. An honourable emulationexisted between himself andGirtin, and their productions are saidto have so much resembled each other,that it was difficult to mark the distinction.Turner had the most finishand detail, preserving, at the same time,the breadth and harmony of nature jhis early studies of trees combine almostevery excellence. Before heventured on the sublime and refinedstyle, in which he has of late yearssucceeded, he took care to make himselfperfectly acquainted with the commonerscenes of nature. By thussobering his imagination, he acquiredpowers that enabled him to take ahigher flight, and was laying thefoundation of that taste and judgmentwithout which genius degenerates intoobscurity or extravagance. Yet it mustbe confessed, that, of the latter, Turnerhas sometimes been guilty : of which hisRembrandt's Daughter, and his Jessica,may be adduced as instances ; thoughif either of these pictures were to beengraved, it has been observed, therewould not be a defect to be seen.Turner exhibits a poetic feeling inalmost every touch of his pencil, whilstthe ubiquity of his serpentine linescompletely substantiates the theory ofHogarth's line of beauty. His knowledgeand powers of light and shade,breadth, and chiaro-scurf, are the chiefcharacteristics of his style. In speakingof breadth, a critic observes, " Notonly does it signify a clear and gradualunion of shadows and half-tints, butthat every part of the picture shouldpresent a mass of broken colouring.This last expression may appear somethingvague ; we will enlarge upon it.If an artist will attentively look atany object in nature, for instance, alawn, he will not find it a mere massof green, but discover it agreeablybroken and diversified by a varietyof tints and tones of colour. It is,then, by the subtle union of such amass and variety of tints, that truebreadth can only be given ; and indoing so, no artist has carried this principleso approaching to perfection furtherthan Turner." His glaring colourshave been matter of attack by many,and he has also been charged withsacrificing fidelity to effect. This hehas undoubtedly done in some of hispictures, and it cannot be denied thathis colouring, at first sight, seems lessbrilliant than extravagant ; but it mustbe recollected, that the painter has thefuture in view as well as the present,and that he must allow something forabsorption and evanescence, especiallyin white and yellow, tints which arevery prevalent in the compositions ofTurner. His defects, however, are infinitelyoutweighed by his merits; andthough, perhaps, all will not agree withFuseli, in pronouncing him " the onlylandscape painter of genius in Europe,"yet, in Turner, the British school oflandscape may be said to have reachedits acme of excellence.It only remains for us to name someof his principal compositions. Some ofhis early oil paintings, in the collectionof Lord de Table, are very fine :among them may be mentioned one,composed entirely of figures, a blacksmith'sshop, with a butcher disputingabout the price charged for shoeing hispony. The arrangement and expressionin this picture are admirable. TheThames at Haddington is a compositionof great force and beauty ; the reflectionof the different objects in the waterhas a transparent and glassy effect, andnature is not outraged in the warm andglowing colouring which pervades thepiece. His Dutch Boats, in the possessionof the Marquess of Stafford, hasbeen pronounced superior to many ofVandevelde's pieces ; and his CalaisPier is another triumph of his pencil inthis style of painting. Some have gonethe length of saying that, in marineviews, Turner has wrested the palmfrom all competitors ; but with this, few,JOHN Jacksonsurely, vvill agree, who have seen theftrlfnirable sea pieces of Powell, an artistwho, though but recently deceased, hashud no biographer to commemorate hispoverty or his genius.Among Turner's most beautiful views,in another line, we may particularizeEton College, Kilgeiran Castle, Stonehenge,Watteau's Study, The Bridgeof Sighs, and a variety of Italian views,in which latter his powers are displayedin all their lustre. Of his abilities" inhistorical and classical composition, hehas given ample proof in various pictures,particularly his Vision of Medea ;Polyphemus; Shadrach, Mesech, andAbednego, in the fiery Furnace;and Ulysses and Polyphemus. In thelast, a critic has said, fairy land, withallits enchantments, its poetry, andunearthliness, seems realized. " In itscolouring, it is intensely beautiful andpoetic ; and for the display of the mostrefined taste and vivid imagination, itsurpasses even all that the painter hasever executed before or since. Someyears ago, Mr. Turner executed a seriesof engravings, called The Liber Studious,in imitation of Claude's Librodi Veritas, but, after a certain number ofimpressions had been taken, destroyedall the plates. The subject of ourmemoir was elected a member of theRoyal Academy in the year 1801.JOHN JACKSON.JOHN JACKSON, the son of a tailor,was born at Nottingham, in the NorthRiding of Yorkshire, on the 31st ofMay, 1778. Whilst at school, hesketched some tolerably good portraitsof his schoolfellows, which being shownto Lord Mulgrave, that nobleman expressedhis admiration, aid promisedto " keep the youth in mind." Hisfather, however, anxious to teach himsome trade, apprenticed him to hisown ; but young Jackson gave all hisleisure to drawing, and reading bookson art. He, at length, made such progresswith his pencil, that Sir GeorgeBeaumont undertook to introduce himto the world, bought up the remainderof his time, and offered him a residenceat his own house and 50 a-year, toenable him to pursue his studies inLondon. His proficiency in the metropoliswas rapid, and he was soonconsidered one of the best water-colourpainters of his day. His portraits inoil were, at first, less happy, but from1809 to 1816, they showed a gradualand decided improvement. In thelatter year, he was elected an associate,and, in the year 1817, a member,of the Royal Academy. In 1819, heset out for Rome, accompanied byChantrey ; and, on his arrival, took aportrait of Canova, one of the best ofhis performances. At first, the roughand rapid way in which he moved hishand about the canvass, excited almostthe sneers of the Italian artists, butwhen he placed his easel before thecelebrated Titian of the BorghesePlace, and copied, in four days, whatothers had failed to do in as manymouths, a general murmur admirationand surprise broke from them.Having been chosen a member of theAcademy of St. Luke, he left Rome,and proceeded, through Florence andVenice, to London, where his pictureof Canova was exhibited. It was receivedwith universal applause, andperhaps Chantrey was not the only onewho considered it " as one of the finestspecimens of true character and truecolour in British portraiture." Hisfame was largely increased, in 1823, bythe exhibition of his portrait of LadyDover, at which, says Allan Cunningham," 1 remember how manytriumphant fingers were pointed." Thesubject of our memoir has, we believe,amassed a tolerable fortune by his professionallabours, and is highly respectedboth by his professional brethren andfriends in general. In addition to theportraits before-mentioned, as paintedwith peculiar excellence, are heads ofLord Grosvenor, and I 7 layman, thesculptor. The latter was particularlyadmired ; at the dinner, given previouslyto the opening of the exhibition,of which it formed a part, SirPAINTERS.Thomas Lawrence is said to havepanegyrist the work, and to have pronouncedit " a great achievement of theEnglish school, and a picture, of whichVandyck might have felt proud to ownhimself the author."The genius of Jackson lies in fidelityof execution, and breadth and vigorousfreedom of colour; but, upon the whole,his pictures denote a correct, ratherthan a great, painter. lie has exhibitedno original subjects, his reputationhaving been obtained solely by hisportraits, which are as like as art canmake them but art unacquainted withthe poetry of nature. In person, Mr.Jackson is above the middle height, ofan agreeable countenance, and mildand reserved manners. He has beentwice married : his first wife was thedaughter of a jeweller ; his second, ofWard, the painter.GEORGE DA WE.GEORGE DA WE, the son of anengraver, was born in Brewer Street,Golden Square, London, on the 8;h ofFebruary, 1781. As early as his fourteenthyear, he published two plates inmezzo tinto, Mary, Queen of Scots, andElizabeth and St. John ; but althoughthese displayed to advantage his talentsin engraving, he relinquished that lineof art altogether on his coming of age.In the meantime, he had become astudent of the Royal Academy, wherehe studied with almost unprecedentedassiduity. He not only copied fromthe living models of the Academy, butattended public lectures on anatomy,and even occupied himself in dissectionsat home ; and such was his progress,that an eminent anatomist is said tohave pronounced him " more than halfa surgeon." Nor were his literarystudies neglected ; for though he wasdeficient in classical knowledge, heread deeply of moral and metaphysicalworks, and, in some way or other, acquiredthe modern languages, of whichhe subsequently spoke French, German,and Russian fluently. The lastengraving published by him was Bacon'sMonumental Groupe to the memory ofthe Marquess Corn wallis; a performancewhich, though not generally known,has been much admired.Mr. Dawe commenced portrait painterabout the year 1802, but it was in thehistorical department of his art that hegained his chief fame. The first, whichhe is known to have painted, wasAchilles frantic for the loss of Patroclus,a work which obtained the gold medal,and of such excellent design and powerfuleffect, that Fuseli declared it wasthe best ever offered to the Academyon a similar occasion. The next importantpicture which he exhibited atthe Academy, of which he was admittedan associate in 1809, was Naomi andher two daughters-inlaw, an admirableillustration of this most interestingScripture narrative. A scene fromCymbeline was his succeeding performance,of which the British Institutionthought so highly, that theypresented him with their highest premiumof two hundred guineas ; and heis said to have afterwards sold the picturefor the same sum, to Mr. T. Hope.This gentleman also purchased hisAndromache soliciting the Life of herSon, and gave him several commissionsfor family portraits, among which wemay mention a hall-length of Mrs.Hope with two of her children, and twowhole lengths of the lady singly. Hisreputation was still further increasedby his picture of The Negro and theBuffalo, which displayed to great advantagehis knowledge of anatomy, andobtained the first premium of the BritishInstitution. In 1811, he painted TheInfant Hercules strangling the Serpent,and a picture from Coleridge's Genevieve,a poem, requiring from the artista very refined imagination rind gracefultouch to do justice to its subject. Mr.Dawe succeeded ; and has conveyed tous,in this performance, the sentimentof one of the most beautiful and touchingpoems on the subject of love, ever,perhaps, composed. His last greatwork, exhibited at Somerset House,was, The Mother rescuing her ChildGEORGE Dare.from the Eagle's Nest, which excitedconsiderable interest, both on accountof the nature of the subject and itsintrinsic merits. The scenery of this pictureis a faithful representation of nature,and was selected by the artist duringa tour, made for the purpose, throughthe lakes of Cumberland and the highlandsof Scotland. This performancebrought an accession to his purse aswell as to his fame ; being purchased ata liberal price, by the Earl of Cassius.The Demoniac, a composition in thesame class with those above, should,perhaps, be mentioned in this place ;it was presented by Mr. Dawe on hisbeing elected an academician, in 1814,and now adorns the council-room of theRoyal" Academy.Hitherto we have only mentionedMr. Dawe's productions in the higherclass of art, but have also to speak ofhim as one of the most successful portraitpainters of his day. His celebratedpicture of Miss O'Neill, in thecharacter of Juliet looking over thebalcony, is well known to the public bythe engraving. The painting was exhibitedat the artist's house, in New-manStreet, by lamp light, in order thatit might be viewed under the samecircumstances as the original was seenon the stage. But his first great effortin portraiture was in the year in whichhe became an associate of the RoyalAcademy. For this honour he waspartly indebted to his exhibition of awhole length portrait of Mrs. White,the wife of an eminent surgeon, which,from the peculiarly easy simplicity,and originality of style and attitude,excited universal admiration. Thispicture, which has been cited asbeing worthy of comparison with anyof Lawrence's, was laboured with suchintense industry, that he required upwardsof thirty sittings before hepronounced himself satisfied with theperformance. Scarcely less notice,however, was attracted by his exhibitionof two domestic groupes; one of Mrs.C. Hammered and her infant child;the other of "Mrs. Wilmot, with herdaughter plucking a rose in a garden.among the illustrious patrons ofDawe, were the Prince Leopold andthe Print-less Charlotte, of whom liepainted several portraits for the royalcouple themselves, and for differentmembers of their respective families.The Duke and Duchess of Kent alsoemployed him ; he went in the suite ofthe former to Brussels, Camera, andAix-la-chapelle, where he painted theportraits of the Duke of Wellington,Lord Hill, General Lava, and severalof the most distinguished Russianofficers. The manner in which he executedthese, probably, induced theEmperor Alexander to engage him topaint the portraits of all the superiorofficers in the Russian service who hadengaged in the war with Napoleon.He accordingly left England for St.Petersburg), in January, 1819, and, inhis way thither, painted, at Brussels,portraits of the Prince and Princess ofOrange ; at Cobourg, of the reigningduke ; and at Weimar, of the GrandDuke of Meinengen, and the celebratedGoethe. His arduous undertaking atSt. Petersburg!! occupied him nineyears, in the course of which period hepainted, besides nearly four hundredportraits of Russian officers, three wholelengths of the field-marshals Wellington,Kutusoff, and Barclay de Tolly,and a portrait of the Emperor Alexanderon horseback, twenty-one feetin height. The whole were placed inagallery, specially erected in the winterpalace, called the Grand NationalMilitary Academy, which, on beingcompleted, was opened with greatpomp. In addition to the above, Mr.Dawe painted, whilst at St. Petersburg!,portraits of all the imperial family, andmany of the illustrious persons of theempire, together with a great numberof private portraits. \\ with respect tohis employment on the Grand NationalMilitary Gallery, says one of his biographers," it will scarcely be credited,that, notwithstanding the express andpositive commands of the emperor,such were the difficulties Mr. Dawehad to encounter in the execution ofthis laborious undertaking, that nothingbut the most extraordinary firmness ofmind could have prevented him fromsinking beneath them, and abandoningthe project altogether, before he hadhalf completed it."Mr. Dawe returned to England aboutthe middle of the year 1828, when heopened a private exhibition of some ofhis later works, and had the honour ofsubmitting them to the inspection ofPAINTERS.George the Fourth, by express command.In September he proceeded toBerlin, where he painted the portraitsof the King of; Prussia and the Duke ofCumberland. From Berlin he continuedhis route to St. Petersburghh, and remainedthere till the spring of 1829, atwhich time he removed to Warsaw,and painted there the Grand DukeConstantine. A cold, which he hadcaught during his last journey to St.Petersburg!, now began to show itseffects on his health in a very seriousmanner, and he was recommendedto try the sulphur baths at Aix-la-Chapelle. Receiving, however, moreharm than benefit from them, he determinedon returning to London ; buthe was too far gone for recovery, anddied on the 15th of October, aboutseven weeks after his arrival, at thehouse of his brother-in-law, Mr. Wright,the engraver. He was buried in St.Paul's Cathedral, being followed to thegrave by the president and othermembers of the Royal Academy, theRussian ambassadors, and a number ofprivate carriages.Neither the manners nor personalappearance of Mr. Dawe were prepossessing; yet few persons, it is said,have ever lived who possessed so muchthe art of conciliating when it was theobject to gain a friend. It has beenasserted that it was not in his natureoften to do a kind or hospitable action ;but it must be stated, in justice tohis memory, that, for many years beforehis death, he allowed his mother jgl'OOper annum. This was, however, but asmall stipend, from one whose emolumentswere so considerable, and will,perhaps, be considered less an act ofgenerosity, than one of reluctant duty.His anxiety to accumulate wassuch," says a biographer, " that hehad recourse to several even mostunprofessional means to increase a fortunealready becoming large from hisfull avocations : thus, at the death ofthe Princess Charlotte, he had his portraitof her engraved, and himself employedpersons to hawk it about thetown, at the coach-stands and otherplaces, by which means he realized aconsiderable sum." It is even saidthat his admission into the Academywas less in consequence of his reputationas a painter, than of his facilitiesas a canvasser ; to this, at least, thejealousy of his contemporaries hasascribed it. If it be true, as asserted,that he realized ,100,000 by paintingthe principal sovereigns of Europe, hemust have been more fortunate as anartist than a speculator ; as, in the lattercharacter, he contrived to reduce hisproperty to a sum which was scarcelysufficient to pay the legacies and annuitiesgiven by his will. It was swornunder 25,000^ out of which he gives alegacy to one Elizabeth Lernnoffsky, inwhom, probably, as he was never married,he had more reasons for takingan interest than expressly appear. Healso left a legacy to her daughter, inwords which we shall quote, both asbeing confirmatory of our last observation,and giving some insight into thecharacter of the subject of our memoir.I leave," he says, " to Sophia Herman,daughter of the said ElizabethLemnoffsky, the sum of 40 sterlingper annum, for her education for fouryears from the date of the will. If shelives, to be increased to 60 per annum ;and, if the executors find it necessaryfor her health or comfort, to \QO perannum, which, on her corning of age,shall be continued to her for life, unlessshe marries a Russian subject or one ofthe catholic religion, when the wholeshall be forfeited. Whereas, if she marriesan Englishman, or an American,not of the catholic religion, her annuityshall be increased to 200 sterlingper annum." After all legacies havebeen paid, he leaves the remainder " toa society, if any, for the education ofthe poor as long as they use the Biblewithout gloss or comment, and so longas no particular catechism shall betaught, but the benefits of the institutionbe open to children of every religiouspersuasion. Should this societyfail, or cease to act thus, the revenuesdestined for this object are directed to betransferred, by the executors, tony othersociety that does fulfil it in any country."As an artist, Dawe has been comparedto Lawrence in portrait painting ;in historical he certainly surpassed him.The character of their portraits resembleeach other, but what was, inLawrence the result of genius, was, inDawe. that of diligence and judgment;the former was more indebted to nature,the latter to art. Dawe, also, has theDAVID WILKIE.credit, as Lawrence observes, "of havingdone much for English art, by establishingits fame over the whole north ofEurope, and connecting it with a workwhich would not soon be forgotten." Heleft several manuscript papers behindhim, and was the author of a life of Mor-land,the artist, who was his godfather.DAVID WILKIE.T HIS distinguished artist was born inthe year 1785, at Cults, in the countyof Fife, where his father was pastor forupwards of thirty years. He showedearly a taste for drawing, and was, inconsequence,sent, at the age of fifteen,to the Academy at Edinburgh, wherehe continued his studies for five years,under the care of Mr. Graham. In1805, he came to London, where, it issaid, he first obtained employmentfrom a picture-dealer, named Buchanan,for whom he painted copies of theFlemish and Dutch masters, which theformer probably sold as originals. Inthis manner, it is not unlikely thatWilkie imbibed a taste for that class ofcomposition, in which he almost immediatelybecame celebrated; but althoughthe style of his pictures resembled thatof Teniers, the sentiment of them wasof a much more elevated cast. Amonghis earliest patrons, when he came toLondon, were the Earl of Mulgraveand Sir George Bennet who subsequentlypurchased some of his finestproductions. The first picture, whichhe exhibited at the Royal Academy,was his Village Politicians, in 1806; itwas received with a burst of applause ;and critics, connoisseurs, and academicians,were all loud in praise of it.A writer of the time observed of it,The interior of a country ale-house,and the general effect of the whole, arein the finest style ; and lead us to rejoiceat the appearance of so promisingan artist, said to be not more thaneighteen or nineteen years of age. Wedo not know him, but sincerely congratulatehim on his first essay, whichgives every promise of the painter beingdestined to rank very high in his profession,and that in a very short time."These anticipations were fully realizedin the next year, when Wilkie exhibitedhis Blind Fiddler, which atonce established the reputation of " thisextraordinary young artist," as he wasnow called by the artistical critics. Inthis admirable composition, it is difficultto say which object strikes us mostforcibly ; the father, with his animatedcountenance and sportive gestures,calling the attention of his infant, whichits mother holds, to the music ; the humourof the boy, imitating the fiddlerwith a poker and bellows ; the half-frowning,half-smiling look of the girlbehind him ; or the inimitable expressionof wonder, interest, and pleasure,in the countenances of the two children,who stand gazing upon the fiddler, forgetfulof the toys that lie neglected behindthem. The sober and naturalcolouring of this picture was anothercharacteristic, equally novel and meritoriousin an artist so young ; andshowed no less his own taste and judgmentthan his reliance on that of thepublic ; it being then a prevalent ideaamong 'painters, that all pictures forexhibition ought to be coloured abovenature, in order to prevent their beingeither overborne by the works of othersor overlooked by the spectators. Thenext popular picture of Wilkie was hisVillage Festival, a performance madefamiliar to all of us by the numerousengravings which have been taken fromit. This picture has been pronounceddeficient in nothing but unity and compressionin the composition, and, consequently,is wanting in general compactnessand effect. There are, it is true,three distinct groupes, out of whichthree different pictures would probablyhave been formed, by Teniers orState ; but, in our opinion, this, insteadof being a merit in them, would be adefect. * may not be according to theorthodox rules of art, to present to theeye disconnected objects in the samepicture; but if these objects all formpart of the same subject, as they do inThe Village Festival, there is no longerPAINTERS,a want of general compactness. It cannotsurely be asserted that every figureshould be linked one with another ; avillage festival, represented in onegroupe, might be very artistical, but itwould be very unnatural. Wilkie, withreference to this picture, is not to besupposed as arranging a scene for atheatre, but as making a representationof nature ; and this admitted, we may,if we please, find fault with him forpainting such a scene at all, but certainlynot for painting it as he found it.The former, few would be inclined todo;for Wilkie has done some thingsin this picture which have never beenexcelled, perhaps never equalled. Theface of the sot, holding up the bottlethe imploring and totally unshrewlikeexpression of the countenance of thewife, as she strives to separate herhusband from his half-drunken companionsthe quiet jollity of the landlord,as he pours out his liquor to hisguests, these are triumphs of art, thathave few parallels. We have only furtherto remark, of this admirable picture,that it displayed a sweetness andpurity of colouring far exceeding thatof the artist's former pictures.Wilkie was admitted an associate ofthe Royal Academy in 1810, and anacademician in 1812. The principalpictures which he has exhibited, besidesthose just mentioned, are : TheChelsea Pensioners, The Rent Day,Distraining for Rent, and The PennyWedding. For The Chelsea Pensionershe received one thousand two hundredguineas from the purchaser, and thesame sum for the copyright, fromMessrs. Moon and Boys, who not onlyhad it engraved, but paid four hundredguineas to an artist to make a copy ofthe painting.In 1826, Wilkie left England forItaly, where he passed two years instudying the old masters. He wouldseem to have given the preference tothe Spanish school, if we may judgefrom his subsequent productions, whichpartake somewhat of the style ofVelasquez, Murillo, and Spagnoletti.This is, at least, apparent in his Repulseat Saragossa, and Guerilla Chief departingfor Battle, compositions sostrikingly different from his formerones, that every one was startled ; andsuperficial spectators scarcely knewwhether to admire or condemn performancesso much at variance withwhat they had been accustomed to beholdfrom the pencil of Wilkie. It soonbecame visible, however, that the painterof The Village Festival, and The ChelseaPensioners, had, in attempting anew style, displayed new powers ; TheRepulse at Saragossa, and GuerillaChief, were not only rich and powerfulin colouring, but bold and spirited indrawing and handling, and executed inevery way appropriate to, and illustrativeof, the subject. But the greattriumph of his genius was his head ofJohn Knox, which at once raised himto the first rank of historical painters ;and, for character and expression, mayvie with the highest efforts of the mosteminent continental artists. We shouldnot omit to mention the portraits ofWilkie, which, though by no means hisbest performances, bear the stamp ofthat originality and genius which areso conspicuous in his other pictures.With some remarks made by Mr. Bulwer,in his England and the English,upon the merits of this distinguishedartist, we shall close our memoir ofhim, regretting that our efforts to renderit more complete have been ineffectual.More various," says Mr. Bulwer,more extensive in "his grasp, thanHogarth, his genius sweeps from thedignity of history to the verge of caricatureitself. What an illimitablespace from the dark power of Hogarthto the graceful tenderness of Wilkie \And which can we say, with certainty,is the higher of the two ? Can weplace even The Harlot's Progress beyondThe Distraining for Rent, or theexquisite beauty of Duncan Grey ?"And again, " If the drama could obtaina Wilkie, we should hear no moreof its decline. He is the exact illustrationof the doctrine I have advanced of thepower and dignity of the popular school,in the hands of a master ; dignifiedfor truth never loses a certain majestyeven in her most familiar shapes."RICHARD BhNJAMIN HAY DON.RICHARD BENJAMIN Haydn.RICHARD BENJAMIN Haydnis the son of a bookseller, at Plymouth,where he was b-jrn, in January, 1786.His fondness for art is said to have beenfirst excited by a servant's giving hima print to amuse himself with, when achild; from which time, he manifesteda decided taste for the art, in whichhe has since become so eminent. Atseven years of age, he was sent tothe grammar-school of Plymouth, andafterwards, successively, to those ofHoniton and Plympton, where Vie completedhis education, in the same schoolthat Sir Joshua Reynolds had receivedhis. As was the case with SirJoshua, also, attempts were made tocheck Haydon's propensity for drawing,his father intending to bring himup to his own business ; but this it wasfound impossible to do. Though heattended to his father's affairs in theday time, he frequently spent half, andsometimes the whole night, in hisfavourite pursuit. A perusal of Reynolds'sDiscourses encouraged him tohope that he should attain to eminencein the profession of an artist, which hedetermined, in spite of all obstacles, tofollow.The opposition of his father, atlength, giving way, he was sent tostudy in London, where he resolved topass two years in acquiring a knowledgeof drawing and anatomy, beforehe began to paint. His labours wereindefatigable ; he sometimes never lefthis room for a fortnight ; and his closeattention at the Academy induced Fuselito ask him, one day, " Pray, do youever dine ?" Among those, to whomhe was introduced in the metropolis,were Prince Hare, David Wilkie, andothers, to whom his merits soon becameconspicuous. In 1809, his picture ofDentated was exhibited at the RoyalAcademy, and, in the following year, atthe Royal Institution, where it obtainedthe largest prize. He commenced thiswork in January, 1808, and had progressedwith it considerably, in thatyear, when he went to see the Elginmarbles, on view of which he becameso convinced of the imperfection of hisown work, as it at present stood, thathe went home, rubbed out the wholeof what he had done, and recommencedon the new principles, which he hadlearnt from the Elgin sculpture.It might be supposed," says one ofHaydon's biographers, " that the academicianswould have been gratifiedat the triumph of one who had beeninitiated into art at the Royal Academy.But such was not the case ; theyappear to have disliked Hay don atonce for the independence of his spiritand his talents, especially for his desireto distinguish himself as a historicalpainter. He was, in consequence,very unfairly treated, with respect tothe picture of Dentated, and that ofRomeo and Juliet; so that, thoroughlydisgusted with their conduct, he relinquishedhis intention of becoming anassociate, and determined to have nofurther connexion with the Academy."In what manner he was ill treated bythe Academy is not stated ; but thesame authority says, that the BritishInstitution withheld from him the prize,to which he had looked as the meansof subsistence, because he had refutedMr. Payne Knight's theories respectingthe Elgin marbles. He was at thistime engaged on his large picture ofSolomon, and, being in want of moneyto proceed with it, was obliged to sellhis books, prints, and even his clothes,to enable him to continue his operations.In this state of deprivation hepassed two years, working the whole timeat his picture, which he, at length, completedwithin the time above-mentioned,by working day and night during thelast week, an exertion that impairedhis sight, and did material injury tohis health. On the exhibition of hisSolomon, at Spring Gardens, the praisesof the artist were resounded in allquarters ; the directors of the Institutionvoted him a present of onehundred guineas, and it was not long beforehe received intimation that he mightbecome an academician ; but this honourhe was not now disposed to accept.PAIN Tears.In the summer of 1814, he set outwithWilkie, for Paris, where he continuedabout two months, the greaterpart of which he passed in studying atthe Louvre. On his return to London,he commenced his great picture ofChrist entering Jerusalem ; but thefailure of his sight, and the want ofpecuniary means, again continued toimpede the progress of his work. Thekindness of friends, and the sale ofsome small paintings, having relievedhim from his embarrassments, he, in1816, again took up his pen against Mr.Payne Knight, and is said completelyto have demolished that gentleman'stheories respecting the Elgin marbles.In this controversy, Hay don was gratifiedto find that the opinion of Canovacoincided with his own ; and a friendship,between him and the great sculptor,was subsequently contracted. In 1817,Mr. Haydon removed to Lesson Grove,and opened a painting academy, wheresome of our most rising artists are saidto have studied. In 1820, he exhibitedhis picture of Christ entering Jerusalem,which, both in London, and uponits subsequent exhibition at Edinburgh,drew crowds of admiring visitors,though cavilled at by some of hishostile critics. The Resurrection ofLazarus, which he produced in 1823,was also much admired : it sold for200; his Christ entering Jerusalemfetched 350.Haydon is said to be of an enthusiasticcharacter, both as an artist anda man ; a consciousness of his ownmerits has subjected him to the chargeof vanity, for which, if he be guiltyof it, there is some excuse, consideringthe comparative neglect with which hisworks have been treated. " On themerits of Haydon," says a critical authority," much has been written andmore has been said: his friends, andthey are many, have not left his finegenius unnoticed, while his un-friends,to use a northern phrase, and they arenumerous, have dwelt, more than wascourteous, on his defects." His zeal inthe cause of art led him to petition theHouse of Commons for an act, directingthe painting of historical pictures forchurches and public buildings ; that hewas unsuccessful he could scarcely himselfhave been surprised. As an artist,he deserves to be classed among themost distinguished of the present age ;his style is chiefly formed upon that ofRafFaelle, of whom he is said to be sodevoted an admirer, as to have affectedthe open collar, and square-toed shoes,of that illustrious artist. " The pencilof Haydon," says the writer of a seriesof papers in The Athenaeum, under thehead of Living Artists, " gave earlynotice of something more than common;indeed, the character of the man maybeguessed from his compositions: hedesired to be thought daring, and,selecting his subjects from history orfrom Scripture, showed an inclinationto measure himself with the race otgiants in art who had preceded him.It would be unjust to say, that hispowers were wholly unequal to thetask : like the vision in The Castle ofOtranto, he showed the foot, if he didnot show the body of the giant. Butit is one thing to grapple with a grandsubject, and another thing to master it:those, who examine the works of thepainter, will find that he fails, not somuch in the conception or the handlingas in the propriety of action in short,that he misses those subordinate, yetnecessary delicacies, which containbeauty and character. There are,doubtless, portions of his pictures whichjustify the praise of those friends whocall him a second Raffaelle; and hehas a glow of colouring, which sometimesequals the finest specimens of hisnative school of art. But he is oftendeficient in the dignified gravity thesevere serenity which Scripture orhistory requires ; he also fails frequentlyin the action of his figures they doevery thing with all their might, andseem to feel a difficulty in accomplishinga task which should be performed withease. That his works were worthy ofopening the doors of the Academy toHaydon, was the opinion of his friends ;and it is but justice to say, that twentyout of the forty are not so good as he."CHARLES ALFRED STOTIIARD.CHARLES ALFRED STOTHARD.CHARLES ALFRED STOTHARD,eldest son of Thomas Stothard, Esq.,the royal academician, was born inLondon, on the 5th of July, 1786. Hereceived the first part of his educationat the school of a Mr. Deane, andafterwards became the private pupil ofthe Rev. Robert Burnside. He firstdeveloped . his taste for the arts bypainting, in a very superior manner,the miniature scenes for his schoolboymodel of a theatre. A propensity tothe study of history, also marked hisearly years ; and, by turns, poetry, astronomy,chemistry, natural history,Latin, French, Italian, music, anddrawing, all engaged his attention.The proficiency which he made inthese was the result of his own diligence; and, indeed, his biographer andwidow remarks, that, for whatever heacquired during life, he was little indebtedto the instruction of others ;such as he was, he made himself.The subject of our memoir had, atfirst, expressed a wish to become aportrait painter; but the following circumstanceinduced him to change hismind. Whilst he was on a visit, onemorning, at the house of a friend, whowas of that profession, a party happenedto call in to look at the pictureof a lady of rank, then under the artist'shands. The original was a woman ofplain features and vulgar character, andas such she appeared in the picture ; anadherence to truth, which the any, towhom the lady was related, took so ill,that they unanimously decried theperformance. " Charles," says Mrs.Stothard, " was so disgusted with thisscene, that he left the house, with adetermination never to become a portraitpainter ; feeling that he could notsubmit to give up his own independenceand judgment to be the sport of ignoranceand vanity."In 1807, a drawing, which he presentedto Mr. Fuseli, procured himadmission as a student at SomersetHouse, where he entered upon a regularcourse of study from the antique,and soon became distinguished for hischaste and beautiful style of copyingantique sculpture In the followingyear, he was admitted a student in theLife Academy ; and, about the sametime, it is said, he executed severalpaintings in oil, from sketches made byhim on the banks of the Thames, orinthe neighbourhood of London. In1808, he also became a student at theInstitution in Pall Mall, where heexecuted a very successful copy of alady and child, after Vandyck.In 1810, he painted a picture of thedeath of Richard the Second in PomfretCastle, in which the costume of theperiod was strictly adhered to, and theportrait of Richard taken from hiseffigy in Westminster Abbey. It wasreceived with unanimous approbationupon its exhibition at Somerset House,and indicated superior talents, in theartist, for historical painting. Thisbranch of his art, however, he was alsoinduced to forego, in consequence of anattachment he had formed with a MissKempe, to whom he was subsequentlymarried. A more lucrative mode ofoccupation than that of historical portraitpainting, had suggested itself tohim as far back as the year 1802, whenhe accompanied his father to BurleighHouse, the seat of the Marquess ofExeter. Mr. Stothard, senior, was employedto decorate the staircase of thismansion ; and, whilst thus occupied,observed to his son, it would be to hisfuture advantage, to fill up his time, bymaking drawings from the monumentsin the neighbouring churches, as usefulauthorities for costume. His son followedhis advice, and thus received thefirst bias of his mind towards a subjectwhich he now resolved to make hispursuit. The hint for the design,which he afterwards carried into effect,was first given him by a sight of somevery clever unpublished etchings, bythe Rev. P. Enrich, of Cambridge, frommonuments in the Dominicans andother churches in Paris. This suggestedto him the idea of a work onThe Monumental Effigies of GreatBritain, of which the first number ap-painters.feared in June, 1811. accompanied by anadvertisement, stating that the objectsof the undertaking were to afford thehistorical painter a complete knowledgeof the costume adopted in England,from an early period of history to thereign of Henry the Eighth ; to illustrate,at the same time, history and biography; and, lastly, to assist the stagein selecting its costume with propriety,for the plays of our great dramatic bard.Such a work was, undoubtedly, a greatdesideratum ; for, whatever informationis to be derived from Mr. Cough'swritings, in his voluminous publicationof the same kind, the delineating part,as Mr. Stothard observes, in an essayfound after his death, is so extremelyincorrect and full of errors, that, at afuture period, when the originals nolonger exist, it will be impossible toform any correct idea of what theyreally were.When I first determined upon publishingthe work myself," says Mr.Stothard, " I knew I should require asmall sum of money exclusively for itto begin with; and, at the time, mypurse was on the decline. I mighthave had what I wanted by applying tomy father ; but, I know not how it was,I had a feeling, I could not conquer,of wishing to begin the world withoutcalling upon his assistance. Added tothis, I thought my not doing so, as Iwas the elder, would be a good exampleto my brothers. I, . therefore,applied to a friend, who had plenty ofmoney, and requested him to lend methe sum I wanted. He did so. Thiswas the first time I had ever borrowedmoney ; and I felt uneasy till it wasrepaid. Accordingly, when I broughtout my first number, I laid by everypound note I received, till I foundsufficient of them lying together to dischargemy debt. I then carried thesum to my friend, and. as soon as I sawit deposited in his pocket, I felt I hadregained my independence, and resolvednever again to become a borrower."The first number of Mr. Stothard'swork was received with the applause itmerited, and obtained for him distinguishedreputation, both as an artist andan antiquary. His time was now occupiedin making various excursions insearch of monumental antiquities ; and,during the summer of 1815, he proceededas far northward as the Picts'Wall, in order to make drawings forTyson's Magna Britannia. In thesame year, he was appointed historicaldraughtsman to the Society of Antiquaries; and, in 1816, he was deputedby that body to commence his elaborateand faithful drawings from the celebratedtapestry preserved at Bayeux, inFrance. He left England, for thatpurpose, in September ; and, afterhaving visited Paris, proceeded, upon atour of investigation, to Chiron, anddiscovered, in the adjacent abbey ofFontevraud, those interesting effigiesof the Plantagenet race, the existenceof which, after the Revolution, hudbecome matter of doubt. He found theabbey converted into a prison ; and, inacellar belonging to it, were depositedthe effigies of Henry the Second, hisqueen, Eleanor of Guienne, Richardthe First, and Isabella of Angouleme,the queen of John. The chapel, inwhich these figures were placed, previouslyto the Revolution, had been destroyed; and, since their removal to thecellar, they were exposed to continualinjury from the prisoners, who camethere, twice a day, lo draw water at thewell. From these effigies Mr. Stothardmade several accurate and beautifuldrawings; and succeeded, after muchlabour and difficulty, in discovering thepainting upon their surface. Whilstupon a visit to the abbey of L' Span,near Mons, which he found convertedinto a barn, he discovered, under aquantity of wheat, the effigy of Beringqueen of Richard the First. AtMons, he also discovered the beautifulenamelled tablet of Geoffrey Plantagenet,which he considered the earliestspecimen of what is termed a sepulchralbrass, and of armorial bearings,depicted decidedly as such.Upon his return to England, he presented,through the medium of SirGeorge Nayler, the drawings which hehad made from the discoveries at Fonsto the Prince Regent, who expressedhis desire for their publication,and gave his permission for Mr. Stot-hardto dedicate to him his MonumentalEffigies. An application was also made,by Mr. Stothard, to government, suggestingthe propriety of their securing,from further destruction, the FontevraudC II A R L h S ALFRED S T O 1 H A K D.effigies, and placing them, with thosestill preserved, in Westminster Abbey.This was not acceded to, but the suggestionhad the good effect of causingthese interesting remains to be removedfrom the cellar into a place of security.In 1817, he made a second, and, in1818, a third journey to Bayeux, incompany with his wife, whom hehad married in the February of thelatter year. Having finished his seriesof drawings from the tapestry, liemade a tour of investigation throughNormandy and Brittany. " The mosttrivial circumstances," says his wife,peculiarity of manners, custom, places,and things, he deemed, in a foreigncountry, fully worthy of his notice ; andhe constantly averred that he travelledas much to observe mankind as hedid to investigate antiquity. Being recommendedto an inn, because severalof his countrymen were there, ' that,'he replied, ' is the very reason I shallnot go to it. I can remark Englishcharacters at home, but here I want toknow the people.' " Among other discoverieswhich Mr. Stothard made,during this tour, were the effigies of theDukes of Brittany, at Pioermel, of SirOliver de Lesson and his lady, atJosselin, and several others, in a verymutilated state, at Tanned.In 1819, he laid before the Society ofAntiquaries the complete series of drawingshe had made from the tapestry atBayeux, together with a paper, inwhich he proved that the tapestry wasreally a work coeval with the time ofthe conquest, assigned to it by tradition ;and not, as attempted to be proved bythe Abbe de la Rue, a work of thetime of Henry the First. The paperwas printed in the nineteenth volumeof The Archaeological ; and, on the 2nd ofJuly, Mr. Stothard was elected a fellowof the Society's Antiquaries. He,soon after, visited various towns inNorfolk and Suffolk, for the purpose ofadding some drawings to his collectionof monumental subjects; and, whilstthus engaged, the accidental perusal ofa newspaper made him acquainted withthe circumstance of the discoveries recentlymade at the House of Lords, onthe walls of the painted chamber. Heimmediately proceeded to London tocopy the paintings on the walls, fromwhich he executed a complete series ofdrawings. " Enthusiastic and fearlessin his pursuit," says his biographer,he took his stand upon the highestand most dangerous parts of the scaffold; and there, almost stunned by theincessant noise of the workmen, amidstdust, and every possible annoyance, heactually commenced and finished thesebeautiful productions of his pencil. Onone occasion, his life was so imminentlyin danger that he narrowly escaped theterrible fate which afterwards befelhim." In these drawings he displayedhis ingenious recovery of the long lostart of raising gold, as embossed on thesurface of the material ; a mode whichcontributes so much to the rich splendourof the old illuminated manuscripts ;a discovery which he communicated tohis wife. Not long before his death, hewas occupied in preparing the materialsfor a paper concerning the age of thesecurious paintings, to be laid before theSociety of Antiquaries ; a portion of itwill be found in the biographical accountof him by Mrs. Stothard. InSeptember, 1820, he made a journey tothe Netherlands ; and, on his return,published the ninth number of hisMonumental Effigies, with splendidvignette illustrations, heraldic and architectural.He prepared the tenth forpublication in the beginning of 1821, andalso finished a large plate of The RoyalEffigies at Fontevraud, to be publishedseparately from his great work. Healso began a work on seals, and leftbehind him about thirty unpublisheddrawings of the scarcest of our regaland baronial ones ; particularly an impressionof the Conqueror's, which heingeniously restored, by uniting thebroken fragments, preserved, with thecharter to the city of London, in thetown clerk's office, Guildhall. Anotherof his undertakings was a work illustrativeof the age of Elizabeth; and hisdrawing of that queen, from her effigyin Westminster Abbey, is consideredone of the finest productions of his pencil.On the 16th of May, he left hishome for Devonshire, for the purposeof making some drawings for the Rev.D. Tyson's account of that county. Hearrived at Beer Ferrers, on Sunday, the27th ; and, after having attended divineservice, requested permission of thevicar, the Rev. Henry Hobart, to drawthe stained glass in the east window.PAINTERS.It was granted him ; and, on the followingmorning, he ascended a ladder tocommence his work, attended by thecurate, Mr. Servante. This gentlemanleft him at half past two o'clock, atwhich time Mr. Stothard stood aboutten feet from the ground, immediatelyabove the tablets containing the creedand commandments, and was tracingthe portrait of Sir William Ferrers. Hehad been invited to dinner by Mr.Hobart, but not appearing at the appointedhour, that gentleman requesteda friend, who was about to pass by Beer,to look in at the church and hasten hisguest. " He obeyed the request," sayshis widow; "and, upon entering thechurch by the little door, near thealtar, beheld my husband, my belovedhusband, lying extended, senseless,dead, at the base of the monument,from which he had received the fatalblow ; every sign of life gone. He wasdead, quite dead, all human aid vain.The ladder remained resting against thewindow ; the step, on which he had stood,being found broken on the floor. Fromall circumstances, it is supposed thatthe step must have suddenly given way ;that my husband, in the effort to savehimself, probably turned round; and,in falling, terrible to relate ! struckagainst the monument with such forcethat little doubt can be entertained ofhis having been killed upon the spot."This melancholy event happened onlywithin a month of the accouchementof his wife, who gave birth to a daughterthat died on the 2nd of February, 1822.A more exemplary character in privatelife has seldom formed the subjectof biography ; nor does Mr. Stothardappear less amiable in the accountsgiven of him by friends and acquaintancesthan in the interesting memoirsof his life, published by his widow.We have only to peruse these memoirsto be convinced of his moral and religiousworth ; they afford another proofthat humility, modesty, and unostenta-tediousness, may be joined to the mostsolid ability. The pursuits which, bothas an antiquary and artist, have renderedhis name so celebrated, he enteredupon and persevered in with equalenthusiasm and industry. Whilst hewas employed in etching, he generallyhad by his side a pencil and severalslips of paper, upon which he madenotes of anything that occurred to hismind. "At another time," says Mrs.Stothard, "he would place a Latinbook upon his table, and study theauthor whilst actually employed uponsome of those very beautiful plates heexecuted for the tenth number of TheMonumental Effigies. It was thus that,during the last six months, he studiedthe German grammar, and had made aconsiderable progress in the elementarypart of that difficult language, withouthaving exclusively devoted a singleday to it." It seems that he entertainedstrong hopes of being able to decipherthe hieroglyphic inscriptions at theBritish Museum; and, according to hisbiographer, so far succeeded, that heclearly proved he could make out thewords king and Ptolemy wherever theyoccurred. As an artist, he studiedchiefly grace and simplicity, firmnessand decision. In regard to colour, hewas a great advocate for endeavouringto imitate nature; for which purpose hethought not merely a correct eye necessary,but judgment, feeling, and regularity.It was a saying of his that hedrew quick, because he drew slow ;meaning that he took time before hemade a line, and from that attention,never had occasion to alter ir.Some anecdotes, related by Mrs.Stothard, in her interesting volume,must conclude our memoir. Whilstshe was at Paris, with her husband,and spending the day with a publiclibrarian of that city, the latter addressedMr. Stothard with, " You are aStothard ; are you any relation to agreat antiquary of that name, who hasexecuted a most beautiful work on themonuments of his own country ?" Notimmediately replying, "Sir," said Mrs.Stothard, "you should have asked methat question, for I am his wife." Uponnearing this, the librarian jumped up,and seized him by the hand, exclaiming,Is it possible that I have spent theday with you and never heard this?Had you been a Frenchman, it is thefirst thing you would have told me."On another occasion, his conversationinduced a French antiquary to say tohis wife, whom he mistook for his sister," I do not know, Miss, who yourbrother may be ; but he must either beMr. Stothard, or the angel of theantiquaries "George HENRY HARLOW.GEORGE HENRY HARLOW.shall commence our memoir ofthis eccentric, but gifted artist, in thewords of one who was present at hisfuneral. " I shall never forget what Isaw some thirty years ago, when I calledand inquired for a worthy friend, longmy companion in Canton. I was introducedto a lady, with five veryyoung girls round her knees, and aboy-babe in her arms ; she receivedme in silence and not without tears ;the mourning which she wore were formy friend, her husband, who had beendead six months ; the infant in herarms, a month old, or scarcely more,was the eminent painter whom we havethis day followed to the grave."He was born in St. James's Street,London, on the 10th of June, 1787,and became the peculiar object of hismother's solicitude. His father, whohad been an East India merchant, leftample means behind him for the supportof his family ; and, on the educationof the subject of our memoir, his survivingparent was willing to bestow anyexpense. Harlow, however, left schoolat sixteen, that of Westminster beingthe third and last to which he was sent.He gave early indications of a taste forpainting, and was, in consequence,placed under the care of a landscapepainter, from Antwerp, named Henryde Cost. In him Harlow soon discovereda conceited and contemptibleinstructor ; and quitting his studio forthat of Drummond, the portrait painter,pursued his art there," says one ofhis biographers, " with an ardour fromwhich even amusements could not seducehim." He next became the pupilof Sir Thomas Lawrence, to whom hewas to pay one hundred guineas yearly;for this he " was to have free access toSir Thomas's house, at nine o'clock inthe morning, with leave to copy hispictures till four o'clock in the afternoon,but to receive no instruction ofany kind." It would seem, however,that some alteration had taken place inthese terms; for Smith afterwards speaksof " the repeated kindnesses of SirThomas in allowing Harlow to preparesome of his pictures in the dead colouring,"&c. We should observe, that beforehe commenced the profession of an artiston his own account, his friends offeredto procure him a mastership in India;but his only answer was, "I care notfor riches ; give me fame and glory."Harlow soon grew weary of studying,or rather, working, under Lawrence,who, after all, seems to have instructedhim no further than how to accomplishthe mechanical drudgery of his ownpictures. Impatient of this employ,and prompted by an innate vanity,which flattered him into a belief thathis genius was not very inferior to thatof his master, he was not sorry tofind an opportunity of depreciating SirThomas's merits. A dog, introduced inthe latter's portrait of Mr. Angerstein,and which Harlow had certainly drawnin dead colour, having excited particularapprobation, the latter claimed thewhole merit of the painting, and, callingupon the Angersteins, personally assertedhis right in the matter. " Allthat Sir Thomas Lawrence did," saysone of his biographers, in a case whichwould have justified strong resentment,was to say to him, " As the animal youclaim is among the best things I everpainted, of course you have no need offarther instructions from me : you mustleave my house immediately." Harlowdid so, and revenged himself by goingdown to the Queen's Head, at Epsom,where he painted a sign-board, in caricatureof Lawrence's style, and wroteunderneath, " T. L. Greek Street, Soho."Sir Thomas meeting him, soon after, issaid to have addressed him with, " I haveseen your additional act of perfidy, atEpsom ; and if you were not a scoundrel,I would kick you from one end ofthe street to the other." Harlow movedout of his reach, replying, " There issome privilege in being a scoundrel,for the street is very long." In thisstory, Allan Cunningham remarks, theremust be some error, either in the factsor their date, but gives no other reasonPAINTERS.for such a supposition than the youthof Harlow, and the cautious and guardedtemper of Lawrence.Harlow now determined to be hisown instructor for the future, from aconviction that genius lost its originalityby submitting to the dictation of others.His quarrel with Lawrence did not preventhim from offering himself as acandidate for the rank of associate inthe Royal Academy, but, to his mortification,only one vote was given in hisfavour. This was understood to comefrom Fuseli ; who, when remonstratedwith on the subject by his brotheracademicians, said, " he voted for thetalent, and not for the man."The earliest works of the subject ofour memoir, did not excite much attention; they were historical compositions:Bolingbroke's Entry into London, andthe Quarrel between Queen Elizabethand the Earl of Essex. The first picturewhich he exhibited was a portrait of hismother ; but he can scarcely be said tohave attracted public notice before theexhibition of his Hubert and PrinceArthur, a composition painted for Mr.Leader, at the price of one hundredguineas. The force of character, however,remarks Allan Cunningham, hadmore influence with the public thanwith the proprietor, who liked this historicaleffort so little, that he had itexchanged for portraits of his daughters.Harlow's next celebrated productionwas the Trial of Queen Katherine, inwhich Mrs. Siddons, and others of theKemble family are introduced. Thepopularity of this picture has beenmuch increased by the numerous copiesof the well-known engraving which hasbeen taken from it; and some particularaccount of the painting may not, therefore,be uninteresting. Whilst it wasin progress, the artist was frequentlyvisited by Fuseli, at that time sittingfor his portrait to Harlow. On firstseeing the picture in dead colouring, theformer expressed his approbation of thegeneral arrangement, but noticed, as agreat defect, in a composition of morethan twenty figures, that not one leg orfoot was shewn. ' Now, if you do notknow how to draw legs and feet," he isrelated to have said to Harlow, I willshow you ;" and at the same time drewt'.vo on the wainscot of the room.Harlow, in consequence of these observations,changed the whole arrangementin the foreground ; and he afterwards,at the suggestion of the sameartist, introduced the two boys who aretaking up the cushion ; the one whoshews his back being, according toKnowles, altogether due to Fuseli.Besides the portrait of Fuseli, whichis considered one of the most perfectresemblances ever painted, Harlow tookexcellent likenesses of Northcote andNollekens. A fine engraving of theformer has been made by Lewis ; thelatter is in the possession of the Dukeof St. Allan's. These and the other performanceswhich we have mentioned,of our artist, had already procured himno ordinary reputation ; and feelingconscious that he only wanted to attainthe art of drawing the human figurewith purity and precision, to enable himto take his place in the first rank of hisprofession, he resolved on proceedingto Italy, with this view. He left Englandin June, 1818 ; and after hisarrival at Rome, made such rapid improvementin drawing, as to promisethe most splendid results. One of hisperformances was a copy of the Transfiguration,completed in eighteen days;on beholding which, Canova exclaimed,This, sir, seems rather the work ofeighteen weeks !" " The next," hesays, in a letter, which, as it is noless characteristic of the man than descriptiveof his proceedings at Rome,we shall quote at some length, " wasa composition of my own, of fifteenfigures, which created no small sensationhere. Canova requested to havethe picture at his house for a few days,which was accordingly sent ; and, onthe 10th of November, upwards of fivehundred persons saw it. It was thenremoved to the Academy of St. Luke,and publicly exhibited. They unanimouslyelected me an academician, andI have received the diploma. Thereare many things which have made thiselection very honourable to me, ofwhich you shall hear in England. Youmust understand, that there are twodegrees in our Academy, one of merit,the other of honour ; mine is of merit,being one of the body of the Academy.The same night of my election, theKing of Naples received his honorarydegree (being then in Rome, on a visitto the pope), in common with all theGeorge liLNllY marlow.other sovereigns of Europe ; and I amhappy to find the Duke of Wellingtonis one also. West, Fuseli, Lawrence,Flaxman, and myself, are the onlyBritish artists belonging to St. Luke's,as academicians. This institution isupwards of three hundred years' standing.Raft'uelle, the Carraccis, Poussin,Guido, Titian, and every great masterthat we esteem, were members. I hadthe high gratification to see my nameenrolled in the list of these illustriouscharacters. Now, my dear friend, asthis fortunate affair has taken place, Ishould wish it added to the print ofKatherine's Trial. You would, perhaps,have the kindness to call on Mr. Cribs,the publisher, in Tavistock Street, CoventGarden, and have it worded thus :Member of the Academy of St. Luke,at Rome.' " He then gives an accountof his visit to Naples, and concludes hisletter thus : " I am to be presented tothe pope either on the second or thirdof next month. Cardinal Gonsalvi willlet me know when the day is fixed, andI leave Rome directly after; perhapsthe next day : a day that I most sincerelydread ; for I have become soattached to the place and the people,that I expect a great struggle with myself.I should be the most ungratefulof human beings, if I did not acknowledgethe endless favours they havebestowed on me. It is the place, of allothers, for an artist, as he is sure to behighly appreciated if he has any talent;and I shall speak of the country, to theend of my days, with the most ferventadmiration."Full of hope and enthusiasm, Harlowleft Rome the latter end of 1818, andpassing through Florence, was therealso made a member of the Academy.He arrived in London in January, 1819,and took a house in Dean Street, Soho ;but had scarcely set up his easel, beforehe was attacked with the mumps, whichcarried him off on the 4th of February,in the thirty-second year of his age.Such was the end of a man who,according to Lawrence, was " the mostpromising of all our painters ;" and towhom none can deny the possession ofvery superior powers. Allan Cunninghamremarks, that " he discovered,after all, no new way of wakening ouremotions ; and followed the beatentrack in which others trod :" but higherauthorities do not justify this opinion ;and, indeed, to waken our emotions atall is no mean merit for a painter, andone to which the manner of doing itis, undoubtedly, subordinate. Add tothis, that Harlow handled his subjectswith extraordinary taste and grace, andwas eminently skilful in colour andhuman character, and he cannot butbe assigned an elevated rank in hisprofession.His private character seems too muchamatter of apology with his differentbiographers, to be viewed in a veryfavourable light ; a natural generosity,and laudable ambition to excel in hisprofession, are the extent of praise thatcan be allowed him: vanity and foppery,to say nothing of his extravaganceand occasional inebriety, formed toogreat a portion of his other characteristics.He dressed, according toSmith, so ridiculously foppish, that hewas often the laughing-stock of hisbrother artists ; and, when excited bywine, was so gross in his conversation,that he was seldom invited a secondtime to the same table. We shall addan anecdote of Harlow, which, whilstit exposes his vanity, will enable us toconclude our memoir of him with anhonourable testimony to his merits asan artist. " It is extraordinary thatFuseli," he said to Mr. Knowles, oneday, " who is so fine a scholar, shouldsuffer engravers to place translationsunder plates taken from the classicalsubjects painted by him." He theninstanced the print taken from Fuseii'spicture of The Death of Oedipus, remarking,that he was himself educateda scholar, having been at WestminsterSchool, and therefore wished to see thesubjects given in their original languages.Fuseli, having been told thisby Knowles, determined, at his nextsitting to Harlow, to put his knowledgeof Greek, which he much suspected,to the test. Accordingly, after he hadsat the usual time, he asked for a pieceof chalk, with which he wrote, on thewainscot, the Greek lines in the printalluded to, and desired Harlow to readthem. Fuseli, seeing his evident inability,then coolly said to him : " Onour way hither, Knowles told me youhad said that I ought not to permitengravers to put translations under theprints taken from me ; and that youPAINTERS.had instanced the Oedipus. Now, thisis the Greek quotation, whence thesubject is taken, and I find you cannotread a letter of it. Let me give youthis advice; undoubtedly, you are agood portrait painter ; and, I think, insmall pictures, such as you are paintingof me, stand unrivalled. This is sufficientmerit; do not, then, pretend tobe that which you are not, andprobably, from your avocations, nevercan be, a scholar."WILLIAM Betty.JL HIS eminent artist was born atYork, of parents more respectable thanwealthy, on the 10th of March, 1787.At an early age, he was bound apprenticeto a printer, at Hull ; but it isno wonder that the labours of a compositorshould soon grow irksome toone who, before he was able to walk,had developed a taste for art, by scrawlingdesigns in chalk, over the floors,tables, and walls of his home. " Fromthat time to this," he says, in a briefautobiographic sketch, " drawing andusing colours was a ruling and evenunconquerable passion ; for though,during the severe labours of the printingbusiness, my darling pursuits couldseldom be followed, yet I found meansto keep alive the spark that wassmouldering in my bosom, and onlywanting in a favourable opportunity tofan itself, and wrap in its flame mywhole soul; for 'I had heard ofpainters, and ' I longed to follow tothe field some ' noble one : feelingthus, my bond soon became tedious,at last irksome, to the greatest degree,and, like the captive, I counted, overand over again, the years, the months,the weeks, the days, I yet had to serveere I could pronounce the happy words,I am free.' "Galling as was the chain, however,he disdained to relieve himself from itsweight in any dishonourable manner,and with aspiring after art so intenseas the above declaration show his ownto have been, it is much to his honourthat he served faithfully every day ofthe seven years, and quitted the placeof his servitude with the approbationand esteem of his master. Shortly afterthe expiration of his apprenticeship, hecame to London, by the desire of somerelatives, who kindly expressed theirwillingness to forward his intention,which he now determined, if possible,to carry into effect, of becoming an artistby profession. After some probationarystudies, he was admitted a student ofthe Royal Academy, being introducedto Fuseli by Opie, to both of whom heexpresses himself much indebted forthe kind and friendly manner withwhich they encouraged his early efforts.The first object of his ambition beingnow accomplished, he began, in thesummer of 1806, to study with indefatigablezeal ; doing so, as he says,with the more ardour, because he feltthat he had lost seven precious years ofhis life, and that he was not startingfairly against others who, never havinglost time in that way, had a great advantageover him. His exertions werenot in vain, and he had, ultimately,reason to be glad of the additionalstimulus they had thus received. Hecompleted his studies in England, underLawrence, to whom he was introducedby Fuseli, and was fortunateenough to obtain the friendship as wellas the instruction of that celebratedpainter, in whose studio he remainedfor about a twelvemonth. In the summerof 1822, he paid a visit to Italy ;and, after passing some time at Rome,Naples, &c., fixed himself at Venice,where, to use his own words, he studiedfor a year, with zeal and assiduity, themaster-keys of colour found in Titian,Paul Veronese, Tintoretto, Hassan,&c. &c. He returned, through Florenceand Verona, to Paris, and fromthence to London, where he arrivedafter an absence altogether of abouttwo years.The first picture which he paintedafter his return to England, was Pandoraformed by Vulcan, and crownedby the Seasons. It was begun andfinished in six weeks, and being sentWILLIAM Betty.to the exhibition, in 1824, obtainedmerited applause, and procured the artist'selection as an associate, in theabove year. His late master, now SirThomas Lawrence, was much struckwith the performance, and by purchasingit, enhanced the value of his own collection,and paid a gratifying tribute tothe talent of his pupil. His next importantwork was also purchased by adistinguished artist; this was his pictureof The Combat: Woman intercedingfor the Vanquished; which wasexhibited in 1825, and, soon after, becamethe property of Mr. Martin. In1828, he was elected a royal academician,and was, we believe, the lastwho had the honour to have his diplomasigned by " the august and splendidmonarch, George the Fourth," as Mr.Etty characterizes that illustrious patronof the fine arts.Among the principal pictures whichMr. Etty has painted, besides those alreadymentioned, are three picturesillustrative of the story of Judith, which,together with two other of his largeworks, have been purchased by theScottish Academy ; A Bevy of FairWomen, from Milton, purchased by thelate Marquess of Stafford; The Judgmentof Paris, a commission from LordDarnley ; The Parting of Hero andLeander; The Death of Hero and Leander; Youth at the Helm, and Pleasureat the Prow, an allegory from Gray,painted for the present liberal patronof the English school, Robert Vernon,Esq.; The Destruction of the Temple ofVice, for Henry Payne, Esq. Leicester;Venus making love, for Mr. Strutt, ofDerby; and Cleopatra, an early picture,painted for one of the artists' earliestpatrons, Sir Francis Feeling.In person, Mr. Etty is stout, andabout the middle size ; his countenancebespeaks an ingenuous and intelligentmind, and an open and benevolentheart. He is devoted to his profession,and pursues it with a steady ardourand an enthusiasm worthy of hisearliest aspirations. He wears hishonours modestly and gracefully, andthe student, who is fortunate enough totake a lesson from him, receives fromEtty rather the advice of a friend thanthe dictum of an instructor. He has agreat veneration for antiquities, andwould as soon think," to use the wordsof a writer in Arnold's Library of theFine Arts, " of beheading a king, as ofdemolishing an antique tower. Hislanguage, when occasion demands, isforcible and eloquent ; his imaginationis glowing and vivid, yet he thinksdeeply before he paints. His dispositioncombines the humorist andthe philosopher : " he is a social being,"says the authority just mentioned, " ifever there was one ; he has a fund ofquiet enjoyment, which is never hystericallydelighted or rhapsodically jocose;he moves on within the smiling precinctsof his natural mind with thesteady step of a philosopher, yet, withthe tenderness of a man of feeling, stoopsto observe the graceful flowerets whichare sure to bloom in regions of peaceand beauty."His merits, as an artist, have beenthus touched upon by the same authority: " His style is one of exquisitesubtlety and delicacy, being a successfuleffort to graft the beauties of theItalian on the stamina of the Englishschool ; he has endeavoured, whilstemulating the excellences of the Venetianstyle, to divest it of the anachronismsand rarities which disgracedit, and to perpetuate the magic of itssun-lit colour, allied with a purer styleof drawing. His deep devotion to thebeauties of nature, and accurate observationof the human form in all itsvarieties, have enabled him to imitatethe delicacies of form and colour, whichblend into one harmonious whole ; andwithout being decidedly classical, hehas, whilst indulging in the amplegraces of Rubens, kept a retentive eyeon the purer models of antiquity, forminga style of peculiar charm statelyand impressive in his larger works,bland and luxurious in his cabinet pictures.He is alike the chosen Apellesof Mars and Venus, and whether thedread moment of a chieftain's death bya female hand, or the blandishment oflove, be the theme, the most likelypencil to unite these conflicting qualitiesis that of William Etty."P A 1 N T E K S .GEORGE FENNEL ROBSON.GEORGE FENNEL ROBSON, theson of a wine-merchant, was born atDurham, about the year 1788. Beforehe could speak, he* imitated by lines,and, as soon as his hands could graspa pencil, it became his favourite, andalmost his only, toy. In his fourthyear, he attempted to draw naturalobjects; on one occasion, whilst outwalking with his mother, he stopped toobserve a crow pecking at some carrion,and, on his arrival at home, hedrew on a slate, with surprising accuracy,the bird, as he had seen it, in itsaction of pecking. At seven years oldhe was sent to school, at Scorn, inYorkshire, where his fondness fordrawing so much increased, that, insteadof joining his schoolfellows intheir sports, he used to seek out somesequestered spot, and there employ himselfwith his pencil. On his return toDurham, his father tried to wean himfrom his favourite pursuit, thinkingthat the profession of an artist wouldonly lead to poverty and wretchedness.Young Robson, however, was not tobe checked ; although he was deniedail encouragement, at home, he stillwent to nature for consolation and instruction,and, " at length," says a writerin Lo Studio, " began to find means ofobtaining information little suspectedby his family. The picturesque sceneryof Durham, and its neighbourhood,attracted artists of eminence to thecity; and so surely as one began hissketching excursions, he found himselfattended by a ruddy, rosy-faced boy,who hung upon his path, and watchedhis footsteps. He had not made muchprogress in his work, before the sameboy was creeping up to his side, and,with an expression of intense interestin his countenance, endeavouring toobtain a sight of the pencil's magicalcreation. There was a simplicity andingenuousness in all this that neverfailed of attracting attention. By degrees,the boy was encouraged to shewhis own attempts to these mighty magicians; and their decision was listenedto with fear and trembling to him itwas the voice of fate." The judgment,however, which was pronouncedupon these boyish efforts encouragedhim to proceed ; and his parents, atlength, allowing him to follow the bentof his inclination, applied to Mr.Hare, the drawing-master, of Durham ;but this gentleman frankly declared, hecould not attempt to give him lessons, asthe boy knew already more of art thanhe did himself. In his seventeenth year,he received an offer, from a relation,to provide him a situation in a publicoffice ; but his parents in vain urged himto accept it ; he decided in favour ofthe art he loved; and, with 5 inhis pocket, left his father's house, to tryhis fortune in London. Here he wasintroduced, by a friend and fellow-townsman,to Mr. Cribb, the carver andgilder, in Holborn, in the windows ofwhose shop his drawings were exposedfor sale. In less than a twelvemonth,he was enabled, out of the profits, torepay his father the 5 he had receivedfrom him; though it was onlyby the most scrupulous attention toeconomy, that he found his earningssufficient for his maintenance.But though Robson was thus partiallysuccessful, what he saw of art, inLondon, made him feel his own inefficiencyin a very painful degree. Thefirst exhibition of water-colour paintingshad just taken place, and the perfectionwhich he there saw displayed almostannihilated all his hopes of success. Inthis state of mind, he paid a visit to arelation in the country, who, eitherfrom ignorance or design, spoke socontemptuously of his efforts, that hereturned to the metropolis in a moredepressed state than that in which hehad left it. His health and spiritswere so much affected, that his friendsscarcely knew him; and it requiredtheir utmost exertions to rally him.With a return of spirits came a renewalof exertion ; and on announcinghis intention of publishing a viewof his native city, he was encouragedby a large list of subscribers. Theprofits of this publication enabled himGEORGE FENNEL ROBSON,to put in practice a design, which hehad for some time contemplated, ofvisiting the highlands of Scotland. Hisenthusiasm, on first finding himselfamong the mountains of this country,was displayed in a remarkable manner.The guides, says his biographer, stillremember the antics he performed,the morning he walked out to thebanks of Loch Katrine. He threw hishat into the air, and his sketching-stoolafter it, and his sketch-book afterthat ; " he could not tell the rapturesthat he felt, he danced for joy."Dressing himself like a shepherd, withScott's poems in his pocket, and hiswallet at his back, he passed a year inthis part of Scotland, roaming over themountains, in search of the picturesque,in all seasons, and at all hours. Someof his excursions were not unattendedwith danger; on one occasion, a stranger,whom he afterwards ascertained to beamaniac, spoke to him of a verysplendid effect he had just beheld, andoffered to lead him to the spot whereit was to be seen. Robson allowedhimself to be conducted to the edge ofa precipice, and, at his guide's request,descended to a projecting stone, whencehe looked down upon a gulf, into whichthe waters were dashing through achasm of the rock. He was so absorbed,for the moment, in contemplatingthe grandeur of the scene, that he didnot perceive that his guide, who had lenthim his hand as he descended, had nowwithdrawn it, and left him in a situationfrom which it was impossible, withoutaid, to extricate himself. Upon hiscalling out, however, the man returned,and seizing him, wildly, by the coat,dragged him from his dangerous position,and then ran, laughing, downthe mountain. An anecdote, of adifferent nature, will illustrate thepeculiar humour of Robson's character.Being mistaken, by some travellers, forthe servant of the inn, at Loch Katrine,he offered also to be their guide, and atthe conclusion of the excursion, madehis bow, and asked his fee. One ofthem, who had seen through his disguiseby his conversation, answeredby presenting his card, saying, hemust defer payment till they met inLondon.Mr. Robson returned to the metropolis,much improved as an artist, andwas soon known to the public byhis masterly delineations of highlandscenery. After some subsequent visitsto Scotland, he published his Outlinesof the Grampian Mountains, whichobtained for him both fame and profit.He now began to rank among the mostrising painters of the day, and had thegratification of finding himself encouragedand assisted in his career by SirThomas Lawrence, to whom he hadbeen introduced on his first comingto London. In 1813, he contributedsome pictures at the ninth annual exhibitionof the Society of Painters inWater Colours; and, in the followingyear, he was elected a member of thatbody.As the establishment of this societyforms an important era in the history ofart, it will not be out of place to give aslight account of it ; for although Mr.Robson had no share in the institutionof the original society, the preservationof it, in its present form, is mainlyowing to his exertions. The schemeoriginated, in 1805, with Messrs. Hills,Pine, Shelley, Wells, Cristal, andothers, to the number of sixteen altogether,by whom an exhibition wasopened at Gresham's rooms, in LowerBrook Street. They afterwards removed,successively, to Bow Street, andSpring Gardens, where the subject ofour memoir first became an exhibitor,under a new society, formed out of therelics of the parent one, which had beendissolved, in 1813, in consequence ofthe want of sufficient patronage. Worksin oil, as well as in water-colours, werenow admitted ; but upon the removalof the exhibition to the Egyptian Hall,Piccadilly, the latter were wisely excluded.The Society now found that,without some permanent gallery, theirformer popularity was not likely to beregained ; and at once to secure theirinterests, in this respect, Mr. Robsoncame to the spirited resolution of takingthe rooms, in Pall Mall East, on hisown responsibility. Having thus givena national importance to the institution,he personally exerted himself in itsbehalf, in a manner highly honourableto him as an artist and a man. Wecannot do better than quote the wordsof one of his friends, in a letter,describing this period of his life. " Thegrand aim of his life," says this cor-painters.respondent, " for many years, was toensure the success of the Society;day and night it was always in histhoughts ; the whole strength of hismind and body were directed to thisone object. His evenings were devotedto visiting the members, exhorting,encouraging, and, in many cases, athis own risk, commissioning them toexecute pictures for the benefit of theexhibition. I could tell a thousand instancesof his extraordinary zeal, own personal knowledge. I rememberhis making himself ill bysitting for a particular character to oneof the members, because he thought hecould supply the required expressionbetter than an ordinary model. Noone can conceive, but those who witnessedit, how much his example andhis activity tended to keep up themembers to the requisite pitch ofexertion."In the meantime, he continued tomake his annual excursion to thehighlands, in the course of which heis said to have visited every lake, vale,and mountain, through the wholeextent of the Grampian. Duringthese solitary wanderings, he metwith many romantic adventures. Oneevening, finding it too late to reachan inn before night, without leavingthe picture upon which he was engagedincomplete, he asked for shelter in asolitary hovel, near the spot. Its onlyinmate was an old woman, who apologizedfor having no straw to make hima comfortable bed, but promised to cuthim some fresh grass to lie upon.Robson thanked her, and, after havingfinished his drawing, took up his habitationin the hovel for the night.At another time, he found himselfbenighted, and obliged to cross a river,without any certainty that he was atthe fording-place, led only by the soundof a horse, or some animal that precededhim. On one occasion, he was lost inasos, and, whilst thus situated, wasstartled by human, but unintelligible,sounds, and afterwards by the approachof faces, all equally wild and savage.They spoke Gaelic, and were unableto comprehend a word which he addressedto them, but, seizing him bythe arms, dragged him through themist to their habitation. Here they fedhim with milk out of an immensebowl, which he was unable to lift to hismouth ; and, after the weather hadcleared up, guided him, in safety, tothe track in which they had found him.One day, whilst drawing in the neighbourhoodof Loch Katrine, a figurestarted up before him, which he, atonce, recognised to be that of JohnKemble. The actor, after having introducedhimself, and invited the artist todinner, said, with rather a theatricalair, " I suppose, sir, you know who Iam ?" Robson replied, in the sametoneThou hait a grim appearance, and thy faceBean a command ui'tThou canst be no other than JohnPhilip Kemble !" He was indebted toa similar rencontre for the friendship ofthe Duke of Atholl. He was sketchingin the neighbourhood of Blair-Atholl,dressed in his shepherd's costume, whenthe duke first discovered him, andinsisted on his coming to dine withhim. Robson pleaded the singularityof his costume, as an excuse for decliningthe invitation ; but his gracewould take none, and the artist wasobliged to accompany him to his house.There was a simple dignity abouthim," says his biographer, " whichnothing could degrade; the surprisehis dinner-dress occasioned was soonchanged into respect for his talents andcharacter; and the lasting friendshipof the Duke of Atholl, and his family,was the result of this adventure." Itwas in the highlands, also, that he firstmet with his friend Mr. Alnutt, whoseassistance he received, when he moststood in need of it, and whose house,at Clapham, he frequently made hishome.Robson's professional excursions werenot confined to Scotland ; he mademany sketches among the lakes ofCumberland and Westmoreland, andthe mountains of North Wales; andcrossed over to Ireland, for the purposeof painting the lake of Killarney.After he had published his series of theGrampian mountains, he brought outhis views of the English cathedraltowns, which was followed by all thechines in the Isle of Wight,' &c. &c.In 1814, he went to see the collectionof pictures at the Louvre; buthis views and feelings were all too de-georgeFENNEL ROBSON.cicely English, to allow him to staylong at Paris. In 1826, he was employedto superintend the drawings made forMrs. Haldimand's celebrated Album ; atask which he performed gratuitously,and with satisfaction to all parties. Healso turned collector on his ownaccount, and became a dealer in theworks of others, in such a manner asto do much good to the profession,without injuring himself.Latterly, the state of Mr. Robson'ssight has prevented him from usinghis pencil as frequently as formerly ;but he has the satisfaction of havingsecured, by his own industry, a sufficientindependence for the future ; andby the noble simplicity and integrity ofhis character, the esteem of many ofthe most distinguished persons in thiscountry, for rank, station, and intelligence.His intercourse with societyhas not deprived him of his nativesimplicity of character and demeanour ;and his hand and heart have lostnothing of that fervour, or readiness inthe cause of art, which has hitherto distinguishedhim on all occasions. " Withwhat delight," says the correspondentwhom we have before quoted, " wouldhe often tell me of his success in havingdirected the attention of some patronof art to a picture, the merit of whichmight otherwise have been overlooked !I could name many of our friends, whoare fully sensible of their obligationsto Robson, for the anxious endeavourshe was constantly making to advancetheir interests and their reputation.Once, he set off, on the last day ofthe exhibition, to his friend, the lateBishop of Durham, to induce him topurchase a picture, that seemed likelyto go back to the artist, unsold ; andhe returned, in triumph, with themoney in his hand. Never shall 1forget the joy with which he came totell me of the successful termination ofthe arrangements which secured toLough, the sculptor, the monument ofBishop Middleton. He thought highlyof Lough's genius, and he was greatlyinstrumental in enabling this meritorioussculptor to surmount the impedimentsthat stood in the way of hissuccess. Lending, or advancing money,giving commissions to assist his brotherartists, buying frames, to lend for picturesthat he feared might be injuredin their effect by being inadequatelyframed, these were actions he wasconstantly performing, when he thoughtthe painter's talents deserved, or hisdeficiency of means required, suchassistance."Indeed, in all respects, the characterof Mr. Robson stands honourablyprominent : his modesty, generosity,conscientiousness, and independence,form, perhaps, its most conspicuousfeatures. In his rooms are to be seenmore pictures of other artists than" thosefrom his own pencil ; and the formerhe never failed to recommend, in preferenceto the latter. Though veryfond of theatres, and intimate withseveral actors, he will never, it is said,accept of an order for admission ;saying, it is his duty, as one of thepublic, to pay for his entertainment, ornow could the theatre be supported,which produced so much gratificationto the admirers of the drama? In thesame feeling, since the building ofWaterloo Bridge, he will not cross theriver by any other road; considering itapleasure to him to pay his share towhat he considered a great public good.The following anecdote is a strikingproof of his independence and moralcourage. Hearing that a nobleman,well known as an enemy to politicalreform, had proposed himself a memberof the Artist's and Amateur's Conversazione,he wrote to his lordship tosay it was his intention to black-ballhim, and to use all the influence hepossessed to prevent his election ; statingas his reason for this opposition, thatas he considered the noble lord hadmisrepresented a certain respectableclass of his majesty's subjects, in aspeech on the reform question, he(Robson) had no security that theartists might not share the same fate.The nobleman, however, was elected ;but so far from feeling offended withRobson, held out his hand to him, atthe first meeting of the Society, intoken of the respect he entertained forhis open and independent conduct. Asan artist, he must ever be consideredas one of the most distinguished amongour water-colour painters; in proof ofwhich we have only to mention hissublime picture of Solitude, his PontAberglaslynn, Llyn Ideal, and Viewfrom Westminster Bridge. His stylePAINTERS.has no peculiarities; his pictures are toofaithful resemblances of nature to indicatethe hand of a mannerist. If theyconvey anything to the spectatorbesides the impress of nature, it is thecairn and tranquil character of theartist's mind, which may be said to bestamped upon almost all his works.JOHN MARTIN.JOHN MARTIN was born at Haydnon the Tyne, about six 'milesfrom Hexham, in Northumberland, inJuly, 1789. Some drawings by hisbrother first inspired him with a loveof art; and the superior manner inwhich he copied them evinced a decidedgenius, as well as inclination,for the pursuit. After struggling withvarious difficulties, he came to London,and soon found patrons, among whomwere the Earl of Warwick and thePrincess Charlotte. The first workwhich he exhibited with complete success,was his Sadak in search of theWaters of Oblivion, which was followedby Adam and Eve in Paradise, Joshuacommanding the Sun to stand still, TheDestruction of Babylon, Belshazzar'sFeast, arid The Destruction of Herculaneum.The two last were exhibitedat Bullock's Museum, where, it is said,they were visited by at least fifty thousandspectators. One of his most recentproductions is Sardanapalus, or the Fallof Nineveh ; of which, together with allhis other pictures, he has himself madeengravings. Those of his Belshazzar,Joshua, and the Deluge, have beenpresented, by the French Academy, tothe King of France, who ordered amedal to be struck, and sent to Mr.Martin, in token of his esteem.The genius of Martin, whose celebrity,we should observe, was predictedby the late Benjamin West, has noaffinity with that of his contemporaries,or of his predecessors ; he standsalone, and, consequently, unrivalled.But, although he has no competitorsin the sublime path he hasstruck out for himself, he has notpursued it without obstacle. Impedimentshave been thrown in the wayof his fame, by those who should havebeen the first to advance it; and ithas been left to a foreign country to dohim that justice which has been refusedin his own.The want of that nominal distinctionin the subject of our memoir, which isconferred by the initials of R. A.,suggests two queries: Is the RoyalAcademy blind to the genius of suchan artist as Mr. Martin ? or does it holdmerit alone an insufficient qualification.We cannot so far impugn its judgmentas to suspect the first to be the case,nor are we justified in suggesting areflection upon the character of Mr.Martin, by surmising the last ; forwith what but character can the objectionlie, if merit be acknowledged?We can, then, but come to the humiliatingconclusion, that among themembers, eminent as they are, of theonly influential institution which ourcountry possesses for the encouragementof art, something like jealousy exists.The great merit of this highly giftedpainter consists in the perfect originalityof his conceptions ; hence the unfairnessof that comparison between him andother artists ,as a test of genius, which hasbeen instituted by those who have beendesirous of depreciating his abilities. Thevery grandeur of his ideas disqualifieshim for a minute attention to the detailsof art ; and thus, even the human figure,which has been usually in vested with thehighest importance, becomes a subordinateconsideration amid the architecturalsublimity of his scenes. Nor ishe, in this respect, without the sanctionof high authority. Claude adopts a similarmode in his landscapes ; yet no onehas been so absurd as to compare thatartist with Raffaelle or Titian, or condemnhim for the absence of qualitieswhich he did not aim at possessing.Martin's pictures do not display themechanism of art ; they are creationsot the mind, to which they appealrather than the eye, and that lessJOH N MARTIN.through the medium of the judgmentthan the imagination. It is the conceptionwhich we are struck with, notthe execution; though the latter, ifexamined, will be found to have attributesof its own, not less peculiar ormagnificent than the former. " Hispictures," says a critic, " are neverdeceptions ; they are representationssometimes mere indications of things ;a dot sometimes stands for a man, anda square patch will indicate a city "The boldness of his handling is occasionallyimpaired by the frequentminuteness of his objects ; but when hissubject permits free scope of hand, hewields his pencil with a might andmajesty that manifests the most perfectand unbounded dominion over hiscanvass. It is in the vast, the obscure,the terrific, the supernatural, that hechiefly excels ; his pictures, if we mayuse so seemingly paradoxical an expression,are as indescribable as his ideas, ofwhich the former are the identical transcript.For instance, he depicts space ashethinks of it words could not havedescribed it as it existed in his mind,and words equally fail in describing itas .it appears on his canvass. In ouropinion, no higher praise can he awardedto him than this ; for to communicateto others that indefinable notion whichwe have of things, requires, beyond allquestion, superior powers of mind tothose which are employed in describingonly the objects of our senses oraffections. His failure in drawing hasbeen attributed to the fact of his neverhaving studied from the living model,nor, it is said, ever having copied apicture of any other master. If, however,he be deficient in the figurativedepartment of his art, he is unequalledin the perspective ; and, in the landscapepart of his compositions, his colouringmay vie with that of Turner. We shallconclude our observations on the geniusof this sublime painter, with a quotationfrom Mr. Lytton Bulwer, who, in speakingof the British artists, thus characterizesMartin. " Vastness is his sphereyet he has not lost or circumfused hisgenius in its space ; he has chained, andwielded, and measured it, at his will ;he has transfused its character intonarrow limits; he has compassed theinfinite itself, with mathematical precision.He is not, it is true, a Raffaelle,delineating and varying human passionor arresting the sympathy of passionitself in a profound and sacred calm ;he is not a Michael Angelo, the creatorof gigantic and preternatural powersthe Titans of the ideal heaven. But heis more original, more self-dependent,than either; they perfected the styleof others ; they perfected others : Mart inhas borrowed from none. Alone, andguideless, he has penetrated the remotestcaverns of the past, and gazedon the primaeval shapes of the goneworld. Look at his Deluge it is themost simple of his works, it is,perhaps, also the most awful. Poussinhad represented before him the dreary-wasteof inundation ; but not the inundationof a world. With an imaginationthat pierces from effects to their ghastlyand sublime agency, Martin gives, inthe same picture, a possible solution tothe phenomenon he records; and inthe gloomy and perturbed heaven yousee the conjunction of the sun, themoon, and a comet ! I consider thisthe most magnificent alliance of philosophyand art of which the history ofpainting can boast."Carson Cranfield.Carson STAN FIELD was bornabout the year 1790, and is said tohave passed the early part of his lifeat sea, and to be now a lieutenant inthe navy. That he has seen much ofthe ocean, the excellence of his marinepaintings attest, and shew that hemust have been artistically inclinedfrom his boyhood. It was in thecharacter of a scene painter that he firstattracted general attention ; and thosewho followed him from the theatre tothe exhibition-room, were hardly preparedto find him occupying the samehigh station in the latter, as he hadmaintained in the former. No one, ifr A 1 N T E R S ,we except Roberts, and him only inthe architectural department of hisart, has appeared since Loutherbourg,worthy of being compared with Cranfieldin pictorial creations for the stage. Histhoracic efforts have never been surpassed; and it is to be regretted thatsuch magnificent triumphs of art asthe Passes of the Alps, and other facsimilesof nature, which all who havevisited the theatres within these fewyears must recollect, should be destinedto such an ephemeral existence as thetime devoted to the run of a pantomime.Of the few drop-scenes he haspainted, that at the Queen's (formerlythe Regency) Theatre, in TottenhamStreet, is considered the best; theeffect is clear and brilliant, the colouringrich and harmonious, and the wholecomposition is superior to his drop-sceneat Drury Lane.As an exhibition painter, Cranfieldfirst began to be known about 1823,when he became one of the membersof the Society of British Artists. Heexhibited at the rooms belonging to thisSociety for some years afterwards, butat length withdrew his pictures, andcontributed only to the Royal Academyand the British Institution. His motivesfor this step are arraigned by awriter in Arnold's Magazine, whoobserves that, as it was through themedium of the first-mentioned societyCranfield first acquired his popularity, itwas hardly fair that he should spurn hisparent institution to become a memberof another, merely for the sake ofbeing an A. R. A. In the absence, however,of any explanation on the part ofMr. Cranfield, it is but just to observe,that it by no means follows he shouldhave left the Society of British Artistsfor the purpose of becoming A. R. A.,from the mere fact of his havingobtained that honour.When Cranfield first appeared as amarine painter, he had to contend withfew, but formidable rivals ; Turner,Callcott, and Bonington. He enteredthe field, in 1826, with his MarketBoats on the Scheldt, a work remarkablefor its picturesque grouping,characteristic figures, and accurate representationof nature in the whole,but particularly in the stillness of thewater. Much and deservedly, however,as it was admired, it may be said tohave been eclipsed by his exhibition,in the following year, of the Wreckersoff Fort Rouge, Calais ; a work which,to use the words of a critic, " hehimself has never since surpassed, fortruth to nature, terrific grandeur ofeffect, and masterly execution." Hisnext important work was exhibited atthe Society of British Artists, in 1829 ;it was a large picture of Eastlake Park,the seat of George Watson Taylor,Esq., handled and coloured in a verymasterly style, and exhibiting effectsno less original than beautiful in theforeground and distance. In his Italianlandscapes, he is not considered sohappy, being too much an imitator ofCanaletti and Guard. Of the former'sstyle he has caught the defects as wellas the beauties, being much too labouredin his local delineations : his own inherentfaults are, a rawness and crudityof colour, and a want of breadth andharmony; the first arising, perhaps,from his frequent occupation as a scenepainter.His water-colour drawings are generallypreferred to his oil paintings, beingconsidered to display more beauty,taste, and rich harmony of colouring.The last work of Cranfield, which weshall mention, is his picture of St.Michael's Mount, which only wantslightness of touch, and transparencyof shadow, to make it one of hismost masterly performances. Upon thewhole, Cranfield takes his rank veryhigh amid the British artists of thenineteenth century ; though a want ofpoetry and imagination may detractfrom his merits, in the estimation ofthose, who, not content with Naturein her own romantic garb, conceive shemay derive improvement from theadornments of fancy.CHARLES ROBERT LESLIE.CHARLES ROBERT LESLIE.THIS distinguished artist was born inLondon, on the 19th of October, 1794.Both his parents were natives of Maryland,to which province his great-grand-fatherhad emigrated from Scotland,soon after the rebellion in 1745. Thesubject of our memoir accompanied hisfamily, on their return to Philadelphia,when he was about five years old, longbefore which period, it is said, he hadgiven extraordinary indications of atalent for painting. His first effortswere rude but spirited representationsof horses and soldiers, on a slate; and ateight years of age, he was able to sketchfrom memory, with great accuracy, thelikeness of any person whom he hadonce seen. At the age of thirteen hewas taken from school, and apprenticedto Mr. W. Bradford, a bookseller, inPhiladelphia; but he still gave all thetime he could spare to his pencil,though conscientiously abstaining fromencroaching upon any of that whichwas due to the service of his master.His favourite subjects were theatricalcharacters, which he generally sketchedfrom memory, or immediately after hisreturn from the theatre. He completed,in this way, one evening, after he hadwitnessed the performance of Cooke, inRichard, a portrait of that eminentactor, with which Mr. Bradford andothers were so struck, that the meritsof the artist became the theme of generalconversation and eulogium. His parentswere now anxious that he should follow,as a profession, the art for which hedeveloped such decided talents ; andtheir wishes were kindly furthered byMr. Bradford, who consented to releaseyoung Leslie from his indentures. Hewas now placed under a Mr. Sully, whotaught him to paint in oil ; and he soonafter left America to pursue his studiesin London. His friends at Philadelphiawere not long in receiving afavourable specimen of his abilities ; hesent them out his first essay in oil, thesubject of which was William of Delosfrom Scott's Lay of the LastMinstrel. Rising rapidly into favour inthis country, he was, in a few years,elected a royal academician, on whichoccasion he presented to the Academyhis picture of Catherine of Arragon, afterher divorce from Henry the Eighth.Among his other pictures, some of theprincipal are: May Day in the Reign ofQueen Elizabeth ; Slender courtingAnne Page ; Lady Jane Grey prevailedon to accept the Crown ; Sancho relatinghis Adventures to the Duchess ; Falstaffdining at Page's house ; an excellentPortrait of Sir Walter Scott; Rogerde Coverley going to Church, and hisParishioners; Uncle Toby and theWidow Madman ; Chabot Crane ;Dutch Courtship; Anthony Van cleanleaving his Mistresses for the Wars;the Dutch Fire-side; and Philip, theIndian Chief.Leslie," says a periodical critic,stands high in the rank of our paintersof domestic scenes, or subjects connectedwith life and manners. He isall nature, not common, but select ; alllife, not muscular, but mental. He delightsin delineating the social affections,in lending lineaments true to the gracefulduties of the fire-side. No one seeswith a truer eye the exact form whichsubjects should take ; and no one surpasseshim in the rare art of inspiringit with sentiment and life. He is alwayseasy, elegant, and impressive ; hestudies all his pictures with great care,and, perhaps, never puts a pencil to thecanvass till he has painted the mattermentally, and can see it before him,shaped 'out of air. He is full of quietvigour; he approaches Wilkie, in humour;Stothard, in the delicacy of femaleloveliness ; and has a tendernessand pathos altogether his own. Hisaction is easy: there is no straining;his men are strong in mind, withoutseeming to know it, and his womenhave sometimes an alluring naivete,and unconscious loveliness of look, suchas no painter rivals."PAINTERS.RICHARD PARKES Bennington.RICHARD PARKES BONING-ton,whose reputation will be, probably,as lasting as his career was brief,was born at the village of Arnold, nearNottingham, on the 25th of October,1801. His father, who had in early lifepursued the arts as an amusement,subsequently adopted them as a profession.From him, however, Boning-toncan hardly be said to have derivedhis taste for painting ; as it would almostseem that we must have recourseto intuition, to account for a childtaking delight in such an art at threeyears old, as, we are informed, was thecase with the subject of our memoir.At that age, he is even said not onlyto have sketched almost every objectthat presented itself to his observation,but actually to have made designs.They were chiefly drawn," says oneof his biographers, " in pen and ink,with surprising accuracy, and illustrativeof history, which, from the momentour infant artist was capable of thought,became his favourite study and research."In the passion which he thus developed,he was encouraged and assistedby his father, who took him into thefields, where he mi.^ht learn from hisbest instructor Nature. In these excursionshe made some drawings whichshowed rapid improvement, and a superiortaste for landscape : before heleft Nottingham, however, he had imbibeda decided predilection for marinesubjects, though he had never as yetseen the ocean. When he was fifteenyears old, his father resolved to send himto Paris, to study in the Louvre. Howhe acquitted himself will be best explainedin the words of his Frenchbiographer : " The scenes which hedesigned without any principles indicatedgreat intelligence ; he imitated,but with ease and spirit. He was butbarely sixteen years old when we sawhim first, and had not acquired themastery of the science on which all:beauty in art depends. As soon as heacquired the power of expressing hisconceptions, his brilliant works becamethe wonder of the school. His companionssaw that he would not followservilely any system, though recommendedby a professor ; and that hewas not born to copy others, but createfor himself. The chief of the schoolwas obliged to reproach him for inattentionto the precepts which he deliveredon picturesque painting ; andfrom the obstinacy of his genius, it wassoon evident that he would walk in hisown paths alone, at whatever risk. Hisspirit was independent, and despisedroutine. He escaped from that by removingfrom the school, where the taskassigned to genius is the art of puttinga figure together, and where the rudimentsof old compositions are sacred.He left the academy as soon as he hadstudied the living model, and could drawit correctly."He soon after became a student ofthe Institute, and also drew at theatteller of M. Le Baron Gros. Thedrawings which he made at this time,whether originals or copies, were somuch admired, that they found immediatepurchasers ; his chief productionswere representations of coast sceneryand fish markets, in which he particularlyexcelled. The first drawing, whichhe exhibited at Paris, was sold the momentthe exhibition opened ; and forthe second, a marine subject, he receivedthe gold medal. Thus honouredand rewarded, he left Paris for Venice,where he painted, among other viewsof that city, the Ducal Palace, and theGrand Canal ; the latter of which allcritics concur in preferring to Canaletti'scelebrated picture of the same subjectHe attempted every style but the historical;and one of his designs was topaint a series of pictures, in which hewas to combine the styles of the Dutch,the Venetians, and the English ; andit is deeply to be regretted, observesone of his biographers, that deathstruck him ere he could put such a planinto execution.Bonington visited England in 1827,with a Tetter of introduction to SirThomas Lawrence, but returned toRICHARD PARKES Bennington.Paris without having delivered it, sayingto the lady from whom he hadreceived it, he did not yet think himselfworthy of being introduced to thepresident; but after another year ofhard study, he might, perhaps, be moredeserving of the honour. In the springof 1828, he again went to London, withsome of his pictures ; among which washis Henry the Third of France, a performancewhich drew forth the applauseof all the critics, on its exhibition atSomerset House, though so badly placedthere as to excite the just indignationof its numerous admirers. His risingreputation now caused him to beliterally overwhelmed with commissions; a tribute to his genius that costhim his life. His nerves became soaffected at this sudden and unexpectedsuccess, that a rapid decline ensued, ofwhich he died, in London, on the 29thof September, 1828, in his twenty-eventyear.Mr. Bonington was tall and stronglybuilt, and gave no personal indicationsof a tendency to consumption. Hisprivate character was marked by themost amiable traits, and never, saysone of his biographers, were more sincereand heartfelt regrets expressed forany individual, than was heard from allwho claimed his intimacy and regard.Except in the case of Mr. Harlow,"says Sir Thomas Lawrence, " I havenever known, in my own time, theearly death of talent so promising, andso rapidly and obviously improving. IfI may judge from the later direction ofhis studies, and from remembrance ofa morning's conversation, his mindseemed expanding in every way, andripening into full maturity of taste andelevated judgment, with that generousambition which makes confinement tolesser departments in the art painfullyirksome and annoying." As an artist,he has the credit of having revived theestimation for water-colours in France,after they had been neglected for twentyyears. He succeeded equally in marinesubjects, in architecture, in landscape,and in interiors; and did extraordinarythings, whether he handled the crayon,the lithographic chalk or pen, or paintedin oil or water-colours. As comparedwith Canaletti, he, perhaps, fails inprecision (if that can be called a failurein which it is not always desirable toexcel) ; but, as a colourist, he surpasseshim; his tone being both brilliant andpoetical, whereas Canaletti's has onlythe former quality. His chief defectsare too great breadth of handling, anda vagueness in the detail of his figures,which are, however, in themselvesbeautiful, both in their design andaction.HENRY LIVERSEGE.HENRY LIVERSEGE was born atManchester, in the year 1803. Hisfather, who held a situation in a cottonmanufactory, treated him with greatcruelty ; and Liversege is said never tospeak of him but with horror and disgust.He found, however, a kind protectorin his uncle, who sent him toschool, and, on his leaving it, allowedhim to follow the occupation of a painter,for which he had evinced a strong predilection.It does not appear underwhom he learned the elements of hisart; he first tried his hand at portrait,and received sufficient employment toprocure him a maintenance, 'in 1827,he sent three pictures representingBanditti, to the Manchester Exhibition .but the originality of his genius mostfully shone out in his design of AdamWoodcock, from Walter Scott's Abbot.He then came to London, and studiedat the British Institution, where hecopied chiefly from Rubens, Vandyck,and Teniers. He executed his copieswith great fidelity, especially one whichhe made from Rubens, so that, to usehis own words, " they could not tell onefrom the other." He next appliedfor permission to draw at the RoyalAcademy, but, in consequence of a wrongsuperscription to the letter, with whichhe sent in his probationary drawing, hecould not obtain leave, and was too indignantto make a second application.The mistake arose from the followingPAINTERS,circumstance : Mr. Thompson, who hadbeen succeeded in the office of keeperby Mr. Hilton, being addressed byname,received the letter, whilst thedrawing alone was presented to Mr.Hilton, which occasioned a delay in theanswer to Liversege's application, thatwas construed by him into a refusal.He then returned to Manchester, wherehe now resides, with a considerable reputation,but one still inferior to hismerits. In person he is five feet fiveinches in height, slightly deformed in hisleft shoulder ; his countenance indicatesanxiety and restlessness, but has a lookof decided intelligence. As an artist, hesucceeds best in ludicrous subjects, orsingle figures, where character and sentimentare required; his colour is, ingeneral, deep and harmonious, and hishandling masterly. " His effects," saysa critical authority, "are never forced,never arise from the incongruousjumble of black and white, to whichonly mediocrity and ignorance resort.His handling is light, firm, and square ;gleaned from his deep study of Rubensand Teniers. His feeling, or style, isoriginal, at the same time highly poeticaland refined, free from the smallesttincture of grossness or vulgarity; inmind most persevering and assiduous,and in perception quick and acute."A friend of Liversege's has describedhim as being, in company, sprightly,witty, and humorous ; but when removedfrom its excitement, at timesmelancholy, though always enthusiastic.Stopping before Wilkie's pictureof The Village Festival, he is said tohave exclaimed: " I would stake myreputation on a work of a similarcharacter ; and if any one would commissionme to do it, and just allow mesufficient for support, I would rest myname on this single work alone, and carenot if I never painted afterwards." Thesame authority represents Liversege ascalling his Shakspeare his Bible, andhaving a notion, that his heart was onhis right side instead of his left. Thefollowing anecdote will be found relatedof him in Arnold's History of the FineArts : " While in London, he began adesign of Christopher Sly and the Landlady,from Catherine and Petruchio,and-for a long time, looked about for amodel for Christopher. At length hemet with a cobbler, the very type of Slyin appearance ; and as Liversege neverpainted anything but from nature, ofcourse he wished to see the cobblerdrunk in reality: so he supplied himselfwith a bottle of gin, and plied his modelwell; but the bottle being finished, andthe cobbler as " sober as a judge," he gotanother, which also went like so muchwater, and the cobbler as steady as ever.Liversege was in a fury, and declaredthat he would not give him anotherdrop ; Ibr that he would cost him morein gin, to make him drunk, than whatthe picture would fetch ; and so he dismissedCrispin about his business, andgave up the design of his picture."SCULPTORS.Grinding GIBBONS.THIS eminent sculptor, whom Evelyn,in his Diary, speaks of as, withoutcontroversy, the greatest master, bothfor invention and rareness of work, thatthe world had ever possessed, was bornabout the year 1650, but whether inLondon or Holland is doubtful. Oneauthority says, that his father was aDutchman, but that Gibbons himselfwas certainly born in Spur Alley, inthe Strand. When he first distinguishedhimself in the metropolis, he appearsto have resided in Belle Sauvage Court,Ludgate Hill, where he is said to haveexhibited a pot of flowers, so exquisitelycarved, that the individual leaves quiveredand shook with the motion ofthe passing coaches. Stone, however,who relates this fact, does not say ofwhat material these leaves were composed;if they were of wood, whichis not improbable, the execution becomesless a matter of wonder. Manyof the works which he completed at thistime have disappeared; among themmay be mentioned, the capitals, cornices,and eagles, of Dorset Gardens Theatre.From Belle Sauvage Court, he removedto Deptford, where, in a house whichhe shared with a musician, he wasfound by Evelyn, who thus relates theinterview. < 1671, January 18th. Thisday I first acquainted his majesty withthat incomparable young man, Gibbons,whom I lately met with in an obscureplace, by mere accident, as I waswalking near a poor, solitary thatchedhouse, in a field in our parish (Dept-ford),near Says Court. I found himshut in ; but, looking in at the window,I perceived him carving the largecartoon of Tintoret, a copy of which Ihad myself brought from Venice,where the original painting remains. Iasked if I might enter ; he opened thedoor to me civilly, and I saw himabout such a work, as, for curiosity ofhandling, drawing, and studious exactness,I had never before seen in all mytravels. I asked him why he workedin such an obscure and lonesome place ?He told me, it was that he might applyhimself to his profession without interruption,and wondered not a little howI had found him out. I asked him ifhe was unwilling to be made known tosome great man, for that I believed itmight turn to his profit : he answered,that he was but as yet a beginner, butwould not be sorry to sell off that piece.On demanding his price, he said, anhundred pounds. In good earnest, thevery frame was worth the money, therebeing in nature nothing so tender anddelicate as the flowers and festoonsabout it, and yet the work was verystrong: in the piece were more thanan hundred figures of men, &c. Ifound he was likewise musical; andvery civil, sober, and discreet in hisdiscourse." Gibbons's talents and mannersso much interested Evelyn in hisfavour, that he recommended him toKing Charles, who declared, he wouldgo to Deptford, and see the artist.Before his majesty, however, had setout on his visit, Gibbons came with hissculpture to Whitehall, where the followingscene occurred. " The king,"says Evelyn, "saw the carving at SirR. Browne's chamber, who was astonishedat the curiosity of it, but wascalled away, and sent it to the queen'schamber. There, a French peddling-woman,who used to bring baubles outof France, for the ladies, began to findSCULPTORS.Jfault with several things in it, whichshe understood no more than an ass oramonkey. So, in a kind of indignation Icaused it to be taken back, and sent downto the cottage again. He, not long after,sold it to Sir G. Viner, for 80 : it waswell worth 100 without the frame."Evelyn now recommended Mr. Gibbonsto Sir Christopher Wren, whoemployed him in the embellishmentsof Windsor, and, soon after, the kinggave him a place in the Board ofWorks. The most tasteful ornamentsin the royal palaces were from thehand of Gibbons ; and the simplicityof his foliage, in the chapel at Windsor,at once, as Walpole says, setting off,and atoning for the glare of Verrio'spainting, has been unanimously anddeservedly admired. At Windsor, healso carved a very fine pedestal, inmarble, for the equestrian statue ofKing Charles, by Stadia; a piece ofworkmanship, in the opinion of LordOxford, so superior to the statue, thathe considered the latter but as a signto draw the eye of a passenger to thepedestal. That at Charing Cross isalso from his chisel, and has beendeservedly admired for the beauty ofits proportions, and the elegance andboldness of its carvings. The nextwork of our artist, who now resided inthe Piazza, Covent Garden, and hadreached the height of his reputation,was the statue of James the Second,which now stands at the back ofWhitehall. Its execution was commissionedby one Tobias Rustat, who,at the same time, ordered one to bemade of King Charles, and presentedthe two, respectively, to the royalbrothers. Both were of brass, andpaid for at the price of 500 each ;that of Charles, which stands in thehospital, at Chelsea, is far inferior tothe statue of James, though, it shouldbe observed, Walpole has some doubtof the latter being the production ofthe subject of our memoir. Gibbonswas also employed to execute a statueof Charles the Second, for the RoyalExchange ; but he deputed the executionof it sit is doubtful whether he evensketched it) to one Quelling, of Antwerp,reserving to himself, by means of alicense, which he obtained from theking, the exclusive right of engravingand publishing a print of the statue.Though the talent of the subject ofour memoir lay chiefly in ornamentalcarving, his reputation caused him tobe employed on some magnificentpieces of sculpture. In the church ofEton, in Rutlandshire, is a splendidtomb for Baptist, Lord Viscount Camden,twenty-two feet high and fourteenwide, from his hand. He received1,000 for this work, of which thedecorative portion is in his best style ;but the figures of the earl and hislady do not bear out the words ofEvelyn, that he was " as great a masterin the statuaries art." His finest works,perhaps, if we except those at Chatsworth,are his carvings in the choir ofSt. Paul's Cathedral, and the woodenthrone in Canterbury Cathedral ; forthe former of which he was paid1,333 7*. 5d.; for the latter, only70. "At Burleigh," observes Walpole,is a noble profusion of his carving,in picture-frames, chimney-pieces, anddoor-cases and the Last Supper, inalto-relief, finely executed. At Chatsworth,where a like taste collectedornaments by the most eminent livingartists, are many by Gibbons, particularlyin the chapel. In the greatante-chamber are several dead fowl, overthe chimney, finely executed ; and overa closet-door, a pen, not distinguishablefrom a real feather. When Gibbonshad finished his works in that palace,he presented the duke with a pointcravat, a woodcock, and a medal, withhis own hand, all preserved, in a glass-case,in the gallery." Gibbons, however,had much assistance in his worksat Chatsworth ; and, indeed, some haveaccorded the merit of the whole to oneSamuel Watson, of Derbyshire. Thisperson was, undoubtedly, employed byGibbons, but only in a subordinate capacity; what hand, indeed, but that ofour artist, could have executed thatwonderful piece of carving, the net ofgame, at Chatsworth ?Gibbons is stated, by Davies, in hisView of Derbyshire, published in 1810,to have lost his life, about 1707, by afall from a scaffold, raised to completethe carvings in the chapel at Chatsworth; but this is certainly erroneous.He lived many years afterwards; and,in 1714, was appointed master-carverin wood to George the First, with asalary of eighteen pence per day. HisLEWIS FRANCIS ROUBILIAC.death took place at his own house, inlow Street, Covent Garden, on the3rd of August, 1721.To the works of Gibbons alreadymentioned, may be added, the font inSt. James's Church, Westminster, representingAdam and Eve, John theBaptist, and Philip and the Eunuch ;a bust, in bronze, of King James theSecond, now in Windsor Castle ;chimney-pieces in several noblemen'smansions ; the altar-piece of TrinityCollege, Oxford ; and the decorationsof Wentworth House, scarcely inferior tothose of Chatsworth. Gibbons wasmarried ; but of his private history, orcharacter, his biographers have saidlittle or nothing. From a bust of hisown, he appears to have dressedsomewhat pompously : his countenanceas depicted by Kneller, is stern, butintellectual ; and there is also a portraitof him and his wife by Closterman.As an artist, he excelled all others,both before and after him, in ornamentalcarving ; and, indeed, if excellencein this branch of art had notdied with Gibbons, we should have,perhaps, little reason to complain ofthe nakedness of our public architecture.However this may be, Englandcertainly, possesses no artist capable ofgiving to wood, or stone, " the looseand airy lightness of flowers, andchaining together the various productionsof the elements, with a freedisorder natural to each species." Such,according to Walpole, was the effectproduced by the chisel of Gibbons ;in statuary, though he was not so greatas in carving, few successors of anynote in England have surpassed him.LEWIS FRANCIS ROUBILIAC.LEWIS FRANCIS ROUBILIACwas born at Lyons, in France, aboutthe year 1695, and studied sculptureunder Balthazar, an eminent artist, ofDresden. He came to London, in 1720,and was at first employed to model foraperson of the name of Carter. Hisearliest patron was Sir Edward Walpole,whose pocket-book he had pickedup in the street, and, though thecontents were valuable, refused allremuneration, except the present of afat buck annually. Sir Edward introducedhim to Cheer, the sculptor, andby him Roubiliac was mentioned as afit person to make a statue of Handel,for Vauxhall Gardens. The boldnessand originality of the style were muchadmired ; and it was manifest that agenius of no ordinary stamp had takenthe chisel in hand. The influence ofWalpole, and the sculptor's own merit,brought him the patronage of government,who commissioned him to executea monument, for Westminster Abbey,to John, Duke of Argyle. The conceptionof this performance is veryfine: the duke is expiring at the footof a pyramid, on which History iswriting his actions, whilst Minerva andEloquence are deploring his fall. Thefigure of Eloquence is all animationand emotion : Canova is said to havestood long before it in mute admiration,and to have exclaimed, on passing fromit, " That is one of the noblest statuesI have seen in England !"Roubiliac's reputation was now completelyestablished; and, indeed, thedearth of native talent which prevailedat the time, could not fail of renderingeminence like his conspicuous andunrivalled. The numerous commissionshe received put in his power the meansof acquiring a speedy fortune ; but ashepreferred fame to money, he wasnot over solicitous about his prices.Among his most celebrated works,which he executed about this time,were two monuments, on a very magnificentscale, in memory of the Dukeand Duchess of Montagu, at Boughton,in Northamptonshire ; the statue ofDuncan Forbes, in Edinburgh, andof George the First, and the Duke ofSomerset, in the Senate House, atCambridge. His next works were,the monuments of Warren and Wade,and the statues of Shakspeare andNewton; the former for Trinity Col-sculptors.lege, Cambridge, and the latter forGarrick, who bequeathed it to theBritish Museum. ' The Sir Isaac Newton,"says Chantrey, " is the noblest,I think, of all our English statues.There is an air of nature, and a loftinessof thought about it, which noother artist has, in this country, Isuspect, reached. You cannot imagineanything grander in sentiment, andthe execution is every way worthy ofit." In the Shakspeare, Roubiliac wasnot so successful; and Garrick complainedof some veins in the marble,which marred the expression of theface, asking if " Shakspeare was markedwith mulberries ?" The sculptor admittedthe defect, and, to satisfy thegreat Roscius, hewed off the head, andput on one of purer marble.In his fifty-first year, Roubiliac paida visit to Rome ; but what impressionwas made upon him by the works ofart there, is doubtful. All that isknown respecting his journey has beenthus laconically related by Flaxman :Roubiliac went to Italy was absentfrom home three months going andreturning stayed three days in Rome,and laughed at the sublime remains ofancient sculpture."Besides some busts of eminent men,both dead and living, the only famousworks that Roubiliac executed, inaddition to those already mentioned,were the monuments of Mrs. Nightingaleand of Handel, both in WestminsterAbbey. The former is wellknown as one ot the most strikingand singular in the edifice where itstands ; it is that where Death, whohas come out of a sepulchral door,stands with his dart pointed against afemale, who is dying in the arms ofher husband. Some objections havebeen taken to the figure of Death ;and Allan Cunningham, who quarrelswith it as the " common dry-bones ofevery vulgar tale," seems to think itshould have had the indistinctness conveyedin Milton's linesWhat icemM his head,Ths likeness of a kingly crown bad onThe comparison appears to us quite outof place ; it is as much as to complainof Roubiliac for not defining that whichthe poet has expressed to be visiblyindefinable; Death, if introduced atall, must be represented in some formor other ; and if Roubiliac had onlysculptured of the grim monarch " whatseemed his head," it might, to thosewho expect marble to speak for itself,have seemed anything else. Thestatue of Handel was the last work ofthe subject of our memoir ; he died onthe llth of January, 1762, and wasburied in the neighbourhood of hisresidence, in St. Martin's Churchyard.Roubiliac was not very dignifiedeither in look or person, though he issaid to have been a gentleman aswell as a genius ; his countenance wasopen and intelligent, and bespoke animagination at once lofty and restless.He was an enthusiast in his art, andwas so wrapt up in his designs, thathe has been known, in the midst ofdinner, to drop his knife and fork, fallback in his chair, and then start up inasort of ecstasy at some conceptionwhich, at the moment, had struck him.He took nature for his model, wheneverhe discovered her in the shape hewished : it was his habit, when he metwith a lady in company whose hand orear was particularly beautiful, to seizeher by the wrist, exclaiming, " Madam,I must have your hand Madam, Ishall have your ear !" He, one night,offered a bed to a friend, and, havingconducted him to his chamber, wishedhim good night, and was himself in the.act of retiring, when he heard hisguest exclaiming, " Roubiliac, Rou-iliac,come here 1" " What is dematter ?" said the sculptor, burstinginto the apartment. " The matter!"said his friend, " look there !" andpointed to the bed, in which lay acorpse. " Oh, dear ! oh, dear !" exclaimedRoubiliac, affected to tears, " it is poorNegro Mary, my house-maid. Shedied yesterday, and they have laidher out here. Poor Mary 1 Oh, dearme ! Come, I shall find you anotherbed."As a sculptor, Roubiliac holds ahigher place than Flaxman was willingto allow him ; but, in public estimation,he deservedly ranks as high as Flaxmanhimself. There is, perhaps, somewhatof extravagance in his imagination ; butunder his chisel, the marble assumed avitality that all but breathed. Heexcelled most in single statues; andsome of them are worthy of the com-THOMAS BANKS.aliment which Roubiliac paid to theunknown sculptor of one of the figuresthat support the canopy over the statueof Sir Francis Vere, in WestminsterAbbey : as Gayer, the abbey mason,passed, the subject of our memoir seizedhim by the arm, and, pointing to thefigure, exclaimed, " Hush! he will speaksoon !" Roubiliac is not now unrivalled;but Lord Chesterfield did not over estimatehis merits when he said of him,that " he was our only statuary of hisday, and that all other artists weremere stone-cutters."THOMAS BANKS.THOMAS BANKS, whose father wasland-steward to the Duke of Beaufort,was born in Lambeth, on the 22nd ofDecember, 1735. After having receiveda good education, he was apprenticedto Kent, the architect ; but, on quittinghis master, devoted himself to sculpture,and is said to have practised, for sometime,the profession of a wood-carver.In what manner he obtained a knowledgeof the art, in which he afterwardsbecame so eminent, has not been ascertained; but he had made such progress,in 1760, that his models obtained-theapprobation of Sir Joshua Reynolds,and, upon their exhibition at the RoyalAcademy, of all the academicians. Between1763 and 1769, he received fiveprizes from the Society of Arts ; and, in1770, he obtained the gold medal fromthe Academy, and, in 1772, was sent, attheir expense, to Rome. Among theworks, by which he had acquiredreputation previous to his quitting England,were, .phineas bearing Anchisesfrom the Siege of Troy, and a groupeof Mercury, Argus, and lo ; the latterwas particularly admired, and calledforth an observation from Reynolds,that Banks was " the first Britishsculptor who had produced works ofclassic grace."He remained in Rome seven years,during which period he improved himselfconsiderably in the use of thechisel, and produced some groupes offirst-rate merit. Among them may bementioned, Caractacus and his Familyin the presence of Claudius, now in thepossession of the Duke of Buckingham,at Stowe ; Psyche stealing the GoldenFlame, intended as a portrait of thePrincess Sophia of Gloucester; andLove, catching a Butterfly. On hisreturn to London, he opened a galleryand studio, in Newman Street butnot finding," says his daughter, " histalents sufficiently appreciated at home,he determined on making a trial ofRussia, where he had very favourableprospects held out to him by the court,"He accordingly proceeded to Peters-burgh,in 1784, but returned, after anabsence of two years, little satisfiedwith his visit to the court of Catherine.The empress, however, had receivedhim kindly, purchased some of hisworks, and commissioned him to executeothers; but he liked neither theclimate nor the people sufficiently well,to induce him to settle in the Russiancapital. One of his finest works, afterhis return, was The Mourning Achilles :it was on its road to the Academy,when the sculptor saw it overturned inthe wagon, and broken in the street.It had been the work of a whole year;but, instead of repining at the accident,he returned home as if nothing hadhappened ; and, as the statue was ofplaster of Paris, succeeded in repairingit. It did not obtain a purchaser,and is now in the hail of the BritishInstitution. His next performanceswere, Thetis dipping the Infant Achilles,and Thetis and her Nymphs ascendingfrom the Sea, to condole with Achilleson the Death of Patroclus. The firstwas a commission from Mr. Johnes, ofHafod, in Cardiganshire, at whose seatBanks passed much of his time inthe summer ; the latter is one of hisfinest and most popular efforts. Theseand other works, obtained for him therank of academician, on which occasionhe presented the Academy with thefigure of a fallen Titan, two-thirds thesize of human life. It displays greatgenius, but is inferior to his representation,in relief, of The BattleSCULPTORS,between Jupiter and the Titans, a workof not more than ten or twelve incheslong, and seven inches high. Thereputation of Banks, however, wasprincipally established by a beautifulpiece of monumental sculpture, nowin Ashbourne Church, Derbyshire, representingthe infant daughter of SirBrooke Booth, Bart. During theperiod of its exhibition at SomersetHouse, it excited considerable sensation ;female beholders were deeply affected,and the queen and the princesses aresaid to have shed tears, while viewingit. Banks's latest works were those inwhich he least succeeded ; the monumentto Sir Eyre Conte, in WestminsterAbbey, and to Captains Westcott andBurgess, in the same place. He died,on the 2nd of February, 1805, and wasburied in Paddington Churchyard. Atablet to his memory, in WestminsterAbbey, justly describes him as " asculptor whose superior abilities addeda lustre to the arts of his country, andwhose character, as a man, reflectedhonour on human nature."Banks had a calm and dignifiedcountenance ; in his person, he was talland erect; and his manners were thoseof a complete gentleman. He possesseda most liberal and benevolent disposition; visited the poor and sick in theirown dwellings, encouraged and assistedall beginners in art, and was an exampleto his brother artists in the purity ofhis life. He was survived by an onlydaughter, who draws a very amiablepicture of her father's character.As a sculptor, Banks approachednearer to the excellence of the ancients,than any artist this country has produced; some of his sketches (the mostmeritorious, though least known, of hisperformances) are worthy of MichaelAngelo. He received but cold encouragementfrom his own countrymen ;and is another instance of the failureof genius to inspire a national taste forthe imaginative and sublime.JOSEPH NOLLEKENS.JOSEPH NOLLEKENS, descendedfrom a race of artists, and the son of apainter, was born in London, on thellth of August, 1737. After having acquireda knowledge of reading, writing,and arithmetic, he attended Shipley'sdrawing-school, in the Strand, and, inhis thirteenth year, was placed in thestudio of Scheemakers, in Vine Street,Piccadilly. Here he studied drawingand modelling with indefatigable diligence,and, in the course of a few-years,obtained three prizes from theSociety of Arts. In 1760, he proceededto Rome, where he passed ten yearsvery profitably; his skill in modellingprocuring him no small emolument,though he seems to have gained considerablymore by the purchase andsale of old pictures, casts, statues, &c.Among other works which he completedwhile abroad, was a marble oneof Timoclea before Alexander, forwhich the Society of Arts voted himfifty guineas ; and,"at Rome, both Sterneand Garrick sat to him for their busts.He was much employed by Lord Yarborough,for whom he executed severalworks, the best of which were, a Mercury,and Venus chiding Cupid.On his return to England, Nollekensopened a shop and gallery in MortimerStreet; and as his name had becomefavourably known during his absence,he soon obtained a tolerable number ofsitters for their busts. In 1771, he wasadmitted an associate, and, in the followingyear, a member, of the RoyalAcademy. The king, shortly afterwards,sat to him ; and a story is told of hishaving pulled the royal nose about, whentaking measure of it, in a manner morebusiness-like than ceremonious. Aboutthe same time, lie married Mary Welch,the daughter of a magistrate, and aspecial favourite of Dr. Johnson, whosebust is said to be one of Nollekens'sbest. The great moralist appears tohave been on intimate terms withNolly," as he used to call him ; andin reference to the lady just mentioned,observed, " he thought Mary wouldhave been his, if little Joe had notstepped in."JOSEPH NOLLEKENS.161)Nollekens began to exhibit at theAcademy in 1771, and continued tosend his works there until within avery few years of his death. CupidsSenses, and Apollos, were his favouritesubjects ; but they gained himlittle applause in comparison with hisbusts. Those that added most to thesculptor's reputation, were the heads ofPitt and Fox; the Prince of Wales;the Dukes of Bedford and York ; LordsCastlereagh, Aberdeen, Erskine, andLiverpool; and Messrs. Canning, Perceval,West, the painter, and Courts,the banker. 'Though the life of Nollekens wasunusually long, little has been relatedof him that pertains strictly to biography; a mass of gossip and anecdotehas been told of him ; but that hewas blunt and honest, sometimes mean,and sometimes liberal ; that he heldthe chisel till his eighty-second year;that his wife was jealous of the femaleswho sat to him for models, and diedin August, 1817; and that legacy-hunterscrowded about the sculptor inhis last moments, are all that we canglean from the mass of matter abovealluded to, in addition to what hasbefore been stated. The subject of somuch tittle-tattle and anecdote died, ofnatural infirmity, on the 23rd of April,1823.Nollekens, if we may judge from abust of him by Chantrey, had a countenancein which intelligence andsimplicity were depicted, in person,he was ill shaped, and so short, thathe used to be called one of the threelittle men of the Academy ; Fuseliand Flaxman being the other two.His manners were boorish, but notunpleasantly so; a want of educationunfitted him for learned conversation,yet his remarks were, sometimes, sensibleenough to obtain the approbationof Dr. Johnson. He preferred, however,the society of the uncultivated to thatof the polite, though the latter neverput him out of his way ; with theformer, he was familiar and unbending,and would delight to mimic the Londoncries, or hum snatches of old songs withthem, over a pint of porter. Hispenuriousness has been overrated ; andthough there is some truth in theinstances that have been given of hisparsimony, quite as many have been related,and more are to be credited, of hisliberality. Of this, after the death of hiswife, he gave various proofs : he wouldfrequently say to his nurse, " I cannotsleep I cannot rest. Is there anyone,with whom I am acquainted, thatwould be better for a little money anyperson that wants a little money to dohim good ?" To those who came tohim as models, he would often give anadditional present of 10; to hisservants, on his birth-day, he alwaysgave 10, and sometimes-20 ; and,when Turner asked him for a subscriptionof one guinea to the Artists' Fund,he presented him with thirty. Hearingthat a poor neighbour was unable toapprentice his son for want of theadequate premium, he sent him 100for the purpose ; and other anecdotesof his generosity are not wanting toprove the falsehood of Fuseli's assertion,that " Nolly was never known tobleed." Numerous are the stories toldof him and his sitters: whilst modellinga lady of rank, who looked ratherhaughtily, he said to her, " Don't lookso scorned" (a favourite expression ofhis) " else you will spoil my bust andyou're a very fine woman I think itwill make one of my very best busts."When the Prince of Wales was sittingto him, he could scarcely help smilingat the grotesque appearance of Nol-helens,whose head kept occasionallydisappearing beneath the immensecollar of his coat. The sculptor, observingthe suppressed smile of hisroyal highness, wagged his head, exclaiming," If you laugh, I'll make afool of you!" A widow once came tohim, in tears, and desired , a modelfor a monument to her husband,exclaiming, as she departed, "Do whatyou please, Mr. Nollekens, but, oh! doitquickly." Nollekens set to work,and had not long completed the order,before the widow again made herappearance. " Dear Mr. Nollekens,you have not, perhaps, commenced themodel ?" " Ay, madam, but I have,"said he; " and finished it, too, thoughit is only three months since youcalled, and there it stands." " Ah !"sighed the lady, " there it stands,indeed, and very charming it is; but,my good friend, since I last saw you, anold Roman acquaintance ,of yours hasmade me an offer, and 1 don't knowSCULPTORS.how he would like to see, in our church,such a proof of my affection, and yourskill, in behalf of my late husband."A hundred guineas, madam, is mycharge for the model," was all thesculptor's reply; which the lady paid,and departed.His honesty led him to despiseflattery, especially from those he disliked.When Wolcot had offendedhim, by publishing, as he told him,such lies of the king," the formerexclaimed, " Well said, little Nolly ! Ilike the man who sticks to his friend ;you shall make a bust of me for that.""I'll see you d d first!" repliedNollekens ; " and I'll tell you, besides, noman in the Academy, but Opie, wouldhave painted your picture ; you richlydeserved the broken head you got fromGifford ; so now you know my mind."As a sculptor, Nollekens has risen toeminence only by his busts ; his monumentaland poetic sculpture are everyway inferior. The monumental work,however, of Mrs. Howard, dying inchildbed, with her infant, and thefigure of Religion by her side, is anexception to his works of this nature ;it is altogether a beautiful and impressiveperformance. His heads werefinely and faithfully chiselled ; if hefailed anywhere, it was near the eye,where he seldom cut deep enough. Inall that art could achieve, Nollekenswas unequalled; but of genius he hasafforded little proof. He has left usbeautiful forms to admire and forget ;but we in vain look for, in the productionsof his chisel, that soul and sentiment,of which something more thanearthly inspiration is the source.JOHN BACONJOHN BACON, the son of a cloth-worker,was born at Southwark, inSurrey, on the 24th of November, 1740.After having fallen into the pit of asoap-boiler, and been run over by aloaded cart, he recovered health enoughto assist in his father's business. Wherehe received his education does not appear.At the age of fourteen, he wasapprenticed to a porcelain manufacturer,in Bow Churchyard, where he learnedto model birds, beasts, &c., and to paintfigures on plates and dishes. The claymodels, sent by the sculptors to beburnt in the pottery furnace, drew hisfirst attention to their art; he examinedthem by day, and tried to imitate themat night. He had made such progress,in 1759, that he ventured to send to theSociety of Arts a figure of Peace, forwhich he received ten guineas ; and hewas subsequently awarded other premiumsto the amount of j200. On theestablishment of the Royal Academy,he became a student ; and, in 1769,received the first gold medal for sculptureever given by that society. Hewas shortly afterwards employed inCode's artificial stone manufactory,at Lambeth, where he executed severalornamental statues, and a colossal headof Ossian, which excited particularattention. In 1770, he exhibited a claystatue of Mars, which procured hiselection as an associate of the Academy,and a gold medal from" the Society ofArts. West, the painter, on seeing it,said " If this is his first essay, whatwill this man be when he arrives atmaturity ? "He now took a shop and lodgings inArdour Street, where he was visitedby Dr. (afterwards Archbishop) Markham; on whose recommendation he wasemployed to make a bust of the king.His majesty was much pleased withBacon, and asked him, amongst otherquestions, if he had learnt his art out ofEngland?" On the sculptor's replyingin the negative, his royal sitter answered,"I am glad of h; you will bethegreater honour to us." In 1774, heremoved to Newman Street; and astory is told, of the house he occupiedhaving been taken by a friend, and fittedup for him without his knowledge, tillhe was told it was at his service free ofexpense. Here he executed somefigures in marble, the finest of whichwere those composing the monument ofLord Chatham, erected by the city ofLondon, in Guildhall. It produced aJOHN BACON.great sensation at the time, and is stillviewed as one of the most beautifulspecimens of sculpture which the metropoliscontains. In 1780, he had becomea member of the Royal Academy, andwas at the height of his reputation. Hereceived commissions, about the sameperiod, to execute a monument to LordHalifax, in Westminster Abbey, thestatue of Blackstone, for All Souls'College, Oxford, and that of Henry theSixth, for the anti-chapel at Eton. Heused to tell an amusing story about thelast commission : a gentleman, lookinglike a distressed clergyman, called inupon him, one morning, and, after expressinghis admiration at the sculptor'sworks, said, " Now, sir, you shall, if youplease, make me a bust of King Henrythe Sixth, and here is half price." Whenit was finished, the same gentlemancalled, and said, "Your bust has but onefault, sir, it ought to have been carveddown to the feet; in short, I musthave a full statue, to be placed in thechapel of Eton College."When government determined toraise a monument to Lord Chatham, inWestminster Abbey, the Academy,who had the right of naming the sculptor,had several designs laid before them,but Bacon went with his own to theking, who approved of it so much thathe declared no one else should makethe monument. His next popularworks were, the monument of MajorPierson, of Mrs. Draper, a statue ofVenus, and a colossal head of Jupiter.About the same time, he executed, andsent to the Academy, where it nowremains, his figure of Thames, a performancenot reckoned among his happiestefforts. The queen is said to haveasked him " Why he made so frightfula figure ?" his excuse was, " Artcannot always effect what is ever withinthe reach of Nature, the union ofbeauty and majesty." About this time,he made an offer to government to doall the national monuments at a certainper centage below the parliamentaryprice ; which was, however, not accepted.His brother artists werenaturally incensed at hearing of thisproposition, and Fuseli is said to haveexclaimed, "Spirit of Phidias! Bacon isto do all the stone work for the navy andarmy, they ought also to give him thecontract for hams and pork." In 1785,his statue of Johnson, and, in 1795,that of Howard, were placed in St.Paul's Cathedral ; they are two of hisfinest performances, conceived with themind of a poet, and executed with thehand of a master.It is unnecessary to particularize allhis various works ; he continued increasingboth in fame and fortune,almost up to the moment of his death,which took place on the 6th of August,1799. He was buried in Whitendd'.-,Chapel, of which he was a member,and the following inscription, composedby himself, was placed upon hisgrave: "What I was, as an artist,seemed to me of some importancewhile I lived ; but what I really was,as a believer in Christ Jesus, is theonly thing of importance to me now."He had been twice married, and leftseveral children, amongst whom heequally divided a fortune of 60,000.He was about the middle stature, of afair complexion, with a fine animatedcountenance, and a high, dome-likeforehead. His manners were gentleand pleasing, and no one knewbetter how to adapt himself to hiscompany. Piety was the pervadingfeature of his private character ; andthough some, envious of the worldlyprosperity which accompanied his religiouslife, called him a hypocrite, lieappears to have practised, as well aspreached, the duties of Christianity.Religion, with him," says his biographer,Mr. Cecil, " was not theSunday coat of a formalist; much lesswas it the vile cloak of the hypocrite.It was neither a system of mereopinions, nor the cant of a party ; butachange of heart, and a hope 'full ofimmortality, grounded alone on the.work of a Redeemer. Occupied withbusiness, exalted by favour, and temptedwith wealth, religion still was his grandconcern. Animated by this, his familydwelt in a house of daily prayer andspiritual instruction. He even 'used towatch his workmen while sick, anddiscourse with them upon the importantsubject that lay nearest his heart: insome instances, where he deemed itproper, he prayed with and for them attheir bedside."He has been accused of parsi-copiousness,and his son admits thathe was, occasionally, " little in littleSCULPTORS,things ;" but adds, " he would give aconsiderable sum of money to somepious or charitable design, on the veryday in which he would burn his fingers,by sparing paper, in lighting a candle."Sensible of the importance of religionhimself, he endeavoured to instil it intoothers, both by oral and written admonitions: he composed a variety ofepitaphs for churchyards, and wrotesermons and fables, which do not, however,appear to have been printed. Healso sought, and professed himselfgrateful for, the reproof of his friends ;and one who remarked, with someseverity, upon what appeared to him, inBacon, a too anxious longing after thevain things of this world, says, " I metwith nothing but gratitude for mystrictures, and had the happiness toperceive that my observations were notmade in vain."As a sculptor, Bacon is exceeded bynone in picturesque arrangement, andneatness and elaborateness of execution; but it has been mentioned, asmatter of reproach, that the traces ofan English hand are too perceptible inthe cuttings of his chisel. This isnothing more than a sneer at hisignorance of foreign and ancient art;but, as he himself used to reply tosuch objections, " he saw art throughnature, and approached the dignity ofancient sculpture by the same roadwhich Phidias had walked before him."His invention, however, was limited;in proof of which the following anecdotehas been told : an order having beenleft with the person who conducted hisbusiness, for a monument to the memoryof a private gentleman, he said,on being informed of it, " A privategentleman a small bas-relief will dowas he a benevolent man ? You inquiredthat, I hope." " Yes, sir, hewas benevolent he always gave sixpence,they said, to an old woman whoopened his pew on a Sunday." " Thatwill do that will do," said Bacon ;we must have recourse to our oldfriend, the pelican."We should not conclude our memoirwithout stating that Bacon renderedgreat service to sculpture, by the inventionof a new pointing machine, withwhich a mason could rough-hew a statuein half the time formerly required ; healso wrote a Disquisition on the Characterof Painting and Sculpture, publishedin Rees's edition of Chambers'Dictionary.JOHN FLAXMAN.JOHN FLAXMAN was born atYork, on the 6th of July, 1755. Hisfather moulded plaster figures, whichhe occasionally took with him intothe country for sale ; but, six months"after the birth of John, opened ashop in London, where the subjectof our memoir, who was afflicted withgreat bodily weakness in his infancy,was to be seen sitting behind thecounter in a little chair, with crutchesbeside him, and a book or drawingbefore him. In his tenth year he completelyrecovered health and strength,but does not appear to have been sentto school for education. He was quicklytaught to read and write at home : andhis own application, and the informationof others, who observed his desirefor knowledge, supplied the rest. Aclergyman, of the name of Mathew, andhis wife, are mentioned as his chief instructors,and from them he is said tohave acquired that partial knowledge ofthe classics, which he afterwards displayedin his works.The figures in his father's shop hadgiven him an early taste for modelling,and he had resolved on becoming asculptor some time previously to his fifteenthyear, when he was entered astudent of the Royal Academy. Atfirst, however, he drew better than hemodelled, though a cast, which he presentedshortly after his admission tothe Academy, obtained for him thesilver medal. In his struggle for thegold one, he was foiled by Engleheart,when, according to one of his biographers,he had made sure of obtainingit. " I had made up my mind," hiswords are said to have been, "that IJOHN FLAXMAN.was to win, and even invited somefriends to cheer themselves at my table,till I should return from the Academywith the prize. It was given, by reynolds,to Engieheart I burst into tears:this sharp lesson humbled my conceit ;and I determined to redouble myexertions, and put it, if possible, beyondthe power of any one to make mistakesfor the future." From his twentieth tohis twenty-seventh year, he wasemployed, chiefly, in furnishing modelsfor Mr. Wedge wood's well-knownestablishment ; devoting his spare timeto his Homer and Bible, from both ofwhich he loved to make designs.In 1782, at which time he hadexhibited about thirteen works at theAcademy, he took a house and studioin Ardour Street, and married anaccomplished woman, named Annepenman. On hearing of his marriage,Sir Joshua Reynolds told him " he wasruined for an artist ;" an observationthat mortified him, but stimulated himto exertion. " I have long thought,"he said to his wife, " that I could riseto distinction in art. without studyingin Italy ; but these words of Reynoldshave determined me. I shall go toRome as soon as my affairs are fit tobe left; and, to shew him that wedlockis for a man's good, rather than hisharm, you shall accompany me." Hewas not able to carry his intention intoeffect till 1787, in the spring of whichyear he set out for the eternal city. Heremained there seven years, in thecourse of which he was elected amember of the Academies of Florenceand Verona, and, among other works,executed his .beautiful illustrations ofHomer, aeschylus, and Dante; thoseof the last amounted to one hundredand nine, and, as well as a small groupeof Cephalic and Aurora, were commissionsfrom Mr. Hope, the author ofAnastatius.On his return to England, Flaxmanfixed his residence in BuckinghamStreet, Fitzroy Square ; and, shortlyafterwards, gained universal applauseby his magnificent monument, in memoryof the Earl of Mansfield. Hereceived j2,500 for this performance ;and Banks is said to have exclaimed,when he saw it, " This little man cutsus all out!" In 1797, he was electedan associate of the Academy ; and amember, about a year or two afterwards.when he presented a marble groupe ofApollo and Marshal. He had previouslyadded to his reputation by theexhibition of some sketches, in bas-relief,from the New Testament, anda monument of Sir William Jones,for the chapel of University College,Oxford ; and when the subject ofthe Naval Pillar was in agitation, hepublished a letter to the committee,in which he offered to erect a statueof Britannia, two hundred feet high,on the top of Greenwich Hill. Theproposition was not acceded to ;and, to add to Flaxman's disappointment,his gigantic undertaking wasridiculed in such language as this:Flaxman," said some critic of theday, " is not contented with cuttingmarble into men ; he wishes to hewGreenwich Hill into a woman, largeenough to graze a couple of goats inher lap." After the peace of Amienshe visited Paris, where he is said tohave refused an introduction to Buonaparte,and to have repulsed the civilitiesof the painter, David, with loathingand disgust. In 1810, on the establishmentof a professorship of sculpture bythe Academy," he was elected to thechair, from which he delivered tenlectures, that have been praised for thejustness of their sentiments, but condemnedfor heaviness of style, andinfelicity of expression. From 1811 to1820, Flaxman executed some of hisfinest works; in the year last mentioned,he lost his wife, and was himselfremoved from the scene of his magnificentlabours, on the 7th of December,In stature, Flaxman was short andslim, and was so plain in his dress, thata degree more so would have made itmean. He had a fine forehead, butpossessed by no means a striking countenance;and, with his long dark hair,combed down on the side of his head,might have been taken, at times, forthe most sedate of Methodist parsons.Of a more exemplary private characterwe have never read; his family andservants loved him with a devotionbordering on enthusiasm, and no oneever had an interview with him, whodid not go away with feelings of admirationand respect. When themen, whom he employed in his shop,SCULPTORS.staid away through illness, he notonly paid them their full wages, butdischarged their doctor's bills, andbehaved to them with such invariablekindness, that they used to speak of himas " the best master God ever made''From his youth he entertained a deepsense of the im pot tance of religion ; andthough said to have been latterly aSwedenborgian, discharged his dutieswith a serenity and simplicity tincturedby moroseness or melancholy. Inspeaking of" the devout feelings of thissingular man," a friend said, "there wasno ostentatious display of piety nay, hewas, in some measure, a lover of mirthand sociality but he was a reader ofthe Scriptures, and a worshipper of sincerity; and if ever purity visited theearth, she resided with John Flaxman."He only cared for money as the meansof acquiring bread, and assisting thosewho wanted it ; he once lost a largesum, by undertaking to execute, for theBishop of Derry, four figures largerthan life, from Ovid's Metamorphoses,for 600; yet, whenever he thought hehad been paid too much, he alwaysreturned part of the purchaser's voluntaryprice. He was, for some time, acollector for the parish of St. Anne, andin that capacity was often known tosupply, from his own purse, the deficienciesof poor rate-payers. Hischaracter may be summed up in somewords put into the mouth of an anonymousartist, by Allan Cunningham.Flaxman," he is made to say, "isinaccessible to either censure or praise ;he is proud, but not shy; diffident, butnot retiring ; as plain as a peasant in hisdress, and as humble as the rudestclown ; yet even all that unites inmaking up this remarkable mixture ofsimplicity and genius ; and were you totry any other ingredients, may I behanged if you would form so gloriousa creature L"Flaxman put his hand to four kindsof sculpture : the religions, the poetic,the classic, and the historical. He wasgreat in all, but greatest in the first;for there, his whole soul was in hischisel, and he was dedicating his geniusto what, in his earliest love of art, he hadpromised entire devotion, morality andreligion. His best works of this classare, Christ raising from the dead thedaughter of Darius ; the ArchangelMichael overcoming Satan ; a monumentto Mrs. Morley, in GloucesterCathedral ; another to Miss Cromwell,personifying the passage " Come, yeblessed;" and a third, in memory ofthe family of Sir Francis Baring, forMildest Church, Hands, embodying thewords, " Thy will be done ; thy kingdomcome; deliver us from evil." His historicalstatues are numerous; amongthem are those of Pitt, Sir John Moore,Warren Hastings, Lord Howe, &c. ;but they are by no means his bestperformances. His poetic works wereinterior to his classical; of the latter,the Shield of Achilles, made by Arundeland Bridge, deserves particular notice :for the drawings and model he was paid620, and George the Fourth gavetwo thousand guineas for the first, eastin silver gilt It contains one hundredhuman figures, and twelve differentscenes, all of which are magnificentlywrought. From the beauty of Flaxman'sworks there were two drawbacks; heworked his marbles from half sizemodels, and used the chisel with lesssuccess than the modelling tool ; buthis conceptions were perfect, and, uponthe whole, no English sculptor, with theexception of Chantrey, .came near tohim. Besides his lectures, the articlesArmour, Basso-relievo, Beauty,Bronze, Bust, Composition, Cast,and Ceres, were written by Flaxman forRees's Encyclopaedia.JOHN DEARE.THIS highly-gifted, but comparativelyunknown, sculptor, was born at Liverpool,on the 18th of October, 1760. Hedisplayed an early passion for drawingand modelling; and, when only tenyears of age, cut ont, in wood, with acommon penknife, a model of a fullgrownskeleton. This extraordinarypiece of carving was six inches and ahalf in height ; the anatomy, accordingJOHN DEARE.to Smith, his biographer, who speaksfrom observation, strictly correct; theribs and double bones most minutelyperforated, and the limbs, fingers, andtoes, connected by the slightest ligamentsleft in the wood, without theassistance of wires. At the age ofsixteen, he was articled to ThomasCarter, of Piccadilly, and employed incarving ornaments for chimney-pieces,some of which he executed in amanner not unworthy of Gibbons. Butit was in historical composition that hewas ambitious of excelling; and tothis branch of his art he devoted allhis leisure hours. After having studieda short time at the Royal Academy, hedetermined to become a candidate forthe gold medal, in 1780. He had twocompetitors ; but, as he says in a letterto his lather, " 1 am told I shall beatthem: I have received the most intoxicatingcompliments from everyone;but I also hear that my youth is againstme, for, if they give it me, it willmake me conceited, and neglect mystudies." On the 13th of December,he writes : " I have carried my point,and suppose my antagonists were neverbeaten so shamefully before ; the roomsrang with the compliments of my wellwishers.The president, Sir JoshuaReynolds, standing up, declared themedal adjudged to the model markedE., the production of Mr. John Deare.The secretary calling 'John Deare,' Ibustled through some hundreds ofpersons, and received it from the handsof Sir Joshua."After the expiration of his apprenticeshipto Carter, he still continued tomodel for him ; and, among otherthings, speaks of a tablet, which he didso well for him, that almost all thecarvers in London came to see it Touse his own words, he now began to beconsidered the " first young fellow inthe kingdom ;" and sculptors came tohim with their models, to beg a touchor two from his chisel, as a very greatfavour. Among others, Bacon employedhim to model some figuresfor a monument ; and, indeed, hisabilities were such, that he mightalmost have commanded employment,even from that eminent sculptor. Hisardour and enthusiasm in the pursuitof his art were unbounded ; he seldomwent to sleep before three o'clock, andfrequently, after his return from thetheatre, would make ten or twelvedesigns before he retired to rest. Theobject of his visits to the theatre wasmore for improvement than recreation; he seldom missed seeing a playof Shakspeare's, from whose soliloquieshe took many of his subjects; and,rather than fail hearing the deliveryof them by a fine actor, he would oftengo without a dinner to pay for his admission.He not only studied anatomy,but, in order to catch the expressionof the various passions, sometimescarried his ardour to a height, fromwhich a more sensitive mind wouldhave, perhaps, shrunk with disgust. Notsatisfied with watching the countenancesof malefactors at the gallows, heonce prevailed upon a relative of an executedcriminal, to whom the body hadbeen consigned, to allow him the loan ofthe head for a night. After having cutit off, he conveyed it to the back washhouseof a workshop belonging toCheer, the leaden figure maker, wherehe had determined, by the connivanceof the keeper, to sit up, and mould itat midnight. His task being finished,he carried the head to the sink, to washthe plaster from the hair, in doingwhich it became so filled with water, asto relax the muscles, and cause thejaws to open. Deare, however, wasonly alarmed at the barking of a fierceyard dog, which he had awakened byhis pumping, and which compelledhim to put out his light, and remainwhere he was till the morning.Among other productions of Deare,about this time, we may mention fourbasso-relievos of the seasons, as tabletsfor chimney-pieces. They are, perhaps,the most inferior of his performances,but deserve notice, as being far abovethe generality of things of their kind.In 1785, he was sent out to Rome, asthe Academy's student, for the usualperiod of three years ; and he hadscarcely arrived in that city, beforecommissions of ail sorts crowded inupon him. At the end of the threeyears, he found himself with severalhundred pounds in his pocket, andwork in hand to execute, to the amountof a thousand more. Among hispatrons, were the Earl of Bristol, SirRichard Worsley, Sir Corbet Corbet,the Duke of Sussex, and Lord Ber-sculptors.wick ; which last nobleman paid him700 for a copy of the Apollo BelvidereThe number of commissionshe had to execute prevented him fromreturning to England at the expirationof the above period ; and, indeed, hismarriage with a Roman girl, and thekind friends he met with at Rome,made him by no means anxious to quitthat city. How assiduously, and withwhat honourable ambition", he toiled,may be guessed from the followingPassage, in a letter; to his brotherjoseph : " I assure you I never workedso hard in my life. I have labouredlike a giant to pick up information andexecution in my art. I mention this, toencourage you not to sicken withlabour and knowledge, till you are aleading man in your line, let it be whatit may. Don't lose an hour, withoutpicking up information ; keep yourmind awake to knowledge, till it becomesa habit, and, of course, apleasure ; and you will rejoice, twentyyears hence, when you will becomemore indifferent about every thing."But his career of genius and industrywas drawing to a close, and in a waywhich Smith has, not very appropriately,called " a silly and eccentricexperiment," considering that Deareventured upon it solely from devotionto his art. Among several blocks ofmarble, which he had just purchased,was one of a singular shape, fromwhich he conceived he should be ableto carve a figure in a peculiar attitude ;but in order to make himself quitecertain of the possibility of the blockaffording the full extension of the limbs,according to his imagination, he determinedto sleep upon it during thenight, not without an excusable superstitionthat he might receive some hintsfor his intended statue, from thevisitation of dreams. When he awoke,he found his frame entirely chilled ;and, a few days after, he was seizedwith a fever, which carried him off, onthe 14th of August, 1798.Thus perished, in the prime of life,one, who bade fair to rival the mosteminent sculptors of his day, and hadalready achieved works worthy of thechisel of Canova himself. That greatman was one of Deare's most rapturousadmirers; and West and Sir JoshuaReynolds did him no more thanjustice, in speaking of him in thewarmest terms of admiration and respect.Though he wrought, chiefly, atRome, it was for his own countrymen ;and England may be proud of Laving,among its collections, some of the finestproductions of this admirable sculptor.His Landing of Julius Caesar,, let intothe wall, over the chimney-piece ofthe dining-parlour of John Penn, Esq.,at Stoke Park, has been named as hisbest performance ; but his marine views,and Edward and Eleanor, are, at least,equal, and, in the opinion of many,superior. The celebrated traveller, Dr.Clarke, in speaking of Queen Eleanorsucking the poison from King Edward'sarm, says : " The tradition, however,which, after all, is not disproved by theevidence Fuller has adduced, has givenrise to one of the finest specimens ofmodern sculpture existing in the world;and as it affords, perhaps, the only remainingproof of the surprising abilitiesof an English artist (snatched from thepursuits of fame in the very openingof a career which might have classedhim with the best sculptors of ancientGreece), the author considers it apatriotic duty, to pay some tribute to itsmerit; and, thereby, to the memory ofits author, John Deare, who, at a veryearly period of life, attained to a surprisingdegree of perfection in sculptureand design." No sculptor had a morespirited touch than Deare, or displayedmore taste and knowledge in everythinghe attempted. That his enthusiasmand industry were unprecedented,none will deny ; perfection, and nothingshort of it, was his aim ; and, in someparticulars, he may be said to haveattained it. The hands and feet of hisfigures were pointed out by West, whenvisitor of the Academy, as perfectmodels, to the students. Deare admiredbeautiful hair to such an excess, thatlie would sometimes walk twenty orthirty miles on foot, under a scorchingsun, to mould an antique head of hair,and return to Rome the same day.The character of Deare was that ofa lively, open-hearted, and generousman, though occasionally hasty in temper.Some of his ideas, too, partook ofthat eccentricity which is not uncommonin genius ; he considered, for instance,that it was improper to pray to theDeity with his clothes on, and, in con-richardWESTMACOTT.forty with this notion, was entirelyuncovered when at his devotions. Hisnephew Joseph, says Smith, " afterhaving gained the whole series of silvermedals in the Royal Academy, had,like his uncle, the honour of receivingthe gold medal for the best model ofan original design of David and Goliath."RICHARD WESTMACOTT.RICHARD WESTMACOTT was bornin London, about the year 1775, and, inconformitywith the taste which he earlydisplayed for the art in which he hassince become so eminent, was apprenticedto an able sculptor, a native ofCarrara. In his eighteenth year he wassent to Italy; and, after having made ashort stay at Paris, arrived at Rome inJanuary, 1793. in this city, he wasfortunate in obtaining the friendshipand advice of the illustrious Canova,who suggested to him a plan of study,and first excited his ambition to excelin historical sculpture. On the approachof the unhealthy season, Mr. Westmacottleft Rome for Florence, where, in theyear 1794, he received the first premiumfrom the Academy for the class ofsculpture. Returning to Rome in thefollowing year, he was awarded thepope's medal, at St. Luke's, for composition,and had the gratification ofreceiving it from the cardinals in thepresence of his royal highness the Dukeof Sussex, in the capitol. During asecond visit to Florence, in 1795, thesubject of our memoir was elected amember of the Academy in that city.He passed the next two years in a tourthrough the interior and unfrequentedparts of Italy, and, on one occasion, wasnear losing his life by banditti. He wasattacked near Storta, close to the tomb,vulgarly called Nero's, on the Flaminianway, and received a severe woundon the shoulder, besides being rifled ofeverything. Crossing the Adriatic toTrieste, he pursued his journey throughVienna, Dresden, and Berlin, and arrivedin England at the close of the year 1797.His reputation was not long in beingestablished ; he was elected an associate ofthe Royal Academy, in 1805 ; and, aboutthree years afterwards, his statue ofAddison was erected, in Poet's Corner,Westminster Abbey; representing, asit has been observed, that celebratedwriter with all the placid dignity belongingto his character. In 1809, hecompleted, and erected in the southtransept of St. Paul's Cathedral, themonument to Sir Ralph Abercrombie :an eminent example of the successfultreatment of modern costume in sculpture.In the same year, he producedthe statue of the Duke of Bedford, inRussell Square, the first he had attemptedin bronze. He subsequentlyexecuted, in the same material, the statueof Mr. Fox, in Bloomsbury Square, andof Lord Nelson, at Birmingham ; andthe masterly manner in which he completedthem, led to his being employedon the colossal bronze statue, in HydePark, called the Achilles ; the largestthat has been achieved in any country.The inscription which it bears informsthe spectator that it is erected to Arthur,Duke of Wellington, and his brave companionsin arms; and that the statue,cast from cannon taken in the battlesof Salamanca, Victoria, Toulouse, andWaterloo, is inscribed by their countrywomen.The material, however, doesnot consist entirely of cannon, themetal of that destructive engine beingfound too brittle to be used alone ; andit was, therefore, found necessary to addto twelve four-and-twenty pounders,about a third of metal of a more pliantand fusible kind. The original figure,from which the Achilles is taken, isone of two statues, called, by some,Castor and Pollux, which stand onMonte Cavalry, in Rome. The former,from which Mr. Westmacott's is taken,has been attributed to Phidias; andit is singular, that when Napoleon hadsubjugated Germany, the very groupe inquestion was selected for a device on amedal, struck by him, to commemoratethat event. The Achilles, to use Mr.Westmacott's own words, " has neverbeen equalled for loftiness of conceptionand grandeur of form, and a cast fromSCULPTORS.it has ever been a desideratum in thenorthern academies of sculpture andpainting ; more particularly, as the antiquemarble has been, in many parts,decomposed by exposure to the atmosphere,and will soon be in a moulderingstate." Mr. Westmacott's undertakingwas of great magnitude and difficulty ;but all the merit of the artist wasoverlooked in the general outcry againstwhat was considered the indecency ofhis performance ; and the press and theprint shops concurred for a time inridiculing and decrying his labours.The other chief works of this eminentsculptor are: the monument to LordCollingwood, in St. Paul's ; to the memoryof Sir Isaac Brock and of CaptainJohn Cooke, in the same cathedral;and the monuments of Fox and Pitt, inWestminster Abbey. Among his statues,we may mention a bronze one of Pitt,in the National Debt office, in the OldJewry, and a marble one of LordErskine in the hall of the Society ofLincoln's Inn. The latter is a goodlikeness, but deficient in character: theattitude and expression are more characteristicof the calm and argumentativephilosopher, than of the energetic andeloquent advocate.The works of our artist, which havechiefly attracted attention at the exhibition,are: the beautiful statue of aPeasant Girl, of a Hindoo Girl, and hisexquisite figures of Cupid and Psyche.The Psyche is, perhaps, his chefd'oeuvre; this lovely and divine perModification is in the Duke of Bedford'sgallery, at Woburn : his grace havinggiven a thousand guineas for it.Mr. Westmacott visited France a secondtime in 1815, when he returnedto England with Canova. He waselected a royal academician in 1816;and is also a fellow of the Societyof Antiquaries, and of the DilettantiSociety.FRANCIS Chantry.THE native place of this eminentsculptor is at Norton, a small village inDerbyshire, where he was born onthe 7th of April, 1782. His fatherwas a wealthy farmer, but dying soonafter the birth of his son, the latter waseducated by his mother with a tendernessand solicitude which have beenamply repaid ; for she has survived towitness the fame attendant upon thoseworks, of which we are about to write.Agriculture appears to have been thefirst pursuit of the subject of ourmemoir, after he had left school, butnot his only one ; he had alreadydeveloped a taste for art, by makingvarious models in clay, but with noidea that such an occupation would beconnected with his future profession.In his seventeenth year, he left home,to be articled to a solicitor at Sheffield;but no sooner had he arrived in thattown, than the sight of some figuresin the window of a shop, determinedhim to become a sculptor. He wasaccordingly apprenticed to a carver andgilder, named Ramsay, under whom,or rather, in whose service, he madeall the progress that skill, industry,and enthusiasm, at so early an age,could attain. " During the intervalsof ordinary labour at Sheffield," sayshis biographer, " he did not amusehimself like most young men; but,when retired to his lodgings, lightsmight be seen in his window, atmidnight ; and there would he befound, working at groupes and figures,with unabated diligence, and unweariedenthusiasm." Mr. Ramsay and hispupil had been long mutually dissatisfiedwith each other: the latter,because he found his efforts checkedin his endeavour to be an artist; theformer, because he did not require morethan a mere workman could perform ;and both parties, therefore, separatedwith pleasure. In his twentieth year,Mr. Chantrey purchased the remainderof his time, and, in the month of May,1802, came to London. In the followingJune, he proceeded to Dublin, with theintention of making a tour throughScotland and Ireland ; but a dangerousillness preventing this, he returned toLondon, determined to devote himself,unremittingly, to his professional studies.One of his earliest works was a bustFRANCIS C H A N T R E Y.of his friend, Raphael Smith ; but that,which first made his name known inthe metropolis, was a bust of HomeTooke, iu which he displayed theprinciples of that free, natural style, forwhich he is so much distinguished.About the same time, he executed acolossal head of Satan ; and, " eclipsedas it now is by more celebratedworks," says his biographer, " its gazeof dark and malignant despair neverescapes notice." In 1810, he fixed hisresidence and his studio at Pimlico;and was, soon after, intrusted with theexecution of the statue of George theThird, for the corporation of the cityof London. Before he had completedthis work, he was employed by Mr.Johnes, of Hafod, to make a monumentin memory of his only daughter ;which is said to be a production ofbeauty and tenderness, a scene ofdomestic sorrow, exalted by meditation.In the course of a professional tour inScotland, he executed, besides otherworks, a statue of President Blair, andof the late Lord Melville, for Edinburgh,and an admirable bust ofProfessor Play fair. On his return toLondon, he was employed, by government,to execute monuments for St.Paul's, in memory of Colonel Cadoganand General Bowes, and, afterwards,of General Gillespie. In 1814 and1815, he visited Paris, for the purposeof inspecting the works of art in theLouvre ; and, shortly after his return,commenced upon that exquisite specimenof art, the monument of thetwo sisters, now in Litchfield Cathedral.A work, finished with such skill, andcombining such grace, pathos, andbeauty, was never, perhaps, beheld ;and it is no wonder that, on itsexhibition at the Royal Academy, itwas preferred, by almost every spectator,to the Hebe and Terpsichore ofCanova, which were placed beside it.So eager," it is said, " was the pressto see this groupe of Chantrey's, thata look could not always be obtained:mothers stood over them, and wept ;little children knelt, and kissed them;and the deep impression they made onthe public mind was permanent."Wrought in the same feeling, by Chantry,is a devotional statue of Lady St.Vincent, and a statue of Louisa Russell,one of the Duke of Bedford's daughters.The attitude and expression of thefigure, which stands on tiptoe, fondling,with delight, a dove in her bosom, isexquisitely natural. In proof of thisit is said, that a child of three years'old, coming into the study of the artist,and seeing (he marble infant, held up itshands to the statue, and called aloud,and laughed, with the evident expectationof being attended to.Mr. Chantrey was elected a memberof the Royal Academy in 1818; hispresentation work being a bust of BenjaminWest. About the same time,lie was elected a member of the Royaland Antiquarian Societies, to theformer of which he presented a bustof their president, Sir Joseph Banks.Among his other busts, we maymention those of Walter Scott, Wordsworth,and Rennie, the civil engineer ;the last has been reckoned, by many,his master-piece. One of his greatestmonumental efforts, is the statue ofthe Hon. Spencer Perceval, in AllSaints' Church, Northampton. His morerecent productions comprise his monumentof the late David Pike Watts,Esq.; a sleeping child, the daughter ofSir Thomas Dyke Acland ; the statueof Washington, in the state-house, atBoston ; of Francis Homer, Esq., forWestminster Abbey; and a bronzestatue of Pitt, for the city of London.For simplicity, grace, and nature,Mr. Chantrey is undoubtedly the finestsculptor which this country, or perhapsany other, has produced. Such qualities,if proof were wanting, have beentriumphantly proved by him to be theleading characteristics of genuine pathosand true dignity. He is essentially anative artist ; for, disdaining all theartificial and meretricious graces of thecontinental school, he has kept true toNature, and Nature such as he foundher characterized in his own country.He generally seizes on the likeness ofa bust in an hour's work ; but, bothin the conception and finish of his productions,he is said to be extremelyfastidious. One of his unexecuteddesigns was a statue of Nelson, onehundred and thirty feet high, witha star on his left breast, to be illuminatedat night, and erected at Yarmouth,on a pier projecting far into thesea, and on a pedestal made of the bowsof vessels taken from the enemy.SCULPTORS.ROBERT FORREST.ROBERT FORREST was born inthe parish of Warlike, in the UpperWard of Lanarkshire, about the year1790. Like his countryman, JamesThorn, he was bred a stone-mason, andturned his attention to sculpture, of hisown accord. During the year 1810,having occasion to visit some noblemen'sseats, where various specimensof art were to be seen, overgrown withmoss, he examined them minutely, andthen determined to attempt somethingin the same style himself. He commencedhis operations in secret, chusingfor his studio a remote spot in a woodon the banks of the Clyde ; and hereinthe autumn of 1817, he was accidentallydiscovered by Colonel Gordon,who had lost his way whilst shooting.The sculptor had, at this time, executeda number of small figures, partly of thehuman species, but chiefly of the hareand fox, and other animals, by whichhe was surrounded. The colonelpurchased of him a figure of Bacchus,the first piece of sculpture which Forresthad ever sold ; and, soon after, a secondpurchase was made of him, by a gentlemanrecommended by his first customer.It was not long before his productionsbegan to form the subject of generalconversation in Lanarkshire. He soonobtained patrons, as well as admirers ;and Mr. Robertson, of Hallcraig, immediatelygave him a commission forafull-sized figure of a highland chief,which the artist executed in a mannerperfectly satisfactory to his employer.He now left his working-place in thewood, and fixed on a quarry, nearOrchard, a few miles below Lanark,for his studio. Here he tried his handat historical subjects; and executed,among other figures, Old Normal,Sir John FalstafF, and Rob Roy:but what, at this period, contributedchiefly to his fame, was his statue ofSir William Wallace, for the town ofLanark. This figure is seven feet sixinches in height, in a Roman costume,with sword and buckler ; and the dayof its elevation, in the place destinedfor its reception, was a proud one forj the sculptor. His performance wasuniversally applauded; and he was himselfcarried in triumph through thestreets, preceded by music, and thebanners of the different trades.In 1823, he attempted a less elevated,but not less difficult, style of sculpture ;taking, for his subjects, Tarn o' Chanterand Souter Johnnie, from Burns ; andSimon and Faulty, from Allan Ramsay :other occupations, however, preventedhim from finishing any of these figures,except Tam o' Shanter. His biographeris silent as to its merits ; but, howevergreat, they were not, probably, on a parwith those of Thorn's celebrated statue.The engagement, which called him offfrom the above subjects, was to cut,according to a design by Chantrey, acolossal figure of Viscount Melville, tobe placed at the top of the navalmonument, in St. Andrew's Square,Edinburgh. The manner in which heexecuted this figure, which is aboutfifteen feet in height, and composedof nine blocks of stone, caused him tobe employed to model and cut acolossal statue of John Knox, whichwas erected in the Merchants' Park,near Glasgow. The committee, underwhose direction he was employed,signed a certificate, on the completionof his work in 1826, stating, " That Mr.Robert Forrest modelled, and completelyfinished, the colossal statue ofJohn Knox, in a manner which hasgiven to them the highest satisfaction ;that they consider it to do great honourto Mr. Forrest as a statuary in thatspecies of sculpture, and trust that itmay prove the means of increasinghis reputation and professional success.They have much pleasure in adding,that, in all their intercourse with him,he manifested the most obliging disposition,and honourable desire to fulfilto the utmost the obligations he hadcontracted."In the meantime, Tam o' Shanter,and other rustic figures, which layincomplete in our artist's studio at thequarry, were being constantly visitedby the curious ; and such was their fame,Robert FORREST.that the coach between Lanark and Glasgowwas advertised as being permittedto stop at the place for a short time,to enable the passengers to view them.Mr. Forrest's other performances thatremain to be noticed are his equestriangroupes ; four of which, the Duke ofWellington, the Duke of Marlborough,Queen Mary and Lord Berries, andRobert the Bruce and the Monk, wereexhibited by him at Edinburgh. Theseare all full of genius and originality, andhave met with the approbation and patronageof the most distinguished personagesin Scotland.The biographer of this talented andindustrious artist has justly characterizedhim as " one of Scotia's humblesons, who, by the efforts of his geniusand strength of mind, has raised himselffrom the obscurity of his nativeglen, to be an honour to himself and tothe country which gave him birth;and one who, to those who haveknown him from his youth, still appearsthe simple, unassuming, unpretendingcountry mason, apparently as muchastonished at his own efforts, as thosewho look on them are gratified."JAMES Them.THIS celebrated self-taught sculptorwas born of respectable parents, nearTarbolton, in Ayrshire, about the year1800. At his own request, he 'wasapprenticed, at a proper age, to amason in Kilmarnock ; but to thedrudgery of his art he shewed suchlittle attachment, that his master issaid to have considered him rather adull apprentice. In the ornamentalpart of his calling, however, he displayedhis talents conspicuously ; and he considers,it is said, some specimens ofhis workmanship, in stone, which heexecuted about this time, as superiorto any thing he has since done. At theexpiration of his term of apprenticeship,he removed to Glasgow, where he metwith speedy and profitable employment,the wages which he receivedbeing considerably higher than theordinary rate.It was not till the year 1827, thatMr. Thorn began publicly to developedhis abilities as a sculptor. His firstessay was a bust of Burns the poet,from a copy of the original portrait byNasmyth, from which he was permittedto take a sketch by Mr. Auld of Ayr,a gentleman, who afterwards proved hissteady friend and patron. Mr. Thornknew so little of drawing, that he wasobliged to content himself with a veryimperfect sketch, taken by means oftransparent paper; yet, in less thanfive days, he surprised Mr. Auld, bybringing the finished bust. The workwas somewhat defective as a likeness,but the execution, the mechanicaldetails, and the general effect, weresurprising. Mr. Auld now advised himto try a full-length figure ; and, on hishesitating only in consequence of theexpense of the block of stone, offeredto procure him any from the neighbouringquarries, which he might select.Whilst he was absent for that purpose,our sculptor, who was little known atAyr, was rather ridiculed, than encouraged,for what was termed his presumption; so that, on his return, to giveconfidence to his friends, he said, " Perhaps,I had just better try my handat a head, as a specimen o' Tarn." Hewent accordingly to Crosby Churchyard,where he was then employedupon a gravestone ; and pulling fromthe ruins of the church the rabat of thedoorway, sat himself down among thelong grass that covered the graves,and, in that position, finished thehead, without rising. What is moreextraordinary, it rained during thewhole time of his operations, but socompletely was he absorbed in hiswork, that he declares himself to havebeen unconscious of the " rattlingshowers" from the moment he commenced.The production of Tarn's head atonce removed all doubts from the mindof Mr. Auld, and a block was accordinglytaken to Ayr, where Thorn commencedupon the full-length figure, in a workshopnear Cromwell's Fort. Themodel, which he had in his imagination,SCULPTORS,was the traditional figure of the well-knownDouglas Graham, a renownedspecimen of a Carrick farmer, someforty years ago, and who, residing atShanter, furnished to Burns the prototypeof his hero. A stout carter satfor the right leg ; but the soubriquet ofTarn o' Shanter being likely to attachto him in consequence, he refused toenter the sculptor's studio again, to sitfor the fellow limb. For a representativeof Souter Johnnie, he chose a cobblerliving near Maypole ; but who, refusing,upon any terms, to sit for his portraiture,Thorn was obliged to trust tohis memory, after two interviews withthe original. " It will doubtless," saysthe writer of a short account of Mr.Thorn, in Chambers's Edinburgh Journal," excite the admiration of everyone,in the slightest degree conversantwith the arts, that these figures, so fullof life, ease, and character, were thusactually executed without model, ordrawing, or palpable archetype whatever.The artist, indeed, knowsnothing of modelling; and so little ofdrawing, that we question if he wouldnot find difficulty in making even atolerable sketch of his own work.The chisel is his modelling tool, hispencil, the only instrument of his art,in short, with which he is acquainted, butwhich he handles in a manner, we maysay, almost unprecedented in the historyof sculpture. This, however, is theminor part ; for we think, nay, aresure, we discover in this dexterity ofhand, in this unerring precision ofeye, in this strong, though still untutored,conception of form and character,the native elements of the highestart. These primordial attributes ofgenius, by proper culture, may dohonour to their country and to theirpossessor: at all events, instructionwill refine and improve attempts in thepresent walk of art, even should studyunable to elevate attainment to ahigher. Now, however, it would benot only premature, but unjust, tocriticise these statues as regular laboursof sculpture: they are to be regardedas wonderful, nay, almost miraculous,efforts of native, unaided, unlearnedtalent, as an approach to truth, almostin spite of nature and of science ; butthey do not hold, with respect to legitimatesculpture high-souled, thenoblest, the severest of all arts thesame rank as, in painting, the worksof the Dutch masters do, as comparedwith the lofty spirits of the Romans,precisely for this reason, that whilesimilar subjects are not only fit, butoften felicitous, for the pencil, they arealtogether improper objects of sculpturalrepresentation."Mr. Thorn's chief works, besidesthose just mentioned, consist of TheLandlord and his Mate, from the samepoem, a statue of Wallace, and a figureof Old Mortality. The Landlord andhis Mate, though not equal in graphictruth and humour to Tarn and Souter,are admirable specimens of the sculptor'spowers, and faithful personificationsof the characters whom he has selectedfor his subject. The statue of theScottish patriot is placed in the niche ofthe new tower, just erected in Ayr, onthe site of the ancient " WallaceTower" of Burns; but possesses, ifthe writer from whom we qi:ote is tobe relied on, neither the truth of nature,nor the dignity of ideal representation.The figure of Old Mortality is said tobe the most striking evidence of itsauthor's genius, though only a model inclay, and as yet, we believe, uncommissionedfor in stone. The subjectoccurred to him during a voyage toLondon in the Leith steam packet,in the cabin of which he read, for thefirst time, Scott's Novel of Old Mortality.After having perused it, he madea sketch of the figure in the imaginedattitude, and, to his astonishment,found nearly a fac-simile of it in theportfolio of Wilkie, whom the sameidea had struck several years before.Mr. Thorn's figures of Tarn o' Shanterand Souter Johnnie have been exhibitedwith applause in almost every part ofthe united kingdom; and, from thehighest to the lowest, there is scarcelya house which does not contain a cast ofthem. His studio is the resort of allintelligent strangers who visit Ayr,where, it is said, his modest manners,and moral worth, have conciliated therespect of every one.ARCHITECTS.SIR CHRISTOPHER WREN.TlIIS illustrious architect, mathematician,mechanic, and philosopher, theson of Dr. Christopher Wren, Bishop ofEly, was born at his father's rectory, atEast Knoyle, in Wiltshire, on the 20thof October, 1632. Being of a delicateconstitution, he was first educated athome ; but was afterwards sent toWestminster School, and Waltham College,Oxford, of which he was entered, atthe age of fourteen, as a gentlemancommoner. He soon attracted the noticeof the whole university by hisprecocious genius, and in particular,by his mathematical and mechanicalskill. Of the latter he gave proof bythe invention of several instruments;and of the former, by writing, in hissixteenth year, a Treatise on SphericalTrigonometry on a new plan. Healso translated into Latin, Oughtred'sGeometrical Dialling, at the instanceof Dr. (afterwards Sir Charles) Scarborough,a celebrated physician andmathematician, for whom Wren madesome excellent architectural models inpasteboard.In 1650, he took the degree of B. A. ;and, in the following year, published analgebraical tract, relating to the Julianperiod, which was inserted in theTheatrum HiatoricumetChronologicum,of Helvicus, printed at Oxford, duringthe same year. In 1653, he graduatedM. A., and was elected fellow of AllSouls. In 1657, he was elected professorof astronomy, in Gresham College,London, which appointment he resignedin 1660, on his election to the Pavilionprofessorship of astronomy, in the universityof Oxford ; and, in the followingyear, he took, both there and at Cambridge,his degree of D.C.L. In 1663,he became one of the members of theRoyal Society, an institution whichoriginated in the meetings of himself andother collegians at Oxford, under thetitle of the Philosophical Society, beforewhom he exhibited various experiments,and mechanical improvements.It is as an architect, however, that wehave chiefly to do with Wren, who appearsto have been recommended to the kingin that capacity a short time previouslyto the last mentioned year. He was thenoffered a commission upon very advantageousterms, to superintend the worksat Tangier, but, preferring employmentin England, in consequence of ill health,he was deputed to prepare designs for thegeneral repair of St. Paul's Cathedral.Whilst engaged upon them, he alsomade the drawings for Dr. Willis'sAnatomy Cerebri, and in 1665, he madea tour to France for the purpose of architecturalimprovement. At Paris, he wasintroduced to the celebrated sculptor,Bernini, and took notice of all that couldtend to elevate his ideas of art. Walpoleobserves, it is to be regretted that hewent no farther " than the Frenchcapital ; " as the great number of drawingshe made of the buildings there, hadbut too visible an influence on some ofhis own."The designs of Wren, for the restorationof St. Paul's, were renderednugatory, by the destruction of thatedifice, shortly after his return toLondon, in the great fire of 1666. Hewas then appointed surveyor-general,and principal architect for rebuilding thewhole city, together with the cathedralof St. Paul, and all the parochialchurches, amounting to fifty-one, whichhad been demolished by the confluxoration. The plan which he, in consequence,drew up, was on a mostample and magnificent scale ; and, if ithad been acted upon, would have renderedLondon the most superb, as wellas the most extensive city in the world.He proposed, among other things, thatthe principal streets should be ninetyfeet wide, others sixty, and none lessthan thirty ; that every church shouldnot only be completely detached, butform a beautiful object from every pointof view; that the principal streets shouldopen into magnificent piazzas, in one ofwhich the Exchange was to stand, andin another, all the city companies' halls ;that all noxious trades should be carriedon without the city, &c. It is to beregretted, that a plan so noble andconvenient was not carried into effect ;but the rights of private property appearto have been insisted on with anobstinacy that rendered its adoptionutterly impracticable.In 1667, Wren succeeded Sir JohnDenham as surveyor-general of theroyal works ; and, in 1673, he found histime so much occupied in the duties ofhis office, that he was compelled toresign his Pavilion professorship. In thefollowing year he was knighted ; and,in 1675, laid the first stone of the presentSt. Paul's Cathedral, his plans for whichhad been approved by the king abouteight months previously. This magnificentstructure occupied thirty-fiveyears of the life of the subject of ourmemoir ; whilst that of St. Peter's, atRome, was not finished under one hundredand forty-five years, a period thatexhausted the labours of twelve successivearchitects, and the patience ofnineteen popes. Sir Christopher is saidto have received only 200 a-year forhis superintendence of St. Paul's ; andto have had a moiety of that detainedfrom him, lest he should relax in hisexertions for its completion !To enumerate the whole of Sir Christopher'svarious works, would be to mentionalmost all the principal churches inLondon, besides the Monument, and theHospital of Christchurch. He also builtHampton Court Palace, the Theatre atOxford, and the great Campanile ofChristchurch College ; the Library ofTrinity College, Cambridge ; and theHospitals of Chelsea and Greenwich.In the meantime, he was selected to fillother offices of honourable trust thanthose connected with his profession.He was elected president of the RoyalSociety in 1680 ; was returned to parliament,in 1685, for Plympton; and, in1700, for Wey mouth and Melcomb-Regis. He held his place of surveyorof the works until 1718, when, in consequenceof a court intrigue, he wassuperseded in the eighty-sixth year ofhis age ; in reference to which, Walpoleobserves, that " the length .of his lifeenriched the reigns of several princes,and disgraced the last of them." Hedied on the 27th of February, 1723, andwas buried in St. Paul's,* where histomb is marked by the appropriateinscription, " Lector ! si monumentumrequires, circumspect." He was twicemarried, and was survived by one son.Sir Christopher Wren," says Seward,in his Biographia, " was a man of smallstature. When Charles the Secondcame to see the hunting-palace he hadbuilt for him at Newmarket, he thoughtthe rooms too low. Sir Christopherwalked about them, and looking up,replied, ' Sir, an please your majesty,I think they are high enough.' Theking squatted down to Sir Christopher'sheight, and creeping about, in thiswhimsical posture, cried, ' Ay, SirChristopher, I think they are highenough.' "Nothing could be more amiable thanhis private character ; temperate andpious, he set an example to all who knewhim, that made him equally respectedand beloved. His intellectual and moralqualities were conspicuously joined, andin the midst of his most arduousexertions, he was as anxious to evincethe one as the other. Whilst St. Paul'swas in progress, he affixed a notice inseveral parts of the building, slating,that any labourer, who was heardswearing during his labour, would bedismissed. Of this master-piece of hisgenius he was justly proud; and, afterits completion, he used to be carried toview it, once every year, until the timeof his death.The other churches, besides thosealready mentioned which particularlyattest his remarkable skill, are, St. Mary-legBow's; St. Michael's, Cornhill ; St.Bride's; and St. Stephen's, Walbrook.This last is remarkable for the beauty ofthe interior ; and has been preferred, bySIR CHRISTOPHER WREN.foreigners of taste, to every thing of thekind in Europe. The Monument, too,may challenge competition with some ofthe" most renowned pillars of antiquity.It is said, that when the committee,appointed to inspect the column, after itscompletion, hastened out in alarm toSir Christopher, to inform him that theyhad very sensibly felt a rocking motion,he exclaimed, " Then, gentlemen, Iam immortalized ! for what you considera cause of alarm is to me an evidence ofits durability !"Much as Wren executed, some of hismost beautiful designs remain on paper.Many of his draughts were purchasedby All Souls' College, in the library ofwhich is a bust of Sir Christopher. Itshould be observed, that the modelselected for St. Paul's was not hisfavourite one ; in the original model,says a writer, quoted by Dr. Aikin, " thechief defects of that building are avoided ;and had it been carried into execution,with the improvements which wouldnaturally have occurred to his inventivemind, it would have been, unquestionably,the finest edifice of the kind."His talent," adds the same authority,"was particular! y adapted to ecclesiasticalarchitecture, which afforded domes andtowers to his picturesque fancy ; while,in his palaces and private houses, he hassometimes sunk into a heavy monotony,as at Hampton Court and Winchester.At Greenwich, however, the additionsmade by him to the original work ofInigo Jones, are singularly grand andbeautiful. On the whole, Sir C. Wren'sarchitecture is perhaps the perfection ofthat modern style, which, with formsand modes of construction essentiallyGothic, adopts, for the decorative part,the orders and ornaments of antiquity."As a man of science, Sir Christopherholds a distinguished rank among thepractical mathematicians and mechanicsof his day ; and in that character alone,would have been known to posterity.To enumerate his various discoverieswould occupy too great a space ; butafew of the principal may be mentioned.He invented a self-registeringthermometer, in which the liquor alway sremained at the same height ; an instrument,to ascertain what quantity of ruinwould fail upon a given piece of ground,in any given space of time; and madetwo telescopes, to open with a joint, likea sector, by which distances mightinfallibly be" taken to half minutes.He fully demonstrated," says Dr.Sprats, in his History of the 'RoyalSociety, " all dioptrics in a few propositions,shewing not only (as inKepler's) the common properties ofglasses, but the preparations by whichthe individual rays cut the axis, andeach other ; upon which the changes, asthey are commonly called, of telescopes,or the proportion of the eye-glasses andapertures, are demonstrably discovered."Navigation also, as well asastronomy, owes much to his labours ;he demonstrated the mechanical powersby which ships are made to sail againstthe wind ; and invented an instrument,which exemplified his theory, andshewed the reason of sailing to all winds.In fine, scarcely anything came underhis eye, capable of improvement, that didnot receive it from him ; and .few problemswere too difficult for his acute andcomprehensive mind to solve.SIR JOHN Vanbrugh.SlR JOHN VANBRUGH, descendedfrom a family, originally of Ghent, in'Flanders, was born in the year 16(6,in the parish of St. Stephen, Walbrook,London. His father is said to have acquireda handsome fortune, by carryingon the business of a sugar-baker atChester, but, at the period of his son'sbirth, he resided in London, and wascomptroller of the Treasury Chambers.Having completed his education, andacquired the character of an agreeablecompanion and a man of wit, he obtainedan ensigncy in the army, fillingup his It sure by sketching the outlinesof several plays, as the ideas of eachoccurred to him. Whilst in winterquarters, he happened to shew one ofthem to Sir Thomas Skipwith, withwhom he had become acquainted, andARCHITECTSwho was possessed of a large share inatheatrical patent. Sir Thomas washighly pleased with the play ; and TheRelapse, which was the name of it, wasproduced, with great success, in 1697.The freedom of the dialogue, however,gave occasion to censure from the graversort of people, and induced Vanbrugh,on his publishing the play, to write avindicatory preface, in which he assertedhis belief that the most innocent woman,after reading it over impartially in hercloset, would think it no affront to herprayer-book, to lay it upon the sameshelf! His next pay was The ProvokedWife, which he finished at the requestof Lord Halifax, and brought out atthe theatre in Lincoln's Inn Fields, in1698. This, though liable to the sameobjections as the former, was consideredone of the most witty and humorousproductions of the age, and has exercisedthe talents of some of our first actors inthe original character of Sir John Brute.His play of The Provoked Wife wassucceeded by his Aesop, performed atDrury Lane Theatre, for about eightor nine nights, and but indifferentlyreceived, though abounding with generalsatire and useful morality, joined tono small portion of humour, 'i he piecewas originally written in French; butthe scenes of Sir Polydorus Hogstye,the players, the senator, and the beau,were added by Vanbrugh.On the accession of Queen Anne,Vanbrugh shared the patronage whichmost of the wits of that time enjoyed ;he was knighted, and made Clarencieuxking at arms, a place which he disposedof after he had held it for some time.In 1705, he projected the building of atheatre in the Haymarket, by subscription; and, on its completion in thefollowing year, it was opt-ned by Bet-merton,and the other patentees, underthe joint management of the subject ofour memoir and Mr. Congreve : " Theproprietors," says one of Sir John's biographers," imagined that the conductof two such eminent authors would restoretheir ruined affairs ; but they foundtheir expectations were too sanguine ;for though Sir John was an expeditiouswriter, yet Mr. Congreve was too judiciousto let anything come unfinishedout of his hands ; besides, every properconvenience of a good theatre had beensacrificed, to show the audience a vasttriumphal piece of architecture, in whichplays, by means of the spaciousness ofthe dome, could not be successfullyrepresented, because the actors couldnot be distinctly heard." The ItalianOpera beginning at this time to comeinto fashion, Vanbrugh and Congreveopened their theatre with an opera,translated from the Italian, called TheTriumph of Love ; but it met with socold a reception, that it was almost immediatelywithdrawn, to make way forVanbrugh's comedy of The Confederacy,adapted and greatly improved from theBourgeois a la Mode, of Rancour. Thisis considered one of his wittiest and, atthe same time, most licentious productions;but it did not meet with thesuccess it deserved, though, upon thewhole, it was well received. By theretirement of Congreve soon afterwards,Vanbrugh was left sole manager of theestablishment, the credit of which heendeavoured to support, by the successivepieces that came from his own penalone. They were mostly adaptationsfrom the French, into his translationsof which he had a most happy talentof throwing the English spirit. Theprincipal pieces which he produced wereThe Cuckold in Conceit, from the CocuImaginaire, of Moliere; Squire Tree-booby,from his Monsieur de ; and The Mistake, from theDepot Amoureux, of the same author.They failed, however, to restore thetheatre to that state of prosperity whichhad been anticipated ; and Vanbrugh,getting tired of the concern, soon afterdisposed of it to Mr. Owen Swine. Besidesthe plays already mentioned, hewas the author of The False Friend,a comedy, and A Journey to London,which was finished by Gibber, who saysthat our author's intention, in composingthis piece, was to make some amendsfor those loose scenes, which, in the fireof his youth, he had, with more regardto applause than virtue, exhibited tothe public. His merits as a dramatisthave been acknowledged to be of a highorder by all critics; and, perhaps, thereis more of praise than of censure inPope's line :How Van wants grace, who never wanted wit 'It is now time to speak of him as anarchitect, in which character his abilitiesare more questionable than those whichSIR JOHN VANBRUGH.he is allowed to possess as a writer.Whether he cultivated, by study, theearly taste which he displayed for theart, we have not been informed ; nor isit clear by what steps he arrived at thehigh reputation he must have enjoyed,to cause him to be intrusted with theerection of the Duke of Marlborough'spalace, at Blenheim. It is said thathe studied architecture in his youth,abroad ; and, whilst in France, being discoveredtaking views of the fortifications,was apprehended and committed to theBastille, as a spy, but was almost immediatelyreleased. His other works,besides Blenheim, are : Castle Howard,in Yorkshire ; Eastbury, in Dorsetshire ;King's Weston, near Bristol ; EatonNewton, in Northamptonshire ; Mr.Buncombe's, in Yorkshire ; and SeatonDelaval, in Northumberland. Whateverfame the building of Blenheim may haveprocured Vanbrugh it was, on the whole,a source of much mortification and disappointmentto him, in more ways thanone. Not only did the wits abuse histaste, but parliament, after the death ofQueen Anne, having withdrawn all pecuniarygrants, for the completion of themansion, great part of the charges fellupon Vanbrugh ; the duke refusing topay either him or his workmen, exceptto a very trifling amount. "I have themisfortune," says Vanbrugh, in a letterto Jacob Jonson, "of losing, for I nowsee little hopes of ever getting it, near^2,000, due to me for many years' service,plague, and trouble at Blenheim,which that wicked woman of Marlborough(the duchess) is so far frompaying me, that the duke, being suedby some of the workmen for work donethere, she has tried to turn the dueto them upon me; for which, I think,she ought to be hanged." As someremuneration for these losses, probably,he was knighted by George the First ;and appointed, in 1716, to the places ofsurveyor of the buildings at GreenwichHospital, comptroller-general of theroyal works, and surveyor of the gardensand waters. It was also intendedthat he should have the place of Garterking at arms; but finding that anotherhad a reversionary grant, he resignedhis tabard to Knox Ward, Esq. anddied, shortly afterwards, at Whitehall,of a quince , on the 26th of March, 1726.Vanbrugh's reputation as an authorhas been established by time ; and,notwithstanding the sarcasms of Swiftand others, his fame as an architect bidsfair to become equally durable. "Theepigrammatic epitaph :Lie heavy on him, earth, for heLaid many a heavy load on thee;has been repeated by innumerable lips ;but how few of those, who have chuckledover the couplet, have ever seen oneof the architect's works ! When he wasappointed Clarencieux king at arms,Swift indulged his humour, by observing,that he might now build houses ;and of his Blenheim, he said,That, if his grace were no more skill'd inThe art of battering walls than building,We might expect to see, next year,A mouse-trap-man chief engineer.Yet those, who repeat these and otherwitticisms, if they can be called so,should be aware, that Swift and Pope,who were the chief authors of them,afterwards expressed a wish that theirraillery against Vanbrugh, " though everso tender, or resentment, though everso just, had not been indulged." Thefollowing censure of Walpole carriesat least evidence of the originality ofVanbrugh's architecture ; and as to therest, we cannot better answer it, than byquoting the opinion of Sir JoshuaReynolds in Sir John's favour : " Vanbrugh,"says Walpole, " wants all themerit of his writings to protect him fromthe censure due to his designs. WhatPope said of his comedies, is much moreapplicable to his buildings :How Van wants grace 'Grace ! he wanted eyes ; he wanted allideas of proportion, convenience, propriety.He undertook vast designs,and composed heaps of littleness. Thestyle of no age, no country, appearsin his works ; he broke through all rule,and compensated for it by no imagination.He seems to have hollowedquarries, rather than to have builthouses; and should his edifices, as theyseem formed to do, outlast all record,what architecture will posterity thinkwas that of their ancestors ? Durableas his edifices are, The Relapse, TheProvoked Wife, The Confederacy, and.aesop, will probably outlast them ; nor,so translated, is it an objection to thetwo last that they were translations.ARCHITECTS.If Vanbrugh had borrowed from Vitruviusas happily as from Rancour, InigoJones would not be the first architect inBritain." This criticism is unjust, and,in some points, is directly opposed bythat of Sir Joshua Reynolds, whosetaste in matters of art, if not admitted tobe supreme, will be, at least, allowed tobe superior to that of Horace Walpole.After stating, that Vanbrugh appearedto have had recourse to some principlesof Gothic architecture, Sir Joshua adds,To speak of Vanbrugh, in the languageof a painter, he had originality of invention; he understood light andshadow, and had great skill in composition.To support his principal object,he produced his second and thirdgroupes or masses. He perfectly understood,in his art, what is most difficult inours, the conduct of the back-ground,by which the design and invention are setoff to the greatest advantage. What theback-ground is in painting, in architectureis the real ground on which thebuilding is erected ; and no architecttook greater care that his work shouldnot appear crude and hard ; that is, thatit did not abruptly start out of thtground without expectation, or preparation.This is a tribute, which apainter owes to an architect, who composedlike a painter, and was defraudedof the due reward of his merit by thewits of his time, who did not understandthe principles of composition in poetrybetter than he, and who knew littleor nothing of what he understood perfectly,the general ruling principles ofarchitecture and painting. Vanbrugh'sfate was that of the great Perrault. Bothwere the objects of the petulant sarcasmsof factious men of letters, and both haveleft some of the fairest monuments,which, to this day, decorate their severalcountries; the facie of the Louvre,Blenheim, and Castle Howard."The private character of Vanbrughwas respectable ; and though hisbuildings made him the butt of the wits,he bad no personal enemies, and eventhose who most abused him, were theforemost to acknowledge him "a manof wit and of honour."JAMES GIBBS.JAMES GIBBS was born, accordingto Walpole, in 1683 ; but Mr. Chalmers,relying on the authority of a memoir ofGibbs, in The Scots' Magazine, placeshis birth at Aberdeen, in the year 1674.He was the son of a respectable merchantof that city, and received hiseducation at the Marischal College there.About the time that he took his degreeof M. A. he had made considerable progressin the mathematics, as a foundationlor the pursuit of architecture, to improvehimself in which, he left Aberdeen forHolland, in the year 1694. In thatcountry he is said to have studied underan architect of reputation, whose name,however, none of his biographers havementioned. He was still in Holland,when that country was visited, in 1700,by the Earl of Mar, who being himselfsomething of an architect, was so muchpleased with the performances of Gibbs,that he generously assisted him withmoney and recommendatory letters, toenable him to proceed to Italy. On hisarrival at Rome, he placed himself undera celebrated sculptor and architect of thename of Carroll, and passed altogethernine years in that city, assiduously employedin prosecuting his studies andcultivating his taste.On his return to England, about 1710,he found the Earl of Mar among theministry, and highly in favour withthe queen. His patron exerted allthe influence in his favour, which hissituation afforded him ; and with suchsuccess, that Gibbs was not long inacquiring both profit and reputation.On the passing of the act for the buildingof fifty new churches, he was employedby the trustees to build severalof them, among which we may mentionSt. Martin's in the Fields, and St. Mary'sin the Strand. The former, which wasfinished in 1726, at a cost of 30,000,has been compared, by Chambers, to theParthenon; with the chaste grandeur,the dignified simplicity, and sublimeeffect of which, however, Mr. Guiltobserves, St. Martin's is not to be compared;though he, at the same time,JAMES GIBBS.admits this church to be one of the bestin London. St. Mary's in the Strand,says Walpole, is " a monument of thepiety more than of the taste of thenation ;" an opinion from which, probably,few will feel inclined to dissent. " Itwants," as Allan Cunningham observes,massive grandeur ; and is composed ofa multitude ot little parts, which, thoughall united, and that skilfully enough,into a perfect whole, produce no impressionof simplicity or true beauty."In 1728, Gibbs published a volume ofdesigns for churches, by which he is saidto have realised nearly j2,000. In 1737,he commenced building, and, in 1747,finished, the Radcliffe Library, at Oxford,where, to use the words of Walpole,he has blundered into a picturesquescenery, not void of grandeur, especiallyif seen through the gate that leads fromthe school. The cupola, which is onehundred feet in diameter, and onehundred and forty feet high, is one ofthe most picturesque architectural objects,perhaps, in England ; and theinterior of the library has beenadmired by all scientific 'men, for theskilful arrangements everywhere visible.Another important work of Gibbs washis monument, in Westminster Abbey,to John Holies, Duke of Newcastle ; asumptuous and elegant structure, butsomewhat out of harmony with theGothic recesses and canopied figuresaround. He also planned and executedKing's College, the Royal Library, andthe Senate House, at Cambridge ; andpresented to the magistrates of his nativecity, a plan of St. Nicholas Church,Aberdeen, a short time previous to hisdeath, which took place, after five yearsof suffering from the gravel and stone,on the 5th of August, 1754.Gibbs was a nonjuror; but esteemedby men of all persuasions for hishumane, forbearing, and charitablecharacter. He died unmarried ; andhaving left few relations, bequeathedthe bulk of his property, which amountedto about 15,000, to friends and publicinstitutions. Besides legacies of 100each to the Foundling and St. Thomas'sHospitals, he left five hundred valuablevolumes to the Radcliffe Library ; andto the son of the Earl of Mar, whosefortunes had been much impaired byhis adherence to the house of Stuart, hebequeathed all his plate, and 1,000 inmoney, and estates which yield td 280per annum.Of his abilities as an architect, Walpolesays, " he proved what has been seenin other arts, that mere mechanicknowledge may avoid faults withoutfurnishing beauties ; that grace doesnot depend upon rules; and that tasteis not to be learnt. Virgil and Statiushad the same number of feet in theirverses; and Gibbs knew the proportionsof the five orders as well as Inigo;yet the Banqueting-house is a standard,and no one talks of one edifice of Gibbs.In all, is wanting that harmonioussimplicity that speaks a genius andthat is not often remarked till it isapproved of by one. It is that graceand that truth, so much meditated, anddelivered at once with such correctnessand ease in the works of the ancients,which good sense admires and consecrates,because it corresponds withnature. Their small temples and statues,like their writings, charm every age bytheir symmetry and grace, and thejust measure of what is necessary ;while pyramids, and the ruins of Persepolis,only make the vulgar stare.Gibbs, like Vanbrugh, had no aversion toponderosity, but not being endued withmuch invention, was only regularlyheavy. His praise was fidelity to rules ;his failing, want of grace. "This, like everything from the pen ofHorace Walpole, is an agreeable pieceof writing enough ; but, surely, it is notrue criticism on the works of Gibbs.If it be true, that "no one talks ofan edifice of Gibbs," there is one edificewhich few pass without gazing atin admiration ; before the portico ofSt. Martin's in the Fields both strangersand Londoners pause, perhaps, morefrequently, than before any sacrededifice, St. Paul's excepted, in the metropolis.To the generality, probably,the name of the architect is unknown ;but, to paraphrase the well-known sayingof a noble Roman, it is more to thehonour of Gibbs that posterity shouldinquire why his name is not, than whyit is, celebrated. Undoubtedly, if beauty,durability, and use, combined, constituteany claim to merit in an architect, Gibbsis entitled to the very first rank amongthe artists of his country.ARCHITECTS.WILLIAM KENT.WILLIAM KENT, noted as anarchitect, painter, and, according toWalpole, the inventor of landscapegardening, was born of humble parents,in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in theyear 1684. He first studied coach-painting,an art of some repute in hisday, but ran away from the master towhom he was apprenticed, in his nineteenthyear ; and, coming to London,found encouragement as an artist in thehigher ranks of his profession. It is notstated what description of pictures heexecuted at this time; but whetherhistorical, landscape, or portraits, theyexcited, says his noble biographer, agenerous patronage in some gentlemenof his own country, who raised a contributionsufficient to send him to Rome,in the year 1710. In this city, hestudied under Cavalier Lute, and gainedthe second prize of the second class inthe academy. Such of his countrymen,as were at that time in Rome, eagerlypurchased his works; he was allowed40 a- year by Sir William Wentworth,for seven years, and he left Italy in companywith Lord Burlington, who gavehim apartments at his own house inLondon, and recommended him to allthe nobility.So miserable, however, were his productions,both in history and portrait,that his reputation as a painter fell asspeedily as it rose ; and, but for thearchitectural powers, which he nowbegan to developed, his name, in spite ofthe patronage of Lord Burlington, musthave sunk at once into oblivion. Hismanner, however, of decorating houses,particularly in the interior, where hedisplayed no less skill as an upholstererthan as a carver of ornaments in woodand stone, was considered so elegant andtasteful, that his hand was employed inalmost every mansion of any architecturalpretensions in the metropolis.His oracle," says Walpole, " was somuch consulted, by all who affectedtaste, that nothing was thought completewithout his assistance. He was notonly consulted for furniture, as frames ofpictures, glasses, tables, chairs, &c., butfor plate, for a barge, for a cradle. Nay,so impetuous was fashion, that two greatladies prevailed on him to make designsfor their birth-day gowns ; the one hedressed in a petticoat, decorated withcolumns of the five orders ; the other,like a bronze, in a copper-coloured satin,with ornaments of gold."Among the principal works whichKent executed as a painter, were, thehall at Wanted House; the staircasesand ceilings of several other mansionsnow levelled with the ground ; and analtar-piece for St. Clement's Church,which was condemned by Hogarth, andhas also deservedly been condemned byall who have beheld it. His portraitswould seem to have been still more voidof merit ; as his noble and partial biographerhimself asserts, they not onlybore little resemblance to the personswho sat for them, but the colouring wasmore raw and undetermined than thatof the most arrant journeyman to theprofession. His chief architectural performanceswere, the Temple of Venus atStowe ; the Great Hall at Mr. Pelham'sin Arlington Street ; and the Earl ofLeicester's house at Holkham, inNorfolk ; though it is a matter ofdispute whether the design of the lastbelongs to him, to the Earl of Leicester,or to one Nottingham ; the two latter ofwhom successively laid claim to it, afterKent's death. Be this as it may, there issome merit in all the works just mentioned,but here all praise of Kent, as anarchitect, must end. His monument toShakspeare has been universally condemned,and Walpole himself joined inthe smile of contempt which it excited.Yet such was the influence of highpatronage, that Kent, bankrupt as hewas in almost every thing that couldhave entitled him to such distinctions,was made successively master-carpenter,architect, keeper of the pictures, and,on the death of Jervas, principal painterto the crown, with a pension of 500 ayear, besides an annuity of 100 for hisworks at Kensington. About the year1730, he made a second tour in Italy,accompanied by Lord Burlington, whoWILLIAM KENT.continued to be his steady friend andpatron, from the beginning to the closeof his career. We shall conclude ournotice of Kent, as an artist, by mentioninghis designs for Gay's Fables,the works of Pope, and Spenser's FairyQueen. The illustrations to the twoformer were tolerably executed, butthose to the Fairy Queen showed hisutter inefficiency in this, as well asin every other branch of art which hehad attempted. " There are figures,"says Walpole, " issuing from cottagesnot so high as their shoulders ; castles,of which the towers could not containan infant; and knights, who hold theirspears as men do who are lifting a loadsideways. The landscapes are theonly tolerable parts, and yet the treesare seldom other than young beeches, towhich Kent, as a planter, was accustomed."As a planter, indeed, alone,Kent merits serious consideration ;though, from the conspicuous station heheld in his day, in other respects, weshould not have been warranted inomitting his name from the presentclass, nor in giving a more brief accountot him, contemptible as are admitted tobe his pretensions to pictorial and architecturalcelebrity.Walpole, and in this particular he hasbeen followed by others, asserts thatKent was the inventor and master oflandscape gardening. Like Hogarth,he laid down, as his primary rule, theundulating line of beauty, and banishingas much as possible the aid of art,exchanged steps for slopes, canals forstreams, and, in fine, rescued Naturefrom the shears and the compass, towhich she had before been subject."He leaped the fence," says Walpole,and saw that all nature was a garden.He felt the delicious contrast of hill andvalley changing imperceptibly into eachother, tasted the beauty of the gentleswell or concave scoop, and remarkedhow loose groves crowned an easyeminence with happy ornament, andwhile they called in the distant viewbetween their graceful stems, removedand extended the perspective by delusivecomparison. Thus, the pencil of hisimagination bestowed all the arts oflandscapes on the scenes he handled.The great principles, on which hewrought, were perspective, and lightand shade. Groupes of trees broke toouniform or too extensive a lawn ; evergreensand woods were opposed to theglare of the champaign ; and where theview was less fortunate, or so muchexposed as to be beheld at once, heblotted out some parts by thick shades,to divide it into variety, or make therichest scene more enchanting, byreserving it to a further advance ofthe spectator's step. Thus selectingfavourite objects, and veiling deformitiesby screens of plantations sometimesallowing the rudest waste to add itsfoil to the richest theatre, he realisedthe compositions of the great masters ofpainting." Among the gardens whichKent laid out, we may mention thefamous one of General Dormer, and thePrince of Wales's at Carlton House,the former of which strongly resemblesthat of Pope at Twickenham.Kent, who is said to have been stubbornin matters of taste, but, in otherrespects, of winning manners, died atBurlington House, on the 12th of April,1748, leaving a fortune of about 10,000,to be divided, " between his relations,and an actress with whom he had longlived in particular friendship."RICHARD BOYLE, EARL OF BURLINGTON.RICHARD BOYLE, third Earl ofBurlington, and fourth Earl of Cork, wasborn on the 25th of April, 1695. Theevents of his life are few, as recordedby his biographers, who have told littlebeyond the date of his successive honours,and the fact of his having a taste for thearts, of which he was also the patron aswell as the cultivator. His marriagetook place on the 21st of March, 1720-1,with Lady Dorothy Savile, the eldestdaughter of the Marquess of Halifax;and, on the 18th of June, 1730, he wasinstalled one of the knights-companionsof the order softhearted. In June, 1731,he was made captain of the band of gen-architects.theme pensioners; and in the followingyear, he was presented with the freedomof the city of York, in return for thefavour he had done them in buildingtheir assembly room. After this periodhe lived retired, employing himself indecorating his garden at Chiswick, andin constructing several pieces of architecture.Lord Burlington appears tohave been indebted to his own geniusfor that proficiency in the above branchof art, which has obtained for himhonourable mention by Walpole andothers, though, it must be confessed, theformer is a somewhat partial authority.He is said to have learnt drawing anddesign by studying the portfolios ofInigo Jones, and the magnificent structuresof Palladio, of whom he became aconfirmed admirer, on paying a visit toRome in his twenty-first year. On hisreturn to London "he turned both histalent and fortune to honourable account." Never," says Walpole, " wasprotection and great wealth more generouslyand more judiciously diffusedthan by this great person, who hadevery quality of a genius and an artist,except envy. He spent great sums incontributing to public works, and wasknown to choose that the expenseshould fall on himself, rather than thathis country should be deprived of somebeautiful edifices. His enthusiasm forthe works of Inigo Jones was so activethat he repaired the church of CoventGarden, because it was the productionof that great master ; and purchased thegateway at Beaufort Garden, in Chelsea,and transported the identical stones toChiswick with religious attachment.With the same zeal for pure architecture,he assisted Kent in publishing Inigo'sdesigns for Whitehall, and gave a beautifuledition of the Antique Baths fromthe drawings of Palladio."The first architectural work, by whichLord Burlington distinguished himself,was the new front and colonnade to hismansion in Piccadilly; than which, if weareto believe Horace Walpole, we havefew examples of architecture more antiqueand imposing. The design, said tohave been borrowed from the palace ofCount Viericati, at Vicenza, is certainlygraceful and classic, and it is to beregretted that the public eye is notgratified with a sight of one of the mostbeautiful colonnades in the metropolis.His villa at Chiswick House, the idea ofwhich is borrowed from the celebratedVilla Caps, of Palladio, has been describedas a model of taste, though notwithout faults. The principal one appearsto have been a want of domesticaccommodation, which subjected hislordship to many severe remarks andlampoons, among which we may mentionthe following lines by Lord Chesterfield:Possessed of one great house of state,Without one room to sleep or eat;How well you buil.l let flattery tell,And all mankind how ill you dwellLord Hervey, on being asked by Burlingtonwhat he thought of his house,replied, " House ! Do you call it a house?Why, it is too little to live in, and toolarge to hang to one's watch." Walpoleconcludes his criticism on it, by saying,that there are some parts more worthseeing than many fragments of ancientgrandeur which our travellers visit underall the dangers attendant on long voyages."The other works, designed byLord Burlington, were: the Dormitoryat Westminster School ; Lord Harrington'smansion at Petersham ; theDuke of Richmond's, at Whitehall ; andGeneral Wade's, in Cork Street. Thetwo last were very inconvenient asdwelling-houses, but General Wade'shad so beautiful a front, that LordChesterfield said, " As the general couldnot live in it to his ease, he had bettertake a house over against it, and look atit." Lord Burlington died in 1753,when his title became extinct. Hiswife, by whom he had three daughters,is said to have drawn in crayons, andto have succeeded admirably.The subject of our memoir, notwithstandingthe sneer of Dr. Johnson,who says, that from the notice of suchmen as* Burlington, Bolingbroke, &c.Pope could derive but little honour,appears to have been a nobleman, notless amiable than accomplished. Thathe was a first-rate architect no one,besides Walpole, has attempted toestablish ; but few, certainly, possessed amore refined taste, or a greater venerationfor the art. Such was hisadmiration of Inigo Jones, that when hesaw the last stone laid of St. Paul's,Covent Garden, he exclaimed, in callingto mind the fallen portico of Jones,JAMES STUART.J.93 \When the Jews saw the secondtemple, they reflected upon the beautyof the first, and wept" He was a loverof poetry as well as of architecture ; andit was to him that Pope addressed hisfourth epistle, and his admirable letteron a journey to Oxford with Linton.He had his foibles ; and vanity, whenhis taste in architecture was called intoquestion, was, perhaps excusably, amongthe number. When the present MansionHouse was proposed to be built,he recommended Kent to send in a design,in which he is supposed to havehad some share, but that of Dance, thecity surveyor, was preferred. On thecompletion of the building, his lordshipwas consulted concerning the properperson to carve the bas-relief on thepediment, when he is said to have answered," Employ the city mason ; whyshould you go out of the city ? besides,any body will do to carve the ornamentsof such a building."JAMES STUART.THIS distinguished architect, commonlycalled Athenian Stuart, was bornin Creed Lane, Ludgate Street, London,in the year 1713. His father was amariner, and in narrow circumstances ;and, at his death, left three children,besides the subject of our memoir, utterlyunprovided for. James developed, atan early age, very promising talents, andin spite of his deficiency of education,showed an ardent thirst for knowledge.His most decided taste was for drawing;and, when yet a boy, he was able tocontribute towards the support of hismother and family, by designing andpainting fans for a shop in the Strand,where he also procured a situation forone of his sisters. In this manner hemaintained the rest of his family forseveral years, filling up his leisure timeby studying the Latin and Greeklanguages, together with anatomy,geometry, and various branches of themathematics, of which he is said tohave acquired an accurate knowledgewithout the help of a single instructor.Mr. Stuart was now anxious to visitRome and Athens, but he did notcommence his journey until he hadplaced the remainder of his family incomfortable situations. He left Englandsoon after the death of his mother, and,with a very scanty pittance, set out forRome on foot. In his way throughHolland, France, Sic., he stopped atthe principal towns, where he contrivedby his ingenuity as an artist, to procuresupplies towards prosecuting the rest ofhis journey. After his arrival at Rome,he formed an intimacy with Mr. NicholasRevett, the architect, from whom Stuartfirst caught his ideas of that science, inwhich he was afterwards so successful.With this gentleman, who became theinstructor and friend of Stuart, hepursued his studies in architecture andfortification, during his residence atRome ; and, in 1748, they circulatedjointly, Proposals for publishing anauthentic Description of Athens, &c.They arrived in that city in March,1751, having previously visited Venice,Pola in Istria, Sant, and Corinth. Mr.Stuart devoted himself to his task withthe utmost ardour and diligence, andwas gratified at receiving the encouragementand assistance of Sir JacobBouverie and Mr. Hawkins, who werethen engaged in similar inquiries. Hesuspended his operations for a shorttime, to enter the service of the Queenof Hungary, in whose army he served acampaign voluntarily, as chief engineer.On his return to Athens, he drew andmeasured the principal architecturalbuildings of that city, which he finallyleft with Mr. Revett, in 1753 ; from thencethey proceeded to Thessalonians, Smyrna,and the islands of the Archipelago', andarrived in England in the beginning ofthe year 1755. The result of theirjoint labours did not appear until 1762,when was published a first volume infolio, under the title of The Antiquitiesof Athens, measured and delineated byJames Stuart, F. R. S., and S. A. andNicholas Revett; Painters and Architects.The work was hailed w;rhadmiration and applause, by all lovers jof art and antiquity, and was considered jARCHITECTS.a worthy companion to the splendiddescriptions of Palmyra and Balbec, byHawkins and Wood. It had beenanticipated, we should observe, by thepublication of M. le Roy, and was surpassedby it, in picturesque beauty ; butthe superior truth and depth of researchdisplayed in Mr. Stuart's work, hasgiven it a more solid and permanentvalue. It is to the publication of thiswork, that Mr. Stuart was indebted forhis appellation of Athenian Stuart.The reputation, which Mr. Stuarthad acquired by his pursuits abroad, insuredhim patronage and employmentat home. By the recommendation ofLord Anson, then at the head of theAdmiralty, he was appointed surveyorto Greenwich Hospital, and he likewisebuilt several noble houses in London,which are conspicuous for the taste andsolidity displayed in their construction.The subject of our memoir died universallyrespected, at his house in LeicesterSquare, on the 2nd of February, 1788.He had been twice married : first, to hishousekeeper, by whom he had one son ;and secondly, in his sixty-eighth year,to a young lady named Blackstone, bywhom he had four children. In stature,Mr. Stuart was of the middle size, butathletic; and the following fact showshim to have possessed, in an equal degree,mental perseverance and physicalcourage. Just before his departure forAthens, a wen on his forehead hadgrown to such an inconvenient size,that he consulted a surgeon as to itsremoval, but the process proposed beingvery long, was objected to by Mr.Stuart, on account of the interruption ofhis pursuits. Upon his asking whetherit could not be cut out, to which thesurgeon replied in the affirmative, butmentioned the excruciating pain anddanger of such an operation, Mr.Stuart reflected for a minute, and then,throwing himself back in the chair,said, " 1 will sit still, do it now ;" theoperation was performed with success.His private character is spoken of inhigh terms by his biographer, whoobserves : " those who knew him intimately,and had opportunities ofremarking the nobleness of his soul,will join in claiming for him the title ofCitizen of the World." He was not onlyan elegant architect, but a skilfulsculptor and engraver, and is said tohave been also " an adept in all the remoteresearches of an antiquary." Thefourth and concluding volume of TheAntiquities of Athens, was not publisheduntil 1816; and a new edition of thewhole, by Mr. Kinnaird, has lately appeared.The original work has beentranslated into French, by Mr. Feuillet,and published in three volumes folio.SIR WILLIAM CHAMBERS.SIR WILLIAM CHAMBERS, saidto be descended from the Chalmers, ofScotland, who were barons of Tartars inFrance, was the son of a Scottish merchant,and was born at Stockholm, aboutthe year 1726. His father was, at thetime, engaged in attempting to procurecompensation for the losses which, likemany others, he had sustained, in conserveTwelfth, in liquidation of the foreignloans which that king had borrowed. Heleft Sweden with his son, in 1728; andshortly afterwards sent him to school atRipon, in Yorkshire, where he, probably,received the whole of his education.At the age of sixteen he was appointedsupercargo, in a ship belonging to theSwedish East India Company, in whichhe made a voyage to Canton, "and, on hisreturn, published a few sketches, whichhe had made, of the picturesque buildingsand gardens of the Chinese. Theywere not received in the most flatteringmanner, yet, at the age of eighteen, hisnatural taste for art had so muchstrengthened, that he determined to renouncecommercial pursuits, and travelinto Italy, for the purpose of studyingarchitecture. " He carefully examined,and studied," says one of his biographers," with unwearied application,the works of Michael Angelo, Sangallo,Palladio, Scamozzi, Vignola, Peruzzi,Sanmichele, Bernini, and other Italianarchitects, whose designs were, in I K WILLIAM CHAMBERS,neral, guided by the rules of the ancients,but whose extraordinary talents,exalting them above the characters ofmere imitators, produced an originalityin their compositions, that fully establishedtheir fame, and pointed them outas the fittest models for succeedingartists. Mr. Chambers knew how todistinguish and to combine all the excellencesof those great men ; and hisintuitive good taste, and sound judgment,led him also to examine into themerits of those French architects, whoseproductions have since been so muchesteemed and applauded ; among whom,Claude Perrault and Jules Mansardheld the most distinguished rank."Chambers studied at Paris, under thecelebrated Clarissa ; and on his returnto England, fixed his residence inPoland Street, London, where he commencedthe profession of an architect.At this time, he was an excellentdraughtsman, and had acquired no commondegree of skill in architecture ; thestory, therefore, that he followed thebusiness of a carpenter, on his firstcoming to London, has been discredited.His manners, too, were such as contributedgreatly to aid him in his profession;and Lord Bute was so pleased withthem at an interview, that he introducedhim as drawing-master to Georgethe Third, then Prince of Wales, bywhom, on his coming to the throne, Mr.Chambers was appointed royal architect.The first work of importance which heexecuted, was Lord Besborough's Villaat Southampton, in Surry, the portico ofwhich is particularly elegant and graceful,la the execution of his contractfor this work, he gave and received,says Chalmers, that satisfaction, whichseldom fails to result from the happyconcurrence of professional skill andtaste, with the most distinguished characterfor punctuality and probity.In 1759, Mr. Chambers published hisDesigns for Chinese Buildings, and aTreatise on Civil Architecture, in whichlatter he has the merit of having beenthe first to compose a regular andelaborate treatise on the Art of Design.He seems, says Allan Cunningham,neither to have wanted knowledge,nor to have spared consideration andresearch, to render his work worthy ofpublic approbation. Here we have theprogress of architecture, traced from thewigwam to the palace, and may read, inasequence of examples, how rudenessgrew into beauty, and coarse strengthinto splendour and magnificence."Shortly after the accession of Georgethe Third, Chambers was appointed tolay out and improve the Royal Gardensat Kew, a task which he seems to haveexecuted with some difficulty, thoughwith ultimate satisfaction, at least tohimself. The gardens at Kew, he observesin the preface to his work on thesubject, are not very large, nor is theirsituation by any means advantageous, asit is low, and commands no prospects ;and, after stating other disadvantages,which made it difficult to produce anythingeven tolerable in gardening, concludes," but princely munificence, andan able director, have overcome all difficulties,and converted what was once adesert into an Eden." The fondness,however, which Mr. Chambers has displayedin these gardens, for the unmeaningfritters of Turkish and Chinesechequer-work, has been universally condemned; and it is generally agreed, thatthese gardens are more calculated toattract the curious, than to display thetaste of the designer. The result ofMr. Chambers's labours appeared in1765, splendidly published in folio, entitledPlans, Elevations, Sections, andPerspective Views of the Gardens andBuildings at Kew, in Surry ; but hisshare of the work excited less applausethan the figures, views, and engravings,which comprised the united talents ofCipriani, Kirby, Marlow, Paul Sandby,Woollett, Major, and others.Chambers seems to have suffered littlein the estimation of his sovereign, inconsequenceof this work, though thecritics and wits handled him severely.Soon after its publication, he was madecomptroller of the office of works, andsurveyor-general to the king; and in1768, he was admitted a member of theRoyal Academy, of which he was one ofthe founders. A present of the drawingsof Kew Gardens to the King of Sweden,in 1771, procured him the order of thePolar Star from that monarch ; and thetitle of knighthood, which he thus acquired,he received the royal permissionto adopt in England. In'l772, he publisheda Dissertation on Oriental Gardening,intended as an attack on Englishornamental gardening in general, whichARCHITECTS.he asserted to be inferior to the Chinese.but more particularly levelled againstthe plans of Capability Brown, whosedesigns for Lord Clive's Villa, at Claremont,in Surry, had been preferredto his own. Its appearance too, immediatelyafter the publication of Mr.Mason's English Garden, led to a beliefthat our author intended his own workas a weapon to deter the king fromintroducing classic improvement into thegardens of Richmond. Chambers failedin his object, and was assailed in his turnby numerous satirical attacks, of whichthat, entitled the Heroic Epistle, supposedto be the joint concoction ofMason and Horace Walpole, gave himthe greatest annoyance. The pomponslanguage which he used in his dissertation,whilst describing the mannerin which the Chinese gardens were tilled,is most happily hit off in the ' Epistle,"from which we extract the followinglines, as a ludicrous, but scarcely exaggerated,paraphrase of Sir William'sprose.Nor rest we here, but at our magic call,Monies shall limb our trees, and liz;ir<l craw!;Huge tops of Tibet hark in yonder (rrovr,Here parrots prate, there cats make cruel love,In some fair island will we turn to grass,With the queen's leave, her elephant and as*,Giants from Africa shall guard the glades,Where hiss our snakes, and spurt our Tartar maids,Or, wanting these, from Charlotte Hayes we bringDamsels alike adroit to sport and sting "Sir William Chambers now confinedhis attention to architecture, in which,undoubtedly, he was more qualified toexcel than in designing gardens. Hehad already been appointed to conductthe building of Somerset House, themost considerable edifice of the reign ofGeorge the Third, and the work on whichChambers's reputation is principallyfounded. Whilst it was in progress, hereceived emoluments to the amount ofabout j2,000 a-year, and the magnificenceof his design, and excellent interiorarrangements, procured him meritedapprobation, and extended his fame bothabroad and at home. The terrace behindSomerset House, which, we shouldobserve, has never been completed accordingto the original plan, has beengreatly admired; but his master piecesare generally allowed to be his staircases,particularly those belonging to the Royaland Antiquarian Societies. The defectsin these buildings, are, perhaps, scarcedeserving of notice, outnumbered as theyare by their beauties. Mr. Allan Cunningham,however, has thought fit topoint out some of the former, whichwe quote. " The structure," he observes,of Somerset House, " is as yetbut a fragment ; but, even makingample allowance for this, there areerrors in its detail which nothing canremove. At the side next the Thames,a portico stands on the summit of asemicircular arch, the bases of two outof its four columns resting on the hollowpart, and giving an appearance of insecurityaltogether intolerable in architecture.The vases on the summit arealike unmeaning and inelegant." Withallits detects, however, he admits it tobe " among the finest of our later publicbuildings."Sir William Chambers died at hishouse, in Norton Street, Marylebone, ofan asthmatic complaint, on the 8th ofMarch, 1796, and was buried in Poet'sCorner, Westminster Abbey. Besidesholding the honours before mentioned,he was treasurer of the Royal Academy.a fellow of the Antiquarian and RoyalSocieties, and member of the RoyalAcademy of Arts, at Florence, and ofthe Royal Academy of Architecture atParis. He left a son and three daughters,the former of whom married one of thedaughters of Admiral Rodney. In privatelife, he was much esteemed ; and,the courtesy and affability," says Chalmers," with which he treated the workmenemployed under him, endearedhim to them, and made it easy for himto collect a numerous and able body ofartificers, when any of his works requiredextraordinary expedition."J A M E S W Y A T T.JAMES WYATT.JAMES WYATT was born of respectableparents, near Burton, in Staffordshire,about the year 1743. His educationwas completed in his fifteenthyear, when, having shewn a fondnessi'or architectural design, he was sent tostudy at Rome, proceeding thither in thesuite of the ambassador, Lord Bagot, towhom he had been introduced. Hestudied architecture, both theoreticallyand practically, with indefatigable zeal ;and, in viewing the classic monumentsand edifices of that city, sometimes exposedhimself to great peril. The writerof his life in The Gentleman's Magazinehas heard him frequently state, that hemeasured, with his own hand, every partof the dome of St. Peter's, and this tooat the imminent danger of his life, beingunder the necessity of lying on hisbuck on a ladder, slung horizontally,without cradle or tide-rail, over a frightfulvoid of three hundred feet. FromRome our young student proceeded toj Venice, where he studied for two years1 under Dissenting, a celebrated archiesect and painter, and made such progressunder his master, in architecturalpainting, as to produce some performancesin that line equal to any byPanniersWyatt returned to England in histwentieth year, and, young as he was,soon had an opportunity of displayinghis powers, through the influence of agentleman whom he had met abroad.By him he was recommended to buildthe Pantheon in Oxford Street, thenabout to be opened for the exhibition ofoperas and masquerades ; and, accordingly,says his biographer, " a youthof twenty-one produced a specimen oftheatrical architecture, which attractedthe attention and commanded the admirationof all persons of taste in Europe,by its grandeur of symmetry, and itslavish but tasteful richness of decoration."Undoubtedly, as a first effort,this work deserved the applause it metwith, and orders soon poured in uponthe architect, not only from all parts ofEngland, but also from the continent.The Empress Catherine, through herambassador in London, made him urgentsolicitations to settle in Petersburg!,and, it is said, offered him a carteblanche as to remuneration, if he wouldconsent to follow his profession in theRussian capital. By the advice of hisfriends, however, he declined her offer,and resolved on pushing his fortune athome. His reputation soon becameestablished ; he was employed in mostof the important architectural works ofthe day ; and, on the death of SirWilliam Chambers, he was chosen to the board of works,which was followed by appointments toall the chief offices connected with hisprofession in the government departments.In 1785, Mr. Wyatt was electeda royal academician ; and, at the timeof the dispute between Mr. West andthe Academy, was requested by theking to hold the vacant chair, which,after a year's occupation of it, he resignedto the former president.Mr. Wyatt's principal works are inthe palaces at Kew and Windsor,Fonthill Abbey, Tamworth Church,House of Lords, Henry the Seventh'sChapel, Bestrode, Dodington Hall,Cashiobury, Abridge Hall, &c. Hisfavourite order was the Gothic, and heis considered as the reviver of thatstyle of architecture in England. Hestudied it with as much zeal, as he haddisplayed in his acquisition of theprinciples of the Roman style, employingdraughtsmen to make drawingsfrom the most celebrated and beautifulremains of our ancient monastic andbaronial structures, the character andornament of which he transferred to hisown designs, with additional grace ofsymmetry, and richness of decoration.This ingenious architect, and estimableindividual, died on the 5th of September,1813. He was proceeding to London,on that day, in the carriage of Mr.Dodington, when it was overturnednear Maryborough, and producing aconcussion of the brain, Mr. Wyatt'sdeath almost immediately followed.ARCHITECTS.Mr. Wyatt left a widow and four sons,the eldest of whom, Mr. Benjamin DeanWyatt, was the architect of Drury LaneTheatre. " A man," says his biographer," who walked foremost in theranks of a lucrative profession, in acountry filled with a liberal and richaristocracy, for near forty-eight years,a considerable portion of which he washonoured with the royal favour, migiunaturally be supposed to have amassed afortune almost princely ; but, alas !strange to say, Mr. Wyatt bequeathedto his family little more than a nameuniversally beloved and regretted, anda reputation, which will live as long asthe liberal arts continue to embellishand ennoble human life."JOHN Sane.His eminent architect, was bornabout the year 1755, and at the ageof fifteen, at which time he had acquireda facility in drawing, and someknowledge of the rudiments of architecture,became a pupil of Mr. Dance,under whom, he says, " I acquiredthat taste and feeling for the architectureof the Greeks and Romans, whichcan only cease with my existence."Having been admitted a student ofthe Royal Academy, he obtained, in1772, the silver medal for the bestdrawing of the Front of the BanquetingHouse in Whitehall; and in 1776, thegold medal was awarded him for thebest design for a triumphal bridge. Hewas soon afterwards introduced, by SirWilliam Chambers, to King George theThird, under whose auspices he wassent to Italy, where he studied for threeyears, upon an allowance of 60 perannum, besides 60 for his travellingexpenses, to and from Rome. His mindteemed with magnificent ideas, duringhis stay in the eternal city ; but thosewhich he took most delight in transferringto paper, and in which he chieflyexcelled, were designs for royal palaces.No subject," he observes, in an unpublishedautobiography, " can be moreinteresting to the architect, nor bettercalculated for the exercise of his skilland taste, than a palace for the sovereign.To unite the grand and the usefulis a most difficult task : for whilstinternal convenience requires severalfloors to be placed one above the other,external magnificence admits only ofone floor, raised on a lofty and imposingbasement. This palace was proposedto be erected in Hyde Park, witha series of magnificent hotels, extendingfrom Knightsbridge to Bayswater, relievedby occasional breaks ; making, atthe same time, a rich foreground to theroyal residence, improving the generalappearance of the Park, and providingan ample fund to defray all the expenseattending the completion of the design."Mr. Soane returned home in 1780, atthe desire of the Bishop of Derry (afterwardsEarl of Bristol), his first patron atRome ; but of whose treatment of himafter his arrival in England, he complainsbitterly. A depression of spiritswas the consequence, from which hewas, at length, roused by a competitionfor the erection of two penitentiaryhouses, proposed to be erected on BatterseaRise ; but, though the commissionersapproved of his design, the premiumswere awarded to Mr. Blackburnand Mr. Hardwicke, through the influenceand interference of a noble duke.Mr. Soane was, however, much employedin private works, in which hegave great satisfaction, and particularlyfor the cost, in which he neithersuffered himself nor his employersto be deceived. This latter quality,so rare in an architect, he possessedin an eminent degree, disdaining toraise his reputation by any of thoseambitious frauds to which genius is toofrequently liable ; and, what is lessexcusable, which ignorance as well asgenius is sometimes commissioned toplan, and licensed to execute. Thecorporation of Norwich seem to havefully appreciated the honesty, as well asthe skill, of the subject of our memoir ;and thanked him with equal surpriseand gratitude, for having completed therebuilding of the Blackfriars Bridge inthat city, within the estimated expense.JOHN Sane.In 1788, Mr. Soane published a work,entitled, Plans, &c., dedicated, by permission,to the king ; and, in the sameyear, after an arduous contest withthirteen competitors, he was chosen tosucceed Sir Robert Taylor, as architectto the Bank of England. The appointment,however, gave great offence tocertain parties ; " a corps collected" heobserves, in his memoir, "was organised,which has since pursued me incessantly,on every opportunity, in every stage ofmy life, up to the present moment."A bitter and malicious attack was madeupon him, in The Observer Newspaper,calling him the " Modern Goth," forhaving pulled down the Rotunda ; anda copy of the obnoxious article, was subsequentlydeposited in the plates of eachguest, at a dinner given by Mr. Wyatt,on the occasion of the opening of theGlobe Tavern, in Fleet Street, which thatgentleman had designed. It seems thathis brethren of the compasses had takenadditional offence at the evidence whichhe had given, in a suit brought againstthe county of Nottingham, by Mr.Stoddart, the measurer, to recover acharge of two per cent, for measuringthe buildings at the new gaol, in additionto the usual allowance of five percent,to the architect or surveyor.My evidence," says Mr. Soane, " wascontrasted with the practice of Messrs.Wyatt, Cockerell, and Holland. Thelatter gentleman deposed, that he was inthe habit of charging one, two, or twoand a half per cent, in addition to theusual allowance of five per cent. 1stood alone in combating this practicea practice from which my own feelingsrevolted as highly unwarrantable ; theestablished allowance of five per cent.to the architect and surveyor, being anadequate compensation for his best services,through all the stages of his duty,from the design, inclusively, to the ultimateexamination and audit of theaccounts of the tradesmen. I was theonly professional witness called on thepart of the county, and the verdict wasin favour of the county."In 1795, Mr. Soane was appointedarchitect to the Woods and Forests; amember of the Antiquarian and RoyalSocieties, at a subsequent period; aroyal academician in 1802 ; and, in1806, professor of architecture to theAcademy, when he revived the readingof lectures. He was chosen one of thetrustees in 1825, and has held, duringhis distinguished career, several professionalappointments, among whichwe may mention that of grand superintendentof work in the United Fraternityof Freemasons, of whose newhall he was the architect; and scarcelya season has passed at Somerset House,in which he has not exhibited somedesigns. Among the public buildingswhich he has executed, besides thosealready mentioned, are BuckinghamHouse, Pall Mall, the entrance to theHouse of Lords, the Board of Trade,and the Law Courts. This last workhas subjected the architect to suchgeneral animadversion, that it is butfair to him, to state the disparagingcircumstances under which it was completed.Having had his original planapproved of, he had nearly finished thecourts, in accordance with it, whenhe received an order to pull down aconsiderable part of his work, and tocomplete it according to a new design,which was sent him by a committee ofthe House of Commons. The judges,who had approved of the original plan,disapproved of the present one, and atonce foresaw those inconveniences to thebar and the public, which have been soloudly and generally complained of.1 have no hesitation," says onr artisthimself, "in subscribing to the statementof numerous defects in the NewLaw Courts, brought before the publicon every possible occasion, in the mostsevere and offensive language, not onlyin the House of Commons by honourablemembers, but in other places bypersons aimed with the privileges ofpowdered wigs and black gowns, withallthe overwhelming influence of forensiclanguage and legal tact. When thebuildings in the front of the court ofKing's Bench are restored to the statethey were in at the time of the appointmentof the select committee, andfinished according to the original plan,and the exterior Gothicized to assimilatewith the north front of WestminsterHall, the public will no longer hear thetaste and convenience of these worksreprobated, and the architect will beproud to have it engraved on histomb, ' Here lies the man who designedand directed the construction ofthe New Law Courts at Westminster. "ARCHITECTS.Mr. Soane's love for art has led himto make, at a very considerable expense,din-king the course of his life, alarge collection of ancient and modernworks, which, it is said, he intends bequeathing,together with his library, tohis country. He is also a liberal 'promoterof our charitable and nationalinstitutions; to the Artist's Fund, and theLiterary Fund, he has been a most generouscontributor; and towards the Dukeof York's monument he gave , 1,000,This last donation subjected him to acharge, from the party before-mentioned,of suffering his nearest relativesto exist in a state of pauperism,whilst he was squandering his moneyfor the purpose of gratifying his prideand vanity. To refute this attack, hehas thought it worth while, in themanuscript, from a review of whichwe have drawn the particulars of thismemoir, to state the fact of his havingset apart 20,000 for the use of hisgrandson and three grand-daughters, inthe names of Mr. Chantrey and others,whom he has appointed trustees. Inthe state of the present system of nationalcompetition in architectural works,Mr. Soane offers little encouragementto the student. " In these pages," heconcludes his manuscript, " he will secthat a committee of taste an honourablemember of parliament a learnedbarrister a favoured clerk or anyfashionable amateur armed with a littlebrief authority has the power to controlthe architect, paralyse the bestenergies of his mind, and destroy hisfair pretensions to fame and fortune ;although such persons are no morefitted to correct tlve public taste andto instruct the architect, than the presumptuousand ignorant pedant was toschool Hannibal in the art of war."In private life, Mr. Soane is distinguishedfor those amenities and courtesies,which proceed no less from arefined mind, than from a benevolentheart.JOHN RENN1E.JOHN Jennie, one of the mosteminent architects and civil engineerswhich this country has produced, wasborn on the 7th of June, 1761, atPhantasies, in the parish of Prestonkirk,in the county of East Lothian, Scotland.He lost his father, who was ahighly respectable farmer, in 1766, andwas, soon after, sent to receive therudiments of education at the parishschool. In his way thither, he had tocross a stream, which was occasionallyso high, as to render the use of a boatnecessary. This boat was kept at theworkshop of Andrew Meikle, wellj known, in Scotland, as the inventor, orimprover, of the threshing-machine;and it was here that young Renniefirst developed the peculiar talents forwhich he afterwards became so celebrated.The various operations that heobserved in progress strongly fixed hisattention ; most of his leisure time waspassed at Meikle's workshop; and suchgood use did he make of it, that hewas enabled, at ten years of age, toconstruct the model of a windmill, apue-engine, and a steam-engine. In1773, he left the school at Preston,in consequence of a quarrel with hisschoolmaster, and entered into theservice of Mr. Meikle; but quitted him,in 1775, for the purpose of resuminghis education, of the deficiency ofwhich he bad become deeply sensible.He, therefore, placed himself underthe tuition oi' Mr. Gibson, an ableteacher of mathematics, at Dunbar, inwhose school he remained two years, atthe expiration of which he returnedto Mr. Meikle, with considerable additionto his former stock of knowledge.Such, indeed, had been his progress inevery branch of mathematical andphysical science which Mr. Gibsoncould teach him, that, on the removalof the latter, to take the mastership ofthe grammar-school at Perth, he earnestlyrecommended the subject ofour memoir to succeed him at Dunbar:but though, as a matter of favour, heundertook the management of theschool for about six weeks, he declinedto follow the employment of a schoolmasterby profession.He now returned to his family, and,JOHN R E N N I E.directing his attention to practicalmechanics, repaired a corn mill in hisnative village ; and, before he waseighteen years of age, had erected twoor three .others. In the winter seasonof the years in which he was employedin these and similar pursuits, heremoved to Edinburgh, and there improvedhis knowledge of physicalscience, by attending the lectures ofProfessors Robinson and Black. Theformer of these gentlemen introducedhim to Messrs. Boulton and Watt, whoengaged him to superintend themachinery of the Albion Mills, theplan of which had just been projected.Before going to London, for thispurpose, he visited their manufactory;it Soho ; and, on his way from thenceto the metropolis, made a tour of themanufacturing districts of Leeds, Sheffield,Rotherham, and Newcastle.Having settled in London, Mr.Rennie commenced upon his work atthe Albion flour-mills, the executionof the mill-work and machinery beingconfided to his care. The mills werecompleted about 1787, and wilfullydestroyed by fire, in 1791, in consequenceof a popular notion, that theestablishment of them tended to createa monopoly injurious to the public good.Mr. Watt has, in his notes to Professorhobson's account of the steam-engine,borne unqualified testimony to the skilldisplayed by Mr. Rennie in the workswhich were thus wantonly destroyed.In place of wooden wheels," he says,always subject to frequent derangement,wheels of cast-iron, with the teethtruly formed and finished, and properlyproportioned to the work, were hereemployed ; and other machinery, whichused to be made of wood, was made ofcast-iron, in improved forms; and, Ibelieve, the work executed here maybesaid to form the commencement ofthat system of mill-work which hasproved so useful to this country. Inthe construction of that mill-work andmachinery, Boulton and Watt derivedmost valuable assistance from that ablemechanician and engineer, Mr. JohnRennie, then just entering into business,who assisted in planning them,and under whose direction they wereexecuted."The share which Mr. Rennie had inthe construction of the Albion Millslaid the foundation of his future fame,and he soon became known to thepublic, as one of the most eminentmechanics of his day. He was employedto construct numerous sugar-millsfor the West India planters, andalso in the machinery of the powder-millat Tunbridge, the flax-mill ofWandsworth, the rolling and trituratingmills of the Mint, in London, and themachinery of various breweries anddistilleries. In these mills, and ail themill-work which he erected, he effectedone great improvement, by making thehorizontal bridge tree perfectly immoveable,and thus freeing the machineryfrom that irregular play which must,in the end, have destroyed every kindof mechanism. Formerly, it had beenusual to place the vertical axis of therunning millstone in a bush, placed inthe middle of the horizontal bridgetree,which was supported only at its twoextremities, in consequence of whichthe bridge tree yielded to the variationsof pressure, arising from the greater orless quantity of grain which was admittedbetween the millstones; and wasconceived (till Mr. Rennie shewed it tobe an injurious one,) 10 be an usefuleffect.The architectural undertakings ofMr. Rennie have rendered his nameno less famous than his mechanicalones. It is in the construction ofbridges that he chiefly excelled : theone which he first completed was, webelieve, that of Kelso, finished aboutthe year 1803. The building is ofstone, and is thrown over the Tweed,immediately below its junction withthe Teviot. It consists of a level roadway,resting on five elliptical arches,each of which has a span of seventy-threefeet, and a rise of twenty-onefeet, and is in perfect accordance withthe scenery which surrounds it. Oneof his biographers tells us, that whenhe first had the pleasure of beingintroduced to Mr. Rennie, he statedto him his opinion of the superiorityof Kelso Bridge, without being awarethat it had been designed by thesubject of our memoir; who was themore gratified by such a testimony tohis talents, as he himself conceived thedesign of Kelso Bridge to be one of thebest he ever made. Mr. Jennie hadalso some share in the design of theARCHITECTS.aqueduct bridge over the Lime, atLancaster; and he also designed,altogether, the stone bridges of Leeds,Musselburgh, Newton-Stewart, Boston,and New Galloway. With respect tothe bridge at Musselburgh, the followinganecdote has been told : WhilstMr. Rennie was superintending theprogress of the work, one of the magistrates,who was present, asked acountryman, who was driving his cartover the bridge at the time, how heliked the new bridge ? " Brig !" repliedthe man ; " its nae brig ava ; yeneither ken whan ye gang on't, orwhan ye come aff't." " The oldbridge," says his biographer, " has avery precipitous roadway; and beingin this, and in other respects, the verycounterpart of the new one, the homelyopinion given above may be consideredas one of the highest compliments thatcould have been paid to the engineer."But the grand architectural triumphof Mr. Rennie, is that superb structure,which, to behold, Canova declared, wasworth journey from the remotest cornerof the eanh,and which was pronounced,by M. Lupin, as a monument worthyof the Sesostrises and the Caesar. We,of course, allude to Waterloo Bridge ;a work, as has been justly observed,not less pre-eminent among the bridgesof all ages and countries, than theevent, which it will commemorate, isunrivalled in the annals of ancient ormodern history. The original projectorof the bridge was Mr. George Dodd ;but, quarrelling with the company, bywtiom the capital was subscribed tocarry the plan into effect, he was eitherdismissed, or threw up his situation,when the execution of the work wasintrusted to Mr. Rennie. It was, atfirst, proposed that the bridge shouldbe of wood, and that, with the profitsof the tolls, which were expected to beimmense, another one of stone shouldbe erected. Parliament, however, refusingto pass a bill, it was resolved tocommence the present edifice, of whichthe foundation-stone was laid on oldMichaelmas day, in 1811, and the lasta short time previous to the 18th ofJune, 1816, the first anniversary ofthe battle of Waterloo; when it wasopened, with great pomp, by the Dukeof Wellington, the Prince Regent, andother persons of the first distinction.The expense of this magnificent structurewas a million of money, all ofwhich was raised by private shares,which, though once at a premium, havenow sunk in the market to a merelynominal price. The execution of thisbridge, which has not altered more thanfive inches in any part, is worthy ofthe design ; the arches and piers arebuilt of large blocks of granite, withshort counter-arches over each pier ;the curve of equilibrium passes everywhereextremely near to the middle ofthe blocks, and, in short, as it has beenobserved, "the accuracy of the wholeexecution seems to have vied with thebeauty of the design, and with the skillof the arrangement, to render the bridgeof Waterloo a monument, of which themetropolis of the British empire willhave abundant reason to be proud for along series of successive ages."Another of Mr. Rennie's great undertakingswas the Break water at Ply mouth,by which so many ships have been protected,and so many lives preserved,that must, without it, have been inevitablylost. The Breakwater stretchesacross the entrance of Plymouth Sound,and consists of a central part of onethousand yards in length, and twowings, each of three hundred and fiftyyards, forming, with the middle portion,angles of 158 deg., the angularpoints being turned towards the ocean.The greater part of it rests uponmasses of rock, which have, at alltimes, impeded the navigation of theSound; and the whole is formed ofimmense blocks of marble, from theneighbouring quarries. The celebratedM. Lupin visited the Breakwater, in1816, and has given a very interestingaccount of the mode in which theoperations were carried on, both at theworks and on shore. We have notspace for any but his concluding remarks: " The great work," he says,which I have here attempted todescribe, the enormous masses of stonewhich the workmen strike with hugehammers, or precipitate from the summitof the hills ; the suspended roads forconveying away the earth ; the linesof cranes, and their simultaneousmachinery ; the movements of thecarriages ; the arrival, loading, anddeparting of the vessels, present, altogether,to an admirer of the great worksJOHN Jennie.of art, one of the most imposingspectacles that can be imagined. Atcertain hours, the ringing of a bellannounces the explosion of the quarries.The works instantly cease, the workmenretire, all becomes silence and solitude ;and this silence is rendered still moreimposing by the report of the gunpowder,the breaking of the rocks, thecrash occasioned by their fall, and theprolonged echoes. Near the quarriesthere are several workshops, for repairingthe tools, carriages, vessels, &c.A little square building serves as anoffice for the engineer, and a few agents,who are sufficient for the direction andcompletion of an undertaking, theannual expenses of which amount to100,000."Mr. Rennie also designed and constructedseveral iron bridges, of whichthe principal are, the one at Southwark,and a small one over the Withal, atBoston. We should not, however,omit to mention, that he designed themagnificent stone edifice, which nowsupplies the place of old LondonBridge; his plan being selected, bythe committee, as the best out of thirty-eight.He, also, designed a bridge ofthree arches, of ninety, eighty, andseventy feet span, for the riverGoorutz, at Lucknow, in the EastIndies ; but the Nabob of Ode wouldnot allow it to be erected. Among thecanals which he executed, and gave hischief personal attention to, were: theCrinan, the Lancaster, Aberdeen, BeechenGrand Western, Bennet and Avon,Portsmouth, Worcester, Birmingham,and several others. Some of our finestdocks and harbours were also constructed,or improved, under his superintendence.The docks at Hull,Greenock, Leith, Liverpool, and Dublin,attest his skill ; as do the harbours ofQueensberry, Berwick, Howth, Holyhead,Unlearn (now called KingstonHarbour), and Newhaven. His chiefworks in this way, however, are in hismajesty's dock-yards, at Portsmouth,Plymouth, Chatham, and Sheerness.The latter, which used to be a merequicksand, of forty feet deep, mixedwith mud and the wrecks of old ships,is now a magnificent basin, with abeautiful surrounding wall of granite,with which three of the finest dry-docksin the universe communicate.His design for the projected navalarsenal, at Northwest, was on so granda scale as to be capable of containing,afloat, two-thirds of the whole navy ;but the estimated sum of eight millions,probably, induced government to abandonthe scheme. The pier-head, atRamsgate, owes much of its durabilityto the ingenuity of Rennie ; and healso effected, what, for centuries past,had baffled some of the ablest civilengineers, the drainage of that vasttract of marsh land, bordering upon therivers Trent, Withal, New Welland,and Ouse. This eminent man died, ofan inflammation of the liver, on the16th of October, 1821; leaving sevenchildren, by his wife, who was a MissMackintosh, and whom he survivedfifteen years. He was buried in St.Paul's, where his remains were interred,near those of Sir ChristopherWren.Mr. Rennie had a fine, commandingperson, of a robust make, and greatlyabove the middle size. His features,though on a large scale, were blendedwith much mildness, as well as dignity; and a minute observer would,perhaps, discern, in his countenance,that natural impetuousness of temper,which, together with a general air ofnobleness, obtained for his bust, byChantrey, the appellation of JupiterTonans, on its exhibition at SomersetHouse. His conversation was amusingand instructive; he possessed a richfund of anecdote, and, as a travellingcompanion, was so highly entertaining,that, it is said, " he knew every bodyon the road, and every body knewJohn Rennie." He was a great book-collector; and, besides a most valuablelibrary, had an excellent collection ofmathematical and astronomical instruments.He is said, often, to haveworked fifteen, and seldom less thantwelve, hours a day ; and never sufferedamusement of any kind to interferewith his business. During thelast thirty years of his life, he wasemployed in undertakings to the estimatedamount of forty millions, abouttwenty of which were expended underhis own immediate superintendence.He seldom had recourse to any otherinstrument than a two-feet rule, which,like Ramsden, he always carried about,in his pocket.ARCH ITECTS."Rennie," says one of the biographersof the subject of our memoir, " has beencompared with Smeaton, as an engineer;but the parallel is, in our opinion, not acorrect one. Smeaton possessed muchmore theoretical knowledge than Rennie,and Rennie surpassed Smeaton in hispractical resources. The latter was moreof a man of science ; and, if he was less ofa practical engineer, we may ascribe it,in some degree, to his having flourishedat an earlier period of the arts, and ata time when the military and navalresources of our country were not calledforth for its defence; and when Britishcapital, and British enterprise, had notdared to embark themselves in worksof national magnitude and interest."SIR Jeffrey WYATVILLE.Jeffrey WYATT, which was theoriginal name of this eminent architect,'vas born at Burton-upon-Trent, inStaffordshire, on the 3rd of August,1766. He was educated at the freeschool of his native place, from which heran away twice, with the intention ofgoing to sea, but was brought backagain, much to his mortification. Hishome, however, becoming irksome tohim from the improvidence of his father,he left it in 1783, and made a third attemptto enter the naval service, but wasunable to obtain any engagement, inconsequenceof the American war beingat an end. He then applied to one ofhis uncles, Mr. Samuel Wyatt, a builderand architect, who took his nephewunder his protection, and gave him thebenefit of his instruction during a periodof seven years. He next entered theservice of another and more eminentuncle, Mr. James Wyatt, the architectof the Pantheon, under whom he madeconsiderable improve-ment. In 1799,the subject of our memoir entered intopartnership with a builder, who had extensivecontracts with government andother offices, but was in too ilia state ofhealth to bestow the requisite personalattention. Mr. Wyatt continued in thisprofitable line of business till 1824, whenhe received a command from His MajestyGeorge the Fourth, to attend andreceive his directions respecting designsfor restoring Windsor Castle. Parliamenthaving voted a large sum for thispurpose, a committee was appointed toselect the architect, and the choice fellupon the subject of our memoir whosedrawings on the occasion were preferredto those of the other candidates, Mr. Nashand Mr. Smirk. " Apprised of thisflattering event," says his biographer.first by his majesty, who had evidentlybeen much pleased with the designs,and who had previously expressed favourableopinions of the architect; and,secondly, by Lord Liverpool, Mr. Wyattwas commissioned to commence theworks, and exert his abilities in renderingthe castle a comfortable and splendidhabitation for the English monarch, andan ornament and honour to the country."He had, in the meantime, beenelected an associate and member of theRoyal Academy, after having been anunsuccessful candidate for twenty years,in consequence " of the union of thetradesman with the architect."Mr. Wyatt commenced his new worksat Windsor Castle, on the 12th of August,1824, the anniversary of the birthdayof his majesty, by whom the firststone was laid. The part began upon,was the foundation of the new gateway,called George the Fourth's Gateway, aview of which, his majesty suggested,should be added to the armorial quarteringsof the architect's family arms, withthe word Windsor, as a motto. At thesame time, the royal permission wasawarded him to change his name toWyatville, not merely as a personalcompliment, but for the purpose of distinguishingand separating the Wyatt ofthat reign, from Mr. James Wyatt, whohad been much identified with the architecturalworks at Windsor, during thelong life of George the Third. By theend of 1828, the king's private apartmentsbeing completed, he took possessionof the castle, and soon after Mr.Wyatville had the honour of knighthoodconferred upon him.Sir Jeffry's improvements of WindsorSIR Jeffrey WYATV1LLE.Castle, have been considered the onlyones combining taste and propriety thathave been made from the commencednt of tue Tudor dynasty. "On arecent examination of the castle," sayshis biographer, " and contemplating itspresent grand, substantial, and imposingportraiture, as a whole, and features indetail, in comparison to, and contrastwith, its state in 1799, the picture isstriking and impressive. It plainlymanifests an improvement in publictaste, as well as an enlarged liberality inthe national councils ; it shews a harmonyand co-operation in the monarch,the parliament, and the people, whichmay be referred to as unparalleled in theannals of the kingdom. At an age,when economy in every department ofthe state has been demanded by thepeople, and partly conceded by the government,it is presumed that a millionof the public money will be expendedon this palace, and paid without a murmurand without a reproach. Nothingcan be a stronger proof of the abilityand integrity of the architect: for themonarch and the subject the Tory andthe Whig the liberal and the radicalare nearly unanimous in commendationof these works." Sir Jeffry Wyatville'sother works consist of alterations andadditions to some of our most celebratedcountry seats, amongst which we maymention those at Chatsworth House,Derbyshire; Bodmiriton House, Gloucestershire;and Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire.He also built the New GateHouse, fronting Sydney College, Cambridge,and several country mansionshave been designed and constructedaltogether by him.WILLIAM WILKINS.WILLIAM WILKINS was born inthe parish of St. Giles, in the city ofNorwich, about the year 1776. He isthe son of an architect and draughtsmanof some celebrity, who contrived, afterhaving been disinherited, in consequenceof his marrying against his father'sconsent, to amass a respectable competence,by his professional exertions.Subsequently, however, he came intothe receipt of a private income, independentlyof his profession, and about thesame time he removed to Cambridge, tosuperintend the education of the subjectof our memoir, who was entered ofCaius College, in that university, havingbeen previously placed at the freegrammar sciicol of Norwich, underDr. Forster. Mr. Wilkins made themost of his time at Cambridge, and hehad the advantage of meeting, at hisfather's house, some of the most eminentmen of the age ; among others,Dr. Parr, Porson, and the present Bishopof Chichester, were frequent and intimateguests. His opportunities ofpersonal intercourse with such distinguishedcharacters, probably acted as astimulus to the exertions of Mr. Wilkins,for we find him, in the year 1800,taking his bachelor's degree as sixthwrangler. Immediately afterwards, heobtained a travelling fellowship, and setout upon a tour to Greece and AsiaMinor, which occupied him about threeyears.The object of Mr. Wilkins was chieflyprofessional, and he may therefore justlyclaim the merit of having been the firstarchitect to set the example of residingat Athens, as a school of architecture ;for, although Stuart and Revett hadpreceded him, their visit was undertakenwith a view of profit from theirintended publication, as they acknowledgedin the first volume of their work.The travels of Parr, in the same country,were made at the expense of theDilettanti Society, merely for the purposeof collecting materials for theirarchitectural publication. Whilst inSicily and Italy, Mr. Wilkins laid thefoundation of his Magna Grecian, an excellentwork on the antiquities of thatcountry, which he published soon afterhis return to England. During hisabsence he was elected a fellow of hiscollege, and he subsequently became asenior, but at what time he took hisdegree of M.A. does not ,appear.The first professional undertaking ofMr. Wilkins, was the East India Coli200ARCHITECTS.lege, at Haleybury, in Hertfordshire, ameritorious specimen of his early abilities.When it was in contemplation tobuild Downing College, Cambridge, hesent in a plan, which was preferred toseveral others, and he was accordinglyappointed to construct that classic edifice.His other chief works, are, theKing's College, London, Corpus Christ,and Trinity College, the London University,and St. George's Hospital. Theplans of this last, both ornamentaland useful building, were submitted tothe personal inspection of His MajestyGeorge the Fourth, who expressed hiswarmest approbation of them. Amongthe most celebrated of his private worksare: The Grange, in Hampshire, thenthe seat of Henry Drummond, Esq.,now the residence of Alex. Baring, Esq.;Dairy, the seat of the Earl of Roseberry; Tragothnan, the seat of the Earlof Falmouth ; and Dunmore Park, theresidence of the nobleman of the samename.Besides the work before mentioned,Mr. Wilkins, who is now architect tothe East India Company, and is fastrising in public estimation, is the authorof a translation of the Civil Architectureof Vitruvius, published in 1813, and ofAthenians, or Remarks on the Topographyand Buildings of Athens, togetherwith several papers published inthe Archaeological. He also edited theAntiquities of Attica, and a new volumeof the Antiquities of Ionia, both publishedby the Society of Dilettante, ofwhich he is a member. He has beenfor some time a royal academician, andis at present engaged in the erection ofseveral public buildings, in London.ENGRAVERS.GEORGE VERTUE.THIS eminent antiquary and engraverwas born in the parish of St. Martin inthe Fields, London, in the year 1684.His parents, whom Walpole describes asmore honest than opulent, were of theRoman Catholic religion. About theage of thirteen, he was placed with aFrenchman, who was an engraver ofarms on plate, and remained with himabout four years ; at the expiration ofwhich period, his master became insolvent,through extravagance, and quittedEngland. Vertue then returned home,and after having studied drawing forabout two years, bound himself apprenticeto Michael Vandergucht, the copperplateengraver, whom he left in the year1709, and commenced business for himself." The art," says Walpole, " wasthen at the lowest ebb in England.The best performers were worn out;the war with France shut the dooragainst recruits ; national acrimony,and the animosity of faction, divertedpublic attention from common acts ofamusement."The patronage, however, of Sir GodfreyKneller, and the talent of the subjectof our memoir, brought him intonotice, in spite of these discouragements,and his works soon began todraw general attention. A plate, whichhe engraved for Lord Somers, of ArchbishopTillotson, at once establishedhis reputation ; nothing like it, as hisbiographer observes, had appeared forsome years, nor, at the time of its production,had he any competitors. Onthe establishment of an Academy ofPainting, by Sir Godfrey Kneller andothers, in 1711, Vertue became one ofthe members, and drew there for severalyears. To the end of the reign ofQueen Anne, he continued to engraveportraits from the works of the mosteminent artists of that day. He also,himself attempted to paint portraits inwater-colours, and made copies fromold or curious pieces, in the choice ofwhich he was guided by his love ofantiquities. He likewise commenced acollection of prints and other materials,for a History of the Arts in England,and to make researches after the livesof our early artists, in which pursuitshe was encouraged and assisted by RobertHarley, second Earl of Oxford,and Engage Finch, Earl of Winchester.On the accession of George the First,he published a large plate of the head ofthat monarch, which had a greater sale,and a larger share of approbation thanits merits warranted. It was so approvedof at court, however, that it wasfollowed by a commission for those ofthe prince and princess, which Vertueexecuted in a style more worthy of hisburin. On the revival of the Society ofAntiquaries, in 1717, of which he wasa member, he was appointed to be itsengraver, through the influence of thepresident, the Earl of Winchester, andthe plates published by that society,from curious remains, were most ofthem by his hand, as long as he lived.He engraved, for many years, the almanacfor the University of Oxford,in which, " instead of insipid emblems,that deserved no longer duration thanwhat they adorned, he introduced viewsof public buildings and historic events."Indefatigable in his researches aftermaterials for his great work, he madetours through various parts of England,in company with his two noble patronsENGRAVERS.above mentioned, and copied manyheads in collections, from which heexecuted engravings. In 1730, he publisheda set of twelve heads of poets, hisiifai work of importance; his second,was a set of heads of the loyal sufferers} in the cause of Charles the First, witha head of that monarch, and an accountof the characters subjoined, from thepen of Lord Clarendon. He was nextemployed in the decoration of Rapin'sHistory of England, a task which occupiedhim about three years. He wasthen engaged to engrave some of theillustrious heads, of which, the greaterpart were executed by Houbraken, andundoubtedly," says Walpole, " surpassedthose of Vertue ; yet his performancesby no means deserved to becondemned, as they were by the undertakers,and the performer laid aside."However this may be, both in the presentwork, and all others in which hewas employed, he has the rare merit ofadhering closely to truth, as far as itwas attainable ; and of never indulginghis fancy in giving imaginary portraits.In 1740, he published proposals forthe publication ot' a set of historic prints,a work highly valuable to antiquaries,and, for which he executed a greatnumber of engravings with extreme careand accuracy. Towards the close of hiscareer, he was much patronised by Frederick,Prince of Wales, who employedhim in collecting prints, &c., and thedeath ot that prince, with other of hisdistinguished patrons, is said to haveaffected both his spirits and his health.He continued, however, his favouriteresearches till prevented by the failureof his sight, and other infirmities; andhis industry may be conceived from thefact that his collection, at the time ofhis death, amounted to forty volumes.He died in the year 1756, and wasburied in the cloisters of WestminsterAbbey. His notes and sketches werepurchased, after his death, by Walpole,who is indebted to them for the principalmaterials of his Anecdotes of Paintingin England. The industry ofVertue was equalled by his modesty ;and his unassuming manners and realprivate worth, conduced very much tothe great esteem and respect in whichhe was held by those to whom his talentmade him known. He was more deeplyi versed in the study of English coinsI than any other antiquary of his time ;and, indeed, in the latter character,few have exerted themselves more usefullyin every respect. As an artist,he has certainly been surpassed; andMr. Gilpin allows him only painfulexactness, displayed in a dry .disagreeablemanner, without force or freedom.Against his want of spirit, however,must be set his scrupulous truth otimitation, though the above charge hasby no means been acquiesced in by allgood judges, some of whom speak of hisportraits in terms highly commendatory.From a complete list of hisprints, given by Walpole, we select thefollowing, consisting of portraits andhistoric prints, with two, or moreportraits. The latter consist of : Henrythe Seventh and his Queen, with Henrythe Eighth and Jane Seymour; ThreeChildren of Henry the Seventh ; CharlesBrandon, Duke of Suffolk, and Mary,Queen of France ; Frances, Duchess ofSuffolk, with Adrian Stoke, her firsthusband; Thomas, Earl of Arundel,his Countess, and Children ; a privateplate; Thomas, Earl of Stratford, andhis Secretary ; The Earl of Stratford'sthree Children ; William, Duke of Portland,his Duchess, and Lady MaryWorsley ; the Procession of Queen Elizabethto Hudson House ; the Tomb ofLord Darnley, James the First, when achild, Earl and Countess of Lennox, &c.praying by it ; The little of CarburyHill; Edward the .Sixth granting thePalace of Bridewell for an Hospital ;The Court of Wards, with an explanation.The former consist of: KingRichard the Second, from the paintingin Westminster Abbey ; Queen Elizabeth,after Isaac Oliver ; Mary, Queenof Scots, after Zuccaro; Queen Anne,after Kneller; King George the I'jrst,very large ; the same, smaller, a betterprint ; George, Prince of Wales ; thePrincess of Wales, with an Angel bringinga Crown, after Amici ; Frederick,Prince of Wales, after Boit; PrincessAnne; William, Duke of Cumberland,after Jervas ; Princess Mary ; WilliamSeymour, Duke of Somerset ; HenrySomerset, Duke of Beaufort; WilliamCavendish, Duke of Newcastle ; John,Duke of Marlborough ; John, Duke ofBuckingham ; Philip, Duke of \Vhar- 'ton, after Jervas; Lionel, Duke of Dorset;Henry Howard, Earl of Surry; jJOHN Boswell.Francis, Earl of Bedford; Edward,Earl of Dorset; Engage, Earl of winchester;Edward, Earl of Oxford, sitting,with many pieces of his collectionround him : Sarah, Duchess of Somerset;Elizabeth, Countess of Shrewsbury;Dorothy, Countess of Sunderland ; Sophia,Countess of Granville ; ArchbishopWarham, Archbishop Cranmer, ArchbishopParker, Archbishop Tillotson ;John Robinson, Bishop of London ;Edward Chandler, Bishop of Durham;Gilbert Burnett, Bishop of Salisbury ;William Lloyd, Bishop of Worcester,sitting in his Library, one of his bestprints ; John Spencer, Dean of Ely ;Humphrey Prideaux, Dean of Norwich ;Sir Thomas More ; Sir Nicholas Bacon ;Sir Francis Bacon ; Sir Joseph Jekyll,Master of the K oils, sitting, fine; Sir JohnVarney, Master of the Rolls, fine.JOHN Boswell..THIS munificent and enterprisingpatron of the arts was born at Stanton.in Shropshire, on the 19th of January,1719. He was the son of a land surveyor,and was brought up to thatbusiness, though originally intended forthe church, and educated with that viewby his grandfather. Dr. Boydell, till hisdeath, in 1731. He had, however, notlong been in his father's office, beforethe accidental view of a very indifferentprint by Toms, of Warden Castle,<jave a decided bias to his mind, in favourof engraving; which he henceforth,in spite of the remonstrances of his father,determined to make his profession.He accordingly walked up to London,in his twenty-first year, and bound himselfapprentice for seven years to Toms,the engraver of the plate which hehad so much admired. Determinedto acquire some knowledge of the otherbranches of art, he studied drawing atthe Academy in St. Martin's Lane; devotedhis leisure hours in the eveningto perspective ; and contrived to learnthe French language without the aid ofa master.Finding himself, at the expiration ofsix years, a much superior artist tohis master, he bought out the last yearof his apprenticeship, and commencedbusiness on his own account. His firstpublication was six small landscapes,designed and engraved by himself, andentitled the Bridge Book, in consequenceof there being a bridge in eachof the views. They were sold, accordingto Chalmers, at one shilling the set ;though a more recent authority, Smith,in his Lives of Nollekens' Contemptvaries, says sixpence was the price ofthem; and, as there were very few printshops at that time in London, he prevailedupon the sellers of children's toy?,to allow his little books to be put in theirwindows. These shops he used to visitevery Saturday; his most fortunate depotwas at the sign of the Cricket Bat, inDuke's Court, St. Martin's Lane, where,finding at the end of one week, that asmany had been sold as came to 5s. 6d.,he was so pleased, that he 1 'id out themoney with the shopkeeper in a silverpencil case; "which article," says Smith,"after he had related the above anecdote,he took out of his pocket, andassured me he never would part with."This statement again differs from thatof Chalmers, who says, that Boydeillaid out the whole of his annual accountwith his agent, and purchased of him, notasilver pencil, but a silver pint mug.He afterwards designed and engravedmany other plates of views in Englandand Wales, besides various prints fromBracing. Berghem, Salvator Rosa. &c.Many of them are executed in a veryrespectable manner ; yet he was, probably,by no means so well satisfied asthe public with them, as we find him,about the same time, cutting to piecesa plate of an historical sketch, which hehad been engaged in copying, for severalmonths.Having at length completed an hundredand fifty prints, he collected thewhole in one portfolio, and publishedit at the price of five guineas. He modestlyallowed, says his biographer,that he himself had not, at that time,arrived at any eminence in the art2:0E N G R A V K R S.of engraving; and indeed these printsare now chiefly valuable, from a comparisonof them with the improvedstate of the art. He saw also, that England,at that period, could boast of noeminent engravers ; and he thereforedetermined, with the profits of his portfolio,which soon became considerable, toencourage that branch of art, by liberalcommissions to its followers. Amongthese was Woollett, whose genius, thusstimulated, shone forth in that splendidengraving of Niobe, of which we havegiven an account in our memoir ofthat celebrated artist. The extensivesale, which attended his book of prints,soon laid the foundation of an amplefortune ; whence he used to observe,that this was the first book that evermade a lord mayor of London ; andthat, when the smallness of the workwas compared with what had followed,it would serve to impress all youngmen with the truth of what he hadoften held out to them, " that industry,patience, and perseverance, ifunited to moderate talents, are certainto surmount all difficulties." The artof engraving was, at this time, at so lowan ebb in England, that the only valuableprints in circulation were importedfrom France ; but such was thespirit and industry of Mr. Boydell, inhis encouragement of native artists, thatin a short time he had the satisfactionof seeing the works of British engraverseagerly sought after in every part ofEurope; and the scale, with referenceto the print trade, at length completelyturned in favour of Great Britain.Thus successful in spreading the fameof British engraving, he determined toattempt the establishment of an Englishschool of historical painting ; the wantof which had been a favourite topic ofopprobrium against this country, amongforeign writers on national taste. In thisundertaking he employed the talents ofthe most eminent artists, remuneratingthem with a liberality that ultimatelyproduced his own ruin. Suffice it to say,that, when in his eighty-fifth year, andafter having expended no less than^350,000 upon this magnificent project,he found himself constrained, in consequenceof the stoppage of his foreigntrade, during a twelve years' war, toapply to parliament for leave to disposeof his gallery by lottery, in order todischarge his debts. This step deeplyaffected him, as he had intended to leavethe Shakspeare Gallery to the public ;and would have been enabled to do so,but for the French revolution, of which,in his letter to Sir John William Anderson,one of the members for the city,he complains very bitterly. " You willexcuse, I am sure, my dear sir," hesays, after stating his reasons for disposingof his gallery, ' some warmth inan old man on this subject, when 1 informyou, that this unhappy revolutionhas cut up by the roots that revenuefrom the continent which enabled meto undertake such considerable worksin this country. At the same time, asI am laying my case fairly before you,it should not be disguised, that my naturalenthusiasm for promoting the finearts (perhaps buoyed up by success)made me improvident. For had I laidby but jglO out of every 100 my platesproduced, I should not now have hadoccasion to trouble my friends, or appealto the public; but, on the contrary,1 flew with impatience to employ somenew artist, with the whole gains" of myformer undertakings. I see, too late,my error ; for I have thereby decreasedmy ready money, and increased mystock of copper-plates to such a size,that all the print sellers in Europe couldnot purchase it. especially at these times,so unfavourable to the arts."Mr. Boydell's civic, as well as professionalcareer, was one of honour andrespectability; he was chosen an aldermanin 1782; sheriff, in 1785; and lordmayor, in 1790, an office which he dischargedwith unexampled diligence,uprightness, and liberality. He did notlong survive the sale of his ShakspeareGallery ; dying, on the 9th of December,1804, of an inflammation of the lungs,contracted during his attendance at theOld Bailey, on magisterial business.He was married, in 1748, to ElizabethLloyd, second daughter of a Shropshiregentleman ; but had no issue by her.His character was, in every respect,estimable ; and few men have beenmore esteemed by their friends, or meritedmore the gratitude of their country,than Alderman Boydell ; a namewhich must ever be honourably associatedwith the history of British engraving,in its rise from mediocrity tocomparative perfection.SIR R B L R 1 s> '1 l\ A N G K .SIR ROBERT STRANGE.SIR ROBERT STRANGE, descendedfrom the family of the Strange of Bal-casey,in the county of Fife, whosettled in Orkney at the time of theReformation, was born in Pomona, oneof the Orkney Isles, on the 14th of July,1721 After having completed his educationunder Mr. Murdoch Mckenzie,at Kirkwall, he commenced studyingfor the law ; but finding this occupationirksome, he went on board a man-of-warbound for the Mediterranean, butsoon returned, disgusted with the sea,and resumed his former pursuits.These, however, he was soon inducedto abandon altogether, and take to drawing,as a profession ; his taste for whichhad first been discovered by his brother,who found, accidentally, somesketches executed by Robert in a verymasterly manner. These being shownto Mr. Cooper, a drawing master atEdinburgh, he was so pleased withthem, that he intimated a desire to haveStrange as a pupil, and the subject of ourmemoir was accordingly apprenticed tohim for a limited time. He had madeconsiderable progress in his studies,when, the civil war breaking out inScotland, he joined the rebels, as a lieutenantin the life guards ; " urged," sayshis biographer, " by many motives, andparticularly by the desire of gaining ahand which was become necessary tohis happiness." He seems to havetaken an active part in behalf of thePretender, and was, in consequence,exposed to much danger. After thebattle of Falkirk, he was intrusted withthe conveyance of some military despatches,and whilst riding along theshore with them, had his sword bent bya ball from one of the vessels stationedon the coast. The decisive victory ofCulloden obliged him, with many others,to seek safety in concealment, and helay, for many months, among the highlandsof Scotland, in a state of thegreatest deprivation and distress. Atlength, he ventured to return to Edinburgh,where he supported himself bythe private sale of drawings of the rivalleaders in the rebellion, at one guineaeach. " A fan, also," says his biographer,the primary destination of which hadgiven it, in his eyes, an additional value,and where he had, on that account, bestowedadditional pains, was sold, at thisperiod, with a sad heart, to the Earl ofWeiss, who was too sensible of itsvalue to suffer it to be repurchased,when that was proposed a short timeafterwards." Miss Isabella Lumisden,the name of the lady for whom he appearsto have entertained so devoted anattachment, rewarded him with herhand in 1747, and, soon after, he proceededto London, with the intention ofembarking for France, At Rouen hemade a short stay, for the purpose ofvisiting the academy there, where heobtained an honorary prize for design,though his competitors were numerous.Continuing his journey to Paris, hethere studied engraving under the celebratedLe Bas, from whom he learnedthe use of what is called the dry point,or needle, which he afterwards improved,and used with much success inhis own plates.Mr. Strange settled in London in 1751,and devoted himself chiefly to historicalengraving, of which he is generally consideredto be the father in this country.His reputation was soon established, andthat at a period when Ryland, Bartonand Woollett were among his contemporaries.The former, however, forsome time supplanted him in courtfavour, in consequence of his undertakingwhat Strange had refused, theexecution of an engraving from, whathe conceived to be, a bad portrait of theking, and therefore unworthy of hisburin. It is said that the king, subsequently,coincided with his opinion, andthat he incurred, at the time, less thedispleasure of his majesty, than of LordBute, whose portrait had been paintedby the same artist, Allan Ramsay. Atall events, the royal favour was not permanentlywithheld from him; for, in1760, we find him engaged at the palacein copying the apotheosis of the king'schildren, after West; and, on his departurefor the continent, in the sameENGRAVE RS.year, his majesty pei milled him to takethe picture with him. In return forthis condescension, Strange, when hehad finished his engraving, and had afew copies taken off, destroyed theplate itself, by cutting out the principalfigure, which, after being gilt, was presentedto his majesty. During his stayabroad, he made designs from the mostdistinguished masters of the differentschools, and was received with markedattention and respect wherever he sojourned;being made a member of theAcademies of Rome, Florence. Bologna,i Parma, and Paris. He returned to| England with increased reputation;| and, in 1787, received the honour ofknighthood, a distinction lie did notlong live to enjoy ; dying on the 5th ofJuly, 1792. He was survived by hiswidow, three sons, and one daughter,to whom he left a considerable property,acquired by honest industry.His moral character is highly eulogizedby his biographer ; from whomwe learn, that notwithstanding the reputationSir Robert attained in his profession,he never really liked it; andwas anxious that it should not be followedby any of his sons. " Even themost mechanical part of his labours,"we are told, " he would generally performhimself; choosing rather to undergoa drudgery so unsuitable to histalents, than trust it to others, or be themeans of engaging them in a profession,which, notwithstanding his own meritedsuccess, he never thought deserving ofrecommendation." His reputation asan engraver may be inferred from thefact, that in the painting in the Vatican,representing the progress of engraving,his portrait is introduced, holding underhis arm a volume, in which his name isinscribed ; an honour accorded to noother Englishman. His chief worksconsist of fifty capital plates, from picturesof th most celebrated masters ofthe Italian schools ; but we should notomit to mention A History of the Fro*dress of Engraving by him, though wearenot aware of its having been published.It had been an early practice withhim to select eighty copies of the bestimpressions of each plate he engraved ;which he collected into as many volumes,prefixing to each two plates of himself,one an etching, the other a finishedproof; and also, by way of introduction,the account of the Progress of Engraving,above mentioned. The plates of SirRobert Strange are distinguished by abold and intelligent execution ; and, ashas been justly said, the force and clearnessof his burin were perhaps scarcelyever surpassed, and gave a value to hisworks which they must always retain.The following is a list of some of hismost celebrated works: Charles theFirst ; two portraits, after Vandyck ;The Children of Charles the First, "andHenrietta Maria, his Queen, with thePrince of Wales and Duke of York,after the same master ; St. Cecilia, afterRaffaelle ; The Virgin and Infant Christ,with Mary Magdalene, St. Jerome, andtwo Angels, after Correggio ; Venus reclining,Venus and Adonis, and Dance,all after Titian ; Mary Magdalene, penitent; The Death of Cleopatra, Fortuneflying over a Globe, Venus attended bythe Graces, and The Chastity of Joseph,all after Guido ; The Virgin, withSt. Catherine and Angels, contemplatingthe Infant Jesus sleeping, after C. Marattiti;Christ appearing to the Virginafter his Resurrection, Abraham sendingaway Hagar, Esther before Ahasuerus,and the Death of Dido, all afterGuercino ; Belisarius, after SalvatorRosa; Romulus and Remus, after Pietroda Corona; Caesar repudiating Pompeii,after the same ; Sappho consecratingher Lyre to Apollo, after Carlo Dolci ;The Martyrdom of St. Agnes, afterDomenSchino ; The Choice of Hercules,after Nicholas Poussin; and The Returnfrom Market, after Ph. Wouvermans.FRANCIS BARTOLOZZI.THIS distinguished engraver was theson of a silversmith at Florence, andwas born in that city, in 1728 ; thoughhis biographer in Assault's Biographicdes Contemporains, places his birth in1725. He was intended for his father'sbusiness ; but handled the graver withso much taste and skill, that it was derFRANCIS BARTOLOZZ1.termined to qualify him altogether lorthe profession in which he afterwardsbecame so eminent. He was accordinglyplaced at the Florentine Academy,and there studied under Gaetano Biasand Ignatius Rumford, at the sametime with Cipriani, with whom heformed an intimacy, that lasted throughlife. After he had studied for threeyears under the above masters, he becamethe pupil of Joseph Wagner, atVenice; who, for some reasons whichare not stated, chose to employ himchiefly in copying the works of inferiormasters. Bat tolozzi, however, continuedto execute several pieces of his owndrawing, and acquired considerable expertnessin the use of the graver.On the expiration of his engagementwith Wagner, Bartolozzi married a Venetianlady, of good family ; and soonafter proceeded to Rome, at the invitationof Cardinal Bottari. Here he engraved,among other works, his fineplates from the life of St. Nisus, andthe heads of painters, for a new editionof Vasari. He did not, however, receivesufficient encouragement to inducehim to remain at Rome ; and, returningto Venice, was there employed byDalton, librarian to George the Third,to engrave some of Guercino's drawings.The beautiful manner in which he executedthem, caused Mr. Dalton to offerhim 300 per annum to accompanyhim to England, and work on his account.Bartolozzi accepted the proposal; and thus completed, in London,his beautiful collection of Gnercinos.Having freed himself from his engagementwith Mr. Dalton, Bartolozzicommenced business on his own account;and was one of the first eminentengravers employed by Alderman Boydell,in contributing by his talents, to obtainthe ascendancy over the continentalartists, whose kites, at that time, wereconsidered very superior to the English.Bartolozzi was particularly celebratedfor the elegance of his designs for thebenefit tickets of the higher performersof the Opera House; and hearing thatit had been said, by Strange, that thiswas all he could do, his pride wasroused, and, in a fit of emulation, heproduced his Clothe, and Virgin andChild, from Carlo Dolci. Another triumphwhich he achieved was not quiteso creditable to him; this was in seducingthe public taste from the superiorand legitimate style of line, bythe beautiful manner in which he executedthe red dotted, or chalk styleintroduced into this country by Rylaudand which was then all the rage.On the institution of the Royal Academy,Bartolozzi was admitted a member;and continued, for many years, toenjoy the patronage and applause whichhis abilities merited. A want of discrimination,however, in the bestowal ofpecuniary assistance, at length so impairedthe fortune he had acquired, thathe found himself, in his seventy-fifthgar, under the necessity of quittingengland. A journal of the day thusnotices his departure : " This morning,(November 3d, 1802,) the celebratedengraver, Bartolozzi, left our metropolis,in order to proceed to Portugal. It ismuch to be regretted, that an artist ofsuch eminence, and whose talents haveso long done honour to this country,should have been compelled, in the declineof his life, to seek an asylum inany other; yet we have nothing withwhich to reproach ourselves on hisaccount; the efforts of his genius havebeen rewarded with the liberality whichuniformly distinguishes the Englishnation: and if imprudence has lavishedwhat generosity has bestowed, it is asubject of regret, that splendid talentsshould be unaccompanied by commonprudence."The reader will not, perhaps, thinkthis a very efficient apology for sufferingan old man, of seventy-four, to quit acountry, whose commercial interest heand Woollett may be said to have increased,by the extensive exportationthe print trade, which immediatelyresulted from the exertions of theirtalents ; and who could not long be expectedto enjoy the bounty which mighthave made him a debtor to this countryfor a grave, as well as for a reputationand subsistence. It indeed has been saidthat he was offered a pension of 400,but refused it, because the English governmentwould not communicate theiroffer to the Prince Regent of Portugal,from whom he had accepted an invitationto superintend a school of engraversat Lisbon, with a pension of 100 perannum. To Lisbon he accordinglyproceeded ; and was received in that :city in a manner which made himE NG U Aversample amends for any neglect whichhe might have met with here. A portionof a letter, which he wrote fromLisbon, soon after his arrival, deservesquotation in this place, as shewing notonly the simplicity and contentedness.of his character, but that he had notall along met with that liberal patronagein England, which is generally understoodto have been extended to him.In this country," he writes, " to whichmy destiny, in the evening of my mortalcourse, has sent me, I have experiencedfrom every one the most flattering reception.The cordiality and affabilitywith which 1 have been treated by threedistinguished noblemen has surpassedmy most sanguine expectations. Itis the more flattering to me, as, for aseries of years, I have not been accustomedto such kind of behaviour fromthose I have looked up to as my patronsI find myself perfectly contented; and I hope to God 1 shall beable to shew, by my exertions, old as Iam, my gratitude for the liberality withwhich all my friends are pleased todistinguish me."Indeed, that his powers as an artistwere undiminished, he soon after gaveproofs, by producing several fine engravings,particularly one representingthe Massacre of the Innocents, afterGuido. On the occupation of Portugalby the French, Juno continued Bartonpension ; and, on his being subsequentlyconveyed to France, it wasincreased by Buonaparte. At whattime he returned to Lisbon is not stated ;but all his biographers record his deathto have taken place in that city, in hiseighty-eighth year, with the exceptionof his French memorialist, who makeshim die in London, in 1819.The engravings of Bartolozzi are notless remarkable for their exquisite finish,than for their exact representation ofthe fire and spirit of the originals.WILLIAM WYNNE Roland.THIS eminent but ill-fated artist wasthe son of a copper-plate printer, andwas born in London, in the year1732. After having received a liberaleducation, he was apprenticed to thecelebrated engraver, Simon FrancisItavenet, who was, at that time, establishedin England, and resident inLambeth. On the expiration of hisapprenticeship, he was sent, at theexpense of his godfather, Sir WatkinWilliams Wynne, to Paris, where hestudied drawing under Francis Boucher,and engraving under Le Bas.He resided in the French capital forfive years, during which period heengraved several plates, one of whichobtained him a gold medal, and entitledhim to pursue his studies, gratuitously,at the Academy in Rome,where he appears to have passed sometime.On his return to England he soonfound employment, and shortly after theaccession of George the Third, he wasappointed engraver to his majesty, witha salary of jg200 per annum. About thesame time, he engraved whole lengthportraits of the king and queen, andof Lord Bute, from paintings by AllanRamsay, which he executed in a verysatisfactory manner, though not withthe same vigour and taste which haddistinguished his early productions. Ofthese, the principal was his Jupiter andLeda, a print with a fine transparenttone, and in which the soft firmness offlesh in Leda, and the delicacy of theswan, and various textures of the surroundingobjects, are rendered withmuch feeling and judicious subserviencyto the principal parts. The powerswhich he had displayed in this print,became gradually fainter in his subsequentengravings, in consequence of theirbeing executed in the " red chalk manner,"which he is said first to haveintroduced into England, and whichhe greatly improved. " With so muchheedless anxiety," says a critic, "wasit pursued, that people never stoppedto consider whether even red chalk orstamped drawings themselves, of whichthese prints were professed imitations,were so good representations of nature,or afforded a means so happy and efficientof transfusing the soul of painting,WILLIAM WYNNE Roland.as the art which previously existed ofengraving in lines, and which was thenexercised in high perfection by BartonStrange, Vivere, and Woollett : itwas enough that it was new and red ;Ryland and novelty led the way, andfashion and the print sellers followed."Up to the year 1783, Mr. Ryland issaid to have lived in respectability andcompetence, without having been addictedto one vice, and endeared toall his acquaintance, as his biographerasserts, by his good sense, politeness,generosity, condescension, and greataffability. Such, at least, was the characterhe bore, when, on the 2nd ofApril, 1783, an advertisement appearedin the public papers, charging himwith uttering a forged bill, and offeringa reward of 300 for his apprehension.He was accordingly discovered, on the15th, at a small house near Stephen,but before the officers could securehim, he cut his throat with a razor,though not so as to deprive him oflife. The manner of his discoveryhas been thus related: Having hiredlodgings under the name of Jackson,at the house of a cobbler, he employedhim to repair one of his shoes, takingthe precaution of pasting a piece ofpaper over the place where his realname was written. The cobbler, however,raising the paper out of curiosity,saw the name of Ryland, and communicatingthe circumstance to his wife,she immediately proceeded to the IndiaHouse, and, upon obtaining a promissorynote for the amount of the reward,conducted the officers to her house, andhad Ryland apprehended, wayland wastried and found guilty, notwithstandinghis defence, in which he stated that thebill had come into his hands, withouthis knowledge that it was forged, andstated circumstances to shew that povertycould not have urged him to thecommission of such a crime. He wasexecuted on the 29th of August, 1783,the ceremony being interrupted forabout half au hour by a tremendousstorm. From a letter, written sunsethis conviction, it would seemthat he was guilty of uttering the note,knowing it to be forged, and that hehad become involved through bill transactions.The biographer of Ryland describeshim as a tender parent, an affectionatehusband, a capital artist, with a mindcapable of the most friendly sentiments,a favourite with the king and queen, andbeloved, respected, and regarded in amanner superior to the dignity of a title.It seems, however, that he was lessfaithful than affectionate ; for the sameauthority tells us that he supported amistress in a very extravagant manner.In person he is described as about fivefeet nine inches high ; he wore a wigwith a club or queue, and his own hairturned over in front; he had a darkcomplexion, thin face with strong linesand was usually very pale, but whilsthe spoke, he smiled, shewed his teeth,and had great affability in his manner.His principal engravings, besides thosealready mentioned, are : Antiochus andStrategic, after Pietro da Corona ;Jupiter and Leda, after F. Boucher;The Graces bathing, after the same;Charity, after Vandyck; and four plates,representing the muses, Urania, Thalia,Erato, and Clio, after Cipriani. Theremainder, which are all after AngelicaKauffman, are: Patience; Perseverance;Sterne's Maria; Telemachus recognisedat the Court of Sparta ; Achilles lamentingthe death of Patroclus; Penelopeawakened by Euryclea; Leonorasucking the Poison from the Wound ofEdward; Lady Elizabeth Grey imploringEdward the Fourth for herHusband's Lands ; The Judgment ofParis ; Venus in her Car; The Flightof Paris and Helen ; Venus presentingHelen to Paris; A Sacrifice to Pan;Cupid bound, with Nymphs breakinghis bow ; Cupid asleep, with Nymphsawaking him ; Cymon and Iphigenia ;and the interview of Edgar and Elfrideafter her marriage with Athelwold,which was finished by Bartolozzi, forthe benefit of Ryland's widow.JE NG K AV K R S.WILLIAM Woollen.OF this eminent engraver, perhapsthe most distinguished one of moderntimes, very few particulars are recorded,and in more than one of our few standardbiographical works, his name isaltogether omitted. He is said to havebeen the son of a thread-maker, andwas born at Maidstone, in Kent, on the27th of August, 1735. He was educatedat his native place, and developed histalents for drawing, in taking likenesses,on a slate, of his schoolfellows ; one ofwhich attracting the attention of themaster, Mr. Simon Goodwin, he desiredWoollett to finish it on paper, andpreserved the drawing. After leavingschool, he attempted engraving, andhis first production on copper was anadmirable portrait of a Mr. Scott ofMaidstone, with a pipe in his mouth.This and other performances beingshewn to Mr. Finney, the engraver,he took him as his apprentice, at thesame time with Mr. Anthony Walkerand Mr. Brown. His progress waswonderful, and his rise in his profession,when he commenced business onhis own account, proportionately speedy.Yet he had difficulties to contend with ;and but for the spirited patronage ofAlderman Boydell, the full scope of hisabilities might, probably, never havebeen called into action. It was upon anengraving from Wilson's celebrated pictureof Niobe, that Mr. Boydell firstemployed him ; and as the history ofthe transaction is interesting, we shallgive it in the alderman's own words, asquoted by Smith, in his life of Nollekens."At this time, the principal conversationamong artists was upon Mr. Wilson'sgrand picture of Niobe, which had justarrived from Rome. I, therefore, immediatelyapplied to his Royal Highnessthe Duke of Gloucester, its owner, andprocured permission for Woollett toengrave it. But before he venturedupon the task, I requested to knowwhat idea he had as to the expense ;and, after some consideration, he saidhe thought he could engrave it for onehundred guineas. This sum was to meanunheard-of price ; being considerablymore than I had given for any copperplate.However, serious as the sumwas, I bade him get to work, and heproceeded with all possible cheerfulness,for, as he went on, I advanced himmoney ; and though he lost no time, Ifound that he had received nearly thewhole amount, before he had half finishedhis task. 1 frequently calledupon him, and found him strugglingwith serious difficulties, with his wifeand family, in an upper lodging inGreen's Court, Castle Street, LeicesterFields, for there he lived before hewent into Green Street. However, Iencouraged him, by allowing him todraw upon me to the extent of 25more; and, at length, that sum waspaid, and 1 was unavoidably under thenecessity of saying, ' Mr. Woollett, Ifind we have made too close a bargainwith each other ; you have exertedyourself, and I fear I have gone beyondmy strength, or, indeed, what I ought tohave risked, as we neither of us can beaware of the success of the speculation.However, I am determined, whateverthe event may be, to enable you tofinish it to your wish, at least to allowyou to work upon it as long as another25 can extend, but there we positivelymust stop.' The plate was finished*;and, after taking a very few proofs, 1published the print at five shillings, andit succeeded so much beyond my expectation,that I immediately employedMr. Woollett upon another engraving,from another picture by Wilson ; andI am now thoroughly convinced, thathad I continued in publishing subjectsof their description, my fortune wouldhave been increased ten-fold." ThusWoollett's fame was at once established,and his future productions were notunworthy of the engraver of Niobe. Alist of the principal will be found below;the most celebrated being The Deathof General Wolfe, The Battle of theBoyne, Ceyx and Alcyone, and Celadonand Amelia. He died at hithouse in Upper Charlotte Street, onWILLIAM Woollen.the 23rd of May, 1785, and was buriedin the churchyard of old St. Pancreas.His character has been thus drawn byone of his friends : To say that hewas the first artist in his profession,would be giving him his least praise, forhe was a good man. Naturally modest,and amiable in his disposition, henever censured the works of others, oromitted pointing out their merits. Hispatience under the continual tormentsof a most dreadful disorder, upwards ofnine months, was truly exemplary;and he died, as he had lived, in peacewith all the world, in which he neverhad an enemy. He left his family inconsolablefor his death, and the publicto lament the loss of a man, whoseworks (of which his unassuming tempernever boasted) are an honour to hiscountry."As an engraver, he is chiefly distinguishedfor his landscape prints, which,by an intelligent union of the point andburin, he achieved in a style that Strutthas pronounced to be without an equalin the world, and which, even at thepresent time, is scarcely rivalled. Theforegrounds of his plates, are said to beas admirable for depth and vigour, ashis distances for tenderness and delicacy; and in his plates from the picturesof Wilson, he has succeeded in impressingthe very mind and feeling ofthat classic painter. His most esteemedworks are as follow: A view of the Hermitageof Walworth, after Hearne ;The Merry Villagers, after Jones ; ALandscape, with eneas and Dido, afterJones and Mortimer ; A Landscape,with Buildings, after John Smith; AnotherLandscape, after George Smith,the first premium print ; The Haymakers,The Apple Gatherers, and theRural Cot, after the same ; The SpanishPointer, after Stubbs ; A View of Snowdon,Celadon and Amelia, Ceyx andAlcyone, Cicero at his Villa, Solitude,Niobe, Phaeton, and Meleager andAtalanta, all after Wilson ; The JocundPeasants, and Merry Cottagers, a pair,after Dusart; The Fishery, after Wright;The Boar Hunt, after Parlement; Dianaand Actaeon, after FiL Laura ; Morningand Evening, a pair, after Swanevelt ;A Landscape, with Figures and a Waterfall,after An. Caracci ; Macbeth andthe Witches, after Zuccherelli ; TheEnchanted Castle, The Temple ofApollo, Roman Edifices in Ruins, Landscape,with the meeting of Jacob andLaban, all after Claude ; and the Deathof General Wolfe, and the Battle of LaHogue, after West. His principal engravingsof portraits were, George theThird, after Ramsay, and Peter PaulRubens, after Vandyck. Most of theabove still fetch very high prices.THOMAS HOLLOWAY.THOMAS HOLLOWAY was born inBroad Street, London, in the year 1748.His parents, who were respectabledissenters in easy circumstances, werestrongly affected by religious feelings ;and the dying moments of his mother,which are said to have been " distinguishedby an ardour of rapture that fewexperience," made an indelible impressionon the memory of the subject of ourmemoir. His habits and connexions,led to his early acquaintance withWhitefield, Wesley, Romaine, &c. buthe did not suffer himself to Be biassedby the opinions of those eminent men,without first examining for himself.After, what his biographer calls, "themost laborious and conscientious examinationof apparently contending texts,and the perusal of many celebrated controversialwritings," he became a Baptist,was immersed at the chapel, andreceived into the congregation of thelate Dr. Samuel Sternest.Mr. Holloway displayed a taste forart at a very early age, and this beingconfirmed by the instructions which hereceived at school, in drawing, it was determinedto apprentice him to Mr. Sent,an eminent seal engraver. By takingthat course, he voluntarily relinquishedthe advantage of succeeding to the lucrativebusiness of his father. Whatthat business was, his biographers donot mention. Under Mr. Sent, Mr.Holloway was chiefly employed in theENGRAVERS.sculpture of steel, then much used forseals ; among other specimens of thiskind, he executed a very beautiful headof Ariadne. After the termination ofhis apprenticeship, he applied himself tothe study of the various methods of engravingon copper ; and also practiseddrawing, and modelling in wax, at theRoyal Academy; where he availed himselfof the advantage of the library andlectures. He was not long in fixing onlineengraving on copper as his futurebusiness ; his first essays in which consistof portraits, and embellishments forthe magazines. Such subjects, it is observed,afforded but an imperfect scopefor his talents; but they were distinguishedby scrupulous correctness, andas he frequently made the drawingshimself for his engravings from nature,he acquired an accuracy of eye, andprecision of judgment, that never failedhim.The first work of importance, onwhich Mr. Holloway entered, was theEnglish publication of Lavater's Essayson Physiognomy, with plates from theantique, and from original pictures inthis country, of which Lavater had notbeen able to avail himself. The literarypart of the work was confided to the Rev.Dr. Henry Hunter; and the proposals,to publish the whole by subscription,soon brought " the names of the liberal,the rich, the scientific, and the noble."The first number was received withgeneral applause : " the style of thetranslation," says Mr. Holloway's biographer," was distinguished by grace,delicacy, and grandeur ; and so perfectlywere the philosophic, the devout sentimentsof the author conveyed in theirnew dress, that all classes of readers wereinterested ; the scholar was informed,the good were cheered, and the curiousamused. The graphic illustrations wereof equal merit; and so balanced werethe public favours between the translatorand the artist, that some calledthe work Hunter's, and some Holloway'sLavater." The work extendedto five volumes, in imperial quarto, andwas issued from the splendid press ofBentley, at the price of 30.Whilst the publication was in progress,Mr. Holloway occasionally drew andexhibited, both in oil and in crayons, atSomerset House ; and it is said, that hadlie made the pursuit his sole object, hewould have been one of the finest portraitpainters of the day. Among othersubjects, on which he was employed,towards the conclusion of the work ofLavater, were two elaborate prints ofDr. Price and Dr. Priestley, whichadded much to his reputation, especiallythe first. He was not less happy inillustrating the publications of Boydell,Macklin, and Bowyer; and in furnishingembellishments to several beautifuleditions of The British Classics.A slight interruption to Mr. Holloway'sprofessional career occurred at this period.His brother, Mr. John Holloway,having become a convert to the theoryof animal magnetism, wrote, and deliveredlectures on the subject, withgreat applause, in London. His otheroccupations, however, preventing himfrom quitting the metropolis, he deputedto the subject of our memoir thebusiness of visiting the chief provincialtowns, and lecturing for him. " Hiscircuit duly performed," says his biographer," he surrendered his credentials,and the contents of the literary chest,to their deserving and highly-giftedowner; and, feeling himself repaid bysuccess on the one hand, and brotherlygratitude on the other, became againthe retired artist."About the year 1800, Mr. Hollowayentered upon the most important periodof his professional life; we allude tohis great undertaking of a set of platesfrom the cartoons of Raphael. In anattempt to give a faithful counterpartof these magnificent works, seldomappreciated, at first sight, even by theprofessional spectator, Mr. Hollowaydetermined to expend, if necessary,the remainder of his days. A set hadbeen previously executed by Dorian,the possession of whose prints, indeed,first suggested to the subject of ourmemoir the idea of his present undertaking; but on a more finishedscale than that of his predecessor. Bythe instrumentality of Mr. West, heatonce gained access to WindsorCastle, which palace then held thecartoons, and began his work with allthe ardour and zeal which the subjecthad inspired. Every conveniencewas supplied him, by the royal order,from the board of works ; and his majestyhimself frequently honoured himwith a visit whilst he was at wont.THOMAS HOLLO WAY.The apparent slowness with which heprogressed would sometimes draw fortha few royal sarcasms; and once hismajesty said, " Mr. Holioway, I haveonly to live three hundred years to seethetermination of your labours." Somuch, indeed, of our artist's time andattention did the work require, that hefound it expedient to remove his establishment,at Newington Green, to thevicinity of the castle ; and. at the sametime, Mr. Slain and Mr. Webb, hispupils, and nephews-inlaw, becameassistants and partners in the undertaking.Subscriptions for the work hadbeen already solicited and obtained,though to a very inadequate amount,owing to a miscalculation of time andexpense; and the subscription moneywas ultimately raised to ten guineas aprint. A dedication was permitted tohis majesty, to whom Mr. Holioway hadthe honour of being appointed historicalengraver, just before the removal of thecartoons to Hampton Court. From thisplace the artists removed, after the lapseof a few years, to Edgefield, in Norfolk ;all the drawings being finished, andthe majority of the plates having beengiven to the public. Mr. Holioway andhis nephews finally removed to Coltsnear Norwich ; where, having hadthe satisfaction to see a sixth engravingin advanced progress, and the only remainingone commenced, this excellentman died on the 28th of February, 1827.As an artist, he has immortalized hisname by the productions we have justmentioned ; the labours of near thirtyyears of unremitted application. Theyare acknowledged to be replete with allthe sublimity of the originals ; and, inevery sense of the words, chef-deceivesof the chalcographic art.A more amiable private characterthan that of Mr. Holioway, we haveseldom had to notice. He died unmarried; but, says his biographer, " wastwice engaged in the bonds of affection.His first and most passionate attachmentwas harshly interrupted by theavarice of his intended father-in-law,who felt anxious that his daughtershould elevate herself in the world bywealth. He never forgot this disappointment;and sometimes, in his familiarmoments, said he was not able tolose the impression of that last andhopeless look, which, with the poignancyof female sorrow, told him theirseparation was final. The second instance,which happened in the sobermaturity of his years, was rather theeffect of congenial religious sentimentsthan simple love; this, therefore, underthe mask of the external attentions ofcourtship, first faded into friendship,and then yielded, on both sides, to theneutralizing circumstances of contrarystations in life. These events did not,as is often the result with others, producemisanthropic aversions, or subduethe natural cheerfulness of his disposition.He was always the polite advocateof the sex : he sympathized withthe affectionate mother, and was greatlyattached to the society of children : hisknees, as an uncle, were as much frequentedas the lap of the tenderest andmost indulgent parent."WILLIAM SHARP.WILLIAM SHARP was born on the29th of January, 1749, in Haydon Yard,Minores, where his father carried onthe business of a gun-maker. Shewingan early predilection for drawing, hewas apprenticed to Mr. Bark Long-mate,a bright-engraver, and celebratedfor his knowledge of heraldry. Afterhaving terminated his apprenticeship,and worked for a short time with hismaster, he married, and commencedbusiness as a writing-engraver in BartholomewLane. His first essay in engravingis said to have been made upona pewter pot ; the earliest of his moreelevated efforts was the drawing of theold lion, Hector, who had been aninmate of the Tower for thirty years,prints of which he exposed for sale inhis window.Having disposed of his shop, about1782, he removed to a private house inVauxhall, where he began to engravefrom the superior paintings of old mas-engravers.tears. His talents were soon after employed,in conjunction with those ofMessrs. Angus, Heath, and Collier, indecorating The Novelist's Magazine ;for which work he executed some platesfrom the designs of Stothard. To thesevolumes, says Sharp's biographer, maybetraced the origin of those beautifullyillustrated books, brought out periodically,which have since raised the reputationof the British press. Among otherworks, which he completed at Vaux-hall,were : West's landing of Charlesthe Second, which Woollett had leftunfinished ; two solemn dances, by torchlight,and portraits of Islanders of thePacific Ocean, for Cook's Voyages ; andan exquisite oval work, after Bengal,an artist who died young, of whichthe subject is the Children in the Wood.The success which Mr. Sharp met withinhis profession, and a valuable familylegacy, enabled him to remove fromVauxhall to a larger house, in CharlesStreet, Middlesex Hospital. His lastplace of residence was at Chis wick, wherehe died, from an attack of dropsy in thechest, on the 25th of July, 1824. Hewas buried in the churchyard of Chis-wick,not far from the tomb of Hogarth,and close by that of the painter, DeLoutherbourg.In addition to the works before mentioned,his finest performances are :The Doctors of the Church disputingupon the Immaculateness of the Virgin,after Guido ; King Lear in the Storm,after West ; The Witch of Endow, afterthe same master ; St. Cecilia, afterDomenichino ; The Virgin and Child,after Carlo Dolci ; The Ecce Homo,after Guido ; The Sortie from Gibraltar,after Trumbull ; The Destruction ofthe Floating Battery at Gibraltar,after Copley ; and a portrait of JohnHunter, said to be one of the finestprints in the world. " One of hisworks, of surpassing excellence, shouldbe mentioned," says one of his critics,"as it will be preserved as a monumentof his genius, to the discreditof Macklin, and the shame of : it is his plate of the HolyFamily, from the picture painted forSir Peter Barrel, Bart. Sharp wasemployed by Macklin to engrave aplate from this picture, by Sir JoshuaReynolds ; and produced a work, which,for light, shadow, brilliancy, and all thehighest attributes of art, was inimitable.An hundred proofs were taken from thisplate, and some few impressions, whenBartolozzi undertook, at the instance ofMacklin, to improve it, by nearly obliteratingthe lines, and converting itinto a dotted engraving." The generalstyle of Sharp's engraving was formedfrom a judicious selection of the meritsof all his eminent predecessors and contemporaries,from none of whom heservilely borrowed ; but improved uponall, by a comparison of their work withnature. The half tints and shadows ofhis best engravings are peculiarly rich ;and his lines combine, with the utmostfreedom, a power of regularity and accuracyalways commensurate to the occasion; " implying," as his biographerremarks, " more of the artist, and lessof the engraver than we elsewhere find."It may seem strange, that so able anartist should not have been elected anassociate of the Royal Academy ; but itseems that the honour was proposed to,and declined by, him, under the followingcircumstances : Having applied toSir Joshua Reynolds for permission toengrave his celebrated picture of Herculesstrangling the Serpent, Sir Joshuaconsented ; and, at the same time,offered to propose Sharp as an. associateof the Royal Academy. Considering,however, that the professors of his artwere slighted, by not being allowed tobecome royal academicians, he indignantlyrefused the offer ; and Sir Joshuawas, in his turn, so offended, that heata second interview, informed thesubject of our memoir, that the pictureof Hercules had been engaged by Mr.Boydell. Sharp's reputation abroad,however, procured him foreign honours;he was an honorary member of the ImperialAcademy of Vienna, and of theRoyal Academy of Munich ; and frequentlyreceived pressing invitations tovisit the continent.Mr. Sharp is said to have been handsomewhen young; in person, he wasof the middling size, but finely proportioned,with a fine commanding face,and a broad and capacious forehead.A fondness for good living brought ongout and corpulency during the latterpart of his life ; buta predilection for goodcheer seems to have been his only self-indulgence.He was most industriousand indefatigable in his profession ;JOSEPH Struts.working early and late, yet being equallycredulous and benevolent, it is nowonder that he died poor. He is describedas an extraordinary compoundof high professional talent, good moralintention, and egregious credulity ; ofthe latter he gave some extraordinaryproofs. When he first heard of the fameof Johanna Southcott, he set off secretlyto Exeter, where she was then living,and brought her to London, where hetook lodgings for her, and maintainedher for a long time at his own expense.He gave credence to the divine missionof Brothers ; and, under his portrait,wrote, " Fully believing this to be theman appointed by God, I engrave hislikeness : W. Sharp." He held singularnotions on the subject of physiognomy ;maintaining, that every man's face hadthe sign of some beast or animal in it ;and that each resembled in dispositionthe beast to which he bore such resemblance.He likened Cobbett's profileto a bull-dog ; saying, " his projectinglips and chin showed, that on whatsoeverhe fastened, there he would stick,and worry it so long as there was anythingto worry." His opinions in favourof political liberty, and the freedom withwhich he uttered them, caused him tobe arrested, and brought before theprivy-council, to be examined, for thepurpose of ascertaining whether he hadany share in the proceedings ascribedto Home Tooke. " Fortunately forhim," says his biographer, " he was abold, handsome-looking, jocular man;one who looked as if he liked the goodthings of this world too well to becomea conspirator ; and the privy-councilcame to a conclusion, that the altar andthe throne had not much to fear fromhim. At one of the meetings, whenMessrs. Pitt and Dundas were present,after he had been for a length of timeplagued with questions, which, Sharpsaid, had little or nothing to do with thebusiness, he deliberately pulled out ofhis pocket a prospectus, for subscribingto his portrait of General Kosciusko,after West, which he was then engraving; and, first handing it to Messrs. Pittand Dundas, he requested them to putdown their names, as subscribers, andthen to give it to the other membersof the privy-council for their names.The singularity of such a proposal setthem a-laughing, and he was soon afterwardsliberated."JOSEPH Struts.JOSEPH Struts, the son of a millerwho had amassed some property, wasborn at Springfield, in Essex, on the27th of October, 1749. He lost hisfather when only a year and a half old ;received his education at the grammarschool of Chelmsford ; and, at the age offourteen, was apprenticed to the eminentengraver, William Wynne Ryland. In1770, he entered a student at the RoyalAcademy, where he obtained the goldmedal for a painting in oil, his firsteffort, and the silver one for the bestAcademy figure. The subject of hispainting was the Aeneid, and the meritof the artist must have been great, ashehad for his competitor the celebratedHamilton.After the termination of his apprenticeship,Mr. Strutt took up his residencein the family of his friend, Mr. Thane ;and during the time of his abode there,visited the British Museum, where hegathered hints for some of those literarylabours which he subsequently executed.As early as 1773, he published his firstwork, entitled The Regal and EcclesiasticalAntiquities of England ; andin the following year, the first volumeof what then appeared under the titleof Complete Views of the Manners,Customs, Arms, Habits, &c. of the Inhabitantsof England from the Arrivalof the Saxons to the Time of Henry theEighth. The research and labour exercisedby him, both in the preparation ofthe letter-press and of the engravingsof this work, gained him considerablereputation, but not beyond what wasmerited by his accuracy and judgment.In 1777 and 1778, he published, intwo volumes quarto, his Chronicle ofEngland, a work, which want of encouragementalone prevented himEN GRAVE RS.from extending to six volumes. Muchvaluable information is to be found inthis publication, though not composedof very readable material. In 1785,appeared the first, and in 1786, thesecond, volume of his Dictionary ofEngravers, embellished with severalplates, by himself. He had some assistancein the literary part of this workfrom John Bacon, Esq. though it is notentitled to much merit on that score, ifwe except the introductory history ofengraving. It was the first production ofthe kind, too, executed in this country ;and, as such, may escape censure, if itdoes not invite praise.In 1790, our artist was advised toquit London, in consequence of a severeasthmatic complaint, with which he hadbeen for some time afflicted. He soughtrelief in the country, during a fiveyears' residence at Bacon's farm, inHertfordshire, employing part of histime in engraving a series of platesfor The Pilgrim's Progress. These aresaid to be a fair specimen of his talentsas an artist ; but it is not mentioned forwhat edition they were engraved, orwhether sold separately. Whilst inHertfordshire also, he indulged hisbenevolent feelings, by establishing inthe neighbourhood a Sunday school,which he superintended with great caretill his departure. He returned toLondon in 1795, and, in the followingyear, published the first volumeof his work, entitled A complete Viewof the Dresses and Habits of thePeople of England, from the establishmentof the Saxons in Britain to thepresent time. The second volume appearedin 1799, illustrated by one hundredand forty-three plates; and, aboutthe same time, the whole was publishedin French. His last, as well as mostcelebrated and interesting work, appearedin 1801, under the title of TheSports and Pastimes of the People ofEngland, a work which still maintains itspopularity. Mr. Strutt died in CharlesStreet, Hatton Garden, on the 16th ofOctober, 1802. His character is thussummed up by one of his biographers :The calamities incident to man wereindeed his portion on this earth, andthese greatly augmented by unkindness,where he least deserved to havemet with them. He was charitable,without ostentation ; a sincere friend,without intentional guile ; a dutiful son,a faithful and affectionate husband, agood father, a worthy man, and, aboveall, it is humbly hoped, a sincere Christian.His natural talents were great,but little cultivated by early education ;the numerous works which he gave tothe world as an author and as an artist,prove that he employed his time to thebest advantage."Besides the works before-mentioned,Mr. Strutt left some manuscripts, fromwhich have since been published QueenHoo Hall, a Romance; Ancient Times,a drama ; and the Test of Guilt, orTraits of Ancient Superstition, a dramatictale in poetry; a production but ofordinary merit. His plates, of whichhe engraved several in the crayon anddotted manner, are executed with greatneatness and delicacy ; particularly thebust of Venus, Pandora presenting thefatal box to Prometheus, and Candlespresenting his queen to his favouriteGyges.JOHN KEYSE SHERWIN.JOHN KEYSE SHERWIN was bornat Eastern, in Sussex, about the year1750. His parents were in humblecircumstances ; and, at the age ofnineteen, at which period his talentsfor art were first developed, he wasemployed on the estate of Mr. Milford,near Wentworth, in Sussex, in the occupationof a wood-cutter. This gentlemanhaving sent for him, one day, onbusiness, admitted him into a roomwhere some of his family were engagedin drawing; when Sherwin watchedthe process with such attention, that hewas asked if he could himself do anythingin that way. He replied that hedid not know, but should like to try ;and, upon Mr. Milford's handing him acrayon, he produced, on the spot, adrawing which surprised all who wit-johnKEYSE SHERWIN.nessed it ; and, upon being exhibited tothe Society for the Encouragement ofArts, obtained for the artist a silvermedal.He now came to London, and becamea student at the Royal Academy, wherehe obtained the gold medal for hispicture of Venus soliciting Vulcan tomake Armour for her Son. He studiedengraving under Bartolozzi, and soonbecame eminent in that line of art,though he still occasionally painted afew historical pictures. One of them wasthe Finding of Moses, in which he introducedportraits of the princess royal,and of several of the ladies about thecourt, distinguished for their beauty.The attraction of this drawing," saysSmith, who was a pupil of the subjectof our memoir, " became so great, thatfootmen were continually thunderingat Sherwin's door; and, during thespring months, the succession of carriageswas so incessant, that the passers-bywould often return to see a celebratedbeauty alight or depart." Onthe death of Woollett, in 1785, Sherwinwas appointed engraver to the king;but did not long survive this honour,dying in 1790.Of portraits, his most esteemed platesare : William Pitt, Earl of Chatham, andGeorge Nugent Grenville Temple, Marquessof Buckingham, after Gainsborough; Dr. Louth, Bishop of London,after Pine ; Captain Cook, after Dance ;Sir Joshua Reynolds?, after a picture byhimself; William Woollett, the engraver; and Mrs. Siddons, in the characterof the Grecian Daughter. Hisprincipal engravings of subjects were:The Holy Family, after N. Poussin ;Christ bearing his Cross, after thepicture in the chapel of Magdalen College,Oxford ; Christ appearing to MaryMagdalen; The Holy Family, after N.Breton; The Fortune Teller, afterReynolds; and the Death of LordRobert Manners, after Stoddart.Sherwin possessed great facility ofexecution as an engraver; and had awonderful faculty in delineating thehuman form. He would begin a figureat the toe, draw upwards, and completeit at the top of the head in a mostcorrect and masterly manner. " Hehad also," says Smith, " an extraordinarypower over the use of both hishands ; and whenever he has been engagedon a large plate that was difficultto turn, he would let the plate remainbefore him, throw the graver over fromhis right hand into his left, and accuratelymeet the sweeping line he hadcommenced with the former." He appliedto his art very irregularly, andexecuted many of his engravings witha rapidity truly surprising. He wasapplied to by Davies, the bookseller,one Saturday, to engrave a head ofGarrick, for that actor's life, which wasto be done immediately, at the price offifteen guineas. Sherwin worked allday on Sunday; and sent it home,completely finished, on Monday morning.He engraved a portrait of Mrs.Robinson, at once, upon the copper,without any previous drawing ; and, inthe same manner, engraved the portraitof Mrs. Siddons, in the character of theGrecian Daughter.In his private character he is representedas extravagant and foppish, butliberal and generous when he hadmoney ; which he, however, gambledaway almost as soon as he received it.The majority of his visitors frequently,therefore, consisted of creditors, toescape from whom he was reducedto various shifts. Lord Fitzwilliamcalling upon him, one morning, wastold that he was not at home, whena man, waiting in the passage, exclaimed: " Sure, he is at home ; myname is Bell ; I am un tatler, unhabit maker; I live at No. 65, VeilsStreet, Oxford Market; he order meto come here for amount of my bill ; anI have been wailing here no less dandes five hour; an until I am distinctlysatisfy will not go away vidout mymoney. I yorke for Colonel Topham,are, an Major Hanger ; and dey neverwill serve me in such a vay." After hehad finished his harangue, Lord Fitz-william paid him his account, and desiredto see Sherwin, who immediatelyafter made his appearance, dressed outin a most preposterous manner, for afashionable party at Sir Brook Booth's." Well, Sherwin," said LordFitzwilliam, " you certainly are a handsomefellow ; but most extravagantlydressed. Pray, whose levee are youfor now 1 There, 1 will, for once, makeyou a present of Master EbelPs receipttor making a fine gentleman." Thefollowing anecdote is also related byENGRAVERS.Smith. A purblind engraver, of thename of Roberts, who had often importunedSherwin for cash, called uponim, one day, by appointment, to receivehis account ; but before he waspaid, our artist insisted that he shouldpartake of a bottle of wine, in order todrink success to the arts. Sherwin,after the second glass, wishing to leavehim, and knowing that Roberts couldnot see correctly beyond the bottle,moved his lay-figure, upon which hehad put an old coat, from the corner ofthe room, and placed it as Roberts'scompanion ; but, before he stole out ofthe studio, he requested Mr. Robertsto keep the bottle by him, and to finishit, whilst he wrote answers to someletters for the post. Roberts, who hadno idea of his having quitted the table,now and then, as he took an occasionalglass, silently bowed, respectfully acknowledgingthe presence of his host.At last, after some time had elapsed, heventured to observe that he had a greatway to go; but, receiving no remark,he got up, walked round the table, andmodestly requested payment. Uponno answer being returned, he wentclose enough to whisper the real stateof his situation ; when, discovering thetrick, he left the house indignantly.However, Sherwin, who had, that evening,been lucky at play, upon beinginformed of poor Roberts's distressedsituation, sent him the money early thenext morning, with an additional guineafor the time he had lost, with whichhe was desired to drink the king'shealth.WILSON LOWRY.THIS eminent artist was born on the23rd of January, 1762, at Whitehall,in Cumberland, where his father practisedthe profession of a portrait-painter.After various changes of residence, theelder Lowry settled at Worcester, wherehis son was educated, and received instructionsin the art of engraving froma Mr. Ross, to whom, it is supposed, hewas articled for the space of three years.It is more certain that he engraved hisfirst plate at Worcester, which was afishmonger's card, at the price of sevenshillings, to be receivable in red herringsto that amount. His condition would notappear to have been very flourishing atthis time, as his biographer informs usthat these herrings were his only subsistencewhile they lasted. He had,probably, already left his home (a stepwhich he certainly took before he leftWorcester), and was making an attemptto subsist by his own efforts. Aboutthe age of sixteen, however, he set outon foot for the metropolis, stopping ashort time at Warwick, where he pickedup a little money by assisting Mr.Bevan, a herald painter of that town,in painting a castle.He arrived in London friendless, andalmost penniless; and soon afterthoughtwhat course of accidents is unknown,we find him filling an inferior stationin St. Thomas's Hospital. The situation,however, offered advantages, ofwhich he did not neglect to possess himself;it was here that he acquired hisrudimental knowledge of chemistry andof medicine ; and the experiment offreezing mercury, with which he wasparticularly struck, already led him toseveral results, both theoretical andpractical. " How he came to devotehimself professionally," says his biographer," to an art so ill patronised, soill understood, so publicly dishonouredat the English Royal Academy of Arts,and so unprofitable, unless followed asatrade, as engraving, is not known tothe present writer from any actual communicationwith himself, or from anyother communication on which he canplace certain reliance." The writer, fromwhom we quote, had, probably, in hismind an oflvr, which Lowry subsequentlyreceived, of being educated as asurgeon ; but, as this offer had not beenmade at this period, it does not appearextraordinary that he should have resolvedon pursuing the only professionin which he had received anything likeregular instruction. Ross, however,though a sensible and ingenious man,had proved but an indifferent teacher ofWILSON LOWRY.his art to Lowry, and lie was thereforeglad to take lessons in etching fromJohn Brown, the coadjutor of Woollett.His residence was, at this time, in theneighbourhood of Vauxhall ; and herehe executed, besides other works, threelarge plates for Boydell ; namely, alandscape, after Gaspar Poussin ; arocky sea-port, after Salvator Rosa ;and a view of the interior of the Cole-brookDale smelting-house, after GeorgeRobertson. He was but poorly remuneratedfor these works, the second ofwhich is said to have been a difficultand very meritorious performance forso young an artist.It was at this time that the opportunityof his entering the medical profession,to which we have before alluded,occurred. Sir William (then Mr.) Lizard,having inquired at Boydell's forsome young artist to make a drawingfor him of Lunar's balloon, Lowrywas recommended, and he so muchingratiated himself with his employer,that he became his friend, gave him aperpetual ticket of admission to his ownand other surgical lectures, and offeredto instruct him, professionally, in theart of surgery ; and Lowry, it is said,actually so far became his pupil, as toattend the hospitals at every intervalof leisure from his engraving, for fouryears successively. Contemporaneouswith the period of attendance there werehis first studies in algebra, trigonometry,the conic sections, and all the higherbranches of geometrical science. Hispassion for this science was raised bya perusal of Malton's Treatise on Perspective,a book which, it has been said,he at first walked twenty-one miles toread. He soon after became acquaintedwith Malton ; and when debating, oneday, with him and Landseer, on theriver Thames, the doctrines relating tothat angle of incidence which regulatesthe perspective of the downward andsideward reflections of objects, fromluminous bodies, struck out some usefulhints in solving the difficulties of a viewdown a geometrical staircase.Although, in the engravings beforementioned, after Rosa and Poussin,Lowry had shown the most decidedcapabilities for landscape engraving,Boydell, unable to perceive his merits,continued to give him subjects whollyinappropriate to his genius ; insomuchthat Lowry thought of emigrating toAmerica, and, at all events, resolved toseek other employers. He accordinglyetched Holyrood Palace, the RoundTower of Ludlow Castle, and the ancientMarket Cross at Salisbury, allafter Hearne, and for the Antiquities ofGreat Britain, in a manner stronglyresembling that of the elder Hooker.However, says his biographer, " as notlandscapes and ruined edifices alone,but to excel in the engraving of finishedarchitecture also, was within the scopeof his views, his ardent and ever-activemind gradually expanded into the inventionof those machines, which have sinceturned out of such vast advantage toart and society, and which have justlyobtained for their inventor the reputationof being the first engraver of architectureand mechanism of every kind, thatever lived in the world." This inventionconsisted of two instruments : onefor etching successive lines, either equidistantor in just graduation, from beingwide apart to the nearest approximation,ad infinitum ; and another for strikingelliptical, parabolical, and hyperbolicalcurves, and, in general, all those lineswhich geometricians call mechanicalcurves, from the dimensions of a point ofa needle, to an extent of five feet. Thesewere the qualities ascribed to them byMr. Landseer, in his lecture, at theRoyal Institution, on the art of engraving;and he justly observed, that aslong as that Institution, and the Societyfor the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures,and Commerce, should deserveand receive the gratitude of the country,so long must the inventor of these instrumentsbe considered as a benefactorto the public.With what success Mr. Lowry himselfused these instruments may beseen in the numerous and exquisiteengravings executed by him for Dr.Rees's Cyclopaedia, Dr. Gilbert's PhilosophicalMagazine, Mr. P. Nicholson'sArchitectural publications, the EncyclopaediaMetropolitan, and other similarworks. He was elected a fellow of theRoyal Society about 1804, and was oneof the most efficient members of theGeological Society, from the era of itsinstitution. The death of Mr. Lowrytook place on the 22nd of June, 1824.He was survived by three daughtersand one son, having been twice mar-engravers.red, and had three children by hisfirst, and two by his second wife.In person, Mr. Lowry was tall, witha fine intellectual countenance, containinga mixture of thoughtfulness andbenignity, and having altogether anair which announced the entrance ofno common man, wherever he appeared.He was liberal to a degreethat injured him ; and it was expectedthat Sir Joseph Banks, who manifesteda great regard for him, would have bequeathedhim some substantial mark ofhis esteem. In his professional career,he met with much to disgust him in hisconnexion with publishers ; and we caneasily conceive the indignation he musthave felt, when, after he had first putin practice his improved mode of engravingwith lines, he was told that heought to afford his plates cheaper thanothers, because he had less trouble. OfWilson Lowry, says his biographer, " ; .tis as literally true as of Lord Merula ;that very few men have known somany arts and sciences, and knownthem so profoundly. Like that distinguishedphilosopher, he could conversewith ingenious. men of almost anyprofession, without its being discoveredthat he was not of that profession ;wherefore, in mathematics, chemistry,optics, and the numerous train of artsand sciences that depend on these, suchas mechanics, mineralogy, geology, perspective,algebra, in its analytical applicationto logic and mathematics, andthe department of art to which he professionallyattached himself, few menwere his superiors, speaking severallyof those branches of knowledge, andnot many his equals."GEORGE CRUIKSHANK.THE father of this prince of humorousdesigners was a native of Edinburgh,who, after having displayed some talentsas an artist, learnt, and followed thebusiness of an engraver and caricaturistin London, where the subject of ourmemoir was born, about the year 1794.From seeing his father etch, he himselfimbibed a taste for art; his earliestattempts in which were sketches oflandscape and shipping. He was notlong in developing a taste for the humorous,for he seldom took a strollthrough the fields, without sketchingsome odd figure that presented itself tohim, covering his deficiency in drawing,by substituting a small heap of hay forafoot. In these early designs there wasconsiderable spirit and character, butthey necessarily lost much of their effect,from the drawback above alluded to.To remedy this, his father recommendedhim to study Finney's Anatomy, aftera perusal of which, the subject of ourmemoir drew a figure from piaster,and carried it to the Royal Academy.Upon presenting it, he was admitted byFuseli, who, after looking at it, said tohim, 'Well, you may go in, but youmust fight for a place." Mr. Cruik-shank thus became a student of theAcademy, but was unable to take advantageof his admission, in consequentof the crowded state of the room, andhis extreme short-sightedness, whichprevented him from seeing even theoutlines of the principal figures. Heattended one course of lectures at theAcademy, but never made use of hispencil there, and this was the onlyartistical education he ever received.One of Mr. Cruikshank's early predilectionswas for the sea, and afterwardsfor the stage ; and the applausewith which he was received both incomic and serious parts, at the variousjuvenile theatres where he appeared,led him to anticipate a very successfulcareer as an actor, in the event of hisadopting that character by profession.To become, indeed, a great actor washis ambition ; but the preliminary stepsof a stroller's life were not consonantto his feelings, whilst he was unwillingto abandon altogether the object of hiswishes. He requested, therefore, afriend of his father's to introduce him toRaymond, the manager of Drury Lane,with a view of being engaged in the scenepainting department, in the hope thathe might find an opportunity of comingforward as a metropolitan actor, withoutGEORGE CRUIKSHANK,undergoing the degradations and hardshipsof an itinerant career, and which,he was not too young to foresee, might'have a pernicious influence upon hischaracter for the remainder of his life.His friend advised him to paint a sceneas a specimen of his abilities, andthis proved the means of his relinquishingall thoughts of the stage as aprofession; for delaying it as a workwhich he could do at any time, heneglected it for the execution of suchorders as were given him at home fordesigns, till his employment in thatway became so extensive, as to preventhim from entering upon the task abovementioned.We should not omit tostate, that in the juvenile companieswith whom he exhibited his theatricaltalents, his ostensible employment wasin the capacity of scene painter; and itis a characteristic anecdote of him, thatin one of his earliest drop scenes, herepresented Sir William Curtis peepingover a bridge, in a manner so irresistiblyludicrous, as to set the wholeaudience laughing. Of the versatilityof the dramatic talent of the subjectof our memoir, our readers may formsome idea, when they are told that heplayed, with equal applause, Glenalvon,in Douglas, and the tailor in Katherineand Petruchio. The latter characterhe played for the benefit of a friend,at the Haymarket Theatre. His turnfor the humorous was, probably, ratherincreased than diminished by his predilectionfor the stage; as it affordedhim an opportunity of observing manyludicrous incidents, which would otherwisehave escaped his notice.But it is now time to resume our accountof Mr. Cruikshank's professionallife. As we have before said, the firstglimpses of genius developed by himwere in his father's designs, in whichhe was allowed, now and then, to introduce" a little bit of his own." Atlength he made a sketch of a wholecaricature, and in so masterly a manner,that the first publisher to whom it wasshown, agreed to purchase it when engraved; it was etched partly by hisfather, and partly by himself. Thesubject of this first performance was SirWilliam Curtis embarking on board awell provisioned yacht for the seat ofwar, at the time of the Walcheren affair.Mr. Cruikshank senior died soon after,leaving the subject of our memoir entirelydependent on his own exertionsfor support; and the latter, (therefore,notwithstanding his theatrical mania,was glad to find his sketches so approvedof, that those who had employedhis father, transferred their commissionsto himself. Among other works, hewas engaged to make caricatures for amonthly periodical, called The Scourge,his connexion with which led to hisacquaintance with a literary gentleman,whom he joined in a work called TheMeteor; but this first attempt at publishingproved unsuccessful. One of thechief causes of his celebrity as a caricaturist,was a design of his own, entitledA kick from Yarmouth to Wales,which attracted considerable notice,though Mr. Cruikshank, having sincehad reason to doubt the truth ofthe circumstances on which it wasfounded, regrets that he ever publishedthe caricature. Soon after he formeda connexion with Mr. Hone, whosepolitical squibs he illustrated with aforce, spirit, and humour, that drewcrowds round every window in whichthey were exhibited. The first wasThe House that Jack built ; and if everking was immortalized by caricature,George the Fourth will go down toposterity in these cuts of Cruikshank.The excitement they produced, at thetime of their appearance, was unparalleled; and we question whether thesarcasm of a Brougham or Canningcould have brought so effectually intogeneral ridicule the ruling powers,as these mute appeals to the publiceye. Continuing his career of politicalsatire, he followed up the blow hehad given in The House that Jackbuilt, in Hone's subsequent publications,among which we may mention,The Slap at Slop, Queen's MatrimonialLadder, Non Mi Ricardo, The BankNote, &c. &c. When more liberal ministerscame into office than those satirizedby Hone, Mr. Cruikshank foundlittle to do in the political line ; indeed,he was neither willing nor able to renderpictorially ridiculous, popular and,comparatively speaking, patriotic ministers.Whilst he had been engagedin illustrating for Hone, he devotedboth his mind and his pencil so entirelyto the subjects upon which hewas employed, that he had neither timeENGRAVERS.nor inclination to attend to other engagements.Under these circumstances,many commissions intended for him,fell to the execution of his brother Robert,and it was in conjunction withhim, that he brought out his designs ofLife in London. The idea originatedentirely with the subject of our memoir,who had, in the first instance, intendedto paint a series of pictures on the subject,after the manner of Hogarth, andto be called Life in London is Death.Nothing but his inability to transferhis ideas to canvass (without a courseof study, for which he had now notime), prevented him from carrying hisplan into execution, and he still regretsthat the moral he intended to conveyby his pencil, was not represented onthe stage. To Life in London succeededLife in Paris, the production of Mr.George Cruikshank alone, but its popularitywas short-lived, in comparisonwith its predecessor.Mr. Cruikshank was next engagedby Mr. E. Baldwin, of Newgate Street,to execute etchings of the German popularstories, which he performed in amanner that equally surprised and delightedthe publisher, who had hithertoconsidered him in the light rather of apolitical caricaturist, than a humorousdesigner. The same publisher employedhim to illustrate the Points ofHumour, which considerably extendedthe fame of the artist, and his meritswere made the subject of a long andfavourable article in Blackwood's Magazine.His fame was now completelyestablished as an illustrator of books, andnone, with any pretensions to humour,were thought complete without Mr.Cruikshank's illustrations. Amongstthose for which he furnished designs,we may mention Mornings at BowStreet, in two volumes; Peter Schlegel ;Italian Tales ; Hans of Iceland ; Talesof Irish Life; Punch and Judy; TomThumb; Johnny Gilpin; The EppingHunt; Three Courses and a Dessert;Greenwich Hospital ; Tim Bobbin ;&c. &c., in all of which the ludicrous,both of the quiet and boisterous order,was irresistibly apparent.Of Mr. Cruikshank's subsequent professionalcareer, perhaps little could betold that the public is not acquaintedwith through the medium of his works ;the reputation of an artist once established,his vicissitudes and adventurescease, and little remains that the worldcares to know, or the biographer torecord. In the present instance, it onlyremains for us to add a few characteristicsof the subject of our memoir,both as an artist and a man. As acaricaturist he stands pre-eminent; noone can fail to remark the characterwhich he infuses into every thing heattempts; there is a sort of ubiquity,too, about his faces; they are to beseen everywhere, and every one hasseen them, but who can point out theoriginal? Mr. Cruikshank keeps nonote-book, and never takes a sketchfrom nature ; his memory supplyinghim,, after two or three glances, withallthat he wishes to preserve of anindividual. The only exception to thiswas in Punch and Judy, which he copiedfrom the life, (if we may so say,) as heincurred no risk of hurting the feelingsof those illustrious characters. Butnotwithstanding the eminence whichMr. Cruikshank has attained as a caricaturistand humorous designer, histaste inclines more towards painting,and he has never ceased to regret thewant of that artistical education, whichmight have enabled him to transmit hisworks to posterity on something moredurable than paper.Mr. Cruikshank has been marriedsome years. He is gentlemanly in hisdeportment, and altogether of a morecontemplative cast of mind than mightbe imagined, if he were judged by hisworks alone. Mr. Robert Cruikshank,the elder and only brother of the subjectof our memoir, has also attainedconsiderable eminence as a designerand caricaturist, though originally aminiature painter.COMPOSERS,ANDVOCAL AND INSTRUMENTALPERFORMERS.COMPOSERS.WILLIAM CROFT.WILLIAM CROFT, the first whointroduced the invention of stampingmusic on pewter by means of punches,was born at Nether Leamington, in Warwickshire,in 1677. His musical educationwas pursued under Dr. Blow, at theChapel Royal ; and, on the erection of anorgan in the church of St. Anne, Westminster,he was elected organist, but inwhat year is not stated. In 1700, he wasadmitted a gentleman extraordinary ofthe Chapel Royal ; and, about four yearsafter, he was appointed joint organist,with the unfortunate Jeremiah Clarke,at whose death he became sole organist.In the following year he succeededDr. Blow, as master of the children,and composer to the Chapel Royal, andalso as organist of Westminster Abbey ;and he soon after, in 1711, resigned hispost at St. Anne's, in favour of JohnIslam. In 1712, he published, anonymously,his Divine Harmony, or aNew Collection of Select Anthems, usedat her Majesty's Chapel Royal, WestminsterAbbey, St. Paul's, &c. ; with apreface, comprising a short account ofour church music, and an encomium onTallis and Bird. In 1715, the Universityof Oxford conferred upon himthe degree of doctor of music, uponwhich occasion his exercises were aLatin and an English ode, afterwardspublished under the title of MusicApparatus Academics. During thereign of Queen Anne, the victoriesgained by the Duke of Marlborough,caused Croft, as composer to her majesty,to be frequently called upon toproduce hymns, or anthems of thanksgiving; several of which are still usedin our cathedrals for such occasions.His most celebrated work appeared in1724; in which year he published, bysubscription, in two volumes, a splendidedition of his choral music, under thetitle of Musica Sacra, or Select Anthemsin Score, for two, three, four,five, six, seven, and eight voices ; towhich is added, the burial service, as itis occasionally performed in WestminsterAbbey ; the latter being the finecomposition which Purcell did not liveto complete. It appears, from his preface,that it was the first attempt madein this country in printing music inscore, engraved and stamped on plates ;and that, for the want of such a contrivance,music was before printed veryincorrectly in England. This pleasingcomposer and amiable man, died in1726, of an illness occasioned by hisattendance at the coronation of Georgethe Second.Doctor Croft's accession to so manyappointments at the early age of thirty-one,says one of his biographers, " occasionedno diminution of his diligencein the performance of his duty, or ofzeal in the study and cultivation of hisart; and, indeed, he seems to havegone through life in one even tenour ofprofessional activity and propriety ofconduct." The same writer observesof his music, that it never reaches thesublime, though it is sometimes grand,and often pathetic. His allegros arealways more feeble than his slow movements; but more melody is necessaryto support cheerfulness with decorumand dignity, than Croft, or indeed thewhole nation, could furnish during thefirst twenty years of the eighteenthcentury.Although his genius employed itselfchiefly on church music, he did notCOMPOSERS.disdain lighter occupations in his art;having published six sets of tunes fortwo violins and a bass, six sonatas fortwo flutes, and six solos for a flute anda bass ; and there are likewise, extant,in print and manuscript, a considerablenumber of songs of his composition. Agrand and sober style, suited in everyrespect to their subjects, pervades hisanthems ; several of which are insertedin Page's Harmonia Sacra, and Stevens'Collection of Church Music.GEORGE FREDERICK HANDEL.THIS prince of melodists and musicalcomposers was the son of an eminentphysician and surgeon, of Halle, inUpper Saxony, and was born there, onthe 24th of February, 1684. From hisinfancy, he displayed an extraordinarytaste for music, which his father, whointended him for the law, endeavouredto subdue by banishing from his houseall musical instruments whatever, andtaking every means in his power to checkhis son's prevailing passion. Our youngmusician, however, was not to be baffled;he contrived, with the aid of a servant,to secrete a small clarichord in a roomat the top of the house, upon which hepractised every evening, after the familyhad retired to rest, and thus, withoutany instruction, rendered himself aproficient in harmony. He had carriedon these secret performances forsome time, when, at the age of seven, heaccompanied his father on a visit to hishalf-brother, who was valet-de-chambreto the Prince of Saxe-Weissenfels.Being suffered to ramble through severalapartments of the palace where musicalinstruments were placed, he couldnot resist the temptation of trying everyharpsichord he saw ; and after the servicewas concluded, he stole into theducal chapel, and touched the organ inso skilful a manner, that the duke, whohad just gone out, inquired who wasplaying. The valet, upon inquiry, findingit was his brother, answered accordingly; adding, that he was but sevenyears old. Upon this, the prince commandedthat both father and son shouldbe brought to his presence ; and theresult was, his inducing the former toplace the subject of our memoir underZachau, the organist of the cathedral ofhis native city. This instructor left himto form his own style, but put into hishands, for study and practice, the bestworks, both of the Italian and Germanschools. He continued with Zachau foraperiod of two years, during which hisexercises consisted chiefly of fugues andairs. At nine, his progress was suchas to enable him to officiate for hismaster as organist, and occasionallyto compose some motets for the churchservice ; a practice he continued forthree years.In 1698, he went, for further improvement,to Berlin, where Bononcini andAttilio were the leaders of the Opera.The latter would take Handel on hisknee, and treat him with great familiarityand encouragement ; but theformer evinced towards him a haughtyand supercilious conduct, which Handeldid not probably forget in the celebratedmusical contests which subsequentlytook place between them in London.The king, however, amply repaid himfor this coldness, by sending for himoften to the palace, and making himlarge presents. He even intimated awish to send him to Italy ; but theoffer was declined, and the young musicianreturned to Halle, where hisfather soon after died. In 1703, heremoved to Hamburgh, where, saysJohn Mattheson, a celebrated writer onmusical subjects, " he had only his musicaltalents to depend on for subsistence ;but, endowed with genius and a gooddisposition, he had little care on hismind." At first, we are told by thesame authority, he only played a ripenviolin in the opera orchestra, and " behavedas if he could not count five,being naturally inclined to dry humour."About the same time, he composed extremelylong airs, and cantatas withoutend ; which, though not deficient inharmony, were yet deficient in truetaste.Handel took up his residence atGEORGE FREDERICK HANDEL.Hamburgh with Mattheson, with whomhe had often an amicable trial of skill,the former excelling on the organ, andthe latter on the harpsichord ; and itwas agreed between them, that neithershould invade the other's province.They mutually kept their promise forsix years ; and it was only to an accidentthat Handel was indebted for anopportunity of publicly displaying hispower over keyed instruments. Thefirst harpsichord player at the operabeing absent, Handel was persuadedto take his place, and played in somasterly a manner, that he was notonly vehemently applauded, but subsequentlyappointed to preside himself,in preference to the second harpsichordplayer. This so enraged theunsuccessful candidate, that, one night,he followed Handel out of the orchestra,and, drawing his sword, attempted tomurder him ; and had it not been forthe score of the opera which Handelwas taking home with him, and hadplaced under his coat, there is littledoubt but the thrust would have provedmortal.Mr. Burgh, in his Anecdotes ofMusic, gives an account of this affair,under different circumstances. Accordingto him, it took place duringthe run of Mattheson's opera of Cleopatra,and he says that Mattheson himselfwas the assailant, in consequenceof Handel's refusal to allow him to presideat the harpsichord, as he had beenaccustomed to do, after he had finishedhis performance of Antony, whosedeath occurs early in the opera. ,it is said, first gave Handela slap on the face; upon which theyboth immediately drew their swords,and a duel ensued in the market-place,which was terminated by the sword ofMattheson breaking against a metalbutton upon Handel's coat. This affair,which made a great noise at the time,created great public interest in favourof Handel, who, thenceforth, continuedto have the entire management of theopera. He shortly afterwards broughtupon the stage his first opera, Elmira,which was performed with applause forthirty successive nights. His opera ofNero, which appeared in February,1705, and in which Mattheson, who wasnow reconciled to him, played the principalcharacter, was scarcely less popular.From this period, till 170S, he composedtwo other operas, Florida andDane, besides occupying himself inteaching, composing pieces for the harpsichord,single songs, and cantatas innumerable.Having completely established hisreputation at Hamburgh, Handel paida visit, by royal invitation, to Florence,where he produced his opera of rodrigo,for which he was honoured by thegrand duke with a present of a 'hundredsequins, (about 45,) and a serviceof plate. The mistress of the grandduke sung the principal part in it ;and, it is said, conceived such a passionfor Handel, as would have proved theruin of both, had he encouraged it.After about twelve monthsresidencein Florence, he departed for Venice,where, in 1709, he added to his fameby his opera of Agrippina. He concludedhis Italian tour with a visit toRome and Naples, whence he returnedto Germany, and settled at Hanover,under the patronage of the elector,afterwards George the First, to whomhe was appointed maestro di capella.He had not been long in this situation,before he expressed a desire to visitEngland, to dissuade him from which,the elector offered him a pension offifteen hundred crowns. It was, however,finally arranged, that he shouldboth receive the pension and take hisintended journey, on condition of hisreturning to Hanover at the expirationof a twelvemonth.Handel arrived in London towardsthe end of 1710, when his services wereimmediately engaged by Aaron Hill,who then managed the Italian Opera.His first composition was the music toRossi's play of Rinaldo ; which Handelis said to have executed in the shortspace of a fortnight. Rossi, who wasthe author of the piece, declares, in hispreface to the work, that the composerwas so rapid in his part of the labour,that he hardly gave him time to write.The opera met with a most favourablereception ; and the publication of themusic produced no less a sum than1,500. The most prominent beautiesof this opera are the air of Cara Sposa ;the bravura of Venti Turbine ; and theair of II tricerbero humiliation, in whichall the parts play in unison and octavesto the voice. At the expiration of a yearCOMPOSE R8.Handel left England for Hanover ; and,on taking leave of Queen Anne, she issaid to have made him some valuablepresents, and expressed her wishes tosee him again. Upon his arrival in Germanyhe resumed his former station,and composed for the electoral princess,Caroline, afterwards Queen of England,twelve chamber duets, as he professed,of the style of Steffani; from which,however, they are said to differ inseveral respects.After a sojourn of two years, he againobtained leave of the elector to visitEngland, on condition that he returnedin a reasonable time. He reached themetropolis in the winter of 1712, atwhich time the celebrated treaty ofUtrecht was in progress ; and a publicthanksgiving being to be solemnizedon the conclusion of it, in 1713, Handelwas commanded by the queen to composea Te Deum and Jubilate for theoccasion. The performance gave greatsatisfaction ; and was succeeded, on thepart of Handel, by such a predilectionfor this country, that he determined topass here the remainder of his days.This step greatly offended the Electorof Hanover ; who, after he had ascendedthe throne of England, was, with difficultypersuaded to restore Handel to hisfavour. A reconciliation is said to havebeen brought about by a contrivance ofthe Baron Kilmansegge; who, havingproposed that the king should make ashort river excursion, took care to havea barge at hand, in which Handelagreeably surprised the king with apiece composed expressly, and sincewell known as Handel's water piece.His majesty inquired who was theauthor, and was informed by the baronthat it was a faithful servant, who, consciousof having merited the royal displeasure,dared not approach withoutthe assurance of pardon. This intercessionhad the desired effect, andHandel was restored to favour. Heshortly afterwards played before theking, with Gemminiani ; and the royalregard was substantially demonstrated jto him, by a grant of 200 per annum,in addition to the same sum which hadbeen settled upon him by Queen Anne ;and, on his becoming musical preceptorto the princesses, Queen Caroline addeda further annuity of 200 to his income.f persons of all ranks and fortunes inEngland were now desirous of Handel'sacquaintance; and amongst others, towhom he was introduced, was the munificentEarl of Burlington, so justlycelebrated for his taste in fine arts,and patronage of its votaries. Inthe mansion of this nobleman Handelresided for a period of three years ;and, in 1718, removed to Canons, theseat of the Duke of Chandos, for thepurpose of superintending the cathedralservice, which was daily performed inthe superb chapel of the duke. HereHandel composed some of his most beautifulanthems, though the greater partof them are in manuscript ; also the chiefpart of his hautboy concertos, sonatas,and organ fugues, and his celebratedmusic to Gay's Acis and Galatea.On the establishment of the RoyalAcademy of Music, Handel was commissionedto engage singers, and appointedsuperintendent; and, in 1720,his opera of Roadamisto was performed,with great applause, in theHaymarket. The reception it met withroused the rivalry of Bononcini andAttilio, both of whom came over toEngland, under the patronage of aparty of the nobility ; and the consequencewas, a grand musical contest,for pre-eminence, between these threecelebrated composers. The friends ofeach entered into a proposition, thatthe three should compose an opera conjointly,each writing a distinct act, andan overture. The opera fixed uponwas Muzio Scaevola, of which Bononcinicomposed the first, Attilio the second,and Handel the third act. The Academydetermined the point of precedence mostdecidedly in favour of Handel ; andBononcini was pronounced to be nextin point of merit. After this dispute,however, the two Italians continued,occasionally, to compose operas for theAcademy for six or seven years. Themusical contest between them gave riseto the following lines by Swift :Compared with Signor Bononcini,Some say that Handel'* a mere ninny ;Others assert, that he to Handel,Ii scarcely fit to hold a candle :Strange, such a difference there should l>Twixt tweedle-dum and tvreedle-deeIn 1726, Handel produced his newopera of Alexandre, and engaged a newsinger, named Signora Faustina Gordon;a circumstance which laid the foundFREDERICK HANDEL.lion of a dispute with the Academy,which terminated in its dissolution.Handel,who, it seems, considered singersvery inferior to composers, had beensomewhat nettled at the enthusiasticapplause which the public had heapedupon Senesino; and, in consequence,treated the pretensions of that vocalistwith great contempt. This led to a rivalrybetween Senesino and Faustina, whichwas carried on in such a spirit by thepartisans of the former, that Handelrefused to compose any piece in whichhe was to have a share ; and the resultwas, in two years afterwards, the dissolutionof the Academy, after it hadexisted about nine years. Handel wasnow deserted by the nobility, who tookthe theatre in Lincoln's Inn Fields,whilst he opened that in the Hay-market;and the town was, for sometime,divided between the operatic attractionsof each. The nobility, however,having got possession of theHaymarket, and engaged the celebratedFarinelli, Handel removed to CoventGarden ; but was soon forced to giveup the contest, after having suffered,both in health and property, to an almostirretrievable degree. His intellects areeven said to have been affected by hisdisappointment ; but, however this mayhave been, both his mental and bodilyfaculties were completely restored, by avisit to Aix-la-chapelle. On his returnto England, he made another effortto regain the public favour at CoventGarden, by the performance of hisAtalanta, Justin, Arminius, and Bere-nice,but without adequate success,though his music of Dryden's Ode toSt. Cecilia's Day was greatly applauded.In the composition of his two subsequentoperas, Faramond.and AlexanderSeverus, performed in 1737, he wasindemnified with 1,000, by the Earl ofMiddlesex, afterwards Duke of Dorset.Three other of his operas, Xerxes,Hymen, and Deidamia, were performedbetween the latter year and 1740 ; but hethen gave another direction to his studies,better suited, as he himself used to declare,to the circumstances of a manadvancing far into the vale of years,than light and trivial music. As earlyas 1733, he had performed his oratorioof Italian, at a solemnity at Oxford,the profits arising from which had beenconsiderable : he therefore concluded,that during the Lent season, when notheatrical performances were allowed,the sacred drama might be producedwith advantage, and little expense. Inthese oratorios he determined to introducea new species of music, the organconcerto: of which, though it must beconfessed it was not the true organstyle, he must be allowed the merit ofbeing the inventor. His oratorios werereceived with sufficient applause toinduce him to persevere in that line ofcomposition ; though the profits whichhe derived from them were by no meansadequate to their merits, in consequenceof the coldness with which the nobilitystill continued to regard him. Handel,therefore, resolved on a visit to Ireland,in order to try whether, in that kingdom,his oratorios would be out of the reachof prejudice and enmity. It was on hisdeparture from London for the sisterkingdom, that Pope, in personifyingthe Italian Opera, put the followinglines into her mouth, with which sheaddresses the goddess of dulness :Strong in new arms, lo ' giant Handel stain's,Like bold Briareus, with his hundred hands ;And Jove's own thunders follow Man's drums.Arrest him, empress 1 or you sleep no more :She heard, and drove him to the Hibernian shoreThe author of The Musical Biographyof the Three last Centuries, endeavoursto explain the necessity for his tryingother audiences, by observing, that whenhe produced his Messiah for the firsttime, in 1741, at Covent Garden, underthe modest title of A Sacred Oratorio,on account of the words being composedof genuine texts of Scripture, asit consisted chiefly of chorus, and as theairs in it were thought inferior to manyof those in his former operas and oratorios,it was not very well received bythe audience. " The consciousness ofthis," he adds, " and a suspicion thatthe public were becoming indifferent towardsthese entertainments, determinedHandel to try the people of Ireland."A characteristic anecdote is told of him,applicable to this period of his life, byDr. Burney, who saw him at Chester,on his way to Ireland. " I was at thepublic school in that city," says thedoctor, " and very well remember seeinghim smoke a pipe, over a dish ofcoffee, at the Exchange coffee-house ;for, being extremely curious to see soCOMPOSERS.extraordinary a man, I watched himnarrowly as long as he remained atChester ; which, on account of thewind being unfavourable for his embarkingat Margate, was several days ;and, during this time, he applied toMr. Baker, the organist, my firstmusic master, to know whether therewere any choir-men in the cathedralwho could sing at sight ; as he wishedto prove some music that had beenhastily transcribed, by trying the chorusses,which he intended to performin Ireland. Mr. Baker mentioned someof the most likely singers then inChester ; and, among the rest, a printer,of the name of Janson, who had agood bass voice, and was one of thebest musicians in the choir. A time,"he adds, " was fixed for this privaterehearsal, at the Golden Falcon, whereHandel was quartered ; but, alas ! ontrial of the chorus in The Messiah,And with His stripes we are healed,"poor Janson, after repeated attempts,Failed so egregiously, that Handel, afterswearing in four or five different languages,cried out in broken English,You scoundrel ! tit not you dell medat you could sing at spite?' ' Yes,sir,' said the printer, ' and so I can,but not at first sight.' "Upon his reaching Dublin, he, withequal judgment and humanity, beganby performing his Messiah for the benefitof the city prison. He remainedfor nine months in Ireland, where heextended his fame, and began to repairhis fortune ; and, on his return to London,in the spring of 1742, found thepublic more favourably disposed towardshim. His oratorio of Samson was notonly received with great applause, bycrowded houses, but became so popular,that the single songs were disseminatedthroughout the country. During thesame season, to the honour of thepublic at large, and the disgrace of cabaland faction," says the author of TheDictionary of Musicians, " The Messiahwas produced in England for the secondtime, and was received with an universalexpression of applause and admiration ;and, from that hour, that sublime workincreased in the reverence and delightwith which it was listened to."Handel caused this oratorio to beperformed, annually, for the benefit ofthe Foundling Hospital; and its performance,under his own direction, from (1749 to 1759, realized to the institutiona sum little short of 7,000. But Handel'spatronage of this hospital did notstop there, he presented the fine organit possesses ; and he bequeathed to it,as a legacy, a fair copy of the originalscore of The Messiah. About 1742-3,he published his twelve grand concertos,by subscription ; an undertakingto which he is said to have been encouragedby the success of his six grandconcertos, known as Hautboy Concertos,which he had composed on themarriage of the Prince of Orange withthe princess royal.In 1744, he had a slight return of thedisorder which had before obliged himto go to Aix-la-chapelle ; and, to addto his misfortunes, though the mind ofthe nation at large was in his favour,an opposition was, for a time, kept uptohis disadvantage, by some of thenobility, who endeavoured to render hisaudiences as thin as possible, by givingcard parties, and other entertainments,during Lent. For a season or two hewas unable to draw houses sufficientlynumerous to pay his expenses ; and, atlength, in January, 1745, after tworepresentations of his Hercules, he wasobliged to discontinue it altogether, forwant of sufficient means to pay hisband. In the March following, however,he was enabled to resume theperformance of his oratorios, Samson,Saul, Joseph, Belshazzar, and TheMessiah : but " I perfectly well remember,"says Dr. Burney, " that none werewell attended, except Samson, andThe Messiah." And, he adds, that hefrequently heard Handel, as pleasantlyas philosophically, console hisfriends, when, previous to the curtainbeing drawn up, they have lamentedthat the house was so empty, by saying,Never mind, de moosic vil sound depetter'" He composed, in succession,the entertainments of Susanna, Belshazzar,Judas Maccabees, Joseph,Alexander, Bells, Solomon, Theodora,the Choice of Hercules, Jeptha, and anentertainment entitled the Triumph ofTime and Truth; in all of which hehad ample scope for the exercise of hisgreatest talent, the sublime in music,as his fine chorusses have been justlydenominated. Most of them were receivedwith the greatest applause ; butGEORGE FREDERICK HANDEL.his Theodora was so neglected, in 1749,that he was glad, it is said, if any professor,who did not perform, wouldaccept orders for admission gratis. Twoof this description having afterwardsapplied to him for a similar privilege,to hear The Messiah, who had not sohonoured his Theodora, " Oh, yoursarvant !" he exclaimed, " you aredamnable taint ! you would no coto Theodora: dere vas room enoughto tance dere even dat vas perform !"It is to the honour of George theSecond, however, that when hiscourt cavaliers constantly abandonedthe oratorios of this great master, heas constantly attended them.In the beginning of 1751, Handelbegan to be alarmed by a disorder inhis eyes, which the surgeons told himwas a cataract. From this moment, itis said, his usual flow of spirits forsookhim, and scarcely left him patience towait that crisis of his disorder, whenrelief might be hoped for. He was,however, prepared to expect a totalprivation of sight, and taught to hopethat it might prove temporary. Hisown fears for the worst were now confirmedto him ; for having called onDr. Samuel Sharp, of Guy's Hospital,that eminent surgeon, after varioustrials of his skill, was obliged to announceto him, that all he could everhope for, was a relief from pain in thevisual organ.His Lent oratorios were from henceforthsuperintended by his friend, Mr.Smith ; but Handel still attended, andplayed extempore voluntaries on theorgan, with all the fancy and feeling ofundiminished genius. He was repeatedlyled forth to the front of the stageto receive the applause of his hearers ;and, one night, when Beard sang, fromSamson, Total Eclipse, many of theaudience mingled their tears with theirplaudits, at the sight of the blind composer.His last appearance in publicwas on the 6th of April, 1759, afterwhich his faculties rapidly declined ;and it was evident he had not long tolive. Of this he was himself fully aware ;and prepared to meet his end with aresignation and composure based upona sincere belief in the doctrines ofChristianity. As the close of his lifeapproached, he signified a fervent wishthat he might expire on Good Friday ;and it is singular that he breathed hislast on that day, dying on the 13th ofthe month, though some say the 14th,and in the year above mentioned. Hewas buried in Westminster Abbey;and over his tomb is a full-length statueof him, by Roubiliac, with a scrollin his hand, bearing the words, " Iknow that my Redeemer liveth," withthe notes to which he set those wordsin his Messiah.In person, he is said to have beenlarge and portly ; and his gait, whichwas sauntering and ungraceful, wasmarked by a peculiar kind of rockingmotion. His features were finelyexpressive of his mind ; and the generalcast of his countenance was mildand placid. He wore an enormouswhite wig ; which, when things wentwell at the oratorio, had a certain nodor vibration ; when this sign was wanting,nice observers were seldom wrongin concluding him to be out of humour.Handel was a man of blameless morals,and strict integrity; though his independentsentiments, and the consciousnessof his own merits, together with atemper naturally impetuous, sometimesbetrayed him into expressions neitherdecent nor temperate towards thosewho offended him. He passed his timewith great regularity ; being too muchdevoted to his art, to neglect it even forthe temporary pleasures of convivialsociety. Yet he is said to have beensomewhat of a gourmand ; and MissHawkins tells an anecdote of him,in this respect, which, if true, certainlyshows him in the light of a more thanordinary glutton. HavinginvitedGoupy,the painter, to dine with him, when hiscircumstances were less prosperous thanusual, he placed before his guest aplain meal, apologizing for his inabilityto give a more costly repast ; but professinga most cordial welcome. Soonafter dinner, Handel left the room;and his absence was so long, thatGouty, at last, for want of other employ,strolled into the adjoining back-room,and, walking up to a window,which looked diagonally on that of asmall third room, he saw his hostsitting at a table, covered with such delicaciesas he had just been lamentinghis inability to afford. Gouty, towhom, possibly, such viands were littleless tempting than to his host, was soCOMPOSERS.enraged, that he quitted the houseabruptly ; and published the engraving,or etching, in which Handel figures as ahog in the midst of dainties. He hadfew friends, and was little fitted for thesocial affections; and, probably, passed alife of celibacy from choice. His literaryknowledge was, necessarily, limited;but he is said to have been well acquaintedwith Latin and Italian, andspoke several other modern languagesbesides English ; all of which he blendedin his conversation in a very amusingmanner.He was an enthusiast in his art, andentered with his whole soul into thespirit of his compositions ; so that whenquestioned as to his feelings whilstcomposing the Hallelujah Chorus, hereplied, " I did think I did see all theheavens before me, and the great Godhimself."His musical ideas flowed with rapidity;and he transferred them to paperwith a degree of impatience proportionedto the eagerness that possessesmen of genius, of seeing their ideasreduced into form. He was fond ofPaintings ; and, until his sight failedim, one of his chief amusements consistedin going to view collections ofpictures exposed for sale. Though he hadearly neglected the violin for the harpsichord,he could play upon the formerin a style, which the ablest mastersof that instrument would have beenglad to imitate ; and, though not possessinga musical voice, sang with suchtaste and pathos, that Farinelli, on oneoccasion, declined singing after him.His favourite vocalist was Mrs. Gibber,to whom he gave the principal femaleparts in his oratorios. At this lady'shouse he was a frequent guest; andthere played many of his pieces, previousto the public performance of them.Quin, who was among the company onone of these occasions, was asked byMrs. Gibber, after the composer hadgone, if he did not think Handel hada charming hand ? (alluding to itsdexterity.) " A hand, madam," saidQuin, " you mistake : it is a foot."Pol ! pol !" said she, " has he not afine finger ?" " Toes, by G ! madam,"was the reply. " In fact," says DoctorBurney, " his hand was so fat, that theknuckles, which usually appear unbent,were like those of a child, tinted ordimpled, so as to be rendered concavehowever, his touch was so smooth, thathis fingers seemed to grow to the keys,and scarcely have motion." But thoughHandel performed on the organ with afine delicate touch, a volant finger, anda ready execution of the most difficultpassages, these subordinate qualitieswere overlooked, in the admirationwhich he awoke by his amazing commandof the instrument, the fulness ofhis harmony, the grandeur and dignityof his style, the copiousness of his imagination,and the fertility of his invention.It was impossible for the mostunmusical ear to listen to him enraptured; and, indeed, it is said, that personsof this description, were, afterhearing Handel, generally the loudestand most spontaneous in their acclamations.As a composer who addresses thesoul rather than the senses, and failsthe mind with the most sublime emotions,Handel stands unrivalled ; andmust be assigned the same position inmusic, that is maintained by Miltonin poetry. His style is the great, andis simple in the degree which tendsmost to this end. From a singer herequires more legitimate and genuineexpression than any other master. Mrs.Gibber once asking him how it happenedthat she drew down such a meedof applause whenever she sang his piecebeginning, " Dear Liberty," his answerwas characteristic of the above fact:It is because you sing it as thoughliberty was dear to you." The lateProfessor Mainspring, in his life ofHandel, has endeavoured to class hisworks ; but, it is justly observed, bymore than one authority, " they areso numerous, and of such differentkinds, that they elude all but generalcriticism." This may be remarkedof his compositions, that theirdifference in point of excellence, is nowayto be accounted for (if we excludethe dispiriting circumstances underwhich many of them were written), buton the supposition that he wrote fortwo descriptions of people, the judiciousand the vulgar; and his solicitude toplease both seems to have been nearlyequal The former he meant to fascinateby such airs as Cara Sposa, inRinaldo; Ombra Cara, in Radamisto;Affani del penser, in Otho ; Da te pesteGEORGE FREDERICK HANDEL.in Julius Caesar; Di note il peregrine,in Richard the First; and Opera si, inAdmetus : Powerful Guardians, andCome ever-smiling Liberty, in JudasMaccabees. Most of the songs inAriadne are calculated to please themultitude ; and, for this deviation fromhis general conduct, Handel gave as areason, to one of his friends, that hethereby hoped to regain the favour ofthe nobility, whom he was sensible hehad displeased in some of his most elaboratecompositions for the stage. Theattempt, however, failed in answeringhis expectations, except as far asrelates to the minuet at the end ofthe overture, which became one of themost popular airs ever known.His Te Deum, Jubilate, his Coronation,and other anthems, his Dettingen TeDeum, and the chorusses in his oratorios,are amongst the highest class of his productions.In the chorusses of his anthems,where the praises of the Almightyare the subject, his power of harmonyis so great, that it may be said to bebeyond ordinary conception : on theother hand, in passages which breathea spirit of humiliation and contrition, heis soothing and pathetic to the last degree.Yet it must be confessed, that hehas carried imitation to a degree thatborders on affectation ; particularly inhis Israel in Egypt, in which he hasendeavoured to express, by passagesbroken in the time, the hopping offrogs, and others calculated to resemblethe buzzing of swarms of flies ; whilstin Joshua he has endeavoured, by theharmony of one long extended note, toimpress upon the imagination of hishearers the idea of the great luminaryof the universe arrested in its course ;or, in other words, to make them hearthe sun stand still. In the compositionof music entirely instrumental, he regardedbut the general effect ; and noproductions of that class appear to havebeen real studies, with the exception ofhis lessons and fugues for the organ.Excellent as his overtures are, he composedthem as fast as he could write ;and scarcely any of them cost him morethan a morning's labour. His violin concertosare generally wanting in thosegreat requisites, harmony and fine modulation; and, on that account, will notbear a comparison with those of Corelli,| Gemminiani, or Martini. His duets andIlessons are of a far more elaborate texture; and his lessons for the harpsichordwhich were composed for the practiceof Queen Anne, and consist of suites ofhis airs, intermixed with fugues, havebeen acknowledged the most masterlyproductions of their kind in the world.Multitudinous, however, as are theworks of this great man, they are alleclipsed by his Messiah, in which iscentred all that the most refined musicaltaste could ever hope to see realized.A national tribute of applause was paidto his genius, in 1784, by a commemorationat Westminster Abbey, consistingof the performance of piecesselected from his works, by a bandof more than five hundred voices andinstruments. It produced 7,000 ; ofwhich 1.000 were given to the WestminsterHospital, and the remainder tothe Society for decayed Musicians.We shall conclude* our memoir with afew characteristic anecdotes of this greatcomposer. The celebrated songstress,Curzon, having insolently refused tosing his admirable air, " False imagine,"in Otto, he told her that he alwaysknew she was a very devil, but heshould now let her know, in his turn,that he was Beelzebub, the prince ofdevils; and then taking her up by thewaist, he swore, if she did not immediatelyobey his orders, he would throwher out of the window. At anothertime, accompanying one of the principalsingers on the harpsichord, at a rehearsal,upon the singer threatening tojump down upon his instrument if hedid not adopt his suggestion, Handelsaid, " You will jump down on myinstrument, will you? Only tell mewhen you jump I will advertise. Ishall get more by your jump dan byyour sing!" But 'his irascibility oftemper was displayed to most advantage,if we may so speak, on the followingoccasion : It should be premised,that his ear was so sensitive, that hecould never bear the tuning of the instruments,and always caused thatoperation to be performed previously totheir being brought into the orchestra.One night, at the theatre, when thePrince of Wales was to be present,some wag stole into the orchestra, andunturned them. As soon as his royalhighness arrived, Handel gave the signalof beginning, con spirit ; but such wasCOMPOSERS.the horrible discord, that the enragedmusician started up from his seat, andhaving overturned the double bass,which stood in his way, he seized akettle-drum, which he threw withsuch violence at the leader of the band,that he lost his own full-bottomed wigin the effort. Without waiting to replaceit, he advanced, bare-headed, tothe front of the orchestra, breathingvengeance ; but so much choked withpassion, that utterance was denied him.In this ridiculous attitude he stood,staring and stamping for some moments,amidst a convulsion of laughter; norcould he be prevailed upon to resumehis seat, until the prince went in person,and, with much difficulty, appeasedhis wrath. His royal highness treatedhim with similar indulgence at therehearsal of his oratorios at CarltonHouse ; and, when the princess sometimesheard him swearing at the maidsof honour, for talking during the performance,she tried to silence them, andput the composer in a good humour, bysaying, " Hush ! hush ! Handel is in apassion."HENRY CAREY.THIS facetious, but ill-fated, musicaland poetical genius, is said to have beenthe illegitimate son of George Seville,Marquess of Halifax, and was roundabout1692. Almost all that is known of hisearly history is, that he was not a regularlybred musician ; though, indeed,it is recorded that he had lessons in theart, first, of a German, named Wit-chironBennet; afterwards, of Rosen; and, finally, of Gemminiani. Allhis instruction, however, if the sayingof his friend, Lampe, is to be credited,did not enable him to put a bass tohis own ballads." Thus slenderly qualified,his chief employment was teachingin small boarding-schools, or families ofmiddling rank ; but possessing a prolificand ready invention, he early began todistinguish himself for the compositionof songs, of which he was the author ofboth words and music; one of thesewas the still popular air, Of all theGirls that are so smart, or Sally inour Alley, which was sung by everybodythe moment it appeared, andhas ever since remained a favourite.In 1715, he produced upon the stagetwo farces ; one of which, The Contrivances,met with good success. In1720, he published a small volume ofpoems; and a larger one, by subscription,in 1729. These were very favourablyreceived ; and one of them, entitledNamby Namby, had the intended effectof bringing Ambrose Phillips's compositionsinto general ridicule.In 1730, he appears to have taken abenefit at Drury Lane Theatre, in anadvertisement of which, in the DailyPost of that period, occurs the followingpassage : " At our friend HarryCarey's benefit to-night, the powers ofmusic, poetry, and painting, assemblein his behalf; he being an admirer ofthe three sisters : the body of the musiciansmeet in the Haymarket, whencethey march in great order, preceded bya magnificent moving organ, &c." In1732, he published six cantatas; and inthe same year, produced the words ofhis two serious operas, Amelia, andTeraminta ; the first was set to music byhis friend, Lampe ; the second by Mr.Smith, Handel's disciple and friend,and successor at the oratorios. In 1734,was acted his mock tragedy of Chrona humorous satireupon the rant and bombast of the tragediesof the period. In 1736, his littleopera of The Honest Yorkshireman wasalmost always in constant run. In 1737,he produced his burlesque opera of TheDragon of Wanted ; which met withsuch success, that, during the first year,it was represented as often as Gay'sBeggar's Opera had been in the ten precedingyears. Dr. Burney tells us thatCarey also succeeded better in his objectof ridiculing the Italian Opera thanGay, upon whose production he makessome sneering remarks ; but The Beggar'sOpera is still popular, while TheDragon of Wanted is forgotten. In1738, Carey produced his Margery, orThe Dragoness, a sequel to The Dragon ;MAURICE GREENE,but this, like most sequels, was a failure.During this period he continued toteach music ; and had no particularhabit of extravagance or vice laid to hischarge ; but whether from embarrassedcircumstances, domestic unhappiness,or other cause, in a fit of desperationor despondency, he hung himself in hisown house, in Warner Street, Cold BathFields, on the 4th of October, 1743.His character, according to the testimonyof all his biographers, was withoutreproach. He was a most agreeableand facetious companion ; and, whatwas a rare thing among the wits ofthose days, excited mirth, both in hisconversation and writings, without violatingdecency. Besides those alreadymentioned, he composed sundry songsfor modern comedies, particularly thosein The Provoked Husband ; and, duringthe laureateship of Gibber, burlesquedhis birth-day odes with all the felicity,and none of the malevolence, of Pope.Besides Sally in our Alley, which waspraised by Addison as a literary, and byGemminiani as a musical, production,Carey is said to have been the composerof AH in the Downs ; and his son,George Smith Carey, subsequentlyclaimed for him the merit of composingGod Save the King.MAURICE GREENE.MAURICE GREENE, son of theRev. Thomas Greene, vicar of St. Slave,Old Jewry, was born in 1693, and educatedin the choir of St. Paul's, and,afterwards, under Richard Bring, theorganist of that cathedral. Before hehad attained his twentieth year, heobtained the place of organist of St.Dunstan's in the West; and, in 1717,succeeded Daniel Purcell, as organist ofSt. Andrew's, Holborn. He was electedto St. Paul's, in the following year, witha salary exceeding that enjoyed by his-predecessors.In 1726, on the death of Dr. Croft,he was appointed organist and composerto the Chapel Royal ; and, atthe decease of John Eccles, obtainedtone office of master of the king's band.On the occasion of receiving his degreeof Mus. D., at Cambridge, in 1730, heset to music Pope's Ode for St. Cecilia'sday, and persuaded the poet toadd an entire stanza, and make severalalterations ; so that the copy, as printedwith Greene's music, differs materiallyfrom the ode as published. As a testimonyto the merits of this composition,the university soon after, on the deathof Dr. Tudway, elected the subject ofour memoir professor of music. Heappears to have been possessed of but amoderate income till 1750; when hisuncle's natural son, Mr. Greene, a barrister,died, and left him an estate inEssex, called Bois Hall, worth 700per annum, equal, perhaps, to 2,000in the present day. This enabled him todevote a portion of his time to the unprofitable,though honourable employment,of reforming our church music ;which he commenced, by correcting agreat number of manuscript services andanthems, and reducing them to score.By 1755, he had made considerable progressin his great undertaking ; but hishealth then failing him, he transferredthe further prosecution of the task tohis friend and disciple, Dr. Boyce. Hedied on the 1st of December, 1755,leaving an only daughter. Dr. Burneyawards to Greene's music the praise ofcontaining more elegant melody, andmore pure harmony, than those of hispredecessors, though beneath them instrength and nervousness. He has,however, not given a very fair estimateof his musical character, having omittedall mention of some of his principalperformances. His reputation chieflyrests on his forty anthems, in twovolumes, which rank high among ecclesiasticalcompositions; and combine thescience and vigour of our earlier writers,with the melody of the best Germanand Italian masters. " Among thefaults," says a critic, " to be ascribedto this composer, none are so flagrantas the light divisions in which his soloanthems abound, and the repetition ofpassages a note higher or a note lower,in what the Italians call rosalie, whichCOMPOSERS.are always dull, tiresome, and indicationsof a sterile fancy."In person, Greene was short anddeformed ; but his manners are said tohave been very fascinating. He was,at first, one of Handel's most obsequiousadmirers, but a quarrel with that composer,induced him to change his mind ;and, in Handel's celebrated musicalcontest with Bononcini, Greene wasone of the latter's most strenuous partisans.THOMAS AUGUSTINE ARNE.THOMAS AUGUSTINE ARNE wasborn in London, about the year 1704.His father, who was an upholsterer,destined him for the law, and, in consequence,sent him to complete his educationat Eton. Here he developed hispassion for music, to the great annoyanceof his schoolfellows, by playing, all hisspare time, upon an old flute; and whilstyet a boy, would often borrow the servant'slivery, and go up into the galleryof the Opera, which was, at that time,appropriated to domestics. At home, hecontrived to secrete a spinet in his room,upon which, after having muffled thestrings with a handkerchief, he used topractise after the family were asleep.At last he was obliged to serve a threeyears' clerkship to the law ; but duringthis period, besides continuing to practiseon his spinet, he contrived to devotesome time to the study of composition.His father, who was yet a stranger tohis son's musical skill, was made acquaintedwith it by calling, one day, atthe house of an acquaintance, and findinga concert in progress, at whichyoung Arne was playing first fiddle !He was soon afterwards prevailed uponto let his son pursue music as a profession,and engaged a foreigner of someability to give him lessons on theviolin. This person, coming, one evening,to give his pupil a lesson, as usual,was surprised to find him in the ware-room,practising, with his desk on acoffin ; and, expressing his surprise, heobserved, that, for his part, he shouldnot be able to study, for thinking itcontained a corpse. " So it does," repliedArne ; and, at the same time,pushing the lid aside, exposed it toview, which so affrighted the foreigner,that he never could be prevailed on tovisit his pupil again. He was no soonerable to practise aloud in his father'shouse, than he enchanted the wholefamily ; and, on discovering that hissister, afterwards known as Mrs. Gibber,had a very sweetly-toned and touchingvoice, he gave her such instruction assoon enabled her to sing in public. Hecomposed for her the music to Addison'sopera of Rosamond, and the successwith which it met, encouraged himto proceed. He set to music TomThumb, in the Italian style, which wasreceived with universal applause. Theopera of Zara was the next specimenof his abilities ; it came out at DruryLane, in 1736, in which year he hadbeen chosen composer to the theatre.In 1738, he produced his admirableadaptation of Milton's Comus, whichhe set with such taste, judgement, andoriginality, that it at once establishedhis reputation as a lyric and dramaticcomposer of music. " He introducedinto this masque," says Dr. Burney, " alight, airy, original, and pleasing melody,wholly different from Purcell andHandel, whom all English composershad hitherto pillaged or imitated. Indeed,the melody of Arne, at this time,and of his Vauxhall songs afterwards,forms an era in English music ; it wasso easy, natural, and agreeable to thewhole kingdom, that it had an effectupon our national taste." In 1740, heset Mallet's Masque of Alfred, in whichhe introduced Rule Britannia ; and, in1742, he became first violin at DruryLane, and is said, although his handwas enfeebled by rheumatism, to havesurpassed in skill every performer whohad preceded him.In 1759, the University of Oxford conferredupon him the degree of Mus. D. ;and, in 1762, he gained a large accessionof fame by the production of hiscelebrated opera of Artaxerxes. Dr.Arne died on the 5th of March, 1778,WILLIAM BOYCE.of a spasm of the lungs,hallelujah a short time previous to hisdecease. " The day after his decease,"says Parke, " his intimate friend, Vernon,the favourite singing actor of DruryLane Theatre, came into the music-room,and, in my presence, describedit as follows : 1 was talking on thesubject of music with the doctor, whosuffered much from exhaustion, when,in attempting to illustrate what he hadadvanced, he, in a very feeble and tremulousvoice, sung part of an air, duringwhich he became progressively morefaint, until he breathed his last ! making,as our immortal Shakspeare expressesit, a swan-like end, fading in music.' "The doctor was of the Roman catholicpersuasion, but is said, until the approachof his last moments, to havepaid little attention to religious duties,and to have spent much of his life indissipation.As a composer, the fame of Dr. Arneis chiefly preserved by his Artaxerxes ;a happy combination of English, Italian,and Scottish melody. An anecdote istold of Mozart's being in the pit of thetheatre when this opera was performed,and observing that the overture was aslovenly performance." Mozart wasthen only ten years of age, and accompaniedby his father, who gave him aslap on the face, and told him to holdhis tongue. There is certainly nothinggrand or striking in the overture, nor,indeed, about Arne's performances ingeneral ; their great merit consisting intheir lightness, grace, and ease. Nextin merit to Artaxerxes ranks the Comusof Dr. Arne. " Upon the whole," saysDr. Burney, in summing up the musicalcharacter of the subject of our memoir,though this composer had formed anew style of his own, there did notappear that fertility of ideas, originalgrandeur of thought, or those resourcesupon all occasions which are discoverablein the works of Purcell ; yet, insecular music, Arne must be allowed tohave surpassed him in ease, grace, andvariety ; which is no inconsiderablepraise when it is remembered, that, fromthe death of Purcell to that of Arne, aperiod of more than eighty years, nocandidate for musical fame among ourcountrymen had appeared, who wasequally admired by the nation at large."WILLIAM BOYCE.THIS eminent composer, to whom wearegreatly indebted lor the reformationof our church music, was born in London,in 1710, where his father followedthe business of a joiner and cabinetmaker.He studied music under Mr.King and Dr. Greene, successively, inSt. Paul's choir; and, in 1734, was acandidate for the place of organist ofSt. Michael's Church, Cornhill, whenKelway was elected. In the same year,however, he was appointed organist ofOxford Chapel ; and Kelway succeedingto the post of organist of St. Martinson the death of Weldon,in 1736, Boyce, in that year, succeededhim as organist of St. Michael's, Corn-hill.At the same time, he was appointedorganist and composer to theChapel Royal; and, shortly afterwards,he set to music David's Lamentationover Saul and Jonathan, which wasthen performed at the Apollo Society.In 1743, he produced his Serenata ofSolomon, justly considered as one ofhis most pleasing compositions. Hisnext publication was twelve sonatasfor two violins and a bass ; which maintainedtheir popularity longer than anysimilar productions in this country, withthe exception of Corelli's: they werelong standing pieces at all concerts andpublic gardens. In 1749, he set Mason'sOde to music; which was written for,and publicly performed at the Universityof Cambridge, at the installation,as chancellor, of the Duke of Newcastle.Upon this occasion, the University ofCambridge conferred upon him " thedegree of doctor of music. He soonafterwards set a musical drama, entitledThe Chaplet, for Drury Lane, in oneact, the dialogue being in recitative : itwas very favourably received, and, formany years, continued one of the stockpieces at that theatre. He had pre-composers.piously set Dryden's Secular Ode tomusic, for the use of the famous Castleconcerts, held at Beckford's room, whereit was performed with such applause, asinduced Mr. Beard to bring it out atDrury Lane ; where, it was, however,less successful than The Chaplet. Thesecompositions, with occasional songs forVauxhall and Ranelagh, spread his famethroughout the kingdom, as a dramaticand miscellaneous composer of greatexcellence; whilst his choral pieces forthe King's Chapel, for the feast of theSons of the Clergy at St. Paul's, andfor the triennial meetings at the threecathedrals of Worcester, Hereford,and Gloucester, at all of which he constantlypresided till his death, fully established'his reputation as an ecclesiasticalcomposer.To Dr. Boyce's labours this countryis indebted for the publication of themost splendid and best collection ofchurch music that has appeared, inthree volumes, folio. The collectionwas commenced by his master, Dr.Greene, who bequeathed it to his pupilat his death ; though he is said to haveshewn a jealousy of the rising reputationof Boyce. This able composer had, inhis youth, a defect of hearing, which atlength terminated in almost total deafness: but his exquisite judgment ofthe effect of harmonious composition,suffered no deterioration by this misfortune;his eye fully supplying theplace of his ear, in communicating theideas of sounds. In 1757, he succeededDr. Greene, as master of the king'sband, and soon after became principalorganist of the Royal Chapel, and composerto his majesty. He died of thegout, in February, 1779, highly retspect by his friends, and deservedlyfamous for his professional abilities.Dr. Boyce," says the author of TheDictionary of Musicians, " with all duereverence for the abilities of Handel,was one of the few of pur churchcomposers who neither pillaged norservilely imitated him. There is anoriginal and sterling merit in his productions,founded as much on the studyof our old masters, as on the best modelsof other countries, that gives to all hisworks a peculiar stamp and characterfor strength, clearness, and facility,without any mixture of styles, or extraneousand heterogeneous ornaments."To this eulogium other authorities bearample testimony. Dr. Boyce left a son,of whom Parke, in his Musical Memoirs,relates an anecdote, which, both for itsinteresting nature and for the honour ofthe doctor, deserves recording : Morethan twenty years after his father'sdeath, Mr. Boyce received a letter froman unknown person, requesting hewould call on him immediately, havingan important communication to makerelative to his late father. He calledupon the writer, in an obscure and dirtycourt in the heart of St. Giles's ; whereinone of the most wretched roomsimaginable, up three pair of stairs, wasan old man, on a miserable bed, in anapparent state of exhaustion, who addressedhim as follows : " Sir, I havebeen a beggar nearly the whole of mylife ; and, during your good father'stime, my station was in the street inwhich he lived ; and so kind and liberalwas he to me, that few days passedwithout my receiving marks of hischarity. I now feel that I am on mydeath-bed; and having been successfulin my calling, I request you will acceptthe amount of my savings, as a tokenof my gratitude to your departedfather." Mr. Boyce urged the possibilityof his recovery ; but the old manadded, with a faint smile, " If you willbe kind enough to call here in threedays from this, you will receive a parceldirected for you, which will be the lasttrouble 1 shall give you." He did call ;and the beggar having died in the interim,left for him the parcel, in which,it is said, he found bank-notes to theamount of 2,000 !C 11 A U Les H U K N K Y.CHARLES BURN BY.CHARLES BURNEY was born in thecity of Shrewsbury, ot' respectable parents,on the 7th "of April, 1726. Hereceived the first part of his educationat the free-school of his native place,and afterwards at a public school atChester; in which city he also commencedthe study of music, under theorganist of the cathedral. At fifteen,he returned to Shrewsbury; where, forthree years, he pursued his musicalstudies under his elder and half brother,James Burney,an eminent music-masterand organist of St. Mary, at Shrewsbury,for nearly fifty years. His nextinstructor was the celebrated Dr. Arne,under whom he studied for about threeyears, in London. In 1749, he waselected organist of St. Dionis-Back-Church, in Fenchurch Street, with asalary of 30 per annum; and, duringthe season of 1749-50, he composed forDrury Lane Theatre the music ofRobin Hood, and two other pieces. Forthe same theatre, in the ensuing year,he composed the music to the pantomimeof Queen Mab, which was receivedwith great applause, and had along run. " The success and popularitywhich attended these early productions,"says a writer in The Harmoniconon," might have attracted himpermanently to theatrical composition,and thus deprived the world of his literarylabours; but, fortunately, as itturned out, for the cause of musicalliterature, and his own reputation, theconfinement and air of the metropolisthreatened even his life: his physiciansapprehended approaching consumption ;and, yielding to their advice, he consentedto retire to the country for atime. He therefore accepted the situationof organist at King's Lynn, inNorfolk, with a salary of 100 a-year;and continued to reside in that townfor the succeeding nine years." In 1760.he returned to London, with restoredhealth, and a large family, and enteredupon his profession with increased profitand rc-pu Union. At this period, hiseldest daughter, then only eight years ofage, obtained great notice in the musicalworld by her astonishing performanceson the harpsichord. He soon after composedseveral much admired concertos ;and, in 1766, he brought out, at DruryLane Theatre, a new musical entertainment,entitled The Cunning Man. Theplay was a translation, by himself, fromRousseau's David du Village ; but failedon representation, notwithstanding theacknowledged merit both of the playand the music. In 1769, the Universityof Oxford conferred upon him the degreesof bachelor and doctor of music ;on which occasion he performed anexercise, consisting of an anthem ofconsiderable length, with an overture,solos, recitatives, and chorusses; whichwas looked upon as so excellent a composition,that it was, for several years,performed at the Oxford music meetings,as well as at St. Catherine'sChurch, Hamburgh, under the directionof the celebrated Emanuel Bach. In1770, with a view of procuring materialsfor his History of Music, he visitedFrance and Italy ; and, on his return toEngland, in the following year, he publishedan account of his tour, under thetitle of A Musical Tour, or PresentState of Music in France and Italy.This was professedly adopted, as amodel, by Dr. Johnson, in his accountof his tour through the Hebrides; inspeaking of which, he says, " I had thatclever dog, Burney's, Musical Tour inmy eye." In July, 1772, he made thetour of Germany and the Netherlands,of which he published an interestingaccount, in two volumes, octavo : a work,says Parke, which " gave birth to thewhimsical burlesque of it by Joel Collier.Both, however, were well receivedby the public." In 1773, he was madea fellow of the Royal Society ; and, in1776, he published the first volume ofhis General History of Music, in quarto;the year in which Sir John Hawkins'swork on the same subject appeared,complete. A comparison was madebetween the two, in favour of Dr. Burney'shistory, which gave rise to theCOMPOSERS.following lines by a versifier, whom awriter in The Harmonicon dignifies bythe name of a wag.Have you read Sir John Hawkins's History .'Some folks think it quite a mystery;Both I have, and I aver,That Burney's History I prefer."These were set to music, as a catch, byDr. Alcott, and generated the miserablepun of Burn His History, which is saidto have been in every body's mouth ;and had a very fatal influence on thereputation of Sir John's History. Dr.Burney's work extended to four" quartovolumes, the last of which was not completeduntil 1789. In this year, he wasappointed organist of Chelsea College,where he died, in the height of a well-meritedreputation, on the 12th ofApril, 1814.Dr. Burney was exemplary in all therelations of life; and his manners weresaid to possess all the graces of the Chesterfieldschool, without any of its formality,or vicious alloy of moral andreligious laxity. He was intimately acquaintedwith all the great charactersthat flourished in his day, both Englishand foreign. As a composer, his meritsand claims are unquestionably high ;but it is as the historian of music, thathis name is chiefly celebrated. It has,however, been a question with some,whether his history ought to take suchhigh ground, when ranged by the sideof his less popular labourer in the samevineyard, Sir John Hawkins. " Betweenthe two rival histories," saysone of his biographers, " the publicdecision was loud and immediate infavour of Dr. Burney. Time has modifiedthis opinion, and brought themerits of each work to their fair andproper level, adjudging to Burney thepalm of style, arrangement, and amusingnarrative, and to Hawkins the credit ofminuter accuracy and deeper research ;more particularly the parts interestingto the antiquary, and the literary worldin general." The literary labours ofDr. Burney, besides those already mentioned,are : an account of Dr. Crotch,when a youth, published in The PhilosophicalTransactions; the commemorationof Handel, with a life of thatcomposer; and the life of Metastasio,with whom he had become very intimatewhilst in Italy. He also wrote anessay towards the history of concerts, aplan of a musical school, and the wholeof the musical articles in Rees's Encyclopaedia,with the exception of those of aphilosophical and mathematical character.Amongst his musical compositionsare, sonatas for two violins and abass, in two parts; six concert pieces,with introduction and fugue for theorgan ; a cantata and song ; six duetsfor two German flutes; twelve cantosa due voce in canons, poesia dell'Abate Metastasio ; six concertos forviolin, &c., in eight parts ; two sonatasfor piano-forte, violin, and violoncello ;six harpsichord lessons ; a sonata a troismains ; two or three anthems ; and, accordingto Parke, La Musica che sicant annual mente nelly funzioni dellasetting santa, nulla Capella Pontifical ;Composite dal Palestrina, Allegro e BaiRacolta. Dr. Burney, who was twicemarried, was the father of the late Rear-admiralBarnes Burney, Dr. CharlesBurney, and the celebrated MadameD'Arblay, the authoress of Evening, &c.WILLIAM JACKSON.WILLIAM JACKSON, commonlycalled Jackson of Exeter, was the sonof a grocer in that city, and born thereinMay, 1730. Having early discovereda taste for music, he was placed, firstunder the principal organist of iii nativecity, and afterwards under T ravers, thecomposer; no small portion of whosespirit he is said to have imbibed. Herose rapidly into notice; and united inhimself, at an early period, the pursuitof the three sister arts, music, painting,and poetry ; but his fame undoubtedlyrests on his musical compositions alone.In 1755, he published a collection oftwelve songs, which immediately becamepopular throughout the kingdom.They were followed by his six sonatasfor the harpsichord, and six elegies, inthree parts, preceded by aii invocation,WILLIAM JACKSON,says Dr. Burney, " affording such satisfactoryproofs of his taste, feeling, andjudgment, as completely established hisreputation, and ranked him amongstthe first musical composers of his time."His succeeding publications were: ananthem, and music to the celebratedode of Pope, the Dying Christian to hisSoul; a book of twelve hymns, in twoparts, and also adapted for a singlevoice ; a second and third collection oftwelve songs ; an Ode to Fancy ; eightsonatas for the harpsichord, and twenty-fourcanzonettes. He also composedthe music of The Lord of the Manor,performed at Drury Lane in 1781 ; andis supposed to have been author of bothwords and music of the comic opera, producedat the same theatre in the followingyear, entitled The Metamorphosis;and of the dramatic piece, Lycidas,performed at Covent Garden in 1767,intended as a dirge on the death of theDuke of York. He became known asan author, in 1782, by the publicationof his Thirty Letters on various Subjects,in two volumes ; consisting, principally,of essays on the belles lettres,in which he evinced much good tasteand learning. In 1791 appeared hisTreatise on the Present State of Music ;and, in 1798, he surprised the literaryworld with his Four Ages, togetherwith essays on various subjects. Towardsthe latter course of his career, heweakened his constitution by too greatan abstinence from animal food; and,finally, brought on a dropsy, whichterminated his life on the 12th of July,1803. He had been organist of ExeterCathedral for twenty-six years, and lefta widow, and two sons and a daughter.As a composer, he ranks high ; thoughhis fame, in a great measure, may b<great measure, may besaid to be founded on his judgment ofselection with regard to poetry. " Hispeculiar forte," says a writer in Rees'sCyclopaedia, " consisted in giving anelegant and plaintive melody to elegiacpoetry. In constituting harmony, withoutrendering the middle parts destituteof melody, Jackson stands unrivalled.This is no trivial praise, when it isknown that, before his time, composerswere, and are at present, very defectivein this part of their art. It was, however,a defect in Jackson's music, thathis melody would suit any species ofplaintive lines : few of his compositionsdisplayed the art of mingling expressionwith melody, and preserving the latterin its purity." The same writer, inspeaking of his character, charges himwith selfishness and arrogance, and aninsatiable rage for superiority." Dr.Burney, who spoke highly of Jackson'svocal compositions, upon the whole,considers his accompaniments too inartificial,and his melodies not sufficientlyfree from mechanical quaintness andrustic inelegance; whilst another authority,cited by The Harmonicon, callshis style both exquisitely refined andexquisitely simple; and, not inaptly,terms him the Whetstone of music.Besides the works already named,Jackson contributed some of the papersin the essays of the celebrated ExeterSociety.Jackson is said to have been a painteras well as a musician ; and to have producedstriking effects in landscape, byhis study of strong and partial lights.THOMAS LINLEY.THIS distinguished musician andcomposer was the son of a carpenter at,or in the neighbourhood of, Bath, wherehe was born about the year 1735. Hewas apprenticed to his father; butbeing, one day, at work at Dodington,in Gloucestershire, the seat of the Dukeof Beaufort, he was overheard to singby Mr. Chilcot, the organist of Bath;who was so much delighted with hisvoice, that he prevailed with youngLinley's father to allow him to studymusic. His capacity and zeal equalledthe highest anticipations of Mr. Chilcot;and, after he had gone through a seriesof practical and theoretical studies,which he completed under Parodies, aVenetian composer of great celebrity,he was, in a short time, considered oneof the most celebrated and talentedCOMPOSERS.professors in Bath. He was conductorof the oratorios and concerts then regularlyperformed there ; and was oneof the chief supporters of the famousBath concerts, of which the late venerableDr. Harrington was the founder.His taste and style were peculiarlyhis own ; but modelled on the principlesof the pure English school.His connexion with Sheridan, whomarried his daughter, induced him toembark in theatrical speculations : hepurchased, in 1776, in conjunction withhis son-in-law and Mr. Ford, Garrick'sshare in Drury Lane Theatre,for 35,000. He had previously madehimself favourably known to the publicas a joint composer, with his son, of thesongs in Sheridan's Duenna. He commencedhis career at Drury LaneTheatre, by the successful productionof a musical piece, in two acts, entitledSelim and Azote, in which the song,No Flower that blows, was rapturouslyapplauded.On the 8th of November, 1777, heproduced his accompaniments to theoriginal airs in The Beggar's Opera;which have been justly eulogised bothby foreign and native composers. Hissubsequent compositions were the musicof The Camp, The Spanish Rivals,The Strangers at Home, and part ofthe music to Sheridan's monody on thedeath of Garrick. He also publishedseveral ballads, full of pathos, spirit,and originality ; particularly that commencing," Sing of the Days that aregone." Mr. Linley's family afflictionswere unusually severe ; and, after havinglost two sons and a daughter, undervery distressing circumstances, he wasseldom, it is said, if ever, seen to smile.He died, universally respected, at hishouse in Southampton Street, CoventGarden, on the 19th of November, 1795 ;and was buried in the cathedral ofWells. He was survived by two sons:Mr. William Linley, favourably knownto the public by some of his compositions,and the Rev. Mr. O. Linley.As a musician, the subject of ouimemoir is distinguished by taste andfeeling. " He did not," says one of hisbiographers, " seek to astonish by sublimeeffects ; but his compositions alwayssoothe and charm by delicacy, simplicity,and tenderness." Linley has also themerit of having restored the music ofHandel, and the performance of it, tothe notice of the public, as Garrickrestored the plays of Shakspeare.Besides the pieces already named, heatdifferent times, published severalglees, canzonets, &c. ; and an anthem,in the key of D major, Bow downthine ear, which is inserted in Page'sHarmonia Sacra.GARRET WELLESLEY, EARL OF Warrington.THIS nobleman, son of Richard Col-leyWellesley, Baron Mornington, wasborn in Ireland, on the 19th of July,1735. He shewed, from his infancy, astrong predilection for music ; his earlycareer, indeed, as recorded in a volumeof miscellanies, in 1781, by the HonourableDaines Barrington, displays aperseverance and intellectual precocity,on a par with that of a Mozart, an Arne,or a Crotch. " His father," says Mr.Barrington, " played well, for a gentleman,on the violin ; which always delightedthe child while in his nurse'sarms, and long before he could speak.Nor did tins proceed from a love commonto other children, of a sprightlynoise ; as may appear by the followinganecdote. Dubourg, who was, thirtyyears ago, a distinguished player onthat instrument, happened to be at thefamily seat; but the child would notpermit him to take the instrument fromhis father, till his little hands were held.After having heard Dubourg, however,the case was altered; and there wasmuch more difficulty to persuade himto let Dubourg give back the instrumentto his father : nor would the infantever afterwards permit the father toplay whilst Dubourg was in the house."At the same period he beat time to allmeasures of music; but it was not tillhis ninth year, that he attempted toplay on any instrument. An old portraitpainter, who came at this time toEARL OF Warrington,the family seat, gave him some instructionon the violin ; and so rapidwas his improvement, that in a shorttime he was able to take part withhis father and the painter in a concertHe next learned to play the secondviolin, in Corelli's sonatas ; and thusacquired a steadiness in time that neverdeserted him. Soon afterwards hecommenced composer, " from emulation,"says Mr. Harrington, " of theapplause given to a country dancemade by a neighbouring clergyman.He accordingly set to work ; and, byplaying a treble on the violin, whilst hesung a bass tc it, he formed a minuet,the bass of which he wrote in the trebleclef, and was very profuse of his fifthsand octaves ; being totally ignorant ofthe established rules of composition.This minuet was followed by a duet fortwo French horns, whilst the piececoncluded by an andante movement ;thus consisting of three parts, all ofwhich being tacked together, he calleda serenata. At this time he had neverheard any music but from his father,sisters, and the old painter."The violin continued to occupy himchiefly till his fourteenth year, althoughhe had always a strong partiality forthe harpsichord; and contrived to stealintervals of practice, in spite of hissisters' assertions that he only spoiledthe instrument. His father, about thistime, declaring his intention of havingan organ for his chapel, the subject ofour memoir undertook to be ready toofficiate as organist the moment the instrumentshould be finished. This wasaccomplished in less than a year and ahalf; and, at the expiration of thatperiod he sat down at the maker's,and played an extempore fugue, tothe astonishment of all present, whodid not imagine that he could haveexecuted a bar of a single tune. " Itis well known," continues Mr. Barrington," that this instrument is morelikely to form a composer than anyother ; and his lordship, in process oftime, committed his ideas to writing.As he had, however, never received theleast instruction in the abstruse, thoughpleasing science, he wished to consultboth Kosengrave and Gemminiani ; who,on examining his compositions, told himthat they could not he of the leastservice to him, as he had himself investigatedall the established rules, withtheir proper exceptions."Another proof of his original talentwas, his preference of church music,and full harmony, to simple melodies ;as also for the minor third, in which hemade his first composition. As he advancedin life, his musical abilities weremore fully developed; and procuredhim, from the university of Dublin, thedegree of doctor and professor of music.He succeeded to the title of BaronMornington, on the death of his father,on the 31st of January, 1758; and, onthe 2nd of October, 1760, he was advancedto the dignities of Viscount Wellesleyand Earl of Mornington. Hedied at Kensington, on the 22nd of May,1781, and was succeeded in his titleand estates by his eldest son, Richard,the present Marquess of Wellesley. Hislordship had several other sons, one ofwhom is the present Duke of Wellington.As a composer, the Earl of Morningtonexcelled chiefly in the glee style ;that beginning, Here, in cool Grot,gained the gold medal given by theCatch Club, in 1779; and has beenjustly described as a work of real genius; a master-piece: not hammeredout, bar by bar, on the piano-forte ; butcomplete in its design, and only reducedto notation after it had been perfectedin the mind. His other most admiredproductions are : When, for the World'sRepose ; glee for four voices, Gentlyhear me, charming Maid ; Come, fairestNymph ; By Greenwood Tree ; glees,the two first for three, and the last forfour voices; and the catch, for threevoices, 'Twas you, Sir. In The Harmonic,for 1830, is also published one ofhis glees for five voices, O, Bird of Eve,which is also one of a collection of sixglees, selected from manuscripts in thepossession of the Catch Club. It is ashort, elegant effusion; and, like thepublication of which it forms a part, isless known to the musical world thanit deserves to be. Several other pieces,by his lordship, worthy of especialnotice, are preserved in Warren's collection; others have been circulated,equally worthy of preservation ; and allmay be, with justice, classed with ournational music.The Earl of Mornington, who married,in 1759, the eldest daughter of meL>;>OCOMPOSERS.first Viscount Dunganuon, had issuesix sons and three daughters ; and itis singular that his grand-daughter,Priscilla Anne (now Lady Burghers),is one of the best musicians that thelarge circle of amateurs (among thefemale portion of them, at least) of ourday can boast.JONATHAN BATTISHILL.JONATHAN BATTISHILL,poser of the popular song of Kate ofAberdeen, and many of our best glees,catches, anthems, &c., was the son ofan attorney, and was born in 1738,probably in London. He had shownso much taste for music at the age ofnine, that his father was induced toplace him in the choir of St. Paul's,where he was instructed in singing bythe master of the boys, Mr. Savage, towhom he was afterwards regularlyarticled, and, as his apprentice, prosecutedhis studies with uncommondiligence. " His anxious spirit of research,"says the author of Public Characters,whose words are cited by severalwriters of biography, "combined withconstant practice on'the organ, at oncestored his mind with those riches ofharmonic combination and evolution onwhich he formed his style, and gavehim a command of hand adequate tothe execution of whatever his imaginationsuggested ; and, at the expirationof his engagement with Mr. Savage, hewas considered one of the best extemporeperformers on the organ whichthis country could boast." He had notbeen long his own master before he wassolicited to compose for Sadler's Wells,then a theatre of some musical notoriety,and where several of Battishill'sbest ballads were sung. He was thenengaged to preside at the harpsichordat Covent Garden Theatre; and, notlong afterwards, he was appointedorganist of the joint parishes of St.Clement's, East Cheap, and St Martin's,Ongar ; and, subsequently, ofChristchurch, Newgate Street.In 1764, the opera of Alcmena, whichwas composed by Battishill, in conjunctionwith Michael Arne, was performedat Drury Lane. It was only acted forfive nights, in consequence of thepoverty of the play itself; but the musicwas well received, and some of thechorusses, for science, dignity, and expression,deserve to be classed with thefirst-rate productions of that period.Battishill, shortly after, produced hismusical drama, The Rites of Hecate, inwhich he gave additional proofs of hisskill as a composer. During this time,notwithstanding his engagement at thetheatre, and his numerous pupils, hecomposed anthems and hymns, catchesand glees; and it was for one of the latterclass, the well-known glee for threevoices, Underneath this Myrtle Shade,that the nobleman's Catch Club, in 1770,awarded their gold medal, as the bestcheerful glee. He had, soon after hisengagement at Covent Garden Theatre,married one of the vocal performersthere, a Miss Davies; after whose death,in 1775, he took to dissipating much ofhis time in convivial parties, and so fargave way to excess, as gradually to underminehis constitution. In 1776, hepublished, by subscription, two excellentcollections of three and four partsongs. He died at Islington, in 1801,and was, at his own request, buriednear Dr. Boyce, in the vaults of St.Paul's Cathedral.Battishill was a composer of greatpower and originality, and one of thegreatest extemporary organ players tin'scountry could boast. His memory wassuch, that even the longest compositionsof Handel, Corelli, or Arne, werealways sufficiently present to his recollection,during the time he was playingthem, as to render the presence of thetext unnecessary. Battisliill's compositionsare characterized by a peculiarstrength of idea, great force and justnessexpression, a masterly disposition,and a happy contrivance in the parts.Four of his anthems Call to Remembrance; How long wilt Thou forget me,O Lord? I will magnify Thee, O Lord ;and, Deliver us, O Lord our God, areprinted in Mr. Page's Harmonia Sacra.SAMUEL Webb.He also left, in manuscript, six anthems,several psalm tunes, and some glees,rondos, and songs. Most of his songsare energetic and vigorous ; this, inparticular, is the characteristic of thetwo bass songs, Poised "in Heaven'seternal Scale, and Thus when youngAmmon marched along. As proofs ofthe beauty and originality of his fancyin ballad composition, every one willadmit the charming pastoral melodyof Ye Shepherds and Nymphs of theGrove, the mellifluous and affecting airof When Damon languished at my feet,the expressive passages in When Beautyon the Lover's Cheek, and, above all, hiswell-known and justly popular song ofKate of Aberdeen.SAMUEL Webb.SAMUEL Webb, the son of agentleman who held an official appointmentat Minorca, was born in 1740.He lost his father whilst yet an infant;and, being left in such circumstances asprecluded his being educated for anyprofession, was, at the age of eleven,apprenticed to a carpenter. He washimself, however, so averse to trade,that, upon the death of his mother,about a year after, he quitted his employment,and obtained a support bycopying music; to which, notwithstandinghis ignorance of it as a science,he was very much attached. Whilstthus occupied, he became known to aGerman professor, of the name of Bar-band,organist of the Bavarian Chapel,in London, from whom he acquired therudiments of the art; which he studiedwith such diligence and zeal, that hewas soon qualified both to teach and tocompose. As a glee composer, he wasparticularly successful ; and, after theestablishment of the Glee Club, scarcelya year passed without his receiving one,and sometimes two, of their medals.Among other performances, to whichthis distinction was so justly awarded,we may mention those acknowledgedgems of British composition, Breathesoft, ye Winds, Discord, Dire Sisters,Glorious Apollo, &c.The literary acquirements of Webbewere scarcely inferior to those whichhe displayed as a teacher and composer ;for his professional engagements, numerousas they were, did not preventhim from attaining a knowledge ofseveral languages, both ancient andmodern. He is said to have excelledalso in fencing and dancing; and, indeed,to have been so generally accomplished,as to suggest a comparisonwith the admirable Crichton. Towardsthe latter part of his life, his infirmitiesobliged him to give up all musicalcomposition ; and he chiefly amusedhimself, with a friend, at the chessboard.He died on the 26th of May,1816, in the seventy-sixth year of hisage, at his chambers in Gray's Inn;having, according to his biographer, inThe Gentleman's Magazine, affordedone of the most extraordinary instancesof a life well-spent, in the genuinesense of the expression. As a musicalcomposer, he is characterized by taste,simplicity, and feeling, in his songs ;whilst his glees, for precision of harmonyand beauty of effect, have seldom beensurpassed. Upon the whole, perhaps,he is entitled to rank with Locke,Purcell, and Arne. His church musicis highly esteemed in this country ; andfew of our cathedrals are strangers tohis anthems. His operas, though notdeficient in merit, have not done muchtowards his reputation.His glees and part songs, which havebeen collected and published, in threevolumes, amount to no less than ahundred and seven compositions. Thosewhich have essentially contributed tohis fame, are the glees, As o'er the variedMeads; Arise, ye Winds; Aroundthe festive Board ; Alas ! how vain ! Belinda'ssparkling Wit ; Bacchus, Jove'sdelighting Boy; Balmy Zephyrs; Bidme, when forty Winters; Come, rosyHealth; Come, push round; DivineCecilia; Hither, all ye lovers; Hail,happy Meeting ; Hence, all ye vainDelights; Hail, Music; I'll enjoy thepresent Time; Live to-day; Music isthe Language; Me, Bacchus fires,' MyCOMPOSE RS,fair is beautiful ; In care and sorrow ;Now I'm prepared ; O, Night ! O, Love !On his Death-bed; O come, Bella;Pretty Warbler; Quand io bevo ; Rise,my joy ; Sister of Phoebus ; Seek not todraw me ; Surely, that's the charmingMaid ; Since I'm born a mortal Man ;So full of Life ; Swiftly from the Mountain'sBrow; Sweet Bird; To me thewanton Girls ; Thy Voice, O Harmony ;The Spring; To the festive Board;There behold the mighty Bowl; Whenshall \ve Three meet again? Who canbe happy? Where'er my Delia comes ;Wine gives the Lover vigour; and manymore, too numerous to mention.JO AH BATES.Joan BATES, the son of the parishclerk of Halifax, in Yorkshire, was bornthere in 1740, and received the rudimentsof education at the grammarschool, under Dr. Samuel Ogden, afterwardsan eminent divine and professorat Cambridge. At Halifax he was alsotaught the rudiments of the science ofmusic; but it was at the collegiatechurch of Manchester, he used to say,that he received the first notion of thatgrand style of organ playing, for whichhe was so remarkable, from hearingold Wainwright. Whilst at Manchester,he pursued his scholastic studies underMr. Powell ; but, at the same time, acquiredsuch proficiency in playing, thathe was able to take the place, occasionally,of the organist at Rochdale.He was next placed on the foundation,at Eton, where scholars not being allowedthe use of musical instruments,he daily practised upon imaginary keys,on his table ; till one of the undermasters, learning his great ability, allowedhim to practise upon his harpsichord,and procured him the use, duringhis leisure hours, of the college organ.He was, in due time, elected to King'sCollege, of which he became a fellow ;and obtained, in the first year of hisresidence in the university, (1760,) thesecond Craven scholarship, always considereda test of superior classical ability.He graduated B.A. in 1764, and M.A.in 1767; and, about the same time,was appointed tutor of his college. Oneof his private pupils was the Earl ofSandwich, then the Right Hon. W. A.Montagu ; who, on his becoming firstlord of the Admiralty, induced Bates toresign both his fellowship and tutorship,and take up his residence with him, inLondon, as hi* private secretary. Aslong, however, as he remained at Cambridge,he was the Coryphaeus at allconcerts, whether public or private ;and was one of the quarter of dilettantemusicians, who at that time graced thehalls of Cambridge. It was abo duringhis residence in the university, that,on the erection of an organ in hisnative town, he proceeded thither toget up, for the first public display of itssower, the oratorio of The Messiah,n this arduous undertaking he hadthe aid of the Hew. John Allots, ofBirkheaton, who had trained up thecountry people in his parish to singchorusses in a very superior manner ;whilst Bates so successfully exertedhimself in qualifying the singers ofHalifax, that The Messiah was universallyacknowledged, by the best judges,never to have been before so well performed.Upon this occasion, he becameacquainted with the celebrated astronomer.Herschel, who played first violin;being, at the time, master of the bandof a regiment quartered in Halifax.During his residence with LordSandwich, Bates became the vocal instructorof the unfortunate Miss Ray,who was shot by her lover, Hackman, oncomingout of Covent Garden Theatre ;and, from his patron's seat at Hatchingproceeded to Leicester, to presideat a music meeting, on the openingof a new organ ; his lordship takingthe double drums. It was upon thisoccasion that he wrote his ode, Hereshall soft Charity repair, which was setto music by Dr. Boyce, and has eversince been performed with applauseat all the principal music meetings. Thesuccess of this undertaking, it is said,inspired Mr. Bates with the idea ofrescuing the old masters' compositionsJO A H BA FES.from oblivion, by having them occasionallyperformed by a numerous andwell-selected band of vocal and instrumentalperformers. With this view,having obtained the highest patronagein the kingdom, he founded, in Street, the now nourishingConcert of Ancient Music. Its celebritywas such, that the royal family soonbecame constant attendants; and Georgethe Third expressed his approbation ofthe performances, by procuring forBates the appointment of commissionerof the Victualling Office. He soonafter married his celebrated pupil, MissHarrow ; and took up his residence atthe office, on Tower Hill. Here heplanned that stupendous musical performance,The Commemoration of Handel,which took place in WestminsterAbbey and the Pantheon, in 1784, underthe sole conduct of the subject of ourmemoir. The manner in which he acquittedhimself raised him to the highestpitch of popularity with all lovers oflegitimate music ; and, at the desire ofthe king, he was promoted from theVictualling Office to a seat at the Boardof Customs.Having, in his former official capacity,noticed the difficulty under which themetropolis laboured, for want of asufficient supply of flour, he, to obviateit, projected the plan of the Albionmills. Of this scheme he was so sanguine,that he invested the whole ofhis own and his wife's fortune, about.10,000, as part of the company's capital; and carried his confidence so far,as to become pledged for a large portionof the stock in hand. The whole,however, was wilfully destroyed, togetherwith the mills, by fire, in 1791.His own deprivations he bore with greatfortitude and resignation ; but the" circumstanceof his having involved hiswife in his ruin, by risking the profitsof her professional career, without herknowledge, as it is said, so preyed uponhis mind, that it produced a complaintin the chest, of which he died on the8th of June, 1799. He was survived byone son, and his wife, " whose seraphicvoice, and disposition for music," heused to say, " rendered her one of themost enchanting singers this, or perhapsany other, country ever produced."Mr. Bates," says a writer in TheHarmonicon, " owed his deserved reputationas a conductor, chiefly to hi*great knowledge of music, .and his enthusiasticlove of the art; though therespect which his education, his commandingmanners, station in society,and acknowledged judgment, obtainedfrom the members of the orchestra,contributed their full share to his success.He suffered no rival near histhrone : no leader disputed with himthe time of a composition : no singercontended with him the right of choice:he was absolute ; and no one is fit tomanage a concert, or any other publicperformance, who does not act uponthe sic volo, sic jubeo principle. 1 hisdoes not preclude the suavity in modo ;but, on the contrary, renders it indispensablynecessary ; and herein Mr.Bates was never deficient. His mannerswere as courteous as his determinationwas fixed ; and to his variousqualifications, transmitted, in a degree,to his successor, the late Mr. Greatorex,are we indebted, not only for the highlycorrect manner in which," what is termedancient music, has been performed inthis country, for a period that nowconsiderably exceeds hal ' a century,but for its very preservation, at a timewhen it was utterly nell. acted, and hadalmost sunk into oblivion in everyother part of Europe."SAMUEL ARNOLD.I HIS celebrated composer, the sonof Baron Arnold, was born about 1740,and received his musical education inthe King's Chapel, under Mr. Gates,and Dr. Nares. He gave early promiseof those superior talents which heafterwards displayed ; and first excitedpublic attention by the production of thelively air, Jf 'tis joy to wound a Lover.Before he was twenty-three, he "asengaged by Mr. Beard, one of themanagers of Covent Garden Theatre,COMPOSERS.as composer to that establishment, forwhich he set to music the comic operaof The Maid of the Mill, in 1765; theopera of Rosamond, in 1767 ; and theburnett, called The Portrait, in 1770.He had, early in life, enjoyed both thenotice and advice of Handel, and havingimbibed from* him a taste for sacredmusic, he made choice of Dr. Browne'ssacred ode, The Curse of Saul, as thesubject of his first effort. He completedit in such a manner, as greatly toaugment his fame ; and this ode wasgenerally allowed to be the best ofits kind composed since the time ofHandel. He generously presented itto the society instituted for the benefitof decayed musicians and theirfamilies ; " to whom," says Dr. Burney,it proved a valuable acquisition." Thusencouraged, he pursued this high branchof his art, and produced the successiveoratorios, Abimelech, The Resurrection,and The Prodigal Son ; which wereperformed during several successiveLents, under his own management, atthe oratorios of the Theatres RoyalCovent Garden and Haymarket Thelast was selected to be performed at theinstallation of Lord North, as Chancellorof the University of Oxford, onwhich occasion, he was offered a publichonorary degree ; but he preferred obtainingit in the customary mode, andhe accordingly received it in the schoolroom,where he performed as an exerciseHughes'spoem on the Power of Music.On such occasions, the professor of music'sduty is to examine the exercises ofcandidates for degrees; but Dr. Hayes,then musical professor at Oxford, returnedhim his score unopened, observing," Sir, it is quite unnecessary toscrutinize the exercise of the author ofThe Prodigal Son."In 1769, he purchased the Mary-le-boneGardens, then a place of fashionableresort, where he produced several excellentburlettas, which were performedby the vocal favourites of the day.The enterprise, however, proved almostruinous to him ; for, in addition to theplace declining in attraction, a person inhis confidence absconded with a largesum of money, and he retired from theconcern a loser to the amount of littleless than 10,000. In 1776, however,he was engaged as composer at theHaymarket, tor which theatre, he, formany years, composed the chief musicalpieces.In 1782, he produced at CoventGarden the celebrated comic opera ofThe Castle of Andalusia, which continuesto keep possession of the stagewith its original popularity. In 1783,on the death of his preceptor, Dr.Nares, he succeeded him in the officeof organist and composer to the king ;and in the same year, he officiated asasub-director of the famous Commemorationof Handel. In 1786, heprojected a plan for publishing an uniformedition of the works of that greatcomposer; an undertaking, in whichhe was encouraged by George theThird, who took twenty-five copies.He proceeded with it till he had completedabout thirty-eight volumes ; andthough it is not totally free from errata,remains as a lasting memorial of hisspirit and judgment. He, about thesame time, published four large volumesof cathedral music, as a continuation ofthe work of Dr. Boyce; three of themin score for the voice, and one for theorgan.On the death of Mr. Stanley, thefamous blind organist, he joined thecelebrated Dr. Linley, in carrying onoratorios at Drury Lane, for which headapted the two very fine and effectiveoratorios, The Redemption, and TheTriumph of Truth : "the last entirelyfrom Handel. He was chosen managerof the concerts of the Academy of AncientMusic, in 1789 ; and on the deceaseof Dr. Cooke, in 1793, he was requestedby the dean, Dr. Horsley, Bishop ofRochester, to become the doctor's successor,as organist of WestminsterAbbey ; when, he declaring his inabilityto accept the situation, in consequenceof his numerous avocations, it was stillpressed upon him, with the allowance ofa deputy whenever he could not attend.In 1792, he was likewise solicited toconduct the annual performances forthe benefit of the Sons of the Clergy, atSt. Paul's, with which he immediatelycomplied, and continued to give his assistanceto that charity till his decease,which took place on the 22nd of October,1802 ; leaving a widow, a son, andtwo daughters. He was buried in WestminsterAbbey ; the choirs of St. Paul's,Westminster," and the Chapel Royal,attending his funeral, and an anthemSAMUEL ARNOLD.being composed for the occasion, by hisfriend, Dr. Alcott.Dr. Arnold is described as havingpossessed many qualities which entitledhim to esteem, besides his excellenceas a-composer: he was of a liberal andbenevolent disposition ; sociable andamiable in society ; and a zealous andsincere friend. Speaking of his abilitiesas a musical composer, Dr. Burneyobserves : " the public approbation hasanticipated the tribute of applause,which the biographer might be disposedto pay his memory. His oratorios arenot unworthy of the disciple of sogreat a master as Handel ; and such wasthe versatility of his talents, that he notonly acquitted himself with high creditin those solemn and august subjectswhich relate to our religious duties, butinthose tender, playful, and humorouscompositions, which belong to the bestof our public amusements." Accordingto a writer in The Harmonicon, Dr. Arnoldpossessed a strong turn for humour,and during the earlier part of the FrenchRevolution, with a view to aid in stemmingthe current of popular opinionin England, is supposed to have contributedseveral jeux-d 1 esprit to a highTory newspaper of that day. The musicalservices of St. Paul's Cathedralhaving been suspended, about forty-fiveyears ago, on account of a certain indisposition,which attacked the choristers,he is said to have written thefollowing epigram, which appeared inThe Whitehall Evening Post :The church shut up I the organ mute 'Who shall explain this riddle .'Now, minor canons, play the flute ;Now, boys, play the Scotch-fiddle.Having once called on that celebratedmusician, Dr. Arnold," says Parke,at his house in Duke Street,Westmin-step, our conversation was interruptedby the arrival of Mr. A the organ-builder,a man of irregular habits, whocame on business. ' How do you do,Mr A ?' said the doctor. 'Verywell, I thank you, doctor,' replied theorgan-builder. ' And how do you get onnow?" added the doctor. 'Oh!' saidMr. A , ' very well ; I work hard allday, and go to bed happy at night.'Ay,' said the doctor, ' we can all go tobed happy ; but the test is how we arisein the morning ?' "Dr. Arnold composed the music of avariety of farces, operas, pantomimes,burlettas, &c., in addition to those alreadymentioned, besides a very fineoratorio called The Shunamite Woman,and four sets of Vauxhall songs inscore, the melodies of which are singularlysweet, and the accompanimentsmarked by a thorough acquaintancewith the character and powers of thevarious instruments.CHARLES DTBDIN.THIS celebrated actor and methodistwas the son of a respectable silversmith,at Southampton, where he wasborn, about the year 1747. Being intendedfor the church, he was placedon the foundation of Winchester School ;but music took such complete possessionof his mind, that, as a boy, he wouldattend to little else. He was for sometime,a chorister in the cathedral ofWinchester, where he was taught thegamut, and five or six common tunes,by Mr. Russel, the organist of thechurch ; but, in every other respect, hewas his own instructor. When onlyfourteen years of age, he offered himselfas candidate tor the situation oforganist of Bishop's Waltham, Hands,and was only rejected on account of hisyouth. Shortly afterwards, his elderbrother, a captain of an East Indiamen,pressingly invited him to make a trialof his powers in London, whither heaccordingly proceeded, and, for sometime,earned the means of support, bycomposing ballads for the music-sellers,and giving lessons on the piano. Disliking,however, the confinement whichthis occupation occasioned him, heturned actor, and in the summer of1762, made his debut on the boards ofthe Richmond Theatre. The followingyear he performed at Birmingham ;whence he returned to London, anilC O M P O S K It S .was engaged at Covent Garden Theatreas a singer; in which character, thefollowing accidental circumstance soonbrought him into repute. It happened,that the part of Ralph, in The Maidof the Mill, having been refused byevery other comedian, was offered tohim, as a dernier ressort, but withoutany sanguine hope that he would beable to do justice to it. The naturalforce of his character, however, and thegreat simplicity with which he wentthrough the part, at once recommendedhim to public notice, and he was receivedwith great approbation. Still,he was not in his element ; he dislikedthe profession of an actor, and his chiefdelight was in composition. He wassoon after invited to write somethingfor Covent Garden, under the managementof Mr. Beard, with a promise thatit should be brought out for his benefit ;and he, in consequence, produced apastoral, called The Shepherd's Artifice,which was performed during theseason of 1763-4, and was well received.About five years afterwardshe composed the overture, first chorus,and the finales of the first and secondacts, as well as three of the songs, inthe operatic farce of Love in the City,since altered into The Romp. His nextcomposition was the principal part ofthe music of Lionel and Clarissa; and ayear or two afterwards, he furnishedthe entire music of 1 he Padlock; thesuccess of which pieces fully establishedhis fame as a dramatic composer. Thelist was brought out at Drury Lane,under the management of Garrick, in1768; Dibdin himself playing the partof Mungo with astonishing success.He afterwards composed the music toseveral pieces for the same theatre, thenames of which are now almost whollyforgotten. The Jubilee was the mostpopular, being performed ninety-threenights in the season.He next undertook the joint charactersof author and composer, andsuccessively produced The Deserter, in1772; The Waterman, in 1774; andThe Quaker, in 1775 ; all of whichare still popular. Amongst the greatnumber of pieces, however, which heproduced about this period, there weremany which did not even rencli mediocrity',A quarrel with Garrick inducedhim to q;iit Drury Lane, and shortlyafter he retired from the stage altogether,and entertained the public witha sort of monopolylogue, in which he introducedhis own songs, accompanyinghimself on the piano-forte. He waseminently successful, both in the metropolisand the provincial towns ; and,but for his improvidence, he might,doubtless, have amassed a handsomefortune. He afterwards introduced, atExeter 'Change, his new species of entertainment,in the form of a musicalpuppet-show, under the name of TheComic Mirror, in which the puppetswere made to personate well-knowncharacters. In the meantime, he wroteand composed a great variety of triflesfor Sadler's Wt-lU ; and, in 1782, hebecame composer and joint managerof the Royal Circus, now the SurreyTheatre. The profit which this speculationbrought him was considerable,but it was soon dissipated in a law-suitwhich he had with his partner.In 1788, he published a Musical Tourthrough England ; and, shortly afterwards,made arrangements for a voyageto the East Indies, for which countryhe actually set sail, but stress of weatherhaving compelled the ship to anchorin Torbay, and other circumstancesoperating upon him, he landed andreturned to London. Here he againgave entertainments on the plan of hisformer ones, and with such success,that he was induced to build a newtheatre, in Leicester Place, to whichhe gave the name of Sans-souci. Hisperformances were very profitable, buthe continued to dispose of his moneyso speedily, that he must have passedhis latter days in poverty, but for thepension bestowed on him by government.This was only 200 a year,and though sufficient to preserve himfrom want, was far from adequate eitherto his merits or necessities. He diedin emhat passed circumstances, andsuffering from the effects of a disorder,which for some years prevented himfrom performing for himself the mostordinary offices of life, on the 25th ofJuly, 1814.As a composer of theatrical music,Dibdiii is comparatively forgotten, buthis collection of nautical songs, will carrydown his name to posterity, a> long asthe race of British sailors exists. Theymay be said to have infused a newWILLIAM SHIELD.soul into our navy, and by makingour seamen familiar with sentiments ofloyalty and courage, in a manner themost grateful to their feelings, it isnot too much to assert, that they havetended to promote a spirit of subordinationamong them much more effectuallythan the coercion of martial law.The music to which they are set issimple . and appropriate, and withoutbeing scientific or profound, is full ofexpression and natural melody.As an author, Dibdin published,the works before-mentioned,Reminiscences of his own Life; TheBy-stander, a periodical, printed about1787; Hannah, a novel, published in1792; The Younger Brother, in 1793;A History of the Stage, in 1795; ATour through various parts of Englandand Scotland, in 1803; and HenryHooker, a novel, in 1806. The bestedition of his songs was published ashort time ago by Dr. Kitchener. Abust of Dibdin has been erected in thehall of Greenwich Hospital ; he lefttwo sons, Charles and Thomas, both ofsome celebrity as theatrical writers.WILLIAM SHIELD.WILLIAM SHIELD was born in theyear 1754, at Shadwell, in the county ofDurham ; where his father, a singing-master,taught him the rudiments ofhis art. At the age of six, he began topractise on the violin, and afterwardson the harpsichord ; on both of whichinstruments, but particularly the former,he soon became a proficient. His father,however, dying when young Shield wasbut nine, he had the choice of resigninghis divine art for the calling of a barberasailor, or a boat-builder; and, fixingon the latter, he was apprenticed toEdward Davison, of North Shields.His master, however, rather encouragedthan checked his pursuit of his favouritescience, by procuring him the opportunityof playing at the music meetingsof the place, as well as at the parties ofthe principal families. The proficiencyhe thus acquired, and the applause hemet with, determined him to renounceboat-building; and, on the expirationof his apprenticeship, to devote himselfentirely to music. Some instructions inthorough-bass, which he received fromAvison, greatly added to his improvement;and an anthem, which he composedfor the opening of a new churchat Sunderland, extended his musicalreputation all over the neighbourhood.He was invited tc direct the fashionableconcerts at Scarborough ; became leaderat the theatre ; and composed severalsongs, the words of which were writtenby the admired pastoral poet, Cunningham,who was his friend, and one ofthe actors. There, too, he became acquaintedwith the celebrated performers,Borgia and Fischer; and, by their recommendation,was engaged, amongthe second violins, at the Opera, underGiardini. The following season he wasraised, by Cramer, the leader, to therank of first violin ; and held that postfor eighteen years. His first appearanceas a dramatic composer was in1778; when his music of The Flitch ofBacon, was performed with great applause.He soon after accepted the postof composer to Covent Garden Theatre ;which a dispute with the manager,respecting pecuniary matters, inducedhim to relinquish, after he had held itsome years. In 1790, while on a visitat Tallow, he had the good fortune tomake the acquaintance of Haydn ;and he is said to have been heard todeclare, that " he gained more importantinformation in four days' communionwith that founder of a stylewhich has given fame to so manyimitators, than ever he did by the bestdirected studies of any part of his life."In 1791, he set out upon a tourthrough France and Italy ; and on returningto England, in the autumn of1792, renewed his engagement at CoventGarden ; but soon relinquished it.Of the advantages gained from hisItalian tour, he gave no mean proof afew years after, by the publication ofhis excellent Introduction to Harmony;the principal object of which is tofacilitate the acquisition of practicalCOMPOSERS.knowledge in that important branch ofthe science of music, by simplifying itslaws, and divesting it of that forbiddingcomplexity of character, by which manyhave been deterred entering upon thestudy. In the meantime, in 1809, hepublished, by subscription, a volume ofballads, rondos, glees, duets, &c., underthe title of A Cento; which beingthereby confined to a certain circulation,is now but little known. In 1817, inwhich year appeared a second edition ofhis Introduction to Harmony, was alsopublished his Rudiments of ThoroughBass for Young Beginners, &c. ; a workof considerable interest and utility.This year of Shield's life was also memorablefor his succeeding the late SirWilliam Parsons, as master of the bandof musicians in ordinary to the king,which the prince bestowed upon himwithout solicitation; and when theobject of his preference attended at thePavilion, to express his thanks, his royalhighness is said to have interrupted himin the midst of his acknowledgments,by observing, " My dear Shield, theplace is your due ; your merits, independentlyof my regard, entitle youto it." The musical part of the ceremonyof the coronation of George theFourth, was under Shield's superintendence;and he continued in theestimation of his royal patron till hisdeath, which occurred on the 25th ofJanuary, 1829.The private character of Shield washighly amiable and respectable; andhis society was courted by some of themost distinguished characters of hisday. By reading and study, he remediedhis deficiency of education ; thewant of which was never visible in theliterary circles to which he was admitted.He had some peculiarities ; oneof which was a passion for being a goodshot. Being at the house of a friend inthe country, on the 1st of September,he declined rising as early as his host,one of the best shots in the country,but went out with his gun, alone, aboutan hour after breakfast. He had notbeen gone long, before he returnedwith a brace of partridges ; whilst hisfriend, who did not arrive till the evening,had not been able to bag a singlehead of game. Shield beginning torally him on his failure, was requestedto produce the brace he had broughthome; when his friend, finding noshot marks, guessed the fact, that theyhad been purchased ; and exclaimed,with a laugh, " These birds were killedwith silver shot !" It would seem, thathe was also as fond of eating, as he wasambitious of the reputation of killing,game ; for having a partridge placedon his plate, at the table of a friendwhere he was dining, one day, for thepurpose of cutting it up, he devouredthe whole before he was aware of theintention with which it had been handedto him : this was, however, principallyowing to absence of mind.As a composer, Shield is most favourablyknown by his music of Rosin,which still maintains its original popularityon the stage. Rural opera wasthe peculiar sphere for his talents ; andconsidered as the composer of the musicabove-mentioned, and that of The PoorSoldier, Marian, The Farmer, and TheWoodman, he stands perhaps unrivalledin that class of composition. His melodyis at once placid and flowing, fullof pathos and sweetness, and admirablyadapted to the sentiment of his songs.Where deep passion, or boisterousexpression, is required, he is comparativelyunsuccessful; but in theplaintive and tender, he is rivalled byfew. His instrumental music, thoughon a par with most of its class, at thetime it was written, is far inferior tohis vocal; and his finales and concertedpieces are, when compared withthose of the present period, feeble.The operas before mentioned, were hischief performances; but he also composedthe music of Robin Hood, Fontainebleau,The Highland Reel, Lockand Key, and several other actingplays. Among his numerous detachedsongs, which still remain popular, are :A Sigh best expresses the passion ofLove, The Thorn, O bring me Wine,The Wolf, The heaving of the Lead,The Post Captain, Old Tower, andDown the Bourne and through theMead.MUZIO Clement.MUZIO Clement.THIS eminent pianist was born, in1752, at Rome, where his father followedthe occupation of a chaser andembossed of silver vases and figures forthe church service. He received hisearliest lessons in singing from his relative,Buroni; and, at the age of seven,was placed under an organist, of thename of Vorticella, to be instructed inthorough-bass; which he acquired sorapidly, that he passed an examinationat nine, and was admitted to an organist'splace in the Roman capital.He was next placed under Santarelli,considered by the Italians the last greatmaster of the vocal school, and Carping,the deepest contrapuntist of his day, atRome. While studying with the latter,at the age of little more than twelve,he, without his master's knowledge,composed a bass for four voices ; whichwas so much admired by his friends,that Carping desired to hear it ; and,though slow to praise, he could notdeny it his approbation : but observed,had he consulted him, " it might havebeen better." About this time, hisproficiency on the harpsichord attractedthe notice of Mr. Peter Beckford, thenon his travels in Italy ; who prevailedwith his parents to consign the futureeducation of their son to his care.Clementii removed to Mr. Beckford'sseat, in Dorsetshire, where the refinementsof the family led him to otherstudies, besides his favourite one ofmusic; and, it is said, he attaineduncommon proficiency in both theliving and dead languages, and extensivelyacquainted with general literatureand science. Young as he was,he became an economist of his time ;and regularly apportioned to each prearrangedoccupation, its quantum ofpractice or application. The works ofCorelli, Alexandre, Scarlatti, Parodies,and Handel, were the sources fromwhich he derived his musical instruction,and the examples on whichhe formed his taste ; and his successj equalled his zeal and assiduity. Ateighteen, he not only surpassed all hiscontemporaries in execution, taste, andexpression, but had already composedhis celebrated Op : 2, published a yearafterwards, a work entitled, by thecommon consent of all musicians, tothe credit of being the basis on whichthe whole fabric of modern piano-fortesonatas has been founded; and which,though it is now, from the immenseprogress which manual dexterity hasmade in the last sixty years, withinthe powers of even second-rate performers,was, at the period of itsproduction, the despair of such pianistsas J. C. Bach and Schroeter; whowere content to admire it, but declinedthe attempt to play what thelatter professor declared " could beexecuted only by its own composer, orby that great performer of all wonders,the devil!" Having completed theperiod his father had engaged he shouldremain with Mr. Beckford, Clementiicame up to London, where he wasspeedily engaged to preside at theharpsichord at the King's Theatre.From this time, his reputation rose sorapidly, that his remuneration, both forlessons and performances, was not inferiorto that of Bach, and other celebratedmusicians of the day.In 1780, he determined on a tour onthe continent, and visited Paris, wherehe was received with such a burst ofParisian enthusiasm, that he frequentlyafterwards jocosely remarked, he couldhardly believe himself the same Clementin Paris he had been in London.After having produced his Op: 5 and6, he proceeded, in 1781, by way ofStrasbourg and Munich, to Vienna;enjoying everywhere the patronage ofprinces, the admiration of his brothermusicians, and the plaudits of thepublic. In the Austrian capital he becameacquainted with Haydn, Mozart,Salter, and other musicians ; with thesecond of whom he was trepanned intoa musical trial of skill before the EmperorJoseph, and the Grand Duke (afterwardsthe Emperor) Paul, of Russia,and his consort, Catherine. Both egoCOMPOSERS.erred themselves to the utmost of theirabilities, and each seemed to merit thepalm till the other began. The contestdelighted and astonished all who witnessedit, and terminated without envyor jealousy on the part of the two greatperformers. At Vienna, dementi producedhis Op: 7, 8, 9, and 10; and asurreptitious and very erroneous copy ofhi celebrated toccata, with his Op: 11,having appeared in France, on his returnto England, he published a correctedition of them, followed by his Op: 12;on the fourth sonata of which Dr.Crotch and Mr. S. Wesley afterwardsgave public lectures. He returned froma second visit to Paris, in 1784; fromwhich year, to 1802, he continued inLondon, pursuing his professional careerwith equal eclat, as a composer,performer, and instructor. Duringthis period, he produced his Ops : 15to 40, as well as his admirable Introductionto the Art of Playing thePiano-forte. Upon the failure ofMessrs. Hangman and Broderip, bywhom he lost considerably, he wasinduced to engage in the music publishing,and piano forte manufacturing,business; and his name was placed atthe head of a new firm, still existingin Cheapside, London. He now declinedtaking pupils ; and dedicated hiswhole time to his professional engagements,his business, and the improvementof the mechanism of his pianofortes.He soon after arranged andpublished Haydn's oratorio of TheCreation, with English words, for thepiano-forte. In the autumn of the aboveyear (1802), he, a third time, visited thecontinent, and extended his journey toPetersburghh. He was accompanied onthe tour by his pupil, Field ; and hisinstruction was sought by young musiciansin almost all the principal citiesthrough which he passed. At Berlinhe married his first wife, with whomhe visited Rome and Naples; but shedied on his return to the Prussian capital,in giving birth to a son, who, someyears afterwards, came to a prematureend by the accidental discharge of hisown pistol. To dissipate the sorrowoccasioned by the loss of his wife, Mr.dementi again visited Petersburghh andVienna, from whence he was called toRome, to arrange the affairs of hisfamily, on the death of a brother.This was no sooner accomplished, thanhe was anxious to return to England ;but was prevented by the war, whichprotracted his stay until, he says, " hewas obliged to live upon the snuff-boxesand rings which had been presentedto him in the course of histravels." Circumstances, at length,relieved him from his embarrassed situation; and, after a short stay atMilan and other cities, he reachedEngland in the summer of 1810. Duringhis long sojourn on the continent, hepublished only a single sonata, hisOp : 4,1. Neither his mind nor hispen, however, was idle ; for, besidespreparing materials for his Gradus adParnassus, which he afterwards publishedin three volumes, he composedseveral symphonies for a full orchestra.In 1801, he married his second wife,a Miss Gisborne ; and, soon after, appearedhis Appendix to his Introductionto the Art of Playing the Piano-forte.This was followed by his adaptation ofHaydn's twelve grand Symphonies forthat instrument, the flute, violin, andvioloncello; and of Haydn's Lessonsfor the piano-forte and four voices; and,in 1815, he produced his highly valuableelementary work, in four volumes,entitled, Practical Harmony. He hadnow declined playing in public; butbroke through his resolution, on twooccasions. The first was to give thePhilharmonic Society an opportunityof saying they had once more heardClementii play ; and the second, at apublic entertainment given to him atthe Albion Tavern. During 1820 and182 1 , he published several original worksfor the piano-forte; his sonata, Op: 46,dedicated to Kalkbrenner; his capricious,Op: 47; a fantasia, Op: 49; a setof sonatas, comprising Op: 50, dedicatedto Cherubini; and an arrangementof six of Mozart's symphonies,with accompaniments for the pianoforte." Clementii," says Dr. Crotch,may be considered as the father ofpiano-forte' music ; for he long agointroduced all the beauty of Italianmelody into pieces, calculated, bytheir ornamental varieties, to elicit thepowers of the instrument, and displaythe taste, as well as the execution, ofthe performer: and the introductionof his sonatas," he afterwards adds,with the quarters and symphoniesTHOMAS GKEATOREX.of Saccharine and Haydn, stamped avalue on modern music, which manyof the admirers of the ancient schoolwere disposed to acknowledge." Toname his pupils, would be to enumeratenearly all the distinguished pianistsof the last fifty years, in Europe ; andsome of the greatest of the present day.dementi's powers of extemporaneousplaying have been equalled by few :when Dussek was asked, early in hisprofessional career, to touch the pianoafter Clementii had been extemporising,he is stated to have replied, that " toattempt anything in the same stylewould be presumption ; for what sonata,what concerto, or what regular composition,could a man play," he asked,that would not be insipid, after whathad just been heard ?"The private character of Clementii is,in every respect, amiable ; and no manis more esteemed and respected by hisprofessional brethren. His studioushabits are said to have induced in himan absence of mind, which is mistakenby some for affectation. The fact ofhis appearing in one stocking white,and the other black, might almost warrantsuch a conclusion ; but an anecdotein Parke's Musical Memoirs setsthis pardonable infirmity in a differentlight. Whilst on a visit, with Cross-dill,at Lord Pembroke's seat, atWilton, they agreed to bathe in thefine piece of water in the park. Cross-dillwas dressed before Clementii hadleft the water; and, with a view ofdetermining whether his friend's absenceof mind was assumed or real,removed his shirt; and, on his returnto the house, informed their noble hostof the intended joke. " Clementii," saysParke, " returned in half an hour,perfectly dressed, as he believed ; andupon a lady requesting to hear himplay one of his sonatas, having takenhis seat at the instrument, and fidgeteda little in his peculiar way, played thefirst movement of one of his most difficultpieces, and was about to begin theadagio; when, being oppressed by theheat, he, unconsciously, unbuttonednearly the whole of his" waistcoat, andwas proceeding, when the lady, greatlysurprised, hastily retired to the furtherend of the room, while Lord Pembroke,convulsed with laughter, apprised Clementof his situation ; who, staringwildly, darted out of the room, andcould not, by any entreaties, be inducedto rejoin the party."THOMAS GREATOREX.THIS celebrated conductor of the AncientConcerts was born at North Wing-field,in Derbyshire, on the 5th ofOctober, 1758. His father, an ingenious jmusician, taught him the first rudimentsof his art; and, in 1772, senthim to London, where he was placedunder the tuition of Dr. Cooke, theorganist of Westminster Abbey. In1774, and two following years, he attendedthe celebrated Christmas oratoriosof the late Earl of Sandwich,performed at his seat at Hinchinbrook,in Huntingdonshire ; and, for sometime,resided, as teacher, in the familyof that nobleman. He was afterwardspatronised by George the Third,, andstill more by George the Fourth ; whomunificently rewarded his talents. Onthe establishment of the Ancient Concerts,in the year 1776, he assisted inthe chorusses ; and he continued aperformer there until advised to trythe north air for the re-establishmentof his health, in 1780, when he acceptedthe situation of organist of thecathedral of Carlisle. He resigned itin 1784 ; and, in that year, proceededto Italy, where he studied vocal music,for two years, under Santarelli, themost famous singer of his time, atRome. On his return to London, atthe end of 1788, he established himselfas a teacher of singing ; and was soonfully occupied. On the death of Mr.Bates, in 1793, he was appointed hissuccessor, to conduct the Ancient Concerts,without any solicitation on hispart ; a post he continued to hold withundiminished credit during the rest ofhis life. In the meantime, in 1801,he contributed to the restoration of theCOMPOSERSVocal Concerts; and, in 1819, he succeededto the situation of organist, andmaster of the boys, at WestminsterAbbey. He is a fellow of the Royaland Linnaean Societies ; having obtainedadmission into the former body,in consequence of his communicatingto them a novel method of measuringthe altitude of mountains, which hepractised during a visit to the lakes, in1817. Besides having some knowledgeof botany and mathematics, heis much attached to astronomy ; andpossesses several valuable telescopes,including the best in Europe, madeby the famous Tully.His publications consist of a compilationof psalm tunes, harmonized byhimself, and dedicated, by permission,to the king; and the arrangements ofnumerous musical compositions, for theAncient and Vocal Concerts, by addingcomplete orchestral, vocal, and instrumentalparts. But it is chiefly to hissuperior talents as a conductor, and amusic master, that he is indebted forhis reputation ; the latter branch of hisprofession is said to have yielded him2,000 per annum.His character is represented as highlyamiable and estimable; and formed,probably, no small portion of the inducementto the high patronage withwhich he has been honoured. Georgethe Fourth, when Prince of Wales,treated him with much condescensionand familiarity; in proof of whichthe following anecdote has been told.Both the prince and musician beingat the annual dinner given by thedirectors of the Ancient Concert, thelatter was about to depart earlier thanthe rest of the company, giving, asareason, that his attendance was requiredat the king's evening concert.Oh ! never mind," said the prince,my father is Rex, I confess ; but youare a Greater Rex." (Greatorex.) Mr.Greatorex was, for some time, a captainin the St. George's volunteers; andbelonged to the Kentish Archery Club,from which he obtained several prizes.When at Rome, he was introduced tothe Chevalier Charles Edward Stuart,who took a great liking to him ; and, athis death, bequeathed to him severalvolumes of manuscript music. Beingonce asked by the chevalier for a song,Mr. Greatorex chose the simple air,Farewell to Lochaber ; upon hearingwhich, the exiled prince is said to haveburst into a flood of tears, and squeezedthe hand of the performer with greatemotion.SIR JOHN ANDREW STEVENSON.1 HIS able musician and tastefulcomposer was born in Ireland, aboutthe year 1760, and received his musicalinstruction in the cathedral of St. Patrick,Dublin, under Dr. Murphy. In thissituation he cultivated, with success,that species of sacred and secular music,which has rendered him so great afavourite with the public. He commencedhis career as a composer bysetting to music the airs of the popularafter-pieces, The Son-in-law and TheAgreeable Surprise ; the original musicof which never had been published;and was the sole property of the proprietorof the Haymarket. Sir Johncomposed the music for the Dublinmanagers, to enable them to performthe pieces ; and executed his task sotastefully, that they still continue to beperformed with his music, at the DublinTheatre. He afterwards set to music,for the Irish stage also, Dr. Bolton'sopera of The Contract, and Mrs. Atkinson'sLove in a Blaze. About thesame time, he commenced his career asavocal composer, with great success ;and it is recorded, as a proof of hismerit, " that, some years ago, he receivedfrom the Hibernian Catch Cluba massive and elegant silver cup, intestimony of their estimation of histalents, and in consideration of themany delightful compositions which hehad contributed to the entertainmentof the club and the honour of thecountry." The degree of doctor of musicwas conferred upon him by the Universityof Dublin ; and he received thehonour of knighthood from the handsMICHAEL KELLY,2C3of the Marquess of Wellesley, duringthat nobleman's first lord-lieutenancyof Ireland. Sir John Stevenson ischiefly known as the harmonizer andarranger, of the Irish Melodies, to thepoetry of Mr. Moore. His originalpieces, however, include compositionsof the very highest merit; of which,not the least deserving of notice, is theduet, Tell me, where was Fancy bred?and the glee, Come unto these yellowSands. Several of his glees and duetshave obtained great celebrity ; and hischurch music, though not so generallyknown, contains some pieces full ofpathos, taste, and sublimity. Besideshis symphonies and accompanimentsto the Irish Melodies, in eight parts,the words by Thomas Moore, Esq;symphonies and accompaniments topopular national airs, with words bythe same; a series of sacred songs,duets, and trios, with words by thesame; and Handel's songs, with apiano-forte accompaniment; his mostadmired pieces are : glees, for threevoices; And will he not come again?Allen-a-Dale; and Alice Brand; Doubtthou the Stars are Fire ; a glee ; Come,let us play, a madrigal for three voices ;a fairy glee ; Hail to the mighty powerof Song ! a charter-glee ; See, our Oarswith feathered Spray, a boat glee ; andseveral others. Amongst his best duetsare, besides the popular ones alreadynamed: Those laughing Eyes; SweetStream, if e'er thy limpid flow; Valentine'sDay, &c. His songs are: Watersof Elle; Farewell, my Harp! Doubtnot, sweet Maid; Remember yourVows ; Come, take the Harp ; Go,sweet Enchantress ; Maid of Marlivale :The Cypress Wreath; and others, ofequal merit.He married a daughter of Mr. Morton,of the Custom-house, Dublin, by whomhe has several children ; one of whomis married to the Marquess of Beaufort.MICHAEL KELLY.celebrated composer, actor, andvocalist, was the son of an eminentwine merchant of Dublin, where thesubject of our memoir was born, in1762; his father being, at the time,master of the ceremonies at the castle.He was the eldest of fourteen children ;and. at the age of three, he states, hewas daily placed, with the wine, uponthe table, to howl Hawthorn's song inLove in a Village, " There was a jollyMiller," for the entertainment of hisfather's company. He commencedtaking lessons in music at the age ofseven ; and, though his first instructorwas so dissipated in his habits, that, touse Kelly's own words, he " has beenkept up till one in the morning, on themere chance of getting a lesson," he wasenabled, in his ninth year, to execute,with precision and neatness, Schobert'ssonatas. His singing masters were thebest that could be procured in Dublin ;but his improvement, it would seem,was not solely owing to the effects oftuition. Speaking of one of his instructors,Signer Giorgio, he says, " Irecollect being with him once, when heentered a fruit shop, and ate peachesand nectarines ; and, at last, took a pineapple,and deliberately sliced it, andate also. This completed my longing;and, while my mouth watered, I askedmyself why, if I assiduously studiedmusic, I should not be able to earnmoney enough to lounge about in fruitshops, and eat peaches and pine-applesas well as Signor Giorgio ? I answeredmyself, by promising that I wouldstudy hard, and I really did so ; and,trifling as this little anecdote may appear,I firmly believe it was the chiefcause of my serious resolution to followup music as a profession." He wasafterwards fortunate enough to obtainthe friendship and notice of Mazzini,then playing at the Rotunda, at Dublin ;who gave him some lessons in singing,and advised his father to send him toItaly. Before he left Dublin, however, acircumstance occurred, which gave himan opportunity of making his debfit inpublic. The person who was to haveplayed the count in the opera of LaBuena Figliola, which had been got upin Italian, having been taken ill, KellyCOMPOSERS,was fixed upon to supply his place.When " the awful night, as he says,arrived, the house was crowded ; andI received great applause. I had apowerful treble voice, pronounced Italianwell, was tall for my age, and acquittedmyself beyond the most sanguine expectationsof my friends." He afterwardsplayed, for three nights, in the characterof Cymon, at the Crow Street Theatre,"then under the management of MichaelArne, Doctor Arne's son, together witha fourth night for his benefit, in thecharacter of Lionel. He started forNaples on the 1st of May, 1779 ; havinggained sufficient, by his performances,to pay for his voyage to Italy, and for hismaintenance and musical education forsome time after his arrival there.In the Bay of Biscay, the vessel inwhich he sailed was attacked by anAmerican privateer, the chief mate ofwhich he discovered to have been hisfather's gardener, who had been transportedfor theft. The recognition tookplace at a fortunate moment for Kelly ;when one of the privateer's crew was inthe act of breaking open his piano witha hatchet.On his arrival at Naples, he was verykindly received by the British minister,Sir William Hamilton, who gave him apresent, " to see the sights of Naples ;"and bid him call on him in a fortnight.He was not quite punctual at the appointedhour, one morning ; when SirWilliam, taking out his watch, said,"' If you do not learn to keep time, youwill never be a good musician ;" a hintwhich, he says, he recollected throughlife. Being introduced to Fineroli, hestudied for some time under that master ;who made it a sine qua non with him,that he should not touch his Englishpiano-forte, thinking it to be highly prejudicialto his voice. Visiting Romeduring the carnival, he was introduced,by his friend Blake, to the celebratedApril; who was so well pleased withhis singing, that he offered to instructhim gratuitously; promising, in a shorttime, to " make him capable of earninghis bread anywhere." With Aprilhe proceeded to Palermo ; and, duringhis residence there, he sang in severalof the principal churches, and particularlyat the Duomo, during the greatfeast of St. Rosalie. From Palermo hesailed to Leghorn, and from thence toFlorence, where he was engaged toappear at the Teatro Nuovo, as firsttenor singer. He then visited Venice,and several of the principal theatres inItaly ; when his success was so great,that he declined an invitation fromMr. Linley to come over to England.Travelling into Germany, he made asuccessful debut at Prague, Warsaw,Berlin, and Vienna ; and at the last city,where he remained for four years inthe service of the emperor, Joseph theSecond, he had the honour of being oneof the original performers in Mozart'sopera of Nozzle di Figaro. Towardsthe close of his engagement at Vienna,he was attacked, one night, by twoAustrian officers, who fancied he hadsupplanted one of them in a lady's affections.They were, in consequence,dismissed from the army by the emperor;who, on this and many otheroccasions, manifested a great regard forKelly. On his requesting permissionfor six months' absence, the emperornot only assented, but allowed him theoption of extending it to twelve months ;desiring his pay should, in the meantime,be continued. He soon after embarkedfor England ; and, on his arrivalin London, found himself so much inrequest, that his scruples, if he hadany, of returning to Vienna, were overcome,by the offer of an engagement asleading vocalist at Drury Lane Theatre.He made his first appearance there onthe 20th of April, 1787, in his old characterof Lionel ; and was received withunanimous applause. From this timehe continued to appear in various characterswith undiminished success; andalso sang at the king's Ancient Concerts,at Westminster Abbey, and at all theprincipal music meetings and theatresin Great Britain. In the meantime heacquired considerable reputation, as thecomposer of various musical pieces, ofwhich the principal were: The CastleSpectre, Blue Beard, Of Age tomorrow,Deaf and Dumb, &c. In September,1802, the board of managementat Drury Lane, then just instituted,appointed him to the charge of superintendingthe musical department.From this period, according to his ownenumeration of them, the various piecesfor which he composed, or adapted music,amounted to nearly forty ; but noneof them have attained equal popularityMICHAEL KELLY.with those above-mentioned. He isalso the composer of a numerous list ofItalian, English, and French songs,duets, and trios. He was stage-managerto the King's Theatre, in the Hay-market,nearly thirty years; at whichestablishment, also, he performed asprincipal tenor singer, both in theserious and comic operas. " The regularemolument for my labours," hesays, in his Reminiscences, (and be itknown to all, that to manage an Italianopera is a most laborious task,) hasbeen the use of the house, and theperformers belonging to it, for myannual benefit ; defraying, myself, however,every other expense belonging tothe performance of the night. Throughall the changes of different proprietor-shipsand lessees, this privilege has beeninvariably granted me, as a reward forlong service." The latter years of hislife he was much afflicted with thegout; and was, at length, carried offby that disease, at Ramsgate, on the15th of October, 1826.Kelly was much esteemed in privatefor many agreeable and amiable qualities,as a companion and friend ; andhe was fortunate in the patronage ofthe great, from the beginning to theclose of his career. His late majesty,George the Fourth, held him in particularesteem, as the following anecdotewill shew : Having been invited tohear the king's band at the Pavilion, atBrighton, Kelly asked Cramer tosuffer his little god-daughter, who wasvery fond of music, to stand behind theorgan. Cramer consented ; but, in themidst of the performances, the childhaving crept out, and placed herselfbetween the kettle-drums, was espiedby the king ; who, after kissing her,and throwing her across his shoulder,brought her across the room to Kelly,asking why he did not bring her intothe room ; and desiring he would do sowhenever he chose. As a composer,Kelly was at least a man of taste andoriginal conception, if he was not deeplyversed in the science of music; and noother, perhaps, has contributed more topublic amusement, with the exception ofBishi p. 1'arke, in his meagre notice ofthis talented man, says, that he '* was ajudicious compiler; and introduced intohis operas many fine compositions ofthe Italian masters. He was, however,but little acquainted with harmony;and I had his own word for this : for, inthe year 1803, he candidly told me, inthe garden of Watson, the proprietor ofthe theatre at Cheltenham, that hemerely wrote the melodies, and thatthe old Italian, Mazzini, did the rest.To corroborate this, it need only be"observed, that the late Doctor Arnoldinformed me, after Kelly had composedseveral of his operas, he called on him,and asked him how long it would taketo learn thorough-bass. Kelly's pieceswere, notwithstanding, generally successful;and I was credibly informed,that the sale of his music to Blue Heard,for a considerable time, produced forCorri, its publisher, a profit of fortyguineas per week."A short while before his death, Kellypublished his Reminiscences, in twovolumes, a very amusing and well-writtenwork, and abounding with anecdote,of which the following is a sample :Having related that he had been engagedby Tate Wilkinson, to sing withMrs. Crouch, at York, he goes on todescribe the manner in which he firstappeared before the eccentric manager;who, it seems, was a great epicure, andhad a strong aversion towards a roundof beef. " I saw in the larder," saysKelly, "a huge round of beef ; I orderedit up, and had it put on the table beforeme ; I pulled off my coat and waistcoat,and tucked up the sleeves of myshirt, took off my cravat, and put on ared woollen night-cap ; thus disrobed,and with a large carving-knife in myhand, I was engaged in seeming delighton the round of beef, at the moment managerWilkinson, to whom Mrs. Crouchhad previously sent, entered the house.He had never seen me ; he went up toMrs. Crouch, and congratulated her onher arrival in York ; turning from her,he espied me, and starting back, exclaimed,' Ugh ! ma'am, who is that,with the enormous round of beef beforehim? How the devil came he here,ma'am?' ' That is Mr. Kelly, whomyou have engaged to sing with me,'said Mrs. Crouch, with a serious countenance.' What, that figure!' saidTate ' what ! that my Lord Aim-worthmy Lionel my Young Meadows!Ugh ! send him away, ma'am !send him back to Drury Lane ! sendhim to Vienna! I never can produceCOMPOSERS.such a thing as that to a York audience,ma'am!' While he was abusing thebad taste of the Drury Lane singers,adds Kelly, " I slipped out of the room,dressed myself, and, in propria person,was introduced to Tate, who participatedin the joke, and laughed heartily ; and.ever after, we were the greatest friends."STEPHEN STORAGE.lHIS eminent dramatic composer wasthe son of Stephen Storace, the wellknown Italian double bass player;during whose-residence in London histalented son was born, in the year 1763.He exhibited a strong propensity formusic at a very early age ; which hisfather took such pains to cultivate, that,before he was eleven years of age, hewas able to perform the most difficultsolos of Tartini and Giardini with greatcorrectness. He was shortly after sentto Italy, where he studied the harpsichordand violin, and the art of composition; and he is said not only tohave written the finale to the first actof The Pirates, during this residenceabroad, but most of the other pieces forwhich he afterwards became so greatlyadmired. Just before Storace quittedVienna, the following circumstancenearly prevented his departure. Beingat a ball, one night, he came downfrom the supper-room somewhat heatedwith wine ; and, seeing his sister on thefloor with an officer, whose spurs hadentangled her dress whilst in the act ofwaltzing with her, he took it into hishead that she had been intentionallyinsulted, and violently attacked theofficer. The confinement of Storacewas the consequence ; but he was released,through the interference of MichaelKelly, and with him left Vienna,in 1787.On his return to England, he wentto reside at Hath ; but finding no openingfor the exercise of his musical talentseither there or in the British metropolis,he was induced for awhile toabandon music as a profession, and toturn his attention to drawing; an artfor which he had always, like his celebratedcotemporary, Dr. Crotch, a strongpredilection. Fortunately, however,when in Italy, he had formed a friendshipwith Mr. Kelly ; and a new erabeing opened to talent, by the assumptionof the management of Drury LaneTheatre by the elder Linley, Storacewas introduced to him by the former,and immediately engaged* as composerto the theatre. His productions wereso well received by the public throughouthis entire career, and became sopopular, that he is said to have receivedfrom the music-publishers greaterprices for some of his operas than hadever before been given. His compositions,in the order in which they wereperformed, are : The Doctor and Apothecary,farce, 1788; The HauntedTower, opera, 1790; No Song, NoSupper, farce, 1791 ; The Siege of Belgrade,opera, and The Cave of Trophies,a musical interlude, 1792; ThePirates, and Dido, operas, in 1793; TimePrize, and the Glorious First of June,musical entertainments; The Cherokee,and Lodoiska, operas, 1794; Three andthe Deuce, comic drama, 1795; MyGrandmother, farce; Iron Chest, aplay; and Mahmoud, an opera, 1796.During the time he was engaged uponthe latter work, he was attacked by aviolent fit of the gout, which flew tohis head; and, in the March of thelatter year, (1796,) suddenly deprivedthe world of this highly promising genius,at the early age of thirty-three.He died at his residence in PercyStreet, Ilathbone Place ; leaving severalchildren by his wife, a daughter of Hall,the engraver. His opera of Mahmoudwas performed shortly after his death,for the benefit of his family.The compositions of Storace are repletewith spirit and fire ; and hismelodies have seldom been excelled bytheatrical composers. With respect todramatic compositions, he has beenheard publicly to declare, " that it wasimpossible for any author to producea good opera, without previouslyconsulting his intended composer; lor,"he added, " the songs must be intro-stephenSTORAGE.duce as lie pleases ; and the words(which are a secondary consideration)must be written agreeably to his directions."This, however, does not saymuch for his powers, at least in givingeffect to language ; which, surely, shouldrather guide the taste and expression ofthe composer, than be made subservientto his fancy.Parke relates of that fine song in hisHaunted Tower, Spirit of my saintedSire, that when Braham was aboutto sing it, during a rehearsal at theBrighton Theatre, where he and SignoraStorace were performing, it wasdiscovered there were no kettle-drums.This was remedied at the public performance; but just before Braham wasgoing to sing the same song, it wasdiscovered there was nobody providedj to play the drums. What was to bej done? the song was immediately comingon, and there appeared no alternative but that of omitting it; wheni Signora Storace, who happened to beon the spot, undertook the part ofdrummer ; and beat them with as muchprecision and effect as any kettle-drummerof them all. This being buzzedabout town, adds Parke, " as a curiousand clever thing, it was spoken of, thenext day, at a party where I dined; onwhich, an elderly Irish captain, whoappeared much struck with the occurrence,exclaimed, ' By the powers !she is a nate lass ; and I should onlyhave one objection to have such a wife ;which is, that being so ready at a bating,she might one day tell an inclination,as Mr. Mulroony says, to bate a coatwith a man in it.' "The last rehearsal which he attendedwas that of The iron Chest: and hisexertions on this occasion, probably,hastened his death. " On the first rehearsal,"says Michael Kelly, " althoughlabouring under a severe attack of goutand fever, after having been confined tohis bed for many days, he insisted uponbeing wrapped up in blankets, andcarried, in a sedan-chair, to the coldstage of the playhouse. The entreatiesand prayers of his friends were of noavail go, he would; he went, andremained there till the end of the rehearsal.* * * He went home to hisbed, whence he never rose again. Thelast twelve bars of music he ever wrote,were the subject of the song (and abeautiful subject it is), " When therobber his Victim has noted;" which 1sang in the character of Captain Armstrong.I called upon him the night ofthe day in which he had been at the rehearsal: he sent for me to his bed-side ;and, pressing my hand, said, ' My dearMick, I have tried to finish your song,but find myself unable to accomplishit; I must be ill, indeed, when Ican't write for you, who have givenso much energy to my compositions.I leave you the subject of your song,and beg you will finish it yourself; noone can do it better ; and my last requestis, that you will let no one elsemeddle with it.' Saying these words,he turned on his side, and fell into aslumber ; and never, never, did I seehim more! His memory will for everlive in the hearts of all who have heardhis compositions ; for the drafts of truegenius, though they may not be honouredso soon as they become due.are sure to be paid with compoundinterest in the end. It is a singularcoincidence, that three such greatmusical geniusses as Purcell, Mozart,and Storace, were nearly of the sameage, when fate ordered them to theirearly graves."Storace possessed other capacitiesbesides those of a composer ; and Sheridan,according to Michael Kelly, gaveit as his opinion, that if he had beenbred to the law, he would have becomelord-chancellor.JOHN DAVY.j L HIS excellent English composer was| born in the parish of Upton Pelion,i about eight miles from Exeter, in 1765.i H2 was riot more than three years ofage, we are told by his biographer, thelev. Mr. Eastcott, when, coming into aroom where his uncle, who lived in thesame parish, was playing a psalm tuneCOMPOSERS.on the violoncello, he was so much terrifiedby the sound, that he ran away,and it was thought he would have goneinto fits. For several weeks his uncletried to reconcile him to the instrument;and at last, after much enticement andcoaxing, effected it, by taking the child'sfingers, and making him strike thestrings. The sound thus produced verymuch startled him at first, but, in afew days, he became so passionatelyfond of the instrument, that he tookevery opportunity of making himselfmore familiar with it; and was soonable to produce such notes as greatlydelighted him. Another circumstance,occurred about this time, which concurredto fix his taste for music. Intie of his visits, with his uncle, toCreditor, a neighbouring village, to seethesoldiers mustered, who were thenquartered there, he was so much pleasedwith the fifes, that he borrowed one ofthem; and, in a few days, could makeout several tunes upon it. It is also said,that he gathered a quantity of what thecountry people call biller (properlytubular), with which he made severalimitations of the file, and sold them tohis playfellows. But the most decisiveindication of his genius and ingenuityis yet to be related. A neighbouringblacksmith, into whose house he usedfrequently to run, having lost betweentwenty and thirty horse-shoes, hadmade diligent search for them for manydays, but to no purpose: not long afterwards,hearing some musical sounds,which seemed to come from the upperpart of his house, he proceeded upstairs,and discovered little Davy withhis property, between the ceiling andthe thatched roof. The child, for he wasthen not six years of age, had selectedeight horse-shoes out of the whole number,to form an octave ; had suspendedeach of them by a single cord, clearfrom the wall ; and, with a small ironrod, was amusing himself, by imitatingthe Creditor chimes, which he did withgreat exactness. This story being madepublic, and his genius for music dailyincreasing, a neighbouring clergyman,of considerable rank in the church,shewed him a harpsichord. This hesoon became familiar with ; and, by hisintuitive genius, was in a short timeable to play any easy lesson which wasput before" him. He applied himselflikewise to the violin ; and found butfew difficulties to surmount in his progresson that instrument.When eleven years old, he was introducedto the Rev. Mr. Eastcott, whowas so much struck with his performanceon the piano-forte, and hisgeneral turn for music, that he earnestlyrecommended to his friends to placehim with some musician of eminence ;and he was, in consequence, at twelve,articled to the celebrated Jackson, ofExeter. His progress in the study ofcomposition, and particularly in thatof church music, was extremely great;and he also soon became an admirableperformer, not only on the organ, buton the violin and" violoncello. Thefirst of his compositions that appear tohave attained any high degree of celebrity,were some" vocal quartets, whichwere considered, by the best judges, toafford the strongest indications of musicalgenius and knowledge. He residedfor some time at Exeter, after he hadcompleted his articles; but in whatcapacity is not stated. It seems, thathe had conceived a strong passion forthe stage ; and actually made his debutat the theatre at Exeter, in the characterof Zanga, the part of Alonzo beingsustained by the late Mr. Dowton. Atlength he ventured to the metropolis,and obtained a seat in the orchestra ofCovent Garden Theatre ; occupyinghimself, at the same period, in teaching,and soon acquired a considerablenumber of pupils. He also composedsome dramatic pieces for Sadler'sWells; and wrote the music to Hoi-man'sopera of What a Blunder! whichwas produced at the HaymarketTheatre in 1800. In the following yearhe was engaged, with Moored, incomposing the music of La Peruse ;and with Mountain, in that of TheBrazen Mask, for Covent Garden.He subsequently wrote the music forThe Miller's Maid, and several otheroperatic compositions; the latest ofwhich were: Rob Roy, for CoventGarden; and Woman's Will, for theEnglish Opera.Intemperance is said to have shortenedthe days and obscured the geniusof this talented composer, during thelatter part of his life. Pecuniary difficultieswere not long in following; andhe died, in neglect and poverty, at a jSAMUEL WESLEY.wretched lodging, in May's Buildings,on the 22nd of February, 1824. As acomposer, he will not soon be forgotten :many of his pieces will, indeed, berecollected and admired as long as ataste for good music shall exist. HisJust like Love, May we ne'er want aFriend, The Smuggler, and The Bayof Biscay, are gems of their kind, andwould do honour to the music of anycountry.SAMUEL WESLEY.SAMUEL WESLEY was born onthe 24th of February, 1766 (the sameday, which gave birth to Handel, eighty-twoyears before). " The seeds ofharmony," says his biographer, the Rev.Charles Wesley, " did not spring up inhim quite so early as in his brother; forhe was three years old before he aimedat a tune." It seems, however, that heplayed a tune when he was but twoyears and eleven months old ; in proofof which his mother produced a quarterguinea, given him by a gentleman,wrapped in a piece of paper, containingthe day and year of the gift, as well asthe occasion of it. God save the King,Fischer's minuet, and such like, mostlypicked up from the street organs, wereamong the earliest tunes that he played ;but he did not put a true bass to themtill he had learnt his notes.He composed music before he wasable to write ; laying up in his memorythe airs to which he set his songs. Hiscustom was to place the words of anoratorio before him, and sing them allover,composing generally as he sang ;and in this manner he set Ruth, Gideon,Manasseh, and The Death of Abel.The airs of Ruth he is said to havethus set in his sixth year; though hedid not write them down until lie waseight years of age, when he hadactually composed an oratorio upon thatsubject. At this time, Boyce calledupon his father, and accosted himwith, " Sir, I hear you have got anEnglish Mozart in your house: youngLinley tells me wonderful things ofhim." Samuel was then sent for ; andthe doctor having looked over his oratoriovery carefully, remarked, " Theseairs are some of the prettiest I haveseen : this boy writes, by nature, as truea bass as I can by rule and study."Nothing can be more interesting thanthe account of the subsequent progressof the musical genius of the subject ofour memoir; and though pertaining,perhaps, more to anecdote than biography,we cannot refrain from giving itat some length ; especially as little elseis related by any of his biographers.Daines Barrington, one day, speaking ofthe youth's wonderful talents to Bremen,the music printer, the latter mentionedhe had some lessons whichwere supposed to have been composedfor Queen Elizabeth ; but which noneof the harpsichord masters could execute,and would consequently puzzlethe young performer. Mr. Barrington,however, requested that he might beallowed to carry the subject of ourmemoir one of these compositions, bywayof trial, which he accordingly did.Wesley immediately placed it upon hisdesk, and was sitting down to play it ;when Mr. Barrington stopped him, bymentioning the difficulties he wouldsoon encounter, and that he had bettercast his eye over the music before hebegan. Having done this very rapidly(for, as Mr. Barrington observes, hewas a devourer of a score, and conceivedat once the effect of the differentparts), he said, that Bremen was inthe right; for there were two or threepassages which he could not play atsight, as they were so queer arid awkward,but that he had no notion ofnot trying; and though he boggled,says our authority, at these parts of thelesson, he executed them clearly atthe second practice.The following is another proof of hisextraordinary quickness and skill as amusician. It often happens, amongthe comic Italian operas, that there is apassage in the bass, which consists of asingle note, to be perhaps repeated fortwo or three bars, at quick and equalintervals ; and which cannot be effectedon the harpsichord by one finger, as anyCOMPOSERS.common musician would attempt to do,It requires a change of two. Mr.Barrington placed an opera song beforethe subject of our memoir, with such apa-sage; when, to the astonishment ofthe former, he made use of the changeabove-mentioned. On coining to thepassage, he was asked from whom heiliad learned this method of fingering;to which he replied, ' From no one;but that it was impossible to play thepassage'with the proper effect, in anyother manner."In union with these precocious faculties,lie displayed a generosity of dispositionstill more admirable. Beingtaken to a concert where young Crotchwas expected to perform, that prematuregenius was not in the best ofhumours ; and Master Wesley, to pleasehim. submitted, amongst other tidings,to play upon a cracked violin. Thecompany, however, having found outwho he was, pressed him very much toplay on the organ, which he constantlydeclined. As this was contrary to hisusual readiness in obliging, Mr. Barringtonasked him, afterwards, hisreasons for refusal : when he told him,he thought it would look like wishingto shine at little Crotch's expense."Another singular feature in the characterof one so young and so courtedand admired, wa's his undeviating observanceof regularity in his hours.Nothing," says his father, " couldexceed his punctuality. No company,no persuasion, could "keep him up beyondhis time. He never could beprevailed on to hear any opera or concertby night. The moment the clockgave warning for eight, away rah Sam,in the midst of his most favourite music.Once, in the playhouse, he rose up,after the first part of The Messiah, withCome, mamma, let us go home, orI shan't be in bed by eight.' Whensome one talked of carrying him tothe queen, and I asked him if hewere willing to go? ' Yes, with allmy heart,' he answered, ' but 1 won'tstay beyond eight.' "Among his early compositions, wasa march for one of the regimentsof foot guards ; which he was taken tohear played, one day, on parade. Afterit was over, he was asked if he wassatisfied with the performance. " Byno means," he replied ; and, being introducedto the band, told them theyhad not done justice to his composition.At the idea of " his composition," theband, who thought he was jesting,smiled, between ridicule and contempt ;but when they were informed that theyhad really been playing the compositionof the little boy before them, and heproceeded to point out their deficiencies,they were mute with astonishment ;and when he ordered the march to beplayed again, submitted with as muchdeference as they would have shewnto Handel.When he was more advanced in life,Mr. Wesley composed a high mass forthe chapel of the Pope Pius the Sixth ;for which his holiness thanked the composer,in a Latin letter, written to hisapostolic vicar, in London, in which hesays, amongst other things, " Gratumanimus, quern ob accepted munus inipsum genius, paternal verbis nominenostri explicable," &c.His compositions," says the authorof Musical Biography, (a contemporarywork) " are in the highest degreemasterly and grand ; and his extemporeperformance of fugues on the organ isvery astonishing. He produces fromthat solemn instrument all the grandand serious graces of which it is capable.His melodies, though struck outon the instant, are sweet and variednever common-place; his harmony isappropriate, and follows them with allthe exactness and discrimination of themost studious master ; and his execution,which is very great, is alwayssacrificed to the superior charms of expression."He has published, amongstother works, some anthems, sonatas,and duets, for the piano-forte, and aseries of voluntaries for the organ ; allof which afford the most satis factoryevidence of his taste and genius. Afull-length portrait of him, at the ageof eight, was engraved in London. Heis standing at a table, with a pen in hishand, and music before him, as if composing;and, at his foot lies a musicbook, with the title, Ruth, an Oratorio;by Samuel Wesley, aged Eight Years.According to the author of The Dictionaryof Musicians, though the eventis mentioned by no other authority,Mr. Wesley died about 1815.JOHN WALL Alcott.JOHN WALL Alcott.JOHN WALL Alcott, the sonof a builder, was born at Kensington,on the 20th of November, 1766. Hewas sent day-boarder to a neighbouringschool, at the age of seven, where heremained till about twelve; and hewas indebted to his own exertions forhis subsequent acquirements. Whilstat school, he had opportunities affordedhim of inspecting the church organ ofhis native place, during a period hisfather was employed in repairing thatedifice ; and the instrument took suchhold of his imagination, that he employedhimself, at home, in endeavouringto construct one. He also formedan acquaintance with the organist,was a regular Sunday visitant at theorgan-loft ; and thus obtained his firstnotions of the science, of which hebecame so eminent a professor. Hewas at first intended for a surgeon ;but received so severe a shock on witnessinga surgical operation, that he atonce renounced the pursuit of surgery,and turned his serious attention tomusic. He practised, occasionally, onKensington organ, attended the ChapelRoyal, and Westminster Abbey; and,by that means, became known to thecelebrated doctors of mus-ic, Cooke andArnold, and the elder Sale. From thetwo former he derived much musicalknowledge; but could hardly be saidto have received any regular instruction,when, in 1783, he was appointeddeputy-organist of St. George theMartyr, Queen Square; a situation heretained for two years.In 1784, he sent in his first productionto the Catch Club, entitled,Oh! beauteous Fair! which provedunsuccessful ; but in the following year,his compositions obtained three out ofthe four medals annually given by theclub. This success gained him immediatereputation, and an invitation fromDr. Hayes, the professor of music atOxford ; where Alcott took the degreeof bachelor of mi:sic. In 1786,besides composing an ode tor the RoyalHumane Society, he produced his catch,On a Summer's Morning; and Bowdown thine Ear, a canon, whichgained him two of the medals of theCatch Club; of which he was electedan honorary member in the followingyear. On this occasion, determined, ashehimself said, observes his memorialistin The Harmonicon, " to prove,that if he was deficient in genius, atleast he did not want industry," hesent in nearly one hundred compositions,as candidates for the prize. His canons,Thou shalt shew me, and When battleseething, gained him two medals ;but the club was displeased with thequantity Alcott had composed; andmade a resolution that, in future, nocandidate should offer above twelvecompositions. In 1789, he sent in thefull number of compositions, and carriedoff all the medals of the year (anoccurrence unparalleled in the historyof the club) ; his successful pieces being:Have you read Sir John Hawkins,a catch ; Oh ! that thou would'st hideme, a canon; and two glees, Go,idle Boys, and Oh, thou! where'erthy Bones. In the interim, he tookan active part, with Dr. Arnold andothers, in the formation of the GleeClub; which held its first meeting,under the doctor's presidency, at theNewcastle coffee-house, on the 22nd ofDeeeinber, 1787. Up to this period,he had acquired but little skill as anorchestral composer; his reputationbeing expressly confined to that of oneof the most popular glee writers of theday. The former class of composition,however, he seized the opportunity ofstudying under Haydn, upon his arrivalin this country, in 1790 ; and itwas whilst receiving" lessons from him,that he composed the beautiful scenafrom Thomson's Hymn, beginning,These, as they change ;" which, thoughit has never been printed, is said tohave been his greatest effort in orchestralwriting; although' his Angel of Life,from The Pleasures of Hope, of Campbell,was much more popular. Fromthe year in which he gained the whole of2 7-JCOMPOSERS.the prizes, (1789,) to that in which theclub ceased to give any, (1793,) he obtainednine other medals; but havingmarried, and become charged with theincreasing expenses of a family, he wasnow obliged to give the greater part ofhis time to the more lucrative employmentof teaching.In 1800, he took his degree of musicaldoctor, at Oxford ; and in 1804and 1805, published his Musical Grammar.He had also made great progressin a Musical Dictionary ; but couldnot find time enough to complete it.In 1806, he wrote his last orchestralpiece, or scena, in commemoration ofthe death of Nelson, for his friend,Bartleman; which, though marked bysome fine passages, bears the marks ofhaving been hastily written. He was,about the same time, appointed to succeedDr. Crotch, as lecturer on music,at the Royal Surrey Institution ; andhis great exertions and anxiety in thissituation were such, that mental aberrationsoon followed. This calamityinvolved his family in distress; fromwhich they were partially relieved bya benefit concert, at the King's Theatre.Though he again recovered hisintellects, he composed nothing worthyof his great powers ; and had the misfortuneto undergo a second deprivationof intellect, some time previous to hisdeath, whi h took place on the 15th ofMay, 1821.44 If Dr. Alcott was entitled to ouradmiration as a musician," says hisson-in-law, Mr. Horsley, (who publishedhis best glees, canons, and catches,in two volumes, in 1824,) " he had thestrongest claim to our reverence as aman. By nature, he was kind, gentle,and beneficent. He had no enemieshe could have none. Violent and malignantpassions never found a place inhis heart; but, whenever troubled bythe folly or indiscretion of mankind,his sentiments on the occasion werealways those of one whose philosophyis excited by Christianity."As a composer, and particularly as aglee writer, Dr. Alcott ranks amongthe first in his profession. His worksall bear marks of study and experience; and excite our wonder, how theauthor, who was almost constantlyengaged in the ta.-k of instruction,could have brought them to such astate of perfection.CHARLES HAGUE.THIS celebrated musical professor andcomposer, was born in 1769, at Lancaster,in Yorkshire, and from his infancydi-played a great fondness for the scienceof music. His brother, severalyears his senior, became his earliestpreceptor, and began by teaching himthe violin, upon which he'had made someprogress at the time of his removal withhim toCambridge,in 1779. Herehewasarticled to the celebrated violin player,Manini; and he, at the same time, studiedthorough-bass and the principles ofcomposition, under the elder FallenWhilst resident in the house ofthe former, Miss Manini was accustomedto employ him, as, it is said, Mrs.Walked did the great Lord Hardwicke,in many menial offices; and he occasionallyaccompanied the young lady toCambridge market, to convey home herseveral purchases. One day, his brothermet him in great tribulation, with a pokeat his back, in which he learned, withindignation, he was carrying a pig."A pig!" exclaimed his brother; "Iapprenticed you to learn music, notpig-driving." The tone in which thisexclamation was uttered so alarmed ouryoung musician, that, setting down hispoke, the pig struggled out of it, andescaped ; a loss, however, which wasthe last he had to fear, as he was sentupon no more similar errands.Under the two able teachers abovementioned,he rapidly acquired celebrity,particularly by his exquisite performanceson the violin, his favouriteinstrument through life. His youth,talents, and interesting manners andappearance, soon secured him manyfriends in the university, and it wasby their advice that, on the death ofManini, in 1785, he removed toCHARLES HAGUE.London, where he became the pupilof the famous Salomon. Already anexcellent performer, he could not failto excel with such an example and inashort time he was superior to mostperformers on the violin, for expressionand delicacy, which he particularly exemplifiedin giving effect to the musicot Haydn.After having taken some lessonsin vocal harmony under Dr. Cooke,Hague returned to Cambridge; and,in 1794, was admitted to the degreeof bachelor of music. His exercisefor the same was the anthem, afterwardspublished, begining, " By thewaters of Babylon ;" taken from theOne hundred a. id thirty-seventh Psalm.In this production," says the authorof The Musical Dictionary, " he hasshewn he had completely overcome themechanical difficulties of composition.The parts proceed without embarrassment,and the harmony is pure. Overthe whole there is thrown a characterof simplicity and learning. The openingtrio is tender and pathetic, and in listeningto the entire composition, we appearto be surveying scenes of desolation andof melancholy grandeur, such as thechildren of Israel deplored in theirexile." This was his first great effortin composition, and gained him thathigh reputation with the university,which induced the senate to elect him,on the death of Dr. Randall, in 1799,to the chair of professor of music ; hisdoctor's degree in which he shortlyafterwards took. He now became theleader of all musical festivals atCambridge, Norwich, and Bury St.Edinond's, and gained universal applauseby the manner in which he conductedthem, and his own admirableperformances on the violin.Following up, also, the reputation hehad gained by his anthem, and severalsingle songs of considerable merit, heset to music the collection of songs,moral, sentimental, and instructive,published in 1807, by the Rev. JamesPlumper, Bed.; and in 1811, he producedhis admirable ode, performed inthe Senate-house, at Cambridge, atthe installation, as chancellor of theuniversity, of his royal highness theDuke of Gloucester. This has beenpronounced " the most elegant and themost sublime of Dr. Hague's productions;" and is, of its kind, scarcelyinferior to any other extant, either incomposition or expression. He hadpreviously printed a set of glees, consistingof-real parts; and he also publisheda masterly arrangement, as quin-sets,of twelve of Haydn's symphonies.Dr. Hague died on the 18th of June,1821, regretted by a large circle offriends, to whom he was endeared bymany estimable qualities.As a composer, Dr. Hague ranksamong the most eminent of those whohave principally confined themselves toconcert music. His glees are remarkablefor their purity and simplicity ;and, contrasted with his other compositions,show that he knew howto preserve a sensible distinction betweenthe secular and the ecclesiasticalstyle. Few persons better understoodthe theory of music; which will readilybe conceded, when it is stated, that hehad made himself completely master ofthe works of Rameau, justly styled theNewton of music. As an instrumentalperformer he excelled most in his violinaccompaniment to the piano-forte :44 In that," says Dr. Burney, <4 we arealmost inclined to think he was unrivalled; so prompt was the intelligencewith which he seized the meaning ofthe composer, so fascinating the eloquencewith which he developed hisideas." He was also complete masterof the tenor and violoncello, and taughtsome of his daughters to play on thelatter instrument with considerableeffect.Composers.WILLIAM H O R S L E Y.WILLIAM Horsey was born inLondon, in the year 1774. Ill healthand family misfortunes are said to havecaused his early education to be greatlyneglected, and he was sixteen beforemusic was fixed on as his futurecalling. He was then articled for fiveyears to Theodore Smith, an eminentpiano-forte player, but deficient in theoreticalknowledge, and occasionally sopassionate, that his pupil, to escapefrom his violence, often lost the benefitof instruction. Smith, however, hadseveral valuable musical acquaintances,including Jacob, Joseph, and IsaacBring, from whose friendship Horsleyobtained great advantages, and fromthem he first imbibed that love of vocalmusic which he ever after cherished.An introduction to Dr. Alcott, in1799, was the means of enabling himto make great improvement in gleewriting; he was at this time employedas a teacher; but now every momenthe could spare was devoted to composition.He had already written services,in five, six, seven, and eight parts;two anthems, in twelve real parts;and a sanctus for four choirs, besidesemploying himself much in the constructionof canons; in the exerciseof which difficult species of compositionhe found a considerable source of improvement.Shortly after his introductionto Dr. Alcott, Horsley suggestedto him the formation of a societyfor the cultivation of English vocalmusic, and the Concentred Scales,so named by Mr. Webbe, was, in consequence,instituted. This, society wasthe means of introducing Horsley toseveral eminent professors, and, as eachmember was to preside in turn, andfurnish music for the day, gave a newstimulus to his exertions.He haul been for some time organisti of Ely Chapel, Holborn, but resignedthat situation on being appointed to the Asylum. Fromthis period he began to compose vocalmusic with instrumental accompaniments,and set, amongst other things,Smollett's Ode to Mirth, and the CantateDomino ; and on proceeding to thedegree of bachelor of music, at Oxford,in 1800, he composed his anthem,When Israel came out of Egypt, asan exercise. When the Vocal Concertswere established, in the following year,he became one of the composers, andwas the most copious and successfulamongst the native contributors o:music for that series of celebratedperformances. In 1802, he succeededDr. Alcott as organist of the Asylum,the whole duty of which post he continuedto perform till 1812, when hewas allowed an assistant, upon beingelected organist of Belgrade Chapel,Malkin Street, Governor Place.Mr. Horsley's principal publishedworks are : three collections of glees,canons, and madrigals, for three, four,five, and six voices ; six glees, for twotrebles and a bass; and a collection offorty canons of various species, inscribedto his friend, Muzio dementi,in language that manifests his highrespect for that great writer. He abocontributed to The Vocal Harmony,fifteen or sixteen glees, expressly composedby him for this splendid work.He has besides printed many otherpieces, both glees, songs, and duets ;together with many pieces of pianofortemusic ; and an explanation ofthe major and minor scales, accompaniedwith exercises, calculated toimprove the mind. Hut these productionsare said to bear no proportionto his manuscript pieces, which consistof services, odes, anthems, &c. ; threesymphonies, for a full orchestra, whichwere several times performed at theVocal Concerts ; several trios, for violinand violoncello ; and a great collectionof single pieces, in glees, canons,duets, songs, &c. His compositionsare all of a very high character; and itis to be regretted that the business ofinstruction prevented him from piviii^more time to this department of his an.WILLIAM CROTCH.WILLIAM CROTCH.WILLIAM CROTCH was born atNorwich, on the 5th of July, 1775. Hewas the son of a carpenter, who understood,besides his business, somethingof organ building. Upon this instrument,the subject of our memoir, whilstnot more than eighteen months old,would attempt to play, and before hewas two years of age, had made suchprogress that he was considered a prodigyamong his neighbours, and wentby the name of the Infant Musician.His ear, too, at this early period, was sofine, that if any one played false, itthrew him into a violent passion. Whenhe first heard the organ at NorwichCathedral, he was strongly agitated, andsuch was the irritability of his nerves,that it was some time before he couldlisten to it without pain and crying.According to one authority, he was atthis time remarkable only tor his musicalfaculties ; but Dr. Burney, in hisaccount of the Infant Musician, printedin The Philosophical Transactions, saysthat he discovered a genius for drawing,as well as music, and was in all respectsa premature and intelligent child.When only two years and four monthsold, he was able to transpose into themost extraneous and difficult keys,whatever he played ; and at two yearsand a half, could distinguish any notestruck in his hearing, when out of sightof the keys. " I examined his countenance,"says Dr. Burney, " when he firstheard the voice of Signer Pacchierotti,the principal singer of the opera, butdid not find that he seemed sensibleof the superior taste and refinement ofthat exquisite performer : however, hecalled out very soon after the air wasbegan, ' he is singing in F.' "He found no difficulty in playing anextempore bass to a treble, or a treble toa bass, and though not always correctaccording to the rules of counterpoint,seldom failed to produce an agreeableaccompaniment. In the November ofthe year in which the doctor concludeshis narrative (1778), a universal interestbegan to be excited concerning littleCrotch ; in consequence of which hisparents were induced to .exhibit him.I first heard little Crotch," say DainesBarrington, " on the 10th of December,1778, when he was nearly three yearsand a half old, and find that I made thefollowing memorandum on returninghome : Plays God save the King, andMinuet de la Cour, almost throughoutwith chords; reaches sixth with his littlefingers; cries 'No,' when I purposelyintroduced a wrong note; delights inchords and running notes for the bass;plays for ten minutes extempore passages,which have a tolerable connexionwith each other; seldom looks at theharpsichord, and yet generally hits theright intervals, though often distantfrom each other. His organ rather of ahard touch ; many of his passageshazarded and singular, some of whichhe executes by his knuckles, tumblinghis hands over the keys."After publicly displaying his talentsin his native town, he removed to Cambridge,and, in 1779, to London, wherehe played before the king and royalfamily with great applause. He wouldalso occasionally amuse the court witha display of that irritable and petulanthumour which appears to have been aconspicuous feature in his juvenilecharacter. Sometimes no entreatiescould prevail upon him to play ; andon one occasion, it is related, that hearingthe king play God save the King,not in the most correct manner, hepushed his majesty aside, saying, " Thatis not right, you fool!" In 1786 and1787, he went to reside at Cambridge,where he studied under professor Randall,and did the duty of that learnedmusician at the chapels of King's andTrinity Colleges, and at the universitychurch, St. Mary's. He also composedan oratorio, called The Captivity ofJudah ; but he had not then formedhis taste, nor was he a correct composer.In 1788, he removed from Cambridgeto Oxford, under the patronage of theRev. A. C. Schomberg with the intentionof studying and graduating for theC M P O S E K S .church; but the illness of his kindpatron inducing him to alter his plans,he resumed his profession of the scienceof music, and, on the death of Mr.Norris, in 1790, he was appointed organistof Christchurch. He graduatedbachelor of music in 1794 ; and duringthe lifetime of Dr. Hayes, the Oxfordprofessor of music, he was intrustedwith the conduct of the music-roomconcerts, and afterwards continued forseveral years to preside at them. Onthe decease of the doctor, in 1797, hewas elected the university professor ofmusic ; and, in 1799, he took his doctor'sdegree in that faculty. In 1800,and the four following years, he readpublic lectures in the music school, atOxford; and when the directors of theSurry Institution determined on establishinga musical lectureship, he wasappointed to fill that chair. On thefoundation of the Royal Academy ofMusic, in 1823, he was named principal;an appointment that gave universalsatisfaction, and which, as wellas his professorship in Oxford, he stillretains.Dr. Crotch's most celebrated performanceis his oratorio of Palestine,one of the most original and successfulthat has been produced for the last fiftyyears. It is remarkable for its sacredcharacter throughout, and the music is,in all respects, worthy of the fine poetryof Bishop Hebe, to which it has beenwedded. His compositions for thepiano-forte are of a very superior order,and he is said to play upon that instrumentwith as much taste and power asupon the organ. His glee of Go, tunefulBird, and his motet, Methinks Ihear, are of the very highest class inthat school of writing. Among his othercompositions may be mentioned his Odeto Fancy, in score ; To love thee, O myEmma; Nymph, with Thee; SweetSylvan Scenes; Hail! all the dear delights;Hail, Sympathy! Bones of Israel,a duet ; Clear shines the Sky, an air ;two organ fugues; three organ concertos; ten anthems, sonatas, diver-mementos,&c. for the piano-forte ;Rounds for ditto, in score; Palestine,with the voice parts in score; FuneralAnthem for the late Duke of York, inscore; Elements of Musical Composition; Practical Thorough-bass ; Questionsin Harmony, with Answers; andPreludes and Instructions for thePiano-forte. His adapted works are :Handel's oratorios, chorusses, andovertures, &c. ; Haydn's Sinfonias,Numbers seven, eight, and ten; twelveof ditto, with accompaniments forpiano-forte; several of Mozart's compositions; Sinfonias of Romberg, Koze-such, and the Pastorale, Beethoven,&c. ; and three volumes of Specimensof Music,JOHN PARRY.THIS prolific and popular composerwas born at Denbigh, in North Wales,in 1776 ; and made his first musical essay,by constructing for himself a file, of apiece of cane, upon which, without anyinstruction, he learned to play all thepopular airs of the day. A dancing-master,who lived in the neighbourhood,taught him his notes, and gave himsufficient instruction on the clarionto enable him to accompany the singers,at his parish church, in their psalm-tunes,In 1793, upon the embodying of theDenbigh militia, he joined the band;and made such progress in the courseof the next four years, that, in 1797,he was appointed master. He quittedthe regiment in 1807, at which time hecould take a part on any wind instrument;besides being well acquaintedwith the harp, piano-forte, and violin.Those on which lie chiefly excelledwere the clarion and flageolet. At aconcert given by him at Rochester, heplayed on three flageolets at once, fixedon a stand; and repeated the sameperformance at Covent Garden, for thebenefit of Mrs. T. Dibdin. In the yearlast-mentioned, he settled in London ;and the double-flageolet being muchin vogue at that time, he was extensivelyemployed in teaching that instrument.J John PARRYA letter, written by him to a friend,after he had been some years in themetropolis, gives an account of hislabours in a manner at once indicativeof his merits and his modesty. " WhenI came to London," he says, in a lettercited in The Dictionary of Musicians,I had almost everything to learn ; Iaccordingly applied myself seriously tostudy, with a view of turning my workout of hand without many glaring faults.I confined myself to vocal compositions,chiefly ballads, and easy pieces forthe harp and piano-forte, also duetsfor flutes and other wind instruments;and never attempt now to soar abovemy sphere: well knowing that thereare many musicians in the higher walksof the science much more able to produceerudite compositions than myself.I understand the nature of every instrumentused in an orchestra ; hencethe rare instances of the necessity of asecond rehearsal of any of my compositions.I score with uncommon facility,and, I trust, tolerably correct ; Iknow the power of the various instruments,and I endeavour to ascertainthe ability of the different performers,and write accordingly. I do my utmostto walk peaceably through life, infriendship with all my brethren, interferingwith no one, and, I trust,bearing the ill-will of no man."In 1809, he published some songs,and other pieces ; and, in the sameyear, was invited to compose for Vaux-hallGardens ; the musical departmentof which he superintended for severalyears. His next publication was a collectionof Welsh melodies, for which theCambrian Society presented him witha silver medal ; and, many years after,appeared his two volumes of AncientBritish Airs, with poetry by Mrs.Hemans, then resident at St. Asaph.Between 1813 and 1818, he composedseveral songs, for public occasions, andtwo musical farces, entitled, respectively,Fair Cheating, and High Notions; ofboth of which the words and musicwere by himself. In 1820, he conductedthe Eeisteddfodau, or Congressof Welsh Bards, at Wrexham; andat a gorsedd, or meeting of Welsh bards,in 1821, a bardic degree was conferredupon him, under the denomination ofBard Law, or professor of music andmaster of song. In the latter year, heproduced, at the English Opera, his verysuccessful piece, called, Two Wives, oraHint to Husbands; which was playedfor twenty-five nights successively.In 1822, he conducted at the congressof the Welsh bards, held at Brecon ;and the meetings of the Welsh bards,held in London, have been constantlyunder his direction, as registrar of musicto the Royal Cambrian Institution.Besides the above dramatic efforts, hehas furnished parts of several operas, andother pieces ; adapted the whole of themusic to the opera of Ivanhoe, as performedat Covent Garden Theatre; andhas composed songs, duets, &c., for all thecelebrated theatrical and public singersof his time. His compositions and arrangementsare said to amount to morethan three hundred, omitting his dramaticpieces, and include almost everyspecies of music. His most favouritepublications are : two volumes of Welshmelodies, with English words; two ofScotch; two volumes of catches andglees; two of minstrel songs, for theflute; one, entitled Corydon, and one,Sapphonia, for the violin. Amongsthis most popular songs are : The PeasantBoy; The Minstrel Boy; ApShenkin; Love's a Tyrant; SweetHome; The Voice of her I love; Takea Bumper and try ; Smile again, mybonnie Lassie, &c. &c. He has alsopublished several pieces of music forthe harp ; popular airs, lessons, androndos for the piano-forte ; music forsingle and double flageolet, the violin,and flute; many volumes of militarymusic; books of instruction for severalinstruments; two sets of Welsh airs;and The aeolian Harmonies, consistingof selections from the works of the mosteminent composers, arranged for windinstruments.COMPOSERS.HENRY ROWLEY BISHOP.THIS popular composer was born inLondon, about 1780 ; and, having displayeda taste for music, he was, inearly life, placed under the care of thecelebrated Francesco Bianchi. Noprinted accounts speak of his progressprevious to 1806; in which year theballet of Tamerlane and Bajazet, andof Narcisse et Les Graces, were produced,with his music, at the King'sTheatre. In the same year, he composedthe music for two ballets, atDrury Lane Theatre, both of whichmet with success. His first attempt atoperatic composition appears to havebeen in June, 1808; when was performedhis Mysterious Bride, a romanticdrama, the music of which was partlyoriginal and partly select. His first entirecomposition was the opera of TheCircassian Bride, performed, for thefirst time, on the 23rd of February, 1809,at Drury Lane, the night preceding thedestruction of the theatre by fire. Thisevent was most unfortunate for Bishop;as it not only cut short the run ot hisopera, which had been received withenthusiastic applause, but occasionedhim the loss ot the score of the operaitself. His next productions were: aballet, called Mora's Love, for theKing's Theatre ; The Vintagers, a musicalromance, performed successfullyat the Haymarket; and, in 1810, hisopera of The Maniac, at the Lyceum.He was shortly afterwards engaged ascomposer to Covent Garden Theatre;and, in 1811, gave a new proof of hisabilities, in the music of a drama, foundedon The Lady of the Lake, called TheKnight of Snowdon. In January, 1812,was performed his opera of The Virginof the Sun ; in which his attempt toconvey, by music, the idea of a stormand earthquake, excited particular admirationand applause. He next produced,in succession, The Renegade ;Haroun Alraschid ; The Brazen Bust;Harry Le Roy; The Miller and hisMen ; For England, ho ! The Farmer'sWife; The Wandering Boys; The(irand |Alliance ; The Forest of Body ; John of 'Paris ; Brother and Sister ; The Slave ;and several other pieces, adapted byhim, such as The Barber of Seville,The Marriage of Figaro, &c.In 1819, he became a joint partnerwith Mr. Harris, in the exhibition oforatorios ; but a separation of interestsoccurring in the following year, theseperformances were carried on at hisown risk, and entirely under his owncontrol. Arrangements had been made,which invested him with the power ofcontinuing them for the following sevenyears ; but anticipating, probably, thatthey would not add much either to hisfame or profit, he took advantage of aclause in the agreement, and relinquishedthem at the end of the firstseason. In the autumn of 1820, hevisited Dublin, the freedom of whichcity was presented to him, in acknowledgmentof his musical genius. In1825, at which time he had considerablyadded to his fame by the musicof several popular pieces, he transferredhis services to Drury Lane. Here heproduced, in 1826, his celebrated operaof Aladdin, as a counter-attraction toWeber's opera of Oberon, at CoventGarden ; to which, however, the formerwas, undoubtedly, inferior. In thesame year, he was appointed to directthe musical performances at VauxhallGardens.His most popular productions, besidesthose already mentioned, are : themusic of Henri Quatre, Maid Marian,Law of Java, Don John, Clare, Cortez,My Native Land, The Two Gentlemenof Verona, Twelfth Night, Comedy ofErrors, &c. &c. " On the institution ofthe Philharmonic Society," says theauthor of The Dictionary of Musicians,Bishop was appointed one of its directors;he has also held the sameoffice several times since. He, further,belongs to the Royal Academy ofMusic, as a professor of harmony.Bishop," it is added, " has been concernedin the production of more thanseventy theatrical pieces; of this number,more than hal; are h's own unas-WILLIAM II A WES.sister compositions. He has also suppliedthe music of three tragedies, theApostate, Retribution, and Miranda ;and a Triumphant Ode, performed atthe oratorios : he has published a multiplicityof single songs, duets, glees, &c.of great merit. He arranged the firstvolume of The Melodies of variousNations; three volumes of The NationalMelodies are also finished, with hissymphonies and accompaniments ; andhe has finally stipulated with Mr.Power," concludes this writer, in 1824,to superintend his future publicationsot'liish and other classical airs." Bishopcomposed the music to Englishmen inIndia, produced in January, 1827, atDrury Lane, containing some masterlypieces; and he shortly after adapted*,for the same theatre, Rossini's music ofII Turco in Italia, to a piece entitled,The Turkish Lovers. In October, 1829,was produced his second overture to anew drama, at Covent Garden, calledShakspeare's Early Days; and, forthe same theatre, he arranged the musicof Boieldieu's French opera of Les DeuxNuits, to an English version of it, underthe title of The Night before the Wedding,and The Wedding Night, to whichhe added some of his own music; thewhole comprising some ingenious chorussesand concerted pieces, that werewell received. In 1830, he selectedand adapted, with great ability, themusic of the splendid opera of Rossini'sGuillaume Tell, to an English opera, ofthe name of Homer, the Tell of theTyrol ; which was produced, with thegreatest success, at Drury Lane Theatre,on the 2nd of May, of the above year.To enumerate the minor productionsof a composer so popular as Bishop,would be a work of supererogation.WILLIAM HAWES.THIS talented composer was born inLondon, in 1785, and having displayedan early taste for music, became achorister in the Chapel Royal, underthe celebrated Dr. Edmund Ayrton,under whose tuition he remained till1801. In the following year he commencedhis professional career as ateacher of singing, and about the sametime took a situation in the orchestra ofCovent Garden Theatre, as a performeron the violin. He also attended theancient, vocal, and other concerts,where he frequently took parts inglees, &c.In 1803, he was appointed deputyvicar-choral of Westminster Abbey ;in 1805, he received the nominationof a gentleman ordinary of the ChapelRoyal; and in 1806, he became anhonorary member of the Nobleman'sCatch Club. In 1807, he was electeda member of the Royal Society of Musicians;and, in 1808, an honorary memberof the Somerset House Lodge, andof the societies called the Madrigal andConcertos. He was also one of theoriginal members of the Philharmonic,which had its commencement in 1813 ;and of the professional concert, whichwas founded soon after; but, on thebreaking up of the latter, he, in consequenceof the party spirit which paralyzedthe profession at that period,quitted the Philharmonic. In 1814, hewas appointed almoner, master of theboys, and lay vicar of St. Paul's; andin 1817, he was named master of thechildren of the Chapel Royal, andlutenist to the kin<r. In the same yearhe was fully appointed vicar-choral ofWestminster Abbey, but resigned thesituation in 1820, "considering himselftreated with undue severity," it is said,in being refused privileges whichothers had before, and have since, enjoyed."He was the first promoter ofthe Royal Harmonic Institution, underthe design of giving composers themeans of publishing their own works,and consequently, of enjoying theprofits of the sale of them. It was forthis purpose that the old Argyle roomswere subsequently rebuilt, and a magnificentestablishment opened for theexclusive sale of music and instrumentsupon the liberal plan proposed. Thepremises were destroyed by fire somefew years since, but have been reconstructedon a still larger scale.COMPOS E RS.Mr. Hawes had previously acquireda deservedly high celebrity as the composerand harmonizer of various songs,duets, &c. On the production ofMontrose, or the Children of the Mist,at Covent Garden, in February, 1822,Miss Stephens sang two songs arrangedby Mr. Hawes, Charlie is my Darling,and We're a' Nodding. The latteracquired great popularity, and beingpirated and published in one of themagazines, by Mr. Taylor, jun., Mr.Hawes applied to the lord-chancellorfor an injunction ; but after having, insupport of his copyright, expended'120, and Mr. Taylor, in his defence,70, the lord-chancellor (Eldon,)finally declared that he knew nothingof music, and left each party to pay hisown costs ! !Mr. Hawes has, for several years, beencomposer to Mr. Arnold's establishment,the English Opera. His three-voicedglees comprise: Allen a Dale; Gallantand Gaily ; John Anderson, my Jo ; andO, Bothwell Bank. Amongst his gleesfor four voices are : Bring me Flowers,bring me Wine! Boy, who the rosybowl doth pass? We Fairy Folks;Henry cull'd the Flow'ret's bloom;Lovely Phillips ; O, saw ye my Father ?Sweet modest Flow'ret; Since, then, I'mdoomed ; and The Shepherd's Daughter,Sally. His most popular songs are:Barbara Allan; Charlie is my Darling;Com in' through the Rye ; Father William; Friendship; He's dear, dear tome;John Anderson, my Jo; I thinkon thee; Logie o' Buchan ; Auld LangSyne; My Harp alone; My Ellen, alas!is no more ; O, 'tis Love ; O, that I couldrecal the Day ! O, saw ye my Father ? O,Bothwell Bank; O, for one-and-twenty,Tarn ; O, Tenure's gave awa'; Sleep,Baby mine; The Land o' the Leal; Thegreen Spot that blooms o'er the desertof Life; Tak' your auld Cloak about ye;The Beacon ; To the Moor ; Here growsa bonny Briar; Wert thou like me;We're a' Nodding; and He's far, farfrae me.He has also edited and publishedMorley's collection of madrigals, underthe title of The Triumph of Oriana.His success in arranging music for theEnglish opera is well known, and notthe least distinguished of his laboursfor that theatre was the share he hadin the original production of DerFreyschiitz, in this country.ISAAC NATHAN.ISAAC NATHAN was born at Canterbury,in the year 1792, and educatedfor the Hebrew church, under the careof Mr. Lyon, the Hebrew teacher tothe University of Cambridge. He hadmade considerable progress in thatlanguage, as also in the German andChaldean, when his growing fondnessfor music caused his parents to changetheir views with respect to his futuredestination. Having learnt the violinby way of relaxation, he not only becamea tolerable player upon thatinstrument, but made an attempt, inhis own way, to become a composer.All his pocket money," says hisbiographer, " was laid out in the purchaseof music paper, on which he feltanxious to try his talent at composition.Ignorant of the theory, his effusions offancy were unintelligible to all buthimself; and it was not a little singularto see him playing from a groupe ofnotes without any guide as to tune, &c.but such as his own ingenuity hadfurnished him with." He was nowapprenticed to Domenico Corri, and, ineight months afterwards, composed hisfirst song, called Infant Love, whichwas followed by O, come, Maria, TheIlliterate Boy, and The Sorrows ofAbsence. Mer. Corri's embarrassmentsfrequently caused his pupil to go withouta lesson, but the latter's indefatigablestudy at home fully compensated forthis disadvantage. He used to rise atfour in the morning, to sit down to anold harpsichord in an attic of hisfather's house, and sometimes wouldpass the whole day before it, withoutrising even for his meals.Disdaining to exercise his powerson words unworthy the name of poetry,Mr. Nathan selected from Lord Baron'sISAAC NATHAN.himride of Abydos, such pieces as liethought most adapted to music, forhis first mature effort in composition.Among them we may mention : ThisRose, to calm my Brother's cares ;Think not thou art what thou appeared ;Ah! were I severed from thy side;and Bound where thou wilt, my Barb.He subsequently set to music severalother pieces of the same author, particularlyhis Hebrew melodies; manyof which Mr. Nathan is said to havecomposed with the noble bard at hiselbow. He fully entered into the spiritof the words ; and whilst setting tomusic those lines relating to the raisingof Samuel, by the witch of Endow, heso startled a friend present as to makehim exclaim, " I really think it betterto depart, Nathan; for you look so wildthat I should soon imagine you Samuelhimself."Mr. Nathan's popularity as a com-power was not sufficient to preservehim from pecuniary embarrassments ;in consequence of which, he, for ashort time, absented himself fromLondon. On his return, he was urgedby some of his creditors to try his successas a singer, and he accordinglymade his debut at Covent Garden, asHenry Bertram, in Guy Wandering.As he had himself anticipated, he failed;the circumstances relating to his appearanceare thus stated in a privateletter, quoted by his biographer. " Ofall risings and fallings in life," saysNathan, " the falling of the pocket ismost annoying, owing to some littleaccompaniments, in the form of angrycreditors, who set a man thinking. Oftwo evils, according to custom, 1 chosethe least; not. considering durancevile, under the best auspices, as a bedof roses, more particularly when upwardsof two hundred miles from thosewhose tender age and necessities requiredmy exertions; and as desperatecases require desperate remedies, Ideemed it prudent to purchase myliberty, by convincing those who hadclaims on my personal property, that 1really did not possess a Stentorianpower of lungs sufficient to fill CoventGarden Theatre. As a proof thatvanity had no hand in the business,I sent Mr. Harris a critique from Canterbury(where I had tried the characterproposed for me), not the mostflattering to my feeble voice. For theAdonis-like state of my appearance, Icannot, in honest truth, say much ; but1 query, with a plaster on his breast,and an unhealed blister on his back,whether even the Apollo Belvidere (towhom I beg it to be understood I bearnot the slightest resemblance) wouldhave looked so attractive as in a wholeskin. Dressed and patched for theoccasion by my much esteemed medicalfriend, Mr. Hare, of Argyle Street, Idared my fate, and while I strutted myhour on the stage, pardon me formost profanely altering the text ofShakspeare ' the curs snarled at meas1 walked along.' Let me disclaimany allusion to those whose condemnationproceeded from an honest expressionof opinion ; ignorant as they wereof the disadvantages under which Ilaboured, I could but anticipate theirsentence : I allude only to such, who,to serve party or private purposes, camewith a premeditated design to crushme."As a composer, Mr. Nathan has considerablyadded to his fame, since thepublication of the pieces before-mentioned,by his music to the play ofSweethearts and Wives. The song,Why are you wandering here, fairmaid ? is excelled in popularity by noother of the present day, and is alonesufficient to establish and perpetuatehis reputation. No composer understoodbetter the union ot poetry withmusic; and, in his hands, each is aided,in expression, by the other. In hisorchestral arrangements, he is said tobe equally happy, and his accompanimentspossess a richness of harmonythat reach beyond the ear. Mr.Nathan is also eminent as a singingmaster, and has lately published a veryvaluable and profound work, in connexionwith this branch of his profession,entitled An Essay on the Historyand Theory of Music, and on theQualities, Capabilities, and Managementof the Human Voice.VOCAL PERFORMERS.ANASTASIA ROBINSON, COUNTESS OFPETERBOROUGH.ANASTASIA ROBINSON was bornabout the year 1690. She was descendedfrom a good family in Leicestershire,and was the daughter of aportrait-painter, who had acquired considerabletaste in music, during hisresidence in Italy, whither he had gonefor professional improvement. Findinghis daughter had a good ear, and apromising voice, he placed her underthe care of Dr. Croft, intending thatshe should be instructed in music asan accomplishment ; but, subsequently,being deprived of sight, by a disorder inhis eyes, he was obliged to look to hisdaughter's vocal talents as a means ofsubsistence for himself and his family.Anastasia, in consequence, took lessonsfrom an eminent singing-master, namedSardonic, and also from the opera-singer,called the baroness; whilst her fathertaught her the Italian language, inwhich she was soon able to converse,and read the best poets, with facility.She made her first appearance in publicat the concerts in York Buildings ;where she accompanied herself on theharpsichord, and met with very greatapplause. Her pleasing style of singing,and interesting manners, gainedher numerous friends and admirers,among whom were several ladies ofhigh rank, under whose patronage herfattier took a house in Golden Square ;where he gave weekly concerts andassemblies, in the manner of conversazione,which were frequented by personsof the first distinction.Her taste being now matured, andher style of singing such as to renderher a valuable acquisition to the stage,she was engaged to appear at the ItalianOpera ; where she made her debut onthe 27th of January, 1714, in the operaof Crest. She continued to performthe principal character in opera fromthis period till 1724, when she retiredfrom the stage, in consequence, as itafterwards appeared, of her marriagewith the Earl of Peterborough. Thisnobleman had long been her admirer,but his pride had hitherto preventedhim from offering himself as her husband; and he was convinced that hecould attach her to him by no dishonourableconnexion. An officer, whois described as General II , hadbefore made unworthy proposals to her,which had been rejected with meritedcontempt. Lord Peterborough, withoutmaking any direct proposal, hadexpressed an interest in her welfare,which she could not misunderstand ;but although she sincerely esteemedhim. she felt that, until he was moreexplicit, it would be improper for herto regard him in the character of a lover.She perceived the struggle between hisaffection and pride ; but, mindful also ofher own honour and dignity, as well aswhat was due to her father, she continuedto sing in public, notwithstandingthe remonstrances of the earl, andher own secret repugnance to the stage.At length, as it is usually said, herperformance in the part of Griselda, orPatient Grisel, completed her conquestover the earl ; who offered her his handin marriage, upon condition that shewould keep their union a secret until itshould be convenient for him to makeit known.She did not, in the early part of hermarriage, reside under the same roofANN CATLEY.with the earl; but, after the death ofher father, lodged with her mother, atFulham, in the neighbourhood of theearl's villa, at Parson's Green. Herhusband, however, being about to undergoa dangerous surgical operation,sent for her to attend him, at MountBevis, near Southampton ; but shewould only go, on condition that shemight be permitted to wear her weddingring, to which he at length consented.But " his haughty spirit,"says Mrs. Robinson's biographer, " wasstill reluctant to the making a declaration,that would have done justice toso worthy a character as the person towhom he was now united ; and, indeed,his uncontrollable temper, and highopinion of his own actions, made him avery awful husband, ill suited to LadyPeterborough's good sense, amiabletemper, and delicate sentiments. Shewas a Roman catholic ; but never gaveoffence to those of a contrary opinion,though very strict in what she thoughther duty. Her excellent principles,and fortitude of mind, supported herthrough many severe trials in her conjugalstate. At last, Lord Peterboroughprevailed on himself to do her justice,instigated, it is supposed, by his bad.-tate of health, which obliged him toseek another climate ; and she absolutelyrefused to go with him, unlesshe declared his marriage. He appointeda day for all his nearest relationsto meet him at the apartmentover the gateway of St. James's Palace,belonging to Mr. Points, who wasmarried to Lord Peterborough's niece.When they were all assembled, he begana most eloquent oration, enumeratingall the virtues and perfections ofMrs. Anastasia Robinson, and the rectitudeof her conduct during his longacquaintance with her; for which heacknowledged his great obligations andsincere attachment, declaring he wasdetermined to do her that justice whichhe ought to have done long ago, bypresenting her to all his family as hiswife. He spoke this harangue with somuch energy, and, in some parts, sopathetically, that Lady Peterborough,not being apprised of his intentions,was so affected, that she fainted awayin the midst of the company."The earl did not long survive thispublic acknowledgment of her rights ;his wife died about fifteen years after,in 1760, beloved and respected by all whoknew her. After Lord Peterborough'sdeath, she found, among his papers, hismemoirs, written by himself; but theycontained so many confessions reflectingupon his character, that, to thegreat disappointment of the curious, sheburnt the whole of the manuscript.ANN CATLEY.THIS celebrated vocal performer wasborn in the year 1745, of parents in veryhumble circumstances. Her father, itis said, was a coachman, and afterwardskept a public-house, near Nor-wood,in Surrey. His daughter havingshown an early taste for music, was, atthe age of fifteen, apprenticed to Mr.Bates, the composer, and in the summerof 1762, made her first appearance inPublic at Vauxhall Gardens. On theth of October, in the same year, shemade her debut at Covent GardenTheatre, in the character of the PastoralNymph, in Comus. At this periodshe is said to have been remarkable forlittle more than the beauty of her person,and a diffidence on the stage, whichshe soon got rid of. In 1763, publicattention was drawn more generallytowards her. by an application, on thepart of lier father, to the Court of King'sBench, for an information against hermaster, Bates, Sir Francis Delaval, andone Raine, an attorney, charging themwith a conspiracy ; the first, for assigningover his daughter to Sir FrancisDelaval, for the purpose of prostitution ;and the last, for drawing the deeds onthe occasion. The facts, as disclosedby affidavits, were, that Sir Francis,having taken the opportunity of hisvisits to the house of Mr. Bates to securethe young lady's affections, hadalso obtain "ed the promise ot her person,which was to be surrendered on theVOCAL PERFORMERS.payment of 200 to Mr. Bates, whowas also to be guaranteed the benefitof all engagements which he had madefor her at the time. An informationwas granted by the court ; but as noother proceedings were taken, thematter was, probably, compromisedbetween the parties.In the season of the same year, MissCatley sung at Mary-le-bone Gardens,and at the expiration of it, went toIreland, where she continued to singwith great applause until 1770, inwhich year she returned to CoventGarden. Her performances on thestage were received with rapturousadmiration ; but, at the oratorios, shedisplayed a levity of manner which, incontrast with the more chastened deportmentof Mrs. Sheridan, did notraise her in public estimation. On thestage, however, she was undoubtedly themost popular vocal actress of her day ;and, in the stoccato style of singing, waswithout a rival. Her beauty and vivacity,combined with her talents, enabledher to take great liberties with theaudience, and effectually to appeasethem, upon any violent manifestationsof disapprobation: when she was encored,she would frequently turn roundand curtsey with her back to theaudience; and, on one occasion, anorange being thrown at her from thegallery, she took it up, and advancingto the lights, exclaimed, " This is notacivil (Seville) orange !" The sameanecdote has been told of Quin, and ofMrs. Clive.Miss Catley's last appearance in publicwas in 1784. She died at the houseof General Lascelles, near Brentford,on the 14th of October, 1789. She issaid to have been married to thegeneral ; and as our authority speaksof her as " the good mother, the chastewife, and accomplished woman," probably,had some children by him. Acritic of the day, after having denominatedher the favourite of Thalia, thefavourite of the town, and the favouriteof fortune, thus commemorates herattractions: " Her theatric representationswill be remembered as long asthe fame exists of the poets who portrayedthem. The discussion of herprofessional merit should be the subjectof a volume ; we shall thereforeonly add, that her voice and mannerwere, perhaps, never equalled in thesame style. The heart of convivialitystill vibrates with song and joy at therecollection of Push about the Jorum.Her person all but equalled her accomplishments.A few years back, shewas the centre of attraction ; the pursuitof men in every rank and station insociety. Beauty is a captivating syren ;and to resist her enchantments, manmust possess something more, or somethingless, than the usual portion ofhumanity. The allurements a theatriclife holds out to lovely women, admitsthe same observation, and justifies theapplication with tenfold force. All thatcan be said is, ' Alas ! poor human nature!'She possessed many virtues;and the greatest of all humanity.Her generous hand often lightened theheavy heart. Feelingly alive by natureto every impression ot sensibility, thisamiable virtue accompanied her elevationto rank and riches; and joinedothers that adorn the first stations insociety, and which alone make themrespectable. Prudery certainly formedno part of her character : but where isthe prude that ever owned half hermerit? Her openness, goodness, knowledge,and generosity, added to herpersonal accomplishments, rendered heran acquisition of which the worthiestmight be proud. The morality ofplayers, like that of princes, is exemptfrom the precision of vulgar rules."SAMUEL HARRISON.THIS sweet and tasteful singer wasborn at Helper, near Durh'eld, inDerbyshire, on the 8th of September,1760. He received his musical educationalmost wholly from Mr. Burton, achorus singer in the oratorios performedat Drury Lane, under the direction ofthe celebrated performers, Messrs.SAMUEL HARRISON.Stanley and Linley. At the first establishmentof the Ancient Concerts,by the celebrated dilettante musician,Mr. Bates, in 1776, Master Harrison,then sixteen, was one of the solosoprano singers ; and it is remarkable,that his voice continued unbroken tillthe age of eighteen, when it at oncefailed him during his performance ofa single song at a provincial festival.From that time till 1784, scarcely anymemorials have been preserved of him;which is the more to be regretted,since i,t would be of high interest andgreat value, both to the musical studentand amateur singer, to learn thecourse, both of practice and study, bywhich he succeeded in forming, outof materials as slender as Nature everbestowed upon a singer, a voice sosweet, a tone so even, a shake soliquid and brilliant, and a style sopure and finished.It was in the above year (1784), that,by the command of the late king,George the Third, who had be; npleased with his performances at thequeen's musical parties, at BuckinghamHouse, he was engaged to openThe Messiah, at that stupendous undertaking,the Commemoration of Handel;and no one, it is said, ever sang withsuch pathos, such truth of feeling, as hedid. " His," observes a writer in TheHarmonicon, " were the very tones tospeak comfort to the people and peaceto Jerusalem ; to announce the end ofwarfare, and the pardon of iniquities;but the voice that should cry aloud inthe wilderness was wanting, and theeffort at force of expression, which thewords compelled him to make, contrastedpainfully, almost ludicrously,with his total want of physical power."In the year 1785, he appeared as theprincipal tenor singer at the AncientConcerts, a post he retained till 1789,when he retired, and was, in the followingyear (1790), succeeded by Kelly.Soon afterwards, he married a MissCenter, a young lady of great personalbeauty, and a singer of no ordinaryabilities. In the following year, in conjunctionwith the father of the presentableconductor of the Ancient Concerts,Mr. Knyvett, he circulated proposalsfor a series of vocal concerts, to beheldat Willis's rooms, which met withsuch decided success, that a secondseries was given during the same season.The principal solo singers, wereHarrison and his wife ; and the ablemanner in which these concerts wereconducted, caused them to becomeof such high consideration, that theyform no mean portion of the history ofthe progress of our national music,during the latter part of the eighteenthand commencement of the nineteenthcentury. For, though dropped for atime, at the close of 1794, they revivedon a more enlarged scale in 1801, andcontinued to enjoy the public favourand patronage till 1822 ; when the increasingtaste of the public for foreignand instrumental music caused themto be finally relinquished.Harrison, together with his wife, retiredfrom public in 1802, the lastsong he sang being Gentle Airs. Hedied of sudden internal inflammation,after many hours of excruciating agony.on the 25th of June, 1812, in thefifty-second year of his age.Harrison's voice is described in TheHarmonicon, for 1830, as having beena true tenor, extending to nearly twooctaves ; and his forte, in the strictestsense of the word, was that of thecantabile. In tone, it was at once theweakest and the most pure and equalthat has, perhaps, ever been heard inEngland its very existence was a proofof how far determination and perseverancecan triumph over natural deficiencies.It seemed as though, firmlybent on being a singer, he had madehis own vocal organ , and tasked himselfto stand forth a living contradictionto the Italian proverb, that, out of onehundred qualifications necessary to theaccomplishment of a great singer, a finevoice forms ninety-nine. Voice (wespeak of his natural organ) he hadreally little ; it was the high polish, andminute and exquisite finish of his style,that made the charm."As we have said, in our memoir ofBraham, Harrison is not to be comparedwith that singer in power andenergy, but in such songs as the compassof his voice could reach, he was.accounted not only the most finishedsinger of his age or country, but of allEurope. In Total Eclipse, he is saidto have pictured to the very life, thehopeless, spirit-broken lamentation ofwhat was once a warrior, now a slave,VOCAL PERFORMERS.over the deepest, the most umuitigublecalamity with which he could bevisited. The other songs in which hechiefly excelled, were Dr. Pepusch'sCantata of Alexis, Handel's Lord,Remember David ; Pleasure my formerw;iys re-signing; Dr. Boyce's SoftlyRise ; Zingarelli's Ombra Aorta ;Webbe's A Rose from her Bosom hadstrayed; and in latter days, Atwood'sSoldier's Dream ; and Horsley's GentleLyre.CHARLES DIGNUM.THIS celebrated vocalist and actor wasthe son of a respectable tradesman atRotherhithe, where he was born, aboutthe year 1765. Subsequently to thisperiod, his father carried on business, asamaster tailor, in Wild Street, Lincoln'sInn Fields, and young Dignumis also said to have been taught to handlethe shears. Being of the Roman catholicpersuasion, he was engaged, while aboy, to sing at the Sardinian ambassador'schapel, where he was generallyadmired for the melody and power ofhis voice ; qualities which induced thecelebrated organist and composer, Mr.Webbe, sen., to give him gratuitousinstruction. At this time, Dignum entertainedno idea of making music hisProfession, having a wish to dedicatehimself to the Roman catholic ministry;to which end he importuned his fatherto send him to the catholic college ofDouay to complete his education, andfit him for taking priest's orders. Theplan, however, was abandoned, and hewas then placed on trial with a carverand gilder, named Egglesoe, at the headof that branch of Messrs. Seddon'sestablishment.Though by no means agreeing withhis taste, he remained in this situationfor nine months, and was on the pointof being apprenticed, when the matterwas put an end to in consequence of adispute between Egglesoe and Dignum'sfather ; and, whilst yet undeterminedas to what calling he should adopt,accident brought him acquainted withthe celebrated Mr. Linley, who soondiscovered his capabilities, and gavehim the most flattering hopes of succeedingas a dramatic vocalist. Thisdetermined the subject of our memoirto article himself to Linley for sevenyears; during the two first of which,the master bestowed upon his pupil themost indefatigable attention, and, witha laudable prudence, would not permithim to sing in public till his judgmentwas sufficiently correct, and his tasteand style somewhat fixed. Under suchmanagement, he made his debut atDrury Lane Theatre, in 1784, as youngMeadows, in the opera of Love in a Village;and, though his figure was againsthim, his clear and full-toned voice, andjudicious manner of managing it, causedhim to be received with the warmestapplause. He was equally well receivedin Cymon ; and, on the removal of theelder Bannister, he succeeded to hisline of characters. Dignum's fine tenorvoice admirably suited such parts asHawthorn, Giles, &c., and he is saidto have excelled in them every actorsince the days of Beard.in 1806, he sustained a part in Corri'sopera, The Travellers, or Music's Fascination; and, after the conflagrationof Drury Lane, he sang, at the Hay-market,"The Death of Sir John Moore,with very great applause. It was. howeverat Vauxhall, rather than at thetheatre, that he acquired his chiefpopularity ; he was for many years theprincipal vocalist there, and drewcrowds to hear him. He retired fromthe stage in easy circumstances, formany years preceding his death, whichtook place in London, on the 29th ofMarch, 1827.Dignum composed several pleasingballads, and also published, by subscription,a collection of popular vocal music.He was greatly esteemed for his privateworth arid amiable disposition, and wasremarkable among his professional brethrenfor good-nature and simplicity.He died, according to Parke, worthj30,000 ; a fact which the same authoritymentions, after his relation of thefollowing anecdote : He was at a tinaN is A M A li 1 A C K O U C Hner party, one day, in passion week,where the subject of our memoir andhis daughter were also present. Thelatter, who, as well as her father, wasa catholic, ate scarcely anything, whilstDignum was eating with as much appetiteas if he had just returned froma fox-chase. " How comes it," saidPah ke, ' that you enjoy the good thingsof this table, while your daughter is notpermitted to taste of them?" " Oh !"said he, smiling, " I have got a dispensation!" " Why," added Parke,did you'not procure for your daughtera similar indulgence ?" " Oh ! my dearboy," replied he, " that would neverhave done ; for it would have cost mehalf-a-crown !"Dignum had a great habit of playingwith his fingers on a table, in imitationof a piano-tore, and was much delightedif any one recognised the tune he wasindicating. His friend, Major Topham,being with him, one day, whilst he wasthus engaged, he said to him, " Come,Topham, tell me what I am playing."Oh, yes, Dignum," said the colonel,any one may tell in a moment whatyou are playing you are playing thefool."ANNA MARIA CROUCH.1 HIS famous vocalist was the daughterof an attorney, named Phillips, and wasborn in Gray's Inn Lane, on the 20thof April, 1763. Her fine-toned voiceattracted early notice, and induced herfather to put her under the instructionof Mr. Wafer, with a view of beingeducated for the concert-room. Sheimproved rapidly ; and, when only tenyears old, is said" to have executed TheSoldier tired, vocally and instrumentally,with precision and effect. In1779, she was articled to Mr. Linley,then patentee of Drury Lane Theatre,for six seasons, at a rising salary offrom 6 to 12 per week; and, in1780, she made her debt at that theatre,1 in the character of Mandane, and wasreceived with distinguished applause.Her next character was Clarissa, inLionel and Clarissa ; in which she notonly displayed her vocal abilities toadvantage, but also shewed great dramaticpowers.In 1783, she went to Ireland, whereher beauty and talents excited a greatsensation. A theatrical critic in Freeman'sDublin Journal, in speaking ofher performance, advises his readers toguard well their hearts ; as so sweet acountenance, elegant person, and ravishingvoice, were scarcely found, in acentury, to unite so powerfully in oneyoung lady. She met, at Dublin, withJohn Kemble, who is said to have fallenviolently in love with her; and theirunion was more than once announcedin the public journals. She was playing,one night, at Limerick, the part ofRosetta, in Love in a Village, whensome drunken officers came behind thescenes, and avowed their intention ofconducting her home. John Kemble,however, having been deputed, by hersick father, to escort her, drew his sword,and declared he would do so at thehazard of his life ; and, soon after,coming out, with Miss Phillips on hisarm, who had locked herself in herroom, in fright, he would have beenkilled, it is said, had not an old womanarrested the arm of an officer, whoaimed a" blow at his head from behind.In 1784, Miss Phillips was again inDublin, and found herself not less anobject of admiration. One gentlemanthreatened to shoot her, i/ she would notreceive his addresses; and he was, inconsequence,removed from the theatre;but no weapons were found upon h : m.Soon after, she eloped with the son ofa nobleman, but was brought back byher parents, after a few days, andcarried back to London, where "she reappearedas Emily, in The DoubleDie-guise.In 1785, she married, at TwickenhamChurch, Mr. Crouch, then a lieutenantin the navy; but she still continuedto sing, under her maiden name,until it became visible that she waspregnant. An accidental fall broughton a premature labour, and she losther child, after ten days; an eventVOCAL PERFORM Es.which is said to have most deeply afflictedher. She returned to the stagein 1786 ; but, though well received,lost much of her popularity, after theappearance of Mrs. Billington, in thatyear.In 1787, she sang at the oratorios ofDrury Lane; and Kelly says, that, arrivingin London, tor the first time inhis life, on the 18th of March, of theabove year, he went to Drury Lanethe same evening, with his friend andfellow-traveller, Stephen Storace, to seetheopera of richard Coeur de Lion, inwhich Mrs. Crouch was to play Manette.I was struck with admiration," he says,in his Reminiscences, " of her wonderfulbeauty, and delighted to hear thatshe was to be my prima donna in theopera (of Lionel and Clarissa), in which1 was to perform, for the first time, onthe London boards. She seemed tometo aggregate in herself, like theVenus of Apelles, ail that was exquisiteand charming." She accordinglyacted with him in the latter opera, atDrury Lane, on the following 20th ofApril, where he made his debut to aLondon audience. An intimacy nowcommenced between Kelly and Mrs.Crouch : which was increased, by Mr.Crouch's proposing, that the formershould take up his residence with himselfand his wife. They then becameinseparable, travelling and singingtogether; and neither accepting anengagement without the other. Inthe above year, they both performedat Dublin, York, Leeds, and otherprovincial theatres, and returned toLondon in September. Mrs. Crouchre-appeared, at Drury Lane, in the partof Selim, in Mr. Linley's revivedmusical piece of Amor and Selim, inwhich Kelly tells us, she was inimitable;looked and acted the character to admiration; and sang the favourite rondoof No Flower that blows is like theRose, in a manner to secure a nightlyencore.At the end of January, 1788, she metwith an accident, by the overturning ofa hackney-coach, which prevented herappearance for some time; and left aslight scar upon her face, which alwaysremained. It was reported, that Mr.Crouch had thrown things at her, whichhad cut her face ; but the rumour hadno foundation ; the scars were entirelyowing to the glass of the coach window,of which several pieces .had penetratedher cheek. In the summer of the aboveyear, she made a tour, with Kelly, toLiverpool, Manchester, Chester, andBirmingham, where their reception wasmost flattering; and they reaped aplentiful harvest. They returned toDrury Lane, when Mrs. Crouch resumedher career, as Miranda, in TheTempest; and afterwards played LadyElinor, in The Hauled Tower. Aftermaking another provincial tour together,Mr. and Mrs. Crouch, and Kelly,went to Margate, where her fatherthen lived, and took great pains toforward a subscription for the benefitof a poor girl who had, by an accident,been deprived of the use of her limbs.A petition was put forth ; " Mrs. Crouchand 1 were present," says Kelly ; " andwhen it came to our turn to bestowour mite, 1 said to Mrs. Crouch, that Ithought our best donation would be toplay a night at the theatre for the girl'sbenefit. Mrs. Crouch cheerfully acquiesced,The Beggar's Opera wasselected; and, the next day, the performancewas announced, every placein the house was taken." The receiptsot the house, and many liberal presents,were invested in an annuity; whichproduced the poor girl a comfortablemaintenance tor the rest of her life.In 1790, Mrs. Crouch, with her husbandand inamorato (for in that characterMr. Kelly had long been considered),visited Paris ; where the subject of ourmemoir incurved some danger, by goingto the grand opera with a white rosein her hair.In 1791, Mr. and Mrs. Crouch separated,by mutual consent; in allprobability they had long before ceasedto cohabit, as man and wife. Kelly,who tells us that her husband " neverappreciated the gem he possessed,"still continued to reside with her, andto accompany anal perform with her inall her theatrical engagements.In 1792, they gave musical concertsat their house in Pall Mall ; whichwere attended by all the rank andfashion of the town. Among othervisitors, was the Prince of Wales, whois said to have made advances to Mrs.Crouch, which she .received in sucha manner, as to give Kelly reasonableground for jealousy ; and it is moreBENJAMIN CHARLES INCLEDON.than doubtful, that she did not scrupleto giant him favours, of which Kellyhad, for some time, been the sole possessor.The latter, however, neverparted from her; and they continuedon affectionate terms to the last.During the latter part of Mrs.Crouch's career, her voice became muchinjured, in consequence oT a severecontusion she had received on thethroat, by a blow from a weighty chest;and she was frequently obliged to applyleeches in a morning, previously to singingat night. She continued to sing,however, with applause, till a shorttime previous to 1804, when she visitedBrighton for the benefit of her health,which had been much impaired, if weareto believe more than one authority,by excessive drinking. She died atBrighton, on the 2nd of October, in theyear above-mentioned, having breathedher last in the arms of Kelly ; who, aftergiving an account of her last moments,says, " I hope I, who knew her best,"may be permitted to say, had she beenso fortunate as to meet with a husbandcapable of appreciating and cherishingher estimable qualities and superiortalents, she would have lived and diedwithout a blemish on her fame." Thefollowing year, he caused a monumentto be erected to her memory ; whereinshe is described as " combining withthe purest taste as a singer, the mostelegant simplicity as an actress : beautifulalmost beyond parallel in her person,she was equally distinguished bythe powers of her mind. They enabledher, when she quitted the stage, togladden life by the charms of her conversation,and refine it by her manners,"She had a remarkably sweet voice,"says the author of The Dictionary ofMusicians, " and a naive, affecting styleof singing; this, added to extraordinarypersonal charms, made her a great favouriteof the public for many years."Her private character was highlyamiable ; she was generous and affectionate,and few were more universallybeloved in the profession, Asa singer,she was chaste and impressive ; havingmore sweetness than power, moresensibility than science. She was amost affectionate child ; and Kelly relates,that when about to sail for Dublin,in 1792, " always kindly attentiveto her father, before she left Liverpool,she gave Mr. Parker, of the DruryLane Theatre, with whom she was intimate,a paper for Mr. Phillips (herfather), wherein she bequeathed to him,in case any accident happened to heracertain property ; but begged him notto deliver the paper to her father, unlesshe heard that any disaster hadbefallen her." The vessel was, strangeenough, reported to be lost ; and poorKelly and Mrs. Crouch, according tothe newspapers, " were followed to thegrave by a large concourse of people,bitterly lamenting their untimely end."The whole was, happily, false ; but Mr.Parker, supposing it true, went immediatelyto Mr. Phillips, who was confinedto his bed with the gout, toreveal the melancholy news, and deliverup the paper. " Just as he was aboutto open the business," adds Kelly, " thepostman came to the door with a letterfrom herself, dated at Manchester, informinghim of her being in excellentj health and spirits,"BENJAMIN CHARLES INCLEDON.I HIS celebrated vocalist and actor, known charles Incltdon.wasborn ret St. Veterans, in Cornwall, in17G4, where his father was a respectablephysic. At the early age of eight,lie developed such powers of voice asinduced his friends to article him to thecelebrated Jackson, of Exeter, underwhose tuition he was entered a choristerof Exeter Cathedral. In thissituation he continued to delight allwho heard him till the year 1779, when,disgusted with the restraint he wasunder at the cathedral, he left Exeter,and, unknown to his friends, entered asasailor on board the Formidable, commandedby Rear-admiral (then Captain)Leland. In this vessel he sailed tothe West Indies ; and, during the fouryears he continued in the navy, he wasVMOVOCAL PERFORMERS.In several actions. Parke, however,says, in his Musical Memoirs, and otherauthorities assert, that Incledon wastaken on board ship, to prevent hisgiving evidence against the son of oneof the dignitaries of the church, whohad been indicted for some disgracefuloffence.During his naval career, his vocalabilities having attracted the notice ofmany distinguished officers, they advisedhim to attempt the stage, andAdmiral Lord Hervey furnished himwith letters of recommendation toColman, but the manager declined toengage him. Incledon, however, determinedto persist in his stage pursuits ;and, about 1783, he joined Collins'scompany at Southampton, making hisdebut as Alphonse, in The Castle ofAndalusia. After playing with thecompany for twelve months, he removedto Bath, where he fortunatelymet with the celebrated Rauzzini, whonot only gave him the benefit of hisinstruction, but was the means of hisbeing brought forward in Bath, in amanner commensurate with his merits.About 1788, he was engaged and sangat Vauxhall Gardens ; with what successis not said ; but, in October, 1790,he began a more favourable career, bymaking his debut in the character ofHerriot, in The Poor Soldier, coventGarden Theatre. He was receivedwith unanimous applause, and was notlong in becoming an established favouritewith the public. During thesummer, he travelled, for several years,in the provinces, styling himself thewandering methodist; and at the principaltowns gave an entertainment, consistingof recitations and songs (onDibdin's plan), with great applause andprofit. He was, however, no actor,although he fancied himself one ; hisfavourite character on the stage wasMacheath ; to play which, says one ofhis biographers, he would have arisenfrom his bed at midnight.Incledon retired from Covent Gardenin 1815, on which occasion he took aparting benefit at the Italian OperaHouse, at play-house prices. He afterwardswent to perform in North America; but his powers being then considerablydiminished, his trip did notDrove a very profitable one. An irregularcourse of life had, indeed, considerablyimpaired his voice, previously tohis retirement from the English stage;but of this he could never be convinced,and always attributed the decline of hispopularity to the caprice of the public.On his return to England, he fixed hisresidence at Brighton, where he wasafflicted with a slight paralytic affection,from the effects of which he recovered;but he died of a second attack, at Worcester,on the llth of February, 1826.He had a few months before takenleave (not his first or second time ofdoing so) of the stage, at the SouthamptonTheatre.Incledon," says a critical authority,had a voice of uncommon power, bothin the natural and the falsetto. Theformer was from A to G, a compass ofabout fourteen notes ; the latter hecould use from D to E, or F, or aboutten notes. His natural voice was fulland open, neither partaking of the reednor the string, and sent forth withoutthe smallest artifice ; and such was itsductility, that when he sang pianissimo,it retained its original quality. Hisfalsetto was rich, sweet, and brilliant,but totally unlike the other. He tookit without preparation, according to circumstances,either about D, E, or F ;or, ascending to an octave, which washis most frequent custom, he could useit with facility, and execute in it ornamentsof a certain class with volubilityand sweetness. His shake was good,and his intonation much more correctthan is common to singers so imperfectlyeducated. His pronunciation ofwords, however, was thick, coarse, andvulgar. His forte was ballad ; andballad not of the modern cast of whiningor rant of sentiment, but the original,manly, energetic strain of an earlierand better age of English poesy andEnglish song-writing; such as Black-eyedSusan, and The Storm, the boldand cheering hunting song, or the lovesong of Shield, breathing the chastesimple grace of genuine English melody."The private character of Incledondoes not give a very favourable impressionof him as a man ; it was a mixtureof carefulness and improvidence, good-natureand irritability ; free, perhaps,from any glaring vice, but certainlymarked by no distinguishing good quality.His conversation was disgust-elizabethWellington.ingle vulgar ; and he had, to the last,a predilection for low company. Hewas a great favourite with the inferiorclass of actors, whom he made his booncompanions, and towards whom manyinstances are recorded of his liberality ;particularly in singing for their benefits.The latter part of his life was embitteredby pecuniary embarrassments ;there might have been a mixture ofgenerosity in the prodigality whichoccasioned them, but of his liberalityhis biographers have not recorded anyinstances. He was fond of goodliving ; indeed, both himself and hiswife, if we may credit Parke, seem tohave been epicures, in every senseof the word. Having invited a partyto dinner, they are said to have covereda John-Dory with herrings, in orderthat the company might not be awareof the fish underneath, of which Mr.and Mrs. Incledon were particularlyfond.Incledon was of a very restless disposition,and could never bear to belongin one place: being missed, oneevening, at the house of a friend,who had a party, he was found in thekitchen, helping the maids to pickparsley, which was preparing for supper.Of his credulity, the followinganecdote, among others, is told byParke : Being accustomed to make agreater benefit than any other of theperformers belonging to the theatre, hebecame so anxious when it was near,that he could not refrain from going,every morning, to the box-bookkeeper'soffice, to see how many places weretaken ; and a week before his last, observingthe names to be few besidesthose of his own private friends, hesaid to Brandon, " Dn it ! Jem, if thenobility don't come forward as usual,I shall cut but a poor figure this time."Don't be afraid," said Brandon ; " Idare say we shall do a great deal foryou to-day." " Well," replied Inches" I hope you will ; and as I gohome to dinner, I will look in again."Incledon, who was not very familiarwith Debrett's Peerage, returned, as hehad promised, and read aloud the followingfictitious names, which Brandonhad inserted, in his absence, as a joke :The Marquess of Piccadilly, theDuke of Windsor, Ah," said he,that must be one of the royal family!Lord Highgate, and the' Bishop ofGravesend. Well," said he to Brandon,quite delighted, " if we get on aswell tomorrow, I shall have a numberof distinguished titles present."Incledon was twice married; and oneof his sons made an unsuccessful debitCovent Garden, in the character ofHawthorn, in Love in a Village.ELIZABETH Wellington.THIS celebrated songstress was bornin London, of German parents, aboutthe year 1765. She was the daughterof Mr. Weichsel, a fine hautboy andpiano-forte player ; and at a very earlyage, exhibited symptoms of her futuremusical excellence. She studied musicand singing under the first masters ;at the age of seven, played a concertoat the Haymarket Theatre ; and,when but eleven, composed a pieceof music of great merit. Against thewill of her parents, she was married,in her seventeenth year, to Mr. JohnBillington, one of the band of DruryLane Theatre ; but although both musical,their harmony proved of shortduration. Immediately on her marriage,she repaired to Dublin with herhusband, where, both as an actress andsinger, she was received with greatapplause. This led to an engagementfor twelve nights at Covent Garden,where she appeared, in February, 1786,as Rosetta, in Love in a Village; andso triumphant was her success, that themanagers secured her for the remainderof the season, by an offer of jgl,000 anda benefit. George the Third went onpurpose to hear her, and, conscious ofhis presence, she sang her first duet sotimidly as almost to augur a failure, butshe soon recovered, and displayed herpowers with equal taste and confidence.On the closing of the theatre, sherepaired to Paris, and completed herVOCAL PEKFOK&KRS.musical education under Sacchini. Liereturned to England greatly improved,and after drawing crowded housesnightly, at Covent Garden, set off, inthe end of 1793, on a professional tourthrough Italy, at the principal cities ofwhich she was looked upon with wonderand admiration. Her reception atNaples (where Bianchi expressly composedfor her his celebrated opera ofNez de Castro) was enthu iastic; theking and queen loaded her with presentsthe English nobility were inraptures both with her voice and herperson ; and Mrs. Billington was, forsome time, the talk of Naples.During her stay, she experienced theloss of her husband, and twenty thousandsequins in the bank, at Venice ;the former she repaired by giving herhand, in 1797, to M. de Felissent, orFlorence, a handsome French officer,and to whom she is said to have confessed" she was then in love for thefirst time in her life." Her husbandwas in the commissariat department;but, on his marriage, he resigned hispost, and lived for some time with hiswife, on an estate purchased from theremnant of his wife's property withinthe Venetian territories. The report ofour vocalist's success in Italy havingreached England, invitations were forwardedby the English managers, beggingher to return ; which, after anabsence of two and a half years, shecomplied with ; and, on the 3rd ofOctober, 1801, re-appeared at CoventGarden, as Mandane, in Artaxerxes.Of Mrs. Billington's performance inthis character," says Burgh, in his Anecdotesof Music, " it were superfluous toexpatiate; by those who witnessed it,it can never be forgotten ; to those whodid not, it cannot be described. Witha daring hand, she introduced a newbravura song into the work of Dr. Arne,which she executed with such rapid,varied, and surprising feats of the voice,if we may be allowed the expression,as to electrify the audience: it was aspecies of wonder, which made themind doubt of its being human, sonearly did it resemble the warbling ofa bird. She imitates and goes beyondall the difficulties of the most exquisiteviolin ; and may therefore be consideredas having reached the acme of instrumentalsinging."She subsequently played, alternately,at Drury Lane and Covent Garden, andat the oratorios and fashionable concerts,to crowded and enthusiastic audiences.Dining the years 1801-2, her profitsamounted to jlO,000; and successiveseasons were no less advantageous. Atoneperiod, her fortune was placed inthe hands of trustees, " for her ownsole use and benefit," and amountedto 65,000. In 1803 and followingyear, she appeared at the Italian Operawith immense success, and continuedto sing at concerts, oratorios, &c. untilthe period of her retirement, which tookplace in 1809. She afterwards lived inaprincely style, at a villa, near Hammersmith,where she gave gratuitousconcerts, which were attended by everyclass of persons, from the prince to theplebeian.In 1817, her husband arrived inEngland, after a separation of sixteenyears. She immediately madepreparations to return with him to thecontinent; but died shortly after herdeparture, at her estate of Artier, nearVenice, on the 25th of August, 1818.The person of Mrs. Billington wasexquisitely beautiful; and continued soto a late period. Upon her privatelife much obloquy has been thrown,through the medium of the public press.She has not only been stigmatised, as afemale destitute of virtue, but chargedwith the assassination of her first husband.She appears, however, if wemay judge by acts, to have possessed anoble and generous disposition. Shehad no children ; but supplied the deficiency,by the adoption of two littlegirls, whom she brought up with thegreatest care. As a singer, she wasconsidered superior to all others, bothat home and abroad. Her voice, thecompass of which was from D to G inaltissimo, possessed a degree of flexibilityand sweetness which astonished,while it captivated. Her style of singingwas redolent of ornament ; but ofsuch a chaste and exquisite description,that it never offended the most fastidiousear. In The Soldier tir'd of War'sAlarms she was particularly celebrated.The distances," to use the languageof a critic contemporary with herself,were hit with a clearness anil a precisionthat evinced her perfect intimacywith the first secret of fine performance jSARAH MOUNTAIN.and the variations she introduced at therepetition of the concluding division, asalso the energy with which she dartedto the key note in alt, excited amixture of feelings, as indescribable asflattering."The following instance of the talentof this extraordinary woman is recordedin The Harmonicon : She proposed tobring forward, for her benefit, Mozart'sopera, La Clemens di Tito, which hadnever been heard in this country, andof which there was only one manuscriptscore in the kingdom. This copy wasin the possession of George the Fourth,then Prince of Wales, who, upon applicationbeing made to him, kindly sentitto the Opera House for her use. Thewhole band, the singers, and chorus, Iwere anxious to hear the contents ofso precious a novelty as a manuscriptopera of Mozart ; and Mrs. Billingtongratified them by sitting down to thepiano-forte, playing the accompanimentsfrom the score, and singing theprincipal part, that of Vitellia. In thisway lie went through the whole of the jopera, from beginning to end, givingMozart's expression and character soadmirably, at sight, that the audiencewere in a state of enthusiasm, no lesswith what they heard, than the admirationof her wonderful powers andenthusiasm of mind.SARAH MOUNTAIN.MlSS SARAH, or, according to someauthorities, Sophia, Wilkinson, whichwas the maiden name of this pleasingvocalist, was born about the year 1768.Her father was a famous tight-ropedancer, and occasionally officiated asbarber, at the Circus, where Miss Wilkinsonfirst appeared, in 1782, in a piececalled Mount Parnassus, in which theprincipal characters were representedby children. She continued at the sametheatre for the two following years, andwas a great favourite, if we may guessfrom her salary, which was two guineasa week ; a large sum for one so young.She afterwards travelled round thecountry with her father, and, at the ageof eighteen, obtained an engagement inTate Wilkinson's company, at Hull,where she made her debfit as Patty, inThe Maid of the Mill. In 1784, shesucceeded to Mrs. Jordan's characters,at York and Leeds, where she wasmuch admired, not less for her acting,than the propriety of her private character.At the latter place, a privatesubscription was made for her, after herperformance of The Poor Soldier, whichwas delivered to her by the manager,in these words : " Here, Miss, is a rewardfor your performance of the partyou played last night; but more particularlyfor your respectability in acharacter, which, I hope, you will alwaysbe perfect in that of a good daughter."In 1786. Miss Wilkinson added toher provincial fame, both as an actressand a singer, at Liverpool, and captivatedthe heart of Mr. Mountain, leaderof the band at the concert hall andtheatre, who married her, in the yearabove-mentioned.Previously to her union, she madeher debut at Covent Garden, in thecharacters of Fidelia, in The Foundling,and Leonora, in The Padlock.Her reception was enthusiastic : yet,for some reason or other, the managersthought fit to throw her into theback-ground, during the three yearsfor which they had engaged her, byseldom employing her, or giving herparts altogether unsuited to her abilities.A dramatic critic of the time observesof her performances : " In characters ofan artless description, this lady appearsparticularly happy, as they seem to accordbest with her countenance, which,though by no means inexpressive, iseminently calculated to depict theserene passions of the mind. Theloveliness of her features, which arecharacterized by an amiable simplicity,are shown to great advantage in vocalparts of a genteel and sentimentalnature. In this particular province ofthe drama, Mrs. Mountain almoststands unrivalled. She, however, occasionallyassumes parts of an oppositenature ; and, in these, we have gene-vocalPERFORMERS.rally seen her acquit herself in the mostcreditable manner. She is certainly agreat acquisition to the London stage."At the close of her metropolitan engagement,she visited Dublin; and, in1790, returned to Covent Garden, butsoon quitted it for the Haymarket, inconsequenceof the manager of theformer theatre having stopped her salaryduring a short illness. She afterwardsmade a second trip to Dublin ;returned again to Covent Garden ; anda third time left it, through a disputewith the manager. She then acceptedan engagement at Vauxhall, where shewas considered a great attraction, andobtained more applause than she hadmet with on the stage. Her last secessionfrom Covent Garden, is accountedfor in the following anecdote, relatedby Parke. Mr. Harris, who, it seems,had little taste for music, while attendingthe rehearsal of an opera, objectedstrongly to a fine song of Paesiello's,which Mrs. Mountain was desirous ofintroducing into that piece, saying,That song will not do ; I don't likeit; bring another, will you, tomorrow."When tomorrow came, however, shebrought the same song ; and, her husbandbeing the leader of the band, shehad it played in a higher key, by theorchestral performers, which giving itamore sprightly character, Mr. Harris,who appeared to be much pleased withit, said to her, " Ay, that is quite thething; it's worth ten of the other, andwill do very well." Mrs. Mountain,like many other ladies who had gainedtheir point, being quite elated, ranto the green-room, and in her livelymanner, exclaimed to some of herfemale friends, " I have done it! I havehummed the manager nicely ! " Mrs.Mountain's exultation, however, wasimprudent; as it afterwards appeared,that Mr. Harris had, by one of hergood-natured friends, been informedof her ingenious device, and she andher husband were shortly after dismissedfrom Covent Garden Theatre.Disgusted with London managers,Mrs. Mountain now went to Bath, andplaced herself for a short time underthe tuition of Mazzini; declining alloffers from Harris, to return to CoventGarden. She was re-engaged, however,at the Haymarket, but left it in 1802;and soon after, got Cherry to write forher a zoological performance, calledThe Lyric Novelist, which she representedat several provincial towns, withgreat success. In 1808, she was engagedat Drury Lane, where she succeededto all the principal charactersformerly sustained by Madame Storace.She subsequently acted at the Lyceum ;and, on the 4th of May, 1814, shetook her farewell benefit at the King'sTheatre. In the following year, however,in consequence, as was said, ofsome differences with her husband, shere-appeared at Sadler's Wells, as Polly,to Incledon's Macheath; but the performance,on both sides, was a failure,and Mrs. Mountain soon after retiredaltogether from the stage.Mrs. Mountain," says a biographicalcritic, " had no pretensions to thetitle of genius, or to the epithet ofbeautiful; yet her talent carried herfarther than the genius of others, andher manner gave her person a charmsuperior to even the strictly beautiful."ANNA Salina Storage.THIS celebrated vocalist and actress,sister of the composer, was born inEngland, about the year 1768. Shewas the daughter of Stephen Storace,an Italian, who was, for many years,a distinguished performer on thedouble bass, at the Italian opera, inthe Haymarket: but her mother wasan Englishwoman. She gave earlyproofs of her talents for music, and wearetold by Kelly, in his Reminiscences,that she could sing and play at sight,at eight. After having been instructedby Sacchini and Mazzini, sheaccompanied her father to Naples,where she sang at some of the oratorios,given at the Theatre San Carlos, duringLent.She next proceeded to Florence,where the celebrated soprano singer,ANNA Salina STORAGEMarches!, was engaged at the PergolaTheatre. " Nancy Storace," says Kelly,was engaged to sing second womanin his operas; and to the* followingcircumstance, well known all over thecontinent, she owed her sudden elevationin her profession. Bianchi hadcomposed the celebrated cavatina, Semeamiable del rio bel sole, whichMarches! sung with such ravishingtaste ; in one passage, he ran up avolet of semitone octaves, the lastnote of which he gave with such powerand strength, that it was ever aftercalled La bomba del Marches! ! Immediatelyafter this song, Nancy Storacehad to sing one, and was determinedto shew the audience that she couldbring a bomba into the field also. Sheattempted it, and executed it to theadmiration and astonishment of theaudience, but to the dismay of poorMarches!. Campigli, the manager, requestedher to discontinue it, but sheperemptorily refused, saying, that shehad as good a right to shew the power ofher bomba as anybody else. The contentionwas brought to a close, by marches'sdeclaring, that if she did notleave the theatre, he would ; and, unjustas it was, the manager was obligedto dismiss her."Madame Storace afterwards sangwith great applause at Lucca, Florence,and Leghorn ; and, in 1784, was invitedto Vienna, by the Emperor Joseph theSecond. She was assigned a salary ofnear 500 per annum ; and became sopopular, that Bianchi composed, expresslyfor her, the favourite opera ofCastor e Pollute. She quitted Viennaafter the carnival of 1787, having beenengaged as prima donna at the ItalianOpera House, in London. She madeher first appearance in Paesiello's operaof Gli Schiavi per More ; and, in comicoperas, was universally acknowledgedto be a lively and intelligent actressand an excellent singer. In 1789, shetransferred her services to Drury Lane,where she made her deb&t in herbrother's comic opera of The HauntedTower ; " the great success of which,"says Parke, "was as much attributable tothe superiority of her histrionic and vocalpowers, as to the merits of the music."In 1796, she revisited the continent;but returned to England, in 1801,having made an engagement, duringher second sojourn at Vienna, withMr. Harris. She shortly after appearedon the Covent Garden stage ; but. subsequentlyremoved to Drury Lane,where she continued to increase inpopularity till 1808, when she retiredaltogether from the stage. She died ather residence, at Herne Hill, near Dulyon the 24th of August, 1817.Signora Storace (as she was alwayscalled, though married to a violinplayer, of the name of Fisher,) sangwith equal taste and feeling; andthough she possessed great power,never sacrificed expression to display.Her animation," says a critic, " wasgreat, without being excessive; and snehad as much execution as was requisitefor the line which Nature seemed tohave marked her for." Kelly relatesnumerous anecdotes of her generosity,and among other kind bequests shemade, was that of 1,000 to the fundof the Royal Society of Musicians.After she had parted from her husband,who appears to have been a brute, bothin manners and person, she formed aconnexion with Mr. Braham, then justentering upon his vocal career, whichlasted for some years. Her attachmentwas sincere and disinterested ; andto the dissolution of her intercoursewith the object of it, some personshave partly ascribed her death. Oneof her biographers describes her asavaricious, and unfaithful to her marriagevow from mercenary motives ;but this account is to be received withcaution, as it is confirmed by no other.JAMES Bateman.A HIS incomparable bass singer wasborn in the city of Westminster, on the19th of September, 17fi9. At the usualag, he had the good fortune to bereceived into the Abbey choir of Westminster,under the mastership of thecelebrated Dr. Cooke; and in snrnhands his powers soon developed them-vocalPERFORMERS.selves, and were fully appreciated. Hewas introduced to Dr. Cooke by Mr.Roger, a gentleman who became theearly patron of the subject of our memoir;and whose house in BurnersStreet the latter ultimately occupied.Whilst under the protection of thisgentleman, Bartleman had two narrowescapes from death : one in consequenceof a severe cough, which onlyyielded to the effects of a quack medicine; the other, by scalding his throat,in the act of purloining some saucethat was preparing, on the kitchen fire,for dinner.Bartleman's voice, while it remaineda soprano, was low, approaching tothe contralto, but distinguished byfulness, strength, and rotundity oftone ; and, amongst his best performances,was Dr. Greene's solo anthem,Acquaint Thyself with God ; in singingwhich, while yet a boy, he shewed allthe germs of that refinement and varietyof expression, which distinguished himin after-life.In 1788, his name, for the firsttime, appeared among the bass chorusat the Concerts of Ancient Music.Before that period, only one bass soloof Purcell's had, it is said, been heardat the Ancient Conceits, that of theCold Genius, in the Frost Scene: it isto Bartleman, therefore, that we areindebted for making us acquainted withthose magnificent monuments of thatgiant of English composers, Let thedreadful Engines; Thy Genius, lo!Ye, twice ten hundred Deities; Hark!my Daridcar. He revived them all inthe short course of one season ; andcontinued to sing them with unabatedapplause, until he sang no more.In 1791, he quitted his post at theAncient Concerts, to assume that offirst solo bass at the newly-establishedVocal Concerts, where he at once establishedhis reputation, as the firstbass singer of the day. In 1795, hereturned to the Ancient Concerts, withhis friends, the Harrison; and continuedto sing there, till compelled toresign his situation by ill health. Thelatter years of his life were passed inalmost unremitting pain; and, it issaid, he was often delighting crowdedaudiences with his performance, whilethe dew of bodily agony stood upon hisbrow. He expired on the 15th ofApril, 1821 ; and was buried, shortlyafter, in the cloisters of WestminsterAbbey, where his grave is marked by amodest inscription, prefaced by the firstnotes of Pergolesi's air, Oh, Lord !have mercy upon me.The private character of this accomplishedsinger seems to have commandedas much esteem and respect ashis professional qualities did admiration.The picture given of him by MissHawkins, in her anecdotes, representshim in the most amiable and interestinglight. " He was," when a boy,she says, " very slight in make, anddelicate in complexion and appearance ;and that he lived as long as he did,was more than I expected. Nothingwas wanting but the appearance of firmhealth, to entitle his features to commendation;lie was fair, with prettylight hair, which grew wildly, andobeyed every breath of wind ; and thecomposure of his countenance free fromall affectation or distortion ; and, aboveall, the opening of his mouth, when hesang, would have required the hand ofan artist of powers as exquisite as his,to do them justice. His manners andtemper, as a boy, were of the pleasantnesskind ; he was very amusing, and had akeen sense of humour. Though delicatein person and constitution, andoften ill, he was lively and spirited to aremarkable degree ; and made nothingof walking home, in a winter evening,to his father's house, the situation ofwhich made it necessary to cross whatwere then called ' The Five Fields,'Chelsea. It used to puzzle me to findout when or how he learnt; and, indeed,I have heard Dr. Cooke sayThose boys of mine learn of oneanother more than I do for them.' Ofhis early superiority, he was as littlevain, as if it had consisted in spinninga top, or trundling a hoop; he neverwent further, in setting himself aboveanother, than in humorously caricaturingsomething ludicrously bad ; and,in short, was one of the most agreeablelads that ever had ' the run' of thehouse. An instance of his nice feelingoccurred, on my father making him apresent ; annexing to the gift, thecondition that he should copy out somemusic for him. Bartleman undertookit cheerfully; but, just afterwards,having reached a point in his musicalMRS. BLAND.studies, which left him less leisure, hefound he had not time to do that whichhe had promised. Having detainedwhat he was to copy long enough tomake the experiment," he returned that,and what he had received, with an extremelywell-penned note, saying, thatas he could not perform the task, itwas not just to accept the reward.' Iremember my own astonishment at thispromptitude," adds his fair memorialist ;though, indeed, being out of thechoir, we had, for some time, seen lessof him ; but it appeared to me as if aboy was, on a sudden, without the interventionof manhood, started intomanhood. I can only add, with prideand acknowledgment, that in the goodnessof his nature, he never forgot wherehe had spent many of his boyish hours ;and that whatever time elapsed withoutour meeting, he was always, on everyoccasion, prompt to shew, and cordialin expressing, the continuance of hisregard. Success never altered him ;applause never elevated him ; and hedied, I am confident, as he had lived,beloved beyond the usual degree oflove bestowed on those whose excellence,to use Wordsworth's beautifulwords respecting longevity, ' has nocompanion.' "As a bass singer, Bartleman's namestands unrivalled in the musical historyof this country. Phillips comes nearestto him ; but even he has much to attain,before he can arrive at the pinnacleof excellence reached by hispredecessor. A writer in The Harmonicononthus sums up his merits :Bartleman, either by the naturalconstruction of his organs, or, as werather believe, by assiduous practice,had obtained the" power (most unusualfor a bass) of singing, and even holdingthe G of the second line of thetreble clef, in his chest voice. Thehigh tones, 1 therefore, which, from theothers, grated the ears of the audience,as a painful effort, seemed toflow spontaneously, and without theslightest exertion, from Bartleman :they were not his extreme notes; andhe sang, in perfect and sure tune, whatothers, if they did not absolutely failin, seemed to accomplish with difficulty,and almost by chance. On the otherhand, Bartleman's low G was a roundand a perfect note, sustainable for severalbars ; and he could reach to thedouble E. The songs written for himby Alcott and Crotch are all calculatedto shew off his great extent of voice,particularly upwards. It was not, however,by the superior compass of hisvoice alone, that Bartleman soared abovehis contemporaries and predecessors :his conceptions were still greater thanhis vocal power; his delineation of eachvariety of human passion or feeling astrue as his intonation. The hurriedmadness of Let the dreadful Engines;the prophetic solemnity of Thus, saiththe Lord to Cyrus ; the deep devotionof Oh, Lord ! have mercy upon me ;were, in turn, so vividly painted, thateach seemed to be the singer's peculiarforte. In fact, Bai'tleman carried tothe exercise of his profession not onlythe highest natural gifts and mechanicalattainments, but a mind of singulardelicacy, discernment, and enthusiasm."MRS. BLAND.THIS pleasing vocalist is the daughter I at Hughes's Riding-school, now thef i^ * T e ^\ . c r> i rf-t: .-.1 r r otto Mof an Italian Jewess, of the name ofRornanzini ; and was born about theyear 1769. While an infant, her voiceis said to have delighted every one thatheard her; and, when about fourteenyears old, a Mr. Cady, hair-dresser tothe Royal Circus, procured her an engagementat that theatre. Kelly, however,says, in his Reminiscences, " thatwhen Miss Romancing, she first sangRoyal Circus, in the spring of 1773.However this may be, her arch manner,and pleasing style of singing, soonbrought her into good repute ; andinduced Daly, who, according to oneof her biographers, had a design uponher virtue, to engage her for the DublinTheatre; where she received greatapplause, both as an actress and asinger. Her popularity never, for aVOCAL PERFORMERS,moment, diminished ; and when Mrs.W righten left the stage, the managerof Drury Lane engaged Miss Ro-mazzini;who soon proved herself anefficient substitute. She made her debuton the 24th of October, 1786; and succeededso effectually in pleasing thepublic, in her personation of the pagein Richard, Coeur de Lion, that sheboth increased the popularity of thepiece and her own fame. In the summerof 1789, she went to Liverpool,where she soon became a favourite,both at the theatre and in the concert-room; in the same year, she marriedMr. Bland, brother of Mrs. Jordan.On the 10th of June, 1791, she madeher debut at the Haymarket, in thecharacter of Wowski, in Inkle andYarico; in which her song of, Rememberwhen we walked alone, was receivedwith tumultuous applause ; andis said to have far surpassed the effectwhich had been communicated to thesong by its original singer, Miss George,afterwards Lady Oldrnixon. From thistime, up to the year 1824, Mrs. Blandcontinued to sing at the principal metropolitanand provincial theatres, withan applause which was undiminishedthroughout the whole of her vocal career.In the year above-mentioned,indications which she gave of mentalimbecility rendered her secession fromthe stage necessary. About a monthafter her retirement, an evening atDrury Lane was devoted to a performancefor her benefit, at which allthe principal actors gave their gratuitousassistance; and the sum obtainedfor her on the occasion is said tohave been sufficient to place her beyondthe fear of want.The principal parts, in which Mrs.Bland acquired her celebrity, were:Nelly, in No Song no Supper; Macedon,in the Surrender of Calais; Barbara, inthe Iron Chest ; Baffling, in Three andthe Deuce; Beta, in Blue Beard;Agnes, in The Mountaineers; DollyDaisy, in Hit or Miss ; and Josephine,in The Children in the Wood,&C. &c. Both as an actress and avocalist, she was a great favourite withthe public; and, in the latter character,she formed, for many years, one of thechief attractions at Vauxhall. Herstyle of singing was looked upon as themost chaste, in the ballad line, that theEnglish school could boast ; and it wasnot more chaste than affecting. It hasbeen generally supposed, that becauseMrs. Bland confined herself to ballads,she could sing nothing else ; but a dramaticauthority, in contradicting this,says that she. could sing The Soldiertired, with ease ; and that he has heardher execute some bravuras with a distinctnessof articulation, that no singerof the day could equal. Another critic,after stating that she possessed all therequisites for a first-rate vocalist, adds :The cadences of other performersgenerally appear like extraneous ornaments,which, however beautiful, wecould dispense with ; her's were allessential to the air; indeed, so much so,that once having heard it, we deemedthe air incomplete, if the grace wereafterwards omitted. Her enunciationwas as distinct as if she were repeatingdialogue; and she never sacrificed senseto sound. She had a method, peculiarto herself, of introducing in her comicballads a word or two of speaking, andthen instantly recurring to the air, in amanner that was truly bewitching."This is not exaggerated praise ; andthe first part of it is confirmed by theopinion of Michael Kelly ; who used tosay, that no real judge of the art couldfind a single blemish in her style ortaste; and that she never introduced agrace unseasonably, or one that was notfull of taste and meaning.Mrs. Bland, according to one authority,formed connexions which inducedher husband to go to America, wherehe died of a broken heart ; and the sameauthor vouches for the authenticity ofthe following anecdote respecting her :Mrs. Bland had been employed, oneday, in working some very expensivelace upon a dress ; and, being calledaway, for a moment, found, on her return,the lace torn in pieces by one ofher children, who happened to be in theroom. This so enraged the mother, thatshe shook the child violently, and puther out of the room ; but what was herhorror when, on opening the door afterwards,she found the child lying dead.The circumstance, for a time, deprivedher of reason; and, in all probability,laid the foundation of the malady withwhich she is at present afflicted.JOHN Abraham,JOHN Abraham.THIS renowned vocalist, descendedfrom a German family of the Jewishpersuasion, was born in London, in777. He was left an orphan veryyoung; and, at one time, it is said, wasnecessitated to walk the streets of theBritish metropolis, as a vendor ofpencils. In this situation he was foundby Leonii, a well-known singer at theSynagogue, in Duke's Place, CoventGarden, and by him was instructed inthe rudiments of his future profession.The compass of his voice, at this time,extended from the tenor B flat to Bflat in alt; but it was still more remarkablefor its peculiar sweetness oftone and expression.He made his debut on the stage in1787, at the Royalty Theatre, CelluloseSquare, for the benefit of his master,Leonii, and continued afterwards to playthere regularly. The bravura stylewas that in which he first distinguishedhimself; and amongst other songs, hewas particularly happy in the executionof that difficult piece, The Soldier tired.The locale of his debut" as a writerin The Harmonicon observes, " was notthe most favourable to rising musicaltalent; neither the titled patron northe accomplished virtuoso frequentedthe dramatic ultima thule of CelluloseSquare. Nevertheless, the fame of thewonderful boy who was singing at theRoyalty, the astonishing pupil of Leonii,spread itself into even the westernregions of dilettanteism, and drewmany gentle auditors from their usualroutine, to the humbler scenes of hissurprising efforts."After a display of his vocal abilitiesfor about two years, his voice suddenlybroke, in consequence of which, aftersinging for a short time under a feignedname, at the Ranelagh Gardens, at Norwich,he ceased for a while, to performin public. Meantime, the departure ofLeonii from England, who had failedin some trading speculations, threwhim entirely upon his own resources,and he supported himself for sometune by teaching the piano-forte. Hewas enabled to do this, by the kindnessof the Goldsmith, a family of respectabilityin the city, who took him undertheir protection and patronage. Thecultivation of the returning powers ofhis voice, however, was the main springof his hopes and ambition ; and, it nowbegan to assume a pleasantness of tone,as well as a considerable degree ofstrength.In 1794, he was enabled to accept anengagement at Bath, where he madehis debut as a tenor singer at theconcerts. Their conductor, the celebratedRauzzini, voluntarily becamethe patron and improver of Braham,who, with gratitude and pride," saysDr. Busby, " acknowledges the obligationsdue to his tutor and protector,and imputes most of the leading featuresof his present vocal excellenceto the invaluable lessons he receivedfrom that able and judicious master."He took the young aspirant into hishouse, and there kept him, gratuitously,for a period of nearly three years,during which Braham studied the songsof Handel, and of the best Italian masters.Rauzzini, himself, composed onesong for him, from Metastasio; which,he used to say, nobody but Brahamcould execute, on account of the brilliantrapidity and trying sostenuto ofthe passages.His fame soon reached the Britishmetropolis, where it was first carriedby Salomon, the musician, who, fromthe moment he heard him at Bath,is said to have pronounced him thefirst tenor singer in Europe. Soonafterwards, Storace, the composer,then about to produce his opera ofMahmoud, came to Bath for the expresspurpose of hearing Braham ;and he immediately recommended themanagers of Drury Lane, to engagehim. Storace, however, died beforehis opera .was brought out ; but it wasplayed for the benefit of his family, onthe 30th of April, 1796 ; the subjectof our memoir making his debut in theprincipal character. He was receivedVOCAL P E R F O K M K K S .with enthusiastic applause, and hisperformances were listened to withequal rapture and astonishment. Thecompass of one of his songs, LetGlory's Clarion, extends over seventeennotes, while the long divisionswith which it abounds, embrace everyvariety of difficulty within the powerof the vocal organ ; yet, Braham wentthrough the whole with very littleapparent effort. "He not only executed,"says a musical critic, " all thatwas written, with facility surpassingeverything that had been heard before,but he superadded notes and embellishments,which at once establishedhim in a rank pre-eminent to all thatcontemporary judges had been accustomedto regard as the greatest andthe best in the florid style."At the opening of the Italian opera,in the following November, Brahammade his debut in the character ofAmor, in Gretry's opera of Seminaand Adore, and shewed himself equallyexcellent in Italian, as in English singing.In the oratorios of the same year,he appeared with similar success ; atonce executing Deeper and deeper still,with that force, pathos, and originality,which to the present day, render i't,perhaps, his chef-d'oeuvre.His reputation might now be saidto be established ; yet resolving to leaveno means of improvement untried, hedetermined on a visit to Italy, forwhich country he set out in the autumnof 1797, accompanied by MadameStorace. Whilst at Paris, some concertshe gave turned out so lucrative,that he was induced to make a stayof eight months ; at the end of whichhe took his departure, having declineda permanent engagement in the Frenchcapital, where a plan had been organizedfor the performance of Italianoperas.In 1798, he made his debut in Florence,as primo tenore, at the TheatrePergola, as Ulysses, in Basil's operaof that name; and, after playing inothers, with his usual success, wasengaged to sing at the Scala, at Milan,during the succeeding carnival season,with Mrs. Wellington, between whoma rivalry took place, of which a writerin The Harmonicon gives the followinginteresting account. " The opera inwhich they were to appear," says ourauthority, " was composed by Nasolini,and entitled, II Triomo di Celia.The applause which Braham elicited,during the rehearsal, aroused thejealousy, not of Mrs. Billington, whowas too secure of her own station tobe jealous, and too liberally minded tobe envious, but of M. Felissent, herhusband; he intrigued with the composer,and induced him to omit a grandscena, which he had written for thetenor, in the second act. The secretsof a green-room are seldom well-kept ;still less where the concerns of thetheatre form the engrossing subjectof interest to a whole population. Theunfair excision of Braham's song becameknown ; the audience took up hisquarrel; and, on the first representation,fairly hissed the new opera.The next day, the offices announcedthat the composer would forthwithcomplete his opera, and that the scenafor Citizen Giovanni Braham wouldbe composed with all possible speed.The Triumph of Celia, was hailed,on its second performance, with unanimousacclamation, and was indeedII Trionfo di Braham. The conductof Mrs. Billington, however, at therehearsals, had given umbrage to hercountryman, who determined on takinga musical revenge; a revenge, at thesame time, that perhaps, no one buthimself could have accomplished. Mrs.Burlington's habit was to study ailher rifiornamenti, which, when onceselected, she seldom or never changed,and to rehearse her songs with fullvoice, and all her ornaments andcadences, at length. Braham, whoseentree and air preceded hers, listenedto her roulades at rehearsals, learnedthem perfectly by heart, and remorselesslyappropriated all her well studiedgraces to the adorning of his own song.Mr. Felissent hardly knew whether tobe most astonished at the talent whichcould, or the audacity which dared, thuscompete with his wife; he threatenedmortal vengeance. Mrs. Billington,influenced probably by him, refused,in the next opera, to sing a duet withBraham ; but her good sense, or herinnate good nature, h'naliy overcameher anger, and the two great Englishsingers became excellent friends."Rome and Naples now contended forthe honour of securing the EnghsiiJOHN Abraham.tenor: but he renewed his engagementat Milan, for a second year ; at the endof which he proceeded to Genoa,where he devoted much of his time tothe study of composition, under Isola.From Genoa he returned to Milan ;from whence, in 1799, he proceeded toVenice, where he assisted at the funeralobsequies of Cimarosa, and performedin the last musical effort of that greatmaster of his art, his Artemisia.After singing at Trieste, and receivinginvitations from Lisbon, Naples, Milan,Vienna, and England, he agreed to gotothe Austrian capital, with the provisoof being at liberty to sing a year inEngland. He accordingly crossed Germany,and again appeared before aLondon audience, at Covent GardenTheatre, on the 9th of December, 1801,in the opera of Chains of the Heart,the music by Mazzini and Reeve,and met with such success, that he wasinduced to relinquish his intended visitto Vienna, His career, since thatperiod, has been one of unvaried success; and, for the last thirty years, hehas not only been unrivalled as avocalist on the English stage, but as atenor singer throughout Europe.During the seasons of 1804, 1805,and 1806, he again sang at the King'sTheatre; and, on taking his benefit, in1805, the pit overflowed till the st;igewas so occupied, that it was with difficultythe performers could get off andon. In 1809, he was engaged at theTheatre Royal, Dublin, for fifteennights, for which he was to receive theextraordinary sum of ^2,000 guineas;which was so successful, that, on thesame terms, the manager extended thenumber of nights to thirty-six. Oflate years, he has considerably changedhis selection both of pieces and characters;giving up such as call for theflorid execution for which he was earlyso distinguished ; and, on the stagein particular, confining himself chieflyto songs or ballads that require a chasterstyle, and a more pure expression. Inhis masterly performance, however, ofthe tenor part, in Der Freischiitz, hedisplayed a force, feeling, and execution,worthy of his most brilliant days ;indeed, the scena in the first act, isamong his greatest vocal triumphs.As a composer, all musical authoritiesagree that he has produced manychaste and beautiful melodies, whichwould have enjoyed and deservedpopularity, even if they had not beenoriginally recommended to public favourby his own singing. The popularityof his songs is attested by the fact, thamescandidates for vocal fame havechosen some of them at their debts.His Death of Nelson, has been classedwith those compositions, which areconsidered as features in the musicalhistory of the present age. We havenot space for the enumeration of all hissongs, but they constitute the establishedfavourites in the following operas;The Cabinet; The English Fleet;Thirty Thousand; Out of Place;Family Quarrels; The Paragraph;Rais ; Americans ; The Devil's Bridge ;False Alarms; Zama; Novensky, &c.As an oratorio and concert singer,he stands out with equal pre-eminence.A comparison has been made betweenhim and Harrison; but though inone or two songs the latter may behis superior, in the majority Brahamimmeasurably excels him. In thebravura air, in Samson, Why doesthe God of Israel sleep? Harrison'sperformance was everything as toexecution, but his voice was "a dwarf'swhisper," compared with Braham's.In Total Eclipse, the weakness ofHarrison's voice added to the effect,whilst Braham's expression and emphasiswere continually out of characterwith the subject. On the whole, wemay, without being accused of naturalprejudice, pronounce Braham the finesttenor of the present age. All ourmusical critics, who have visited thecontinent, concur in saying, that theyhave met with no vocalist to be comparedto him abroad ; whilst foreignsingers who have heard him, confirmthe judgment of his countrymen, bysayingNon e'e tenore in Italia come Braham."It has been aptly said of him, as asinger, that from the simplicity ofThere was a Jolly Miller, to the difficultyof Amid a Thousand rackingWoes, he has no competitor. Hiscompass extends to about nineteen notes,and his falsetto, from D to A, is soentirely within his control, that it ishardly possible to distinguish wherehis natural voice begins and ends.VOCAL PERFORMERS,The private character of the subjectof our memoir is highly estimable andrespectable, if we may judge from thevery handsome manner in which he isspoken of by his professional brethren,and the intimacy that subsists betweenhis family and a circle of friends equallyextensive and respectable. We shouldnot omit to mention the fact of hishaving, previous to his marriage, beenthe defendant in an action for crim. con.,brought against him by a Mr. Wright,who received 1,000 damages. Hisconnexion, in early life, with SalinaStorace, we shall only allude to forthe purpose of stating that he had ason by her, whom he educated for thechurch of England, to which he hadhimself become a proselyte. He wasmarried, in 1816, to Miss Bolton, ofWarwick, near Manchester, by whomhe has a large family.MARIA Dickens.THIS lady, whose maiden name wasPoole, was born about the year 1778.She began to display her powers at theearly age of four ; and at six was capableof performing Handel's overtures andfugues, on the piano-forte, with an astonishingdegree of taste and precision.This induced her father to give her thebest opportunities for further improvement; and, at eleven, he placed herunder the celebrated Rauzzini, of Bath,from whom she imbibed the true Italiantaste. At thirteen years of age,she appeared as a public singer at Vaux-hall; and, in 1793, made her debit onCovent Garden stage in the characterof Ophelia, in which she is said to haveevinced the most delicate feeling andpathos. Parke, however, differs fromother accounts, in saying, that MissPoole made her debut, on the 26th ofFebruary, 1791, in the character ofEmily, in Shield's comic opera of TheWoodman. She was subsequently engagedat the Ancient and Vocal Concerts,and performed, with unrivalledsuccess, the first range of operatic characters,both in England, Scotland, andIreland ; by the latter nation she wasreceived with particular enthusiasm.In 1800, she married Mr. Dickens,and then intended to relinquish thestage entirely ; but some losses, whichher husband sustained in trade, produceda change in her resolution. In1806, she sang at the Covent Gardenoratorios ; and, for many successiveseasons, she divided the applause inthese performances with Braham, Catalans,and Mrs. Salmon. Equally successfulin Italian singing, Mrs. Dickenswas engaged for some time at theItalian Opera, where she played, amongother parts, the Countess, in Mozart'sII Nozzle di Figaro, to Madame Catalans'sSusanna. The latter vocalist,in 1816, engaged her as prima donna ather own theatre at Paris, whence thesubject of our memoir proceeded toItaly, where she was received with themost distinguished applause. At Venice,she had the high and unusual honourof being proclaimed, by generalvote, Social honoraria dell' Institute),Filarmonico. She was also engaged tosing and perform at several places withSignor Veluti ; but the death of a nearrelative obliged her to return to Englandand forego their fulfilment. On herreturn to her native metropolis, Mr.Harris again secured her services forCovent Garden Theatre, where she reappearedon the llth of March, 1819,as the Countess, Miss Stephens sustainingthe part of Susanna, in the Englishversion of Mozart's Marriage of Figaro,then performed on the English stageunder the direction of Bishop. Themusic of their respective parts lostnothing in the hands of these delightfulvocalists, who sang the principal duetin a manner that produced a rapturouscall for an encore, in which Mozarthimself would have joined.Mrs. Dickons was evidently muchimproved by her continental tour ; butan acquisition of some addition to herincome securing to her an independencesufficient to meet the extent of herwishes, she resolved upon retiring intoprivate life. She is said to be not lessbeloved and esteemed for her manyMARY SALMON.social virtues, than she had been forher former ability as a singer andactress. She has since had manytempting offers, both from Italy and inher own country, to resume her ,professionalcareer ; but, content with thefortune and fame she has acquired, hasnaturally no desire of being at the painsof making an addition to either.Mrs. Dickons's chief excellence lay,perhaps, in sacred music, in whichstyle she is said to have sung with sucha degree of sublimity, that religionseemed to breathe from every note. InRejoice, and Let the bright Seraphim,she was particularly effective, and seldomfailed to procure an encore. Onthe stage, her Polly is said to have beena delightful performance ; exhibiting, noless in the acting than the singing, asmuch nature, pathos, and vivacity, asthis varied character will admit of.MARY SALMON.THIS celebrated " queen of Englishsong," as she has been called, was bornabout 1784; and is sprung from amusical family, that of the Masons, ofOxford. Her mother, whose name wasSunday. was sister to the celebratedMiss Mason, who married either a sonor brother of Dr. Joseph Wanton, andalso of Mrs. Ambrose and Mrs. Second,both public singers, remarkable for theexcellence of their voices. The firstmaster of the subject of our memoirwas John Ashley ; but time, practice,and observation, are said to have beenher most efficient instructors. She cameout as Miss Sunday, in 1803, at theCovent Garden oratorios; singing, onher first appearance, Thou didst notleave, from The Messiah. Her shakes inthis song, says a musical writer, " werefar too numerous, to be justified bygood taste or correct feeling of the subject; but they, together with the toneof voice, and, last to be retained inmusical record, but, perhaps, not leastin effect, a pair of dove-like eyes, andan extremely pretty, though rather inanimateface, of dazzling fairness, securedher a loud and unanimous encore,and, at once, fixed her station in theorchestra." After a few seasons, shedisappeared from the metropolis altogether;and the impression she hadformerly made had almost died away,when she re-appeared in London ; and,at once, took her station at the veryhead of English concert singers.In 1814, she was received into theorchestra of the Ancient Concert ; andcontinued to sing there, and at theprincipal London concerts, with undiminishedapplause, till the suddenfailure of her voice, in 1824. Thisevent took place in the middle of asong, one evening, at the Ancient Concerts; and a report was, at the time,circulated, that the failure was occasionedby causes independent of physicalweakness. This, however, hasbeen denied by Mr. Crosse, who,in his History of the York MusicalFestival of the above year, says, " Theday, on the evening of which thefailure of Mrs. Salmon's voice was firstnoticed, I spent entirely in her company; the morning in visiting an exhibitionof pictures, and trying somenew music. I lunched and dined withher ; and can vouch, that four glassesof Madeira formed, excepting water,her whole beverage. Unless whiledressing for dinner, or re-adjusting herdress to go to the Ancient, she was notout of my sight during the day ; I wentwith her and her companion to theHanover Square Rooms, conversing bythe way, and parting only, when, at thehead of the stairs, she proceeded tothe singers' ante-room, and I into theconcert-room. Among the assembledhundreds, no one was more surprisedthan myself, when the intonation, formerlyso correct, was heard fluttering,uncertain, or false ; and the enunciation,which was wont to be so clear,was mumbling and thick."The vocal abilities of this lady may bepronounced of the first-rate quality, ifthey are to be judged from the effectthey produce on her hearers ; yet manyless successful singers have possessedmore requisites for success than Mrs.VOCAL PERFORMERS.Salmon. " In compass," says a musicalcritic, " in musical knowledge, in delicacyof taste, strength of expression, andeven in volubility of execution (thoughit was not one of her fortes), in one orall of these she has been frequently excelledby singers who made not half theimpression on an audience she did.There was something in the tone of her voice that wentat once to the soul ; something in theexquisite brilliancy and facility of herpassing shake, that not only procured awilling pardon for all faults, but madethe hearer doubt, whether what wouldhave been musical sinning in otherless-gifted singers, partook of the natureof sin in Mrs. Salmon. She seldomappeared to be imbued with any deepfeeling herself; while one tone of herclear mellow voice would draw a tearfrom many a stern eye, or drive him,who was too proud to weep, to the resourceof his snuff-box."CHARLES SMITH.CHARLES SMITH was born inLondon, in 1786. At the early age offour, he evinced a great genius formusic, both vocal and instrumental,playing on the piano-forte at every opportunityand singing several of Dib-din's favourite songs with great truthand correctness, though he could notspeak the words plain. His father hadbeen brought up in the choir of Christchurch,Oxford, where he displayed considerabletalent, but afterwards declinedmaking music his profession ; and hismother, a woman of good family, atDurham, in Yorkshire, had given traitsof genius in literature, many specimensof which had appeared in the periodicalsof the day. To her watchful care issaid to be owing his early improvement,and uncommon success in his youthfulcareer. At length, his precocity oftalent induced his parents to give hima master; and he was, at the age offive, placed under Mr. Costellow, withwhom he made such progress, that hecomposed a little air before he was six,to some words by his brother; andthis, with some of Dr. Arne's, he usedto sing, to the astonishment of hisauditors, accompanying himself on thepiano-forte.He had pursued this course till hewas eight years of age, when his mother,having requested the advice ofthe late Dr. Arnold, as to what courseought to be adopted with the child, hecalled at their house to hear him ; whenMaster Smith began by playing avery difficult sonata of dementi's, athis performance of which the doctorexpressed himself highly delighted, andthen requested to hear a specimen ofhis vocal ability. Upon this, he sangHenry's Cottage Maid, and In Infancyour Hopes and Fears, to his own accompaniment: the latter highly gratifyinghis learned auditor; but whenhe saw the child place on the desk TheSoldier tired, he is said to have exclaimed,laughing, " My dear, you areaclever little fellow; but I hope youare not going to attempt that song."Yes, sir, if you please," was his artlessreply, " I'll try it ; but as I only boughtit yesterday, I fear I shall not sing itvery well." He, however, executedthe air, accompanying himself, in astyle which the doctor confessed hehad no conception of; deeming it impossiblethat a child of his age couldhave breath sufficient to go throughthe running passages. The doctor admittedthat he had every requisite toform a fine singer ; but as the voices ofboys were very precarious, recommendedthat he should be placed inthe Chapel Royal, where he would bewell grounded in the theory of music,&c. This prudent counsel was attendedto ; and he was accordingly introducedto the head of the choir of the ChapelRoyal, the late Dr. Edward Ayrton ;who, being highly delighted with thechild, gave him the first vacancy in thechoir, which took place in 1796. Inthe summer of that year was solemnizedthe marriage of the princessroyal, and young Smith was selected tosing a principal part in the marriageanthem ; in performing which, lie !iCHARLES SMITH.an*.pleased Dr. Ayrton so much, that hegave him a silver penny. The doctor'sgreat age and infirmities, however, preventedhis paying him proper attention ;and the other branches of his educationbeing somewhat neglected, his parentstook him out of the school, in 1798, andarticled him to J. Ashley, a celebratedteacher of Handel's music and ballads.In 1799, he commenced singing inprivate parties ; and, in 1800, was engagedat the oratorios, vocal concerts,llanelagh, &c. ; and subsequently, at allthe private concerts, ladies' glee-concerts,provincial music meetings, &c.He was also a regular attendant of thePrince's Harmonic Club, held at theThatched House Tavern, St. James'sStreet, where he occasionally joined inglees and duets with his majesty, Georgethe Fourth, then Prince of Wales. Hesang also, regularly, at the RoyalKentish Bowman's Lodge, in Kent ;where he was much caressed by theDuchesses of Devonshire and Gordon,and other ladies who graced the lodgewith their presence.After his articles with Mr. Ashleyhad expired, he continued his vocalcareer without interruption till 1803 ;and such was his popularity, that hefrequently had three engagements forthe same night. In the summer of thelatter year, he went with a party toEdinburgh and Glasgow, to performat glee-concerts ; but, after his returnto town, his voice becoming unsteady,he resolved, by the advice of Mr.Ashley, to cease singing soprano. Henow commenced teaching, and resumedhis practice on the organ, inwhich he had early become a proficient ;and very often officiated at the ChapelRoyal for Mr. Kny vent and Mr. StaffordSmith.When he was about eighteen, hebecame Bartleman's deputy at CroydonChurch ; and was elected organistthere on the resignation of that greatvocalist. In the meantime, Smith hadcomposed several songs, which weresung with great applause by Mr.Thomas Welsh and himself; his ownvoice having now sunk into a tenor.When nearly twenty, he made a trip toDublin, where he formed some connexionsthat unsettled his mind, andkept him from his family and his businessfor upwards of ten months.Shortly after his return, he was appointedorganist of Warbeck Chapel, onthe resignation of Charles Wesley ;and, about the same time, began tocompose for the theatres. He furnishedthe music for the farce of Yes or No ;The Tourist's Friend ; Hit or Miss ;Any Thing New ; How to die for Love ;all from the pen of Mr. Cock, inconjunction with whom, alone, Mr.Smith wrote for the stage.In 1813, at which time his voice hadsettled to a bass, he was received withgreat applause at the oratorios; andwas engaged at the same performancesfor three successive seasons. In 1815,he married Miss Booth, of Norwich ;and, in the following year, accepted theoffer of a lucrative situation at Liverpool,where he has since resided. Amonghis latter compositions, are the ballads,The Baby Boy, and Far o'er the Sea ;but his most celebrated production inThe Battle of Hohenlinden, which hasbeen highly eulogized by all musicalcritics. His merits, as an organist, havebeen frequently testified by Dr. Crorciiand Mr. Charles Wesley; and hisabilities as a concert-vocalist were surpassedby few during the period of liUearly career.JOHN SINCLAIR.JOHN SINCLAIR was born in ornear Edinburgh, in 1790; and, from achild, is said to have received constantinstruction in music. When a boy, hebecame extremely partial to scenic exhibitions;and used, it is said, to passall his leisure hours, with his littlecompanions, in performing plays, in aplace they procured for the purpose, inEdinburgh. At length his ambition ledhim to desire to try his powers on aregular stage ; and, for this end, he andone of his associates of the sock andbuskin, earnestly entreated Montfort,U UVOCAL PERFORMERS.the proprietor of the Edinburgh Theatre,to hear them recite. This he declined,but furnished them with a letter of recommendationto a friend of his, themanager of a provincial theatre in theneighbourhood. Of the contents of thisimportant document, they resolved toacquaint themselves before its presentation; and, breaking the seal, found itto run thus:" Dear Sam, This willbe presented to you by two young gentlemen,who are determined to go toh 11 their own way; and as I knowno one so intimate with the old gentlemanas yourself, I intrust them to yourcare."This seems to have cut short their expedition; and a knowledge of Sinclair'spredilection having become known tohis horror-stricken father, a devoutfollower of the kirk, his future attendanceat theatrical exhibitions wasprohibited ; and he was subsequentlyobliged, by his father, to undertakethe office of chanter in a Scotch church.At this time, his musical abilities weremuch admired, both for the sweetnesswith which he sang, and his manner ofperforming on more than one instrument; application was, in consequence,made to the celebrated Gow, of Edinburgh,by the late Colonel Campbell, ofSheffield, that he would prevail withSinclair to join his regiment as a clarionplayer. Sinclair, who found hissituation at home very irksome, andwas under many obligations to Gow forhis friendly offices and instructions, didnot want much persuasion ; and accordingly,without the knowledge ofhis parents, accepted the offer, andjoined the colonel's regiment. Removingwith it to Aberdeen, he theretaught singing in most of the principalfamilies; and was prudent enough toeconomize his means till he had accumulated100, with which he purchasedhis discharge, and obtained a substitute.He then went to London ; but meetingwith small encouragement, he returnedto Aberdeen in a short time. By theadvice of his friends, however, he visitedthe British metropolis, in the hope ofprocuring an engagement; and, at abenefit at the Haymarket Theatre,which took place soon after, he appearedin the character of Cheerly, in TheLock and Key, as a young gentleman,being his first appearance. His receptionwas such as to induce him todecline an offer made to him, aboutthis time, of an ensign's commission ;and, shortly afterwards, he was takenby Mr. Welsh, as a pupil, for threeyears. Mr. Harris, of Covent Garden,no sooner heard him sing, thanhe concluded an engagement with himfor five, and, subsequently, for sevenyears; Mr. Welsh sharing his salaryand benefits during the time he remainedunder his tuition. He madehis debUt in the character of Don Carlos,in The Duenna; and was received withthe most flattering applause.In 1816, he married the daughter ofthe late Captain Norton, who tell withSir Ralph Abercrombie, in Egypt, anattachment of long secret standing.The union took place in Edinburgh,without the knowledge or consent ofthe lady's mother ; but all parties wereafterwards reconciled. In July, 1818,his engagement with Mr. Harris terminating,he resolved to visit Italy forimprovement, and declined, therefore,a renewal of terms with Mr. Harris;and, after fulfilling some provincial engagements,he left England for Paris inApril, 1819; where he studied forsome time, under the celebrated Peregrine,of the French Italian Opera.His next instructor was Banderali, atMilan, where he was offered an engagement;but declined it, in consequenceof his determination to hearevery style of Italian singing before hemade his debut in a foreign theatre.In May, 1820, whilst at Naples, hebecame acquainted with Rossini, whogave him his advice and instruction ;and introduced him to the manager ofSan Carlos. His immediate engagementwas the consequence ; but the revolutionputting an end to the gaming-tables,the great source of the manager'sprofits, he resigned the management ofthe theatre ; and Sinclair's engagementwas nullified. Thus checked, afterprofiting, it is said, both by the instructionand advice of Rossini, hequitted Naples to avail himself of offersmade him in the north of Italy. Atthe carnival of 1821, he was engaged atPisa, where he had previously sung atthe court of the Grand Duke of Tuscany,by whom he was liberally rewarded.He appeared at Bologna inthe following spring, where he wasKatherine STEPHENS.voted a member of the PhilharmonicAcademy ; a distinction but rarely conferredupon foreigners : he was, thesame year, engaged at Modena, and atFlorence. From Florence he went toVenice, where he appeared during thecarnival of 1822-3 ; with the advantageof having an opera written purposelyfor him by Rossini. In the spring of1823, he was engaged at Genoa, onaccount of the visit of the king of Sardinia,who greatly distinguished himby his attention, and sent for him tosing at his palace. He declined allfurther offers in Italy ; and, soon after,departed for England, having concludedan engagement with Mr. C. Kemble, forfifty nights. He made his re-appearancein Prince Orlando, in The Cabinet,and was received with the mostvehement applause ; and in the malacca,No more by Sorrow chas'd, he was encoredtwice. Both his voice and styleof singing have been decidedly improvedby his continental tour ; yet, forthe last few years, his reputation hasbeen on the decline. He is, however,in the estimation of all judges of hisart, amongst the first of our theatricalvocalists of the nineteenth century.His style of executing The Thorn is abeautiful specimen of ballad singing.KATHERINE STEPHENS.THIS charming vocalist is the daughterof a carver and gilder, and was bornin London, on the 18th of September,1794.She gave early proofs of her musicalabilities, and was, in 1807, placedunder the tuition of Mr. Lanza, whotaught her, in three years, to singat sight with perfect correctness. Shewent through, not only all the gradationsof solfeggios, but a wholecourse of vocal exercises, designed togive facility of execution in modulations,cadences, and every style of ornament; and studied nearly two hundredpieces of music, English and Italian, selectedfrom the best English and Italianoperas, and from oratorios. Such, atleast, is the statement of Mr. Lanza, whohas set it forth in a letter written byhim, in confutation of a report, thatMiss Stephens had only received fromhim twenty-five lessons during thewhole five years for which she was articledto him. Whilst under Mr. Lanza'scare, she sang at Bath, Bristol, Southampton,the Pantheon, and otherplaces, with great applause ; and it wasnot until she had mastered the mostdifficult parts of her professional studies,that, in the autumn of 1812, she becamethe pupil of Mr. Welch. SignorGuglioni, it is said, had previously recommendedher to the managers of theOpera House, to supply the place ofMadame Catalani ; but as the subjectof our memoir was unacquainted withthe Italian language, she declined thecontemplated engagement.On the 23rd of September, 1813, shemade her debUt on the stage at CoventGarden Theatre, as Mandane, in Artaxerxes,and was received with rapturousapplause, particularly in herexecution of Checked by Duty, rackedby Love. Her next appearance wasas Polly, and her third as Clara, in TheDuenna, in both of which she was successful,and soon became the leadingfemale vocalist of the time. In 1814,she was engaged to sing at the AncientConcerts, and opened the same yearher performance there with, Hush, yepretty warbling Quire ; which is said, bysome critics, to be, perhaps, the bestsong she ever sang. After remainingsome years at Covent Garden, shetransferred her services to Drury Lane,but, from some cause or other, she attractedless attention than she did atthe rival theatre. Latterly she has beenheard to more advantage at the oratorios,concerts, and music meetings,than on the stage ; though even there,few would find more admirers.Whether she was indebted to hervocal accomplishments alone, for thehomage which has sometimes been paidher, we leave our readers to judge, fromthe following anecdote. " We are wellaware of the fact," says an anonymouswriter, " that ever since the yearVOCAL PERFORMERS.1815, a gentleman has regularly attendedall the metropolitan performancesof Miss Stephens, sitting generallyin the third or fourth row of the pit, andthe instant the opera concluded, quittingthe house, and placing himself at thestage door of the theatre, to catch aglance of the syren as she passed to hercarriage ; yet he never presumed toaddress her. To such a pitch of enthusiasmwas he carried, that he hasgone as far as Ipswich, and we believe,once even to Dublin, in hopes of meetingthe lady, if she, by chance walkedforth to enjoy the country scenery. Tothe truth of the tale we positivelypledge ourselves." This gentleman isnot the only one who is said to havebeen captivated by the charms of MissStephens; and more than one titledpersonage has been often named as herintended husband. Be this as it mayamore spotless character than that ofthe fair vocalist, has never been knownto the stage ; whilst, in private life, herquiet and unassuming manners, and heramiable conduct in all her domestic relations,have endeared her to a largecircle of friends and acquaintances. It isnot a solitary instance of her charitabledisposition, that when she was engagedon the occasion of a benefit for theDulwich Hospital, she not only returnedthe price of her services (thirty guineas),but sent ten guineas in addition.The songs, in which Miss Stephenshas chiefly distinguished herself, are:Auld Robin Gray, Oh, Slumber myDarling, Pretty Mocking Bard, Angelsever bright and lair, Let the brightSeraphim, We're a' nodding, PiousOrgies, &c. &c. The pathos and simplicitywhich she throws into the wordsof Auld Robin Gray, have never beenequalled ; and the ballad, as sung byher, is undoubtedly one of the muttaffecting vocal performances on thestage. As an actress, she holds a respectablerank, though she has had butfew opportunities offered her, of displayingher powers in that respect; insuch characters, however, as Polly andFlorets, she excels ; her natural artlessnessinfusing into those parts a charmthat the most studied acting frequentlyfails to impart. There is a gentleness,almost approaching to timidity in hermanner on the stage, which renders itthe more interesting, from its beingpart of her real character. In somerespects, however, this has been a disadvantageto her; for the slightestdisapprobation on the part of the audience,has quite unnerved her, and asingle hiss has been sufficient to drawtears from her, arid suspend her powersof utterance in the midst of a song.Her voice," says a writer in TheHarmonicon, "while it retained theearly freshness of youth, was one of thesweetest that can be imagined ; hercompass, the usual compass of a soprano,reaching to the high D ; herexecution good, but not remarkableeither for rapidity or variety. Ballads,and songs of simple and pathetic expression,were her forte ; loftier effortsseemed neither adapted to her taste,nor suited to her talents. An honourableindependence has been the resultof her labours, and whenever she retiresinto private life," (which she hashad the prudence to do before thewaning either of her powers or popularity)"she will carry with her therespect of the public, and meet withthat welcome in society, which is thesure reward of talent joined to suchexemplary conduct, in all situations, asshe has exhibited from the commencementof her career up to the presenthour."MRS. WAY LETT.MRS. Wallet is the daughter ofa Mr. Cooke, a respectable upholstererat Bath, where she was born on the7th of February, 1800. After havingreceived a genteel education, she wasplaced under Mr. Lower, the eminentviolinist, and, on the 16th of March,1816, she made her debut on the Bathstage, in the part of Elvira, in TheBlind Boy. She continued to performat Bath, Bristol, and Brighton, for thenext two yvar-:. r-.i-plnuU'd in most ofMARIANNE PAT ON.her characters, but particularly in thatof Made, in the opera of Love in aVillage; a performance which, in herhands, is said to be unequalled by anyexhibition on the stage.A severe illness, which had nearlyproved fatal to her, caused her disappearancefrom the stage for about eightmonths, at the expiration of whichperiod she accepted an engagement atCoventry. Here she became the wifeof Mr. Waylett, a member of thecompany; having, according to herbiographer, previously refused two opportunitiesof being united to rank andaffluence. Yet the same authority tellsus, that she was only "prevailed on togive her hand to Mr. Waylett, by perseverance,empty threats, and continuedpersecution ;" a statement not very re-conciliate with the former one. Howeverthis may be, their union was notahappy one, and a separation tookplace between them, three years afterthe date of their marriage, in consequence,as it is said, of Mr. Waylett'scruel treatment of his wife.After playing in succession, at Leicester,Dover, Birmingham, and Leamington,Mrs. Waylett made her curtseyto a London audience, at the DelphiTheatre, in October, 1820, and, to usethe words of her biographer, at oncebecame a perfect treasure to the managers,performing a great variety of Ibusiness, and in every character giving |univer-al satisfaction. She continuedat the Adelphi until the summer of1824, playing during the recess at IBirmingham, where some insinuations 'were made in the public prints againsther character, which she promptly re- jfated. The parties wrote a letter, acknowledgingthe falsehood of theircharges, and enclosing 50 for a ticket,in cure side might suffer at her benefit,which, however, was not the case. Herconduct, indeed, at this time, appears tohave been highly praiseworthy, andequally guided by prudence and propriety.Finding herself suddenlythrown out of an expected, and inpart concluded, engagement at DruryLane, she quitted the apartments shethen occupied as being too expensive,and took a single room, where sheremained till April, 1825, when shemade her debut at the HaymarketTheatre. In the following year, shewent to Dublin, where she met witha most enthusiastic reception ; andher benefit, it is said, was neverequalled by any in that theatre, excepton the night of his majesty's visit.She was subsequently engaged bothat Covent Garden and Drury Lane;and may be now said to be in therewithof her fame, both as an actressand a singer, though chiefly eminentin the hitter capacity. Indeed, as asinger of ballads, she is decidedly unrivalledon the stage ; in proof of which,we need only allude to the chaste yetexquisite style in which she sings KateKearney. Her voice is remarkablysweet and clear; and, it is said, shepossesses, probably, more science inmusic than, with one or two exceptions,any other performer. Her actingis distinguished by a naivete and vivacity,of which no other singer of equalvocal pretensions can boast; and evenin serious parts, she is occasionally morethan respectable.MARIANNE PATON.I HIS delightful vocalist was born in1802. at Edinburgh; at the high schoolof which city her father was the writing-master.He appears to have eminentlypossessed the faculty of discerning thenatural bent and peculiar capabilitiesof his children's tastes and intellect ;and he soon perceived that a love ofmusic was the ruling passion of the subjectof our memoir. The evidenceshe gave of her aptitude in imitatingsounds and tunes, and acquiring therudiments of composition and harmony,determined him on the seriouscultivation of her abilities ; and withsuch success, that, it is said, she composedseveral songs when she was onlyfive years of age. Persevering in hermuMcal studies, she became, in hereighth year, a subject of great attractionVOCAL PERFORMERS.in the Scottish capital, and severalpublic concerts were given in her name,which were attended by numerous audiences,at which she made a display,as well of her abilities on the harp andpiano-forte, as of her budding vocalpowers. She afterwards appeared atthe nobility's concerts, in London, andmet with so much encouragement, thatshe had an annual concert of her own.Nothing could be more flattering thanher prospects as a singer ; yet, as herhealth was somewhat impaired, andthe pursuit of her education in otherbranches was necessarily impeded byher frequent appearance in public, itwas thought advisable for her to pause,for the present, in her professionalcareer. Accordingly, she retired frompublic performances for the space of sixyears ; the greater part of which timewas spent in the completion of her education,and the further cultivation ofher musical abilities. She was instructedin the harp and piano, by Mr. SamuelWebbe, jun., in whose family her fatherwas engaged as writing-master; and,indeed, it was as a performer uponthose instruments, rather than as a vocalist,that her friends had at first anticipatedshe would become eminent.At length, the growing powers ofher voice became the predominantconsideration, and after much judiciouscultivation, she again made herappearance in the various concerts ofthe British metropolis, during the seasonsof 1821-2. In the latter yearshe ventured to appear on the stage,making her debut at the Haymarket,in the character of Susanna, in TheMarriage of Figaro. She was decidedlysuccessful; and she afterwards playedRosinaa, in The Barber of Seville, andPolly, in The Beggar's Opera, in astyle that at once placed her on anequality with the best female singersof the day. On her engagement atCovent Garden, some fears were entertained,that her voice had scarcely powersufficient to fill so large a theatre ; but theexperiment removed all apprehensionon that head. She not only concludedher part triumphantly, but repeated itwith increased applause ; and from thismoment, she became a leading favouritewith the public. She gave a furtherproof of her powers in the arduous partof Mandane ; and never, perhaps, wasthat difficult song, The Soldier Tired,executed with greater success or effect.After having sustained a round of characters,a fresh laurel was reserved forher, on the introduction into this countryof Weber's opera of Der Freyschutz.The fine scena of Agatha, in the secondact, was sung by her in an unrivalledmanner; at once delighting the audience,and realizing the ideas of thecomposer ; who is said to have expressedhimself in the most enthusiasticterms of approbation, both of her conceptionand execution.Her talents were now in demandthroughout the kingdom, and she performedboth at theatres and provincialmusic meetings with an applause, scarcelyinferior to that which had marked thecareer of Mrs. Billington. Her otherperformances that particularly deservemention, are in Weber's opera of Oberon; and, lately, in Rossini's opera ofLa Gaza Laura, and Cenerentola, asproduced at Covent Garden. She sustained,says Parke, the part of Ninety,with great truth and nature, and sungthe English version of Di placer mibala il cor, with all that sweetness andbrilliancy for which she is so eminentlydistinguished.In Miss Paton, we may not only boastof a first-rate natural singer, but onewho owes nothing to foreign instructionfor her accomplishments. " She hasnot," as a writer in The Harmoniconobserves, " basked in the sun of Naples,nor breathed the musical atmosphere ofVenice or Milan ; yet I, who am an oldstager, and like lago, 'nothing, if notcritical,' and have heard every primadonna, from Billington, down to thispresent writing, have seldom utteredmy brava with more sanction, thanwhen listening to the strains of thischarming vocalist." The followinganecdote has been told of Miss Patonand T. Dibdin : At a rehearsal of TheBeggar's Opera, when the latter wasmanager at the Haymarket Theatre,the fair vocalist intimated her wish tosing The Miser thus a Shilling sees, anote higher. " Then, madam," repliedDibdin, " you must sing The Mi&ei'thus a guima sees."HENRY PHILLIPS.HENRY PHILLIPS.THIS eminent singer was born in thecity of Bristol, on the 13th of August,1802. His father was a man of property,had been bred to the bar, and possessedconsiderable literary acquirements ; buthe subsequently took to the stage, andruined himself in theatrical speculations.At this time, his talented sonhad already shewn a taste for music ;and necessity requiring that he shouldbe bred to some employment, his vocalabilities were fostered by his mother,who was well known as Miss Barrett, apupil of James Hook, and a singer ofmerit. His further progress, however,was checked by his father's misfortunes,and his musical studies were whollyneglected for a time. At the age ofseven, he made his deb&t as MasterPhillips, for his father's benefit, at thetheatre of Harrogate, in Yorkshire,and sang the Bay of Biscay, in character,with great success. This led to histaking a benefit concert, at York, in thefollowing year ; the profits of which wereso considerable, that it enabled hisfather to proceed with him to London,with a view of procuring for him somepermanent theatrical engagement. Thiswas speedily effected ; and he made hisdeb&t at the old Haymarket Theatre,in the character of the Robber Boy, inThe Iron Chest, with such success, that,at the termination of his engagement,his services were secured by the DruryLane managers.He was still almost totally ignorantboth of the theory and practice ofmusic, and he was, in consequence,placed under the tuition of Leonii Lee,who gratuitously and most successfullycultivated his neglected powers. Hecontinued at Drury Lane, till thebreaking of his voice incapacitated himfrom further exertion, and deprivedhim of his only means of subsistence.In this destitute situation, his mind wasfar from giving way to despondency :for having, happily, had an early ta^tt-for drawing, which he had cultivatedfrom amusement merely, he now resolvedto make it a source of emoiuuifiit.He accordingly executed several drawings; but in vain tried every means ofdisposing of them. At this criticalmoment, they fortunately attracted theeye of a gentleman known to Messrs.Ackermann, who employed him incolouring prints, to such advantage, thathe realized the sum of two guineas perweek, though with intense labour. Outof this he was enabled to spare sufficientto purchase cheap editions of thesongs of Handel and Mozart; and itwas to this selection, and his subsequentperseverance in the study of the bestmasters, that his great excellence as avocalist is probably owing.On the return of his vocal powers, heobtained the countenance and friendshipof Mr. Bathurst, who, discerninghis promising excellence, procuredhim an engagement at the EnglishOpera House, where he was for sometimeengaged as a chorus-singer. Atlength he ventured on a professionalspeculation at Bath, where he successivelyappeared in the characters of thepoet, in the opera of II Turco in Italia,and Don Basilic, in 11 Barrier di Sevig-lia, in both of which he acquitted himselfwith great credit. About this time,he was recommended to Sir GeorgeSmart, as competent to undertake theoffice of principal bass singer, at hisfestival, then about to take place ; butSir George expressing a doubt of theyoung aspirant's ability to execute thesongs of Handel, selected for the occasion,it was fully removed by his executingseveral in his presence, withoutfurther preparation. This satisfied SirGeorge, who immediately engaged him ;and, in consequence of the celebrity heobtained at Bath, by this and other displaysof his powers, his services, onhis return to London, were secured byMr. Arnold, of the English OperaHouse. He made his first appearanceat that theatre in the arduous characterof Caspar, in Der Freyschiitz, in whichhe at once established his reputation asaba.-s singer. He has played numerousother parts with great eclat, and3J2VOCAL PERFORMERS.sung at the most celebrated metropolitan,and other music meetings andconcerts; where he has, in some measure,supplied the loss of Bartleman.Mr. Phillips's voice," says a musicalauthority, "is a barytone of uncommonrichness and volume ; his intonationis perfect ; and the flexibility whichenables him to ascend with perfect easefrom his lowest voice to his beautifulfalsetto, while it never fails to delighth's auditors with its sweetness, enableshim, at the same time, to execute themost difficult passages with the greatestease, delicacy, and smoothness."As an actor, he studies his charactersin strict accordance with the author'sviews; and his articulation is pure, wellaccentuated, and wholly free fromaffectation. As a composer, he rankshigh in the profession : his style is light,buoyant, and tasteful. Among his mostpopular pieces are: My Heart's inthe Highlands ; I'm free, I'm free !and some Bacchanalian songs of greatmerit,INSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.JOHN STANLEY.THIS celebrated blind musical geniuswas born in January, 1713. At the ageof two years he was entirely deprivedof sight, by falling on a marble hearthwith a china basin in his hand. Thiscalamity induced his parents to placehim with a music master, but more in thehope of amusing him, than of enablinghim to learn a profession by which hecould gain a livelihood. His instructorwas Mr. Reading, a scholar of the greatDr. Blow, and organist of St. John's,Hackney ; but his father finding henot only made a rapid progress, buttook great delight in the art of music,procured him the superior tuition ofDr. Greene. Under this great master,such was his rapid improvement, thathe obtained the organist's place at shallows,in Bread Street, when onlyeleven years of age; and, at thirteen, inpreference to a great number of candidates,he was made organist of St.Andrew's, Holborn.In 1734, the benchers of the InnerTemple elected Stanley one of theorganists at the Temple Church ; andthis situation, as well as the former,he retained during the remainder ofhis life. In the interim, on the 19thof July, 1729, the University of Oxfordconferred upon him the degreeof bachelor of music. His performanceson the organ are said to havegiven so much delight to contemporarymusicians, that it was no uncommonthing, when the service of St. Andrew'sChurch, or the Temple, was concluding,to see forty or fifty organists at thealtar, waiting to hear his last voluntary,including the great Handel himself. Onthe decease of the latter, in conjunctionwith Mr. Smith, to whom and himselfHandel had bequeathed his music,he undertook to superintend the Lentperformances ; and after his coadjutorretired, he carried them on in conjunctionwith Mr. Linley, till about 1784,with an ability that few have surpassed.That he was, indeed, able to accompanya singer as he did, and above all, toconduct the oratorios, observes the authorof The Dictionary of Musicians, isastonishing, and far beyond all possibilityof explanation. It is said, that MissAcland, his sister-in-law, played eachoratorio once through to him, previouslyto the public performance, and that heneeded no further help. " In proof ofhismasterly management of the organ,adds the writer of The Musical Biographyof the Three last Centuries, " it iswell known, that when, at the performanceof one of Handel's Te Deems,he found the organ was half a note toosharp for the other instruments, he,without the least premeditation, transposedthe whole piece; and this, withas much facility and address, as anyother person could have done by thehelp of sight. This was the more remarkable,since the key into which itwas transposed, from having sevensharps in the clef, is so exceedinglydifficult, that it is never made use of.It is probable that there was not thenin the kingdom one performer besideshimself who would have attempted it,even though he had taken the troubleof previously writing out the whole ofthe part."On the death of Dr. Boyce, Stanleysucceeded him as master of the king'sband of musicians; and in 1782, hebecame its conductor, in the room ofWiseman. He died on the 19th ofMay, 1786, and was buried in the newground of St. Andrew's, Holborn ; onINSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.which occasion, and on the followingSunday after his funeral, a solemn dirgewas performed in honour of him.Exclusively of his musical talents,Stanley was a most intelligent andagreeable companion, and contributedas much to the pleasure of the privatecircles in which he mixed, by his conversation,as he did in public by his professionalmerits. It was remarkable, notwithstandinghis total blindness, that foramusement, when young, he was fondof playing billiards, mississippi, shuffleboard,and skittles ; at the latter gamehe could generally beat all his competitors.His evenings were often passedat whist ; and it was at once both curiousand entertaining, to observe withwhat readiness and judgment he playedthe game. Each card was puncturedat the corner with a needle, but so delicately,that the marks could scarcelybe felt or seen by any person who wasnot apprised of them. His hand wasgenerally the first arranged ; and it wasno uncommon thing to hear him upbraidthe rest of the party with being tediousin sorting their cards. Another extraordinarything was the facility with whichhe would alone find his way throughthe streets, even the intricate ones ofthe city, including by-passages; andhe would frequently go, both on footand on horseback, to villages in theneighbourhood of London, and even toplaces he had never before visited. Hewas seldom known to forget the voice ofa person he had once heard speak ; andit is related, as an instance of this facultyin him, that as he was once going withDr. Alcock to the sale of the effects o!Dr. Boyce, he met a gentleman whomhe had known, that had been in Jamaicafor upwards of twenty years.This person said to him, in a feignedvoice, " How do you do, Mr. Stanley ?'He paused for a moment, and thenreplied, " God bless me ! Mr. Smith,how long have you been in England?"And not less extraordinary was it, thatif seated at table with twenty persons,without the situations being previouslyannounced to him, he would addressthem all in order.Besides leading the oratorios, hewas the conductor, and the very soul, itis observed, of the Swan and CastleConcerts in the city, as long as theyexisted ; and it was by the destructionof the Swan Tavern, Cornhill, by fire,where they were originally held, thathe lost his two favourite violins ; one aStranger, which he always used in concert,the other a Cremona, on which heperformed his solos. Besides variouscompositions for the organ, he was theauthor of two oratorios, Jeptha andZimri. He also composed the musicto an ode, performed at Drury Lanein 1760, intended as an elegy on thedeath of George the Second, and a complimentto George the Third ; and atthe same theatre, in the same year, heproduced his Arcadia, or the Shepherd'sWedding, a dramatic pastoral,in honour of the nuptials of George theThird and the late Queen Charlotte.He married the daughter of CaptainAcland, of the East India Company'sservice, by whom he had no issue.JOHN Organ.JOHN Organ was born in the year1724. He was brought up under thecare of his brother James, organist atLydgate and St. Dunstan's in the East,and was, at first, so unpromising a pupil,as far as his ear was concerned, that hisinstructor gave up all hope of teachinghim time. One day, however, whenthe brothers were sitting at dinner,after a morning of apparently fruitlesstoil on either part, John suddenly roseand exclaimed, " I have it !" "havewhat?" inquired the brother. "Thetime ; " rejoined the pupil. " I am gladof it," said his instructor ; " but come,let us see what you have." Theyimmediately went to the harpsichord,and John surprised and delighted hisbrother with a practical proof of hisacquisition. From this moment the spellseemed broken, and his progress thenbecame so rapid, that it is said, James,who was both theoretically and practically,a good musician, could not beholdNEIL GOW.his success without envy. In 1751,however, his brother resigned to himhis situation of organist at VauxhallGardens; and-on his death, in 1753,John was erected organist of Lydgate.In the same year he published his firstbook of Vauxhall songs; and he continuedto supply the gardens with vocalmusic till 1761, when the proprietorthought fit to try the effect of newnames. At the end of nine years, however,after the changes had been rungupon the names of Arne, Potter, Arnold,and others, Worgan was selectedto resume his situation of composer, in1770. He was, however, less popularin the orchestra than in thechuich;and his fine playing being little appreciatedby a Vauxhall audience, his continuingto preside there gave rise to acaricature, in which Apollo was representedas kicking him out of heaven,for wasting celestial energies on theprofane vulgar. He quitted Vauxhallfinally in 1774, and continued to teachand play from that time until his death,in 1790, after he had undergone anoperation for the stone.Worgan derived his chief celebrityfrom his performances on the organ ;for although his accomplishments as acomposer are said to have been of a superiororder, he was, in that character,little appreciated. " His compositions,indeed," says one of his biographers,attracted a little circle of intelligentadmirers; but the beams of patricianpatronage passed over the unfashionableEnglishman, to foster exotic plants, andhe descended to the grave to await thetardy and barren retribution of posthumousjustice." He was an enthusiastin his art, and successively became theworshipper of Domenico, Scarlatti, Palestrina,Geminiani, and Handel. Tothe memory of Palestrina, we are told,he once, at a convivial meeting, poureda libation on his bare knee ; a youthfulfreak, that in England, as hisbiographer observes, " is a subject forridicule ; not so in Italy." As a teacherof, and performer on, the organ, hewas not inferior to Stanley ; and hehas the honour of having had for hispupil the celebrated Charles Wesley.His published compositions consist oftwo oratorios, some organ pieces, and athanksgiving anthem, a set of cantosand several sets of songs; allabounding in taste, learning, and genius.NEIL Gothicextraordinary self-taught musician,was born of humble but honestparents, in March, 1727. His birthplace,according to Principal Baird ofEdinburgh, was Strathband, in Perth-shire; but at Inver, near Ducked, asstated in Chambers's Biography of distinguishedScotchmen. He was intendedfor the trade of a plaid weaver, butsoon resigned the shuttle for the bow,having discovered an early taste formusic, and began to play on the violinin his ninth year. It was not till histhirteenth, that he received any instructionon that instrument ; he then tooksome lessons from John Cameron, anattendant of Sir George Stewart ofGradually, and, it is said, soon placedhimself at the head of all the performersin the country, although Perthshirethen produced more skilful reel andstrathspey players than any other countyin Scotland. A circumstance, whichoccurred before he had reached histwenty-first year, completely attestedhis superiority : a trial of skill havingbeen proposed among some of theprincipal performers in the country,Neil was invited to join ; but thinkinghe had no chance, declined at firstbecoming a candidate. He at lengthconsented to enter the lists, and had theprize awarded to him by the umpire,a blind, but skilful minstrel, who saidthat he could distinguish the strokeof Neil's bow among a hundredplayers."Gow's talents soon gained him friendsand patrons, among the foremost ofwhom were the Duke of Athol andfamily, and the Duchess of Gordon.He was engaged at all the balls andfashionable parties in the county ; andas his reputation extended, which itINSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.did with a celerity proportioned to hisabilities, at Edinburgh, Dumfries, andall the principal towns in Scotland.So necessary, we are told, was he onsuch occasions, and so much was hisabsence felt, that, at one time, whenindisposition prevented him attendingthe Cupar hunt, the press called onevery lady and gentleman present to"dedicate a bumper to the betterhealth of Neil Gow, a true Scottishcharacter, whose absence from themeeting no one could sufficiently regret."Neil Gow died on the 1st of March,1807, leaving a competence to bedivided between his surviving children,two sons and a daughter. Fewmen appear to have been more estimablein all the relations of life, thanthe subject of our memoir. He retainedto the last his simplicity of dressand manners; and both in this respect,and in his personal appearance, exhibited,as one of his biographers observes,so characteristic a model of whatnational partiality conceives a Scottishhighlander to be, that his portrait hasbeen repeatedly copied. He is said tohave possessed a sound and vigorousunderstanding, and to have combinedwith strong sense and knowledge ofthe world, a fund of broad humour,which rendered him a welcome guestwherever he visited."With reference to his merits as amusician, the observations of PrincipalBaird are too pertinent and interestingto allow the substitution of any other.After stating that Gow's unrivalled excellenceformed an era in the progressof the improvement of Scottish music,which has since been completed by hissons, our authority continues : " Thelivelier airs which belong to the classof what are called the strathspey andreel, and which have long been peculiarto the northern part of the island, assumed,in his hand, a style of spirit,fire, and beauty, which had never beenheard before. It is curious and interestingto inquire, on the principles of art,in what consisted the peculiar characterof a performance which had thuscharmed and enlivened the scenes ofgaiety and innocent pleasure, withequal effect, in every rank and age oflife. There is, perhaps, no species whateverof music executed on the violin, inwhich the characteristic expression dependsmore on the power of the bow,particularly what is called the upwardor returning stroke, than the highlandreel. Here, accordingly, was Gow'sforte. His bow-hand, as a suitableinstrument of his genius, was uncommonlypowerful ; and when the noteproduced by the up-bow, was oftenfeeble and indistinct in other hands,it was struck, in his playing, with astrength and certainty, which neverfailed to surprise and delight the skilfulhearer. As an example, may bementioned his manner of striking thetenor C, in Athol House. To thisextraordinary power of the bow, in thehand of great original genius, must beascribed the singular felicity of expressionwhich he gave to all his music,and the native highland goat of certaintunes, such as Bullock Forum, in whichhis taste and style of bowing, couldnever be exactly reached by any otherperformer. We may add the effect ofthe sudden shout, with which he frequentlyaccompanied his playing in thequick tunes, and which seemed instantlyto electrify the dancers, inspiringthem with new life and energy,and rousing the spirits of the mostinanimate. Thus, it has been wellobserved, " The violin, in his hands,sounded like the harp of Ossian, or thelyre of Orpheus, and gave reality tothe poetic fictions which describe theastonishing effects of their performance."As a composer, Neil Gow is knownby upwards of a hundred popular tunespublished in the collection of his son,Nathaniel, at Edinburgh. They compriseno difficult or concerted pieces,but are, for the most part, of a livelycharacter, and suited for dancing. Oneof them is the very beautiful air, calledLocheink-side, to which Burns wrotehis ballad, Oh ! stay, sweet warblingWoodlark, stay,CHARLES W K S T, E Y.CHARLES WESLEY.THIS highly celebrated musical genius,whose early precocity places him on aparallel with Mozart, Crotch, and others,is the son of the Rev. Charles Wesley,M. A., and nephew of John Wesley,the famous founder of Methodism. Hewas born at Bristol, on the llth ofDecember, 1757 ; and, when little morethan two years old, his extraordinarytalent for music so far developed itself,that he could play many tunes withextreme correctness. At this early periodhe surprised his father, by, one day,executing an air on the harpsichordreadily, and in just time ;" and heafterwards played several others. Thiswas, probably,' the result of his mother'shabit of quieting and amusing him,almost from his birth, with the harpsichord.On these occasions he wouldnot suffer her to play with only onehand ; but, even before he could speak,would seize the other, and place it onthe keys of the instrument. He performedhimself without study or hesitation;and always put a true bass toevery tune he attempted He seems alsoto have possessed confidence in his ownpowers; and whenever asked to playbefore strangers, as was frequently thecase, he would invariably inquire, " Ishe a quicker?" and if he were answeredin the affirmative, he alwayscomplied with the greatest readiness.His style was .generally con spirit ;and there was, in his manner, somethingso much beyond what couldbe expected from a child, that hishearers, whether " musickers" or not,were invariably both delighted andastonished.On proceeding to London, with hisfather, in his fifth year, Mr. Beard wasso much pleased with his abilities, that hevolunteered his interest with Dr. Boyce,to get him admitted among the king'sboys ; but the offer was declined byMr. Wesley, as he then had no thoughtof bringing up his son to the professionof music. Among others, he was introducedto Mr. Worgan, who would frequentlyentertain him, by playing onthe harpsichord ; and the child, struckwith his bold and full manner of playing,seemed even then, it is said, tocatch a spark of his fire.Mr. Wesley, soon afterwards, returnedwith him to Bristol; and, whenhe was about six years old, placed himunder the tuition of Mr. Rooke, a good-naturedman, but an indifferent musician,who allowed him to run on, adlibitum, whilst he sat by, apparentlymore to observe than to control him.Rogers, at that time one of the oldestorganists in Bristol, would often sethim on his knee, and make him playto him ; declaring, that he was moredelighted with the boy's performancethan his own.For some years, young Wesley'sstudy and practice were almost entirelyconfined to the works of Corelli, Scarlatti,and Handel; and so rapid washis progress, that at the age of twelveor thirteen, it is said that no personwas able to excel him in performingthe compositions of these masters. Oncoining to London, he received instructionson the harpsichord from Mr.Kelway, and in the rules of compositionfrom Dr. Boyce. Tims prepared, hewas not long ere he began to make hisfirst essay as an original composer; andhis first work was a set of six concertosfor the organ or harpsichord, publishedunder the immediate inspectionof that master ; and, for a first attempt,it is said, " was indeed a wonderfulproduction ; as it contained some tongueswhich would have done credit to aprofessor of the greatest experience,and the first science." He had now-takenup his residence in ChesterfieldStreet, Mary-le-bone ; and there, about1779, he got up a domestic subscriptionconcert, of twelve nights, in each season,which were continued for some years.At the commencement of these trials ofhis skill he was but twenty-two; and,in 1784, he gave a further proof of hisability, as a composer, by the publicationof eight songs, in an extremely fineand masterly style of composition ; andINSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.hathinan anthem, beginning, " My Soul hpatiently tarried," which is insertedPage's Harmonia Sacra.Having been appointed organist inordinary to George the Fourth, he performedone of his own compositionsbefore his majesty, in the Royal Chanel,at Windsor, on the 12th of August, 1827,consisting of the late Hannah More'swell-known little lyric drama; whichshe afterwards published, with hismusic, under the title of The Feast ofFreedom; or, The Abolition of DomesticSlavery in Ceylon.He is, undoubtedly, to be rankedamongst the first professors of music inthis or any other country ; nor, perhaps,is he exceeded in his knowledge of theart by any other English composer ;but it is as an extempore organ-playerthat his powers are, probably, unrivalled.Of his manner of playing. MissHawkins has given an animated picturein her anecdotes. Alluding to a manuscriptcomposition which she heardhim play, she says, " I wish that, independentof the extraordinary abilitywhich, what was in itself so difficult,required, and which it met fully in thetalents of the professor, I could give theeye of the reader any idea of what themanual execution was. The greaterpart was performed with the handscrossed; rapidity made the utmostquickness of sight necessary ; and thehands were, at one moment, at the mostextreme distance that they could reachwhen crossed, and, at the next, so close,that the eye was deceived into the supposition,that that which was uppermost,was again brought under thatwhich it crossed upon. I never witnessedanything of the kind to be putin comparison with it. I think theperformer hardly drew his breath ;and I myself stood looking over him,with nearly as little recollection of thenecessity of respiration."ANDREW ASHE.ANDREW ASHE was born at Lis-burn,in the north of Ireland, about theyear 1759. Being sent to Woolwichfor his education, he there learnt theviolin from the master of the artilleryband ; and had made considerable progresson the instrument, when, in histwelfth year, he was recalled home, bya letter from his father. It stated that,in consequence of the unfavourable terminationof a law-suit, his parents wereunable to maintain their son any longerat school. He was reading the letter,bathed in tears at its contents, whenCount Bentinck, a relation of the Portlandfamily, happening to ride by theacademy at the moment, stopped toinquire the cause of young Ashe's grief.After having been told the particulars,the humane nobleman," says Ashe'sbiographer, " was induced to makefurther inquiry about him, from themaster of the academy ; and a correspondencebetween the count and thechild's parents commenced in consequence,which terminated in youngAshe's removal to the house of thecount, who, shortly after, took him tothe island of Minorca, where his regimentthen was." Here he receivedfurther instruction in the violin froman Italian ; and, before he left theisland, was looked upon as a musicalprodigy. Leaving Minorca, he proceeded",with Count Bentinck, throughSpain, Portugal, France, and Germany,to Holland ; where his patron intendedthat he should complete his education,with a view of becoming his land-steward.Music, however, had becometoo much a passion with the subject ofour memoir, to allow him to attend toany other studies. He was alreadymaster of several wind instruments';but the flute, in his performance onwhich he afterwards was so successful,had been tried, and abandoned by him,in consequence of its limited powers.In 1774, however, hearing that theSieur Vanhall had arrived at theHague, with a flute of six keys, Ashewas so delighted with the effect, upona trial of the instrument, that he determinedto purchase it, at any expense.He was immediately enabled, by thecount, to carry his wishes into effect ;WILLIAM THOMAS PARKEwhen he gave up the violin, and devotedhimself solely to the flute; in which hetook several lessons from the celebratedWending. His preceptor attempted toput him out of conceit with his newflute, by telling him that the long keyson the bottom joint spoiled the instrument;and that the small keys were ofno use, particularly in quick passages.Ashe did not agree with these observations; and, in consequence, it is said,discontinued his lessons as soon as aproper respect for such a distinguishedmaster would permit. He then, we aretold, " had recourse to his own naturalgenius ; and, after a few years incessantapplication, became the admiration ofHolland, chiefly from the uncommonfulness of his tone in those more abstrusekeys in music, which could notbe produced from the flute then ingeneral use; and which perfection waserroneously, in a great measure, ascribedto the performer, without allowinga participation in this honour to bedue to the great improvement in theconstruction of his instrument."Ashe now left the roof of CountBentinck, and went to reside at Brussels,as family musician to Lord warrington,with whom he remained tillthe reduction of that nobleman's establishment.He was next taken underthe patronage of Lord Dillon, who endeavouredto procure for him the situationof first flute in the orchestra ofthe opera at Brussels. The nominationwas opposed by the Brabant nobility,and the Flemish subscribers in general ;who gave the preference to the residentflute of the opera, the Sieur Vanhall.The .English, however, who were amaterial support to the opera, demandeda public trial of skill between the twoflutists; when Ashe, although inferiorin style to Vanhall, gained the generalapplause, by his superiority of tone ;for which, it is said, " in all probability,he had to thank the capabilities ofthe instrument, more than any preferenceof accoucheur. This musicalcontest took place in 1779; about fiveyears afterwards Ashe left Brussels, forDublin, in company with an Irish gentlemanand musical amateur, of thename of White. He remained in theIrish metropolis till 1791 ; having completelyestablished his reputation, byhis brilliant performances at the RotundaConcerts. His celebrity at length InducedSalomon to come to Dublin forthe express purpose of hearing himplay, with the intention of engaginghim for the concerts in Hanover Square;for which he had also brought over theillustrious Haydn from Germany. Ashemade his first appearance, in London,at Salomon's second concert, in 1792,in a manuscript concerto of his owncomposition ; and was received in amanner that at once fixed his fame. Hewas, soon after, appointed to succeedMontana, as principal flute at the ItalianOpera ; and, both as an orchestra andconcerto player, was considered thechief performer at all the establishedmetropolitan concerts. On the deathof Rauzzini, in 1810, he was chosendirector of the Bath Concerts, which heconducted with great ability till 1820;when he resigned his situation, in consequence,it is said, of having lost aconsiderable sum by the last four yearsof his directorship. His wife, who wasa pupil of Rauzzini, sang for someyears, with great applause, as Mrs.Ashe, at the oratorios, and other publicconcerts.WILLIAM THOMAS PARKE.THIS celebrated hautboy player, andtasteful composer, was born in 1762.When about nine years of age, hereceived instructions on the hautboy,from his brother, a celebrated performeron that instrument. He studied thepractice of music under Mr. Burney,nephew of Dr. Burney; and took lessonsin harmony from the celebrated Baum-garden.After he had appeared for afew seasons, at Drury Lane Theatre,as a soprano chorus singer, he wasengaged, in 1776, as tenor violin, atVauxhall, and, subsequently, as secondhautboy player. He also played thetenor for a short time at Drury Lane ;INSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS,and in 1783, succeeded Sharpe. as firsthautboy at Covent Garden. " But," hesays, "although I now felt very comfortablein my situation, possessing thefriendship of Mr. Shield, who wrote formy instrument, and of Mr. Baumgarten,a great contrapuntist, under whom Istudied composition, I did not considerthe fish to be yet caught ; my ambitionprompting me to endeavour to obtainthe still higher walk of concerts andconcerto playing ; to effect which, Iembraced every opportunity affordedme for practice and study ; and as everylittle helps, I had a party of talentedfriends, every Sunday morning, tobreakfast with me, after which weplayed quartets and quinces, for threeor four hours."In 1800, he accepted the place ofprincipal hautboy player, and performerof concertos on that instrument, atVaux-hall, which he retained till about 1823,when the new proprietors exchangedtheir fine instrumental band, scarcelyinferior to any other in the kingdom,for a mere military one. He was alsoconstantly engaged both at the principalperformances in London, and thefestivals and music meetings throughoutthe kingdom; nor, perhaps, wasany other hautboys ever so popular.He attended all the musical parties ofGeorge the Fourth, when Prince ofWales, as well as those of the late Dukeof Cumberland, who, having appointedhim to attend a concert on the day onwhich he died, is said to have inquiredwith his last breath, " if Parke andShield were come ?" One evening, afterhe had been accompanying MadameMara on the hautboy, in a peculiarlybrilliant manner, " I think," said theaccomplished vocalist to Dr. Arnold,that if 1 could have made a flight toGermany, Mr. Parke would have followedme." " Yes, madame," repliedDr. Arnold ; " and if you had made aflight to the infernal regions, no doubthe would have followed you there, tomake the Apollo-like attempt of conductingyou, like another Eurydice,back again, to delight the public."The impression which Parke madeon his audience, by his performances,was shared in even by the cynical andfastidious Dr. Wolcot, who, under hissoubriquet of Peter Pindar, thus eulogizedhim :To thee, while others pour their praise,The bard delighted joins the throng ;With pride he turns, though weak his lay*,Where merit justifies the sung.Yet think not, I'arke, thy wondrous skillFair praise alone from mortals draws :Lo '. I'luvhus listens from his hill,And all the Muses join til' applause.A more professional but not less complimentaryview has been taken of hismerits by the author of The Dictionaryof Musicians, who says, " His tone isremarkably sweet, his execution rapidand articulate, his shakes brilliant, hiscantabile and cadences varied and fanciful,whilst his judicious style of playingadagio movements evinces the greatestfeeling and expression. We must notavoid mentioning," it is added, " thathe has, by his industry and genius,added to the compass of the hautboy;as he plays up to G in alt, which is athird higher than the usual extent ofthe instrument E natural having beenthe highest note." He has not, however,confined himself to the practice ofhis instrument ; having, as a composer,acquired a deservedly high reputation,by numerous songs, glees, &c., composedby him for vaux hall. His instrumentalpieces comprise, besides aconcerto dedicated to George theFourth, the overtures to Nether Abbey,and The Lock and Key (with some ofthe songs of the first), both very successfulpieces: but to enumerate allhis productions would be beyond ourspace. His last work appears to havebeen a literary effort, printed during1830, under the title of Musical Memoirs;including the period from the commemorationof Handel, in 1784, to 1830;which he has interspersed with manycharacteristic anecdotes of his contemporaries.From the title page of thiswork, he appears to have been fortyyears principal hautboys of CoventGarden Theatre; he is also stated tobe a member of the Royal Society ofMusicians, and was, some years since,elected one of the court assistants, orgovernor for life.The following anecdote is related byParke of himself. At the time lie wasengaged in the orchestra of DruryLane Theatre, as tenor violin, he foundso little leisure for performance on hisfavourite instrument, the hautboy, thathe was obliged to rise very early in themorning for the purpose of practisingNATHANIEL Gownit. To enable him to do this, heused to fasten a cord to his arm atnight, which, being let down throughthe window to the area, was there leftto be pulled every morning at fouro'clock, by the watchman. One night,however, ' a drunken man passing,seized hold of the cord, and dragged itso violently that Parke every momentexpected to find himself 6n the pavement."In 1775," he says, " then a boy ofthirteen, having had an accident withmy sky-blue inexpressible, I was dispatchedto old Forest, the family tailor,living in a small house in MarketCourt, Bow Street, Covent Garden, toget them repaired. Having knockedat his door two or three times, it wasat length opened by a female (the tailorbeing from home) with an infant in herarms. The lady, who displayed a finefigure, and an expressive countenance,inclining to melancholy, kindly took mymessage and my inexpressible, promisingto deliver them to her landlord.Judge, then, of my surprise, when, afew years afterwards (in 1782), I discoveredthat the lady who had previouslyfavoured me, was the theatricalstar, ' the grace and ornament ' of theBritish stage, Mrs. Siddons! who hadformerly lodged in the tailor's littlefirst floor."NATHANIEL GOW.NATHANIEL, son of Neil GOW, andconsidered the most eminent of hisfamily or name, was born at the birthplaceof his father, in Perthshire, in766. His first musical essay was on asmall violin, commonly called a, kit;the same on which Neil Gow commenced,and which is still preserved inthe family. He afterwards took lessonsat Edinburgh, under Robert Macintosh,and next under M'Glashan, an excellentcomposer of Scottish airs, and anable leader of the fashionable bands,His instructor in the violoncello wasJoseph Reneagle, a person of somenote in the musical world ; and whoafterwards became professor of music atOxford.When not more than sixteen yearsof age, Nathaniel was appointed one ofhis majesty's trumpeters for Scotland,with a salary of 70 per annum. Atthis time he was known as an excellentviolin player, and a successful teacher,and, in 1791, he succeeded his brother,William, as a leader; a situation whichhe is said to have maintained for fortyyears, with a degree of success far beyondthat of any one that ever precededor followed him. In 1796, he commencedmusic-seller, in partnershipwith Mr. William Shepherd; but thoughthey carried on, for thirteen years, themost extensive business in that line ofany town in Scotland, Mr. Gow foundhimself, at the expiration of that period,obliged to make up such a sum to hispartner's executors, as considerablydeducted from his previous profits.Whilst he was engaged in business,Mr. Gow continued to publish, at differentperiods, the collections commencedby his father and himself; theyconsist of six books, besides three volumesof beauties, being a republicationof airs in the three first collections,with additions ; four volumes of a repositoryof Scotch slow airs, strathspeys,and dances ; two volumes of Scotsvocal melodies, and a collection of ancientcurious Scots melodies ; togetherwith a great many smaller publications,all arranged by himself for the harp,the piano forte, violin, and violoncello.These collections are considered themost complete and extensive ever submittedto the public ; and have supersededthat of Arnold, and of all othersanterior to him.Gow, after an interval of some years,again commenced business, in partnershipwith his son; but after hisdeath, in 1823, the trade speedily declined,and ended with the bankruptcyof Nathaniel, in 1827, " at a time,"says his biographer, " when age andinfirmity prevented him from doinganything to retrieve his fortunes." Inthis situation, his friends advised himto advertise a ball for his benefit; onINSTRUMENTAL P R F O R M E 11 S.which occasion he put forth the followingcircular: " When I formerly addressedmy kind patrons, and thepublic, I had no other claim than thatwhich professional men generally have,whose exertions are devoted to thepublic amusement. By a patronagethe most unvarying and flattering, Iwas placed in a situation of comfortableindependence ; and I looked forwardwithout apprehension to passing thedecline of my days in the bosom ofmy family, with competence and withhappiness. Unfortunately for me, circumstanceshave changed. By obligationsfor friends, and losses in trade,my anxious savings have been graduallywasted, till now, when almost bed-rid,unable to leave my house, or to followmy profession, I am forced to surrenderthe remnant of my means to pay myjust and lawful creditors. In this situation,some generous friends havestepped forward, and persuaded me,that the recollection of my formerefforts to please may not be so entirelyeffaced, as to induce the public to thinkthat my day of distress should passwithout notice or without sympathy."The ball produced him nearly 300;and yielded him a sum little inferior onits repetition, the three following years.Besides this assistance, he has latterlyreceived a pension of 50 per annum,voted him by the gentlemen of the CaledonianClub. It is to be lamented, however,that no liberality on the part ofothers, nor any exertions ot the subject ofour memoir, can now retrieve the seriouslosses he has undergone; amounting,as it is said they do, to not less than20,000. His great abilities, and equallygreat emoluments, render it highly probablethat he should have amassed, in'the course of his long career as a teacherand leader, a sum little short of theabove. He was frequently paid onehundred and fifty guineas for attendingat Perth, Dumfries, &c. ; and, in severalinstances, he was summoned toEngland. " One of the first objects,"says his biographer, " in the formationof fashionable panes, was to ascertainif Gow was disengaged ; and theywould be fixed, postponed, or altered,to suit his convenience."Mr. Gow has been twice married,and has several sons and daughters,besides the son to whom we have alreadyalluded. This gentleman, who,after having received a medical educationat Edinburgh and Paris, forsookhis destined profession for that ofmusic, is the composer of the beautifulmelody of Bonny Prince Charlie,and many others.The subject of our memoir has beenjustly described, in a biographical accountof his father, as one " whoserespectable character, and propriety ofconduct, have long secured him theesteem and favour of the public ; andwhose knowledge of composition, andvariety of talent in the art, joined withthe greatest refinement of taste, eleganceof expression, and power of execution,render him, beyond all dispute,the most accomplished and successfulperformer of Scottish music, in general,ever produced in this country."JOHN BAPTISTE CRAMER.THIS eminent musician and composeris the son of William Cramer, whobrought him over to England with himin 1770, when yet an infant, althoughhe is said to have already given indica-nationsof a taste for music. Surroundedby professors of the first eminence, hislatent powers were quickly drawn forth,but his father had no opportunity ofdiscovering the true bent of his geniustill he had attained the age of six years,when it was manifested by his takingevery opportunity of practising privatelyon an old piano-forte. His father beingdetermined to cultivate his taste for thisinstrument, shortly after apprenticedhim for three years to Bensar, a Germanprofessor, in London ; at the expirationof the time, he was placed withthe celebrated Schroeter, and subsequentlyunder Muzio dementi. At thecompletion of his tuition, he was onlythirteen; and after he had, for anotheryear, studied the works of the greatestROBERT Lindsey.masters with devotion and assiduity, hisfame, as a pianist, spread so widelythrough the metropolis, that he wasinvited publicly to play at several of thefirst concerts, where he astonished thebest judges and most tasteful audiences,by the brilliancy of his touch, rapidityof his execution, and precocity of hisgenius. Both himself and his fatherwere, at this time, looked upon as twoof the first instrumentalists of the day ;and their assistance was anxiouslysought in every orchestra of importancethroughout the kingdom.John Baptiste did not, however, neglectthe important study of the theoryof composition ; which he, at this period,pursued under the eye of the celebratedprofessor, C. F. Abel. At seventeen, hewent to the continent, and exhibitedhis talents in several of the principaltowns, in such a manner as to delightand astonish all who heard him. Duringthis tour he became known as a composer,and published, at Paris, severaloperas and sonatas for his favouriteinstrument. He returned to Englandin 1791 ; but went abroad again a fewyears after, and visited Germany andItaly ; and whilst at Vienna, he renewedhis acquaintance with Haydn, who hadhonoured him with his attentions andfriendship during his residence inLondon. Shortly after his return toEngland he married, and, with theexception of occasional visits to Paris, onsubjects connected with his profession,has since been located in London,where he has, for several years, headedthe music publishing firm of Cramer,Addison, and Beale, Regent Street.His name is well known throughoutEurope as a pianist of unrivalled excellence; at least the palm is yielded tohim by all who prefer taste and feeling,to mere mechanical display, in which,perhaps, there are some who excel him.His brilliancy of execution," saysa critical authority (though he disdainsto practise the mere legerdemain trickswhich are calculated to entrap theunwary), " is astonishing ; but thisquality, which is, in fact, purely mechanical,amounts to little or nothing inthe general estimate of such merits ashis ; taste, expression, feeling, the powerthat he possesses of almost making theinstrument speak a language, are theattributes by which he is so eminentlydistinguished." Mr. Cramer is alsocelebrated as a teacher, in which characterhe may be considered as havinggiven the finish to the improvements inthe school of pianists in this country,which dementi founded; and his Instructionsand Studies for this instrument,are justly considered as amongstthe best in Europe. Besides theseelementary works, he has published amultitude of airs, duets, operas, sonatas,concertos, &c., for the piano ; allabounding with beauties peculiarly hisown, and of a highly original andtasteful style.ROBERT Lindsey.His eminent performer on the violoncello,was born at Rotherham, in Yorkshire,in 1777. He displayed a fondnessfor music from his infancy ; and atfour years of age, his father, who wasan amateur musician, could not pleasehim so much as by playing to him onthe violoncello. He shortly after commencedteaching him the violin ; and assoon as he had attained the age of nineyears, gave him lessons on the violoncello,in which he continued to be hisinstructor for seven years. He subsequentlyreceived lessons from the celebratedCervetto, who undertook to givehim tuition gratuitously ; and under soexcellent a master, with a genius of thehighest promise, Lindley could not failto excel. Soon after his arrival in thesouth of England, and during the timethe Prince of Wales, afterwards Georgethe Fourth, held his court at thePavilion, Brighton, Lindley being engagedat the theatre there, was commandedto perform before his royalhighness, who expressed himself highlydelighted with his powers. On somesubsequent occasion he is said to haveconsented to play a duet with theprince's teacher, Crossdill, on conditionINSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.that each should execute no more thanwas written for them by the composer.This was agreed to ; but Crossdill, it isadded, departed from the engagement,and began to extemporize ; in whichexample, Lindley followed him withsuch effect, to the surprise of theaudience, that thunders of applause alternatelyresounded to " Bravo, Cross-dill! " Bravissimo, Lindley ! " till theclose of the piece ; when the latter roseindignantly at the want of faith in hisopponent, put up his instrument, anddeclared he would never again playwith him.In 1794, he had acquired such deservedconsideration, that he succeededOperate as first violoncello at the Operaor King's Theatre, a post he continuedto hold with undiminished reputationtill within a season or two, when thesalaries were so reduced, on account ofFrench performers being to be had atinferior rates, that he, with William,and other eminent instrumental performers,retired from the orchestra.They have, however, since obtainedtheir old stations in the orchestra, withtheir original salaries. For the lastthirty years, it may be said, that nomusic meeting or concert of consideration,in England, could have been consideredcomplete without the assistanceof Lindley : his performances alone, indeed,in many provincial towns, wouldbe almost sufficient to draw an audience.No musician, probably, ever had agreater command of his instrument, andhis style of playing is undoubtedlyunique. His bow-arm has unlimitedpowers of action ; his tones are full andsweet ; his variety of expression, perfectionof tune, power of modulating,and rapidity in fingering (his passingfrom the top to the bottom of thefinger-board of his unwieldy instrumentbeing an operation of no effort tohim), is truly surprising,In private life he is a most amiableman, and an excellent companion.Though not communicative, in consequence,probably, of an impediment inhis speech, no man enjoys pleasing andinstructive conversation more. Thewriter of this memoir heard from thecelebrated violinist, Nicholas Mori, thefollowing anecdote of Lindley, which is aforcible example of the ruling passion ;though, in this instance, happily, notexemplified in death : Whilst on hisway, with Mrs. Salmon and other eminentvocalists and musicians, to atteixlthe Birmingham music meeting, thestage coach in which they travelled wasupset. Lindley was one of those whoescaped without much injury ; but hisfirst thoughts, on rising, were respectingthe fate of his violoncello, which he nosooner saw lying in the road, than hehurried towards it, and dragging it undera hedge, very coolly unlocked the case,took out the instrument, and began totry its tone. The discordant soundswhich it yielded, soon met the ears ofthe other passengers, one of whom, alady, unable to see, from the dusk ofthe evening, whence they proceeded,and mistaking them for the moans ofsome one expiring, exclaimed to one ofher companions, " Do go and assist thepoor gentleman, yonder ! List, how heis groaning ! "Mr. Lindley has composed severalconcertos and other works of merit forhis instrument ; and is one of those whoearly adopted the popular plan of introducingin his concertos some popularmelody, upon which to ground the delightfulvariations with which his piecesabound. He has a son, William, whowas born in London, in 1802, who,though he cannot be said to possessthat power which characterizes his father'shand, is equalled by few othervioloncello players in the British metropolis.BENJAMIN JACOB.BENJAMIN JACOB was born inLondon, in 1778, and was first instructedin the rudiments of music by his father,a tolerable amateur performer on theviolin. In his eighth year he enteredas a chorus singer in the choir of PortlandChapel, being introduced into itby Robert Willoughby, from whomBENJAMIN JACOB.Jacob received his earliest vocal instruction.He soon after commencedof his own accord upon the harpsichord,but was subsequently placed under thetuition of Mr. hhrubsole, the organist ofSpa Fields Chapel, and Matthew Cooke,organist of Bloomsbury Church ; but, ashis biographer observes, he was principallyadvanced in the science by hisown study, attention, and perseverance,making whatever he heard or saw inmusic a lesson. When only ten yearsof age, he was appointed organist ofSalem Chapel; and, at twelve, was chosento fill the same situation at CarlisleChapel, Kennington Lane. About thistime, he gave a proof of his correct earin temperament, by. tuning the pianoforteof Haydn, who was then in London,so much to that great composer'ssatisfaction, that he desired Jacobshould always tune his instruments.Such rapid reputation did he obtain asan organ player, that he was frequentlyengaged, in his eleventh year, to performin places of worship, for charitablepurposes ; and, as a singer, he was oneof the treble boys at the two last musicalfestivals in Westminster Abbey, in1790-91. From 1790 to 1794, he heldthe situation of organist at BentinckChapel, Lesson Green ; and in the Decemberof the last year, he succeededImmyns, as organist of Rowland Hill'sSurrey Chapel.In 1796, he commenced studyingharmony under Dr. Arnold, and by himwas proposed a member of the RoyalSociety of Musicians, into which bodyhe was elected in 1799. In the followingyear, he conducted a series of oratorio's,under the direction of Bartleman,in Cross Street, Hatton Garden ; andfor many years he presided at theannual concert for the Choral fund.In 1808, he instituted, at the SurreyChapel, an organ performance withoutany vocal accompaniments, consistingof a selection of airs, chorusses, andfugues, from various authors. In 1809,he was joined by Samuel Wesley in apublic performance, each playing alternately.They chose the fugues of SebastianBach, and Handel, with manyof the latter's overtures, airs and chorusses; and drew an audience of aboutthree thousand persons, including manypersons in the first rank of professorsand amateurs. These performanceswere repeated in 1811, 1812, and 1814,when Dr. Crotch played alternatelywith Jacob. He had previously openedthe organ of St. Swithin's, London, andthat of Maiden Chapel, Camberwell,and in the year last-mentioned, he wasappointed umpire in the selection of anorganist of St. Paul's, Deptford; anhonour which was imposed upon himon several other similar occasions. In1818, he conducted, at the organ andpiano-forte, the Lent oratorios at CoventGarden Theatre; and in the October ofthe same year, was elected an associateof the Philharmonic Society. In 1823,he was chosen one of the court ofassistants of the Royal Society of Musicians.He has for several yearsconducted an annual concert at theSurrey Chapel, for the benefit of thealms-houses belonging to that place ; aperformance which is always crowded,and produces about 200 annually.As a composer, Mr. Jacob is favourablyknown by his National Psalmody,a collection of tunes for everySunday throughout the year, many ofthem entirely composed by himself.He has aho produced a second volumeof tunes, for the use of the SurreyChapel; Dr. Watt's Divine and MoralSongs, as solos, duets, and trios ; Stayoh ! stay, thou lovely shade, a gleefor two trebles and bass ; Sure not tolife's short span confined, a glee for aho,tenor, and bass; and Maternal Tenderness,a canzonet by William Bay ley.JOHN WHITE.THIS eminent organist was born inYork, in 1779, and was intended forthe medical profession by his parents,till they were induced to alter theirviews in consequence of the decidedtaste developed, by the subject of ourmemoir, for music. " They observed,"says his biographer, " that whereverINSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.the sound of a violin was to be heard,the young boy was found to be aneager listener; that neither marbles,hoop, cricket, nor, indeed, any otherjuvenile amusement, possessed the leastcharm for him ; that although compelledto attend the grammar-schoolfrom seven in the morning till five inthe evening, he sought no relief fromthe confinement of school in the amusementof his schoolfellows; but preferredsitting to hear the strains evenof indifferent music." He was nowregularly educated for the professionfor which he had shewn so decided aninclination ; and, before he was thirteenyears of age, is said to have surprisedthe citizens of York, by performing aconcerto of Borgia, whose works wereat that time considered equally difficultof execution, and masterly in composition.In 1794, he was engaged by LordHarewood as leader, teacher, and directorof his private concerts at Hare-woodHouse : he superintended them formany years, upon a very handsomesalary, which is said to be still continuedto him by the present earl.The visits of White to London, withhis noble patron's family, enabled himto complete his musical instruction invarious departments of the art. Helearnt the piano-forte under Dussek ;thorough-bass, the organ, and singing,under John Ashley ; the violin underRaymond ; the harp under Philip Meyersen., and the violoncello under Darien.The study of these different instrumentsdid not retard his progress inany particular one; indeed he playedso admirably on all, that it was difficultto say in which he succeeded best.The violin and violoncello were, probably,his favourite instruments ; and,being introduced by Salomon to theprofessional concerts in town, he waschosen to supply the place of Linleyand Darien on these instruments.The subject of our memoir married,in 1803, the daughter of John Sharp,Esq., of Gildersome, in Yorkshire;and, soon after, accepted an invitationto settle at Leeds. He was appointedorganist of Harewood Church, in 1804;of St. Paul's, Leeds, in 1807; and in1821, of the parish church of Wakefield.From 1793 to 1818 he had attendedalmost all the principal concerts in thenorthern part of the kingdom ; wherehe was considered unrivalled as a concertoplayer, and leader in Handel'soratorios. " In Yorkshire," says acritical authority, " we may safely pronounceWhite to be the favourite andpopular leader, particularly in Handel'soratorio music; which may be said tohave been greatly cultivated and improvedunder his direction. His skill,indeed, in this department is verygreat; and has given a confidence andaccuracy to the chorus singers of theWest Riding, which renders themalmost unrivalled. They may now disputethe palm with the Lancashirechorus singers, who have long beenconsidered the first in England; and,perhaps, in their treble voices, still areso : but we may venture to say that,since White has had the managementof the orchestras in the West Riding,the male voices, which are there broughtforward, may enter the lists with anyof their neighbours."The time occupied by Mr. White, inhis attendance on the schools, and hisregular pupils, has prevented his givingto the press any composition; thoughhe is said to be the author of somechurch services, anthems, chants, responses,&c. worthy, in every respect,of publication.JOHN PURKIS.JOHN PURKIS was born in London,in 1781, being blind in both eyes, of acataract, which was discovered when hewas about twelve months old. As soonas he could speak he discovered afondness for music, and, at the age ofthree years, he could sing correctly severalpopular airs. At six, he was placedunder the care of Thomas Grenville, theorganist of the Foundling Hospital, andblind, like his pupil, but celebrated forhis abilities, both as a teacher and per-JOH N PURKI3.former. The progress of young Purkiswas surprising ; insomuch that those whoheard him play, could scarcely believethat it was a blind child who producedsuch effects. At seven years of age heperformed many of Handel's overtures,and was in the habit, says one of hisbiographers, "of playing voluntariesand other parts of the service at theFoundling Chapel, to the great delightof his master and the congregation,who frequently seated themselves in theorgan gallery for the purpose of beingeye-witnesses to the playing of youngPurkis, who was then generally knownat the chapel by the appellation ofyoung Handel."Up to his ninth year, the subject ofour memoir had received instruction bymeans of a mechanical table and apparatus,invented by Mr. Stanley, but thiswas now entirely thrown aside ; hismemory being capable of retaining anypiece of music that was once read overto him. An instance, indeed, is relatedof his hearing, on one day, many pagesof newly published music read over tohim, and deferring to try it on the instrumenttill the next, when he wentthrough the whole correctly. As earlyas 1790, he was appointed organist ofMargaret Chapel, in Margaret Street,Cavendish Square ; and, three years afterwards,to the same post at St. Slave,Southwark, after a contested electionwith twelve adult candidates, over themost popular of whom he obtained amajority of one hundred and eleven.At this period he frequently devotedten hours a day to study and practice;and, in the course of time, heacquired, by self-application, a knowledgeof several instruments, besides theorgan and piano forte, including theharp, violin, French-horn,bassoon, flute,flageolet, &c. &c. The organ, however,continued to be his favourite instrument; and as the Temple Church containedone of the finest in the kingdom,he made several attempts to obtain theorganist's place there, and at lengthaccepted a deputy's situation in thatchurch for three years. In his twenty-secondyear he was elected organist ofSt. Clement's Danes, Strand ; and on hisleaving St. Slave's, had the complimentpaid him of being appointed umpire ata trial of skill amongst the candidatesfor the succession to his office.Mr. Purkis had passed thirty years ofhis life in total blindness, when an oculistfrom Exeter ventured to give himhopes of obtaining his sight. After thefirst operation, which took place athis father's house, in Chancery Lane, onthe 9th of June, 1810, he was able todistinguish several objects. It wouldappear that he had previously gained atolerably accurate notion of colours; foron first seeing the pavement, he describedit as being white as snow ; anda hat being placed before him, as round,and black. He supposed St. Paul's Cathedralto be a black cloud, till he wasinformed that clouds were always movingand changing their appearance ;moving objects he was at a loss to describe.The future operations on hiseyes were performed in the house ofthe surgeon, at Exeter, where he remainedfrom the middle of August tothe end of October. He returned toLondon with his sight restored in sucha manner, as to enable him to walk thestreets of London alone, and to fulfil allthe purposes of domestic life withoutassistance. It was expected that therecovery of his powers of vision, mighthave a tendency to destroy his musicaltalents, but in a concert given by him,shortly after his arrival in London, heafforded ample proof, by his performanceon several instruments, that hiscapacities in this respect were perfectlyunimpaired. Some years afterwards heagain lost his sight, but not in such adegree, we believe, as to deprive himof the use of it altogether.One important feature in the careerof Purkis, was his introduction to thelate Lord Kirkwall, by whom he wasempowered to superintend the constructionof a superb chamber organ, thenbuilding for his . lordship, by Messrs.Flight and Robson. His performanceon it when it was complete, at therooms of those gentlemen, in St. Martin'sLane, attracted crowds of persons daily ;and it is said, first gave the builders theidea of constructing the Apollonicon forthe purpose of public exhibition. Hisadmirable performances on this magnificentinstrument are too well known torequire comment ; suffice it to say, thatthey form an era in musical history,and create scarce less wonder and delightthan are produced by its mechanicalpowers.INSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.The ear of Mr. Purkis is said to beso acute, that if a whole orchestra beperforming, and one instrument in theband is a quarter of a tone flat orsharp, he can not only detect theerror, but point out the identical instrumentfrom which it has arisen. No onehas a more accurate knowledge of themechanism of the organ ; the soundalone is sufficient to enable him to calculatethe number of its pipes. Withrespect to his merits as a composer, hisbiographer observes : " Although thepublications of Purkis are not very numerous,yet what have appeared aregenerally admired; and it may be presumed,that as he on all occasions requiresan amanuensis (from those dayshaving been spent in darkness, in whichis usually acquired the art of using penand ink), his publications will not bevery voluminous, although some ofhis manuscript compositions are trulysublime. Whilst speaking of the manuscripts,we should state the fact, thatwhen he composes a piece of music, hewrites, as it were, in his mind, suchparts as he approves; and when helias prepared a fair mental copy (if wemay be allowed the expression), sendsfor his amanuensis, and dictates hisideas much quicker than any one canwrite them." Mr. Purkis is said to beagood arithmetician ; and, in addition tohis other musical merits, has that ofbringing to perfection the double flageolet,originally invented by Scott, andon which he himself plays beautifully.ACTORS,ACTORS.ROBERT Wiles.ACCORDING to the testimony of hisschoolfellow, Daniel O'brien, RobertWilks was born in 1666, in MeathStreet, Dublin, where his father carriedon the business of a stuff weaver.Bedchamber, however, in his editionof the life of Colley Cibber, says, " theancestors of this great comedian wereseated at Bromesgrove, in Worcestershire,where Judge Wilks, his grandfather,raised a troop of horse at his ownexpense, for the service of Charles theFirst, in whose cause the family sufferedso much, that the father of Robert, withhis wife, and the scanty remains of anample fortune, removed to Dublin ;near to which, at a place called Rath-farnham, the comedian was born, inthe year 1670." He was sent to schoolwith a view of being educated for thechurch ; but paying more attention topenmanship than to his classical studies,a situation was procured for him inthe office of the Irish secretary at war,where, for some time, he conducted himselfwith great assiduity : but, havingcontracted a fondness for play-reading,and an affection for a neighbour'sdaughter, whom he married clandestinely,his inattention became so manifest,that he was at length dismissedfrom his situation. His prospects werenow truly deplorable : his wife, havingbeen turned out of doors by her father,on the discovery of her pregnancy, hadbut just claimed his protection ; andMr. Wilks senior, equally enraged atthe connexion his son had formed,had forbidden the young couple to stayin his house a single night; and declaredto his own wife, that if she everwent near them, or gave them the leastassistance, a separation would certainlyensue between themselves. Such harshtreatment became, at length, the commontopic of discourse in Dublin, andinduced a Mr. Cope, a respectablegoldsmith, with the approbation of hiswife, to offer the unfortunate pair anasylum in his house, where Mr. andMrs. Wilks were most kindly entertainedfor two years, in the course ofwhich the latter became the mother ofas many children.The stage, to which Wilks had anearly propensity, was now sought byhim as a means of obtaining subsistence,and, in January, 1689, he made his firstappearance at the Dublin Theatre, inthe character of Othello. His successwas sufficient to induce the manager toenter into an engagement with him, ata salary of l per week, which was, inthe next year; increased to 30s. On thebreaking out of the troubles in Ireland,which occasioned many protestant familiesto quit that kingdom, Wilks wasadvised to try his fortune in London,and was furnished with an introductionto Betterton, by an actor namedRichards. The assistance of Mr.and Mrs.Cope, and a present of twenty guineas,which they had prevailed upon oldMr. Wilks to make his son, enabled himand his family to reach the Britishmetropolis, where he was received intothe Drury Lane company, but at asalary of only 15*. per week. The bestpart allotted to him, was thatofLycippus,in The Maid's Tragedy, his diffidencein which, so pleased Betterton, whoperformed in the same play, that hesaid to him, " Young man, this feardoes not ill become you ; a horse thatsets out at the strength of his speed,will soon be jaded." But though Dryden,Wycherley, and others, expressedthemselves, as well as Betterton, inACTORS,favourable terms of his performance, hecontinued for nearly three years toplay low parts in comedy. At the expirationof that period, though Bell-chamberssays he remained in Londonbut one winter, he was engaged byAshbury to return to Dublin ; wherehe played superior parts with great applause.His career, for a time, was cut shortby a violent fever, caught in consequenceof his exertions in the character ofAlexander the Great, and which nearlyterminated his life. On his recoveryhe again appeared at the theatre, andcontinued to perform, till a report thathe was too intimate with his friendAshbury's wife, determined him on returningto London. Ashbury, who hadevery confidence in the honour ofWilks, had long disregarded these rumours;but at length began to givecredit to what he heard. Wilks thenwent to him, and said, "Sir, as youhave known the world many yearslonger than I have done, I was ingreat hopes that you would have beenso far your own friend, as not to givecredit to idle and groundless reports.Rumour is a common liar ; and if thetittle tattle of the multitude shall beadmitted as a sufficient proof, whosereputation is safe? I declare myselfinnocent ; and am willing to give youthe most convincing satisfaction, that Iam incapable of such unworthiness,while I shall esteem myself happy ifI can restore your former tranquillityand peace of mind." " That is not inyour power," said Ashbury; "I wishit could be done ; but the arrow is toodeeply rooted, ever to be drawn out.""Then, sir," replied Wilks, "sinceyou are obstinately bent not to sufferany means to be used which may removeyour uneasiness, I can onlypromise you, that in a very little time,shall put it out of the power ofmalice to say, that you shall disquietyourself for the future on my account."Neither, however, the protestations ofWilks, nor of Mrs. Ashbury herself,had the desired effect ; and the former,therefore, carried into execution hisresolution of leaving Ireland, thoughAshbury now endeavoured to detainhim, sensible of his merit, and convinced,perhaps, of his innocence ofthe charge imputed to him.Wilks's re-appearance at Drury Lane,was in 1696, in the part of Roebuck, inFarquhar's Love and a Bottle ; but hissuccess was not complete till he playedSir Harry Wildair, a character whichFarquhar is said to have drawn onpurpose for him. The piece had a runof fifty-two nights ; and Wilks was soapplauded, that Powell, who had at firsttreated him with pretended contempt,grew seriously jealous, and after aquarrel, in which Wilks acted withgreat spirit, went over to the oppositioncompany in Lincoln's Inn Fields. Soonafter his appearance in the part ofWildair, Wilks, who had lost his firstwife, married a Miss Knapton, and, in1708, he became one of the managersof the Haymarket Theatre. In thissituation, Gibber describes him as toofond of fame, and less solicitous for thepecuniary interests of the theatre, thanfor the glory of the performance ; but,it should be recollected, as Mr. Gaitobserves, that it was during the periodof Wilks's joint management, that theEnglish stage was conducted with thegreatest success.After the death of his second wife,Wilks married a third ; like his twoformer ones, she possessed no fortune,being, though a lady, compelled to earnher livelihood as a sempstress. Shewas employed to make some shirts forWilks, who, pleased with the nicenessof the work, requested to see the ladyat his lodgings, and, soon after, courtedand married her. As a friend expressedsome surprise at his choice, heis related to have said, " Sir, as Providencehas been pleased to bless mewith a competency, sufficient to maintainmyself and a family, could I dobetter than take to my arms one whowanted such a blessing ? I assure you,that, as love was the only motive thatprompted me to marry the gentlewomanwho is now my wife, the unhappycircumstances she was in shallnot in the least diminish, but ratherserve to increase, my affection to her ;and I am fully convinced, that, as ourlove is reciprocal, there will be noroom for complaint on either side. Ishall look upon her children as myown; they shall not want anythingthat is necessary or convenient forthem; nor am I under any apprehensionof their not discharging a filialKOBF.KT Wiles.duty to me, since they have beeneducated in the best and most virtuousprinciples."Wilks died on the 27th of September,1732, and was buried at midnight, byhis own request, in order to avoidostentation, in the church of St. Paul's,Covent Garden.The distinguishing feature of Wilks'sprivate character was generosity; innumerableinstances of which havebeen related, not only of purse, but ofheart He enabled Farquhar to come toEngland, by giving him ten guineas,although at' the time he was in indifferentcircumstances himself; and whenthat eminent dramatist was again in distress,presented him with twenty guineas,as an inducement to him to write acomedy ; the fruit of this liberality was,the celebrated Beaux Stratagem, on thethird night of which the author died ofa broken heart. Wilks was one of thosewho assisted the unfortunate Savage ;and it is worthy of remark, that, whenhe obtained from his reputed motherthe sum of sixty guineas, she assuredWilks that Savage was not her son ;but was palmed upon her, for the childwhich she had put out to nurse.O'brien speaks of the amours ofWilks, but says that they were few;and, indeed, his partiality for a marriedlife, and his uniform kindness in all hisdomestic relations, proved, that libertinismwas neither his choice nor hishabit. His " gaiety of humour," saysGait, " was without that carelessness ofothers' feelings, which is too often associatedwith light-heartedness ; nor doeshis life afford any support to the opinionof the satirist, that those who havethemselves drunk deeply of distress,are apt to look with disgust, rather thanpity, on the sufferings of others."As an actor, Wilks was successful,both in tragedy and comedy, but excelledchiefly in the latter. His SirHarry Wiluair was, according to Gibber,the best acted part that ever our Englishtheatre had to boast of; whilstDavies, in his Dramatic Miscellanies,says, that his Prince of Wales was oneof the most perfect exhibitions of thetheatre. " He threw aside," he tellsus, " the libertine gaiety of Hal withfelicity, when he assumed the princelydeportment of Henry. At the Boar'sHead he was lively and frolicsome.In the reconciliation with his father, hispenitence was ingenuous, and his promisesof amendment were manly andaffecting. In the challenge with Hotspur,his defiance was bold, yet modest ;and his triumph over that impatientand imperious rebel, was tempered bygenerous regret." The part of Buckingham,in Henry the Eighth, was rendered,as performed by him, one ofgreat importance. His delicate mannerof addressing ladies, was equalledby no actor of his o\vn time ; and hencehis Castalio and Hamlet were particularlyadmired. " To beseech, gracefully,"says Sir Richard Steele, speaking ofWilks as a tragedian, " to approachrespectfully, to pity, to mourn, to love,are the places wherein he may besaid to shine with the utmost beauty."Wilks had a tall, erect person, pleasingaspect, and elegant address ; good senseand diligence, and so tenacious a memory,that in all the parts which heperformed for forty years, he rarelychanged, it is said, or misplaced anarticle in any one of them. " I havebeen astonished," says Gibber, " to seehim swallow a volume of froth andinsipidity in a new play, that we weresure could not live above three days,though it had been recommended to thestage by some good person of quality."But he carried his professional zealstill further, if the following anecdotebe correct: Having a part in a newcomedy to study, in which he found aparticular speech, very difficult to get byheart, he persuaded the author to cutit out altogether ; but on going homefrom the rehearsal, he thought it suchan indignity to his memory, that anythingshould be considered too hard forhim, that he made himself perfect inthe speech, although he knew it wasnot to be spoken.JA C T O R S .BARTON BOOTH.THIS distinguished tragedian, thethird son of John Booth, Esq., anddescended from an ancient and respectablefamily in Lancashire, was bornin the year 1681. He was sent, foreducation, in his ninth year, to WestminsterSchool, then under the superintendenceof the celebrated Dr. Busby.Booth became one of his most favouritepupils ; not only on account of the proficiencyhe made in his studies, butalso of the dramatic spirit with whichhe recited his lessons ; the doctor himselfhaving had a propensity to acting,in his youth. The subject ofour memoir was assigned a part inthe Latin comedy, annually performedat the school, and gained such applauseby his acting, that he determinedsecretly to make the stage hisprofession. Dr. Busby was the mostvehement in his approbation of ouryoung actor, so that his father, whohad a great aversion towards the stage,would sometimes tell his son, in alludingto this circumstance, that " theold man poisoned him with his lastbreath."On reaching his seventeenth year,when it was intended that he should beremoved to the university, with a view ofpreparing himself for the church, Boothran away from school, and joined astrolling company in the country. Thehardships he underwent, at length,made him glad to return home; butthough he was kindly received, hispredilection for the stage was not overcome,and again leaving home, he acquiredsome renown as an actor atBartholomew Fair. Soon after, meetingwith Ashbury, the Dublin manager,he accompanied him to the Irish metropolis,where, in June, 1698, he madehis debut in the character of Oroonoko.A ludicrous incident might have marredhis success : happening to wipe his faceas he entered the stage, he appearedwith a pie-bald countenance, which setall the audience laughing, till he discoveredand rectified the accident. Theapplause, however, with which he wasreceived, so pleased Ashbury, that hemade him a present of five guineas,and treated him with great kindnessduring the remainder of his stay inDublin, which lasted two years. Atthe expiration of this period, he cameto London, and was engaged by Mr.Betterton, to appear at his theatre. Hemade his debut in the character ofMaximus, in the tragedy of Valentinian,and at once took his station among thefirst actors of his day. After the deathof Betterton, he was received into theDrury Lane company, and in 1712, hewas fixed upon, by Addison, to performthe part of Cato, in his tragedy of thatname, on its first representation. Theapplause he received was most enthusiastic; and, undoubtedly, the manner inwhich he sustained the character ofCato, contributed, no less than the politicalallusions with which it abounded,to the success of the piece. At the conclusionof the play, Lord Bolingbrokemade him a present of fifty guineas,for his honest opposition to a perpetualdictator, and his dying so bravelyin the cause of liberty;" and the nextday, we are told by Gibber, in his Apology,the managers presented him withthe same sum, at the suggestion ofDogged.In 1713, he was, by the influence ofLord Bolingbroke, appointed one of thepatentees of the theatre ; a measurewhich gave great offence to his colleagues,who thought his nominationan invasion of their property. As manager,however, he so conducted himselfas to obtain, for twenty years, the continuedapprobation of the public, and sohighly was he thought of as an actor,that his appearance, even in the declineof life, always attracted a crowded audience.Occasional fits of lunacy causedhis retirement from the stage, at a periodwhen his physical faculties were in theirfull vigour. He died on the 10th of May,1733, and was buried privately, accordingto his own direction, at Cowley,near Uxbridge, the constant place of hissummer retirement. He was twiceBARTON BOOTH,married : first, to a daughter of Sir WilliamMarkham, Bart., of Norfolk ; andsecondly, to Mrs. Santlowe, a favouriteactress, who survived him forty years,and caused a monument to be erectedto his memory in Westminster Abbey,in 1772.Amongst the high requisites of Boothfor a tragic actor, he had a grave countenance,a good person, a dignified air,firm voice, and manly action ; he spokevery quickly, his enunciation was distinct,and the cadence of his voice extremelygrateful to the ear. It is matter of disputein which parts he best succeeded,the poetical and sentimental, or theimpassioned. From Pope's expressionof " well mouthed," it would seem thathe was, in the poet's opinion, at least,less an actor, than a declaimer ; butother and more able critics are of acontrary opinion ; and Cibber, in acomparison of his merits as Othello andCato, speaks, though somewhat reluctantly,in high terms of his performanceof the former character. Perhapsthe most just remarks on the acting ofBooth, are from the pen of Aaron Hill,who Says, " Two advantages distinguishedhim in the strongest light, fromthe rest of his fraternity : he had learningto understand perfectly whatever itwas his part to speak, and judgment toknow how far it agreed or disagreedwith his character. Hence arose a peculiargrace, which was visible to everyspectator, though few were at the painsof examining into the cause of theirpleasure. He could soften and slideover, with a kind of elegant negligence,the improprieties in a part he acted;while, on the contrary, he would dwellwith energy upon the beauties, as if heexerted a latent spirit which had beenkept back for such an occasion, that hemight alarm, awaken, and transport, inthose places only, where the dignityof his own good sense could be supportedby that of his author. A littlereflection upon this remarkable quality,will teach us to account for that manifestlanguor, which has sometimes beenobserved in his action, and which wasgenerally, though I think falsely, imputedto the natural indolence of histemper. For the same reason, thoughin the customary rounds of his business,he would condescend to some parts incomedy, he seldom appeared in any ofthem with much advantage to his character.The passions which he foundin comedy, were not strong enough toexcite his fire ; and what seemed wantof qualification, was only absence ofimpression. He had a talent at discoveringthe passions, where they layhid in some celebrated parts, by theinjudicious practice of some other actors,and when he had discovered, he soongrew able to express them. His secretfor obtaining this great lesson of thetheatre, was an adaptation of his lookto his voice, by which artful imitationof nature, the variations in the soundof his words, gave propriety to everychange in his countenance. So thatit was Mr. Booth's peculiar felicity tobe heard and seen the same whether,as the pleased, the grieved, the pitying,the reproachful, or the angry. Onewould almost be tempted to borrow theaid of a very bold figure, and to expressthis excellence the more significantly,by permission to affirm, that the blindmight have seen him in his voice, andthe deaf have heard him in his visage.His gesture, or as it is commonlycalled, his action, was but the resultand necessary consequence of his dominionover his voice and countenance ;for having, by a concurrence of twosuch causes, impressed his imaginationwith such a stamp and spirit of passion,he ever obeyed the impulse by a kindof natural dependency, and relaxed orbraced successively into all that fine expressivenesswith which he paintedwhat he spoke, without restraint oraffectation."As an author, Booth attainedsome reputation, by several songsand other small pieces of poetry ; liealso translated some Odes of Horace,and composed for the stage, a masque,entitled Dido and aeneas; but his indolenceprevented him from cultivatinghis literary abilities to the extent theymerited. In private, he was generallybeloved and respected, and, with theexception of an occasional roughness ofmanner, and haste of temper, whichnot unfrequently accompany franknessand sincerity, few defects have beenpointed out in his character.During the period which elapsedbetween the death of his first, and hismarriage with his second, wife, heformed a connexion with Miss Mount-actors.ford, daughter of the player of that name.He left her, upon discovering that, sheintrigued with another gentleman, and,soon after, married Mrs. Saritlowe ;An event," says Mr. Gait, " whichgreatly distressed Miss Montfort, andthrew her into a violent fit of despondency,which might have killed her, ifshe had not been enamoured of a bottlebefore." On parting from her, Boothrestored to her the whole of her fortune,amounting to several thousand pounds,which she had previously placed at hisdisposal; though he was unworthilytraduced for his conduct in this affair,and reported to have dissipated thelady's fortune, besides having brokenher heart.ANNE OLDFIELD.ANNE OLDFIELD was born in theyear 1683. Her father was an officerin the army ; and is said to havesquandered away the small fortune towhich his daughter was entitled, at anearly period of her life. She thenwent to reside with her aunt, landladyof the Mitre Tavern, in St. James'sMarket, where she was first seen byFarquhar. Overhearing her read Beaumontand Fletcher's Scornful Lady, heentered the parlour where she wassitting ; and, not less struck by her personalappearance, than by her voice andenunciation, hinted that she possessedno ordinary qualifications for the stage.Flattered by his encouragement, sheconsented to make her debfit, but inwhat character her biographers havenot informed us. As she was engagedat a salary of only 15s. a-week, sheprobably commenced her career in avery humble line; though Mr. Rich,the manager of Drury Lane, increasedit to 20s., on hearing a man of qualityexpress himself in her favour.The first character of importance inwhich she appeared was that of Linda,in The Pilgrim ; which was assignedher by Sir John Vanbrugh, at whoserecommendation she had been engagedby Rich. It was not, however, until1705, that she began to fill a decidedplace in public estimation ; but, in thatyear, her performance of Betty Modish,in Gibber's Careless Husband, at onceestablished her reputation as an actressin comedy. Her success, however, wasnot without interruption ; for havingsupplanted Mrs. Rodgers in severalparts, that actress quitted the Hay-market,in pique; and the public believingher injured, regularly hissedMrs. Oldfield whenever she appearedin any of the former lady's characters.The character in question had beenformerly sustained by Mrs. Mumford,and had been assigned, at her death, toMrs. Oldfield, as the best representativeof it ; but, in order to appease thepublic, the managers advertised, thatthe subject of our memoir, and Mrs.Rodgers, should choose such parts aspleased them best; and whoever performedto the most advantage, of whichthe audience were to be the judge,should supply Mrs. Mustard's place.Mrs. Oldfield chose the part of LadyFarewell, in The Trip to the Jubilee, andwas received with such applause, thather rival declined being a competitor ;and thus left our actress in undisputedpossession of the station which hadbeen assigned her by the managers.Her Lady Townley was considered herchef-d'ueiivre ; for her performance ofwhich the managers gave her a presentof fifty guineas, beyond her salary:neither her predecessor nor successors,in this part, were to be compared to her.She succeeded also well in several tragicpans, but never played them con more ;though her reluctance to them, was, insome measure, diminished, by the applausewith which she was always received.In allusion to her dislike ofserious parts, she is represented as saying," I hate to have a page draggingmy train about; why don't they givePorter these parts ? She can put on abetter tragedy face than 1 can." Yetthere are more testimonies to the excellenceof her tragic than of her comicpowers. ' Mrs. Oldfield," says the poet,Thomson, " in the character of Sopho-nisba, has excelled what, even in theANNE O L D F 1 ti L D .fondness of an author, I could eitherwish or imagine; the grace, dignity,and happy variety of her action, havebeen universally applauded, and aretruly admirable." There was a grandeur,it is said, in her manner of utteringthe line,Not on bate word of Carthage, for tir soul !which was truly sublime, and produceda great impression upon the audience.She died, having preserved her popularityto the last, on the 23rd of October,1730, and was buried in WestminsterAbbey.Mrs. Oldfield was, in person, tall andwell shaped ; with expressive features,and a natural air and elegance of manner,in which she excelled all her competitors; she had also a charming voice,and a manner of half shutting, at times,her large and intelligent eyes, that wasdelightfully comic and agreeable. Hermanners and conversation off the stagewere equally fascinating and lady-like ;and she was admitted a guest at theparties of the royal family, notwithstandingher questionable private life.It is doubtful what was the nature ofher connexion with Farquhar, of whoseamatory correspondence she is supposedto be the Penelope ; but it waswell known that she lived successivelywith Arthur Managing, and with GeneralChurchill, and had a son by each.The Princess of Wales once told herthat she had heard she was married toGeneral Churchill. " So it is said,may it please your royal highness," washerreply ; " but we have not owned ityet." Being in a boat, one day, withsome other passengers, who expressedfears for their safety, she put on an airof much dignity, and told them theirdeaths would only be a private loss ;but I," she said " am a public concern."She was not less generous than witty ;to her influence has been ascribed thepardon granted to Savage, when he wascast for death ; but that she allowed himan annuity, as stated by Dr. Johnson, is,accordingly Mr. Gait, " not quite true."In summing up the merits of Mrs. Old-field,the same authority observes:had her birth placed her in a higherrank of life, she had certainly appearedin reality what she was often on thestage, an agreeable gay woman ofquality, a little too conscious of hernatural beauty. In the wearing of herperson, it is said she was particularlyfortunate her figure was always improving,to her thirty-sixth year; herexcellence in acting was ever progressive,and she possessed an inestimablequality, of never undertaking any partshe liked, without having all the helpsin it that another could possibly suggest ;and yet it was hard to give her any hintshe was unable to improve. She was,indeed, in all that respected her profession,tractable, judicious, and modest."CHARLES MACK LIN.CHARLES MACKLIN or M<Lau g h-lin, which was his real name, was born inIreland, some time towards the end ofthe seventeenth century. According tothe testimony of some of his contemporaries,his birth took place in 1690, butMacklin himself dated it nine yearslater, in order, it is said, to conciliatethe affections of a theatrical mistresswho was then under twenty. WickedCharley, and The Wild Irishman, arethe names by which he is said to havebeen called in his youth ; but of thenature of his early pursuits we have novery clear account. According to hisearliest recollection of himself, he was,when he was a boy of six or sevenyears of age, living on a small farmwith his parents, and first conceived apredilection for the stage, by performingthe part of Monimia, in the Orphan,at some private theatricals, got up by alady in the neighbourhood.In his fifteenth year he was boundapprentice to a saddler, but soon ranaway from his master, and went toDublin, where he got his living as abargeman in Trinity College. Howlong Vie continued in this capacity isuncertain ; but we hear nothing furtherACTORS.of him until 1725, when he came toLondon, and made his debut at theLincoln's Inn Theatre, in the part ofAlexander, in Oedipus. We have hisown authority for stating that he wasunsuccessful : " I spoke so familiarity**he used to say, "and so little in thehoity-toity tone of the tragedy of thatday, that' the manager told me I hadbetter go to grass for another year ortwo."Macklin accordingly joined a strollingcompany in Wales ; but, beforeleaving London, having had the goodfortune to win 400 at the gamingtable, he furnished himself with afemale companion, and, for some time,rambled about the country, in the dressand style of a man of fashion. FromWales, he occasionally went to Bristol,where he fell in love with a gentleman'sdaughter, who, one night, consented toadmit him in the dark, and, for thatpurpose, left one of the parlour windowsunbolted. Having had Harlequin aswell as Hamlet to perform, he wasunusually late, but went through adrenching rain to the fair one's abode,into which he had just slept when alarge china jar, which he upset, disturbedthe family, and compelled himto decamp.Macklin was in London in 1728; and,in 1730, he played in the great boothon the bowling-green, Southwark, andat Lincoln's Inn Fields. In 1735, inadispute with a fellow actor, he gavehim a blow, which occasioned his death,and was, in consequence, tried formurder, but was found guilty of manslaughteronly. " The dispute," sayshis biographer, " originated about awig, which Hallam (the name of theother actor) had on in Fabian's Trickfor Trick, and which Macklin claimedas his property; and, in a warmth oftemper, he raised his cane, and gavehim a fatal stroke in the eye." In1741, we find Macklin joint managerof Drury Lane, with Fleetwood, forwhom he had become bondsman to theamount of j3,000 ; but feigning a taleof his own necessities, in order to getrid of his liability, he so frightenedFleetwood, that the latter procured PaulWhitehead, to become bondsman in hisstead. Fleetwood soon after ran away tothe continent, and left Macklin in themanagement, when he determined torevive Shakspeare's Merchant of Venice,which had been laid aside since 1701,and to play the character of Shylockhimself. Both friends and rivals expressedtheir surprise at his intention ;but the latter flattered him with success,for the purpose of enjoying a greatertriumph at his expected failure.The following is his own account ofwhat took place when the appointedevening arrived: "When the longexpected night at last came, the housewas crowded, from top to bottom, withthe first company in town. The twofront rows of me pit, as usual, were fullof critics. I eyed them," said Macklin,I eyed them, sir, through the slit in thecurtain, and was glad to see them there;as I wished, in such a cause, to be triedby a special jury. When I made myappearance in the green-room, dressedfor the part, with my red hat on myhead, my piqued beard, my loose blackgown, and with a confidence which Ihad never before assumed, the performersall stared at one another, andevidently with a stare of disappointment.Well, sir, hitherto all was right,till the last bell rung : then, I confess,my heart began to beat a little ; however,I mustered up all the courage Icould, and recommending my cause toProvidence, threw myself boldly on thestage, and was received by one of theloudest thunders of applause I everbefore experienced. The opening scenesbeing rather tame and level, 1 couldnot expect much applause; but I foundmyself well listened to : I could heardistinctly in the pit, the words, 'verywell very well, indeed! this manseems to know what he is about.' Theseencomiums warmed me, but did notoverset me. I knew where I should havethe pull, which was in the third act, andaccordingly, at this period I threw outall my fire ; and, as the contrasted passionsof joy for the merchant's losses,and grief for the elopement of Jessica,open a fine field for an actor's powers,1 had the good fortune to please beyondmy most sanguine expectations. Thewhole house was in an uproar of applause;and I was obliged to pausebetween the speeches to give it vent,so as to be heard. The trial scenewound up the fulness of my reputation.Here I was well listened to, and hereI made such a silent, yet forcible im-charlesMACK LIN.pression on my audience, that I retiredfro'ii this great attempt most perfectlysatisfied. On my return to the greenroom,after the play was over, it wascrowded with nobility and critics, whoall complimented me in the warmestand most unbounded manner; and thesituation I felt myself in, I mustconfess, was one of the most flatteringand intoxicating of my whole life.No money, no title could purchasewhat I felt. By G , sir, thoughI was not worth jt'50 in the world,at the time, yet. let me tell you, I wasCharles the Great for that night."In 1743, Macklin, who was nowmarried, left Drury Lane, after aquarrel with Garrick, and in the springoi"1744, opened the little theatre in theHaymarkei, but the speculation failed,and he was glad to return to DruryLane in the following winter. In 1748,himself and his wife were engaged onvery advantageous terms, to play at theDublin Theatre, but quarrelling with themanager, he soon returned to England,and alter performing some time atChester, appeared at Covent Garden.In 1753, he took a formal leave of thestage, to attend to a scheme which hehad formed of a tavern, and school oforatory, in the Piazza, but becoming abankrupt through its failure, he resumedhis professional career, and, inthe latter part of 1758, made his re-appearanceon the boards, at the newtheatre in Crow Street. Dublin, underthe management of Barry. In thefollowing year, he returned to London,when he brought out his farce of Lovea-la-mode. His next pieces, The TruebornIrishman, and The True-bornScotchman, were first acted at Dublin,and received with the applause theymerited. The former, however, didnot succeed upon its representation inLondon, which led Macklin to observe,that, " there was a geography inhumour, as well as in morals which hehad not previously considered." In 1770,he returned to Ireland, when, notwithstandinghis great age, he ventured topersonate Richard, Othello, and Macbeth;and in the season of 1772, heplayed the last-mentioned of the threeat Covent Garden, on which occasionhe was the first who appeared in theCaledonian habit, instead of one ofscarlet and gold, with a tie wig.In 1773, a party was formed againstMacklin, who, whenever he appeared,created a great uproar, and at lengthsucceeded in procuring his dischargefrom Covent Garden. Macklin, in consequence,brought an action againstthe parties who had headed the oppositionagainst him, and was awardednearly j50Q damages, with all his expensesout of pocket. This, however, heundertook to forego, upon certain termsbeing agreed to by the offending parties ;upon hearing which, Lord Mansfieldsaid, " You have met with great applauseto-day, Mr. Macklin, you neveracted better."In 1781, he brought out his celebratedcomedy of The Man of the World,being an extension of his farce of TheTrue-born Scotchman, before-mentioned.From 1784 to 1788, he appearedat intervals in various provincialtheatres ; and on the 7th of May, 1789,he took his final leave of the stage, inthe character' of Shylock. If the dateof his birth, assigned by those whoknew him in his youth, be correct, hewas, at this time, in his hundreth year ;but even had he been ten years less, thefailure of his powers in this last essaywill not surprise. "When the nightarrived, he went dressed into the greenroom,and said to Mrs. Pope, " Mydear, are you to play to night?" " Tobe sure I am. Don't you see I amdressed for Portia?" "Ah! very true,I had forgot ; but who is to play Shylock?" He said this in a tone of feeblesadness, that distressed all who heardit; but Mrs. Pope, rousing heresy! f, answered," Why, you. Are not youdressed for the part ?" He put hishand to his forehead, and said, pathetically," God help me ! my memoryhas, I fear, left me." He went, however,upon the stage, but was only able todeliver two or three speeches, at the terminationof which, he looked helplesslyround, and exclaiming, <l I can do nomore," quitted the stage for ever. Hesurvived his retirement ei^lit years;during which period he frequentlyvisited the theatre, though his facultieswere scarcely in a state that enabled himto enjoy the peribmumcp. ilc < ii-don the llth of July, 1797, long after hiswife and daughter, am* was buried inSt. Paul's. Covent Garden.As an actor, notwithstanding his long3-10AC TORS.exp hence on the stage, Macklin wasonly pre-eminent for his performance ofShy lock ; though his Othello and SirPertinax Macsycophant, were more thanrespectable, when he was in the zenithof his powers. His Man of the World,and Love-a-la-Mode, are sufficient toplace his name high among dramaticwriters, particularly the first, whichcontains a most skilful exposition ofsycophancy and political servility, anddisplays an acute perception of lifeana manners.As a man, Macklin, although somewhatirascible and dogmatical, meritedrespect ; he could be a steady friendas well as an entertaining companion,and his conduct as a husband anda father, was estimable. An anecdotehas been told of him, which veryforcibly illustrates this part of his character: A nobleman called upon him,one morning, and after expatiating onthe talents of his daughter, said, " Imean to be her friend ; not in the articleof taking tickets for her benefit, andsuch trifling acts of friendship, whichmean nothing more than the vanity ofPatronage. I mean to be her friend forfe." Macklin, with an expression ofcountenance, which told his lordshipthat he was half understood, demandedan explicit declaration. " Why," re-rplied the other, " I mean as I say, tomake her my friend for life: and asyou are a man of the world, and it isfit you should be considered in thebusiness, I now make you an offer of400 per annum for your daughter,and 200 in like manner for yourself,to be secured on any of my estates,during both of your natural lives."He lead no sooner finished, than Macklindesired him to quit the room ; andupon the other's hesitating to do so,sprang towards him with a knife, withwhich, at the moment, he was butteringa roll, and holding it to his throat, repeatedhis command in a tone thatmade the noble rascal jump from thetop of the stairs to the bottom, andscamper out of the house, as fast ashis legs could carry him. Macklin wa*twice married, but had, we believe,only one child, the daughter abovementioned.JOHN RICH.JOHN RICH was the son of ChristopherRich, formerly patentee of DruryLane Theatre, and born about the year1691. His father, we are told, wishedrather to acquire wealth by Frenchdancers, Italian singers, and any otherexotic exhibition, than by the unitedskill of the most accomplished comedians.His son inherited the sanataste, though he is said 10 have imbibed,from his youth, a " dislike of the peoplewith whom he was destined to live andconverse." After his tatler's death,Rich being left joint patentee, with hisbrother, of the theatre in Lincoln's InnFields, tried his talent for acting, in thepart of the Earl of Essex ; but soon gaveup all speaking characters, and devotedhimself to pantomimic representation ;in which, with the exception of Bologna,he has never been equalled by anyactor, either before or since.To Rich, it seems, we are indebtedfor the first introduction, upon theEnglish stage, of the genuine pantomime." To retrieve the credit of histheatre," says Davies, " Rich created aspecies of dramatic composition, unknownto this, and, I believe, to anyother country, which he called a pantomime; it consisted of two parts, oneserious, and the other comic. By thehelp of gay scenes, fine habits, granddances, appropriate music, and otherdecorations, he exhibited a story fromOvid's Metamorphoses, or some otherfabulous writer. Between the pauses,or acts, of this serious representation,he interwove a comic fable ; consistingchiefly of the courtship of Harlequinand Columbine, with a variety of surprisingadventures and tricks, whichwere produced by the magic wand ofHarlequin : such as the sudden transformationof palaces and temples to hutsand cottages ; of men and women intowheelbarrows and joint-stools ; of treesturned to houses ; colonnades to beds ofJOHN RICH.tulips ; and mechanic's shops into serpentsand ostriches. It would be idleto dwell lung upon a subject with whichalmost every body is as familiar asthe writer." " Of these pantomimes, inwhich he appeared under the feignedname of Lun, Rich brought out a succession,from the year 1717, until theperiod of his death, all of which wereeminently successful; and played atleast forty or fifty nights each.In 1733, he removed his company toCovent Garden, and died on the 2Gth ofNovember, 1761, during the run of agrand exhibition, got up by him, inhonour of the coronation of George theThird ; and which would seem, fromthe account given of it by his biographer,to have exceeded, both in splendourand correctness, our more modern representationsof that ceremony.The merits of Rich, as an actor, wereconfined solely to his performance ofHarlequin ; in which his gesticulationwas so perfectly expressive of his meaning,that every motion of his hand orhead, or indeed of any part of his body,was a kind of dumb eloquence that wasreadily understood by the audience.Garrick's action, it is said, was not moreperfectly adapted to his character, thanRich's altitudes and movements wereto the varied employment of the woodensword magician. His performance ofHarlequin was, doubtless, of a superiorkind; yet one is almost inclined tosmile, at being informed that, " in oneor two of his pantomimes, his takingleave of Columbine, was at once gracefuland affecting." His skill in teachingothers how to perform in these divertingmummers, was consummate; and heis said to have performed himself Pantaloon,Pierrot, the Clown, and all theother various dramatis persona, peculiarto pantomime.Rich also fancied that no one wasmore able than himself to prepare actorsfor the regular drama; and he constantlyhad a Richard, a Hamlet, or a Lear, intraining, although he could not readten lines of Shakspeare, or, indeed, ofany other author, with propriety.Though he possessed a good understanding,he was utterly unable to joinin polite conversation without displayingsundry vulgarisms. One of thesewas a habit, which he had contracted,of calling every body Mister; whichoffended Foote so, on his being thus repeatedlyaddressed, that he asked Richthe reason of his not addressing himby name. " Don't be angry," he replied,for I sometimes forget my own name."Indeed !" rejoined Foote, " that isextraordinary; I knew you could notwrite your own name; but 1 did notsuppose you could forget it."Notwithstanding the many squabblesthat Rich had, in his managerial capacity,and his dislike of actors as longas he lived, he was extremely charitableto the unfortunate and distressed inthat profession. We are told that hehad <i long list of theatrical pensioners,male and female; " and I have heard."says one of his biographers, " muchto the reputation of his humanity,that he never diminished their incomeon any pretence." He bore the samecharacter for benevolence among hisfriends, one of whom has related, thatthe great consolation of Rich, in hisdying moments, proceeded from therecollection of his many charitableactions. He was survived by his widow,whom he had married in October, 1744,and four daughters.JAMES QUIN.THIS celebrated comedian is representedby Aikin, and other writers,as the illegitimate offspring of a gentleman,who had married a supposedwidow, in Ireland ; where, accordingto some authorities, the subject of ourmemoir was born. Quin, however,always denied the story of his illegitimacy; and his birth is ascertainedto have taken place in King Street,Covent Garden, London, on the 24thof February, 1693. His grandfatherhad been lord mayor of Dublin, andhis father settling in that city shortlyafter the above date, Quin there receivedhis education.ACTORSAccording to one of his biographers,he remained at the university until hewas nearly twenty years of age, when,being destined for the bar, he came toLondon, and took up his abode in theTemple. Here he led a gay and dissipatedlife, reading any books ratherthan those connected with his profession; so that, on the death of hisfather, he found himself obliged to seekfor some other means of support. Hisinability to prove his legitimacy, is assignedas a reason for the loss of hispatrimony ; but it is more probable,that his father had left him little, ornone, to inherit; and, indeed, it isstated in one account, that " he foundhis patrimony so very small, that therewas no possibility of his supporting himselfupon it." However this may havebeen, he was now necessitated to seeka more immediate source of subsistencethan the bar could afford him, and,in consequence, determined to becomean actor. For such a profession hepossessed many of the requisites, andcommunicating his intention to LacyRyan, was by him introduced into theDrury Lane company in 1717, where hewas engaged for the following year.Dr. Aikin says, that his first appearanceon the stage was at the Old SmockAlley Theatre, Dublin, as early as 1714 ;that he came to London in 1715; andafter playing at Drury Lane for twoyears, was engaged at the Lincoln'sInn Theatre. But the more generally-receivedaccount is, that he made hisdebit in London at Drury Lane; thoughit is possible he might previously haveappeared on the Dublin boards, duringhis temporary sojourn in that city,whither lie had gone to avoid the consequencesof an action, which had beencommenced against him for crim. con.While Quin," says Gait, ' was em-eyedin studying those parts in whichimagined he might appear in theensuing season, he was unexpectedlyobliged to leave London. In his youthfulyears, he laid no claim to any peculiarpurity in his conduct, and formed,what he supposed, a very snug alliancewith a woollen-draper's wife. Onenight, he met the lady by accident,and persuaded her to accompany himto a tavern, and she could not resisthis persuasion. But a stupid waitershowed negligently, into the same room,a vestal, in company with the husbandof the lady. Swords were drawn,the ladies screamed, and a battle ensued.A crim. con., and an assault andbattery, were both instituted, and ourhero fled to Dublin. The husband,however, died soon after, and Quinwas invited to return. It was duringthis evasion, that I am of opinion hemade his appearance as Abel, in SmockAlley."After his return to London, Quinperformed but subordinate parts ; norwere his abilities at all appreciated tillhe had an opportunity of displayingthem in the part of Bajazet, which wasgiven to him in consequence of theillness of the actor who was to haverepresented it. But his reputationcannot be properly dated earlier than1721, when, on the revival of TheMerry Wives of Windsor, he undertookto play Falstaff. The managerwas about to give up all thoughts ofbringing out the comedy, in consequenceof every actor having declinedto venture upon the character, whenthe subject of our memoir offered toattempt it. " Hem !" said Rich, " youattempt Falstaff! Why, you mightas well think of acting Cato afterBooth! The character of Falstaff,young man, is quite another characterfrom what you think ; it is not a littlesnivelling part that that in short,any one can do. There is not a manamong you that has any idea of thepart but myself. It is quite out ofyour walk. No, never think of Falstaffit is quite out of your walk,indeed, young man." In the sequel,however, Quin was permitted to performthe character, and went throughit in such a manner as to surprise anddelight both the audience and the actors.His next capital character was thatof Sir John Brute, in The ProvokedWife ; but he was not considered afirst-rate actor till 1731, when he undertookthe part of Cato, after theretirement of Booth. Aware of theimpression that great actor had produced,the subject of our memoirmodestly announced that, "the part ofCato would be only attempted leyMr. Quin ;" but he acquitted himselfin such a manner as to obtain a greaterdegree of applause than was bestowedon his predecessor. He was encor.-u (JAMES QUIN.in the famous soliloquy, and the audiencewere so affected at the style inwhich he pronounced the wordsThanks to the Gods, my hoy hasdone his duty!" that they exclaimed,Booth outdone ! Booth outdone !"During Quin's performance of this character,one evening, a circumstanceoccurred, which, though in itself ludicrous,produced very unhappy consequences.A Welshman, named Williams,who performed the part of themessenger, in delivering the lineCaesar sends health to Cato," pronouncedthe former word " Keesar,"which so amused Quin, that he replied,with his usual coolness, " Would he hadsent a better messenger." The poorWelchman was so stung by the retort,that he challenged Quin to fight him ;but only receiving some rallying remarksin reply, waited for the latter under thepiazza, where he drew, and a contestensued, in which Williams was killed.Quin was tried for his murder at theOld Bailey, but a verdict of manslaughteronly was brought in againsthim.Quin maintained his pre-eminenceon the stage till the latter part of 1741,when the appearance of Garrick, atGoodman's Fields, caused the othertheatres to be comparatively deserted.Quin at first affected to treat Garrickwith contempt; " He is a new religion,"was his remark ; " the peoplefollow him as another Whitefield, butthey will soon return to church again."Garrick soon heard of the sarcasm, andanswered it by an epigram, endingwith the following lines :Thou grand infallible, forbear to roar,Thy bulls and errors are rever'd no more ;When doctrines meet with general approbation,It is not heresy, but reformation.These sallies produced no ill-will oneither part, and both actors ultimatelybecame on intimate terms of friendshipwith each other. Quin's popularity,however, began to wane, though in hisperformance of Sir John Brute, SirJohn Falstaff, and Cato, he was stillallowed to continue unrivalled ; but, inall other characters, he was manifestlyoutmatched by Garrick.Quin's secession from the stage aroseout of a quarrel with Rich, in consequenceof which, the former went downto Bath ; whence, on his resentmentbeginning to abate, he condescended towrite to Rich as follows : " I am atBath. QUIN." This, though laconic,was intended, on his part, as a letterof truce; but Rich, not choosing totake it, or affecting not to see it inthat light, immediately replied, " Staythere, and be d d f RICH." Thisanswer, as it has been said, cost thepublic one of the greatest ornaments ofthe stage ; for Quin, after receiving it,determined never to renew an engagementwith Rich. He came, however,every year to London, to play Falstaff,for the benefit of his friend Ryan,till 1754, when the loss of two of hisfront teeth compelled him to declinegiving his wonted assistance. Uponthis occasion, he is said to have sentthe following epistle to Ryan: "Iwould play for you if I could ; but willnot whistle for you. I have willed youa thousand pounds. If you wantmoney, you may have it, and save myexecutors trouble. JAMES QUIN."Soon after the accession of Georgethe Third, his majesty gave orders,without any application being madeto him, for the allowance of a pensionto Quin, who had formerly instructedhim, when Prince of Wales, in elocution.The subject of our memoirwas not a little proud of the lessons hehad given to his royal pupil ; and onbeing informed with what elegance andpropriety the king had delivered hisfirst speech from the throne, is saidto have exclaimed, " Ah ! I taught theboy to speak !" Upon quitting thestage, Quin retired permanently toBath, upon a very comfortable independence,as, besides his pension, hehad 2,000 in the funds, and for thesame sum he obtained from the Dukeof Bedford, an annuity of 200 perannum. He came once a year toLondon, to visit his friends, and alwaysspent a week at Hampton with Garrick; bet een whom and himself aregular correspondence had been keptup since Quin's retirement from thestage. During his last excursion, in1765, an eruption appeared on theback of his hand, which his physicianapprehended would turn to mortification.It was, however, cured ; but theanxiety Quin had suffered, and hisinattention to the moderate rule ofACTORS.living, which was prescribed for him,brought on a fever, which carried himoff on the 21st of January, 17G6.Although Quin," says Mr. Gait,"was a kind-hearted, jovial, and facetiousman, I know not how it is, ifit be not from the coarseness of someof his jokes, that a general impressionprevails of his being a morose character.No general persuasion was evermorefallacious. He was naturally ahandsome man ; beloved by his friends,and always on joyous terms with himself.Few understood the inclinationsof man better, and none could be moreindulgent to unpremeditated error.While he cherished a little affectationin himself, to conceal the warmth andmildness of his disposition, he discernedevery degree of it in others witha shrewd eye. I think he was anaccomplished specimen of the man ofthe world, of the right sort ; for he wasmore amiable than he really seemedto be."Undoubtedly Quin had many amiablequalities ; his heart, if we may believeMrs. Bellamy, was one of the bestthat ever inhabited mortal bosom ;though his prejudices, his prepossessions,and his whims, often gave riseto conduct equally at variance withgood breeding, good sense, and goodfeeling. A man of strong passions,irritable temper, and coarse language,he offended many who never forgavehim ; yet he often accompanied hisgruffness and acerbity with such indicationsof the native warmth andgentleness of his heart, as made thelater alone remembered. Although,as one of his friends said of him, " Therewas a sediment of brutality in him,when you shook the bottle," it is to hishonour that it soon subsided ; andseldomrose, except when excited by insolence,presumption, or oppression. His morality,according to the received phraseof the word, was not conspicuous; buthe was neither debauched nor propagate;and, as respects this part of hisconduct, imbibed more contaminationthan he imparted. When asked whyhe did not marry, take a house, andset up an equipage, he replied, ' Icarry a coach, a wife, and a dinner,always in my pocket ; and I can eithertake 'the number, obtain a dinner, orturn off my cook, whenever I please."In illustration of his doctrine, he usedto make an annual excursion withsome agreeable lady, whom he selected,agreeing with her to accompanyhim on his tour, as long as100 would carry them. Alter allthe money was spent, he gave the ladya parting supper, at the piazzas, CoventGarden, and dismissed her with thefollowing words : " Madam, for ourmutual convenience, I have given youthe name of Quin for this sometimepast. There is no reason for carryingon this farce here; and now, madam,give me leave to un-Quin you, andrestore to you your own name fc.r thefuture."One cannot but smile at such conduct,the laxity of which was, perhaps,redeemed by a conscientious abstinencefrom some gratifications in which themost moral have deemed it harmless toindulge. Angling he always thought avery barbarous diversion; and, beingasked the reason, gave an answer, withhis accustomed facetiousness. " Suppose,"he said, " some superior beingshould bait a hook with venison, andgo a Cunning, 1 should certainly bite ;and what a sight I should be, danglingin the air!" But, though he disapprovedof angling, he was passionatelyfond offish, particularly of John Dories,which gave rise to the hollowing lines,alter his death :Aha, poor Quiii ! thy j< m and storiesAre itiii? extinguished ; HIM! hit mure 16,Where you're gone, there's no John Dories.He used to pay an annual vL-it to Ply-month,for the purpose of eating JohnDories, and attributed his last illnessto his omitting to do so; saying, 'reconsideredthem as salutary to ins constitution,as herrings were to a Dutchman,and that ii lie recovers, liewould eat nothing else all the daysof his life." He was certainly somewhatof an epicure, and there was asmuch of the gourmand as of thehumorist in his exclamation, on hisfirst sight of Westminster Bridge'Oh! that my mouth were that centrearch, and that the river ran claret !"Claret was his favourite beverage. andhe is said to iiuve drunk a buttie of itonly a .short nine ueiore his death.The numerous vuity sayings anddoings that have been recorded of QuinJAMES Q U I X .would fill a volume, and many, thoughprobably not new, are too characteristicto be omitted in this memoir. Weshall not shock the reader with therepetition of the invariable expletive bywhich they were always accompanied ;and it is to be lamented that a man of(ruin's general propriety of feeling,should have thought it necessary tointroduce the name of the Deity, to givepoint to almost every joke he uttered.Dining, one day, at Bath, a noblemansaid to him, " What a pity it is, Quin,my boy, that a clever fellow, like you,should be a player!" " What wouldyour lordship have me to be ?" was hisreply. "A lord ?" A young gentleman,who had lately become acquainted withhim, volunteered, one day, a specimen ofhis talents for the stage ; intending, ashesaid, to turn actor, if Quin approvedof his performance. He had, however,scarcely concluded the line, " To be,or not to be, that is the question,"before Quin started up, exclaiming,"No question at all, sir; not to be,upon my honour." Lamenting, oneday, that he grew old, Quin was asked,by an impertinent young fellow, Whathe would give to be as young as hewas. " I would even submit," saidQuin, " to be almost as foolish." Beingironically complimented by a nobleman,upon his happy retreat at Bath,he replied, " Look ye, my lord, perhaps'tis a sinecure your lordship wouldnot accept of; but, I can assure you, Igave up ,1,400 a-year for it." Anofficer, not remarkable for courage,came, one day, to Quin, to ask him howhe should act, after having had hisnose pulled. " Why, sir," said he,soap your nose for the future, andthen they'll slip their hold." Thefirst time he was invited to dine uponturtle, the host, a West Indian, burstinto a loud laugh, because he did notunderstand the callipash, and otherniceties, of such an elegant dish. " Itmay be an elegant dish," said Quin ;but, if it had been fit for Christians,we should have been acquainted withit as soon as the wild Indians." Toan author, whose play he had lost, heapologized, saying, " Here is a drawerfull of both comedies and tragedies ;take any two you please in the roomof it."Quin once passed some time at aninn, which was much infested withrats ; telling the landlord he would endeavourto find some remedy for them,before he went. At the end of eightweeks he prepared to depart, and, callingfor his bill, paid it, observing thatthe amount (150) was a good deal foracheap inn. " I hope," said the landlord," you have not forgot the remedyyou promised me for the rats." " Oh !no," replied Quin, as he stepped into hischaise ; " there's your bill ; show themthat when they come, and if theytrouble your house again I'll be d d!"Our wit, however, sometimes met withhis match. Having lost his horse,which he had turned out to grass,whilst he was staying at a farm-house,in Somersetshire, he asked a countryfellow, if there were any thieves, orhorse-stealers, in his neighbourhood."No," answered the man, " we be allhonest folk here ; but there's one Quin,I think they call him, a strolling playerfrom London, mayhap he may havestole him." The Drury Lane audiencewere once very angry at the nonappearanceof a dancer, named Roland,when Quin, being sent forward to apologize,retired, amidst shouts of laughterand applause, after saying, " Ladiesand gentlemen, Madam-a-a-Roland hasput her ankle out, I wish it had beenher neck, and be d d to her !"Mrs. Clive once offending him by someremark in his own way, he said to her,Madam, if spitting upon you were nottaking notice of you, I would do it."He would, however, say a gallant, andeven poetical thing, when he was inthe humour. Being asked by a ladywhy there were more women in theworld than men, he replied, " It is inconformitywith the arrangements ofNature, madam ; we always see more ofheaven than of earth."His generous conduct to Mrs. GeorgeAnne Bellamy we have already relatedin our memoir of that lady, but in noinstance was it more nobly shewn, thantowards the poet Thomson. Hearingthat he was confined in a spunging-house,for a debt of 70, Quin calledupon the poet, and after having finisheda supper, which hud been ordered athis own expense, from a neighbouringtavern, said, " It is now time that weshould balance accounts; the pleasureI have had in perusing your works, IACTORS.cannot estimate at less than 100, and Iinsist on now acquitting the debt;" onsaying which, he put down a note and !took his leave, without waiting for a re- jply. Nor did the display of his affection ;for Thomson end here ; for after thepoet's death, he delivered the prologue ;to his tragedy of Coriolanus, with a true jpathos that did honour to his feelings, jQuin's manner of pronouncing the jword fasces, occasioned a ludicrousmistake at the rehearsal of this tragedy,for the centurions of the Volscian army,imagining that he said faces, all bowedtheir heads on being told to lower theformer.We have seen that Quin's love ofsarcasm involved him in the bitter reflectionof having first wounded thefeelings, and then taken the life, of afellow-creature; it produced, amongother quarrels, one with Culled Gibber,which did not terminate so fatally.The coxcombry of Colley had so exasperatedQuin, in some transactionswhich they had with each other, thathe made use, in return, of the strongestand foulest expressions he was capableof. Gibber took little notice ofhis conduct at the time, but passingthe Bedford Coffee-house, one night,walked in, and began to abuse Quintosome of his friends, calling him " acapon-lined rascal," and expressing hisdetermination to call him to an account.Some one pointed out Quin at theother end of the room, and, anxious tospur on Goliey, added, " he sets off forbath tomorrow, and may not, perhaps,be in town again these twelvemonths."" Is that the case ?" criedGibber, nettled at finding his couragesuspected, " then I'll e'en chastise himnow. You, Mr. Quin, I think youcall yourself, I insist upon satisfactionfor the affront you gave me femme !"If you have a mind to be flogged,"replied Quin, " I'll do it for you withallmy heart femme 1" Gibber, halfmad at so contemptuous an answer,could only exclaim, "Draw, sir, or I'llbe through your guts this instant!"Quin, still cool, replied, " This, sir, isan improper place to rehearse LordFoppington in; but, if you'll go underthe piazza, I may, perhaps, make youput up your sword faster than you drewit." The result was a duel in the piazza,in which Quin was slightly wounded.As an actor, Quin had many personaladvantages: his figure was majestic; hiescountenance was expressive; his eyepenetrating; his voice clear, full, anamelodious ; besides which, he possessedan extensive memory, and an enthusiasticadmiration of Shakspeare. thisutterance is said to have been somewhatcumbrous and monotonous, thoughweighty and impressive ; but his faun s,in this respect, were those of the age ;for, until the appearance of Garrick, therolling pompous manner of recitingwas the most applauded. Upon thewhole, Quin's merits as a comedian havebeen fairly summed up by Thomson, inone of his stanzas in i he Castle of Indolence,in which, after introducingQuin as " Th* Esopus of the Age," heWith double force th' enlivened scene he wake,Vet qiliti not Nature's bounds, llr. knows to keepEach due decorum : now the heart he hak-s.And now, with well-urged sense. Hi' euligliienrdjudgment take*.CATHERINE CLIVE.THIS excellent actress was the daughterof Mr. Rafter, an Irish gentleman,of some property, which he sacrificedto his principles at the time of theRevolution, and coming to London,married the daughter of a respectablecitizen, by whom he had several children.Catherine was born in Ireland,in the year 1711, and so n\ dew lopedan inclination for the sta, r e, which herparents in vain tried to check. Apleasing voice and taste for singingcaused her to be engaged, in her seventeenthyear, at Drury Lane Theatre,then under the management of Booth,VVilks, and Gibber. Her first appearancewas in the play of Mithridates,the part she performed being that olScenes, in boy's clothes. As anactress, however, she was not, at first,CATHERINE Clive,considered equal to anything beyondsome innocent country girl, such asPliillida. in Damon and Phillips; and,for the first three years of her theatricalcareer, was chiefly employed in singinga song between the acts of a play. Herperformance, however, of Nell, in TheDevil to Pay, in 1731, displayed herabilities in their true light; and, forthirty years, she remained the firstcomic actress on the British stage.In 1732, she married Mr. Clive, abrother of Baron Clive ; but, theirunion was soon followed by a separation.In 1740, she performed beforethe Prince of Wales, at Cliefden House ;and in the same year, played Celia, inAs You Like It, and Portia, in TheMerchant of Venice. For the mostpart, such characters as these wereneither suited to her genius nor herperson, yet to the last she was ambitiousof shining in parts above herreach; a failing which sometimes involvedher in disagreeable disputes. InPortia, she was always much applauded ;but this, says Davies, " was owing toher misrepresentation of the character;mimicry in a pleader, when a client'slife is in danger, is but misplacedbuffoonery."In 1741, she went over to Ireland, toperform in Dublin ; and, in 1743, removedto Covent Garden. She wasnot engaged the following year, in consequenceof a dispute between her andthe managers, the particulars of whichshe published in a pamphlet, entitled,The Case of Mrs. Clive submitted tothe Public. In 1745, she returned toDrury Lane, where she continued untilthe 24th of April, 17G9, when she tookher leave of the stage in The Wonder,and Lethe, and spoke an epilogue,written for the occasion by HoraceWalpole. She then retired upon acomfortable independence, to an elegantabode near Strawberry Hill, whereshe died, universally respected, on the6th of December, 1785.Mrs. Clive was the most famousactress, in her peculiar line, that evertrod the stage ; her equal is not to befound in theatrical history, either beforeor since the era in which sheflourished. Mrs. Davison and MissKelly are, perhaps, the only actressesthat can be compared to her. " Hermirth," says Mr. Davies, " was sogenuine, that whether it was restrainedto the arch sneer, and the suppressedhalf laugh, widened to the broad grin,or extended to the downright honestburst of loud laughter, the audiencewere sure to accompany her; he musthave been more or less than man,who could be grave when Clive wasdisposed to be merry." She excelledalike in chambermaids, the affected orcapricious lady of fashion, country girls,romps, hoydens, and dowdies, superannuatedbeauties, viragoes, and humorist.To quote the eulogy ofChurchill :First (,'ipglinjr, plotting, chambermaids arrive,Hoydens anil romps, led on by General Clivelu spite of outward blemishes she shone,For humour famed, and humour all her own :Easy, as if at home, the stage she trod,Nor sought the critic's praise, nor heard his rod ;Original in spirit, and in rase,She pleased by hiding all attempts to please >No comic actress ever yet could raiseOn humour's base more merit or more praiseIn private life, Mrs. Clive was scarcelyless entertaining and agreeable, thanin public ; her conversation is describedas a mixture of uncommon vivacity,droll mirth, and honest bluntness. Shepreserved throughout life an unsulliedreputation, and to the last, was visitedby persons of both sexes of high rankand character. She was the only performerover whom Garrick did notdare to domineer ; and he is said tohave dreaded an altercation with her,as much as a quarrel with an authorwhose play he had rejected. He bothfelt and acknowledged, however, hertalent as an actress, and affected to feelgreat sorrow at her leaving the stage ;though Mrs. Clive, if we may credit thefollowing anecdote, thought otherwise.When the manager and Mrs. Clivemet," says Davies, " after she had expressedher determination to retire,their interview was short, and theirdiscourse curious. After some complimentson her great merit, Mr. Garrickwished, he said, that she would continue,for her own sake, some yearslonger on the stage. This civil suggestionshe answered by a look of contempt,and a decisive negative,. Heasked how much she was worth ; shereplied, briskly, ' as much as yourself.'Upon his smiling at her supposedignorance, or misinformation, she explainedherself by telling him, that sheACTORS.knew when she had enough, though henever would. He then entreated herto renew her agreement for three orfour years; but she peremptorily refused.Upon repeating his regret ather leaving the stage, she frankly toldhim that she hated hypocrisy ; for shewas sure that he would light up candlesfor joy of her leaving him, but that itwould be attended with some expense ."HANNAH PRITCHARD.THIS eminent actress, whose maidenname was Vaughan, was born aboutthe year 1711. Her manner of reciting,when young, several scenes of partsboth in tragedy and comedy, havingattracted the notice of Mr. Booth, thatgentleman advised her to apply tor anengagement on the stage, and she accordinglymade her appearance in oneof Fielding's pieces, at the little theatrein the Haymarket. She next appearedat the playhouse in Goodman's Fields,and subsequently at Bartholomew Fair,where," says her biographer, " shegained the notice and applause of thepublic, by her easy, unaffected mannerof speaking ; and was greatly caressedand admired for. singing, in some farceor droll, a favourite air, which beganwith, Sweet, if you love me, smilingturn."In the year 1733, when Mr. High-more,then patentee of Drury LaneTheatre, quarrelled with his actors,and took the Haymarket, he engagedMrs. Pritchard, who made her debut asBelinda, in a play, called The botheringLaw. Of her acting, at this period,Davies says little, but he gives asomewhat inflated account of the impressionproduced by her personal appearance.Her genteel person, lie tellsus (for she was then young and slender),her attractive countenance, which " beatan alarm to love ;" her expressive yetsimple manner; her unembarrasseddeportment, and proper action, charmedall the spectators; who looked at oneanother with surprise and pleasure, asif congratulating themselves on seeinga rising genius, capable, perhaps, oneday, of consoling them for the loss oftheir favourite, Oldfield.On the union of the Haymarket andDrury Lane companies, under themanagement of Fleetwood. Mrs. Pritchard'sservices were required at thelatter theatre, where she personnes-bothin tragedy and comedy, with great applause,after having established hertheatrical character by her matchlessperformance of Rosalind, in AsYou LikeIt. In sprightly characters, indeed,she had no superior; yet her Zara, inThe Mourning Bride, her Merope, andQueen Katharine, have seldom beensurpassed. In comedy, her chiefstrength lay in such parts as LadyTownley, Lady Betty Modish, andMaria, in The Nonjuror; but neitherher person (which soon lost its slimness)nor her manner, were sufficientlyelegant and graceful for the high-bredwoman of fashion. In Shakspeare'sBeatrice, Vanbrugh's Carinthia, 'sMrs. Sullen, and ail such partsas are thrown into situations of intrigue,gaiety and mirth, she is said to havebeen equally charming and inimitable.Her enunciation was voluble, yetdistinct ; so that Davies called heramistress of dramatic eloquence infamiliar dialogue." In scolds and viragos,she had a powerful rival inMrs. Clive ; but Mrs. Pritchard's representationof Mrs. Termagant and Mrs.Oakley, were thought, by many, evensuperior to the acting of the formerlady in those characters.Mrs. Pritchard took leave of thestage in the spring of 1768, in the partof Lady Macbeth, on which occasion,Garrick played Macbeth, and wrotea farewell epilogue for her. She deliveredit with sobs and tears, andretired amidst the plaudits and regretsof an audience, more than commonlynumerous, notwithstanding that theprices had been doubled on the occasionfor her benefit. Her Lady Macbethis said to have been one of her besttragic parts; and the manner in whichshe used to exclaim, " Give me thedagger ! " never failed to produce a mostDAVID Garrick.extraordinary impression; nor washerlow desponding moan, of " Out, damnedspot!" less thrilling and appalling.Before concluding our notice of herprofessional character, we should observe,that, in tragedy, she had, withmany excellences, two great defects :a too loud and profuse expression ofgrief, and a deficiency of grace in hermanner.Mrs. Pritchard retired from the stage,in consequence of an intimation, thru alegacy had been left her by a distantrelation, wjiicli would enable her topass the remainder of her days in affluence.The will, however, was disputed,and the bulk of the testator'sproperty was adjudged 10 belong to hisheir-at-law. Mrs. Pritchard did not livelongto feel the effects of this disappointment,dying at Bath, about fourmonths after her retirement thither, inthe August of the year above-mentioned.Her private character is saidto have been amiable, and utterly freefrom reproach.DAVID GAR RICK.DAVID GARRICK was born atHereford, on the 28th of February, 1710.His father was a captain in the army,and his grandfather one of the Frenchprotestants who, at the revocation ofthe edict of Nantes, sought refuge inEngland.In 1726, David was sent to the gram-mareschalat Litchfield ; but was moreremarkable for the sprightliness of hisdisposition, than for his application tostudy. He early imbibed a strong predilectionfor the stage; and, when littlemore than eleven years of age, assistedin the getting up of The RecruitingOfficer, and took the character of serjeantKite. He was shortly afterwardssent out to an uncle, who was an eminentmerchant, at Lisbon ; but returnedto England the following year, and resumedhis place in the grammar-school.On finally quitting it, he did not carryaway much learning with him ; andwhen, in 1735, he was placed under thetuition of the celebrated Samuel Johnson,his thoughts were still turned tothe stage; and, instead of composingexercises, he sketched scenes of a newcomedy.In the March of the year 1736,Johnson gave up his school, and went toLondon, accompanied by Garrick ; who,shortly after his arrival, was entereda student of Lincoln Inn. In the followingyear, he became a private pupilof the Rev. Mr. Colon, an eminent mathematician,for the purpose of acquiringsome general knowledge, previous tohis intended call to the bar. The deathof both his parents, however, and of hisLisbon uncle, who left him 1,000,altered his views; and, with the summentioned, he entered into partnershipwith his brother, Peter, in the winetrade. Disagreements between themsoon led to a separation ; when Daviddetermined to commence actor; and, inthe summer of 1741, made his debut atIpswich, as Aboan, in Oroonoko, underthe assumed name of Lyddal. Thisname he continued during many performances; and manifested the versatilityof his genius, by playing, amongother characters, Captain Brazen, SirHarry Wildair, and Harlequin, withequal success.lie made his first appearance inLondon, on the 19th of October, 1741.at the theatre in Goodman's Fields, asCloister, in Richard the Third. Thecontrast to the cold declamation towhich the town had been accustomed,and the manifest genius which t'.e newactor exhibited, excited enthusiastic applause;and Covent Garden and DruryLane were, in consequence, for a timedeserted. Pope, on seeing him, exclaimed," that he was afraid the youngman would be spoiled ; for he wouldhave no competitor." During his stayat Goodman's Fields, he brought outtwo pieces, The Lying Valet, a farce,and Lethe, a dramatic satire ; the firstof which still keeps possession of thestage.The patent theatres growing jealousof the success of that in Goodman'sFields, resolved to have recourse to lawACTORS.to stop their progress. This created analarm, and a compromise was enteredinto; by means of which, Garrick wasengaged at Drury Lane, at a salary of1^500 a-year, with an understanding,that he should share the profits arisingfrom his acting Richard, Bayes, andLe;tr.In June, 1742, he accepted an engagementin Dublin, where he drewsuch crowds to the theatre, that a feverbreaking out at the time, was called theGarrick fever. On his return to London,he performed, among other newparts, Abel Drugger; in which thestare of stupidity he put on, is said tohave dispossessed him of the affectionsof a young lady, who had fallen in lovewith him, in the part of Chant, inThe Orphan. After having made asecond visit to Dublin, and producedthe farce of Miss in her Teens, he becamea joint proprietor, with Mr. Lacy,of Drury Lane Theatre ; and, on the20th of September, opened it for thisseason, himself speaking the celebratedprologue, written for the occasion byDr. Johnson.Garrick's management, on the whole,gave satisfaction to the actors, authors,and the public; but he was not freefrom the occasional displeasure of each.A spectacle brought out by him in November,1755, gave great offence, inconsequenceof the number of foreignerswho were employed in it ; and, on thesixth representation, a violent riot tookplace, by which a damage was incurredto the theatre of some thousand pounds.In answer to some critics, who censuredhis performances, he published a mockheroic poem, called The Fribbleriad, aproduction of much pleasantry andvivacity.In 1763, he visited Italy and France ;and, whilst at Paris, contrasted histheatrical powers with those of the celebratedMademoiselle Clairon, before asplendid and select circle. After hisreturn to London, the king commandedMuch ado about Nothing for. his reappearance; on which occasion he spokea prologue that was called for the tenfollowing nights. From his continentaltour Garrick was much improved ; andhad acquired a greater degree of graceand elegance than he had before exhibited.In the season of 1766, hewrote, in conjunction with Mr. Colman,and produced, The Clandestine Marriage.After this, he re-wrote, andadapted for the stage, The CountryWife, of Wycherley, under the title ofThe Country Girl; and, subsequently,Cymon, and The Christmas Tale.In 1769, the corporation of Stratfordpresented him with the freedom of thetown, in a box formed from a portionof a mulberry tree planted by the handof Shakspeare ; at the same time, requestinghe would, in return, favourthem with a portrait or bust of theimmortal bard; together with one to beplaced beside it of himself. This requestled to the commencement of thecelebrated Stratford Jubilee ; which wasplanned by Garrick on a very magnificentscale, and lasted three days. Healso represented it at Drury Lane ; andwith such success, that it had a run ofninety-two nights to crowded audiences.On the death of Mr. Lacy, in 1773,the whole management of Drury Lanedevolved on the subject of our memoir;but he only continued the duties of hisoffice for three years longer, duringwhich he perfected his plan of an institutionfor the relief of decayed actors.He sold the moiety of his patent, inJanuary, 1776, for 35,000; but, previouslyto his quitting the stage, performed,successively, all his old andfavourite characters. His last appearancewas on the 10th of June, as Felix,in The Wonder, at the conclusion ofwhich play he spoke an address, whichdrew tears both from the audience andhimself. After his retirement, he occasionallyattended rehearsals, with aview to assist his friend, Sheridan.In 1777, he was commanded to reada play before the king and queen, atBuckingham Palace, in the manner ofMonsieur Le Tether, who had obtainedgreat reputation by reading plays, sittingat a table, and acting them as hewent on. He chose, for the occasion,his farce of Lethe ; but the comparativecoldness with which he was heard bythe royal party, greatly damped hisexertions.In the above-mentioned year, he wasput into the commission of the peace,but did not long survive the appointment.Whilst partaking of the Christmasfestivities, in 1778, at Lord Spencer'sseat, at Thorpe, he was seizedwith an attack of the stone ; which, onDAVID GARRICK.his coming to London, terminated in apalsy of the kidneys, and deprived himof life on the 20th of January, 1779.He met with calmness, and was perfectlyaware of, his approaching death ;and, a short time previous to that event,observing a number of gentlemen inhis room, who, he was told, were allphysicians, he exclaimed, in the languageof Horatio, in The Fair Penitent:Another and another still succeeds;And the last Tool is welcome a* the former.His body was interred in WestminsterAbbey, and followed to the grave bysome of the most eminent persons ofthe day, both in rank and talent. Hiswidow, a celebrated dancer, namedViolent, whom he had married in 1749,died on the 16th of October, 1822.Garrick was low in stature, but wellproportioned ; and he had much improvedhis natural grace by an earlyproficiency in dancing and fencing. Hisdeportment was prepossessing and easy,and bespoke the character of a perfectgentleman. His complexion was dark,his eye black, full, and penetrating, andhis features regular. His voice wasclear, soft, and commanding; and hisarticulation, which possessed unlimitedvariation, was so remarkably distinct,that it could be heard in the most distantparts of the theatre, and underany expression of feeling. Amid somany excellences which he possessedas an actor, it would be difficult to statewhat was his peculiar forte. In tragedy,comedy, or farce, he was alike, byturns, great. All the passions of theheart seemed thrown open for theadoption of this great actor ; and allwere, by him, portrayed with equalability, vigour, and truth. " Rage andridicule," says a critic, " doubt anddespair, transport and tenderness, compassionand contempt, love, jealousy,hear, fury, and simplicity, all took, inturn, possession of his features ; whileeach of them, in turn, appeared to be thesole possessor of those features. Onenight, old age sat on his countenance,as if the wrinkles she had stampedthere were indelible; the next, thegaiety and bloom of youth seemed tooverspread his face, and smooth eventhose marks which time and muscularconformation might have really madethere. Of these truths, no one can beignorant, who ever saw him in theseveral characters of Lear or Hamlet,Richard, Douglas, Romeo or Lusignan,Ranger, Hayes, Drugger, Kitely, Brute,or Benedict." It was, however, as theliving commentator of Shakspeare, thathe shone with peculiar lustre; and itis certain, as one of his biographersobserves, " that the almost idolatrousadmiration of our immortal bard, whichhas distinguished the last half centuryof literature, may be traced from theappearance of Garrick in his principalcharacters."The private character of Garrick wasvery estimable; and gained him therespect of a large circle of friends, someof them moving in the highest circles ofsociety. He was possessed of a soundunderstanding and nice discrimination ;and exhibited a constant attention tothe wishes of others, without servility tothe great, or ostentation to the humble.An unprecedented tribute was paid tohis talents, about two years before hisdeath. He happened to be presentduring a debate in the House of Commons,when one of the members movedto clear the gallery. On this, Mr.Burke rose and addressed the house,inquiring, "it it would be decent orliberal, to exclude from the hearing oftheir debates, a man to whom theywere all obliged ; one, who was thegreatest master of eloquence; and inwhose school they had all imbibedthe art of speaking." The motionwas seconded by Mr. Fox and Mr.T. Townshend, and the house almostunanimously concurred in exemptingGarrick from the general order toquit the gallery.His vanity brought with it jealousy,in allusion to which, his biographer,Davies, observes: "Though, in theopinion of the world, he stood upon apedestal, looking down upon all actorsas his inferiors, yet sometimes, fromthe impulse of theatric jealousy, hewould condescend to raise the meanestshrub of the stage to a level withhimself."His economy subjected him to the imputationof avarice, but this is partiallyrefuted by the declaration of Johnson,that he believed David Garrick gaveaway more money than any man inLondon. Many anecdotes have beentold, however, which represent him asA C T O R S .condescending to meanness beneatha liberal and gentlemanly mind. It issaid, that alter iii victors had drparu-d,he would demand the wails from hisservant, and if the menial pretended tohave received none, he would searchhis pockets, and drag out the douceur.He boasted of having sold a lame rare,for a sound one, to a friend ; who wasso exasperated, that he sent Garricka bill for small sums which he had expendedin his company at taverns, &c.and compelled him to pay it. He wasnaturally passionate and irritable, butmade great, and, in general, successfulefforts, to conquer his temper. Thevanity, which marked his character,and was its principal foible, has beenwell described by Goldsmith, in hispoem of Retaliation :Of praise a mere glutton, he swallowed whatcame,And the puff of a dunce, lie misiok it fr lame,Till his rrlisli grown callous, almost to disease,Who proper the highest, was c urcst to pltftse.He both hated and feared Foote, yetdid all in his power to conciliate him,and often lent him money. In returnfor this, Foote made an ungrateful jestupon the manager's imputed avarice.I dare say," he said to a visitor at hishouse, one day, " you think it strangemy having Garrick so near my gold"pointing to a small bust of the actorwhich stood upon his bureau, " butyou see it's got no hands."Garrick had, when it was wanted, awitty answer ready. Being at thetheatre, one rainy night, with Quin,both sent for a chair, and Garrick' 4, tothe mortification of the former, arrivedfirst. " Let me get into the chair, 'cried the surly veteran, " let me getinto the chair, and put little Davy intothe lantern." " By all means," saidGarrick ; " I shall ever be happy togive Mr. Quin light in anything."He did not always take a joke socalmly : on his re-appearance at DruryLane, after his return from the continent,coming forward to speak aprologue, as soon as the applause athis re-appearance had a little subsided,all was silent as the grave, in eagerexpectation of hearing the address,when old Cervetto, better known bythe name of Nosey, the musician, whosat in the orchestra, anticipated thefirst line by a tremendous yawn Aw !Convulsive laughter among the audiencewas the consequence, and it wassome minutes before silence could beagain restored; that, however, obtained,Garrick delivered his address, andretired. The moment he came off thestage, he flew to the music-room, wherecollaring the astonished Nosey, he beganto abuse him pretty vociferously,"What why? you old scoundrelyou must be the most infernal '"At length poor Cervetto said, " Oh !Mr. Garrick! vat is de matter vat ihave do oh, Heavens ! vat it is ?""The matter! Why, you old d dbass-viol just at the a the verymoment I had played with the audiencetickled them like a trout, andbrought them to the most accommodatingsilence so pat to my purposeso perfect that it was, one may say,a companion for Milton's visible darkness" " Indeed, Mr. Garrick, itvas no darkness." " Darkness ! stupidfool ! but how should a man of myreading make himself understood bya answer me, was not the wholehouse, pit, box, and gallery, very stiii?"Yes, sir, indeed still as a mouse."Well, then, just at that very momentdid you not, with your d d jaws extendedwide enough to swallow a sixpennyloaf yawn ? Oh ! I wish youhad never shut your d d jaws again."Are Mr. Garrick only if you pleasehear me von word it is alway thevay it is, indeed, Mr. Garrick, it isalway the vay I go when I has thegreatest rapture, ,Mr. Garrick." Thelittle great man's anger instantly cooled,and he declared that he ought to beforgiven, for the wit of the excuse.On his departure from Dublin, alady put into his hands a small parcel,with an injunction not to open it till liewas alone. Garrick had no soonerembarked than he went to a solitarypart of the vessel, and, expecting tofind nothing less than a declaration oflove, opened the packet with equalimpatience and caution. It contained,however, nothing but a copy ofWesley's Hymns, and Dean Swift'swork on the Trinity, both of which,he afterwards told a friend, he immediatelythrew into the sea.As an author, Mr. Gat rick ranks ona somewhat elevated footing. Thecharacter of Lord Ogleby, in The Clan-susannaMARIA Cibber.destine Marriage, which is said to behis writing, is undoubtedly of thehighest class. In most of his dramas,his characters possess much to admire,and his prologues and epilogues teemwith pleasantry and light satire.As a critic, he was hard to please ;and authors did not always receivejustice at his hands. Mallet dupedhim into the acceptance of his play ofElvira, by telling him he should introducehim into the Lite of Marlborough,he was about to write. A gentlemanof the law who had heard of this, toldGarrick, the next time he met him, thathe was about to publish an edition ofthe statutes at large, and should certainlyfind a niche for him.His choice of books, if the followinganecdote may be credited, was as ill-judged,as his occasional rejection ofplays. Dr. Johnson, being, one day, inhis library, continued for some timeskimming through the title pages of thebest bound books, uttering, all thewhile, expressions of great contemptfor the authors ; at last he disdainfullydashed a volume open on the ground,and continued doing this till twentylay exposed on the floor. Garrick andall pre-went had watched this proceedingin astonishment, though none hadspoken; but the former now roaredout loudly, "Why, d it! Johnsonyou you you will destroy all mybooks!" At this, Johnson paused andcoolly said, " Looked, David, you mayunderstand plays, but you knownothing about books."In addition to the pieces before-mentioned,he was the author of a fewdramatic interludes, and the adapter ofmany old plays, in which he displayedgreat judgment, and a thorough knowledgeof dramatic effect. His Bon Ton,or High Life above Stairs, still keepsits place as one of the best farcesknown to the stage.Mr. Garrick was also the author ofan ode on the death of Mr. Pelham,which, in less than six weeks' time, ranthrough four editions ; and of .songs,prologues, and epilogues, too numerousto recount.Susanna MARIA GIBBER.Susanna MARIA GIBBER,born about the year 1716, was thedaughter of Mr. Arne, upholsterer, inCovent Garden, and sister of Dr.Arne, the celebrated composer. Theearly talent, which she displayed formusic, being discovered and cultivatedby her brother, she first appeared onthe stage as a vocalist in one of Arne'soperas, performed at the Haymarket.She was, however, distinguished forsweetness of voice alone, in thiscapacity, being deficient both in earand judgment.In 1734, her "amiable and virtuousdisposition" won her the heart of Mr.Theophilus Gibber, and the first yearof their nuptials was marked by nodiminution of affection on either "side.Soon after their marriage, Mrs. Gibberappeared at Drury Lane, but still inthe character of a singer, until Coll yGibber, at the request of his son, undertookto bring her forward as anactress in tragedy. Accordingly, aftershe had put herself, for some time,under the tuition of her father-in-law,she appeared as Zara, in Aaron Hill'stragedy of that name, in 1736. Hersuccess was decided, and from thattime until the close of her career,she continued to rank as one ofthe first tragic actresses of her day.An immediate consequence of herfavourable reception was the increaseof her salary, from 30*. a week todouble that sum ; a price that contrastsstrangely with the salaries nowgiven, even to second-rate actresses.In the meantime, the profligacy andextravagance of her husband led toresults which shewed the character ofneither himself nor his wife in a veryadvantageous light. The visits of ayoung gentleman of fortune were receivedby both with apparent satisfaction;and not the less, on the part ofeither, when it was discovered that theattractions of Mrs. Gibber were thechief cause of his attentions. Gibber,ACTORS.very accommodatingly, took himselfabroad, but on his return, to the surpriseof all but those who knew moreof him than the public, commencedan action against the gentleman, forcriminal conversation with his wife;laying his damages at 5,000. Soclearly, however, was the instrumentalityof the husband proved in theaffair, that the jury awarded only .10damages. Mrs. Gibber henceforth livedseparately from him, and residedaltogether with the gentleman in question,by whom she had one son. Anindulgent public applauded her on herreturn to the stage, where she continuedto astonish and delight all whowitnessed her unrivalled performances,until her death. This event took placeon the 30th of January, 1766; and,in about a week afterwards, she wasinterred in the cloisters of WestminsterAbbey.Her merits as an actress, have beenwell portrayed by Davies, in hisLife of Garrick. " Her great excellence,"he says, " consisted in thatsimplicity, which needed no ornament;in that sensibility, which despised allart. There was in her person little orno elegance, in her countenance asmall share of beauty but Nature hadgiven her such symmetry of form, andfine expression of feature, that shepreserved all the appearance of youthafter she had reached to middle life.The harmony of her voice was aspowerful as the animation of her look.In grief and tenderness, her eyeslooked as if they swam in tears; inrage and despair, they seemed to dartflashes of fire. In spite of the unimportanceof her figure, she maintaineda dignity in her action, and a grace inher step!"Mrs. Cibber also sustained the partof an authoress respectably, in hertranslation of The Oracle of St. Fix,which was occasionally played for herbenefit. When Garrick was informedof her death, he exclaimed, " Thentragedy expired with her ; and yetshe was the greatest female plaguebelonging to my house. I could easilyparry the artless thrusts, and despisethe coarse language of some of myother heroines ; but whatever wasGibber's object, a new part, or a newdress, she was always sure to carry herpoint, by the acuteness of her invention,and the steadiness of her perseverance."Notwithstanding, however,the occasional violence of hertemper and language, and the circumstancesunder which she separated fromher husband, she possessed sufficientqualities and accomplishments to retainto the close of her life, the acquaintanceand esteem of many persons of highrank. Though her vocal acquirementswere not great, she sang with muchsweetness and feeling, and no oneever equalled her in Handel's He wasdespised.HENRY WOODWARD.HENRY WOODWARD was the sonof a tallow chandler, in the borough of'Southwark, and born there in the year1717. Though intended by his fatherfor the same business, he was sentfor education to Merchant Taylor'sschool, where he acquired that taste forthe classics, which he frequently displayedin after-life, to the no smallastonishment of some of his brotheractors. The circumstances which led tohis introduction to the stage, and hisearly progress there, have been thusrelated : " From the uncommon runof The Beggar's Opera, Mr. Rich, whowas at that time manager of the theatrein Lincoln's Inn Fields, was encouragedto represent it by children. In thisLilliputian company, Harry performedthe part of Peacnum with great success ;and having thus entertained a passionfor the drama, could never afterwardsdivest himself of it. He had begun withthe lowest of pantomimic characters,and went on, in a regular progression,from a frog to a hedgehog, an ape anda bear, till he arrived at the summit ofhis ambition, Harlequin. His talents asacomedian, soon began to developedthemselves, and produced him an en-henryWOODWARD,engagement. with a good salary, at CoventGarden, where the death of Chapmanafforded him an excellent openingfor the display of his powers. He wascompletely successful ; and by his performanceof Marplot, Lord Foppington,Sir Andrew Aguecheek, Touchstone, &c.established his theatrical reputation."In 1747, he was engaged by Mr.Sheridan to act at the Smock AlleyTheatre, Dublin, at 500 for the season.He appeared both as a comedianand Harlequin, and drew, in eithercharacter, such numerous audiences,as amply repaid the manager for theliberal salary which he gave him. Inthe former, he is said to have imitatedFoote in his favourite piece, of Tea, orThe Diversions of the Morning, with suchsuperior strength of humour, ridicule,and mimicry, as beat him out of thefield ; and in the latter, got up a newpantomime, which did his inventiongreat credit, and the theatre considerableservice. On his return to England,he was engaged by Mr. Garrick, atDrury Lane, where he made his debutas Boabdil, in Every Man in hisHumour, which was revived for theoccasion, with some alterations and anadditional scene. This character hasbeen thought, by some, to be Woodward'smaster-piece, and he certainlyinvested it with an interest and originalitywhich have never been impartedto it by any other performer.Woodward had saved nearly 5,000,and was enjoying a higher salary thanwas ever before paid to a comic performer,when, in 1759, he received aproposal from Barry, the actor, to joinhim in a speculation of building a newtheatre in Crow Street, Dublin, inopposition to Mr. Sheridan's, in SmockAlley. The hope of increasing hisfortune, and the fear of losing his presentgain, kept Woodward for some time inastate of suspense regarding the expediencyof his accepting this offer. Hiswife entreated him not to quit DruryLane, and Garrick was also loth to partwith so useful an actor. The manager,however, was too high-spirited to retainWoodward upon the terms proposedby the latter, which were, thathe should receive as large an income aswas then given, or might hereafterbe given, to any actor or actress. Whilethe negotiation was pending, Foote, itis said, asked Woodward, whether hehad gained his point, and on beinganswered in the negative, exclaimed,"That is strange; you play in almostall the comedies, and Harlequin besides: why, then, in my opinion, youare entitled to the money, whether yougo by the hour or the ground." Findinghe could procure no advance ofsalary, Woodward embarked in thespeculation with Barry, and proceedingto Dublin, built the Crow StreetTheatre, and opened it with the comedyof She Would and She Would not, to avery thin audience. All the subsequentexertions of the two managers couldnot avail, and after three or four unsuccessfulseasons, Woodward returnedto England with a loss of above 3,000.The failure of the speculation arosefrom these causes : the great differencein the disposition of the managers ;and the want of a sufficient number ofplay-going people in Dublin to supporttwo theatres. Woodward resumed hismetropolitan career at Covent Garden,where he made his debut in the characterof Marplot, having first conciliatedthe audience by an address ofhis own composition, commencingthus :Behold! the prodigal returned quite tame,And (though you'll hardly think it) full of shame;Ashamed, so long t' have left my patrons here,On random schemes the Lord knows what andwhere;With piteous face (long stranger to a grin),Receive the penitent and let him in !This, and other lines, in the prologue,gave great offence to the Irish, so that,when, after his wife's death, he returnedto Dublin, he was vehemently hissed offthe stage, and even hooted in the streets.He was not, therefore, sorry to comeback again to London, where he continuedat the height of his profession,until within a few months of his death,which took place on the 17th of April,1777. He left the interest of his fortuneto Mrs. Bellamy, the actress, with whomhe had latterly formed a connexion ; buthis will was so ill worded, that shenever derived any benefit from it.Woodward," says Davies, " wasan actor, who, for various abilities todelight an audience in comic characters,had scarcely an equal. His person wasso regularly formed, and his look soserious and composed, that an imiiifer-AC TO RS.went observer would have supposed thathis talents were adapted to charactersof the serious cast ; to the real finegentleman, to the man of graceful deportmentand elegant demeanor, ratherthan to the affector of gaiety, the briskfop, and pert coxcomb. But the momenthe spoke on the stage, a certain ludicrousair laid hold of his features, andevery muscle of his face ranged itselfon the side of levity. The very tonesof his voice inspired comic idea's; andthough he often wished to act tragedy,he could never speak a line with proprietythat was serious. A burlesqueimitation of tragedy was exhibitedby him, happily, in The Apprentice.Churchill, in his Rosciad, charges himwith action, bordering upon the extravagant; and observes, ' that he excelledmost in parts where nature had stretchedher power to ridiculous excess.' Thispartly may be true, but this was copyingNature still." Besides the charactersbefore-mentioned, those which Woodwardparticularly excelled in, were,Congreve's Sir Joseph Wittol, Brisk,Tattle, and Twould ; Shakspeare'sParoles, Osric, and Mercutio; LordFoppington; Sancho, in The Mistake,and Lusarao, in The Wonder. Hispantomimic powers were also of a superiororder ; and the compliment whichSir Richard Steele pays to the celebratedNicolai, in the one hundredand fifteenth number of the Tatler, issaid to be equally applicable to Woodward.As a composer of pantomimehe had also great merit, and producedthe three best that were ever represented: Harlequin Fortunatus, HarlequinFaustus, and Queen Mao. Healtered for the stage, The LondonCuckold, The Winter's Tale, and someother pieces ; and is the reputed authorof The Male Coquet, A Lick at theTown, &c.Woodward is said to have been dislikedby h'S brother actors ; his un-convivialdisposition, and economicalhabits, were probably construed by theminto niggardness and ill-nature. Hisacquaintance, however, was sought bymen of taste and learning, for whosesociety he was more fitted, by theeducation he had received, and whichhe endeavoured to improve, by a small,but well chosen, library of books.Stranger BARRY.THIS eminent actor was the son of asilversmith, and born in St. Hamburgh'sparish, Dublin, on the 20th of November,1719. He was himself destined fortrade; and followed, for some time,the business of his father, with everyprospect of realizing an ample fortune.Besides his paternal inheritance, hereceived 1,500 with his wife; andwas, altogether, a man of competenceand commercial substantiality. A situation,so apparently remote frompoverty, probably, first induced him toslacken in his attendance behind thecounter; whilst his handsome personand pleasing address gained him attentionsand invitations, which materiallyinterfered with his business. Afondness for theatricals also contributedto wean him from his regular pursuits ;in short, in about four years after hehad commenced silversmith on his ownaccount, he became bankrupt.He now determined to try his successon the stage ; and accordingly, in 1744,he made his debut on the Irish boards,in the character of Othello. No firstappearance was ever more decidedlysuccessful ; the harmony of his voice, itis said, and the manly beauty of hisperson, spoke him alike the warriorand the lover; and those, who beforedoubted of the poet's consistency, informinga mutual passion between suchcharacters as Othello and Desdemona,were now convinced of its propriety.Our actor afterwards played at Cork withequal applause ; and thence, returningto Dublin, made one of that galaxy oftalent, which drew such full houses inthe summer, that it was then verycommon to say, one died of a Garrick,a Qu in, or a Barry fever.In 1746, he came to London, and wasengaged at Drury Lane, where he performedboth in tragedy and genteel iLS P R A N G t K li A K K Y .comedy, with distinguished approbation.The Prince of Wales, it is said, afterseeing him perform the part of LordTownley, sent him a polite message, thenext day, with an offer of the attendanceof his dancing-master for three months;adding, ' that, in his opinion, he wantedonly the addition of a little manner, tomake him the first Lord Townley in theworld." After having, tor some time,divided the applause of the town withGarrick, Barry removed lo CoventGarden, in 1749 ; when a decided competitiontook place between the twogreat actors, each playing against theother their principal characters, withvarious success. The grand strugglemade by both, was in the part of Romeo,in which the majority agreed in awardingthe palm to Barry. Indeed, hisperformance of this character, aided byhis uncommonly handsome person, andwinning address, and a voice the mostmelodious and touching conceivable,was, perhaps, never equalled. Thefemale part of the audience were mostpowerfully affected by his acting; anda Miss Nessiter, who sometimes playedJuliet to his Romeo, in Dublin, fellviolently in love with him ; and, it issaid, died of a broken heart, leavinghim a fortune of about 3,000. Buthis favourite Juliet was Mrs. Gibber ;and, perhaps, a more affecting exhibitionnever took place on the stage, thanwhen these two performers appearedtogether as the lovers of Verona. Akinwith Harry's representation of Romeo,was his Ca'stalio, in The Orphan. TomChapman, an excellent comic actor, toldDavies, the biographer of Garrick,that when he saw Barry in the last-mentionedcharacter, he could not refrainfrom bursting into tears, andalmost audibly sobbing. His Gaffer,Lear, Othello, and Essex, frequentlyproduced the same effect upon thespectators of either sex; " so powerfullyexpressive," says a writer of the time,of grief and agony were his features,that the audience were disposed to pitybefore he spoke ; and his broken throbsso wrung the soul, that their distresscould be relieved only by torrents oftears." Gibber, when grown old, seldommissed seeing Barry's Othello; thinkingit superior to any other performer's.Iv 1758, the subject of our memoirjoined, with Woodward, in building theCrow Street Theatre, Dublin; but, aswe have stated in our memoir of thelatter, the speculation failed. He returnedto London, in 1766, bringingwith him Mrs. Dancer, whom he subsequentlymarried, and hired, for a fewnights, the King's Theatre ; where hiswife first established her reputation, inthe character of Desdemona. He subsequentlyentered into an engagementwith Foote ; and, soon after, himselfand his wife were received into theDrury Lane company, at a joint salaryof 1,500 per annum.In 1774, he removed to Covent Garden,where, though now growing old,and manifesting a falling off in some ofhis characters, he sustained that oiOrestes, in The Distressed Mother, in amanner which threw a new lustre overhis last efforts. His death took placeon the 10th of January, 1777, after hehad many years suffered from theagonies of hereditary gout.Of Barry's acting, we have alreadysaid sufficient to enable the reader toform a tolerable idea of its chief attributes.As a man, he was much beloved ;his insinuating address, and pleasingconversation, making friends of almostevery one who came near him. Hispowers of persuasion were only equalledby those of Sheridan ; and both appearto have had similar occasions of exertingthem. " Don't be in a passion," Barry,one day, said to a creditor who stoodstorming in the passage, " but do me thefavour to walk up stairs, and we'll speakon the business." " Not I," answeredthe man ; " you owe me jlOO already ;and if you get me up stairs, you won'tlet me leave you till you owe me jg200."It is not extraordinary that he shouldhave made many conquests among thefair sex ; and his biographers hint thathis amours, both on and off the stage,were considerable in their number, andextended to ladies of rank. He wasextravagant in his living, and fond ofgiving expensive entertainments. Mr.Pelham, once going to sup with him,found such a profusion of elegant dishesand choice wines set out for him, thathe could not forbear reproving Barry forhis folly ; and, it is said, never gave himanother opportunity ot exposing hiswant of judgment.S5SACTORS.MARGARET Washington.MARGARET Washington wasborn in Dame Street, Dublin, in theyear 1719. She was the daughter of ajourneyman bricklayer, and attendedschool from her fifth to her tenth year,when her father dying, she came hometo assist her mother, in net business ofa washerwoman. Being seen, one day,fetching water from the Liffey, by aMademoiselle Violante, who kept ashow-booth in Dame Street, the latterwas so struck with the little Irish girl'sbeauty, that she offered to engage heras an apprentice. Her mother consenting,little Woffington was transferredto the care of Mademoiselle Violante,to be taught the dramatic art, and itwas not long before she was announcedto play Polly, in The Beggar's Opera.Her reception was enthusiastic ; andcontinuing to perform, she became theprop ot the Booth Theatre, and wasallowed a salary of 30.v. per week. Shenow took lodgings for herself, and enteringinto a life of profligacy, leftDublin for London, in company with alibertine, whose mistress she had become; and had not long been in themetropolis before she was engaged byRich,toappearatCovent (harden, whereshe made her debut in the character ofSir Harry Wildair, a part previouslyperformed by her in Dublin. Hersuccesswas brilliant ; she played Sir Harry tocrowded audiences for twenty two successivenights, and on the terminationof her engagement with Rich, who hadgiven het 9 per week, she went backto Dublin, on a salary of 14. Littleshort of adoration was now paid her inher native town; and, whilst on the stageshe fascinated all, she determined toenjoy herself off it, as far as an equipageand two footmen, and other luxuries,would enable her to do so. She madean allowance of j20 per annum to hermother; and was, in other respects, agenerous and liberal distributor of thefortune she was acquiring.The failure of the Dublin manager,inducing her to return to London, sheaccepted an engagement at CoventGarden, where she continued to be anadmired favourite until her retirementfrom the stage in May, 1757. Thederangement of her health has beenstated, by some, as a reason for herquitting the theatre ; whilst othersascribe her renunciation of it to asermon she had heard, in which someerrors, similar to her own, were veryforcibly touched upon. The alterationwhich took place in her conduct, makesthe last account the more probable one;she increased her mother's allowancefrom 20 to 30; became simple inher dress and manners, and pious inher demeanour ; and regarded nothingwith any degree of aversion, but thestage. She died, retaining all theamiable but none of the blameable,qualities of her early life, on the 28thof March, 1760. She was buried atHaddington ; and shortly after herdeath, a monody was published, inwhich her professional character wasdrawn, and from which we extract thefollowing lines as being the most characteristic.Blest in each art! by nature formed to plea*.With beauty, sens*, with elegance and eae !\Vlinse piercing genius studied all mankind.All Shakspeare opening to tliy vigorous mind.In every sense of comic humour known,In sprightly sallies wit was al 1 thy own;whether you seem'd the (it's more IiunibV wife,Or sh ne in Townley s higher sphere of life,A Proteus still, in all the varying range.Thyself the same, divine in every change 1Her person was remarkably beautiful; " an irresistible gracefulness,"says Mr. Gait, " was conspicuous in allher actions : a pleasing air, and, for hercondition, a most surprising eleganceshone, as it were, around her. Hereyes were black, of the darkest brilliancy; and while, it was said, theybeamed with the most beautiful lustre,they revealed every movement of herheart, and showed, notwithstanding jshe was but little indebted to educa- jtion, that acute discernment whichdistinguished her career throughoutlife. Her eyebrows arched and vividlymarked, possessed a flexibility, which 'Same EL F Foot E .greatly increased the expression of herother features ; in love and terror, theywere powerful beyond conception ; butthe beautiful owner never appeared tobe sensible of their force. Her complexionwas of the finest hue, and hernose being gently aquiline, gave hercountenance an air of great majesty ;all her other features were of no inferiormould ; she was altogether one of themost beautiful of Eve's daughters."This is a charming picture ; but Mr.Gait has omitted to state, that "thismost beautiful of Eve's daughters," waspresident of the weekly Beefsteak Club,held in the green room of Covent GardenTheatre ; and that after she hadbeen portrayingThe fair resemblance of a martyr queen,she was to be seen in the green roomholding up a pot of porter in her hand,and crying out, " Confusion to allorder ! Let liberty thrive ! " Like Mrs.Clive, she attempted both tragedy andcomedy ; and whilst she excelled thatactress in the former, strongly resembled,and was nearly upon a par withher in the latter. Garrick is said tohave been a favoured lover of Mrs. Washington,and not the only one, accordingto some of her biographers. Aftershe had been performing Sir HarryWildair, one night, she said to Quin,Half the audience believe I am aman." " Very probably," replied Quin ;but half the world know to the contrary."Omitting many anecdotes that mightbe told of her generosity, we concludewith one of her early life, which is atonce characteristic and amusing. Theyoung gentleman, whom she had firstleft Dublin with, having made overturesof marriage to a lady in the country,she determined, out of revenge, totry to break off the match. Accordingly,hearing that a masked ball was aboutto be given to celebrate the intendedbride's birth-day, she contrived to gainadmittance in man's apparel, and havingpersuaded the young lady to becomeher partner in a minuet, revealed toher the real character of her lover. Thebride, it is said, fainted at the table;the company dispersed; and our heroinereturned to town, exulting in thesuccess of her stratagem.SAMUEL FOOTE.THIS inimitable comic actor anddramatist, whose talents have procuredfor him the title of the modern Aristophanes,was descended from a goodfamily, and born of highly respectableparents, at Truro, about the year 1720.His father, who held a commission inthe prize office, was also a magistrateof the county, and had been, for sometime,a member of parliament ; hismother was a sister of Sir John DyneleyGoodbye, Bart., whose murder, by hi'sown brother, caused so great a sensationat the time. He received hisschool education at Worcester, wherehe displayed uncommon quickness ofparts, and that inclination to slyhumour, in which the future mimicand satirist might be traced. Of hispowers, in this respect, he gave manyamusing proofs at a very early age.On leaving school, Foote was sentto Worcester College, Oxford, carryingwith him his waggish spirit in its fullmaturity. Men, rather than books,were the objects of his attention; thoughit must be confessed, his acumen in thisrespect was productive of more amusementand annoyance to others, than ofcredit or honour to himself. At first,however, his localities were harmless;and few will be ascetic enough, not tosmile at the one we are about to relate.It happened that the church belongingto his college fronted the side of a lane,into which cattle were sometimes turnedfor the night, and that the bell-rope ofthe steeple hung low enough to betouched, in the middle of the outsideporch. Foote, noticing this, tied, onenight, a wisp of hay to it, as a bait forthe cows, and the consequence was,a tremendous tugging of the bell byone of these animals, which awakenedall the college, and being several timesrepeated, gave rise to sundry conjee-SCOACTORS.turns, and occasioned much alarm. Atlength, Dr.Gower, the provost, and thesexton, determined to watch for themysterious hell-toller, and sallyingforth after dark, were not long beforethey heard a footstep approach theporch, and the bell violently pulled.The sexton, darting forward, caughthold of the cow's tail, whilst the doctorseized her by the horn ; and, lightsbeing brought, the ludicrous cause oftheir alarm was discovered ; less to theirown satisfaction than to the amusementof the neighbours. This was not theonly joke of the subject of our memoirat Dr. Gower's expense ; for when theprovost began to lecture him, one day. inphrases equally quaint and monitory,Foote, pretending not to understandhim, drew out a large dictionary fromunder his arm, which he had broughtwith hem for the purpose, and, afterhaving consulted it, coolly exclaimed,Very well, sir; now please to go on !"On quilting college, where, probably,he had taken no degree, Foote enteredhimself of the Temple, with a view ofbeing called to the bar. Instead, however,of pursuing the studies incidentto his profession, he plunged into ailthe gaieties and dissipation of fashionableHie ; losing at the gaming tablewhat his extravagance in living wasnot sufficient to consume. Hopingthat he might be reclaimed by marriage,his friends, and those of the bride, consentedto his union, in 1741, with a ladyat Worcester; but this step was onlya transient check to his career, whilsthis conduct, as a husband, was anythingbut affectionate. It was not longafter their marriage that the necessitiesof Foote caused him to be arrested, andconfined in the Fleet Prison. whilstthere, a friend paid him a visit, but perceivingsomething stir behind him inthe bed, got up to depart, saying hewould call another time. " Make yourselfeasy," said Foote, " 'tis only myFoot /" and to convince you of its beingno more, it shall speak to you directly."Upon this, his wife put her head fromunder the bed clothes, making manyapologies for her situation. It was,probably, at this time that he receivedfrom his mother, who is said to haveresembled him in character, the followingepistle : " Dear Sam, 1 am in prisonfor debt; come and assist your lovingmother, E. FOOTE." Sam's reply wasequally laconic. " Dear Mother, so amI, which prevents his duty being paidto his loving mother, by her affectionateson, SAMUEL FOOTE."Foote, who, in disposition, differedfrom his wife, proposed his separationfrom her, at one time, in order, as hesaid, to make her more comfortable;and they were accordingly parted for afew months. His wife, however, had,it seems, been little inclined to thisstep, which Foote, probably, merelysuggested as an excuse to get rid ofher, and they were eventually broughttogether again.Having completely outran his fortune,Foote now began to think of thestage as a means of support, but beforemaking his appearance there, he accepted\Q from a bookseller, to writea defence of his uncle, who was executedfor the murder of his brotherSir John Dyneley, to which we havebefore alluded. On his way back fromthe bookseller's, having no stockingsunder his boots, he went into a shop topurchase a pair, and, on coming out,met a party of his college friends, withwhom he agreed to dine at the BedfordTavern. In the course of the eveningone of his companions cried out, " Why,eh ! Foote, how is this ? you seem tohave no stockings on." " No," repliedthe other, " 1 never wear any at thistime of the year, till I am going to dressfor the evening ; and, you see, I amalways provided with a pair for theoccasion," at the same time, pulling outthe pair he had bought in the morning.On the 6th of February, 1744, Footemade his theatrical debut at the Hay-market,in the character of Othello, butwith such little success, that he wasadvised to try another style of actingaltogether. He was, however, littlemore at home in Lord Foppington, andhe must undoubtedly "nave failed altogetheron the stage, had he not struckout a new path for himself, and for theentertainment of the public. Accordingly,in the spring of 1747, he openedthe Haymarket Theatre, with a piececalled, The Diversions of the Morning,written by himself, and in which hewas the principal performer. The exhibitionresembled, in some measure,the At Home of Mathews, with thisSAMUEL FOOTEdifference, that Foote was not the soleactor, and, instead of imaginary characters,introduced, for the purposes ofmimicry, real and well-known onesupon the stage. It was highly successful; but as he incurred the penalties ofthe act for limiting playhouses, by theshape in which he gave the exhibition,he altered the title to that of, Mr.Foote giving Tea to his Friends, whichattracted fashionable audiences for morethan fifty successive mornings. Thenext season, he produced a piece of thesame kind, entitled, The Auction ofPictures, in which he introduced severalpopular and well-known characters,particularly Mr. Cock, the auctioneer,and the celebrated Orator Henley.In the early part of 1749, 'Footehaving had a considerable fortune lefthim by a relation, went over to Paris,and entered into the dissipations of thatmetropolis with all the zest of a man offashion. He returned to London in1752, and soon after brought out acomedy in two acts, called Taste,which met with a very favourable reception; as did also his Englishmanin Paris, The Knights, The Englishmanreturned from Paris, and TheAuthor, which last was performed in1757. The idea of The Englishmanreturned from Paris, is said to have beenstolen from Murphy, who had communicatedto Foote his plot of a similarpiece. In The Author he had taken off,with peculiar felicity, in the characterof Cadwallader, a gentleman of fortunenamed Price, who was extremelyproud of his pedigree, and who himself,without recognizing that he was theoriginal of the portrait, had enjoyedthe performance extremely. But findinghimself, at length, the laughingstockof his friends, and that he wassaluted, wherever he went, as Cadwal-lader, he grew so annoyed, that hesolicited the lord-chamberlain to prohibitthe performance, which wasgranted.In 1758, Foote went with Tate Wilkinsonto Dublin, where both performedwith great eclat, and on their return toLondon, were engaged by Garrick, atDrury Lane. In the following year,the former took a theatrical trip toScotland ; and, in the winter, againvisited Dublin, where his celebratedplay of The Minor was first brought out,but with indifferent success. On itsproduction in London, in 1760, it wasreceived with greater applause than hadattended any of his former productions,though it gave great offence to the Methodists,against whom it was levelled, andoccasioned some controversy in the literaryworld. The Liar, and The Orators,were the next pieces which he gave tothe stage ; in the latter of which heintended to ridicule Dr. Johnson, butwas prevented by the doctor's declaration,that he intended to plant himselfin the front of the stage box on the firstnight of representation, and if anybuffoon attempted to take him off, ortreat him with any degree of personalridicule, to spring forward on the stage,and knock him down in the face of theaudience.In 1763, Foote brought out his excellentfarce of The Mayor of Garrett,a piece rich in comic delineation, andnot so overcharged as to be unnatural.The success of this farce relieved himfrom many pecuniary difficulties, andenabled him to lay out 1,200 on aservice of plate, excusing himself forsuch a seeming piece of extravagance,by saying, that, " As he knew he couldnever keep his gold, he prudently laidout his money in silver." His nextpieces, The Patron, and The Commissary,abounded more in general thanpersonal satire ; but they were equallywell relished by the town, and themerits of them have been esteemed, bygood critics, equal to those of his bestcompositions.In 1766, a fall from his horse renderednecessary the amputation of hisleg; an accident that some might thinkretributive, as he had before made thisinfirmity in others the subject of hismirth on the stage. He bore, however,the loss of his limb with fortitude, and,in one sense, had no reason to regret it ;for the Duke of York, brother to Georgethe Third, happening to pass at the timeof his fall, behaved to him on the spotwith great kindness, and afterwardsobtained for him a patent for life, toerect a theatre in Westminster, with theprivilege of exhibiting dramatic piecesthere, from the 14th of May, to the14th of September." Under this patent,he immediately purchased the Hay-marketTheatre, which he had hithertoonly rented.ACTORS.In 1768, he lost, whilst at Bath, 1,700at the gaming table, but indemnifiedhimself for his losses by a visit to Dublin,and returned to London, in 1769, neitherout of spirits, nor out of pocket. In1770, was brought out his comedy ofThe Lame Lover, and afterwards, insuccession, The Maid of Bath, and TheNabob ; the last intended as a satireagainst the ostentatious pretensions ofcertain members of the East India Company.Two gentlemen, who felt themselvesincluded in the ridicule, furnishedthemselves with cudgels, and calledupon Foote, with the intention ot chastisinghim ; but his address and politenessso completely captivated them,that, instead of cudgelling, they stoppedand dined with him.In 1775. he wrote a piece, called, TheTrip to Calais, in which, having ridiculed,under the name of Kitty Crocodile,the eccentric Duchess of Kingston,she offered him a sum of money, tostrike out the part. Whether, however,he demanded too much, or was tootardy in his reply, a correspondencedisgraceful to both parties took place,which ended in the duchess makingan application to the lord-chamberlain, jwho interdicted the performance. Foote |brought out the play, with some alterations,the next year, under the title ofThe Capuchin, in which he levelledhis satire against a Dr. Jackson, theeditor of a newspaper, and the bosomfriend of the duchess. 1 he revengetaken by this person, .aid to be at theinstigation of the duchess, was of themost diabolical description. A chargeof an infamous nature was broughtagainst Foote by a discarded man servant,at the secret instance of the aboveparties; and although he was fullyacquitted, to the satisfaction of hisfriends, the accusation made an impressionupon his spirits, which henever recovered. His health declined,and though he subsequently appearedon the stage, he was no longer, eitherin health or spirits, the same man.In the beginning of January, i777,he sold his property in the HaymarketTheatre to George Colman, and afterhaving passed some time at Brighton,went to Dover, with the intention ofproceeding to the continent. The windproving unfavourable, he was preventedfrom embarking, and being seized withshivering fits, the day after his arrival,was put to bed, and in a few hoursexpired. He died on the 21st of October,1777, and was buried by torch-light inWestminster Abbey.The character of Foote, as delineatedby his biographers, presents scarcelyone amiable or respectable feature ; and,indeed, considered apart from hispeculiar abilities, he must ever appearin a contemptible light. A talent formimicking the foibles and faults ofothers, if exercised without touchingupon those unfortunate defects, whichare subjects railer for compassionthan ridicule, may deserve the applauseit is calculated to excite; butwhen these alone are made the occasionof contributing to the publicmirth, the exhibition can be neitherpleasing nor edifying to the reflectingspectator. It is not to be denied that,in some of his pieces, Foote aimed hisshafts against moral depravity, as wellas physical infirmity ; but it was morefrom coincidence than dee-ign ; and ifthe one had not existed, it is verydoubtful whether he would have sparedthe other. Dr. Johnson, who seems tohave thought him under the influenceof no principle, observed, that he neverlet truth stand between him and ajest; the doctor, perhaps, felt he wouldbe hitting too near home, if lie nat substitutedthe word ''fei-ling'' for "truth."But though Johnson disliked the man,even his muscles could not but relax atFoote's inimitable drolleries. ' J'he firsttime," said the doctor, ' 1 ever was incompany with Foote, 1 was resolved notto be pleased and it is very difficultto please a man against his will. Iwent on eating my dinner pretty sullenly,affecting, for a long time, not tomind him; but the dg was so verycomical, that I was obliged to lay downmy knife and fork, throw myself backon my chair, and fairly laugh it outwiththe rest : there was no avoidingit the fellow was irresistible." Thegreat lexicographer, however, maintained,in opposition to the generalopinion, that Foote was not a goodmimic " His imitations," he said, ' arenot like : he gives you something differentfrom himself, without going intoother people. He cannot take off anyperson, unless he is strongly marked.He is like a painter, who can draw theSAMUEL FOOTE.portrait of a man who has a wen uponhis face, and who, therefore, is easilyknown. If a man hops upon one leg,Foote can hop upon one leg; but hehas not a nice discrimination of character."Such of Foote's comic delineations,however, in his plays, as stand apartfrom personal peculiarities, show, thathe did possess this discrimination, atleast in his writings ; so much so,indeed, that he has been compared bymore than one critic to Moliere, whocould hardly display in a greater degreethan Foote, the true vis comica. Hisdialogue was easy, and an echo of realconversation ; and though, it must beconfessed, that he borrowed hints andincidents from others, he made themhis own by their application. His appellationof the English Aristophanes,is only pertinent as respects his bringingliving characters upon the stage, but heresembles the Greek in no other point.Upon the whole, Foote may be consideredan original, who has hithertohad no successor in the comic theatreof his country.For all the witticisms, genuine andspurious, that have been ascribed toFoote, we have not space in a worklike the present ; nor would a detail,probably, of the most authentic, be nowconsidered either welcome or necessary.No circumstance depressed his jocularity; and only the day before his death,he perpetrated a brace of puns, whichwe record, not as being his best, butbecause they were his last. Going intothe kitchen to order a particular dishfor dinner, the cook, understanding thathe was about to embark for France,observed, that for her part, she wasnever out of her own country. " Indeed,Cooke," said Foote, " that's veryextraordinary, as they tell me, abovestairs, that, you have been several timesall over grease (Greece), and I myseiihave seen you at Spithead" WhenFoote heard of the death of his intimatefriend and companion, Sir FrancisDelaval, he was, which was a rare thingwith him, seriously affected, until informedthat the surgeons were goingto dissect his head. " They may sparethemselves the trouble," he" exclaimed ;for I have known Frank's head forthis last twenty-five years, and neverfound anything in it." He was oncetaken before Sir Thomas de Veil, forbeing engaged in some midnight brawl,when Sir Thomas very pompouslydesired one of the witnesses againsthim, " to mind and tell the truth."Ay," said Foote, to the witness, whowas placed just opposite the magistrate,tell the truth, and face the devil."Having used, in one of his plays, theexpression, "Lost sheep," the Bishopof London objected to it, as introducinga Scriptural expression on the stage.Foote promised it should be rectified ;and accordingly, when the performercame to the sentence in which it was tobe spoken, he altered it, by the author'sdirection, to " Lost mutton." At atavern, one evening, Foote called on ayoung nobleman, remarkable for hisviciousness, for his toast. " Why, mygood fellow," says he, " I'll give youthe Devil." " Well, my lord," repliedFoote, " I have no objection to any ofyour lordship's friends. The followinganecdote has been told of him, whilsthe was on the continent : At Paris,it is the custom, in collecting charitythroughout a parish, for two or threeladies of the first rank, to accompanythe collector; Foote was in that citywhen a collection was making in thestreet where he lodged; but, being verylow in cash, was hard put to it for anexcuse. Whilst he was ruminating, theladies stopped at the hotel where helodged, and were coming up stairs ; onwhich he called out very loud to hisservant, " Peter, don't let any bodycome up stairs, without first acquaintingthem that there is a gentleman here illof the small-pox." Immediately onhearing this, tire ladies, (fee., went downstairs,without asking for charity.ACTORS.HENRY MOSSOP.HENRY MOSSOP was born in 1729,in the province of Connaught, in Ireland.His father, the rector of Team,placed him, at an early age, under thecare of a maternal uncle, a bookseller inDublin, by whom he was sent to theuniversity of that city, where he remained,until he received an invitationto join another uncle in London, whomade him large promises. Mossopaccordingly visited the metropolis, butbeing deceived in his expectations fromhis uncle, turned his thoughts to thestage, and applied to Garrick and Richfor an engagement, by whom he wasdeclared, after receiving an audience, astotally unfit." He was then introducedto Sheridan, and received aninvitation to join the Smock AlleyTheatre, in Dublin, where he was toappear in any character he might select.He chose Zanga, in The Revenge,and made his debut on the 28th of November,1749. He performed this characterfor three successive nights, and,on the fourth, appeared as Richard theThird, which he dressed in a mannerthat drew some censure from Sheridan.Mossop, on hearing this, came, theensuing morning, into his dressing-room,and said, " Mr. She-ri-dan, Ihear you said I dressed Richard like acoxcomb : that is an af-front ; you weara sword pull it out of the scabbard.I'll draw mine, and thrust it into yourbody." Sheridan smiled at his furiousconduct, but entering into an explanation,the matter was accommodated.Mossop's disposition, however, was sohasty, that it was difficult for any oneto live with him on terms of friendship ;and a fresh dispute having arisen betweenhim and Sheridan, he suddenlyquitted Ireland, and engaged withGarrick, at Drury Lane. Here he remainedtill 1759, when quarrellingwith the manager, he left him, andaccompanied Barry to Ireland, wherehe re-appeared on the 31st of October.He was the original representative ofDr. Brown's Barbarossa, and in thepart of Achmet, was acknowledged tobe equal to Garrick himself. His grandsuccess in Dublin, in that character,greatly irritated Garrick; and when itwas the talk of London, he rebukedhis performers, even in the presenceof the author, for expatiating on hismerits.In 1760, Mossop became manager ofthe Smock Alley Theatre, which heopened with a powerful company, andunder the immediate patronage of hisgodmother, the Countess of Brandon.Seven years afterwards, Barry retiredfrom the theatre in Crow Street, whichMossop also took, and appeared thereinRichard. A rival theatre now startedsuccessfully against him, and proceedingto London, in 1771, he was arrestedby one of his performers. Necessityat length, drove him to rip the lacefrom the dresses in his wardrobe, tofurnish means of subsistence, and hewas shortly afterwards made bankrupt.It was now supposed that Garlickwould have engaged him, butJVIossop disdained to make an applicationfor that purpose ; without which, theformer had expressed a resolution notto employ him. After making a tour tothe south of France, Mossop returnedto London, in a state of feeling thatdetermined him to put an end to hisexistence. For this purpose, he retiredto an obscure lodging in Chelsea ; andrefusing sustenance of every kind, diedof sorrow and starvation, in November,1772.The stature of Mossop was betweenthat of Garrick and Barry ; his personagreeable ; and his action, though notalways elegant, far from unpleasing.His countenance was stamped with amarked and peculiar expression, andhis large, full eye, was replete withmeaning. His voice was distinct in itsarticulation, and surpassed, in volumeand compass, that of all his competitors.His greatest drawback was the unnaturalposition of his arms, which appearedforeign to his body, and theawkward and unmeaning motions ofhis hands, which he continually busiedTHOMAS KING.in buttoning and unbuttoning' hiswaistcoat. He was, nevertheless, a greatand finished actor; although, to theEnglish reader, he is generally but littleknown, saxe through the cold descriptionof Davies, the panegyrist of Garrick,and the satire of Churchill. In Wolsey,Coriolanus, King John, Zanga, andPierre, his efforts were all but transcendent.In acting, it is said, he frequentlyworked himself up to a beliefthat he was the very person he represented; and, one night, after playingKing Richard, he flew into a violentpassion with his servant, who appearedbefore him with a small candle, andasked him if that was a taper fit to lighthis majesty to bed ?.THOMAS KING.THOMAS KING was born in London,of respectable parents, in August,1730. He was educated at WestminsterSchool ; and, at the age of seventeen,was articled to an attorney, with whom,however, he did not long remain; but,accompanied by Shuterr, joined a strollingcompany of players at Tunbridge.He continued, until the spring of 1748,playing in various itinerant companies,and encountering every species of distress; his parents being too indignantat his conduct to afford him any assistance.In June, 1748, he appeared at Windsor,where he was seen by Garrick,who engaged him at Drury Lane fortwo seasons. During the recess, heplayed Romeo, at Bristol, with suchsuccess, that Whitehead, the poet laureate,who witnessed the performance,appointed him to play Valerian, in hisplay of The Roman Father. Thinkinghimself, however, more suited to comedythan tragedy, he appeared, in September1750, in Dublin, as Ranger; andcontinued for many seasons the leadingcomedian there.In September, 1755, he became managerof the Bath Theatre ; was theremarried to a Miss Baker; and, inOctober, 1759, returned to Drury Lane.He was already a favourite with thepublic; but the manner in which he,soon after his re-appearance, performedLord Ogleby, at once raised him to thehighest eminence, as an actor. It issaid that Garrick had intended to playthe part himself; but not determiningon the style he should adopt, he desiredKing to try it. This was done, andGarrick was so pleased with the viewhe had taken of the character, that hedeclared, if King could support it inthe same style throughout, it would beone of the first comic parts on thestage. He now became the confidentialfriend of Garrick ; and was the constantprologue speaker, and generalmediator between the audience and themanager. When Garrick sold his sharein Drury Lane Theatre, King wishedto take his leave of the stage ; but thesubsequent reputation he acquired insustaining, amongst other characters,those of Puff, and Sir Peter Teazle, lefthim no cause to regret his remainingon it.In the summer of 1770-1, he becamemanager, and part proprietor of theBristol Theatre ; but sold his share in1771, and purchased three-fourths ofSadler's Wells; which he also disposedof on taking the management of DruryLane. This he relinquished in 1788;but resumed it in the latter part of thefollowing year ; having, in the interim,played to full houses at Edinburgh andDublin. He retired, finally, from themanagement of Drury Lane in 1801 ;and, in 1802, took his farewell of thestage, in the character of Sir PeterTeazle ; on which occasion he was presented,by his brother performers, witha silver cup and salver, bearing thisinscription from Shakspeare :If he be not fellow with the best King,Thou shalt find him the best King of good fellows.King died on the llth of December,1805, and was buried in the church-yardof St. Paul, Covent Garden.He is said to have been an intelligentand delightful companion, and to havepossessed a very amiable private character; the only drawback upon whichA C T O li S .was his inordinate love of gaining. Onone occasion he won 2,000; \vnen hemade a mort solemn declaration, bothto his wife and Mr. Garrick, that hewould never touch a dice-box again.He is even said to have given a bondto the former, with a heavy penalty,by way of forfeiture. However thismay be, it is certain he did not returnto his old habits until after the death ofGarrick, when he was tempted to becomea member of a club at Miles's,where he was eventually ruined. Hewas the author of a dramatic ode ;Love at First Sight, a farce, 1763; andWit's Last Stake, 1769.EDWARD Shutter.EDWARD Shutter was von aboutthe year 1730, according to his ownaccount, in a cellar near Covent Garden,and was the " offspring of achairman on one side, and an oyster-womanon the other." He subsequentlybecame a marker at a billiardtable, and was in this, or someother capacity, when Mr. Chapman, ofDrury Lane, perceiving strong marksof low humour about him, took him ashis apprentice. Another account informsus, that he was, in the earlierpart of his life, tapster at a public-housein the neighbourhood of CoventGarden ; and, whilst in that situation,obtained the patronage of a gentlemanunder the following circumstances:Shuterr was employed by thegentleman to call a coach for him, oneday. and happening to leave in it hisgold-headed cane, he came to inquire ofShuterr, the next morning, if he recollectedthe number of the vehicle. Ouractor, who was then no great adept infigures, except in his own way ofscoring up a reckoning, immediatelyreplied, " It was two pots of porter, ashillings-worth of punch, and a paperof tobacco." The gentleman lookingsurprised, Shuterr took out his chalk,and thus scored down his reckoning :4, 4, for two pots of porter, 0, for ashillings-worth of punch, and a lineacross the two pots of porter for a paperof tobacco; which formed the number410. The gentleman, we are told, inconsequence,recovered his cane ; andthinking it a pity that such acutenessof genius should be hidden, like a diamondin the mine, very generously gavehim an education, and thus enabledShuterr to shine in the profession whichhe afterwards adopted.Such is the popular anecdote ofShuterr's introduction to the stage; butwe are inclined to rely more on thefirst statement, which is from the pen ofa biographer writing whilst Shuterr wasyet alive, and some time previous tohis death. Following, therefore, thislatter authority, we find Shuterr, afterthe death of Mr. Chapman, joininga strolling company ; among which, byhis drolleries and good-nature, he soonacquired the appellation of Comical Ned.Afier a few years spent in the country,he was engaged at Drury Lane, wherehe played several characters, but, withthe exception oi Sharp, in The LyingValet, got little reputation by any ofthem. At length, Garrick gave himthe part of Stephen, in Every Man inhis Humour, in which he at once establishedhimself as a favourite withthe public. His subsequent characters,in which he chiefly distinguished himself,were, Scrub, Trapoiin, Clincher,Launcelot, Justice Clack, Midas, and,occasionally, Falstaff. " He was sothoroughly acquainted," says a criticalauthority, " with the vis ccmica, thathe seldom called in those common auxiliaries,grimace and buffoonery, butrested entirely upon genuine humour.His chief excellence lay in old men.He had strong features, and was happyin a peculiar turn efface, which, withoutany natural deformity, he threwinto many ridiculous shapes by variousalterations of the muscles of the cheek,or rather, of the mouth and nose. Naturediu a great deal for this actoreducation very little ; but the goodnessof his head was such, that lie dailyadvanced towards perfection." He diedon the 1st of November, 1776 ; involved,as we are told, through the levityWILL I AM SMITH.disposition, in numerous embarrassments.Shuterr was one of the most facetiousand good-natured of companions, andwas equally ready to laugh or belaughed at. After Churchill had satirisedhim in The Kosciad, he took thefirst opportunity of making merry withthe author, over a bottle. Being in disgrace,one night, with the audience, forsome irregularity in his performance,they demanded an apology, and vehementlycalled for him, after he hadmade his exit. At the time they werevociferating ' Shuterrrr, Shuterrrr !" an actresshappened to be the only personon the stage. when Shuterr, poking hishead out from behind one of the sidescene*, with his comical face, called out,Don't shoot her !" which put thespectators in a good humour with himfor the rest of the evening. Whilsttravelling across Finchley Common,one night, in the public conveyance,it was stopped by some highwaymen ;one of whom, opening the door, clappeda pistol to Sister's head, and demandedIris money. Immediately assumingthe air of a simpleton, ourcomedian, pointing to his fellow-travelleropposite, exclaimed, " Nnnkey pays forme,turnpikes and all;" upon which,the highwayman, transferring his pistolto the supposed uncle, who had justpretended to have fallen asleep, wokehim with a sharp blow on the face, andemptied his pockets of their contents.Shuetr is said to have been a devotedfollower of Whitefield, and to have expendedgreat part of his professionalemoluments in contributions to theMethodists.WILLIAM SMITH.WILLIAM SMITH, commonly calledGentleman Smith, was the son of awholesale grocer and tea-dealer in thecity, and was born about the year 1730.He was educated at Eton, and St. John'sCollege, Cambridge, with a view of enteringinto holy orders ; but his conduct Iat the university was marked by some 'eccentricities, which prevented this design1'rom taking effect. The immediatecause of his leaving college, was adrunken frolic with some other youngmen, which induced him, when pursuedby the proctor, to snap an unloadedpistol at him. For this offence he wassentenced to a punishment, to which hedid not choose u> submit ; and, in consequence,to avoid expulsion, left theuniversity, and came to London, withthe intention of trying his success onthe stage. He immediately put himselfunder the tuition of Barry, and on the1st of January, 1753, made his debut atCovent Garden, as Theodosius, in thetragedy of The Force of Love. Hisperformance was a decided hit, and,lor twenty-two years, he continued hiscareer at the same theatre, with increasingreputation.Soon after his appearance on thestage, he married a daughter of ViscountHinchinbrook ; an union, by which, it issaid, the lady's family considered herand themselves dishonoured. Mr. Smithimmediately called upon his wife's brother,and finding that he was only objectedto on the score of his being anactor, said, " that if the family he hadso much disgraced, would allow him, forlife, a sum equal to his theatrical acquisition,he would cease to dishonourthem ; but if not, having no other alternative,he must even follow that profession,disgraceful as it might appeariii their eyes, to prevent acts of greaterdishonour in his." The offer was, however,rejected, and the alliance, whichgave rise to it, was terminated by thelady's death in December, 1762.In the winter of 1774, he entered intoan engagement with Garrick, and continuedto play at Drury Lane until hisretirement in 1788, when he took leaveof the stage in the character of CharlesSurface. His marriage with a widowlady of large fortune was the reputedcause of his terminating his theatricalcareer, lie appeared, however, aboutten years after, for the benefit of hisfriend, King; when, notwithstandinghis increased size and great age, whichwas then within a year of seventy, heACTORS,is said to have gone through his partwith that spirit, ease, and elegance, forwhich he was unequalled. It is singular,that during the thirty-five yearshe continued upon the stage, he wasnever absent from London but oneseason ; nor ever performed out of themetropolis, except for one summer atBristol, after the death of Mr. Holland,and again, in the summer of 1774, whenhe went to Dublin. He died at BurySt. Edmund's, on the 13th of September,1819.As an actor, he has been well characterizedin Churchill's Rosciad, as " thegenteel, the airy, and the smart;" yetthis was not all the praise he merited.In tragedy, his Richard the Third,Hastings, and Hotspur, have been rarelyexcelled; and the same may be said ofhis Kitely, Oakley, and Charles Surface,in comedy. His representationof Kitely, indeed, a character in whichQuin and other eminent actors failed,was generally considered superior toGarrick's. His voice, though rich andfull, had a kind of monotony ; and hisaction, though ever easy, was not alwaysperfect; but the superior graceand elegance of his manners and appearance,were never equalled on thestage, and justly procured him the appellationof Gentleman Smith. He wasa gentleman also in feeling as well asappearance, and is said to have pridedhimself in the reflection, that he wasnever called upon to perform in anafter-piece, or required to pass througha trap-door in any entrance or exit onthe stage. Both before and after hisretirement, his chief diversion was fox-hunting.He was a legatee under thewill of the eccentric Lord Chatsworth,who bequeathed to him .200, a sumwhich is said greatly to have disappointedhis expectations.MRS. GEORGE ANNE BELLAMY.THIS lady was the daughter of Mrs.Bellamy, by Lord Tyrawley ; though,at the time of her birth, her motherhad not long been married to CaptainBellamy. " I was born," says the subjectof our memoir, " on St. George'sday, 1733, some months too soon forCaptain Bellamy to claim any degreeof consanguinity to me." So well,however, had her mother concealed herpregnancy from her husband, that,strange as it may seem, he had no ideaof her incontinence till the event tookplace which discovered it; when heimmediately left her in disgust, andnever saw her more. This was not theonly extraordinary circumstance in theelder Mrs. Bellamy's life. She was thedaughter of a rich quaker, named Seal ;who dying young, his widow marrieda Mr. Busby, who dissipated her property,and left her dependent uponfriends for support. Mrs. Godfrey,sister of the great Duke of Marlborough,undertook to bring up Miss Seal withher own daughter ; and both being sentto school together, the former remainedthere till the age of fourteen, when sheeloped with Lord Tyrawley. Under apromise of marriage, she continued toreside with him at his apartments inSomerset House; and had just givenbirth to a son, by his lordship, widenshe received information of his approachingunion with Lady Mary Stewart,in a letter from her father, the Earlof Blessings. That nobleman, whohad heard of Lord Tyra\\ ley's connexionwith Miss Seal, requested toknow from herself the particulars of it.She could think of no better way ofavenging herself than by sending to theearl every letter which had been writtento her by her lover, together with oneshe had that morning received by thesame post, and which she forwardedunopened. Lord Blessings's indignationmay be conceived, on readingthis, when he found, among other passages,one to the effect, that he (LordTyrawley) should stay no longer withhis intended wife, than was necessaryto receive her fortune ; that he hadmade choice of Lady Mary Stewart,who was both ugly and foolish, in preferenceto one with an equal fortune,who was beautiful and sensible, lest anunion with a more agreeable personMRS. BELLAMYmight be the means of decreasing hisaffection for Miss Seal. The earl receivedthe information too late to preventhis daughter's marriage; but shewas immediately separated from LordT crawley, who received no part of herexpected fortune ; and, soon after, wentout, in a diplomatic character, to Lisbon.Here, after many pressing solicitationson his part, Miss Seal resumed herconnexion with him ; but discoveringan intrigue he was carrying on with aSpanish lady, married Captain Bellamy,who had for some time professed anardent attachment for her.The child of such parents was notlikely to be surrounded with circumstancesfavourable to female virtue ;and it is not to be wondered at that shewas guilty of those errors and indiscretions,and underwent the variousvicissitudes and misfortunes, of whichshe has given so candid and interestingan account in her own Apology /or herLife. Shortly before her birth, her fatherwrote to his adjutant in Ireland, to requesthim to take care of the expectedchild as his ; and, if possible, to preventthe mother even seeing it. Accordingly,she was put out to nurse till shewas two years old ; and, at four, shewas sent to be educated in a conventat Boulogne. Just before leaving England,she was taken, by the maid servant,to visit her mother; who is saidto have pushed away the child, exclaiming,after looking at her, " MyGod ! what have you brought me here ?This goggle-eyed, splatter-faced, wretch is not my child!Take her away !" The subject of ourmemoir remained at Boulogne for sevenyears ; and, at the expiration of thatperiod; came to England, and residedwith an old domestic of her father, tillhis lordship's return from Portugal;when he received her in the most affectionatemanner, and took a smallhouse for her near Bushy Park. Theflattery of her father's visitors, whowere chiefly among the gay and witty,soon tainted her mind, and renderedher an easy dupe to the designs of themore experienced. The departure ofher father on an embassy to Russia, lefther in possession of an annual allowanceof 100, and under the protection of alady of quality, provided she held nointercourse with her mother. The elderMrs. Bellamy, however, found littledifficulty in persuading her daughter tocome and reside with her; in consequenceof which she lost both herannuity and the friendship of a kindprotectress, and was renounced by herfather.The stage having been the mother'schief support for some years, wasthought a probable one for the daughter,and she was accordingly introduced toMr. Rich ; who, upon hearing her repeatsome passages in Othello, engagedher as a performer. At the time of herengagement she was, to use her ownwords, just fourteen: of a figure notinelegant, a powerful voice, light as thegossamer, of inexhaustible spirits, andpossessed of some humour. The characterof Monimia was fixed upon forher appearance ; and, with this view, shewas introduced to Quin ; who, withoutdeigning to notice her, said contemptuouslyto Rich, " It will not do, sir."But it shall do, sir," replied Rich ;some further conversation passed, atthe end of which Quin observed to thesubject of our memoir, " Child, I wouldadvise you to play Serena, before youthink of Monimia." " This sarcasm,"she says, " raised my spirits, whichbefore were much sunk ; and I pertlyreplied, ' If I did, sir, I should neverlive to play the Orphan.' " Quin stillopposed her appearance ; and Richequally determined that it should takeplace In that character, ordered a rehearsalof The Orphan to be called, atwhich Quin refused to attend, Halemumbled over Castalio, Ryan whistledover Polydore, and every thing w : asdone by the company to annoy theprotege of the manager. The Orphan,however, was announced for performance; and the public having caughtsome intelligence of the manner inwhich the new debutante had beentreated, received her with an applausewhich so affected her, that the curtainwas dropped until she could recoverher confusion. The three first actspassed without her being able to makeherself heard beyond the side boxes;and Rich began to fear, what Quinconfidently anticipated a failure.When the manager found," says Mrs.Bellamy, " that I was unable to raisemy spirits, he was as distracted as if hisown fate, and that of his theatre, hadACTORS.depended upon it. He once more hadrecourse to persuasion and encouragement; but nothing could rouse me frommy stupidity till the foiath act. Thiswas the critical period which was to determinemy fate. By this criterion wasI, as an actress, to stand or fall ; when,to the astonishment of the audience, thesurprise of the performers, and the exultationof the manager, I felt myselfsuddenly inspired. I blazed out at oncewith meridian splendour; and I acquittedmyself throughout the whole ofthis most arduous part of the character,in which many veterans have failed,with the greatest eclat. Mr. Quin was sofascinated (as he expressed himself) atthis unexpected exertion, that he waitedbehind the scenes till the conclusion ofthe act; when, lifting me up from theground, in a transport, he exclaimedaloud, " Thou art a divine creature,and the true spirit is in thee !'' Theaudience likewise honoured me withthe highest marks of their approbation.As for Mr. Rich, he expressed as muchtriumph on this occasion, as he usuallydid on the success of one of his darlingpantomimes." But her warmest friendwas Quin ; he invited her to his house,sent her, anonymously, a handsomepecuniary present; and watched overher with a solicitude almost parental.Sending for her to his room, one day,at the theatre, he said to her, " My deargirl ; you are vastly followed, I hear.Do not let the love of finery, or anyother inducement, prevail upon you tocommit an indiscretion. Men, in general,are rascals ; you are young andengaging, and, therefore, ought to bedoubly cautious. If you want anythingin my power, which money can purchase,come to me, and say, JamesQuin, give me such a thing, and mypurse shall be always at your service."Our young actress excited a greatsensation in the town by her beautyand talents ; the nobility patronised herwith great liberality, and fame andfortune appeared equally within herreach. Among her admirers of anotherdescription were Lord Byron, and Mr.Montgomery, afterwards Sir GeorgeMetham, the former of whom had herconveyed, by stratagem, to some lodgingshe had taken for her; a circumstancewhich was so misrepresented intho newspapers, as to cause her temporarysecession from the stage, andalienation from her mother. She thenpaid a visit to a female relation atBraintree, in Essex; where she wasreconciled to her mother, and receiveda legacy of 300. She returned toLondon in 1745, and was immediatelyengaged by Mr. Sheridan to perform inDublin ; where she was recognised byMrs. O'Hara, Lord Tyrawley's sister,as her niece, and was introduced intothe first circles. Her reception at thetheatre was of the most flattering description; but her vanity was somewhatmortified, by Garrick's rejecting her forthe part of Constance, in King John,on the ground of her youth. The aristocraticparty took up her cause, andwould not go to see King John till shewas announced for the part of Constance; when the house could not receivethe numerous auditors who soughtadmission ; and when Garrick, afterwards,requested her to play Jane Shorefor his benefit, she declined, upon theplea that she was " too young."On her return to England, she wasagain engaged at Covent Garden; and,by the interposition of Mr. Quin, reconciledto Lord Tyrawley, who pressedher to marry a Mr. Crump, as being anadvantageous match. She, however,preferred eloping with Mr. Metham,who took an elegant house for her atYork, where she gave birth to a son ;and, in a few months afterwards, reappearedat Covent Garden Theatre,and was again reconciled to her father.Her re-appearance on the stage wasgreeted with loud applause; and, atthe approach of her benefit, she wasdesired to attend on the Prince andPrincess of Wales, who chose a play,and liberally rewarded her.The subject of our memoir had nowcontracted a taste for extravagance,which ultimately produced the mostdistressing consequences. Mr. Methamhad taught her to become, like himself,a gambler ; their mutual losses producedmutual reproaches and indifference ;and, being compelled to relinquish theirestablishment, a separation took place.Mrs. Bellamy, coming to London, wasengaged at Drury Lane ; and, at thesame time, set up a faro bank, theprofits of which soon enabled her torect em her jewels, and pay her debts,besides leaving a considerable residue.MRS. BELLAMYOn the opening of Drury Lane, sheplayed Juliet, to Ganick's Romeo, tora considerable number of rights; though(garrick is said to have engaged herrather as a counter-attraction to-thefavourite female actress at the otherhouse, than from his own sense of hermerits. She performed, about thistime, the principal female character inDr. Young's tragedy of The Brothers ;and on coming, at rehearsal, to the line,I will speak in thunder to you,she objected to it as absurd ; but thedoctor declared it was the most forcibleline in the piece, to which she replied,it would be much more so if he addedlightning.' The doctor,' however, wasprevailed upon to sacrifice the line, andended the contest with our actress, byinviting himself to dine with her.Although still living apart from Mr.Metham, she had not lost her partialityfor him ; and, on the first anniversaryof his birth-day, after their separation,invited him and other friends to anentertainment at her house. The festivityof the party vias, however, suddenlydestroyed," by Mr. Metham'sobserving, that the" dessert was toosumptuous ; upon which she made avow that, were he then to offer hishand, she would reject it ; and althoughhe called next day, his attempts werevain to conciliate her. She, soon after,formed a connexion with a Mr. Calcraft,with whom she lived about nine yearsand a half, upon his promise of marryingher; though, as-lie subsequentlydiscovered, he had still a wife living.It was commonly supposed," saysMr. Gait, " that t-he was married toCalcraft ; yet though regarded as thewife of a man in universal esteem, inthe enjoyment of fame, affluence, andevery luxury, she was now unhappy.Her heart lay cold, in the midst of allthe blandishments around her; and,with a gay and smiling countenance,her bosom was full of sorrow." Theconnexion was of more benefit to othersthan to herself; her cleverness and sagacityenabled her materially to augmentthe fortune of Mr. Calcraft, andto exert her influence in so many ways,that she may be considered as the MaryAnne Clarke of the day ; though herexertions were generally in the causeot benevolence. The meanness of Mr.Calcrait, in refusing to pay some housekeepingexpenses, at length caused herso much disgust, that she determinedto leave him ; and, accordingly, afterthe birth of their son, Henry Fox Cal-craft,to whom Mr. Fox stood sponsor,she went to Bristol, intending to returnno more. She admits, however, thather own extravagance was boundless;and that her poverty was not less owingto her own imprudence, than to themeanness and injustice of those withwhom she was connected.During the time she continued to livewith Mr. Calcraft, she still continuedto pursue her career on the stage ; andto her performance of Cleon, wasmainly owing the success of Dudley'stragedy of that name. Whilst at Bristol,she accepted an engagement at Dublin,where she formed a connexion withDigges, the actor. She returned withhim to London ; but getting deeplyin debt, was obliged to leave it, andproceed to Scotland, where she performedat Edinburgh and Glasgow.On her return to London, she separatedfrom Dirges, and was re-engaged atCovent Garden; but she was no longerattractive, ana! the managers began tolook with indifference on her services.About this time, her mother, andMr. Calcraft, died; the latter leavingher nothing by his will, but merelymentioning her as the mother of hischildren. She now took lodgings atLambeth, where Woodward, the actor,boarded with her; and at his death, in1777, he left her all his plate, &c., anda reversion, on the death of his mother,of 700; " the whole of which, except59," we are told, in her Apology, " shelost through the chicanery of the law."She is said to have been also left afortune, of several thousand pounds, bya Mr. Sykes, who died in France ; butwas deprived of it by the villany of hisservant, who absconded with his willand effects. Her distress, at length,drove her to a state of desperation. " Ihad now," she says, " parted with everythingthat I could raise a shilling upon ;and poverty, with all her horrid trainof evils, stared me in the face. In thisdreadful situation, worn Ost with calamity,and terrified with the gloomyprospect which presented itself to myview, I endeavoured to persuade myselfthat suicide could not be a crime."ACTORSShe, accordingly, one night, left herlodgings privately, with the intention ofdrowning herself in the Thames ; andwas sitting on the steps of one of thebridges, calmly reconciling herself tothe decision she had come to, " when,"she says, " I was suddenly roused frommy awful reverie, by the voice of awoman, at some little distance, addressingher child. In a soft, plaintive tone,she said, ' How, my dear, can you cryto me for bread, when you know I havenot even a morsel to carry your dyingfather?' She then exclaimed, in all thebitterness of woe, ' My God ! my God !what wretchedness can compare tomine ! But thy Almighty will be done !' "These last words had such an effectupon her own mind, that she immediatelyburst into tears; and, renouncingher intention of suicide, tranquillizedher mind by prayer, andreturned home, comparatively cheerful.An advertisement in the paper was themeans of procuring her immediate relief;but Mr. Metham, now become SirGeorge, not only refused to assist her,but even to furnish her with money tobuy mourning for the death of theirson, which occurred about this time.A free benefit, which the players gave j 1her, on the 24th of May, 1785, was thelast public relief which she experienced ;she was again imprisoned for debt, in1786, aid died in 1788.Should the relation of my errors,and their consequences," says Mrs.Bellamy, in her Apology, " prove a documentto my own sex ; warn them toshun the paths I have pursued; andinspire them with a greater degree ofprudence and reflection than I havebeen possessed of; I shall have employedmy time to some good purpose.The certain effects of an inattention toa prudential system are, poverty, distress,anxiety, and every attendant evil,as I have most severely experienced.May the world (particularly my readers)have the same indulgence and compassionfor me which I have unremittinglyshewn to others ! And maySterne's recording angel drop the tearof pity, and obliterate my faults !" Itshould be observed, that the letter fromwhich this quotation, and the precedingnarrative, is taken, have been ascribedto Alexander Bicknell, the editor ofCarver's Travels in Africa; howeverthis may be, " few sketches of biography,"as Mr. Gait observes, " moreemphatically tell their moral."ANNE CRAWFORD.THIS distinguished actress, betterknown in the theatrical world underher second husband's name of Barry,was the daughter of an eminent apothecaryat Bath, where she was bornin the year 1734. As her father wasfond of giving parties, and went muchinto fashionable society, his daughter,who possessed great beauty, excitedmuch notice; and when she was onlyseventeen years old. a gentleman oflarge fortune became her acceptedlover. Not long, however, after he hadoffered his hand, business called him toLondon, whence he never returned tofulfil his engagement ; and, in consequence,the subject of our memoir sufferedfor a time considerably in herhealth. To recruit this, and raise herspirits, she was sent on a visit to thehouse of an uncle in Yorkshire, whereshe won the heart of Mr. Dancer, themanager of the playhouse in a neighbouringtown, and having imbibed afondness for theatricals herself, marriedhim. The union gave displeasure toher family, who used their utmost exertionsto prevent her public appearanceon the stage. To escape their importunities,she went with her husbandto Dublin, and made her first appearanceat the Crow Street Theatre,then just opened under the managementof Woodward and Barry. Herearliest parts were in comedy ; andafter having been emboldened by alittle encouragement to lay aside hernatural timidity, she soon became afavourite.An anecdote told of her at this time,forms, in the dearth of matter whichwe can term biographical, a prominentANNE CRAWFORDfeature in her history. On the samestage with herself, was a dancer of thename of Pointer, with whom andanother lady, she, one day, by permissionof her husband, took an excursioninto the country. Mr. Dancer,however, being informed by some good-naturedfriend, " that something morethan amusement was intended as theobject of the excursion," went posthasteafter the party, and rushing intothe inn of the town, where they hadarrived before him, demanded his wife.Mrs. Dancer, alarmed at his threats,retreated into a bed-chamber, followedby Mr. Pointer, whose protection shehad invoked, and who imprudentlylocked the door upon her husband.This was at length broken open ; butwhether," says the relator of thisanecdote, " from seeing the partner ofhis heart in distress, or the fear ofmeeting the contents of a pistol, whichhis antagonist held in opposition to his,he quietly conducted her out of theroom, placed her in a post-chaise, anddrove to town." The above circumstancegave occasion to various caricaturesin Dublin, and among the punsand epigrams, with which the newspaperswere filled on the occasion, wasthe following :When Rosalind chose from Champanfi to fly,None had blam'd, had she pleas'd or her ear or hereye;But who for that fair one soft pity can feel,Whose passion's not fixed on the head.but the heel .'Her first choice, 'tis true, shew'd corruption of taste,But an utter depravity reigns in the last.Their how for her sense or her taste can we answer,Who, twice in her life, has gone off with a Dancer ?Mrs. Dancer soon after received sometempting offers, in a pecuniary sense, toinduce her to quit her husband ; butBarry had entirely engaged her affections,and coming with him to London,in 1766, she made her first appearancethere at the King's Theatre, as Desde-mona, to his Othello. The performancetook so well with the town, that bothwere soon after engaged at Drury Lane,at very large salaries, and the subject ofour memoir rose to the rank of one ofthe first actresses of the day. At whattime she became the wife of Barry isnot stated in any memoir extant ofher ; she took his name, after they hadbeen a season or two in London ; andwe may presume, therefore, that herhusband was dead at the time. Mrs.Barry was almost as successful in comedyas in tragedy, and she was receivedwith equal applause in LadyTownley, Beatrice, Rosalind, Belvedere,Monimia, Heroine, and Zenobia.Davies, writing whilst she was stillalive, says, "Every spectator of Zenobiamust confess that it was not possibleto say too much of her inimitableperformance. Mrs. Barry knowsperfectly well the ready avenues tothe heart, and can rouse every latentspring of human fee-ling ; she, if anyactress can, will force lamentations fromthe obdurate, and sensibility from thebrutal ! "In 1774, Mrs. Barry removed withher husband to Covent Garden, andafter the death of the latter, in 1777,she continued to maintain her formerpre-eminence, and was supposed tohave accumulated a handsome fortune.Whatever might have been the extentof her wealth, it was soon dissipatedafter her marriage with Mr. Crawford,a gentleman by birth, but afterwardsan actor and manager at Dublin. Mrs.Crawford, after performing some timein Dublin, and seeing all her propertygone, left her husband, and returned toLondon, where she was engaged, atCovent Garden, as a rival to Mrs.Siddons, then just coming into notice.The competition was unjust ; for theformer was then in the decline, and thelatter in the zenith of her powers : yet,in comedy, Mrs. Crawford was stillthought to be superior to Mrs. Siddons,and even in the pathetic partsof tragedy. Mrs. Crawford died at herapartments in Queen Street, Westminster,on the 29th of December, 1801 ;and was buried, at her own request,near the remains of Mr. Barry, in WestminsterAbbey.WILLIAM PARSONS.WILLIAM PARSONS was born atMaidstone, of respectable parents, inthe year 1735. After having beeneducated at St. Paul's School, he wasapprenticed to an eminent apothecaryin London, but not liking his profession,paid more attention to drawing, ofwhich, at the age of fourteen, he wasparticularly fond. He also paintedwith considerable talent, and executedseveral landscapes, about this time, ofmore than ordinary merit. It doesnot appear whether or not lie completedthe term of his apprenticeship, or whatmade him turn his thoughts to thestage; but we find him, at the age oftwenty, performing at Edinburgh, andcelebrated for his acting in old men.Here he married a lady, double hisown age, named Price, an excellentactress in low comedy, and under whosetuition he quickly advanced in publicfavour. In 1763, they were both engagedby Garrick, to appear at DruryLane, where Parsons made his debfttin the part of Filch, and his wife her's,in that of Mrs. Pef.chum. His performancegained him immediate reputation,for, "notwithstanding," says oneof his biographers, " there was whatwas thought a finished Filch, at theother house, Parsons so enriched thischaracter by his dress, manner, and thepeculiar knowing vulgarity of his language,as promised him to turn out aconsiderable acquisition to the list oflow comedians." Garrick perceivinghis abilities, both encouraged and instructedhim ; and to avail himself of thegreat Roscius's tuition, Parsons declinedall summer engagements in the country.He was, for many seasons, the chiefsupport of Mr. Colman's company atthe Haymarket, and in his peculiarline, was unrivalled by any performerof his day.After the death of his first wife,which occurred in 1787, he marriedDorothy, one of the three daughtersof the Hon. James Stewart, brother tothe Karl of Galloway. This lady hadescaped from a convent at Lisle, whereshe had been placed by her brother,and coming to London, met accidentallywith Parsons, who married her at Lee,in Kent. He was, at this time, possessedof a tolerable income, which was subsequentlyincreased by a small paternalestate, into the possession of which hecame, on the death of his mother, in1790. His own took place at his housein Mead Row, Lambeth, on the 3rd ofFebruary, 1795. He was survived byone son, the offspring of his secondwife, to whom he left property to theamount of 4QQ a-year. The" disconsolatewidow married her son's tutorwithin four days after the death ofPersons; so that, we are informed, shehad, for some days, a dead and a livinghusband in the house at the same time.Parsons had considerable taste inpictures, and is said to have made muchof his fortune by buying and selling theworks of the old masters. His owndrawings and paintings, were sold atChristie's auction room, and fetcheda tolerable price. From a print of himwhich we have seen, we should imaginehe must have looked irresistibly comicalin certain characters. He excelledchiefly in Foresight, Sir Fretful Plagiary,Doiley, &c., and infused into theseparts a greater portion of the genuinevis comica than any other contemporaryperformer. " It happens," says acritic of that day, " with most actors,who perform in" disguised characters,such as buffoons, old men, &c., that, ifthey imitate the outlines of such a part,they are at liberty to fill it as theyplease ; this license often gives rise toaffectation, and unnatural acting; butParsons, by a happy attention to all theminutiae of his cast, shows a finishedpicture of dotage, avarice, or whateverinfirmity or passions he would represent; the tottering knee, the suddenstare, the pleading look, nay, thetaking out the handkerchief, all proclaimhim a finished actor in his walk.Where can, for instance, be a finer illustrationof Sir Sampson Legend's accountof him, in the character of Old Fore-francesAbingdon.sight, in Love for Love, where he | perhaps, the best picture of a ploddingasks ' On what old nail, now, my astronomer in the cabinets of theNostradamus, are you poring ?' than curious." Parsons, however, possessedParsons shows you, at that time, in his a greater portion of art than nature,face and attitude ? An engraving taken but art displayed with so much him at this moment, would be, ment, as to appear like the latter.FRANCES Abingdon.TL HIS actress, whose maiden name wasBarton, was born in 1735, and at the ageof fourteen, on the death of her mother,went to reside with a female relation ofher father's, in Sheppard Street, GoldenSquare. After a stay of three years,she quitted this place, together with ayoung companion of her own sex, whohad promised to introduce her to themanager of one of the theatres. Beingdisappointed in this expectation, shewas reduced to the most degradingmeans of obtaining a sustenance ; andit is asserted, that she actually soldoysters from a tub. After having performedwith some strolling companies,she was, in 1752, engaged to perform atthe Haymarket, where she first appearedas Miranda, in The Busy Body,in .which part she gained the highestapplause. In 1755, she acted at Bath ;and, during the summer of the sameyear, was engaged by Mr. Lacy, Garrick'spartner, to perform at DruryLane ; where she made a very successfuldebUt as Lady Pliant, in The DoubleDealer ; and was shortly afterwardsmarried to Mr. James Abingdon.In 1759, she transferred her servicesto the Dublin stage, and soon becamethe chief theatrical favourite of thatcity. On her benefit night, so greatwas the encouragement she experienced,that the pit was made intoboxes, and the overflow enormous. Somuch, indeed, was she the rage, thatmany female ornaments were made byher name, and the Abingdon cap isnot forgotten at the present day.About 1761, being at variance withher husband, she formed an intimacywith Mr. Needham, a member of parliament,and continued to reside withhim till his death, when he left her aportion of his fortune. Afier this event,she was re-engaged at Drury Lane,and continued to act with applause, bothat that theatre and Covent Garden,until her retirement from the stage, in1799. She died on the 4th of March,1815, at her apartments in Pall Mall,and was buried in St. James's Churchyard.Mrs. Abingdon possessed an elegantfigure, and naivete of manners that wasextremely delightful. Her voice washarsh ; but this defect was greatly rectifiedby the superlative tact she evincedin modulating its tones. Her articulationwas distinct and impassioned,and, in characters requiring sarcasm,arch playfulness, somewhat violentvivacity, piquante expression, andquickness of repartee, she stood unrivalled.As the finished lady andromping chambermaid, she was equallyat home. Although a woman of fierceand ungovernable passions, she waspossessed of very many virtues ; amongthe most prominent of which was herfilial affection.Her principal characters were, LadyTownley. The Widow Belmont, LadyRacket, and she is once said to haveperformed Scrub ; though she took greatpains afterwards to conceal the circumstance.Davies, speaking of Mrs.Abingdon, when alive, says, " To thegoodness of her understanding, and thesuperiority of her taste, she is indebtedprincipally for her power of pleasing.Congreve's Millamant of past times,she has skilfully modelled and adaptedto the admired coquette and livelytyrant of the present day. All ageshave their particular colours and variationsof follies and fashions. These sheunderstands perfectly, and dresses themto the taste of the present hour. InShakspeare's Beatrice, she had difficultiesto encounter, and prejudices to'' conquer. Remembrance of Mrs. Prit-actors.chard's excellence in that favourite parthad stamped a decisive mark on themode of representing it ; notwithstandingthis, Mrs. Abingdon, knowing herown peculiar powers of expression,would not submit to an imitation of thatgreat actress, but exhibited the part accordingto her own ideas ; nor did shefail of gaining great applause whereverher judgment directed her to point outthe wit, sentiment, or humour of Beatrice."MARY YATES.MARY, or Moll Graham, as this ladyis said to have been familiarly called inher maiden state, was born, accordingto one of her biographers, in London,in 1737; according to others, at Birmingham,in 1728. She is said to havereceived a good education, and to havemade her first appearance on the stage,in London, in 1754 ; but here again ourauthorities differ : another of themstating her to have made her theatricaldebut at Dublin, in 1752 ; and, a third,that she was engaged at Drury Lane, ata still earlier period, under the doublecharacter of dresser and mute, at asalary of 20s. per week. At Dublin,we are told, her performance was soindifferent, that Mr. Sheridan, themanager, was glad to dissolve her engagementby a present. " The ladyherself," says one of her biographers,thought Mr. Sheridan's opinion veryjust, and despaired of ever attainingany degree of eminence in the theatricalline ; for, at that time, her voice wasvery weak, and her figure incumberedwith corpulence : accordingly, she gaveup her theatrical pursuits ; but, as theearly part of her life was marked withunhappiness, it is supposed that necessityurged her to another attempt, asshe became a candidate at Drury Lane,on the 25th of February, 1754,' in thecharacter of Julia, the first night of therepresentation of the tragedy of Virginia,when an occasional prologue was spokenby Mr. Garrick, in which he mentionedthe fears and diffidence of the newactress." She was not very successfulin her first appearance ; and though shesubsequently played Jane Shore, andother important parts in tragedy, wasdismissed the ensuing season. On hermarriage, however, with Mr. Yates,under whose instruction she considerablyimproved in her histrionic talents,Mr. Garrick received her back, with herhusband, and both were assigned prominentparts. With experience, Mrs.Yates gained confidence; and, frombeing so meek as to seem quite insusceptibleof resentment upon any occasion,became, it is said, as remarkablefor the high impetuosity of her temper.The illness of Mrs. Cibber afforded heran opportunity of displaying her powersin several new characters; and in thatof Mandane, in The Orphan of China,she at once fixed her reputation. Thedeath of Mrs. Cibber, in 1766, leftMrs. Yates in complete possession ofthat lady's parts, and she remained thefavourite actress of the day, notwithstandingthe powerful rivalry of Mrs.Barry. On Mr. Powell's becomingmanager of Covent Garden, Mr. andMrs. Yates were engaged by that gentleman; the former at 10 per weekand a benefit, and 'the latter at 500for the season and a benefit. She retiredfrom the stage in 1785, her lastperformance being at Drury Lane, forMrs. Bellamy's benefit, and died at herhouse in Pimlico, on the 3rd of May,1787.Mrs. Yates's tragic powers were veryextensive ; she is said to have performed,with success, in at least ninety differentcharacters. Whether in the injuredvindictive Margaret of Anjou ; the ambitiousLady Macbeth ; the tenderlymaternal Andromache ; the raving Constance; the despairing Horatio ; thesublime Medea ; the proud Semiramis ;the accomplished Lady Townley ; or thegentle, bashful Viola, we are told shewas equally at home. It was in suchcharacters,' however, as Margaret ofAnjou, Constance, and Semiramis, thatshe principally excelled; and, possibly,in those parts of tragedy, where rageand imperiousness call for portraiture,THOMAS Weston.she had no equal; but in Juliet, Imogen,Desdemona, and other similarcharacters, she was ti r error to Mr.-.Woffington, Mrs. Cibber, and Mr.Barry. Speaking of the tragedy ifThe Earl of Warwick, Davies says,'When the play was acted, notwithstandingall the dazzling show ofEdward's grandeur, and Warwick'spopular speeches, Mrs. Yates acted socharacteristically, displayed such grandeurof mind, pride of behaviour, resentmentof injury, and dignity ofaction, that the other characters seemedto be totally eclipsed ; the audience wasfull of admiration of the unfortunatequeen ; who, in the last scene, seemedto triumph over all her enemies." Asto her person, if we are to believe theauthor of Authentic Memoirs of thelate Mrs. Yates, printed in The Gentleman'sMagazine, it was " beautifuleven to the most poetical idea of beauty;"whilst, in private life, there was scarcelya virtue which she did not possess. Thewhole memoir, indeed, is a fulsomepanegyric ; in which, scarcely any otherfacts are recorded, than the date of herbirth and death, and the differentplaces of her residence. The author,indeed, tells us that, " Having profitedof the great models in England, shepassed twice into France, to have theadvantage of seeing Clairon and DuMesnil in their most celebrated characters;" but here ends all biographicalnotice of Mrs. Yates.All that we are enabled to add,besides the particulars stated in theforegoing memoir, is, that she certainlydid possess great personal attractions,but, if one of our authorities is to be reliedon, her charms attracted admirerswho were not so readily repulsed as theauthor of Authentic Memoirs wouldlead us to infer. We may add that,great as this actress undoubtedly was,she once performed in The PlainDealer, with Holland, King, Weston,and Miss Pope, to an audience, consisting,at the beginning the play, of fourpersons only, in the whole tier of boxes,about seventy in the upper boxes,eighteen in the pit, and about one hundredin the galleries.THOMAS WESTON.THOMAS WESTON was the son ofthe chief cook ot' King George theSecond, and was born about the year1737. He evinced a predilection forthe stage as early as his sixteenth year,and performed Pilchard the Third,and other tragic characters, at a privatetheatre, with an applause, which hisperformances did not merit, as his fortelay quite in another line. Through theinfluence of his father, Weston obtainedthe place of turn broach or turnspit inthe king's kitchen, where he was alsoan under-clerk ; but being able to gethis duties performed by deputy, gaveall his time to acting, play-going, andstreet brawls. He was soon involvedin debts, which his father consented topay, on condition of his going to sea,as a midshipman ; but he had not beenlong on board, before he escaped by astratagem, and returning to London,enlisted in an itinerant company, withwhich he visited several towns, gaininggreat applause in the character of Scrub,but, to his indignation and mortification,nothing but laughter and hisses in thatof Richard. Distress soon drove himto London, with the intention of returninghome ; but meeting with anold schoolfellow, who lent him fiveguineas, he went back to the country,and resumed his strolling career. Againdestitute, he once more found his wayto the metropolis ; and recruited hisfinances by an engagement at a boothin Bartholomew Fair.His next appearance was at theHay market, in 1760, when he marrieda lady belonging to the same theatre,and soon after obtained considerablereputation by his performance of JerrySneak, a part which Foote is said tohave written expressly for him. Fromthe Haymarket he went to Dublin,and after playing with his wife atseveral provincial towns in Ireland,was engaged at Drury Lane, at a salaryA G 1 k S .of 3 per week. Here, during theabsence of Garrick in Italy, he performedAbel Drugger, in a mannerscarcely excelled, and, in the opinion ofsome, not equalled by that eminentactor. He was fast rising in publicestimation, when his dissipated habits,and consequent involvements, fromwhich the managers had more thanonce relieved him, caused such irregularitiesin his attendance at the theatre,that it was found expedient to dismisshim. Garrick, however, received himback again, and a night was appointedfor his benefit, but some fresh exigenciesprevented his appearance, and the performancenever took place. Footeraised a subscription for him, of 70,but he was soon in debt again, andwhen the Haymarket season commenced,he was obliged to enter thetheatre by the upper windows of thedressing rooms, from the roof of theadjoining Tennis Court, in order toavoid the bailiffs. One of these gentlemenhaving succeeded in surprisinghim in the lobby, " Follow me," saidWeston, " to MY. Foote, and he willeither pay your demand, or give security.The bailiff followed, but oncomingto the dark passages behind theboxes, was soon distanced by Weston,who locked the door communicatingwith the stage, fled across it, and madehis escape through Foote's house. Abenefit which he had shortly afterwards,brought him jl80, with which startedfor Edinburgh, to fulfil an engagementwith Foote, who had taken the theatrethere, for three years. His salary inthe Scottish metropolis was 5 a week,and he had every reason to be pleasedwith his sojourn there, as he became agreat favourite, and was honoured witha large attendance at his benefit.On his return to London, he wasengaged, upon the same salary, at DruryLane ; but though he was now reapingaltogether from his professional labours,not less than 600 per annum, thebailiffs were constantly at his heels, andthe managers called upon to releasehim as frequently as before. Tired out,they at length determined to leave himto his fate ; but Weston was not to beso got rid of: persuading a bailiff, whohad arrested him that day. to accompanyhim to the gallery of Drury Lane,he waited till an apology was made forhis absence, on a plea of illness, whenspringing up on his seat, he told theaudience his real situation, and soexcited their sympathy, that the managerswere obliged to procure hisrelease, and let him appear as advertised.In this manner he went on tothe last, still continuing such a favouritewith the public, as almost to compelthe managers to purchase his servicesat any sacrifice. Being afraid to makehis appearance in the streets beforeSunday, he used to spend almost allhis time in bed during the six days,and when the Sabbath came, wouldsally out and celebrate his temporaryfreedom by the grossest excesses.Latterly, he never performed withouttaking a dram ; and when Foote oncetook his bottle from him, and broke iton the floor, he refused to go on thestage till another had been suppliedhim. Unaltered in his habits, he diedpoor, but not in the destitution hemerited, on the 18th of January, 1776.Weston, as a low comedian, stoodunrivalled. " His walk, however," saysMr. Gait, " was very narrow ; beingthat of dry, vulgar simplicity, but inthis he had no equal on the stage. Inhis Jerry Sneak, Drugger, Scrub, &c.,lie exhibited so palpable a simplicity ofnature in his person, voice, and manner,that, contrary to all other actors, thelonger and more intensely he was seen,the more he seemed to confirm thespectator in the opinion, that he wasnot an actor, but the real person herepresented ; at times supporting thisdelusion in a manner so peculiarly hisown, that in those ludicrous distresseswhich low comedy occasionally affords,he seemed to feel so piteous a pusillanimity,that after the bursts of laughterwere over, his abjectness moved almostto pity."His private character has been sufficientlydeveloped in the foregoingmemoir ; it was unadulterated low ;and, as a man, he may be dismissedwith the contempt due to one who, notless a sensualist than a spendthrift, wasmore of a glutton than a drunkard; andwhose only generosity consisted in hissharing with others, what principlewould have taught him, was not ibisown to divide.JOHN HENDERSON.JOHN HENDERSON.JpHN HENDERSON, the son of anIrish factor, settled in London, wasborn in Goldsmith Street, Cheapside,in February, 1747. His father died theyear after his birth, and left Mrs. Hendersonand two sons, with the interestof less than 1,000, for the support ofthem all. With this small pittance, sheretired to Newport Panel, in Buckinghamshire,where she devoted herselfentirely to her children. The subjectof our memoir received the chief partof his education from his mother; whotaught him to recite, with judgment,passages from the best poets, particularlyShakspeare: To this circumstancemay be traced Henderson's predilectionfor the art in which he was subsequentlyso conspicuous ; and he frequently congratulatedhimself that his mother'sedition of the great dramatist, waswithout notes ; which, he said, onlyconfused him afterwards, and wouldhave crazed him at the time.When about eleven years of age, hewent, for a twelvemonth, loan academyat Hemel Hempstead, where he acquiredsome knowledge of French,which completed his slender education,and he was then sent to London, andplaced as a kind 01 house-pupil, withan eccentric drawing-master, namedFournier, by whom he was chiefly employedin deriving him about in "a gigand grooming his horse. While in thissituation, however, he made a pen andink drawing, which gained him thesecond premium from the Society forthe Encouragement of Arts. He afterwardswas employed by a silversmith,whose death leaving him, at twentyyears of age, with no determinate pursuit,he resolved to try his success onthe stage. He made his first appearancein a barn at Islington, where lierecited Garrick's Ode to Shakspeare,with such close mimicking of the author,that it was almost impossible to distinguishit from the original.About 1772, he made strenuous endeavoursto get an engagement a; il-.etheatres, but found " managers as difficultof access as ministers of state."His admirable mimicry of Garrick wasalso a considerable impediment to hisobtaining anv notice from that greatactor : but after much intercession offriends, he procured a recommendationfrom him to Palmer, who was thenmanager of the Bath Theatre ; wherehe appeared on the 6th of October,1772, under the assumed name ofCourtney, in the character of Hamlet.He was well received, and must havepreviously excited considerable expectationsamongst his friends, as severalof them went from London to witnesshis debut.During the season, he played thethen usual range of characters, bothtragedy and comedy, with great success,though with unequal ability.Amongst the most opposite may bementioned, Hamlet and Boabdil, Benedictand Macbeth. Colman the elder,seems, at this time, to have attackedhim with some of that contemptiblesatire, which only fixes either on impoverishedcircumstances or some pettyfoible. Henderson was, however, amplycompensated by the general approbation,and was offered a fourth share ofthe theatre, winch he declined fromprudential motives.At the close of the season, he returnedto London, and Garrick, who was desirousto hear his famous imitations,invited him to breakfast, and after beingdelighted with his mimicry of others,begged to hear a specimen of himself.Henderson imprudently complied, andso offended the vain manager, that hesuffered the former to return unengagedto Bath, where he continued a great andincreasing favourite. He might havehad, it is said, an engagement at DruryLane ; but declined playing secondarycharacters, while Garrick performed atthe same theatre.In the summer of 1776, he played atBirmingham with Mrs siddons ; andon the llth of June, 1777, he made hisfire appearance on the London boards,at the theatre in the Haymarket, thenACTORS,belonging to Colman, who imposed onhim the character of Shylock ; a partagainst which he and his friends remonstrated.The result, however, justifiedthe manager's judgment. Hendersonwas immediately the " rage," and attractedcrowded and fashionable audienceseven in the dog-days. Colmanappears to have amply compensated forhis illiberal remarks, "on his first seeingHenderson, by his subsequent kindness;but this met with an ill return from thesubject of our memoir, who mimickedthe manager at his own table, after thelatter had exerted unusual liberality ingiving him a free benefit.In the winter of 1777, Henderson wasengaged by Sheridan, at Drury Lane,at jlO per week, a salary not equal tothat given to Gentleman Smith. In thesummer of 1778, he visited Ireland,where he was received with enthusiasmby the higher classes, but did not drawvery good houses. He says, in one ofhis letters, " my spirits have been inone state of the most delicious delirium,ever since I reached this shore ;" anddescribes his lodgings as crowded bypeople of the first consequence. On hisreturn to England, in 1779, he marrieda Miss Higgins, of Cheltenham, Somers; and, at the close of the sameyear, he removed to Covent Garden, ata salary of ]2 a week, and performedseveral new characters.In the summer of 1780, he went toLiverpool ; and returning to CoventGarden, performed for the first time,lago, which, with the opposite part ofFalstaff, were his chef-d'oeuvres. In1781, he was not engaged at any of thetheatres, and employed himself in theperusal of our old dramatists. In 1783,he played Tamerlane to John Kemble'sBajazet; and, in the following year,went to Edinburgh, where he was wellreceived. In the Lent season of 1785,he and the elder Sheridan gave publicreadings at the Freemason's Tavern ;which were very popular, and whichproduced them 800. It is said, Henderson,by this means, gave celebrity toseveral works which had not previouslybeen noticed ; and amongst others, toCowper's Johnny Gilpin ; of which onebookseller immediately sold six thousandcopies, although it had been printedsome years before. In the summer heagain visited Dublin ; and whilst there,read Sterne's story of Le Fere to thecourt. On his return, he entered intoan engagement with Mr. Harris, uponvery profitable terms, but did not longreap the benefit of them, dying on the25th of November, 1785. He was buriedon the 3rd of December following, inWestminster Abbey, near Johnson andGarrick; the chapter and choir, andseveral literati attending.Henderson appears to have been anagreeable and estimable man, combining,with remarkably good humour,manners of so winning a kind asto secure the friendship of the mostopposite men. His friend and biographer,Ireland, states his failings tohave been a somewhat exuberance ofvanity, and an inclination to be inflatedby the unbounded admiration withwhich he was latterly regarded. Headds, his spirits, though generally high,were subject occasionally to very painfuldepression.As an actor, he possessed versatilepowers ; but he is generally consideredto have excelled in comedy. Likemany great men of his profession, liehad several personal defects to overcome.His height was below the commonstandard ; his form was not compact,nor well proportioned ; he " hada moist eye, a fleshy face ;" and hisvoice was neither particularly sweetnor strong. His power lay entirely inhis intellect ; he grasped, with all thepromptness and fulness of original conception,the character he attempted; andhis imagination, tempered by a severeand delicate taste, gave a fulness, depth,and richness to his portrayal, which was,probably, never surpassed ; and, in theintricate part of Falstaff. never equalled.He not only uttered the words withunexampled force, but gave endless embellishmentsby the most characteristiclooks and motions. He utterly despisedstage trick ; discarded all assistancefrom costume : and neglected theusual accomplishments of the stage ;yet no actor ever had more powerover both the tears and smiles of hisaudience. His Hamlet was full of theprofoundest taste and feeling ; his lagowas equally characteristic ; and JohnKemble pronounced his Shylock to bethegreatest effort he ever witnessed onthe stage. His delivery must have beenvery fine, as his reading was as popularJOHN PAL M E R ,as h ; .s acting. His defects are said tohave been an occasional sawing of theair, and latterly, a habit of impregnatingevery character with a tinge ofFalstaff. Like all the truly great actors,he worshipped Shakspeare, and neverperformed so well as when portrayinghis powerful characters.JOHN PALMER.JOHN PALMER was the son of aprivate in the first regiment of guards,who afterwards held the station of doorkeeperat Drury Lane Theatre, andwas born in the parish of St. Luke,Old Street, in the year 1747. Seeingmuch of the stage in his youth, heimbibed a predilection for a theatricallife, which his father, who wished himto enter the army, in vain tried to overcome.Nor was he more influenced toalter his choice, by the opinion ofGarrick, who, after seeing him rehearsepart george Barnwell, and Mercutio,in hopes of an engagement at DruryLane, told him, he was not at allqualified to shine in a theatre.Though he declined, however, enteringthe army, he so far took the hintof the great "Roscius, as to engage himselfin the service of a print seller, onLudgate Hill, with a view of becominga painter. But his fondness for thestage returned at the end of a twelvemonth,and being allowed to speakBucks, have at ye all !" at his father'sbenefit, he was well received, andimmediately got a small engagement.He was soon after introduced, to Foote,who, after hearing him rehearse, toldhim that his tragedy was d d bad,but that his comedy might do ; andaccordingly engaged him. He madehis debut as Harry Scamper, in Foote'splay of The Orators, arid was receivedwith sufficient applause to induce themanager to retain him until the closeof the season. He then applied toGarrick for an engagement, but withno better success than before ; thatgentleman still persisting in his opinionof our actor's incapacity for the sock.Mr. Palmer then enlisted in a companyat Sheffield, where he appeared asRichmond, in Richard the Third, butsudden illness put a stop to his career,and returning to London, he re-appearedat the Haymarket. In themiddle of the season he was abruptlydischarged; the ostensible cause, it issaid, having been " a number of femalevisitants, who had listened to his falsevows, and who attended the theatre tobewail their 'credulity and his perfidy."After his dismissal, he joined thePortsmouth company, and on comingagain to London, was at length engagedby Garrick, at a salary of 20s. perweek, but not intrusted with anycharacter of more importance than theofficer, in Richard the Third. Hedemanded however, an increase ofsalary, the next season, and being refused,closed with Mr. Ivory, theNorwich manager, at ,\ 10s. perweek. What impression his actingmade, we are not told, but he had notbeen many days in this city, beforetwo boxes were engaged for his benefit,although at least four or five monthsbefore it could take place. Palmer,finding that the boxes had been takenin the names of Miss Burroughs, andanother young lady, was secretly introducedto them, and after severalstolen interviews with the former, marriedher. The lady's aunt, who hadleft her a large fortune, was so exasperatedby this step, that she immediatelyrenounced her niece, andbequeathed all her property to adomestic. Mr. Palmer was hardlyworthy of such a sacrifice; for not longafter his marriage, he left his wife forawoman with whom he had previouslybeen connected, and did not return tothe former, until he had experiencedthe effects of public indignation. Afterplaying at Colchester, Ipswich, andYarmouth, he again visited the metropolis; but being unable to obtain anengagement, went about the country,delivering, at various provincial towns,Stevens's Lecture on Heads, with greatprofit and applause.In the following April, he was enactors.gaged at the Haymarket, to play lago,to Barry's Othello, but he was so awedat the rehearsal, by the disparity betweenthe latter gentleman and himself,that he lost his powers of utterance,and gave up the part. But althoughhe would only undertake characters ofminor importance, he evinced sufficientdramatic talent to show that he wascapable of greater things, and to induceat the same time, Barry, Beard, andGarrick. to desire his services at theirrespective theatres. Mr. Palmer closedwith the latter ; but was extremelymortified, at finding his salary put downat only 25s., 3 a week having beenoffered him by Beard, for Covent Garden.Garrick made an advance of 5s., butgave him such insignificant charactersto perform, as plainly showed a jealousyof Palmer, or an incapacity to judge ofhis merits. An accident at lengthbrought him into popular notice. Hisnamesake, then the great Palmer, beingprevented by indisposition from playingthe part of Harcourt, in The CountryGirl, it was undertaken by the subjectof our memoir, after several actors hadrefused it, for the want of time to studythe part. Garrick laughed at the idea ofhis being perfect in the part; but, tohis astonishment, Palmer went throughit as correctly as if he had played itahundred times. The manager nowthought him too useful an actor to besneered at, and immediately articledhim for four years, at 2 per weekthe first two seasons, and 2 5s. and2 10s. for the two lastOn the secession of Mr. Powell, andthe deaths of the other Mr. Palmer,and Mr. Holland, his line of businessconsiderably improved, and, at theexpiration of the Drury Lane season,he was engaged to succeed Mr. King,at Liverpool. Here he became agreat favourite, till it was knownthat he had left an ill-treated wife inLondon, when the townspeople determinedto show their disapprobation ofhis conduct, by keeping away from hisbenefit. " Alarmed," says his biographer,at this intelligence', " he postedto London, prevailed uporf his wife toaccompany him to Liverpool, andcolouring over the disfigured face hisbrutal and unprovoked violence hadgiven her, they walked together in apublic place on the Sunday evening;which so completely refuted the report,in the public opinion, that his benefitwas crowded and lucrative." Duringthe next season, at Drury Lane, he metwith a serious accident, whilst performingthe part of Dionysius, in The GrecianDaughter, in consequence of a failurein the spring of the dagger with whichMrs. Barry struck him.He continued to perform at DruryLane, and the Haymarket, until 1785,when, in conjunction with some friends,he commenced building the RoyaltyTheatre, near Cellulose Square, and in1787, opened it, with As You Like It,and Miss in her Teens. The representationof the regular drama, however,was considered, by the proprietors of thelarger houses, an invasion of theirrights, and they took such measures aseventually compelled Palmer to give upthe theatre, and return to Drury Lane,where he re-appeared as Young Wilding.He was soon after arrested for thedebts which he had incurred in connexionwith the Royalty Theatre ; buthaving obtained the rules of the Bench,he delivered his Lecture on Heads, andspeeches out of various plays, at theCircus. For performing here, whilsta ruler, he was committed to Bridewell,but was released upon applicationto the court of King's Bench, and allowedto perform at the establishedtheatres, upon his undertaking to payhis creditors a certain sum out ofhis weekly salary. He subsequentlyofficiated "as manager at Brighton,and again performed at the Hay-market,but still found himself soharassed by the hostility of some ofhis creditors, that he meditated goingto America, and was only preventedfrom carrying his intention into effect,by some "good success which he metwith at Edinburgh, where he and LeeLewis lectured. His person, however,was by no means out of danger afterhis return to the metropolis ; and toensure his appearance at night, hewas often obliged to live in the theatre.But Mr. Colman could not always thusaccommodate him ; and one evening,when he was announced to perform,he was conveyed to the theatre inDr. Lenitive's box, in the farce of ThePrize, which farce, with the et cetera,was borrowed by Colman from DruryLane.JOHN QUICKMr. Palmer's last engagement was atLiverpool, where he was announced forthe part of The Stranger, but on themorning of the day on which he wasto have appeared in that character, hereceived intelligence of the death of hissecond son, and the play, in consequenceof Mr. Palmer's distress, wasdeferred. On the evening of the 2ndof August, 1798, he made an effort togo through the part, but in the fourthact, where the Stranger relates toSieinfort the cause of his domesticafflictions, he became visibly agitated,and had no sooner uttered the words.There is another and a better world !"than he fell lifeless on the stage. Atfirst, the audience, imagining it anovel point, applauded, but immediatelyseparated, in horror and astonishment,on being informed that the actor hadbeen carried off a corpse. The theatrewas shut for three days, on the occasion,and he was followed to the grave by allthe actors, and several respectable inhabitantsof the city, where his deathcreated a great sensation. He leftbehind him eight children, to whomthe managers of Drury Lane gave afree benefit, shortly after their father'sdeath.Mr. Palmer's best characters on thestage, were, Surely, Brush, JosephSurface, and Colonel Feignwell. HisJoseph Surface, says a critic, " was notthe cold, whining, hypocritical villain,that actors of the present day renderhim ; but the finished gentleman, whomprudence had taught caution, intercoursewith the world, had taught deception,and necessity drove to grossdissimulation. His scene with LadyTeazle, was a master-piece of acting.The closeness of his reasoning, wasaided by the ardency of his tones ; andif he was the cool calculator upon adulteryin his conversation, he was theenraptured votary of love in his actions.You could not despise Joseph, in hishands, you only viewed him as a rakeof another order, but no way inferiorin morality to Charles, save, indeed,with regard to his conduct to theimaginary Stanley ; a difficulty that nodramatic power could surmount. " Theprivate character of Palmer was inevery respect depraved ; though adelightful and fascinating companion,he was an unprincipled and profligateman, and, as respects his conduct to hiswife, a ruffian. Yet he could be indiscriminatelycharitable, when lie hadmoney ; and the manner of his deathshows that he was capable of strongdomestic feelings. In person, he wasnear six feet in height, with a pleasingcountenance and dignified manner,which, to use the words of one of hisbiographers, " made him appear likea superior being to the generality ofhis brethren."JOHN QUICK.JOHN QUICK was born in the year1748, in Whitechapel, where his fathercarried on the business of a brewer.He left his home in his fourteenth year,and joined a theatrical company atFulham, where he made his first appearanceas Altamont, in The FairPenitent ; and performed, it is"* said,with so much satisfaction to the manager,that he desired his wife to setyoung Quick down a whole share ;which, at the close of the farce, amountedto 3s. He subsequently played variouscharacters in tragedy, in the countiesof Kent and Surrey ; and, in 1769,he was engaged at" the HaymarketTheatre, but remained unnoticed tillhis performance of Mordecai, in .Other parts of importancewere then intrusted to him ; such asTony Bumpkin, Acres, and Isaac Mendoza,of which he was the originalrepresentative.On his removal to Covent Garden, hebecame a great favourite with his majesty,George the Third, who seldomor ever commanded a play, in whichQuick did not take a prominent part.As he was considered the Liston of hisday, the public were surprised by seeinghis name, one night, at CoventGarden, in the bills, for the part ofACTO RS.Richard the Third. He had intendedto make it a serious attempt, but findingthe audience disposed to laugh themoment he came upon the stage, he indulgedtheir humour, and gave a completeburlesque of the character, whichwas received with general laughter andapprobation.Quick was, for some time, joint managerof the Bristol Theatre, and whilstresiding in that city, married thedaughter of a clergyman, by whom hehas had several children. He retiredfrom the stage in 1798, after a successfulcareer of nearly thirty-six years.Latterly, Quick's best personations onthe stage, were of old men ; in which,from a peculiarity in his voice, he wasextremely whimsical. His Launcelot,however, Isaac Mendoza, and a fewother parts, he continued to act withundiminished excellence to the last.Mr. Quick has the reputation, thoughnow in his eighty-third year, of stillbeing a very cheerful and even jovialcompanion. It is said that he is frequentlyto be met with at the King'sHead, Islington, as president of a respectableclub ; and where he drinkshis glass of punch with as much freedomas ever; although told by hisphysician, forty years ago, that punchwould be the death of him. A fortuneof .10,000, the fruits of his professionalexertions, enables him to live in a comfortableindependence.WILLIAM THOMAS LEWIS.WILLIAM THOMAS LEWIS wasborn at Ormskirk, in Lancashire, aboutthe year 1748. His grandfather was aclergyman, rector of There, in Carmarthenshire,and second son of ErasmusLewis. Esq., private secretary toMr. Harley, minister to Queen Anne.The father of the subject of our memoirwas apprenticed to a linen-draper, andfor some time followed that business,but, ultimately, quitted it for the stage,and performed at Dublin, at the sametime with Garrick, under the managementof Sheridan. About a year afterhis birth. William Thomas was carriedto Ireland, and educated at the gram-mareschal,at Armagh. He went onthe stage when very young, and earlydistinguished himself, at Edinburgh,under Mr. Digges.In 1771, he made his debut at Dublin,as Belcour, in The West Indian, atthe little theatre in Cape Street, anddrew such crowded houses, by his admirableperformance in this part, thatthe opposition theatre, in Crow Street,was comparatively deserted, notwithstandingthe rival attractions of Mossop.Belcour, however, it must be confessed,was one of Mossop's worst characters,yet he had the advantage in the impassionedscenes, whilst, in the gayones, Lewis was infinitely his superior.Among those who witnessed the performanceof our actor, was Macklin,who, on his return to London, spoke toColman in such terms of Lewis, thathe was immediately engaged to appearat Covent Garden.He arrived in the metropolis in theautumn of 3773, and on the 13th ofOctober, made his debut in his favouritecharacter of Belcour, and wasreceived with applause fully equal tothat which had been accorded to himin Dublin. Colman at once saw hehad made a valuable acquisition to hiscompany, and, the same season, allottedhim the principal part in his newcomedy of The Man of Business. Thedeaths of Barry and Woodward openeda way to his advance in the estimationof the public, and for many years hecontinued without a competitor in hisline.In 1782, he became deputy managerof Covent Garden Theatre, when hejudiciously confined himself to comedy ;indeed, his tragic efforts were almostbeneath notice. He seems to have hada difficult task in his capacity of stagemanager, being unfortunate enough toplease neither authors nor performers.He quitted the stage in 1813, and becamejoint proprietor, with Mr. Knight,in the Liverpool and Manchester Theatres; which proved a profitable speculationto both. Mr. Lewis, who bore aJOHN ED W 1 Kvery respectable private character, diedthe latter end of January, 1811. He hadseveral children by his wife, who wasa Miss Lesson, an actress of CoventGarden.Lewis was an unrivalled actor inlight comedy, and, with the exceptionof Elliston and Jones, is above comparisonwith any subsequent performer,for the vivacity "and elegance of deportmentwith which he sustained everypart in which he appeared. Eventhose gentlemen, however, have neverapproached him in some characters;and his Mercutio and Copper Captainare, for the present, lost to thestage. His merits and faults are thussummed up in a work publishedwhilst the comedian was yet alive.As an actor, Mr. Lewis is at presentunequalled in sprightly comedy, butcriticism must acknowledge there is agreat sameness in his performance.Though full of life and spirit, he is vapidin all ; and, however versatile his abilitiesmight formerly have been, whenhe played both in tragedy and comedy,he is at present so deficient in the art ofdiscrimination, that it would be difficultfor his judges to point out the differencebetween his Bdcour and Ranger : however,justice must freely own, that incharacters of the latter description, Mr.Lewis is, notwithstanding the disadvantageof age, the first performer nowon the stage."JOHN EDWIN.THIS eminent comedian was bornin Clare Street, St. Clement's Danes,London, on the 10th of August, 1749.His father was a watchmaker, who,though not in very prosperous circumstances,bestowed on the subject of ourmemoir, a good education. He earlyacquired a knowledge of music, which,aided by a happy invention and drollmanner of delivery, contributed torender him one of the first comic singersof the age. Before leaving school,where he continued until his sixteenthyear, he frequently exhibited at privatetheatricals, where he ranted throughAlexander the Great, and other tragicheroes, with the usual boisterous presumptionof a juvenile debutant.A situation which he obtained in theExchequer office, after he had quittedschool, afforded him a decent subsistence,without taking up more than twohours per day of his time, and he wasthus the more easily enabled to indulgehis propensity for the stage. He enteredhimself a member of a spoutingclub, at the French Horn, in WoodStreet, Cheapside, where, it is said, hefirst seriously conceived the idea ofturning comedian, from witnessing "thesingular humour of William Footfall,as Old Mask, in The Musical Lady."He immediately began to study variouscharacters in the comic line ; and havingmade himself perfect in the part ofSimon, in the first act of The Apprentice,and in the tankard scene of Scrub, andSir Harry Sycamore, in The Maid of theMill, he joined a new spouting society,at the Falcon, in Fetter Lane, and theretried the effect of his performances inthe parts above-mentioned. He wasgreatly applauded ; and Shuterr, whoentertained a high opinion of his comicabilities, used frequently to say to him,My boy, you will be an excellentactor when 1 "am laid low." To Edwin'simitation, indeed, of this actor's songs,and his performances at the FalconClub, he was indebted for his first introductionto the public stage. The admirablemanner in which he there wentthrough the part of Launcelot, in TheMerchant of Venice, induced Mr. Lee,of Drury Lane Theatre, to engage himfor the ensuing season at Manchester,at a salary of one guinea per week, andthe profits of half a benefit. His acceptanceof the engagement rendered itimpossible for him to retain his situationin the Exchequer ; but he seemeddetermined to sacrifice this and everyother connexion to his predilection forthe stage.A distant relation of his dying, aboutthis time, and who had left property tothe amount of 50,000, to be distilbute in public charities, the trusteesACTORSof the will, wishing the kindred of thetestator to derive some benefit from hiswealth, appointed Edwin their secretary,with a salary of 30 a year, besidessome very considerable perquisites. Atthe end of a year, however, he resignedthis appointment, having accumulatedno less than 500, which he immediatelypresented to his father, whose circumstanceswere embarrassed, and thenset off for Manchester. The charactersin which he here obtained most applausewere, Justice Woodcock and SirHarry Sycamore ; which has occasionedone of his biographers to observe, thathe played old men in his youth, andyoung men in his more advanced years.The applause he met with at Manchester,led to his being engaged at theSmock Alley Theatre, Dublin. Beforeproceeding thither, he visited London,where " having received," it is said,some money and a watch from hisfather, he set out for the metropolis ofIreland, where he at length arrived ingreat distress, having waited so longtor a fair wind at Margate, that he hadbeen obliged to pawn his watch, andexpend his last shilling on the road."He made his debut at Dublin, inthe character of Sir Philip Modelove, inA Bold Stroke for a Wife. His nextappearance was as Lord Trinket, in TheJealous Wife; but neither in this northe former character was he very successful.The latter was, indeed, utterlyunsuitable to his abilities, and he had solittle of the nobleman in his mannersand address, that when he exclaimed, inthe course of his part, " I act, a mightyridiculous figure here, upon honour ! "some wag vociferated, " You do, indeed! " His reception, however, inJustice Woodcock was most enthusiastic; and after his appearance in thispart, he continued throughout the seasonto attract considerable applause,either as an "old man, a thief, clown,or a constable." After leaving Ireland,lie performed at several of the provincialtheatres in England, and particularlyat Hath. It was in this city thathe first became acquainted with Mrs.Walmsley, a milliner, his desertion ofwhom, about twenty years afterwards,occasioned him to be frequently hissedoff the London stage.It was not till the year 1775, thatEdwin made his first professional bowto a London audience, at Foote's theatre,in the Haymarket. The part selectedfor his 'debt was Flaw, in thecomedy of The Cozeners ; but it wasnot till he had performed Jobson, inThe Devil to Pay, and Billy Button, inThe Maid of Bath, that he began to beafavourite with the town. His reputationrose gradually, and in 1779, hewas engaged by Mr. Harris, to appearat Covent Garden, at a salary of Ji7 perweek. His first appearances at this andall the theatres before-mentioned, seemto have been unsuccessful ; on thepresent occasion, he chose the part ofTouchstone, in As You Like It ; but itwas not liked at all, though the actorexerted himself to the utmost of hisabilities. His performance, however,of Midas, on the same evening, amplyredeemed his former failure. " Theluminousness," says his biographer, " ofthis prince of burlettas began to appear,and the public eye dazzled with radiancebefore that period unknown." Yetit was not till he played Stephen, inEvery Man in his Humour, that fullscope was afforded him for the displayof his comic powers; his personation ofthis character alone, stamped him as anactor of first-rate excellence, and greatlyenhanced the value of his services. Hewas engaged, the next season, at S,and the following one, at 12, perweek ; and continued to receive thatsum until the period of his death, whichtook place at his lodgings in BedfordStreet, Covent Garden, on the 31st ofJuly, 1790.JOHN HENRY Johnston.THIS excellent vocalist, but morecelebrated personator of Irish characters,was born in 1750, at Tipperary,in Ireland, where his father was a smallbut respectable farmer. He was bredto rustic pursuits, but at the age ofeighteen, enlisted in a regiment of Irishdragoons, stationed at Clonmel, whereJOHN HENRY JOHN SI ONE.he soon attracted the notice of hisbrother soldiers, by his fine voice, andwon their regard by his liveliness andgood-nature. Being smitten with thecharms of the daughter of a farmer inthe neighbourhood of Clonmel, he usedto scale the barrack walls after hiscomrades had retired to their quarters,for the purpose of serenading hismistress : but he had the prudencealways to return, and be ready forparade on the following morning. Aftertwo or three experiments of this sort,his vocal powers were put to the test,under less romantic circumstances.The colonel of his regiment, having aparty to dine with him, whom he wasanxious to treat with some harmony,inquired, what soldier in the regimenthad the best voice. Johnstonee was atonce named, and being immediatelysent for, gave the party a hunting song,and though he laboured under greattrepidation, got through it with applause.The colonel then desired himto sing one of his favourite love songs,as he understood he excelled in Irishmelodies. This increased his embarrassment; but after taking refreshment,he plucked up his courage sufficientlyto sing the identical ditty with whichhe used to serenade his mistress, andthat in a style of such pathos, feeling,and taste, as perfectly enraptured hisauditors. Thus encouraged, he regainedhis perfect self possession, andwas equally applauded in several othersongs. The result proved most fortunatefor him ; for the next day, waitingon the colonel by order, the lattersounded his inclination for the stage.He readily expressed his desire toattempt the profession, but modestlyadded his fears of success, from hisutter want of experience in musicalknowledge. The colonel, however,who had a different view of the subject,overcame his objections, granted himhis discharge, and gave him a highlyrecommendatory letter of introductionto his particular friend, Mr. Ryder,then manager of the Dublin Theatre.He immediately engaged Johnstonee forthree years, at a salary of two guineasa week, and after his appearance, inthe character of Lionel, in the opera ofLionel and Clarissa, raised it to fourguineas, then a very high salary inDublin. From this moment, it is saidby several authorities, " his fame, as avocalist, gathered like a snowball ; andhe performed the whole range ofyoung singing lovers, with pre-eminenteclat."His theatrical career seems to havecut off all further communication withhis lady-love, at Clonmel, and aboutthis time, he married Miss Poitiers,daughter of Colonel Poitiers, who hadthe command of the military depot atKilmainham. This lady being highlyaccomplished, and possessed of a profoundknowledge of the science ofmusic, considerably improved her husband'sstyle of singing, by her valuableinstruction. He likewise formed aconnexion with Macklin, the celebratedactor, who advised him to try theLondon boards, and wrote so stronglyin his favour to Mr. Harris, of CoventGarden, that, upon the arrival ofJohnstonee and his wife in theBritish metropolis, they were engagedat that theatre, for three years,at a weekly salary of 14,^16, and18. He made his debut at CoventGarden, in the season of 1783, inhis old character of Lionel, and continuedto sing at the same theatre forseveral years, with undiminished success.Finding, however, his voice didnot improve with time, he formed thejudicious resolution of taking to Irishparts, then but inadequately filledand his native humour, rich brogue, andfine voice for Irish ditties, carried himto a height of excellence in the pathhe had chosen which left every competitorfar behind. His career wasinterrupted, in 1801, by the new regulationsintroduced at Covent Garden,and he being one who remonstratedagainst them, he left that house, andnext appeared at the IIa\ market.After losing his first wife, he formeda second matrimonial connexion witha Miss Boulton, daughter of a winemerchant, by whom he had one daughter,now Mrs. Wallack. He died a fewyears after his retirement from thestage, at his house in Tavistock Row,Covent Garden, on the 26th of December,1828, in the seventy-eighth year of hisage, and was buried in a vault underthe church of St. Paul, Covent Garden.The bulk of his property (his personalsbeing sworn under 12,000, thoughmany gave him credit for being worthA C T O 11 S .jgoO.OOO) was left to his daughter'schildren.Johnstonee seems to have been one ofthose happily constituted persons whoare, by nature, born to please : but tothis quality he also added more prudencethan commonly falls to the lot of suchpersons. Few public performers havebeen so happy in a long career, beganand ended with such uninterruptedsuccess, as marked that of Johnstonee.As a vocalist, he was received with approbation:but as an actor, in his line,he stood alone ; being the only one whopersonated, with the utmost effect, boththe patrician and plebeian Irishman. InSir Lucius Outrigger, Callaghan O'Bral-raglan, Major O'Flaherty, League,Tully, (the Irish gardener), and DennisBrulgruddery, he was perfectly unrivalled.Kelly relates, in his Reminiscences,the following anecdote respectingJohnstonee, when they were atMargate together. " Mr. and Mrs.Crouch, and myself," he says, " werestaying at an hotel, the landlord of whichwas free and easy, and a perfect adeptat making out a. bill, and a gamblerto boot ; one day, Johnstonee dined withus, and we drank our usual quantum ofwine. In the course of the evening,our bashful host forced upon us somepink champagne, which he wished usto give our opinions of. My friend JackJohnstonee, who never was an enemyto the juice of the grape, took suchcopious draughts of the sparkling beverage,that his eyes began to twinkle.Our host, seeing this, proposed toamuse him, and entered our room witha backgammon table, and dice. Weearnestly entreated Jack to go to bed.He whispered me, saying, ' You shallsee how I will serve the fellow for hisimpudence ;' Johnstonee won nearly200, and I retired to bed, delighted atseeing the biter bit. It was, what thecockneys call, quite refreshing."MRS. SIDDONS.A HIS pre-eminently gifted actresswas born at Brecon, on the 5th of July,1755, in a public-house, called theShoulder of Mutton. Her father, Mr.Roger Kemble, was, in the words ofMr. Campbell, a man of respectablefamily, who having married the daughterof a provincial manager (Mr. Ward),received a company of strolling playersfor her dowry, and set up as managerfor himself. The mother of our heroinehad, it seems, promised her fattier notto marry an actor ; but so little did thelatter think Mr. Kemble worthy ofthat title, that he is reputed to have saidto his daughter, " Sarah, you have notdisobeyed me ; I told you never tomarry an actor j and you have marrieda man who neither is, nor ever can beanactor."Miss Kemble made her first appearanceon the stage, when almost aninfant, on the occasion of her father'sbenefit, where she recited, with greatapplause, the fable of The Boys andthe Frogs. At the age of thirteen,she played the principal character inseveral operas, besides occasionallysinging between the acts.In her sixteenth or seventeenth year,she formed an attachment to Mr.Siddons, a member of her father's company,and whose capacities were soversatile, that he could play anything,from Macbeth to Pantaloon. But, whatevermight have been the manager'sopinion of Mr. Siddons's theatrical abilities,he was very much averse to seeinghim the husband of his daughter. Thisopposition to the gentleman's wishes,excited the sympathy of the people ofBrecon, which Mr. Siddons took theopportunity of his benefit to improve,by singing a song of his own composition,in which he described his ownfeelings, the coldness of Miss Kemble,and the attempts of her parents tounite her to another. The effusionwas received with enthusiastic applause,which so exasperated Mrs. Kemble,that on the disconsolate swain's exitfrom the stage, she flew at him withher fists, and imprinted, upon his face,marks of her vengeance, equally permanentand unexpected. All partieshowever, were subsequently reconciled;and Miss Kemble, after having passeda year in the family of Mrs. Breathed,MRS. SIDDONS,of Guy's Cliff, Warwickshire, in thecapacity of reader and companion, becamethe wife of Mr. Siddons, atTrinity Church, Coventry, on the 26thof November, 1773.A short time after their union, Mrs.Siddons and her husband were engagedto perform in the company of Messrs.Chamberlain and Crump, at Bath.This was a corps but recently established,and rather unsuccessful : suchwas the poverty of their wardrobe, that,it is said, Mrs. Siddons was. obliged,during the performance of the IrishWidow, to borrow a coat of a gentlemanin the boxes, to equip herself for theWidow Brady ; which she obtained oncondition that she gave him her petticoatto put over his shoulders, andadmitted him to stand behind thescenes, her performances, however,always met with success, and her subsequentengagements at Liverpool,Birmingham, &c., considerably addedboth to her profits and reputation.Cheltenham next became the scene ofher performances ; and here an incidentoccurred that formed one of the mostimportant eras in her life. A partyof fashionables, consisting, amongothers, of the Honourable Miss Boyle,the only daughter of Lord Dunbarton,Lord Aylesbury, &c., had just arrivedin the town, when Mrs. Siddons wasannounced to play Belvidera. Theparty, in the expectation of seeingsomething vastly ludicrous, took a boxat the theatre ; and as suppressed noiseswere heard to come from the placewhere they sat. our actress concludedthey were tittering at her performance,and' went home, at its conclusion,extremely mortified. Next day, however,Lord Aylesbury, meeting Mr.Siddons in the street, expressed hisadmiration at his wife's acting, andsaid that it had made such an impressionon the ladies of his party, thatthey were confined to their rooms,with head-aches, from weeping soexcessively the preceding night. MissBoyle soon after called on Mrs. Siddons,encouraged her efforts, and foretold hersuccess. " She took also upon her,"says Mr. Campbell, " the direction ofher wardrobe, enriched it from herown, and made many of her dresseswith her own hands."Lord Aylesbury was not less zealousin advancing the interests of our youngactress ; at his suggestion, Garrick sentdown Mr. King to see her act, andupon hearing a favourable report, gaveher an engagement at Drury Lane.Her feelings on this occasion, and thesituation in which she found herselfafter her arrival in London, aredescribed in her Autograph Recollections,with a candour and simplicitywhich her own words alone are able toconvey. " Happy," she says, " to beplaced where I presumptuously auguredthat I should do all that I have sinceachieved, if I could but once gain theopportunity, I instantly paid my respectsto the great man. 1 was, at thattime, good-looking ; and certainly, allthings considered, an actress well worthmy poor 5 a week. His praiseswere most liberally conferred uponme ; but his attentions, great and unremittingas they were, ended in worsethan nothing. How was all this admirationto be accounted for, consistentlywith his subsequent conduct ? Why,thus, I believe : He was retiring frownthe management of Drury Lane, and,1 suppose, at that time, wished to washhis hands of all its concerns anddel ails. I, moreover, had served whatI believe was his chief object in theexaltation of poor me and that was,the mortification and irritation of Mrs.Yates and Miss Younge, whose consequenceand troublesome airs, were, itmust be confessed, enough to try hispatience. As he had now almost withdrawnfrom it, the interests of thetheatre, grew, I suppose, rather indifferentto him. However that mayhave been, he always objected to myappearance in any very prominent character; telling me that the forenamedladies would poison me, it I did. I, ofcourse, thought him, not only an oracle,but my friend ; and in consequence ofhis advice, Portia, in The Merchant ofVenice, was fixed for my debit ; acharacter in which it was not likelythat I should excite any great sensation.I was, therefore, merely tolerated. Thefulsome adulation that courted Garrick,in the theatre, cannot be imagined ;and whosoever was the luckless wightwho should be honoured by his distinguishedand envied smile, of coursebecame an object of spite and malevolence.Little did I imagine that 1 rny-A C T O R Sself was now that wretched victim. Hewould sometimes hand me from my ownseat, in the green room, to place menext to his own. He also selected meto personate Venus, at the revival ofThe Jubilee. This gained me themalicious appellation of Garrick's Venus;and the ladies, who so kindly bestowedit on me, rushed before me in the lastscene, so that if he (Mr Garrick) hadnot brought us forward with him withhis own hands, my little Cupid andmyself, whose appointed situations werein the very front of the stage, might aswell have been in the island of paphosat that moment. Mr. Garrick wouldalso flatter me, by sending me into oneof his own boxes, when he acted any ofhis great characters. In short, his attentionswere enough to turn an olderand wiser head. He promised Mr.Siddons to procure me a good engagementwith the new managers, anddesired him to give himself no troubleabout the matter, but to put my causeentirely into his hands. He let medown, however, after all these proti stations,in the most humiliating manner ;and instead of doing me common justicewith those gentlemen, rather depreciatedmy talents. This, Mr. Sheridanafterwards told me ; and said, thatwiden Mrs. Abingdon heard of myimpending dismissal, she told themthey were all acting like fools. Whenthe London season was over, I madean engagement at Birmingham for theensuing summer, little doubting of myreturn to Drury Lane, for the nextwinter; but whilst I was fulfilling myengagement at Birmingham, to myutter dismay and astonishment, I receivedan official letter from the prompterof Drury Lane, acquainting methat my services would no longer berequired. It was a stunning and cruelblow, overwhelming all my ambitioushopes, and involving peril, even to thesubsistence of my helpless babes. Itwas very near destroying rne. Myblighted prospects, indeed, induced astate of niind that preyed upon myhealth ; and, for a year and a half, I wassupposed to be hastening to a decline.For the sake of my poor children,however, I roused myself to shake offthis despondency, and my endeavourswere blessed with success, in spite ofthe degradation I had suffered in beingbanished from Drury Lane, as a worthlesscandidate for fame and fortune."After her failure, for so it may becalled, in Portia, she played in Mrs.Cowley's comedy of The Runaway,and in a farce by Vaughan. called Love'sMetamorphoses. At length, Garricktrusted her with the part of Mrs. Strickland,in The Suspicious Husband, himselfperforming Ranger; this charactershe repeated, and with such success,that her own name in large type nowappeared in the play-bills. She, however,did not draw ; and though sheadded to her other performances that ofQueen Anne, in Richard the Third,with tolerable success, Garrick did notthink it to his interest to engage herfor the ensuing season. According toMr. Boaden, Mrs. Siddons was awareof her failure ; not, aj she observed,because she had not a proper conceptionof the parts assigned to her ; butfrom timidity, and a want of artificialtact in the expression of her feelings.Some I ave attributed her short stay inLondon to Garrick's jealousy of hermerit : there is not the highest groundfor such a supposition ; or why shouldlie have cherished the talents of Mrs.Yates and Mrs. Abingdon, who weresuperior to the subject of our memoir?From London, M rs. Siddons proceededto Birmingham, where she acted withHenderson, who declared she was anactress who never had an equal, andnever would have a superior. In 1777,she was the heroine of the Manchesterstage, where, according to Mr. Boaden,she performed, among other parts, thatof Hamlet, with great applause. Shesubsequently played at York ; wheretouse the words of Tate Wilkinson, alllifted up their eyes with astonishment,that such a voice, such a judgment,and such acting, should have been neglectedby a London audience, and bythe first actor in the world.Her next engagement was at Bath ;there," she says in her memoranda,there my talents and industry wereencouraged by the greatest indulgence,and I may say, with some admiration.Tragedies, which had been almostbanished, again resumed their properinterest ; but still I had the mortificationof being obliged to personatea y subordinate characters in comedy ;the first being, by contract, in the |>os-M K S . M D L> O N S .session of another lady. To this I wasobliged to submit, or to forfeit a part ofmy salary, which was only 3 a week.Tragedies were now becoming more andmore fashionable. This was favourableto my cast of powers ; and whilst Ilaboured hard, 1 began to earn a distinctand flattering reputation. Hardlabour, indeed, it was ; for, after therehearsal at Bath, and on a Mondaymorning, I had to go and act at Bristolon the evening of the same day ; andreaching Bath again, after a drive oftwelve miles, I was obliged to representsome fatiguing part there on the Tuesdayevening. Meantime I was gainingprivate friends, as well as public favour ;and my industry and perseverance wereindefatigable. When i recollect all thislabour of mind and body, I wonder thatI had strength and courage to supportit, interrupted as I was by the cares ofa mother, and by the childish sports ofmy little ones, who were often mostunwillingly hushed to silence, for in-te>'i upting their mother's studies."In the summer of 1782, she receiveda second invitation to Drury Lane,though the recollection of her formerreception rendered her fearful of acceptingit; and, but for the sake of herchildren, she would, probably, have remainedat Bath, to which city she hadbecome much attached. Her farewelladdress on this occasion has, probably,before met the eye of our readers, butit is too characteristic both of the actressand the woman, to be omitted in anythinglike a substantial account of herlife. The address, which was writtenas well as spoken by herself, was asfollows :Have 1 not raised some expectation here ?Wrote by herself ? What '. authoress and player?True, we have heard her thus I guess'd you'd lay,With decency recite another'* lay ;But never heard, nor ever could we dream.Herself had sipp'd the Heliconian stream.Perhaps you farther said Excuse me, pray,For thus supposing all that you might sayWhat will she treat of in this same address ?Is it to shew her learning > Can you guess ?Here let me answer No : far different view*Possessed my soul, and fired my virgin muse ;T was honest gratitude, at whose requestChained be the heart that will not do its lies.The time draws nigh, when I nut bid adieuTo this delightful spot nay, even to you.To you whose fostering kindness reared my name,O'er owed my faults, but magnified my fame.How shall 1 b :<r the purling .- well I km.wAnticipation here is daily woe.Oh ! could kind Fortune, where I next am thrown.Bestow but half the candour you have shown,Envy, o'ercome, will hurl her pointless dart,And critic call be shed without its smart ;The numerous doubts and fears I entertain,Be idle all as all possess'd in vain-hutto my promise. If I thus am bless'd.In friendship link'd, beyond my worth caressedWhy don't 1 here, you'll say, content remain rNor seek uncertainties for certain gain ?What run compensate for the risks you run ?Ami what your reasons ? Surely, you have none.To article here would but your time abuse:I keep my woril my reasons I produce,Here were discovered her three children.These are the moles that bear me from your side.Where I as rooted where I could have died.Stand forth, ye elves, and plead your mother's cause,Ye little magnets, whose toft influence drawsMe. frm a point where every gentle breezeWafted my bark to happiness and easeSends me, adventurous, on a larger main,In hopes that you may profit by my gain.Have I been hasty am 1, then, to blame *Answer all ye who own a parent's name ?Thus nave 1 tired you with an untaught muse,Who for your favour still most humbly sues ;That you, for classic learning, will receiveMy soul's best wishes, which I freely giveFur polished periods, sound, and touched with art,1 he fervent offering of my grateful heart.It was on the 10th of October, 1782,that Mrs. Siddons made her second appearanceon the boards of Drury Lane,in the character of Isabella. She wasin her twenty-eighth year, and in thevigour of her physical" powers, and thematurity of her personal beauty. Herperformance made a most powerful impression; she was applauded in almostevery sentence, and the theatre overflowedevery evening of her appearancein this character, which she repeatednineteen nights successively.Her own feelings, on her return home,after the evening which established herreputation, are affectingly delineated byher own pen. " 1 reached my own quietfireside," she says, " on returning fromthe scene of reiterated shouts andplaudits. I was half dead ; and my joyand thanksgiving were of too solemnand overpowering a nature to admit ofwords, or even tears. My father, myhusband, and myself, sat down to afrugal supper, in a silence uninterrupted,except by exclamations of gladnessfrom Mr. Siddons. My father enjoyedhis refreshments ; but occasionallyslopped short, and, laying down hisknife and fork, lifting up his venerableface, and throwing back his silver hair,gave many tokens of happiness. Wesoon parted for the night, and I, wornout with continually broken rest andACTORS.laborious exertion, after an hour's retrospection(who can conceive the intensenessof that reverie ? ), fell intoa sweet and profound sleep, whichlasted to the middle of the next day.I rose alert in mind and body."At this period, she created a sensationperfectly unparalleled in the annals oftheatrical history. At a fashionableparty, to which "she was invited, oneSunday evening, she herself recordsthat, for hours before her departure,the room she sat in was so painfullycrowded, that the people absolutelystood on the chairs round the walls, thatthey might look over their neighbours'heads to stare at her. One morning,after having given orders that she mightnot be interrupted, she was surprisedby the sudden entrance of a lady ofhigh rank, who thus accosted her:You must think it strange to see aperson intrude in this manner uponyour privacy ; but you must know, Iam in a very delicate state of health,and my physician won't let me go tothe theatre to see you ; so I am come tolook at you here." " I was in nohumour," says Mrs Siddons, " to overlooksuch insolence, and so let herdepart in silence."It was in the part of Isabella, thatMadame de Steel was so much affectedby Mrs. Siddons's performance ; of whichthe former has recorded her impressionsin her celebrated novel of Corne. Ouractress's next characters were, Euphra-asia, Jane Shore, Calista, Belvidera,Zara, &c., which she played with equalapplause. Before the close of theseason, the managers increased hersalary from jglO to 20 ; and, on herbenefit night, great part of the pitwas suffered to be thrown into boxes ;immense presents were given by thenobility and gentry for tickets, and asubscription to the amount of one hundredguineas, was collected for her, asapresent from the gentlemen of the bar.From this time, to the end of theeighteenth century, she continued atDrury Lane, adding to her fame andfortune, each successive season. LadyMacbeth, Constance, and Katherine ofArragon, were her chef-d'oeuvres ; butshe was also very great in Belvidera,Mrs. Beverley, Ophelia, Imogen, Columna,Mrs. Oakley, Mrs. Haller, andElvira ; the last character she playedthirty-one nights successively. She alsoattempted Juliet, but it was not a partsuited to her talents.In the midst, however, of this triumphantcareer, Mrs. Siddons found toomuch occasion for painful reflections athome. She had lost two of her children,and seems to have been expecting thedeath of a third. In a letter to a friend,describing her feelings upon the occasion,she says, " Happiness is the inhabitantof a better world. Content,the offspring of moderation, is all weought to aspire to here ; and moderationwill be our surest and best guide tothat happiness to which she will mostassuredly conduct us. If any one thinkhimself unfortunate, let him look onme, and be silent. The inscrutableways of Providence ! Two lovely creaturesgone; and another is just arrivedfrom school, with all the dazzling,frightful sort of beauty, that irradiatedthe countenance of Maria, and makesme shudder when I look at her. I feelmyself like poor Niobe, grasping to herbosom the last and youngest of herchildren ; and, like her, look everymoment for the vengeful arrow of destruction."About 1798, matrimonial differencesended in a separation from Mr. Siddons.He had felt himself, Mr. Boaden informsus, thrown into the shade by thebrilliancy of his wife's career ; and thisconviction, added to the failure of almostall his pecuniary speculations, producedin him a mortified spirit and temper,which called forth some expressions ofirritation from his wife ; and terminatedin the way we have stated. It is said,however, that she always entertained ahigh regard for her husband, and lefthim an annuity at her death. Hertheatrical glory was not without itsalloy; but the calumnies which werepropagated by a cabal formed againsther, in 1784 and 1802, were all equallyunfounded. The first accusation againsther was, that she had refused to alleviatethe distresses of her sister, Mrs. Curtis,a vicious woman, who would not conformto modest habits, though offered agenteel annuity on that condition. Thenext was, that she had taken a largesum from Mr. Digges, the once eminent,but then distressed, comedian, for performingon his benefit night, in Dublin ;that she had been guilty of aMRS. SIDDONS.crime to Mr. Bretton ; and that herwhole conduct was replete with meannessand inhumanity. All this wasparagraphed in the newspapers; aridwhen she appeared on the stage, shewas saluted with violent hissing, andcries ot " Off! off!" The interference ofJohn Kemble, however, and a refutationof the aspersion hy Mrs. Siddons herself,procured her "an immediate at ion to favour. But what had takenplace, was sufficient to disgust her withthe stage, upon which, indeed, she wasonly induced to remain for the purposeof assisting her brother, John, who hadtaken Covent Garden. To this theatreshe accordingly removed; but even herattractions were, tor a time, overbalancedby those of Master Betty, and a spectaclewith a dog and real water, at the rivalhouse. She continued on the boards,with the exception of two years absence,in consequence of illness, till theyear 1812; when the play-bills, of the29th of June, announced, that shewould take leave of the public in thecharacter of Lady Macbeth. Duringher performance, the applause was tremendous,and almost unceasing; andthe moment the night scene was over,the audience rose, en masse, and demandedthat the play should close.Mrs. Siddons then came forward, andtook her leave in a poetical address,written by Mr. Horace Swiss (whohad married her sister), and concludingthus :Perhaps your hearts, when year* have elided by,And past emotions wake a fleeting sigh,May think on her, whose lips have poured so longThe charmed sorrows of your shakspeare's song.Of her, who parting, to return no more,Is now the mourner she but Deemed before :Herself subdued, resigns the melting spell ;And breathes, wall swelling heart, her long, herlast farewell.It is a trite remark," says a periodicalwriter, " that few lives can beconceived less joyous than that of anapplauded beauty and actress, whenher reign is over, and she can no longercommand the triumphs and the excitementin which she had lived all herbest years. And, truly, such an existencemust be wretched, when beautyand noisy popularity, and things equallyevanescent, were alone cherished. ButMrs. Siddons had stored both her heartand mind with other objects and resourcesto fall back upon ; and thesesupplied little fountains of contentmentand cheerfulness to the last day of herlife. The rapturous applause, the shoutsof gathered thousands, all died beforethe stage where she had so long excitedthem; but her other qualities, and,above all, her private virtues, had gainedher troops of friends, who enlivenedher retirement."She appeared four times afterwardson the stage: once, for the benefit ofthe Theatrical Fund ; twice, for that ofher brother, Charles; and, finally, forthe gratification of the Princess Charlotte,in the character of Lady Macbeth ;but, unfortunately, sudden illness preventedthe princess from witnessing herperformance. This, however, was notthe last public appearance of Mrs. Siddons;for two seasons she gave readingsfrom Shakspeare, at the ArgyleRooms, as her income was not of thatextent that she could live unemployed,without some diminution of her comforts.Few individuals ever gained fromthe public such universal and enthusiastichomage as Mrs. Siddons. Shewas not only honoured with the patronageof her monarch on the stage,but was admitted to the private circleof himself and his family. Such wasthe feeling of George the Third towardsher, that, it is said, he, one day, handedher a blank paper, bearing his signature,as a silent intimation that, if she hadany wants, she had only herself to state,and supply them. Mrs. Siddons didnot, however, avail herself of the opportunity; but returned the paper, inthe state she received it, to the queen.She frequently read before their majesties,at Windsor; when the king,one day, told her he had vainly endeavouredto detect her in a false emphasis.Many of onr readers may thinkit strange, if he had succeeded in hisendeavour.Sir Joshua Reynolds, who painted aportrait of her as the tragic muse, wasone of her most intimate friends, andgreatest admirers. The attitude, inwhich she appears in the picture, wassuggested by herself, and immediatelyadopted by Sir Joshua. She was alsoacquainted with Dr. Johnson ; w\jo.finding her without a chair, one day,at his house, said, with a smile, " You,who so often occasion a want of seatsACTORS.to other people, will more easily excusethe want of one yourself."Mrs. Siddons, undoubtedly, possessedthe highest osier o:' poetical conceptionfor the purposes of state delivery ; yetnot a little of the impression she producedwas owing to her great physicalpowers, and the commanding dignityof her person. Her eye, her voice, herstature, were majestic almost to awfulness; Boaden aptly says of her expression,that no one could dare to looklike her. In her most violent scenes, themajesty of her mien was pre-eminent;and even when prostrate on the stage,she still lay graceful and sublime. AsMadame de Steel says of her, in Corne :Beatrice la plus noble dans ses manners,Madame Siddons, ne perd riende sa dignity quattd mile se posterncentre terre."Of her Lady Macbeth, which allcritics allow to be her chefd'aeuvre. LordByron said: " It was something abovenature. It seemed almost as it a beingof a superior order had dropped from ahigher sphere to awe the world with themajesty of her appearance. Power wasseated on her brow ; passion emanatedfrom her breast, as from a shrine. Incomingon in the Sleeping scene, hereyes "were open, but their sense wasshut ; she was like a person bewildered :her lips moved involuntarily; all hergestures seemed mechanical she glidedon and off the stage like an apparition.To have seen her in that character, wasan event in every one's life never to beforgotten."The characteristic of Mrs. Siddons,both on and off the stage, was dignity;the common fluttering of passion seemedbeneath her; her judgment never appearsto have been outstripped by herpart. When she came forward to vindicateherself against the aspersions onher conduct, it was noi with the quickimpulse of indignation : she addressedthe audience in language as firm andstately as her own towering deportment.For this reason, she would naturallyfail in such a character as Juliet; hernerves were too strong; they were notenough for the passionate tendernessof the Italian girl. But in suchparts as Elvira, Katherine of Arragon,&c., requiring a grandeur of soul, andmasculine energy of purpose, it maylately be asserted, that in the justnessand sublimity of her conception oi'cha-racer, she was not inferior to Shakspearehimself. Yet grandeur anddignity were not her sole, though hermost prominent, characteristics ; if shehad little sympathy with the love-sickmaiden, her affections found a suitablechannel in the devoted daughter andthe faithful wife. " Her genius," asawriter in Blackwood observes, " vaslatterly so devoted to characters ofpower and majesty, that they who firstsaw her then, doubted if she evercould have been as mighty a mistressof the pathetic. Lady 'Macbeth,Queen Katherine, Constance. andColumna, effaced the recollections ofIsabella, Jane Shore, Belvideia, andhuphrasia as well they might effacethe tenderest records ever written onhuman hearts. But in her earliestseasons, pathos prevailed voice, eyes,lips, look, &c., gave motion ail werethen softly beautiful at will; and shestood ' pouring out sorrows like a sea.'Grief and pity seemed, sometimes,the sole emotions of humanity ; andmelting bosoms knew of no othertribute to pay to her genius but unmeasuredtears."Majestic is too common place anepithet to apply to Mrs. Siddons's personupon the st.-ige ; it was magnificent.She was somewhat em ban point, at theclose of her dramatic career, whichsomewhat, but only comparatively, detractedfrom the dignity of her appearance; but, in the meridian of her success,her towering form, fair, high forehead,coal-black hair, and dark, bright eyes,-ave to her aspect, either in sorrow,scorn, indignation, tenderness, or joy,an expression, that the term ' sublime'conveys but a faint idea oC The stagemay yet be trod by many actressesmore beautiful than Mrs. Siddons; butthat we should ever witness her parallel,is as remote an expectation as that ofthe appear once of a second Shakspeare.K I C H A K D S U E T T ,RICHARD Suet.RICHARD Suet, or Dicky suet,as he was familiarly called, was born atChelsea, about the year 1755, and, atten .years of age, entered the choir ofWestminster Abbey, as a pupil of Dr.Cooke. When lie could be persuadedto attend to his lessons, he is said tohave displayed considerable taUnt. bothin his musical and academical studies ;but he was, in general, more fond ofamusing himself, by defacing with stonesthe statues about the abbey, and sundryother juvenile mischievous tricks.In the summer of 1769, he appearedas a singer at Ranelagh Gardens; andsung, in the ensuing year, with greatapplause, at the Haymarket Theatre,the Grotto Gardens, Southwark, andthe then celebrated Mary-le-bone Gardens.He was, shortly after, engagedat York, as a singer and second lowcomedian; in which capacity he remainedfor nine years, at the largestsalary that had ever been given to acomedian in that company.At the expiration of the above period,he had just completed an agreement withTate Wilkinson, of which one of thecovenants was, that either party breakingthe contract, should forfeit 100,when he received an offer from Linley,to appear ai Drury Lane. Wilkinson, itis said, upon hearing this, generouslythrew the articles of his own contractwith Suettt, into the fire, and thus enabledhim to take advantage of Linley'soffer without incurring any pecuniaryrisk.Suettt made his bow on the boardsof Drury Lane, in October 1780, asRalph, in The Maid of the Mill; inwhich he displayed his comic powers tosuch advantage, that he soon became apopular favourite. Such was his reputation,in the month of November,1781, that, when Parsons was disabledby illness, i'rom acting in a piece, whichhad been bespoken by royal command,fits majesty himself' recommended Suetttas the only performer in the theatrewho could take the former comedian'scharacter. Suettt's theatrical fame wasmuch increased by his matchless performancesof Dicky Gossip, Endless,and Lord Puberty, of which he wasthe original re recitative. He also,occasionally, performed operatic characters; among which, we may mentionthat of Lubin, the Quaker; buthis voice, which, from frequent excesses,was considerably deteriorated, was notalways to be depended on.Mr. Suettt's life," says one of hisbiographers, ' was a long tissue of irregularity; and, we are sorry to recordthe disgraceful and disgusting fact, ofhis actually living with two sisters atthe same time, and under the sameroof. He died at a small public-house,in Densely Street, Clare Market, andnot, as generally believed, at his ownhouse, on the 6th ot July, 1805. RobertPalmer, it is said, was with him inhis last moments (which was precededby the rattles in his throat), and, goingto the window, to conceal his tears,heard Suettt exclaim, " lobby, my boy,the watchmen are coming I hear therattles !" The punster, indeed, was apart of Suettt's character ; but it wouldbe drawing too liberally on our credulity,to expect us to credit this anecdote.He never performed Endless,without saying, as he emerged from thesack, to the infinite enjoyment of thegods, " Flour and suet make excellentpudding."His character, off the stage, was notvery reputable ; he was fond of lowsociety, and never was in higher gleethan when surrounded by drovers andslaughtered. As an actor, he wasunequalled in his clownish and simpleassumptions ; besides those before-mentioned,his best performances were, Toto,in She Would and She Would Not,Siskin, and Label, in The Prize; towhich he communicated an effect producedby no other representative of thatpart.His merits have been so felicitouslydescribed by Charles Lamb (in one ofhis delightful essays, under the signatureof Elia), that we shall forbear quotasOf?A CTO 14S.lion from any other critic. " Richard,or rather, Dicky Suettt," says thisingenious and original writer, "wasthe Robin Good-fellow of the stage.He came in to trouble all things witha welcome perplexity, himself no whittroubled for the matter. He was known,like Puck, by his note 'Ha! ha! ha!'sometimes deepening to ' Ho ! ho !ho !' with an irresistible accession, derived,perhaps remotely, from his ecclesiasticaleducation, foreign to his prototype,of ' O la !' Thousands of heartsyet respond to the chuckling ' O la !' ofDicky Suettt, brought back by thefaithful transcript of his friend Mathews'smimicry. ' The force of Naturecould no further go.' He rolled uponthe stock of these two syllables, richerthan the cuckoo. Care, that troublesall the world, was forgotten in his composition.Had he but two grains, nay,half a grain, of it, he could never havesupported himself upon those twospider's strings, which served him (inthe latter part of his unmixed existence)as legs. A doubt, or a scruple,must have made him totter ; a sighhave puffed him down ; the weight of afrown had staggered him ; a wrinklemade him lose his balance. But on hewent, scrambling upon those airy stiltsof his, with Robin Schoolfellow, ' throughbrake, through briar,' reckless of ascratched face or a torn doublet.Shakspeare foresaw him, when heframed his fools and jesters. Theyhave all the true Suet stamp a looseand shambling gait, a slippery tonguethis last the ready midwife to a uith-out-pain-delivered jest: in words, lightas air, venting truths, deep as the centre;singing with Lear, in the tempest, orSir Toby, at the buttery-hatch. JackBannister and he had the fortune to bemore of personal favourites with thetown, than any actors before or after.The difference, I take it, was this :Jack was more beloved for his sweet,good-natured, moral pretensions.Dicky was more liked for his sweet,good-natured, no pretensions at all.Your whole conscience stirred withBannister's performance of Walter, inThe Children in the Wood ; but Dickyseemed like a thing, as Shakspeare says,of love, too young to know what conscienceis. He put us into Vesta'sdays. Evil fled before him ; not asfrom Jack, as from an antagonist,but, because it could not touch him, anymorethan a cannon-ball a fly. Hewas delivered iron the burden of thatdeath ; and when death came himself,not in metaphor, to fetch Dicky,it is recorded of him, by Robert Palmer,who kindly watched his exit, thathe received the last stroke, neithervarying his accustomed tranquillity nortune, with the simple exclamation,worthy to have been recorded on hisepitaph' O la! O la ! Bobby !' "GEORGE FREDERICK COOKE.GEORGE FREDERICK COOKE,the son of an Irish captain of dragoons,was born at Westminster, on the 17thof April, 1756. His father died soonafterwards, when his mother removedto Berwick-upon-tweed, where youngCooke was placed at school. Here heimbibed a fondness for theatricals bywitnessing the performances of a strollingcompany, and shortly afterwards heacted Young Meadows, in Love in aVillage, got up by his schoolfellows ata private theatre.Becoming anxious to see the regularplayers, and being short of money, hestole into the theatre unperceived, andhid himself in a barrel, containing twotwenty-four pound cannon-balls, destinedfor theatrical thunder. The playhappened to be Macbeth ; and, thethunder being required, a carpet wastied over the mouth of the barrel;which, at the proper moment, wasrolled clown the stage ; the screams fromwithin frightening the man who shouldhave stopped it at the wing; and Cookebursting off the carpet, found himself inthe presence of the audience.Ai a fit age, he was bound apprenticeto a printer, at Berwick ; but, about themonth of May, 1771, he threw up hisindentures, and went to London. InGEORGE FREDERICK COOKE.the November following, he repaired toHolland, and, in 1772, returned toEngland ; where, in the spring of 1776,he first appeared as a professed actor,as Dumont, in Jane Shore, at a public-house,in Brentford.In 1778, he performed Castalio, atthe Haymarket Theatre; and, from thisperiod, was a member of various provincialcompanies, till January, 1784,when he acted, with great applause, atManchester.He subsequently visited York, and, in1794. joined the Dublin company; butinconsequence of his intemperate anddisgraceful conduct, at a tavern in thatcity, was soon obliged to quit it. Hiscompanion, on the occasion, was CharlesMathews, to whom he had been givinga lecture on the subject of acting, at thesame time illustrating his lesson bydelineations of the different passions.The comedian regarded him seriouslyfor some time, till he assumed a lookof most repulsive drunkenness, whichhe declared was love; when Mathews,unable longer to withstand, burst intoan immoderate net of laughter. Cookewas indignant, but, deaf to remonstrance,still continued to drink; andthe landlady refusing at last to supplyhim with more liquor, he destroyed thewhole of her furniture, and threw acandlestick at the head of Mathews,for expostulating with him on the improprietyof his conduct.Ashamed of this transaction, Cookeenlisted as a private in a regimentbound for the West Indies; but hisembarkation was prevented by illness,produced through intoxication. Hisdischarge was procured by the Manchestermanagers, by whom he wasengaged ; and he subsequently appearedat Chester, where, in 1796, he marriedMiss Daniels.On the 17th of September, of thesame year, he appeared as Shylock, atCork ; and, after playing again at Dublin,he accepted an engagement withMr. Harris, at Govern Garden; wherehe appeared on the 31st of October. 1800,in the character of Richard the Third.He was received with such applause,that he played the part twenty-threetimes during the season ; and was equallywell received in Shylock, Sir GilesOverreach, and other "first-rate characters.On the closing of Covent Garden, herepaired to Birmingham and Edinburgh; and, on the 4ih of July, 1801,was divorced from his wife, whom heis said to have treated with greatcruelty ; he then played at Glasgow,Manchester, and Newcastle ; and againappeared, during the ensuing season,at Covent Garden Theatre.His inveterate habits of intoxicationwere now becoming more fixed, andscarcely an evening passed without hisexhibiting some proofs of recent or actualinebriety. He, nevertheless, continuedto draw crowded houses, andhis representation of Sir Pertinax Mac-sycophant,which he performed for thefirst time in 1802, was considered oneof the finest specimens of acting the stagehad witnessed. He became the themeof discourse in every society ; and it issaid, that a nobleman, observing himstanding at the window of a print-shop,sent his footman with a command thatthe actor would turn round, in orderthat his lordship might view him. Tothis insult, Cooke returned the followinganswer : " Tell his lordship, that if hewill step this way, I'll show him whathe never saw when he looked in hismirror the face of a man !"On the 10th of June of this season(1802-3). he was solicited to play atDrury Lane, for the benefit of Cooper,the American actor, with whom hewent down to Mr. Harris's house, atUxbridge, to obtain his permission. Hisfriend remained in a post-chaise, whileCooke himself went to solicit the favourhe desired, which was granted aftersome hesitation, while the gratefultragedian, though he had to play thesame night, was pledging the manager,in his own wine, so late as six o'clockin the evening, at a distance of fifteenmiles from London. On Mr. Harris'sentreating him to take his departure,Cooke abused him with great violence ;and, though the actor had just receivedfrom him a draft of j^oO, besides otherfavours, he declared that " he would notbe ill-treated by the son of a soap-boiler;"and asked his host, if he thoughthe was offering proper usage to theman who had made his fortune. Hewas at length forced into the chaisethat was waiting to carry him to London; and, arriving at Covent GardenTheatre, went through the first act ofACTORSThe Man of the World, but, in themiddle of the second, the curtain fell,amidst groans and confusion.In October, 1810, he sailed for NewYork ; and on the 21st oi the followingmonth he appeared as Richard, beforetwo thousand two hundred spectators.On the drawing up of the curtain, headvanced to the front of the stage, andrequested that God save the King shouldbe played ; the audience standing. Hemet the tumult which consequentlyensued, as formerly in London, bycoolly taking out his snuff-box, whichput the audience into such good humour,that his demand was complied with.On the conclusion of our national air,he exclaimed, with a contemptuouswave of the hand, " Now, then, youmay play your Yankee Doodle 1"Though received with great applause,he treated the Americans with coolcontempt; and, on his benefit-night,was so intoxicated, that he could notrepeat two lines of his part successively.From New York he proceeded toBoston and Philadelphia, where, aftersome caprice, as to the night of his firstappearance, he acted Richard the Thirdto an audience more numerous thanthat with which Mrs. Siddons was, onher first tour, greeted. On going tothe theatre he could scarcely reach itfor the crowd, which, on his being recognised,made way for him ; uponwhich he remarked, ' They understandtheir interest; for, as the man said,when going to the gallows, there willbe no sport without me." Such, indeed,was the anxiety, at Philadelphia,10 see him, that the doors of the theatrewere open at ten o'clock in the morning,and the stone steps in front actuallytaken possession of on Sundaymorning lor the Monday night's performance.On his return to New York,he was invited to an assembly, wheremany persons of consideration came expresslyto meet him. But his minddwelling on the detention, at the customhouse,of two silver cups, which hadbeen presented to him by the Liverpoolmanagement, his only observation, onentering the room, was, " 1 have lostmy cups!" He seated himself in achair, tom which he did not rise duringthe evening, behaving in a disgraceful,I and often insole. ;t, manner. A lislei)iack girl, having minded him successsiveiy, tea, cakes, and fruit, was each timerepulsed ; the third time with the additionof " I'm sick of seeing your face !"A fourth time she came and handedhim wine, which he accepted, saying,Why, you little black angel, you looklike the devil, 'tis true ; but you bear apassport that would carry you, unquestionablyinto paradise !"At Baltimore, his conduct was equallyextraordinary : on being told that Mr.Madison, the president of the UnitedStates, intended coining to see him act,he exclaimed, " If he does. I'll be d dif I play before him ! What, I ! I,George Frederick Cooke, who haveplayed before the majesty of Britain,play before the contemptible rebel kingof the Yankee Doodles !" After playingin different parts of America, he ultimatelyreturned to New York ; and here,worn out by dissipation, he died, on the26th of September, 1812.On Mr. Cooke's talents, as an actor,it would be needless to expatiate ; thelenity with which his errors, a:;d evenhis insults, were overlooked, sufficientlytestify the extent and influence of hisgenius. As a man, history can furnLhtew instances where talent has been somuch sacrificed to dissipation, and intellectdrowned in habitual intoxication.His education had not been classical,but he was, nevertheless, considering thehours he passed in drunkenness, a weirread man ; and he displayed in criticisma correctness of judgment, and a degreeof taste, which proved that his mindwas not naturally degenerate.In person, he was commanding; hiscountenance was striking ; his foreheadhigh, betokening intellect; and his eyequick, piercing, and intelligent. Hisfeatures, when not distorted by inebriety,indicated a benevolence ofcharacter, the possession of which wasmanifest in his frequent acts of charity.When intoxicated, his mind and his appearanceunderwent a total change ;and his disposition, as well as his countenance,seemed altered from that of aman to a demon. His lamentable maniafor drink was the only stain on hischaracter; and every degrading actionof which, in the course of his life, hewas guilty, may be solely attributed toits destructive influence. His extravagance,on such occasions, was inordinate;he would throw gold right andJOHN KEMBLE.left, and give, intentionally, guineas tohackney-coachmen and waiters, in lieuof shillings.From an innumerable quantity ofanecdotes which, besides those alreadyrelated, have been told of Cooke, weselect the following: Whilst kneeling,one night, in his part of the Duke ofCloister, to the Lady Anne of Mrs.Litchfield, he was seized, though not intoxicated,with so violent a spasm inhis side, that he could not rise. The audience,of course, imagining him to beintoxicated, began to hiss, when Mr.Henry Siddons, stepping forward, said,Ladies and gentlemen, upon my wordMr. Cooke is not drunk !"On the last night of his appearance atLiverpool, he was, as usual, intoxicated,and accordingly hissed. Enraged atthis, he suddenly advanced to the footlights,and called out to the audience,B 1 ye ! b 1 ye all ! there's notabrick throughout your town that'snot cemented with "the blood of anAfrican !" To a London audience hewas. on a similar occasion, not quiteso txpli it: 'ladies and gentlemen,"he exclaimed placing, as he spoke, hisiiund upo;i has cheat, " My old complaintmy old complaint !" and retired amidmingled shouts of laughter and contempt.A short time before his death,he sent to a friend for one hundred dollars,who, on taking the sum to him,found him just recovered from intoxication,in the house of a poor, sick, oldwoman, to prevent the seizure of whosefurniture he had borrowed the money.After a benefit night at Manchester, heis reported to have gone with the receipts,300 or 400, to a tavern, wherehe got drunk, at a meeting of republicanmanufacturers ; towards whom he usedhasty language, and eventually challengedone of them to fight. The man,however, refused ; on the score that,Cooke being rich, and himself poor,rendered the match unequal ; on which,the former put into the fire the banknoteshe had about him, saying, " That'sall I have in the world, and so, d ye !come on, for now I'm as poor as youare."These two last anecdotes show thatthe germ of something lay in the heartof Cooke, whit h, if properly cultivated,might have made him a great and agood man.JOHN KEMBLE.JOHN PHTLTP KEMBLE was born,on the 1st of February, 1757, at Pres-cot,in Lancashire, where his fatherwas manager of a company of comedians.From a preparatory school, atWorcester, Kemble was sent to a Romancatholic seminary, at Sedley ParkinStaffordshire ; and from thence, beingdestined lor the church, to the Englishcollege at Douay. Here he manifestedconsiderable powers of elocution; and,on his return to Ei gland, he determined,though much against the will ofhis father, to emliraa- the profession ofan actor. He made his first appearanceon the 8th of January, 1776, at Wolverhampton,as Theodosius, and afterwardsacted at Manchester. Liverpool,and Hull, with an originality whichgave indications of his future greatness.On the 29th of D cumber, 1778. heproduced, for his benefit, at the last-mentionedtown, a tragedy of his owncomposition, called Belisarius ; and, fourmonths afterwards, a comedy, calledThe Female Officer. In 1780, he published,at York, a volume of fugitivepieces; but. subsequently, bought everycopy he could find, for the purpose ofdestroying them. In 1780, he producedan alteration of The Comedy of Errors,under the title of, Oh ! It's impossible !and, the same year, tried a new speciesof entertainment, called An Attic Evening'sEntertainment ; wherein he delivereda lecture on the art of speaking,and recited odes and passages from theEnglish poets.At the expiration of his York engagement,he went to Dublin, at asalary of 5 a-week ; and, on the 30thof September. 1783, made his first appearancein London, at Drury LaneTheatre, in the character of Hamlet.ACTORS.He was received with great applause ;but it was not until after his return from asecond provincial tour, and subsequentlyto his marriage with Mrs. Bretton, in1787, that his merit began to be fullyappreciated. The leading tragedian,Smith, having then retired from thestage, Kemble had the whole range ofthe first-rate characters to himself; andproved himself equal to the personationof them all. Lord Townley, Lear,Macbeth, Mirabel, and Romeo, wereamong his best performances ; whichhe rendered more impressive by hisintroduction of appropriate costume, &c.alter his accession to the managementof the theatre, in 1788-9. He also revived,with judicious alterations, severalu'.d plays of merit, and brought outsome which were new to the stage,among which were, Deaf and Dumb,The Stranger, The Siege of Belgrade,&c. A musical entertainment, of hisown composition, called Lodoiska, wasreceived with great applause on its productionin 1794; and still continues apopular piece.In 1802, he travelled on the continent,as far as Madrid ; and, on his return,became the purchaser of one-sixth shareof Covent Garden Theatre (for whichhe is said to have given 25,000); andbecame manager in the room of Mr.Lewis, who had resigned.In 1806, he revived Coriolanus; andwhilst playing that character, one night,an apple was thrown upon the stage, inone of the finest scenes between himselfand Mrs. Siddons. Taking it inhis hand, he made a spirited and indignantaddress to the audience-andoffered, on the spot, a reward of onehundred guineas, to any one who woulddisclose the ruffian who had been guiltyof the act.He continued to conduct his theatrewith great success, until the conflagrationof it, on the 20th of September, 1808 ;a calamity which he endured with greatfortitude. Lord Mountjoy, in endeavouringto console him, observed, thatit would be but gratitude in the peopleto compensate his loss : to which Kemblereplied, with much quickness :"Gratitude, my lord! the gratitude ofthe world and the people! My lord,Christ was crucified I)e Witt was assassinated.So much for the world andthe people!" Amongst other kindnesses,however, which he experienced,the Duke of Northumberland lent him[0,000, upon his simple bond; whichhe cancelled, on the day of laying thefoundation-stone of the new " theatre.This was opened in the September ofthe ensuing year, with an increase ofprices, which gave rise to the famousO. P. riots. During sixty nights of continueduproar, the greatest insults werelavished upon Mr. Kemble, and everymember of his family ; and he, in vain,attempted to address the audience.On one occasion, however, a statementof the exigencies which rendered theobjectionable measure necessary, waspartially heard, as also his concludingsentence, " This I declare to youupon my honour I, who would not tella lie for all that this theatre is worth."After very many disgraceful proceedings,these riots subsided, through amutual concession. The boxes remainedat 7s., the pit was reduced from 4s. to3*. 6d.In 1812-13, Mr. Kemble went toIreland; and, on the 23d of June, 1817,took his farewell of the stage, at CoventGarden Theatre, in the character ofCoriolanus ; which part he played withan energy that exceeded all his previousefforts. On the falling of the curtain,a spontaneous shout arose, of " Nofarewell !" and it was some time beforehe was permitted to commence his partingaddress. He was strongly agitatedduring its delivery; and in mentioningthe divine Shakspeare," tears, forsome time, impeded his utterance.He, shortly afterwards, went to resideat Toulouse, for the benefit of hishealth, and thence to Lausanne. Hepaid a final visit to England, in 1820;and, returning to the continent, fixedhis abode at Lausanne, where he diedof a paralytic attack, on the 26th ofFebruary, 1823.Mr. Kemble possessed a well made,and graceful figure ; which was setoff to peculiar advantage by his commandingstature, and the dignified, yetnatural attitudes, he so loved to assume.His countenance was a finely formedoval ; the eyes were more brilliant andromantic than observant and penetrating,and shadowed by strongly-markedeyebrows; the forehead straightand open; the chin prominent, andslightly pointed; and the nose aquiline.JOSEPH MUNDEN,His whole features were highly ex |preserve ; and yet so delicately blended, jthat no harsh or rugged line was to be ;discerned upon their surface. Therewas a dignity in his every look andgesture never yet surpassed. His countenance,calculated to attract attentionat first sight, and, once seen, never tobe forgotten, was as indicative of mindand intellect, as it was of symmetryand beauty. His voice was feeble, butpossessed of great depth ; and capableof producing the sweetest tones of harmony.With such physical advantages,added to mental capacities of a veryhigh order, it is not to be wondered at,that he became a most impressive actor ;and in characters of a reflective, ratherthan impulsive cast, an unequalled one.His Hamlet, Cato, and Coriolanus, will,probably, never be surpassed; but inRichard, Othello, Lear, &c., perhapsKean is not the only one who hasexcelled him.The private character of Mr. Kemblewould have been as amiable as it wasdecidedly estimable, but for the overbearingpride by which it was said tohave been occasionally marked. Hepossessed, however, a humane and benevolentdisposition ; and, throughouthis life, preserved a rectitude of principleand propriety of conduct, which, possiblyrendered him more attractive than hissplendid talents as an actor. Amongother valuable requisites for the stage,he possessed a very retentive memory ;and has been often heard to say, thathe would make a bet that, in a fewdays' time, he would repeat every linein a newspaper, advertisements and all,without misplacing a single word. Hispauses, however, were so long, thatSheridan told him to act Hamlet, andplay music between them, by way ofnovelty, of the want of which Kemblewas, at the time, complaining.He is said, when young, to haveplayed a singing part (Richard, Coeurde Lion), for twenty nights. At therehearsal, the leader of the band exclaimed," Oh, sir! how shockinglyyou murder time!" " If I do," repliedKemble, " I am not so merciless as you,who are always beating it." Beingaddressed by a beggar, he dropped ahalfpenny in his hat, with the same airand grace as he would have playedHamlet; observing to Bannister, withwhom he was walking, " It is not often1 do these things, Bannister; but whenI do them, it is with dignity." InDunlap's Memoirs of Cooke, the latteris made to say of Kemble, " John takeshis bottle sometimes, as well as otherpeople. I have had some hard boutswith him. ' Come, Cooke,' says he,we don't play tomorrow let's getdrunk.' And if he said so, he was sureto do it." The same authority relatessome curious instances of the confusionoccasioned by Kemble's misdirection ofletters, after several were sealed up,and lying together. On one occasion,his landlady received a letter from him,ordering her to get ready to play Clytus ;and his principal performer, another,directing him to be sure to have hissheets well aired.In addition to the pieces before-mentioned,Mr. Kemble wrote a farce,called, The Panel, and revived andaltered for the stage several other piecesbesides those before-named.JOSEPH MUNDEN.JOSEPH MUNDEN was born in theyear 1758, in Brook Market, Holborn,where his father carried on the businessof a poulterer. His mother being lefta widow, with scanty means, soon afterthe birth of the subject of our memoir,the latter was, at an early age, placedas shop-boy with an apothecary, butdu-liking the employment, engagedhimself as writing clerk to an attorney,and subsequently to a law stationer.It seems that in this situation he paidmore attention to dress than wasagreeable to his master, and a quarreltaking place between them, Mundenleft him, and returned to a solicitor'soffice.M under's penchant for the stage wasfirst excited by his frequent attendanceat the treaties to witness the ding ofACTORS.Garrick, of which he had seen morethan any of his contemporaries whowere living in 1820, with the exceptionof Quick and Bannister. Atwhat time he entered upon his theatricalcareer, we are not informed,but Liverpool was the scene of hisfirst stage debut. lie came to thistown in company with an actor, whomlit had become acquainted with inLondon, but merely in the hope ofobtaining ati engagement himself. Toprocure himself a subsistence in themeanwhile, he got some employment inthe office of the town clerk, and at thesame time copied parts out for thetheatre. Here he was at length introducedas a walker in processions, andbanner-bearer, at 1*. per night, and,in process of time, had his ambitiongratified, by being allowed to performthe part of the first carrier in Henry theFourth.From Liverpool he went to Rochdale,but soon returned to the former town,and, for the next two years, earned hisliving by his powers of penmanship.At the expiration of this period, histheatrical mania again came upon him,and he started off to Chester, with onlya guinea in his pocket. This haddwindled to a shilling on his arrival,but instead of securing himself a lodgingfor the night, he parted with his all foran admission to the theatre. Fortunatelyhe there met with an acquaintance,whom he had known whilst an apprenticeto a butcher in Brook Market;by him Munden was hospitablyentertained, and enabled, the nextmorning, to pursue his journey to themetropolis. By the time he had arrivedat Stratford-upon-Avon, his cash againtailed, when he hit upon the expedientof passing off for the comrade of aWarwickshire militia-man, who wasmarching to the town at which he wasbilleted. The trick told; "he wasordered," says the relater of the anecdote," to the general mess room, andreceived as one among the warriors ;and his lively humour made him kingof the company for the night. Nextmorning, the regiment mustered, andMunden was told to follow, and beenlisted ; but, as he had obtained allhe wished, a supper and a bed. he lefthis military friends to their glory, andproceeded to London." The recital ofthese circumstances, it is said, inducedO'Keefe to introduce the incident inthe part of Nipperkin, in Sprigs ofLaurel or Rival Soldiers.Munden was again obliged to haverecourse to his quill for a subsistence inLondon, but the moment he was out ofemployment, he resumed his theatricalcareer at Leatherhead, as a representativeof old men. He afterwards playedat Windsor, Colnbrook, and Andover,with tolerable success, at half-a-guineaper week. Finding that tragedy wasnot his forte, he refused to play Alta-mont,when desired to do so by themanager, and persisting in his refusal,was dismissed. He then procured anengagement at Canterbury, and afterwardsat other provincial towns, tillat length we find him playing first lowcomedian at Manchester, and beginningto save money. He joined Mr. Whitlockin the management of the SheffieldTheatre ; but his conduct in this capacitygave little satisfaction to eitheractors or audience, and he was soonglad to retire from it.About this time (1790), Edwin died,and the subject of our memoir was immediatelyengaged to appear at CoventGarden. He made his debut on the2nd of December, in the character ofSir Francis Gripe, in The Busy Body,and Jemmy Jumps, in The Farmer; hissuccess in which parts, after the impressionsmade by Parsons and Edwin, wasconsidered little short of a miracle.His reputation was at once established,and he sustained it by a variety ofcharacters admirably suited to hisabilities, and of most of which he was theoriginal representative. Among themwe may mention, Old Rapid, Caustic,Brummagem, Lazzarillo (Two Stringsto your Bow), Verdun, Bonus (Laughwhen you Can), Crack, Nipperkin,Captain Bertram, Valour (Mysteriesof the Castle), Sir Abel Handy, SirRobert Bramble, Old Dornton, &c.This latter part had been assigned toQuick, but that actor was so struckwith the character of Silky, which hadbeen given to Munden, that he declaredhe would play the latter, or noneat all, and in this manner Munden gotpossession of Old Dornton.In 1813, he left Covent Garden forDrury Lane, where he remained untilthe 31st of May, 1824, when he took hisMRS. ROBINSON,40 -ileave of the stage in the character of jSir Robert Bramble, in The Poor Gentleman,and Old Dozen, in Past Teno'clock. It is singular that, instead ofspeaking, he read his farewell address,which considerably marred its effect.As an actor," says one of Mr.Munden's biographers, ' our hero'sgreatest defect was buffoonery, but yetit was a buffoonery exclusively his own;he did not, like Listen, step from hischaracter as an actor, to converse withthe spectators ; if he took liberties withhis part, he took few with his audience.What a mutable face was his! acountenance ever shifting, ever new,his globular liquid eye, glistening androlling alternately, illumining everycorner of his laughing face ; then theeternal tortuosities of his nose, and thealarming descent of his chin, contrasted,as it eternally was, with the portentousrise of his eyebrows. Munden was, asagrimai.ier, what Rowlandson was asacaricaturist, very broad, but veryoriginal. He lavished more contortionsof countenance on a single part, thanother actors can afford to do on a rangeof characters. His face was a visualkaleidoscope, and its changes were unlimited.Thai he could restrain hislove of mumming was evident, whenhe had assigned to him characters ofreal importance. His Autolycus, colonies,and Dornton, proved that he wasf a sterling comedian ; and in Darrell,i though he yielded a little to his love ofj face-making, he established his claimto originality of conception and chastenessof style. In Crack, Dozen, andcharacters of that description, wheredrunkenness formed the principal feature,he was perfectly irresistible. Hisrepresentation of that sort of inebriety,that gives drollery, rather than imbe-I facility to the individual, was singularlyfelicitous ; and in that, indeed, lay thecharm of his drunkards, they werenever dead drunk, they were merrysouls, and had taken liquor to enliven,not destroy, their powers."Mr. Munden is married, and has twochildren, a son and a daughter. He issaid to be penurious in his habits, buthospitable at his table, though he catersfor it with due attention 10 economy. Ini person, he is about five feet three inchesin height, with large and expressiveeyes, and a shuffling gait, occasioned byI frequent attacks of the gout. Notwith-| standing his comic powers, he is said tobe of a sombre disposition off the stage.MRS. ROBINSON.THIS lady, whose maiden name wasDarby, was born at Bristol, on the 27thof November, 1758. Her father, bybirth an American, was at one timepossessed of a large fortune, but lost itby speculation in a project for civilizingthe Esquimaux Indians. At the age often,she went to a school in London,kept by Miss Hannah More and hersisters, and when in her fourteenth year,assisted her mother in the instructionof a few pupils. She completed hereducation at a seminary in Mary-le-bone,the dancing-master of which,being ballet-master at Covent Garden,introduced her to Garrick, who was sopleased with her, that he resolved onher appearing as Cordelia to his Lear.At the-age of sixteen, she was clandestinelymarried to Mr. Robinson, thenunder articles to an attorney. For twoyears she lived with her husband ingreat splendour ; but on his arrest fordebt, she accompanied him to prison,and remained with him for fifteenmonths. After this, she again turnedher thoughts to the stage, when Garrick,although he had retired, becameher instructor. Having fixed uponJuliet for her debut, he himself spokethe part of Romeo, during the rehearsals: and on the night of her appearance,sat in the orchestra to witness herperformance. Her reception was of themost flattering description, and it wasnot long before George the Fourth (thenPrince of Wales), saw and admired herin the part ot Permit. It is to be observed,that, at this time, her husbandwas leading a most abandoned life, butshe rejected the most splendid offersto live separately from him, even whenA C T O ils ,she discovered that he was supportingtwo mistresses from the proceeds of herown labours.At length, through the Earl of Essex,a correspondence was entered into withher, on the part of the prince, betweenwhom and herself, an interview tookplace, for the first time, at Kew. " Themeeting," she says, in her account ofit, " was but of a moment The Princeof Wales and the Duke of York (thenBishop of Osuaburg) were walking downthe avenue. They hastened to meet us.A few words, and those scarcely articulate,were uttered by the prince, whena noise of people approaching from thepalace startled us. The moon was nowrising, and the idea of his royal highnessbeing seen out at so unusual an hour,terrified the whole groupe. After a fewmore words of the most affectionate nature,uttered by the prince, we parted.The rank of the prince," she continues," no longer chilled into awethat being who now considered him asthe lover and the friend. The gracesof his person, the irresistible sweetnessof his smile, the tenderness of his melodious,yet manly voice, will be rememberedby me, till every vision ofthis changing scene shall be forgotten."Mrs. Robinson had several subsequentmeetings with the prince in KewGardens, and shortly afterwards madeher last appearance on the stage, as SirHenry Reveal, in The Miniature Picture.Previously to her first interviewwith the prince, he had enclosed herabond or 20,000, to be paid on hiscoming of age ; but on the very day ofhis majority, she received a cold letterfrom him, saying, " we must meet nomore." After having in vain sought anexplanation, by letter, she set off, onenight, for Windsor, and, on her way,was robbed by some highwaymen onHounslow Heath. On her arrival, theprince would not see her, but she hadan interview with her friends theDuke of Dorset and the Earl of Essex,neither of whom could account for theprince's conduct. Her royal paramourat length condescended to see her oncemore, when he assured her of his unabatedaffection ; but on meeting her inthe Park, the next day, passed her unnoticed.Her embarrassments now rendered itnecessary tor her to leave England forParis, when she wrote to the prince, butreceived no answer. The business wasat length referred to Mr. Fox, and, in1784, her claims were adjusted by anannuity of 500 a year for herself, anda moiety of that sum to descend to herdaughter on her death. At Paris shebecame an object of great interest, andwas noticed by Marie Antoinette, whocalled her La belle Anglaise, and gaveher a purse netted by her own hand.In the interim she is said to have attachedherself to a general officer ofcelebrity, and with such sincerity, as topart with all her disposable propertyin his behalf, besides incurring a violentrheumatism, by suddenly following himto the sea-side, to procure his releasefrom arrest. She continued for sometimeto reside alternately in Franceand England, and in 1787, she fixed herresidence at Brighton. Here she wrotethe admired lines, " To him who willunderstand them," and the poem TheHaunted Beach. In the winter of1790, she entered into a poetical correspondencewith Mr. Robert Merry,under the assumed names of Laura andLaura Maria ; her productions gaining,in every circle, the highest commendations.She subsequently wrote several poems,which were collected into one volume ;Vicenza, a romance ; and a farce calledNobody, which nobody admired. Thesewere followed by The Sicilian Lover, atragedy; some novels, entitled, respectively,The Widow, Angelina, Hubertde Levrac, Walsingham, The FalseFriend, and The Natural Daughter ;Lyrical Tales ; Impartial Reflectionson the Situation of the Queen ofFrance ; Thoughts on the Condition otWomen ; and two volumes of poems.In 1799, she undertook the poeticaldepartment of The Morning Post, buther contributions to this paper were soonterminated by her death, which tookplace on the 26th of December, 1800.The person of Mrs, Robinson waslovely in the extreme; and such wasthe early ripeness of her charms, thatshe received an offer of marriage beforeshe was thirteen years of age. Her dispositionwas ingenuous and affectionate,and in unbounded affection for hermother and daughter, she gave decisiveCes of the tenderness of her heart,manners were highly polished;MISS Barren.40/Vand among other accomplishments, shewas mistress of the French, German,and Italian languages. Her only faultsoriginated in her misfortunes : and ifshe erred in flying from the arms of aProfligate husband, to those of a heartslibertine, the sufferings which followedsuch a step, render condemnationsuperfluous.As an actress, her career was briefand brilliant ; her personation of Per-dita was exquisitely touching; and hadshe remained on the stage, she would,probably, have stood alone in all characterswhere the soft, tender, andgraceful, prevail over the impetuous,proud, and ambitious. Her poetry (whichtouches, in many parts, on her ownmisfortunes), is easy, natural, and tender; and in her novels, good-naturedsatire, with just views, and much knowledgeof life, are combined.MISS FAR II EN.THIS elegant actress was born in theyear 1759. Her father carried on thebusiness of a surgeon and apothecary,at Cork ; his habits we are told, werelow and irregular, and " had it not beenfor the exertions of her mother, and theassistance occasionally received rougherrelations, the condition of the familymust have been wretched in theextreme." The indigent circumstancesof her parents probably led Miss Farrento think of the stage, upon which shemade her first appearance at Liverpool,in the year 1773, as Rosetta, in Love inaVillage. She was exceedingly wellreceived, and became a favourite atLiverpool, as well as at Chester and othertowns belonging to the circuit, whereshe subsequently performed. The manager,Mr. Younger, at once prophesiedher future eminence, and by his attentionsand instruction, did all in hispower to further her professional advancement.He gave her an introductionto Colman, who immediately engagedher at the Hay market Theatre,where she made her debfit on the 10thof June, 1777, as Miss Hardcastle, inShe Stoops to Conquer, the same nighton which lid win and Henderson appeared.Her person is described atthe time as thin, genteel, and abovethe middle stature ; her countenanceexpressive and full of sensibility ; hervoice clear, but rather sharp and unvaried; her action not awkward, andher delivery emphatic and distinct.She was received with great applause,and gave satisfaction both to audienceand critics, although the latter had, astwual, some faults to find. " WhenMiss Farren," said one of them, "learnsto tread the stage with more ease ; tomodulate and vary her voice ; to correct,in spirit, and regulate her action ; andto give a proper utterance to her feelings,by a suitable expression of voiceand countenance, in our opinion shewill be a most valuable acquisition toour London theatres."In the ensuing season she appearedat Covent Garden, but gained littleaccession to her fame, being placedmostly in tragic characters, in which,although she performed them withjudgment and taste, she was far frombeing great. At length, on her removalto Drury Lane, she was chosento fill up the gap in comedy, occasionedby the engagement of Mrs. Abingdonat the other house. The latter hadlong been considered supreme in thefashionable heroines of the stage; andMiss Farren had, therefore, no ordinarydisadvantages to contend with, as .thesuccessor of a most excellent actressand an established favourite. The firstcharacter which she attempted, of thosehitherto considered Mrs. Abingdon'salone, wis Lady Townley, and she wentthrough it with a success beyond hermost sanguine expectations. It was notlong before she was noticed by some ofthe first circles in the fashionable world,and she continued to maintain her highrank on the staple, until her retirementfrom it, on the 7th of April. 1797.In the following month she became thewife of the Earl ot Derby, who had forsome time been attached to her, but hadbeen unable to offer her his hand duringthe existence of the Countess of Derby,ACTORS,rom whom he had long been separated.So well did she fill the station to whichshe was raised, that Queen Charlotte,'* the most rigid discriminator of femaleworth," as Mr. Gait calls her, "treatedHer with special attention, and she wasselected to make one in the processionat the marriage of the princess royal.She died universally esteemed and "respected,on the 23rd of April, 1829.Miss Farren possessed neither thephysical nor mental requisites to be aSiddons, an O'Neill, or a Jordan ; butinthat style of acting, which, in everysense of the word is implied by theterm, lady-like, no one came near herexcept Mrs. Abingdon; although thatlady, upon the whole, was a superiorperformer. " In the style of her acting,as Lady Townley," says Mr. Gait, " Ihave been often assured, that she affordeda very fascinating representationof a thoughtless lady of quality, whosereal virtues were disguised by follies,carelessly assumed. It was markedwill) even more delicacy than Mrs.Abingdon had been able to show inany of her performances, and in thisrespect, finely presented a gentlewomanof the same nature, but, in the opinionof the public, more refined. Her talentswere perhaps, however, less versatile ;and after having seen her in all thosedifferent characters, in which she wasdeemed happiest, the conclusion wasgeneral, that although Lady Townleywas not her most pleasing personation,it was the part in which her art andendowments were best shown. Thepublic preferred her Lady Teazle ; andit appears that it must have been distinguishedby some superior charms;but I have been told by good judges,that it was, in several points, not so appropriatein manner as the performanceof Mrs. Jordan. Those of that opinion,regarded it as too much of the fine lady,and defective in those little points andsparkles of rusticity, which are still, bythe philosophical critics, supposed tomark the country education of the fascinatingheroine. She was as the ameliaof the conservatory soft, beautiful,and delicate ; and Mrs. Jordan asthe rose of the garden, sprinkled withdew."JOSEPH GEORGE HOLMAN.JOSEPH GEORGE HOLMAN, theson of an officer in the army, anddescended from the younger brotherof Sir John Holman, Baronet, of WalworthCastle, Oxfordshire, was bornabout the year 1760. His father dyingtwo years after, he was placed underthe care of his uncle, who sent him,first to the academy in Soho Square,and afterwards to Queen's College,Oxford, with a view of enabling him totake orders. The applause, however,which he had met with as a performerin the annual dramatic representationsat the Soho Academy, had given hima predilection for the stage, which wastoo powerful to be overcome, and on the26th of October, 1784, he made hisdebut at Covent Garden, in the characterof Romeo. His performance wassomewhat too fiery, perhaps, but therewas also a grace, genius, and sensibilityabout it, that surprised and delightedhis audience, who bestowed on himsuch flattering applause, that he wasirrevocably confirmed an actor. At theclose of the season, he returned toOxford, in time to keep a term ; histheatrical efforts not being considered,by those who then presided in theuniversity, as any bar to whateveracademical distinction he might bedesirous of obtaining. On a secondvisit to the university, he was permittedto wear the gown oi a civilian, althoughhe had not kept the usual number ofterms, on which occasion he displayedhis gratitude and classical eloquence, inaLatin oration. After he had performedfor three seasons at CoventGarden, a difference with the managerrespecting an increase of salary, causeda separation, and Mr. Holman thenwent to Dublin and Edinburgh, wherehis reputation rose so high, that Mr.Harris was glad to re-engage him.In the season of 1800, however, freshdifferences arose, which led to Mr.JOHN BANNISTER.Hotmail's secession from the theatre,with eight other principal performers.These returned to Covent Garden,after a decision of the lord chamberlain,who had been appointed arbitrator, infavour of the manager, but the subjectof our memoir was either not offered,or would not accept of, a re-engagement.After performing for a fewnights at the Haymarket, he returnedto Dublin, where he purchased a shareof the theatre, but did not find thespeculation answer his expectations.The next important event in histheatrical life, was a trip to America,where he was received with the mostflattering applause, and met with suchsuccess, that he was induced to takethe theatre at Charleston. Hereafterhaving strengthened his companyby recruits from London, he again resumedthe duties of manager, but withno better success than before. Inthe midst of his difficulties, lie wasattacked, together with several of hisp. reformers, by the autumnal fever. Itsoon carried off his wife, to whom hehad been married only a short time,and he himself died two days afterwards,at a bathing place, called Rockaway,in I-ong Island, on the 24th ofAugust, 1817. His first wife was a greatgrand-daughter of the Duke of Hamilton; she died ten years after her unionwith Mr. Holman/in 1810.As an actor, Mr. Holman was, foralong time, the powerful rival ofJohn Kemble, whom, in some characters,and in particular, that of LordTownley, he was thought to have excelled.He is another instance of thesuccess which natural abilities, combinedwith education, at once commands;he, as well as Barry and Smith, havingestablished a theatrical reputation, onthe very first night of his appearance.Mr. Holman was also a successfulwriter for the stage : his chief worksare Abroad and at Home, a comicopera ; Red Cross Knights, a play ; TheVotary of Wealth, a comedy; What aBlunder ! a comic opera; Love givesthe Alarm, a comedy ; and The GazetteExtraordinary, a comedy.JOHN BANNISTER.JOHN BANNISTER is the son ofMr. Charles Bannister, celebrated onthe stage as a finger, and was born aboutthe year 1760. The night precedinghis birth, his mother, it is said, had adream, in which she beheld her infantson dancing a hornpipe on Garrick'shead. Whether this had any influenceon his destination, is not stated ; butat the age of four, he was introducedto the public, upon the Ipswich stage,as the Duke of York, in Richard III.In the meantime, his education wasnot neglected ; and as he began toevince a talent for painting, his fatherwas recommended to bring him up asan artist. A lady, to whom he wasintroduced by his grandmother, becamehis patroness, and called with him uponGarrick, for the purpose of taking hisopinion as to the master under whomyoung Bannister should study. Garrickrecommended Loutherbourg; but wasso pleased with the boy's repetition ofsome passages from Shakspeare, that hewrote a part for him in his Maid of theOaks, and requested him to play it.Bannister, however, preferred paintingto acting, and declined the part. Afterhe had been six months under DeLoutherbourg, his master required thepremium of ^200 to be paid down ; buthis father being unable to spare thatsum, the former gave Bannister his dismissal,complaining to Garrick " thathis pupil was more fit to imitate Natureon the boards than on canvass." Thesubject of our memoir, however, pursuedhis studies at the Royal Academy,nothing daunted by the observation ofDe Loutherbourg. " His father, toencourage him," says one of his biographers," always presented a shillingfor every new piece he produced,which were mostly heads ; and wheneverJack was in want of money, heretouched one of his old drawings,knowing that his father's discriminationwas not the most acute. One evening,being in want of a small sum, he madeA C T O R S .a few alterations in an old head, andcarried it to the theatre, in hopes of theusual douceur from his father, who wasin waiting to go on the stage ; he pointedout the various beauties, but withoutreceiving the gratuity ; he repeated hisobservations, but still without effect,until he was obliged to come to the pointby begging the loan of a shilling, andhis father, somewhat warmly, replied,Why d e ! you are just like anordinary ; come when you will, it is ashilling a-head.' "At length his father's circumstancesmade it desirable that he should seekfor earlier means of subsistence thanthose afforded him in the profession ofan artist, and he accordingly applied toGarrick for an engagement. The managerinstructed him in the part of Dick,in The Apprentice, in which Bannistermade his debut, in 1778. He met witha favourable reception, and performedso well that it was doubtful whether hisserious or comic powers most prevailed.The principal characters which he nextacted were Achmet, in Barbarossa,Hamlet, Romeo, &c., which he playedto Miss Farren's Juliet, &c. Amongthose, who admired his tragedy, wasGarrick, who used frequently to sit inthe orchestra to watch his performance ;and behaved with so much kindness offthe stage to Bannister, that the latterfelt a great shock at his death. Whenthe elder Colman opened the Hay marketTheatre, Bannister made his debit thereas Gradus, in Who's the Dupe? andso delighted Parsons, by his acting, thathe called him his son. The original partof Dabble, in The Humorist, addedto his reputation ; but it was not tillafter the demise of Edwin that he maybesaid to have become an establishedfavourite, when he added to his otherperformances those of Lingo, Brisket,and Peeping Tom.Bannister, at one time, gave imitationswith great success, but thinkingmimicry an, unfair mode of excitingmerriment, discontinued the exhibition.He gave also a sort of monopolylogue,entitled Bannister's Budget, at theFreemason's Tavern, and occasionallyon his benefit nights.]n 1802, he became acting managerof Drury Lane, hut resigned the officein 1804; in which year he nearly lost hiseft hand by the bursting of a gun,while sporting. His re-appearance washailed with entries a^iic applause, andin the course of the character he assumed,being asked if he would go ona sporting excursion, he amused theaudience by replying, " Oh, no ! the lasttime I went out a shooting I made abad hand of it!" He continued toperform with undiminished applauseuntil the 1st of June, 1815, on theevening of which day he took his farewellof the stage, after a successfulcareer of thirty-seven years.We affirm," says a critic of 1826,that the present stage has nothinglike Bannister. He had the vivacity ofHarley, without his tedious fidgetingand his empty volubility ; he had themanly roughness of Fawcett, withoutthe hardness that attends that quality inthe Covent Garden stage manager ; hehad the deep feeling of Wallack, withoutso much parade of pantomime display; he was not so good a mimic asMathews, yet his Colonel Feignwellpleased us more than that performer's;he was more like the colonel, if he wasless like the steward, and he preservedthrough all his assumptions a face, anair, for the audience, in addition to theone he presented to his fellow-performers."In comparing Bannister'sBudget, with Mathews's At Home, thesame authority remarks : " Bannisterinterposed touches of feeling and pathos,and aimed at the heart Mathews onlyattacked the imagination. Bannistermade you laugh less, but he satisfiedyou more. Mathews created moremirth, and surprised you infinitely more,though he actually pleased you less.Mathews gives every imitation as if hewere embodying the being Bannister,as if he were imitating it."Bannister's best parts were Walter,Whimsical, Trudge, La Gloire, Leopold,Dick, Brass, &c., some of whichare almost dead to the stage for thewant of an efficient performer. Dowtonand Fawcett excelled him in old men,but in such parts as Job Thorn berry,Storm, in Ella Rosenberg, and in sailors,he was inimitable.Mr. Bannister was, many years ago,united to Miss Harper, who, if we are tocredit one of his biographers, " changedhim, by the most gentle and endearingmethods, from a professed rake to atender parent and fond husband."DOROTHY JORDAN.DOROTHY JORDAN.DOROTHY BLAND, the real nameof this accomplished actress, that ofJordan being assumed, was born inWaterford, about the year 1762. Herfather was the son of a Welsh clergyman; who, having married when aminor, instituted proceedings which invalidatedhis union with the mother ofour actress. Mrs. Jordan made hertheatrical debut on the Dublin stage, in1777, as Miss Francis, in the part ofPhoebe, in As You Like It, and wasreceived with a moderate share of applause; which also attended her representationof Lopez, in The Duenna,the Romp, in the farce of that name, andAdelaide, in The Count of Narbonne.In the following season, she appearedat Cork, where she was much admiredfor her archness of manner, and delightfuland sportive simplicity ; and had afree benefit procured for her by theyoung bucks," by which she clearedj40. At Dublin, she is said to havebeen exposed to the persecution ofDaly, the manager ; who, after havinglent her a sum of money, threatened toarrest her, if she would not consent tobecome his mistress. However thismay be, after her return from Cork toDublin, when her salary was raised tothree guineas a-week, she had an offerof marriage from Lieutenant Done, butdeclined it, by the advice of her friends.In 1782, she came to England, andwas engaged by Tate Wilkinson, toappear at the Leeds Theatre; whereshe made her debfit as Calista, in TheFair Penitent. Tate Wilkinson had, onher first introduction to him, asked herwhether her line was tragedy, comedy,or opera ; to which she replied, ' all ;'and, to give him a specimen of hercomic powers, she undertook, when thetragedy was ended, to sing The GreenwoodLaddie. " She was heard," saysBoaden, " through the play, with thegreatest attention and sympathy ; andthe manager began to tremble at theabsurdity, as he reasonably thought it,of Calista arising from the dead, andrushing before an audience in theirtears, to sing a ballad in the pastoralstyle, which nobody called for or caredabout. But on she jumped, with herelastic spring, and a smile that Nature'sown cunning hand had moulded, in afrock and a little mob-cap, and hercurls as she wore them all her life ;and she sang her ballad so enchantingly,as to fascinate her hearers, and convincethe manager that every charm had notbeen exhausted by past times, nor allof them numbered ; for the volunteer,unaccompanied ballad of Mrs. Jordanwas peculiar to her, and charmed onlyby her voice and manner."From Leeds, she proceeded, withWilkinson, to York, and other provincialtowns, performing male, as wellas female, characters ; but, though generallyreceived with applause, acquiringno very great reputation. Itwas at York that she first played underthe name of Jordan ; but whether inconsequenceof her connexion with agentleman of that name, or merely forthe purpose of creating a suppositionthat she was married, is uncertain. Itwas visible that she was pregnant ; andone of her biographers hints, that Dalywas the father of the expected child ;whilst Mr. Boaden thinks that, eventhen, she was under the protection ofMr. Ford.In 1785, she was engaged to appearat Drury Lane ; where she made hercurtsey to the audience in the part ofPeggy, in The Country Girl, on the18th of October. ' She came to town,"says Mrs. Inchbald, " with no report inher favour to elevate her above a verymoderate salary, or to attract morethan a very moderate house when sheappeared. But here moderation stopped.She at once displayed such consummateart, with such bewitching nature, suchexcellent sense, and such innocent simplicity,that her auditors were boundlessin their plaudits, and so warm in theirpraises, when they left the theatre,that their friends at home would notgive credit to the extent of theireulogium." Mrs. Jordan's next partACTORS,was that of Viola, in Twelfth Night,and her third, Imogen, in Cymbeline ;but though she succeeded in both, shewas not so much applauded as in herfirst character. She, consequently,played comic parts chiefly, during theremainder of the season; and drewsuch full houses, that her salary wasdoubled, and she was allowed two benefits.A short time after she had been inLondon, she became the mistress ofa Mr. Ford, by whom she had two orthree children ; one of whom was Mrs.Alsop, the actress. At the close of theDrury Lane season, Mrs. Jordan returnedto Leeds ; where the receptionshe met with fully compensated for theformer coldness of her audience in thattown. She then visited York, Edinburgh,and Glasgow ; and, at the latterplace, made such an impression on thetheatrical portion of the public, thatthey presented her with a gold medal.She continued to act at the principalmetropolitan arid provincial theatreswith her usual popularity, until theyear 1790; when her connexion withthe Duke of Clarence subjected her tosome newspaper strictures, chargingher with a less careful attention to herprofessional duties. On her appearancein the December of that year, somemarks of displeasure were, in consequence,manifested, upon which shewalked to the front of the stage, andthus addressed the audience:" Ladiesand Gentlemen, I should conceive myselfutterly unworthy of your favour, if theslightest mark of public disapprobationdid not affect me very sensibly. SinceI have had the honour and the happinessto strive here to please you, it hasbeen my constant endeavour, by unremittingassiduity, to merit your approbation.I beg to assure you, uponmy honour, that I have never absentedmyself one minute from the duties ofmy profession, but from real indisposition; thus having invariably acted, Ido consider myself under the publicprotection." This address had the desiredeffect ; and her domestic circumstanceswere no more made the subjectof complaint against her in her professionalcareer.At the time of her connexion withthe Duke of Clarence, her salary, atCovent Garden, was 30 per week;and want, therefore, could not haveinduced her to become his mistress.She submitted to his proposals on conditionof receiving 1,000 per annum ;which was paid her regularly until, asit is said, at the suggestion of the king,the duke proposed jgoOO, as a sufficientsum. Mrs. Jordan's only answer tothe proposition was, a blank cover, directedto the duke, inclosing that partof the play-bill on which was printed,No money returned after the risingof the curtain."Such is the statement of one of herbiographers ; but from more authenticaccounts, we learn the following particulars.At the time when the Dukeof Clarence first made overtures to her,she was the mistress of Mr. Ford ;who had, it seems, only hesitated tomake her his wife, through fear ofoffending his father. It was now necessaryfor him to declare his intentionsexplicitly, as Mrs. Jordan informed himthat she should certainly prefer theprotection of the Duke of Clarence tohis (Mr. Ford's); but that the dukeshould not be listened to for a moment,if the father of her present childrenwould consent to become her husband.Mr. Ford refused; and Mrs. Jordanentered into that connexion with theDuke of Clarence, which brought herten children; and lasted in an almostuninterrupted state of domestic harmony,until its sudden dissolution, in1811. She was acting at Cheltenhamat the time when the letter, communicatingthe duke's intention of separatingfrom her, and desiring her tomeet him at Maidenhead, was received.She arrived at the theatre," says Mr.Boaden, " dreadfully weakened by asuccession of fainting fits. She, however,struggled on with Nell, until Jobsonarrived at the passage where he hasto accuse the conjuror of making herlaughing drunk. When the actress hereattempted to laugh, the afflicted womanburst into tears. Her Jobson. with greatpresence of mind, altered the text, andexclaimed to her ' Why, Nell, theconjuror has not only made thee drunkhe has made thee crying drunk,'thus covering her personal distress, andcarrying her through the scene incharacter. After the performance, shewas put into a travelling chariot in herstage dress, to keep her appointmentDOROTHY JORDAN.with the royal duke, in a state of anguisheasily to be conceived. Whatpassed at the meeting I would not wishto detail. After allowing her due timeto recover her spirits, and endeavour todoherself justice, by making her statementto the Regent submitting herselfentirely to his judgment, and, finally,to the generous nature of the dukehimself, she thus writes upon the subjectof the separation to her confidentialfriend :My dear Sir, I received yours,and its enclosure, safe this morning.My mind is beginning to feel somewhatreconciled to the shock and surprise ithas lately received ; for could you orthe world believe that we never had,for twenty years, the semblance of aquarrel. 'But this is so well known inour domestic circle, that the astonishmentis the greater ! Money, money,my good friend, or the want of it, has,I "am convinced, made him, at thismoment, the most wretched of men ;but having done wrong, he does notlike to retract. But with all his excellentqualities, his domestic virtues, andhis love for his lovely children, whatmust he not at this moment suffer!His distresses should have been relievedbefore ; but this is entre nous.All his letters are full of the mostunqualified praise of my conduct; andit is the most heartfelt blessing to knowthat, to the best of my power, I haveendeavoured to deserve it. I have receivedthe greatest kindness and attentionfrom the R 1, and everybranch of the royal family ; who, in themost unreserved terms, deplore thismelancholy business. The whole correspondenceis before the R> 1 ; and,1 am proud to add, that my past andpresent conduct has secured rne a friend,who declares he never will forsake me.My forbearance,' he says, ' is beyondwhat he could have imagined !' Butwhat will not a woman do, who is firmlyand sincerely attached? Had he leftme to starve, I never would haveuttered a word to his disadvantage. Ienclose you two other letters; and in aday or two you shall see more, the restbeing in the hands of the R 1. Andnow, my dear friend, do not hear theD. of C. unfairly abused. He has donewrong, and he is suffering for it. Butas far as he has left it in his own power,he is doing everything kind and noble,even to the distressing himself. I thankyou sincerely for the friendly cautionat the end of your letter, though I trustthere will be no occasion for it; but itwas kind and friendly, and as such Ishall ever esteem it. I remain, dearsir, yours sincerely, DORA JORDAN."What was the true cause of this separationis as much a mystery as ever;indeed, from the expression in the aboveletter, it would seem that Mrs. Jordanwas a stranger to it herself. Mr. Gaitthinks that state reasons may have ledto it ; there being a probability offailure of male heirs to the crown.But this appears to us a most improbable,not to say absurd, hypothesis ;the Salic law does not obtain in thiscountry ; and if it did, there was theDuke of Kent to appropriate for statepurposes, without making a victim ofone already hound by ties next tosacred ; and whose disunion from themwas, to use the words of Mrs. Jordan,deplored by every branch of the royalfamily, in the most unreserved terms."The particulars of the allowance madeto Mrs. Jordan, and upon what conditions,after her separation from theduke, were publicly stated in a letter,from Mr. Barton, of the Mint, dated inJanuary, 1824. She was to receive, forthe maintenance of the duke's fourdaughters, and a house and carriage fortheir use, 2,100; for her own use,1,500 per annum ; and, to enable herto make a provision for her marrieddaughters, children of a former connexion,800 per annum ; making,altogether, 4,400. This settlementwas carried into effect, a trustee wasappointed, and the monies, under suchtrust were paid, quarterly, to the respectiveaccounts, at the banking-houseof Messrs. Coutts and Co. The settlementwas subject to a stipulation, that,in the event of Mrs. Jordan resumingher profession, the care of the duke'sfour daughters, together with the 1,500per annum for their maintenance, shouldrevert to his royal highness. In a fewmonths afterwards, Mrs. Jordan expresseda wish to return to the stage ;and the care of her four children bythe duke, together with the allowancefor their maintenance, was, in consequence,surrendered to their royalfather. Her avowed motive for re-ACTORS,suing her professional labours, was tomake that provision for herself, andher other children, which the duke'sdeath might suddenly deprive her of.This was the commencement of hersubsequent difficulties and miseries ;which we cannot but think she, insome measure, entailed upon herself,by taking a step which appears to usto have been, just then, neither necessarynor expedient; and by hersubsequent imprudences. The sameconsiderations that induced her to a renunciationof four unmarried children,for the provision of three married ones(towards whose maintenance she wasallowed 800 per annum), should haveprevented her from entering into thoseengagements which drove her from thestage altogether ; and thus deprived herof the society of both sets of children,without enabling her to provide for themaintenance of one.The imprudences, to which we havealluded, arose certainly from too generousa motive, on the part of Mrs.Jordan, to be used in any other wayagainst her, than as a vindication ofthe Duke of Clarence from the chargeof compelling her to quit England, forthe want of a sufficient allowance toremain in it. After having stated thereturn of Mrs. Jordan to the stage, Mr.Barton continues : " A cessation ofcorrespondence between Mrs. Jordanand myself ensued, until September,1815; when I, most unexpectedly, receiveda note from her, requesting tosee me immediately. 1 found her intears, and under much embarrassment,from a circumstance that had burstupon her, as she said, ' like a thunderstorm.'She found herself involved, toa considerable amount, by securities,which, all at once, appeared againsther, in the form of bonds and promissorynotes, given, incautiously, by herself,to relieve, as she thought, fromtrifling difficulties, a near relation, inwhom she had placed the greatest confidence."Acceptances had been givenby her, in blank, upon stamped paper,which she supposed were for smallamounts, but which afterwards appearto have* been laid before her, capable ofcarrying larger sums. " She was fearfulof immediate arrest. She wished totreat all her claimants most fairly andhonourably ; and to save, if possible, thewife and children of the person who hadso deceived her, from utter ruin. Shecould not enter into negociations withher creditors unless at large ; and, apprehendingthat, if she remained inEngland, that would not long be thecase, she instantly adopted the resolutionbefore-mentioned, of going toFrance." A list of creditors was madeout, and an arrangement was in progress,to enable her to return to thiscountry. All she required, in order toset her mind at ease on the extent ofthe' demands that might be out againsther was, that the person who hadplunged her into all these difficultiesshould declare, upon oath, that the listhe had given to her included the whole.This, the party, from time to time, refusedto do; and disappointed thus inthe hope she had so fondly cherished,of again returning to this country, andseeing those children for whom shehad the most tender affection, she sunkunder the weight of her afflictions;and, in the month of June, 1816, diedat St. Cloud."The above statement is confirmed bya letter, which Mr. Barton quotes fromMrs. Jordan herself, in which she veryforcibly depicts the agony of her feelings; but in no part of it hints thatshe is in want of money for presentsubsistence. It seems, however, fromSir Jonah Barrington's account, thatshe was living in very gloomy and miserableapartments, at St. Cloud ; not,as has been stated, without a singlefriend, but with only the female companionwho had accompanied her fromEngland, and who had formerly beengoverness to her children, at Bushy.However this may be, she died at St.Cloud, in a state, if not of pecuniary want,of extreme mental misery, after havingresided there for some months underthe feigned name of Johnson. Evenher death, however, was a matter ofmystery; for she was declared to bealive after the first report of it, and, infact, she died on the 3rd of July, 1816;and not in June, as stated in Mr.Barton's letter, and at first generallycredited. Indeed, Mr. Boaden tellsus, that there was a notion, that so farfrom her being dead, Mrs. Jordan hadbeen met by various persons in London,and he himself was strongly impressedwith a notion that he had seenDOROTHY JORDAN,her. " I was taking," he says, " avery usual walk before dinner, and Istopped at a bookseller's window onthe left side of Piccadilly, to look atan embellishment to some new publicationthat struck my eye. On a suddena lady stood by my side, who hadstopped with a similar impulse : to myconviction it was Mrs. Jordan. As shedid not speak, but dropped a long whiteveil immediately over her face, I concludedthat she did not wish to be recognised,and therefore, however Ishould have wished an explanation ofwhat so surprised me, I yielded to herpleasure upon the occasion, grounded,I had no doubt, upon sufficient reason.When I returned to my own house,at dinner time, I mentioned the circumstanceat table, and the way inwhich it struck me is still rememberedin the family. I used, on the occasion,the strong language of Macbeth, ' If Istand here, I saw her.' It was but veryrecently I heard, for the first time, thatone of her daughters, Mrs. Alsop, had,to her entire conviction, met her motherin the Strand, after the report of herdeath ; that the reality, or the fancy,threw her into fits at the time ; andthat to her own death, she believedthat she had not been deceived. Withher, indeed, it was deemed a vision, aspectral appearance at noon-day, which,I need not say, was not my impressionin the rencontre with myself."We have only one observation tomake on the facts stated in Mr. Barton'sletter, relative to the last moments ofMrs. Jordan : If the Duke of Clarenceknew the cause and extent of her distresses,and had the power to relievethem, the imputation of neglecting, HIher last moments, the object of a longand next to conjugal attachment, is notwholly undeserved. Of the amiableand generous disposition of Mrs. Jordan,as a woman, and of her abilities,as an actress, there can be but oneopinion. Speaking of her in the lattercharacter, Hazlittsays: " Mrs. Jordan'sexcellences were all natural to her. Itwas not as an actress, but as herself,that she charmed every one. Naturehad formed her in her most prodigalhumour; and when Nature is in thehumour to make a woman all that isdelightful, she does it most effectually.Her face, her tones, her manner, wereirresistible. Her smile had the effect ofsunshine, and her laugh did one good tohear it Her voice was eloquence itself;it seemed as if her heart was always ather mouth. She was all gaiety, openness,and good-nature. She rioted inher fine animal spirits, and gave morepleasure than any other actress, becauseshe had the greatest spirit of enjoymentin herself."We shall conclude our memoir ofthis ill-fated woman, with the followinganecdotes, related by Mr. Boaden.When at Chester, Mrs. Jordan hearingthat a widow, with three youngchildren, was imprisoned for a smalldebt, with expenses, amounting to 8,paid the amount, and procured thedebtor's release. The same evening,whilst taking shelter from the rain,under a porch in the street, she was surprisedby the appearance of the womanwith her children, kneeling before her,to thank her for her kindness. Thescene strongly affected her, and not lessa stranger, who had taken shelter underthe same porch, who extended his handto Mrs. Jordan, saying, ' Would to theLord the world were all like thee ! 'Seeing that he was a Methodist parson,she retreated a little, saying, playfully,No, I won't shake hands with you.'Why ? ' ' Because you are a Methodistpreacher ; and when you know whoI am, you'll send me to the devil.''The Lord forbid!' he replied ;' I amasyou say, a preacher of the Gospelof Jesus Christ, who tells us to clothethe naked, feed the hungry and relievethe distressed ; and do youthink I can behold a alter fulfil thecommands of my great Master, withoutfeeling that spiritual attachment, whichleads me to break through worldly customs,and offer you the hand of friendshipand brotherly love ?' ' Well, youare a good old soul, I dare say, but Idon't like fanatics, and you'll not likeme, when I tell you who I am.' ' Ihope I shall.' Well, then, I am aplayer.' The preacher sighed. ' Yes, Iam a player, and you must have heardof me, Mrs. Jordan is my name.'After a short pause, the preacher extendedhis hand, and replied, ' TheLord bless thee, whoever thou art ! Hisgoodness is unlimited. He has bestowedon thee a large portion of hisspirit ; and, as to thy calling, if thy soulACTORS.upbraid thee not, the Lord forbid thatI should." Mrs. Jordan accepted hishand, and walked with him a short distance,when he parted from her, saying,Fare thee well, sister ! I know not whatthe principles of people of thy callingmay be ; thou art the first I ever conversedwith; but, if their benevolentpractices equal thine, I hope and trust,at the great day, the Almighty will sayto each, ' Thy sins are forgiven thee.' "Mary-ann DAVENPORT.THIS lady is the daughter of a Mr.Harvey, and was born at Launceston,in Cornwall, in the year 1765. Shereceived a good education at Bath,and becoming acquainted with themanager of the theatre in that city,made her debut on the stage, whenabout twenty years of age, as Lappet,in The Miser. She remained at Bathfor the next two years ; and during herresidence there, is thus described by aneye-witness of her performances :Miss Harvey, about the years 1785 and1786, was a lively, animated, bustlingactress ; arch, and of exuberant spirits ;her style was pointed and energetic ;perhaps, indeed, she had less easethan was altogether the thing ; butwhen she had to speak satirically or inirony, when, in fact, she had to conveyone idea to the person on the stagewith her, and another to her audience,she was alone and inimitable ; she didnot carry you away with her so muchas many young actresses that I haveseen, but she always satisfied you moreamply. Then her voice what a voicewas hers! nay, what a voice has shestill, though it has had pretty fairexercise for the last half century andupwards. Then it had all the clearnessfor which it is even now distinguishable ;and it had, besides, a witching softnessof tone, that knew no equal then, andthat I have never heard exceededsince."After leaving Bath, our actress joinedthe Exeter company, and then marriedMr. Davenport, an actor of ordinarytalent in low comedy. After she hadbeen married a short time, Mrs. Davenportwent to Birmingham, and fromthence to London, where she remaineda considerable time in hopes of obtainingan engagement. Being disappointedin this, she accepted an offerfrom Dublin, where she made herdebfit as Rosalind, and first commencedthat line of characters, in which sheafterwards became so famous. On thedeath of Mrs. Webb, she was engagedto supply her place at Covent Garden,and, at the same time, received a verylucrative offer from America. Shepreferred the former, and accordinglymade her first appearance on theLondon boards, in 1794, as Mrs. Hardcastle,in She Stoops to Conquer. Shewas received with enthusiastic applause,and at the close of the season, wasengaged by Colman, for six years, atthe Haymarket.Mrs. Davenport's most celebratedpersonations are, her Nurse, in Romeoand Juliet, Mrs. Heidelberg, Mrs.Bundle, Aladdin's Mother, Alice, in TheCastle Spectre, Lucretia Mac Tab, anda variety of other characters. It hasnot been inaptly said of her, that inthe vulgar loquacity of the would-beyouthful Mrs. Hardcastle the oglingof the antiquated virgin, Miss Durablethe imbecility of fourscore in Mrs.Nicely the sturdy brutality of Mrs.Brulgruddery the warm-hearted cottagerin Lover's Vows, the attemptedelegances of Mrs. Dowlas, the fiery-humoureddame Quickly, and the obtuseintellect of Deborah, she overcameall rivalry.WILLIAM DOWTONWILLIAM DOWTON.WILLIAM DOWTON ;* a native ofExeter, where his father carried on thebusiness of a grocer. He was born in1766, and, at the age of sixteen, wasapprenticed to an architect ; but havingplayed Carlos, in The Revenge, withgreat applause, at a private performance,he imbibed such a predilection forthe stage, that he relinquished his professionalstudies and joined a strollingcompany at Ashburton. The manyhardships which he suffered at the commencementof his career did not checkhis theatrical ambition; and it is saidthat, when nearly in a state of starvation,he gave away a new coat for thepart of Beaufort, in The Citizen. FromAshburton he proceeded to Weymouth,whence he returned to his native town,and performed there in tragedy withmoderate success. He afterwards joinedMrs. Baker's company in Kent, of whichhe was the principal comedian, andbeing assigned the line of charactersbest suited to his talents, soon acquireda provincial reputation. A Canterburycritic thus notices his performances inthat city : " Mr. Dowton, who madehis first appearance here in the lastrace week, we will venture to pronouncea young man of superior abilities, who,with attention, will soon become one ofour London first-rate comic geniuses.His La Gloire, Jemmy Jumps, BillyBristle, Sir David Under, PeepingTom, &c., would be highly relished bya town audience." Not long after, hewas engaged to appear at Drury Lane,when he chose for his debut the part ofSheba, in rivalship of Elliston, to whichhe was encouraged by the approbationof Mr. Cumberland, who had previouslyseen him personate the character. Hemade his first appearance at DruryLane, on the 10th of October, 1795, andin a very short time established his reputationas a first-rate comedian, thoughcomparatively failing in the part ofSheba. As Shylock, however, which heperformed in 1816, he was eminentlysuccessful ; and he produced a greatsensation by immediately fainting, whenhe i told that he must presently turnChristian. Mr. Dowton was, for sometime,manager of the Maidstone andother theatres in Kent; he has, continueda favourite with the public, and,in many of his personations, is an unrivalledactor. His best characters arethe three opposite ones of Sir AnthonyAbsolute, Dr. Caldwell, and Sir OliverSurface; of his respective merits inwhich, an able critic of the day givesthe following just estimate :The greatest living comedian out ofthe direct pale of gentility, though weby no means insinuate that he is vulgar,appears to us to be Dowton. His geniuslies in the expression of strong feeling,open or subdued, at the middle periodof life. He can smooth over an habitualvehemence, indulge himself in the mostdelightful cordiality, and be carriedaway into the uttermost transport ofrage, with equal felicity. Of this, histhree several parts of the Hypocrite, ofSir Oliver, in The School for Scandal,and of Sir Anthony Absolute, may beconsidered as finished specimens. TheHypocrite, indeed, is one of the fewperfect pieces of acting on the stage ;and, after that long exhibition of smoothnessand affected humility, of whichevery body has spoken in praise, nothingcan show the greatness of this actormore than his foregoing the temptationto rant in the concluding scene, andbraving the scorn of those who havedetected him, not with the ordinaryoutcry of stage desperation, but with arage too deep for violence, and a black,inward-breathing, quivering malignity.It amounts to the awful. On the otherhand, Sir Anthony Absolute, a mereself-witted old gentleman, is indulgedin the usual comic transports ; and theactor's art is shown almost as much inthese by carrying them to their fullextent, even to a hoarse voice and anindication of absolute kicking, withoutgiving us an idea of their being caricatured.Between these two, and with allthe strength but none of the amiablenessof their feelings, is his Sir Oliver ;ACTORS.and in this, though altogether quiet, he isjust as true to the life, with his cordialand unaffected benevolence. Withpowers of this kind, it will be easily seenthat Mr. Dowton must be alive to all theother impressions of his nature ; and sohe is ; though there is a barrier of mindand manners drawn between tragedyand comedy, in general, which the finestsusceptibility, without other requisites,will not enable an actor to get over.He can reach all the pathetic feelingswhich are out of the range of tragedy ;and we need not inform our readersthat a great comedian of this kind isinfinitely superior to the common runof serious actors, and only yields to thevery first of tragedians."It must be confessed, however, thatMr. Dowton has, occasionally, condescendedto something less tolerable thanvulgarity. We have seen his mentalexuberance more than once degenerateinto physical indecency. He was married,early in life, to Miss Baker, thedaughter of the lady above-mentioned.JOHN Facets.JOHN Facets was born in London,in the year 1769, and apprenticedat the age of fifteen, to a respectabletradesman, after having received agood education. His father had beenan actor ; but a considerable legacy,which was left him some time beforehis death, enabled him to retire fromthe stage, to which he had no wishto bring up his son. Young Fawcett,however, having contracted a fondnessfor theatricals, by his constant attendanceat a spouting club, left his homesecretly, and joined a company in theisle of Thanet, under the name ofFoote. He made his debut at Margate,as Courtly, in The Belle's Stratagem,and after performing various other characters,joined the Rochester and Tunbridgecompany. At the latter place,he obtained the notice and patronage ofMr. Cumberland, the author, who gavehim some judicious hints for improvinghis acting. At this time his chief characterswere, Othello, Shylock, Oro-nook,Romeo, Jaffier, &c. ; but he alsoplayed genteel comedy respectably, andsang, both on and off the stage, withapplause. He was next engaged forthe York circuit by Tate Wilkinson,but the manager soon discovered thattragedy was not his forte, though heopened in a first-rate tragic character.A low comedy part was then assignedhim by Wilkinson, in which he so successfullyacquitted himself, that he atonce fixed his reputation in that line,and continued for some years the comichero of the York circuit. On the deathof Edwin, he was engaged at CoventGarden, and made his debut there, onthe 21st of September, 1791, as Caleb,in He Would be a Soldier, and Simp-kin,in The Deserter. He was receivedwith great applause by the audience,though the critics of the day decried hisacting as being an imitation of Edwin,and it was not until he appeared inthe parts of Pangloss, Ollapod, aridCaleb Quotem, that his dramatic talentswere properly appreciated. In 1798,he supplied the place of Bannister atthe Haymarket, where he had a greaterrange of characters allowed him than atCovent Garden, and added to his reputationby his performance of Trudge,Gregory Gubbins (in which his song ofOh ! what a valiant Hero ! excited peculiarapplause), Scout, and other partsof considerable importance.In 1808, he became acting managerat the Haymarket, and produced, inthat capacity, the serious pantomime ofObi, in which Charles Kemble playedthe hero. Mr. Fawcett's later serviceshave been confined to Covent Garden,where he has been stage-manager formany years. He has been twice married,and has several children by hissecond wife, who was a widow, of thename of Mills.As a performer, Mr. Fawcett standsalone in many of his personations ;among them are his Rivers, Job Thorn-berry,Sir Harry Sycamore, JusticeWoodcock, Sir John Contrast, and CaptainCopy, in Charles the Second. Heis serious, without being pompous, andR I C 11 A K 1> JONES.his conic touches go sometimes moreto the heart, than the most studiedefforts of the tragic delineator. " Hisold men," says a critic, " are the secondnow on the stage. Less humorousthan Dowton, he is more so than Terry;nor is he so hard as the iron Mr.Farren : he wants, perhaps, the oilyhumour, the warmth of colouring, thatMunden could, and Dowton can, throwinto his performances : but he has humourmore exclusively his own thaneither of these gentlemen." As a singingold man he is superior to both ; hisvoice is a counter-tenor, and when inits full power, justly entitled him tobe called the best buffo-singer of theEnglish stage.RICHARD JONES.RICHARD JONES was born aboutthe year 1770, at Birmingham, wherehis father was a builder and surveyorof some eminence. He was educatedfor the profession of an architect, butthe applause with which he met in thedelivery of his school recitations, excitedin him a fondness for the stage ;and after he had distinguished himselfby his performances at a private theatre,he renounced Palladio, and enrolledhimself among the votaries of Thespis.He commenced his career with Ilomeo,Douglas, Hamlet, &c., which he performedat Litchfield, Newcastle, Birmingham,and Manchester, where, hesays in his autobiography, " a circumstanceoccurred which laid the foundationof my theatrical prosperity. Mr.Reynolds's comedy of Laugh when youCan, was announced for the first time;Mr. Ward, who was to have personatedthe part of Gossamer, being taken illthe night preceding the representation,sooner than disappoint the town, as adernier resort, I was entreated to studythe part. Although certainly an arduousundertaking, I complied ; and, afterhaving performed Laertes to Mr. Young'sHamlet, I sat up the remainder of thenight, and perfected myself in Gossamer; in which character, the followingnight, the audience were pleased tohonour me with the most natteringmarks of approbation. This proved afortunate event. The fame of my successoccasioned Mr. Jones, the proprietorof the Dublin Theatre, to offer me alucrative engagement ; and I mademy debut in Dublin, on the 20th ofNovember, 1799. The encouragementI met with on my first appearance, wasrepeated on every succeeding one ; and,for nearly eight years, I had the happinessof enjoying both the public andprivate favour of the inhabitants ofDublin, Cork, and Limerick, and mostof the principal towns in Ireland."Mr. Jones had received various overturesfrom the London managers, whichhis popularity in Ireland occasionedhim to decline; but considering, as hehimself expresses it, that the Londonstamp was necessary to rank him at thetop of his profession, he accepted anengagement at Covent Garden Theatre,where he made his deb&t as Goldfinch,on the 9th of October, 1807, but hisperformance, as compared both withhis previous and subsequent efforts,was a decided failure. Whether fromtimidity or depression of spirits, heseemed quite out of his element ; norwas he more successful in the nextcharacter which he played, Frederick,in Of Age To Morrow. The press,one and all, denounced him as a presumptuousimitator of Lewis ; andwhen he appeared in the CopperCaptain, no remarks more favourablethan the following were elicited by hisperformance. " Mr. Lewis," said oneof the critics, " has left no one so capableof following him, at any decent distance,as this gentleman ; but it was injudiciousin him, to endeavour to shine inthis particular character, while oureyes are still blinded by the meteorthat has just passed away. Mr. Jonesunderstands his business and is veryattentive to it ; his light and wellshaped figure is a perpetual recommendation; and his judgment teaches himwhen to laugh, and when to be gay andspirited ; but his face does not alwayscountenance his mirth ; his mouthACTORS.laughs, hut his eyes do not; and, whenwe laugh with him, it is more frequentlya tribute to his good intention,than through the force of inspiration,or the kindling of good humour, at anirresistible flame."In spite of criticism, however, Mr.Jones gradually rose in public estimation,and has long stood alone in hispeculiar line of acting. He is not perhaps,the best delineator of a finegentleman, in the most dignifiedmeaning of the word ; but in a gentlemanlyfop, he is inimitable, and he is,under any circumstances, well bred.Sentiment is quite out of his line ; it isin the drinking, heartless, but goodnatured libertine, on excellent termswith himself and every one else, thathe is pre-eminent. He is sometimestoo mercurial for a polished beau, or asystematic seducer; indeed, he neverseems quite at ease except when inmotion. When he comes on the stageyou expect he has not a moment tostay ; he is all bustle, haste, impatience,and animation. Animation, perhaps,is not the word we should use, for hisspirits are said to be forced on the stage,which may account for his over-excitement.His Irishmen are in general good :he hits off the brogue ana manner withallthe genuineness of a native ; but hislong residence at Dublin renders thisfact not very extraordinary. Upon thewhole, as the hero of a farce, whether asthe well-dressed dandy, the sprucefootman, or the fashionable spendthrift,Mr. Jones is unrivalled. His JeremyDiddler, in Raising the Wind, is a specimenof the most naive and amusingpiece of swindling we ever witnessed.In private life, few persons are moreesteemed than Mr. Jones. He is saidto be the victim of hypochondriacal toa painful extent, and to live in comparativeseclusion. His figure is excellent,and he is allowed to be the bestdressed actor on the stage. A piececalled Too Late for Dinner, and TheGreen Man, have been ascribed to thepen of Mr. Jones. He is a very ableteacher of elocution, arid has preparedfor the stage several of our rising actorsand actresses.ROBERT WILLIAM Ellison.THIS celebrated actor, the nephew ofthe Rev. Dr. Elliston, formerly masterof Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge,and the son of a watchmaker inLondon, was born in Orange Street,Red Lion Square, on the 7th of April,1774. At the age of nine, he wasplaced at St. Paul's School, where heimbibed a fondness for declamation, byspeaking the school speeches; and afterwards,making a trial of the stage ata private theatre, his predilection forthe profession of an actor became confirmed.He quitted school clandestinely,and going to Bath, procured an engagementas clerk in a lottery office ; butafter having appeared as Tressel, inRichard the Third, proceeded to York,where he was, for some time, a memberof Tate Wilkinson's company.He shortly after returned to his family,but still determining to pursue histheatrical career, re-appeared at Bath,in 1793, in the character of Romeo. Heremained in this city till 1796, when heleft it in company with a Miss Wendell,a teacher of dancing, whom he soonafter married in London; and on the24th of June, of the same year, hemade his bow to a London audience, atthe Haymarket Theatre, in the veryopposite characters of Octavian, in TheMountaineers, and Vapour, in MyGrandmother. After performing a fewnights, however, he returned to Bath,whence he again came to London, andin consequence of a disagreement withMr. Harris, of Covent Garden, wherehe had been engaged for a limited numberof nights, resumed his connexionwith the Haymarket company ; andunder Mr. Colman's new arrangements,in 1803, became both acting-managerand principal performer. In 1804, hewas chosen to succeed Kemble, at DruryLane ; but after that theatre was burnt,and the company opened at the Lyceum,he left in consequence of a quareWILLIAM Ellison.rel with the late Thomas Sheridan. Hethen took the Circus', where, under thepresent name of the Surrey Theatre, heexhibited burlettas, founded on some ofShakspeare's plays, and various operas,performing all the principal parts himself,and shewing the versatility of hispowers, by obtaining equal applause inMacbeth and Macerationthe opening of the new DruryLane Theatre, in 1812, he again joinedthat company, and, on the first night,had the honour of delivering LordByron's celebrated address. In 1819,he became the lessee of the theatre, ata rent of 10,200, and continued toconduct it with great spirit, till 1826,when lie was declared a bankrupt, inspite of hies great pecuniary sacrifices,and the additional attraction of his ownunrivalled acting. He next took, successively,the Olympic, and the Surrey.As an actor," Mr. Elliston has stoodunrivalled in the gentleman-comedianline of acting. Whether as the lover,the fop, the rake, or the libertine, hewas always the outward gentleman ;and, indeed, with the exception of Lewis,no actor can be compared to him in theabove characters. It has been wellobserved, by an anonymous writer,that he understood all the little pretendedor avowed arts of a gentleman,when he was courting, or complimenting,or making love ; everythingwhich implied the necessity ofattention to the other person, and a just,and, as it were, a mutual consciousnessof the graces of life or his own." . He hasnot, perhaps (or in reference to his agewe should say, had not), the airinessof Lewis, but he excelled him in thoseparts, where mirth gradually gives placeto seriousness. For this reason, thoughnot more than a respectable actor intragedy, he was the best tragic actor incomedy, and in such parts as Mercutiohe evidenced the converse of this. Inwhat, however, may be called homelytragedy, he was decidedly successful ;and his performance of Job Thornberry,in John Bull, was not inferior to that ofBannister. His voice and person wereadmirably suited to assist the representationof the characters he performed :the former was at once melodious andmanly ; and the latter, until of lateyears, slight, easy, and graceful.One great defect in his acting, was ahabit of what we may call awningbetween his words, which he used tomistake for nature. "He said once, atthe table of a friend of ours," says thewriter before quoted, " clapping himselfon the knee, and breathing with hisusual fervour, 'Nature aw, sir, iseverything aw : I am aw, alwaysaw natural aw." The same partymaking some observations respectingthe quantity of business he had to getthrough, he replied, " that he hadformed himself on the model of thegrand pensionary, De Witt ;" and pointingto the portico in Bridges Street,which had just been added to the front,Yes, sir, said he, " energy is thething ; I no sooner said it, than it wasdone ; it was a Buonaparte blow."In the spirit of identifying himselfwith greatness, he was, both on and offthe stage, singularly amusing. Whilstperforming George the Fourth, in thepiece of the Coronation, he cried out tothe audience, whilst applauding him,Bless you, bless you, my people ! "and it is quite certain, if he did notconsider himself actually the Britishmonarch, he conceived himself to possesslittle less power, as manager ofDrury Lane Theatre.Of his pompous manner, CharlesLamb, better known as EUa, has givensome ludicrous instances. Meeting him,one morning, and grasping his handwith a look of significance, Elliston exclaimed," Have you heard the news ? Iam the future manager of Drury LaneTheatre !" " Breathless, as he saw me,"says Mr. Lamb, " he stayed not for congratulationor reply, but mutely stalkedaway, leaving me to chew upon hisnew-blown dignities at leisure." Thesame authority thus describes a subsequentinterview : " ' Have you heard ?'(his customary exordium) 'have youheard,' said he, ' how they treat me ?They put me in comedy !' Thought Ibut his finger on his lips forbadeany verbal interruption ' Where couldthey put you better?' Then, after apause, ' Where I formerly played Romeo,I now play Mercutio ; ' and soagain he stalked away, neither staying,nor caring for, responses." The fact is,that Elliston was well known to hisfriends to be an actor off the stage, aswell as on, and even the dismissal of themost superfluous supernumerary was theACTORS.occasion of a scene worthy the boards ofhis theatre. Whilst he was managerof the Olympic, an inferior singer appearedbefore him, who had resignedher situation in disgust at the ill receptionshe had met with. " How dareyou, madam, withdraw yourself withouta notice, from your theatrical duties ? "I was hissed, sir." " And you havethe presumption to decide upon thetaste of the town ?" " I don't know that,sir ; but I will never stand to be hissed,"was her subjoined ; when Elliston,gathering up his features into one concentrationof wonder, pity, and expostulatoryindignation, put himself intoan imposing attitude, and exclaimed,They have hissed me I"A scene of still richer character isthus related by a writer in The MonthlyMagazine. A gentleman of considerablemerit as a provincial actor,once called, by appointment, at DruryLane Theatre. He found Mr. Elliston,who had then the management, givingsome directions on the stage, and waswelcomed by him with great politeness.The manager, however, thinking, fromthe slight conversation which passed, thatthe gentleman in question did not seemsufficiently impressed with the greatnessof the individual, whom he had the honour,for the first time, of addressing, tookan odd method of displaying his powerand consequence. " Yes, sir," said he,continuing the conversation previouslycommenced, with a slow and solemnenunciation, " the drama is now atits lowest ebb; and" then suddenlybreaking off, in a loud, emphatic voice,he called, " First night watchman !" Theman instantly stepped up, and makinghis bow, stood for orders. " And," resumingto the actor, " and unless amaterial change I say takes place,as Juvenal justly observes, Box-keeper,dress circle, right-hand !" Theman joined the group : " but, sir, areaction must take place, when Otherbox-keepers !" The other box-keeperscame up. " Sir. I say, there must beaCopyist !" (Copyist arrives, )must be a First scene-shifter !" (theman comes,) " Sir, I say, a convulsionwhich will overturn Other scene-shifters!"(they all flock round,)"and eventually crush even the Callboy !" He having now, by the power ofhis wand, collected all these personage*round him, without seeming to have anidea of providing for their exit, luckilythought that the easiest way to dismissthem, without derogation to hisdignity, would be to make an exithimself: beckoning, therefore, to theactor, for whose especial benefit thisdisplay of authority was got up, he said,in a slow and magisterial tone, " Followme !" then, in the most dignified manner,he retired to his room, leavingthe minions of his power to guess athis will.Some accounts of Mr. Elliston's privatecharacter, mention it in a mannerwe should regret, and have not, perhaps,sufficient authority to record. A too greataddiction to wine is one of the faultsattributed to him ; but of this, we believe,the public have not had frequentoccasion to complain. He is the authorof a drama, called The Venetian Outlaw,and of a pamphlet on the subject ofaltering plays to meet the limited licenseallowed to minor theatres.EDWARD KNIGHT.iHIS excellent comedian, commonlycalled Little Knight, was born in Birmingham,though generally supposed tobe a native of Yorkshire, in the year1774. He was brought up as an artist,but after he had completed his apprenticeship,became stage-struck, throughwitnessing some performances at a privatetheatre; and joining a company atNewcastle-undergone, was announcedthere to make his first appearance asHob, in Hob in the Well. When thecurtain drew up, however, he was sotimid, that his brother performers wereobliged to push him on to the stage ;but here the plaudits of the audiencecould not give him confidence to speak,and, without uttering a word, he ran offthe boards. This mortification damped,for a time, his ambition, and he followedEDWARD KNIGHThis profession of a painter for a wholeyear ; but at the expiration of that period,his mania for the stage revived,and he ventured to play Hob, at Rather,in North Wales, where he had beenengaged at a salary of 5*. per week.Here he became a great favouritewith the play-going public, and thegentlemen of the hunt sent him 6 6s.n lieu of attending his benefit, whichoccurred on the same night as a publicdinner. A short time afterwards, hestumbled over a purse containing sevenguineas ; from that period, he remarkedto a friend, he had never known thewant of a guinea.After performing at Stafford, andother provincial towns, Knight was atlength engaged by Tate Wilkinson.The manner of his first becoming knownto that facetious manager has been thusrelated : One evening, after Knighthad been performing at Worcester, hereceived a note requesting him to meeta stranger, who was determined to puthim in a situation where his talentsmight be shown to advantage. Ouractor hastened to the place appointed,and was there addressed by a gentlemancalling himself Phillips ; who, after anencomium upon Knight's theatrical abilities,stated that he was well known toTate Wilkinson, the manager of theYork Theatre ; and concluded by saying," Now, sir, you have only to makeuse of my name, which I fully authorizeyou to do, and you may rely uponbeing well received. Say, that 1 haveseen you on the stage, and declared mysatisfaction at your performance." Uponthis, Knight immediately wrote to TateWilkinson, from whom he received, byreturn of post, the following answer:Sir, I am not acquainted with anyMr-phillips, except a rigid Quaker, andhe is the last man in the world to recommendan actor to my theatre. Idon't want you. TATE WILKINSON."Knight's reply was equally laconic :"Sir, I should as soon think of applyingto a methodist parson to preach formy benefit, as a Quaker to recommendme to Mr. Wilkinson. 1 don't want tocome. E. KNIGHT." The style of ourcomedian's retort pleased Tate, and,about a year after, he invited Knight tojoin his company, in the following epistle: " Mr. Methodist Parson, I have aliving that produces 25s. per week. VV illyou hold forth ? TATE WILKINSON."Knight immediately proceeded to York,where he found that he had been engagedwith a view of supplying the placeof Mathews; and as Frank Oaklandhad been one of the worst parts of thatcomedian, he judiciously chose that characterfor his debut. He had performedfor a fortnight with considerable applause,but Tate Wilkinson had, as hethought, looked so coolly upon him, thathe was extremely mortified, and hadeven come to the resolution of leavinghim. One evening, however, as he wasdressing for Davy, in Bon Ton, the managerrequested to see him, when, takingKnight by the hand, he presented himwith a bureau, containing all the paraphernaliaof an actor's wardrobe, exclaiming," Here, young man, take thesethings; I have been long looking forsome one who knew how to value them ;you are the very man there, go along."In 1808, Mr. Knight was, by the recommendationof Bannister, engaged atDrury Lane, at a salary of 7, 8, and9 per week, for three years ; but justafter ' his arrival in the metropolis thetheatre was burnt down. He accordinglyreturned to York, but soon receivedanother summons to join theDrury Lane company at the Lyceum,where he made his debfit on the 14thof October, 1809, as Timothy Quaint,in The Soldier's Daughter, and RobinRoughhead, in Fortune's Frolic. Hesoon became a favourite with the public,and was considered without a rivalin Jerry Blossom, Spado, Trip, Sin, &c.His performance in the last characterwas reckoned the most chaste and naturalon the stage. Whilst performing,in 1816, with Miss Kelly, in the farce ofModern Antiques, a pistol was fired atthe lady which had nearly proved fatalto Mr. Knight.Illness compelled him to retire fromthe stage some time before his death,which took place at his house in GreatQueen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, onthe 21st of February, 1826. Mr. Knightwas twice married : his second wife,to whom he was united at York, in1807, was sister to Mrs. Barley, andthe then heroine of the York stage.In sharp footmen, cunning rustics,and decrepit old men, Mr. Knightdisplayed inimitable comic powers.There was, it has been observed, anACTORS.odd quickness, and a certain droll playabout every muscle in his face, thatfully prepared the audience for the jestthat was to follow. It has been objectedto him, however, that he was toofond of laughter on the stage, and that,in pathetic parts, he was to be seensqueezing his eyelids, and fidgeting,and pelting about, till he had got thenecessary moisture." Mr. Knight dislikedconvivial society, and after he hadentered upon domestic life seldom visitedabroad himself, or received visitorsat home. His private character wasestimable ; and though he was methodicaland reserved in his manners, possessedgreat kindness and benevolenceof heart.CHARLES KEMBLE.CHARLES KEMBLE was born on the25th of November, 1775, at Brecknock,in South Wales, and sent, for education,to the college of Douay, whence hereturned to England in 1792. By theinfluence of his brother John, he soonafter obtained a situation in the postoffice,but the salary was not largeenough to repress his ambition for thestage. He, accordingly, threw up hisemployment ; and after two or three exhibitionsat private theatres, made his appearanceon the boards, of the Sheffieldstage, as Orlando, in As You Like It.He subsequently played at Newcastle,but was decidedly unsuccessful ; he was,however, engaged to perform at DruryLane, in the season of 1794, when heopened with Malcolm. Of his performance,a critic of the day observes, " AsMalcolm, appeared a tall, awkwardyouth, with what is termed a hatchetface, a figure badly proportioned, andevidently weak in his limbs; his actingwas even worse than his appearance."Some improvement was visible in hisperformance at the Haymarket, in 1797,but he was still far from respectable.In the following year, he gave sometokens of genius in Pilots, in TheGrecian Daughter, and Prince Henry,in Henry the Fourth.In 1800, he adapted to the Englishstage Mercier's Deserter, which wasbrought out at the Haymarket, underthe title of The Point of Honour, and isstill occasionally performed with applause.In 1802, he made a tour to thecontinent, and, on his return, appearedat Covent Garden, of which theatre hisbrother John had purchased a sixthshare. In 1807, he brought out at theHaymarket, a drama, translated fromthe French, called The Wanderer, orthe Rights of Hospitality ; and in thefollowing year, Plot and Counterplot,also a translation. In 1812, an originalfarce of his composition, called The Childof Chance, was acted at the Haymarket,but speedily withdrawn ; his BrazenBust, produced the following year, atCovent Garden, was hardly more successful.At the latter theatre, of whichhe possesses the share formerly held byhis brother, Mr. Charles Kemble hasbeen the chief actor in genteel comedy,and in tragedy lovers for the last fifteenyears.As an actor, Mr. Charles Kemblepossesses great versatility of talent,but we doubt whether he would everhave attained the rank he now holdswithout the aid of his brother's influence.Not that we deny his right tothe situation assigned him by the histrioniccritics ; but to no one, except aKemble, would so long a probation havebeen allowed as the subject of our memoirwent through before he could becalled more than respectable. Amonghis best characters in comedy are,Charles Surface, Lovemore, Mirabel,Doricourt, Captain Absolute, &c. Intragedy, there were some parts that hemade completely his own. His Edgar,Falconbiidge, Pierre, and Marc Antony,were never more ably represented.We should say that, latterly, hewhined and ranted too much ; but thereis still enough of the genuine actorabout him to repay attention, thoughhe is, undoubtedly, getting too old forRomeo, et id omne genus. We have forgottento speak of his Cassino and Mer-curio; his drunken scene in the formerpart, with lago, is a matchless delineationCHARLES M A T H E W S .of gentlemanly (if we may apply thatepithet to any vice so degrading) intoxication.He has been pronounced, bysome, the best Hamlet on the stage, anda good Macbeth ; but we are not amongthose who think Mr. Charles Kemble'spowers equal to the task of portrayingthe loftier heroes of Sliakspeare. Mr.Charles Kemble, who is about five feeteleven inches in height, was married,on the 2nd of July, 1806, to MissDecamp, by whom he has a son andtwo daughters ; of whom we believeMiss Fanny Kemble is the elder.CHARLES MATHEWS.CHARLES MATHEWS was bornon the 28th of June, 1776, in the Strand,where his father carried on the businessof a bookseller. After having completedhis education at MerchantTailors' School, he was apprenticed tohis father, but paid less attention tobooks than to theatricals, for which hisacquaintance with Elliston, at this period,led him to imbibe a predilection. Thelatter was then employed in getting upthe tragedy of The Distrest Mother, inthe-back parlour of a pastry-cook'sshop in the Strand, and Mathewsundertook to perform Phoenix.1 n 1793, he appeared, as an amateur, atRichmond, and at Canterbury, where heplayed Old Doiley, Bowkitt, and Richmond,and in the latter character, as hesays, fought with Richard for twenty-fiveminutes. In the following year, hewas engaged by Macklin for the DublinTheatre, and at starting from London,received from his father twenty guineas,with a promise of the same sum, wheneverhe should return and resume hissituation behind the counter. Hemade his debut at Dublin, in the partof Lingo, because, as he said, he knewhe should succeed in any characterthat required a wig. The audience,however, had been so used to theacting of one Cornelia, as Lingo, thatthey would tolerate "no one in hisstead, and Mathews, becoming enragedat his ill reception, took off his wig,and threw it into the pit. Inferior partswere afterwards accorded to him, andhe began to grow so disgusted with thestage, that he left Dublin, in 1795, withthe intention of once more establishinghimself under his father's roof, andfollowing the bookselling line. Thevessel, however, in which he sailed,being driven, by stress of weather, intoSwansea, he accepted of an engagementat the theatre in that town, and wasreceived with so much applause, thathe deferred his visit to the metropolis,and passed about two years in Wales.In the course of that time, his namehad become favourably known toTate Wilkinson, who, on the departureof Emery from York for London, engagedMathews to succeed him. Hisfirst appearance in this city, took placeon the 17th of August, 1798, when heperformed Silky, in The Road to Ruin,and his favourite part of Lingo. Hewas, at this time, so thin, that Wilkinsonobserved to him, " he never saw anyoneso thin to be alive."On the 16th of May, 1803, he madehis bow to a London audience, as Cabalin The Jew, and Lingo; he was wellreceived, and his personation of OldWiggins, Risk, and a few other characters,at once stamped his fame. InSeptember, 1804, he appeared at DruryLane, as Don Manuel, in She Would andShe Would Not; but a timidity, whichhe could not conquer, paralysed hisexertions; and, from 1804 to 1S09, headded little to his fame, except in thesummer season, at the Ilaymarket,where his admirable performance in thelatter year, in Killing No Murder,formed an era in his theatrical career.He was not less successful in the partof Cypher, which he performed at theLyceum, after the conflagration ofthe two patent theatres. In 1812, hemade his debt at Covent Garden, asBuskin, in Love, Law, and Physic; andPerformed in several farces with Listen,during that season, with enthusiasticapplause. When the Ilaymarket againopened, he was announced to play sixcharacters in a piece, called The Actor01 all Work, his performance in whichACTORS.drew crowded houses for many nights.On the occasion of his benefit, he gavefurther proof of the versatility of histalent, by playing Macheath, dressingthe character as it used to be in thetime of Gay.Mr. Mathews had, from the time ofhis first appearance at the Haymarket,been intrusted with some of the mostimportant parts in his line, at thattheatre ; but, at the larger houses, thereseemed to be anything but a dispositionto give proper scope to his abilities.Under these circumstances he resolvedupon giving an entertainment by himself,and, in 1818, he announced himself,for the first time, At Home, at theEnglish Opera House. In his preliminaryaddress to the audience he statedthat it had been his highest ambitionto appear before the public in thelegitimate shape of a regular comedian ;but that, circumstances, however, whichhe could neither control nor accountfor, had deprived him of the opportunityof so doing; in the meantime hehad been frequently urged to attemptan entertainment by himself, and remindedwith what success the celebratedDibdin had, during severalwinters, kept together whole audiences,by his single exertions. " Still I preferred,"he continued, " the exerciseof my profession as a member ofthe national theatre ; and could I havebeen indulged in the first wish of myheart, that of appearing frequentlybefore you in characters of legitimatecomedy, in that capacity I should probablyhave remained." His At Home,was completely successful ; but he wasnot, it seems, permitted to enjoy histriumph without opposition on thepart of the Drury Lane and CoventGarden managers, to whom we presume,he alludes, in the following passagesin his address at the conclusionof his performances for the season.I am aware, ladies and gentlemen,and it is fit you should be aware also,that very serious efforts have beenmade by the proprietors and managersof the winter theatres, to drive mefrom this asylum ; and as I had declinedto eat their bread, fi r which I had lostall relish, they wished to deprive meof the means of eating any bread atail. At all events, they have certainlyenvied, and endeavoured to prevent myreaping that plentiful harvest, whichhas ripened in the sunshine of yourfavour."In 1819, and three following years,he resumed his performances At Home,in The Trip to Paris, Country Cousins,Travels in Air, Earth, and Water,and Youthful Days of Mr. Mathews.It has been reported, that he received1,000 per annum for his share in theseentertainments from Mr. Arnold ; butthis is contradicted by one of his biographers,who says that the latter gentleman'sagreement was, to take thefirst 40, and to share the remaindernightly with Mr. Mathews.In 1823, Mr. Mathews went toAmerica, where he performed withgreat applause in the regular dramas,and also in his At Homes. " Thesewere attended by a great number of thePhiladelphian gentry who were toofastidious to witness a regular play ;and this circumstance gave rise to someill-natured remarks on our comedian,who was stigmatized as an itinerantmimic, and otherwise abused in thePhiladelphia Gazette. " If we hear,"ran one of the passages in this newspaper," of any of our learned professors,sage judges, wise legislators, or piousclergymen, being present, we shall notfail to report thereof to the public; andendeavour to hold up, to the admirationof our readers, those fastidiousladies and gentlemen, whose delicatestomachs cannot digest a play, but cangorge their cormorant appetites on thevulgarity and smut, which have beenscouted from the stage as stale andunprofitable excrescences."Mr. Mathews made this paragraphthe subject of an action lor libel, andreceived heavy damages. After hisreturn to England, he continued to beAt Home as usual, and also performedin several of the English Opera Housepieces. Among the characters by whichhe gained most reputation were, JonathanW. Doubikins, in Jonathan in England,and Monsieur Mallet, in MyDaughter's Letter.As an actor," says a biographicalcritic, " Mr. Mathews possesses therare art of extracting his personalnature from his assumptions ; and heis Sir Fretful or Morbleu, without oneshade of Mathews about him." HisAt Homes have caused some to call himCHARLES tfOUNG.a mere mimic; but, as the same authorityobserves, " where a man, by thepowers of his imagination, conceives avoice and a manner, and executes hisconception, he ceases to be a mimic ;because what he produces has no realexistence. Let us, under this idea,behold Mr. Mathews At Home. Whereare the originals from whence MonsieurZephyr, Longbow, Nab, Dr.Prolix, Daniel O'Rourke, Sassafras,Orville, Ezekiel Hulk, &c., weredrawn ? to say nothing of the countlesshundreds of beings, that live theirbrief moment in his dialogue songs.Do they ever strike the ear or the eyeas unnatural ? No ! we feel they mightexist; but to track their likeness toindividuals, is impossible. Much moreimpossible is it that he should havecopied them from individuals. Such acourse would have required a muchlonger servitude to society, than Mr.Mathews's life, quadrupled, wouldallow him to pay. The fact is, almostall the creatures forming Mr. Mathews'sdramatis persona, are creations of hisfancy ; and he is, therefore, as much anactor as Garrick could have been, andmuch more so than any actor of thepresent day is."In person, Mr. Mathews is aboutfive feet eleven inches in height ; hiscountenance is pleasing on the stage,though inclining rather to seriousnessthan drollery in its expression. Hisaction is somewhat impeded by a limpin one of his legs, but not sufficiently soas to mar the effect of his performance.He owes this infirmity to an accidentwhich he met with some years ago,when he was thrown out of a gig, andseriously injured.Mr. Mathews, has been twice married:first, to a Miss Strong, of Exeter,in the year 1797 ; and secondly, in1803, about a year after the death ofhis former wife, to Miss Jackson, halfsister to Miss F. M. Kelly. This lady,who left the stage in 1800, was a verysweet singer, and the original Fanny, inKilling No Murder. In private life,Mr. Mathews is much respected by alarge circle of friends and acquaintances.His residence is at Hampstead, wherehe is said to have collected a veryvaluable and extensive set of theatricalpaintings.CHARLES YOUNG.J?HIS eminent tragedian is the son ofa surgeon, and was born in FenchurchStreet, London, on the loi of January,1777. He received the rudiments ofeducation under a private tutor; and,after passing a short time at Copenhagen,was sent to Eton, and, ultimately,to Merchant Tailors' School. At theage of eighteen, he was placed in amerchant's counting-house ; but a theatricalmania had taken too strong holdon his mind, to render any other professionbut the stage tolerable to him.He tried his powers, first, at John Street,and other private theatres ; and faroutshone all his companions on theboards. The Liverpool manager, hearingof his talents, at once engaged him ;and he accordingly made his debut inthat city, in 1798. in the part of Douglas.The applause with which he met wasunprecedented for a new actor; andinduced him, in the following season,to resume his own name, which he hadpreviously laid aside for that of Green.In 1800, 1801, and 1802, he was thehero of the Glasgow stage ; and in1805, whilst performing at Liverpool,he married Miss Grimace, who diedsoon after becoming a mother.After having conducted the Chestertheatre for a year or two, Mr. Youngwas engaged at the Hay market Theatre;where he made his first bow to a Londonaudience, in the character ofHamlet, on the 22nd of June, 1807.He was well received by the audience,and, upon the whole, favourably noticedby the critics ; one of the best of thatday, after pointing out some of thefaults of our actor, says : " Mr. Young,however, is not the common actor ofthe stage ; he has genius, and muchfeeling; and if he did not altogetherenter into the character of Hamlet,an allowance must be made for theACTORS,difficulty and variety of a part inwhich Kemble, undoubtedly the firstactor in Europe, is daily making improvements.We will finish, by pronouncingMr. Young a great acquisitionto the profession. The chief faults ofhis performance appear to have been amonotony of declamation in his soliloquies,and a want of sufficient dignity,ease, and elegance, in the familiarscenes." After the destruction of thetwo patent theatres, by fire, Mr. Youngleft, the metropolis; "but returned in1810, and was engaged at Covent Garden,as second to John Kemble, and asthe occasional representative of his parts.The latter tragedian played but rarely;and the subject of our memoir had, in consequence,full opportunity of displayinghis powers in a varied range of characters,of which he held undisputed possessionuntil the appearance of Kean andMacready. About a year or two ago, heplayed, alternately, with Kean, at DruryLane, Othello and I ago, and other characters; and their united performancedrew very large houses. He returned,subsequently, to Covent Garden; where,his performance in Miss Milford'sRienzi, added to his reputation ; andcaused that tragedy to have a verysuccessful run.As an actor, Mr. Young has feweradmirers than either Kean or Macready ;to both of whom he is, in our estimation,decidedly inferior. His best charactersare, Darn, in The Exile, Beverley,Cassius, lago, The Stranger, Hamlet,and Macbeth. In Holla, he is tar surpassedby Wallack ; and his Richardthe Third may be called a failure. Ingenteel comedy, he succeeded best insuch parts as Joseph Surface, Mr.Oakley, and Falkland ; but in these hegave more of the actor and the gentlemanthan the man ; it was Mr. Young,rather than Mr. Surface, that the audienceseemed to be listening to. Indeed,this fault runs through all his person-nations;his distinct and sonorous voice;his graceful action ; his cold and carefuldeclamation; his thoughtful brow andserious aspect, are to be seen alike inlago, in Rolla, in Macbeth, and inHamlet. He never seemed to losehimself in his character; and thus hisacting had more the appearance of adrawing-room exhibition, where theperformer is afraid of startling hisaudience, than that of an actor with fullscope for action and expression, withoutthe danger of his soiling a carpet, oroverturning a china jar. We fully concurin the following remarks of a critic :The elegance of Young's attitudes atoneperiod delighted us, the harmonyof his voice charmed us, and the correctnessof his delineations procuredour respect; but we can challenge ourmemory with no period, when the excellenceof his acting made our heartsthrob quicker, or caused the blood torush from our breasts with fear, orrevel there in rapture he never excitedus all our emotions were thoseof placid pleasure. At his worst, henever offended us ; at his best, he onlypleased us. All he does, appears to usto smell of the lamp. We can see theregular gradation of every act ; and heplunges a dagger in his breast with thesame elegance and precision that heused to hand a chair to Lady Teazle.He never lets passion run away withhim ; and if he, in consequence, nevercommits a gross absurdity, lie unluckilynever hits upon a wildly original beauty.Mr. Young never gives himself up tohis feelings, but always relies upon hisjudgment he never acts from the heart,but the head. The effect of his per-donations to us are only so many specimensof his elocutionary powers;talented recitations of the authors, butcold embodiments of the character;pleasing illustrations of language,weak ebullitions of feeling."In person, Mr. Young is about fivefeet seven inches in height with adark complexion, and, in profile, notunlike John Kemble ; though, both inphysical and mental respects, he is muchinferior to that gifted tragedian. Heplays on the piano, and sings with taste,both on and off the stage; an accomplishmentexhibited by him to advantagein the slight vocal portion allottedto Falkland and lago. He is also saidto have acted Macheath and Inkle,with applause ; and to have given aspecimen of his comic powers, at Liverpool,in the part of Shacab ,c.MR. I IS TO N .'127MR. LISTON.MR. LISTON was born about theyear 1777, in the parish of St. Anne,Westminster, and educated at theSoho School, under Dr. Barrow. Hisparentage has not been precisely ascertained; but one of his biographers,after alluding to the circumstance of anangry newspaper correspondence whichtook place some years ago, betweenthe subject of our memoir, and a personwho claimed him as his son, adds:Mr. Listen's father was a Mr. JohnListon, once well known in the sportingworld. He was a man of eccentrichabits, and more eccentric sayings : but,from his devotion to the gaming-table,became reduced, and, at the time heclaimed our hero, was in a very meancapacity in the Custom-house." If thisaccount be correct, it is not improbablethat Mr. Liston, had only his educationto depend on, for the means of subsistence; and accordingly, we find him,about 1799, in the capacity of master ofthe grammar-school of St. Martin's, inCastle Street, Leicester Square.We are not informed what led himto follow the stage as a profession ; hisfirst regular theatrical situation was atDublin, where he played some unimportantparts in tragedy and comedy, butexcited no notice in either. He afterwardsbecame a member of StephenKemble's company, who advised him toattempt second-rate old men, in whichhe succeeded tolerably well. His countryboys, however, procured him the greatestapplause ; the happy negativeness ofhis face, as his biographer expresses it,greatly aided his delineations of obtuseintellect ; and his benefits became convincingproofs of the townsfolk's estimationof their comedian. This successinduced him to apply for an advance ofsalary, which the "manager refused ;telling him, if he were dissatisfied hemight go; " for such actors as he wereto be found in every bush." The nextmorning, Stephen Kemble was on hisway to another town, when, at the distanceof about a mile from Newcastle, heperceived Liston standing in the middleof a hedge by the road-side. ' Goodheavens ! Liston," cried the manager,what are you doing there ?" " Onlylooking," he replied, "for some of theactors you told me of this morning."The manager's disapprobation was notthe only mortification Liston met withat Newcastle ; being rejected by hisdaughter, Fanny, to whom he had paidhis addresses.By the recommendation of Mr.Charles Kemble, who entertained anopinion of his abilities different fromthat of Stephen, Mr. Liston was engagedat the Haymarket, in the summerof 1805. He made his debut as Sheep-face,a part in which, from its effectivesituations, he could scarcely fail tosucceed. This and other characters,gained him a reputation sufficient toinduce the Covent Garden management,who had previously declined his services,to find a vacancy for him, and heaccordingly appeared at that theatre,on the 15th of October,in Jacob Gawky,in The Chapter of Accidents. " Hisentree," says one of his critics, "waspeculiarly felicitous ; his outre appearancefulfilled all the ideas that thecognomen ' Gawky ' creates, and hisreception was enthusiastic." But hissubsequent performances were not soeffective ; and during that, and thefollowing season, his engagement waslooked upon, by his brethren, as animprudent managerial step ; and a celebratedtragedian is reported to havesaid, " he has phiz comica, sure enough,but as to vis comica, he has nothing ofit in his composition." He was, however,gradually rising in public favour, andhis performances in Lord Grizzle, andCaper, in The Widow's Choice, at oncestamped his reputation.At his benefit, in the season of 1809, hesurprised his admirers by announcinghimself for the part of Octavian ; theattempt was too respectable to excitelaughter, and for that reason only, metwith applause.At the time of the O. P. row, ouractor was reported to have said that,ACTORS.the managers would have conquered,had it not been for the opposition of theblackguard citizens." This getting tothe public ear, the play-going patronsdetermined to resent it, and the nexttime Listen appeared, he was receivedwith a shower of apples, and divershowls, hisses, and vituperative exclamations.Upon his advancing however,to the front of the house, and totallydenying the charge which had givenrise "to the clamour, he was immediatelyrestored to favour.After having been many years atCovent Garden, he removed to DruryLane, at a salary, it is said, of 40 perweek, and he subsequently played atthe Haymarket at IQ per night.If the creation of laughter in othersbe the test of comic merit, no actor,perhaps, ever ranked higher than thesubject of this memoir; but it may bequestioned, after all, whether he is tobe regarded even as a second-rateperformer in genuine comedy. Peculiarities,and habits of a limited nature,he can portray with great effect ; but apersonation of character which is toappeal to the judgment, or the feelings,seems quite beyond his reach. In far je,however, he is unequalled; and, whetherfrom his countenance, his voice, or hismanner, or all these together, produceseffects the most irresistibly ludicrous,and muscle-moving. His Apollo Belli,and Lubin Log, have made all othersintolerable, to say nothing of his PaulPry, his Groan, in Quite Correct,Solomon Sharpest, Bombast Furioso,Tristan Sappy, Billy Lackaday, inSweethearts and Wives, &c. His bestparts in comedy are, Tony Bumpkin,and Sir Bashful Constant, but hispersonation of the latter character isalmost forgotten.Mr. Liston was married, in 1807, toMiss Tyre. She mired from the stagein 1823, after having delighted, forsome years, the play-going public bythe sweetness of her singing in Beta,and other similar characters.JOHN EMERY.JOHN EMERY was born at Sunderland,in the county of Durham, in theyear 1777, of parents who were bothactors of provincial celebrity. He waseducated at Macclesfield, where he imbibedthe Yorkshire dialect ; his acquaintancewith which contributed somuch to his popularity on the stage.It was at first intended that he shouldbe brought up to the profession ot music;and his first engagement at a theatrewas in the capacity of a performer inthe orchestra, at Brighton. At length,his predilection for the stage developingitself, he was engaged behind the curtain,and made his debut, with greatsuccess, as Old Crazy, the bellman, inthe farce of Peeping Tom. The nextyear or two of his theatrical life waspassed in a strolling tour through thecounties of Kent and Sussex ; in thecourse of which he acquired more experiencethan either fame or profit. Atfifteen, he became a member of TateWilkinson's York company, with whichhe went a provincial circuit that broughthim into general notice, and may besaid to have fixed his reputation. Hisperformance of old men was particularlyapplauded, and his celebrity in thisclass of character first drew the attentionof the London managers towards him.Emery came to the metropolis in1798 ; and, in the season of that year,made his appearance at Covent Garden,as Frank Garlands, in A Cure for theHeart Ache, and Lovegold, in TheMiser. The applause which he receivedin these characters is attributed,by Mr. Gait, more to the desire of thepublic to encourage the talent whichthey saw Emery possessed, than toadmiration at the excellence of his acting.We do not understand this: if hedisplayed any talent at all, it must havebeen in his manner of acting, which, ifadmired, would naturally be applauded;and the expression of such admirationwould, doubtless, operate as an encouragementto the talent of the actor;but audiences are not usually so generousas to applaud before they admire.JOSEPH GRIMALDI.The career of an actor, whose fameis once established, presents few eventsworthy of biographical record ; nor isthat of the subject of our memoir anexception to the general truth of thisremark. He continued, in his peculiarline of acting, unrivalled and unexcelled,until the close of his career;which took place when he was in thezenith both of his fame and powers.He died, from the rupture of a blood-vessel,on the 25th of July, 1822, whenhe was only in his forty fifth year. Heleft a widow, and seven children, forwhose support the principal performersused their utmost efforts to raise a fundby subscription.Emery's private character was mostexemplary ; he was, in every sense ofthe word, estimable and respectable,and an ornament, of whom the stagehad reason to be proud, both as an actorand a man. His abilities were notconfined to his profession; he wrotesongs in the Yorkshire dialect, of asuperior kind in their way ; and is saidto have used his pencil so well, that hemight have risen to eminence as anartist, had he not preferred a theatricalcareer.As an actor, in such parts as he excelled,no one, before or since histime, is to be compared with him. Inhis hands, the difficult character ofCaliban, in The Tempest, produced animpression to which the audience hadbefore been strangers. It was in thepart of Tyke, however, in The Schoolof Reform, that he shone pre-eminent.No character," says Mr. Gait, " couldbe more energetically performed ; itwas, if excellence can be spoken of as afault, too violent ; for the dreadful feelinghe infused into it could not be witnessedwithout pain, far beyond whatthe drama should ever attempt to inflict.It lacked of the temperance and smoothnessof passion requisite to give pleasure;never was the frenzy of guilt andremorse so truly exhibited ; it was avery whirlwind and hurricane of thesoul ; and few tragedies have everdrawn more tears."JOSEPH GRIMALDI.JOSEPH GRIMALDI was born onthe 18th of December, 1779. His fathercame to England in the suite ofQueen Charlotte, on her marriage withGeorge the Third, in 1760, and was,for some time, dentist to her majesty.He was also engaged as ballet-masterto Drury Lane Theatre, but still continuedto practise his calling of tooth-drawing,though not always in themost orthodox manner. He is said tohave been dismissed from court, for extractingone of her majesty's teeth withhis fingers ; and an anecdote is told ofhis substituting for the tooth of a patient,that of a horse, which he insistedon retaining as his own fee, and whichthe sufferer actually bought of him foraguinea.Under his father's superintendence,the subject of our memoir was broughtup to the stage from his infancy,and on the 26th of December, 1781,made his debut at Drury Lane Theatre,in a pantomime, called RobinsonCrusoe. He continued to act Zephyr,Cupid, Goblin, &c., until his eighteenthyear, when he appeared in the characterof Orson, in Valentine and Orson,his first part of any importance. Soonafter, he performed the Clown, in theChristmas pantomime, and in this characterestablished a reputation totallyunprecedented.After having been a member of theDrury Lane company for nearly twenty-fiveyears, he removed to Coven t Garden,and it was at this theatre, and atSadler's Wells, that he obtained hischief celebrity in humorous pantomime.He played at both those < *theatres onthe same night; and once, in the autumnof 1814 or 1815, he also performedat the Surrey. A depression of spirits,and weak state of health, induced himto retire from his professional dutiesearlier than he wished, and an attemptwhich he made to resume them, atSadler's Wells, was nearly attended withfatal consequences. At four o'clock ofACTORS.the day, on which he was announced toPerform, he was still in bed, and in adreadful state of debility. His friendsentreated that he would not think ofappearing, but he was inflexible; andsaying, " he would play, if it cost himhis life, " he dressed himself, and proceededto the theatre. The audiencehad been prepared, by an address fromMr. T. Dibdin, to see a change in theirold favourite, and they received him, inconsequence,with such vehement applause,that Grimaldi burst into tears.He took his final leave of the stage atDrury Lane, on the 27th of June, 1828,in Harlequin Hoax. At the conclusionof the performance he addressed thehouse as follows :Ladies and Gentlemen, I appearbefore you for the last time. I need notassure you of the sad regret with whichI say it, but sickness and infirmity havecome upon me, and I can no longerwear ' the motley.' Four years ago, Ijumped my last "jump, filched my lastcustard, and ate my last sausage. Icannot describe the "pleasure I felt ononce more assuming my cap and bellsto-night that dress, in which I haveso often been made happy in yourapplause ; and, as I stripped them off',I fancied they seemed to cleave to me.I am not so rich a man as I was, when1 was basking in your favour formerly,for then I had always a fowl in onepocket, arid some fruit in the other. 1thank you for the benevolence whichhas brought you here to assist your oldand faithful servant in his prematuredecline. Eight and forty years have notyet passed over my head, and I amsinking fast. I now stand worse onmy legs, than I used to do on my head.But I suppose I am paying the penaltyof the course I pursued all my life; myanxiety and desire to merit your favours,has excited me to more exertionthan my constitution can bear, and likevaulting ambition, I have overleapedmyself. Ladies and Gentleman, I musthasten to bid you farewell ; but the painI feel in doing so, is assuaged by seeingbefore me a disproof of the old adage,that favourites have no friends. Ladiesand Gentlemen, may you and yoursever enjoy the blessings of health, isthe fervent prayer of Joseph Grimaldi :farewell farewell!"As an actor, in his peculiar line, Mr.Grimaldi stands alone ; the part ofClown, in his hands, assumed an importanceand an interest equally entertainingand original. In serious pantomime,his acting was also very effective ; andhe once, for his benefit, sustained thepart of Acres, in a manner that gavepromise of great talent in the regulardrama, had his inclinations tended thatway. " Those who have seen him,"says a critic, " can find no descriptionto do justice to his talent ; and thosewho have not-will not have any ideaof his talent from description, howeverminute or elaborate. All that is droll inhumanaction, Mr. Grimaldi can portray ;he can represent all the workings of ournature in every day occurrence. ' Noone,' it has been observed, ' can be ata loss like Grimaldi.' This is, indeed,true. The hopelessness of one whoknows not what to do next, he hits roa nicety ; he always appeared to us torepresent a grown child waking to perception,but wondering at every objecthe beholds. Then his exuberance ofanimal spirits was really miraculous;what a rich ringing laugh ! the veryvoice of merriment! Then the self-approvingchuckle, and the contemptuouslook, half pity, half derision, thathe gave to the dupe of his artifice ; hisincessant annoyance to Pantaloon, andhis feigned condolence for the very misfortuneoi which he was the author ; hisamazement and awe of Harlequin ; hisamorous glances at Columbine; and hiswinks at the imbecility of the doting,and the dandyism of the young lover ;his braggadocio blustering ; his cautiousescapes from detection ; and his ludicrousagonies during castigation ; wereall his, and his alone. lie was thevery beau ideal of thieves ; robbery becamea science in his hands; you forgavethe larceny, for the humour withwhich it was perpetrated. 11 e abstracteda leg of mutton from a butcher's tray,with such a delightful assumption ofnonchalance, and threw such plumpstupidity into his countenance, whilstthe slyness of observation linked in hishalf closed eyes; he extracted a watch,or a handkerchief, with such a bewitchingeagerness ; with such a devotionto the task, and yet kept his waryeye upon the victim of his trickery ; heseemed so imbued with the spirit ofpeculation, that you saw it in himD A N I E L TERRY.merely as a portion of his nature, and forwhich he was neither blameable nor accountable! His pantomimic colloquies,too, with the other sex, were inimitable ;his mincing affectation, when addressinga dandizette ; his broad, bold style, whenmaking love to a irishwoman, were alltrue to nature. We can scarcely say,why, but he always reminded us ofMaiden; and we can conceive thathe would have made much such a comedian: the roll of the eye the dropof the chin the elongated respiration,were peculiar to both."Mr. Grimaldi has been twice married:first, in 1798, to Miss Hughes, who diedin child-bed the following year ; andsecondly, to Miss Burton, in 1802, bywhom lie has a son, Mr. J. S. Grimaldi,who bids fair to equal his father inagility and cleverness, if not in genuinehumour*Mr. Grimaldi, who is said to be aman of peculiarly fine susceptibility,is universally respected for his amiabilityand integrity; and, in his deportmentoff the stage, preserves notrace of the character which he sosuccessfully represents on it. He wasonce asked to a dinner party at thehouse of a clergyman, and when thecloth had been removed, was requestedto sin a, but persisted in declining; onwhich his reverend host said, " Why,Mr. Grimaldi, 1 invited you on purposeto hear a song ! " " Did you, sir ? " repliedthe latter, " Good evening ! " andinstantly quitted the house. There wasa peculiarity about his voice, which noone who had once heard him, couldfail to recognize again. In his wayfrom Sadler's Wells to Covent Garden,one night, he poked his head out of thehackney-coach window, whilst passinga crowd in Holborn, and giving one ofhis electrical laughs, exclaimed, in hiswell-known tone, " There they are ! "The mob instantly recognized him, andfollowing the coach, cheered him all theway to Covent Garden, where manyentered the theatre, and gave him anadditional cheer from the gallery.DANIEL TERRY.DANIEL TERRY was born at Bath,ab ut the year 1780. He received therudiments of education at the grammar-schoolof that city, and completed itat a private academy at Whitfield, inWiltshire, whence he was removed tothe care of Mr. Samuel Wyatt, thearchitect, with whom he remained fiveyears. At the expiration of that periodhe gratified his taste for the stage byjoining Mr. Macready's company, atSheffield, where he acted Tressel, inRichard the Third, and other subordinatecharacters, at a salary of 25*.per week. Not thinking his talentswere properly appreciated, he returnedto his original profession, but finallyquitted it, in 1805, and resumed hisactual labours at Newcastle. In thefollowing year he was engaged at Liverpool,where be became a great favouriteboth with the manager and thepublic ; he had few parts of importancegiven him, but did all he attemptedwell, and thought none beneath hisnotice.In November, 1807, he was engagedby Mr. Henry Siddons to manage theEdinburgh Theatre, where he acquiredhis earliest popularity, as an actor.Whilst at Edinburgh, he was introducedto Sir Walter Scott, to whom he wassubsequently indebted for many substantialacts of friendship. On the 20thof May, 1812, he appeared as LordOgleby, at the Haymarket Theatre, andplayed, during the season, a variety ofcharacters with great success.In 1813, he was engaged at CoventGarden, but, owing to some disagreement,he quitted it in 1822, and repairedto Drury Lane, where he remainedtill October, 1825, when, inconjunction with Mr. Yates, he purchasedthe Adelphi Theatre. He continuedas a partner for about two seasons,when, owing to pecuniary embarrassments,connected with that establishment,he was compelled to make acomposition with his creditors, and retirefrom the concern. He was subsequentlyre-engaged at Drury Lane,A C T O RS .but soon relinquished his engagement,and died shortly afterwards, on the 23rdof June, 1829.As an actor, Mr. Terry undoubtedlyranked high ; and perhaps no actor,in his line, had finer conceptions of hischaracters. He, however, never aimedto the elevation of a star, but contentedhimself with being generally serviceableto the management. The characteristicsof his acting were good sense,judgment, and discrimination ; thepassionate and impetuous did not suithim.To our mind, one of his finest per-donations was that of Mephistopheles, inFaustus; the cold, calm firmness, andapathetic certainty of success, withwhich he guided his victim to destruction,is yet to be rivalled. We mustnot, however, forget his Simpson, inwhich he has never had an equal ; itwas, as a critic says, chaste, humorous,natural almost pathetic; for he blendedperplexity with pathos ; and, whenfairly tired of laughing, you began topity him. His Sir Peter Teazle was good,but inferior to Farren's ; and his Dr.Caldwell, though below Dowton's, wassecond to that of no other actor. Intragedy, his most attractive characterswere Lear, King John, and Macbeth :in the first, he is described as havingbeen great in the extreme. Mr. Terryhad few personal advantages, but hiscountenance was expressive, and indicativeof a high order of intellect andrefinement.ALEXANDER RAE.i. HIS elegant actor was born in London,in May, 1782, and, after havingreceived a classical education, enteredthe office of an army agent. Theatricals,however, soon took possession of hismind, and, on the retirement from businessof the gentleman with whom hehad been placed, he went down to Huntingdon,and, either there or at Bath,made his first public appearance on thestage. This was at the commencementof the year 1806, when we find him performing,with great applause, Hamlet,Octavian, Charles Surface, Young Wilding,&c. &c.On the 9th of June he appeared atthe Hay market, as Octavian, and in thatcharacter, as well as in Hamlet, Sir EdwardMortimer, Frederick Bramble, inThe Poor Gentleman, and others, whichhe subsequently performed, was receivedwith decided approbation. At the closeof the season he was engaged as Mr.Young's successor, at Liverpool, and ledin that town for four years, except whenplaying second to John Kemble. Heused, it was said, to fight so furiouslyas MacdufF, that the great actor, whoplayed Macbeth, told the manager " thatyoung man would be the death of himin earnest." Mrs. Siddons, during herstay at Liverpool, expressed her opinionin very high terms of Rae's acting ; inconsequenceof which he received anoffer for Drury Lane. He made hisdebt there, in 1813, as Hamlet undoubtedlyhis best character; yet hemet with a few hisses, which were,however, overwhelmed by the generalapplause.When Coleridge's tragedy of Remorsewas brought out, the part ofOrdinis was intrusted to Rae, who issaid to have made as much of it as Keanafterwards did of Sir Giles Overreach.At the debut of the latter tragedian, inThe Merchant of Venice, Rae playedBassanio, and he is said to have treatedthe new representative of Shylock withsomething like contempt. Kean, at allevents, thought so ; and took a ludicrousmethod of revenge. On the rehearsal ofthe fight in Richard, Rae, who playedRichmond, and little suspected his adversaryto be a better fencer than himself,asked him, " where he should hithim?" "Where you can, sir," repliedKean ; and he is said to have drivenpoor Rae about the stage for at least aquarter of an hour, before he wouldsuffer him to make the final thrust.Rae's performances, even by the sideof Kean, were still admirable , thoughfew opportunities were afforded him ofdisplaying his talents. His Alonzo, inThe Revenge, and his lago, were mas-juliaGLOVER.terry efforts ; and as De Melos, in Manuel,he is said to have thrown Kean completelyinto the shade. When the latterthrew up his part in The Italians, Raeundertook it, and went through it insuch a manner as to silence many whohad come prepared to condemn thepiece.After the death of Raymond, thesubject of our memoir succeeded himas stage manager of Drury Lane, whichsituation he left to take, in conjunctionwith other performers, the RoyaltyTheatre. The speculation failed, andinvolved him in difficulties from whichhe did not live long enough to extricatehimself. His death was preceded bycircumstances more afflicting to himselfand family than pecuniary embarrassments.An actress at the Royalty Theatrebecame so passionately attached tohim, that she declared she would destroyherself if he did not live with her.Rae consented, but had not long doneso, before he was attacked with thestone ; and, whilst writhing under thetortures of that dreadful malady, wasvisited, forgiven, and nursed by his wife.All her kindness, however, could notstifle bodily agony and mental remorse ;a prey to both, he expired, under anoperation for the stone, on the 8th ofSeptember, 1820, leaving three childrenand a widow without any means ofsupport. A night was devoted to theirbenefit at Drury Lane, soon after Mr.Rae's death, which drew a crowdedhouse.Rae was, in general, much esteemedamong his brother actors ; and, indeed,his private character, with the exceptionof the taint upon it above-mentioned,was amiable and respectable. Besidesbeing a fine actor, he was a talentedman, and a finished gentleman. HisHamlet was, as Shakspeare intended,princely and melancholy ; he failed inMacbeth ; but his Octavian and Romeowere, perhaps, the best on the stage.In light comedy, he was between Ellis-tonand Jones; in some qualificationshe excelled, and in others was inferiorto, both.JULIA GLOVER.JULIA BETTERTON, the maidenname of this excellent actress, was bornat Newly, in Ireland, on the 8th ofJanuary, 1781 ; or, according to somewriters, 1783. Her father was himselfan actor of some importance in themetropolis, and descended from thegreat Betterton. As soon as his daughtercould walk, we are told, she tottered onas a Cupid, or tripped as a fairy, accompanyingher lather on all his provincialengagements for the first sixyears of her life.In 1789, she displayed great talentin Tate Wilkinson's company, at York,by her performance of the page, inThe Orphan, and gained enthusiasticapplause as Tom Thumb, which sheplayed for the benefit of George FrederickCooke, who himself appeared asGlumdalca. In 1796, she was the heroineof both tragedy and comedy atBath, where her reputation rose sohigh, that the Covent Garden manageroffered her a salary of 10 per week,or an engagement for three years, witha rise of stipend, l each year. Thefather refused this offer, together witha second one of 12 a week for thefirst season ; and finally entered intoan agreement on behalf of his daughter,for five years, at the then immensecompensation of \5, 16, 18, and20 per week.Miss Betterton made her debut beforea London audience on the 12th ofOctober, 1797, as Elvira, in HannahMore's tragedy of Percy, and metwith the most flattering applause. Hersecond character was Charlotte Rus-port,in The West Indian, in which sheso pleased Cumberland, the author,that he obtained for her the part ot theheroine in his new piece, called FalseImpressions, acted for the first time, onthe 23rd of November. About thistime, the celebrated Mrs. Abingdon returnedfor a few nights to the stage,but the subject of our memoir lostnothing by the comparison, and con-actors.tinned to receive the applause of theaudience, as well as that of Mrs. Abingdonherself. Our actress remained atCovent Garden until 1801, having, theyear previous, become the husband ofMr. Glover, of whom we shall speakhereafter.In 1803, Mrs. Glover appeared atDrury Lane, and created so favourablean impression there, that, at the close ofthe season, she was engaged by Bannister,for three years longer, with anincrease of salary. Bannister, however,died before the contract was signed ;and as his successor was unwilling toconfirm it upon the same terms, Mrs.Glover declined renewing her engagement,and tendered her services toCovent Garden, which, though at firstrefused, were at length accepted, uponher own terms. In 1813 and 1814,she re-appeared at Drury Lane, andsubsequently at Covent Garden, butlatterly she has been seen to thebest advantage at the Haymarket,where she has appeared in several newcharacters, admirably suited to herstyle of acting. Her Maria Delorme,in Ambition, or Marie Minot, a translationfrom the French, in which sherepresented the career of a woman ofpleasure, beginning in splendid dishonour,and ending in desertion andpoverty, was, in particular, a most impressiveand natural piece of acting.The private life of Mrs. Glover appearsto have been singularly markedby affliction. After having survived theloss of a lover, to whom she was mostdeeply attached, she gave her handto Mr. Glover, by compulsion of hersatiety who had been bribed to obtainher consent, by a bond for j 1,000,from the intended husband. He, itseems, had deceived both Miss Bettertonand her father, by representations ofhis great expectations from a wealthyrelative ; whilst, in fact, he was whollydependent on his father, who at oncediscarded him for allying himself withan actress. Mrs. Glover soon found hisconduct such as to render it impossiblefor her to reside with him ; and she accordinglyseparated from him, takingupon herself the care and maintenanceof her children. Soon after, Mr. Gloverbrought an action against the DruryLane committee for the amount of hersalary, which they had refused to payto him ; but failing in this, he seizedone of his daughters, whom he metwalking with a servant, and attemptedforcibly to detain her. On the 19th ofDecember, 1817, however, the partiesbeing brought before Mr. SergeantSelon, that gentleman disclaimed hisauthority to interfere in behalf of Mr.Glover, who thenceforth refrained frommaking any similar attempt.The biographer, who relates thesecircumstances, justly observes, that herdomestic sufferings must often haveoperated to her prejudice as an actress,as she was frequently compelled toperform " when her heart was rivenwhen her mind was agonized andwhen she had endured mental andbodily fatigue, enough to overcome thestrongest of the stronger sex."With respect to her acting, Mr. GeorgeSoane makes the following remarks :Mrs. Glover's style of acting is moresuited to broad humour, than to thesickly stilted sentiments of moderncomedy. She is an admirable Estifa-nia, a good Beatrice ; but she wouldmake a very indifferent representative ofMr. Morton's heroines. Her humour istoo strong, and, perhaps, even too coarse,for the Delia and Julia, that speak thelanguage of the last fashionable novel,and breathe nothing but purity andsentiment ; while, according to establishedcustom, they are very dutifullyprepared to outwit some hard-heartedmamma, who may have the misfortunenot to patronise their attachments. Asfar as our recollection goes of MissPope, she partially resembled Mrs.Glover, though with infinitely more vivacityand sprightliness. Mrs. Glover,though a judicious actress, and possessingconsiderable comic powers, is yetdevoid of animation. There is alwayssomething heavy in her acting; a defectwhich may probably be traced to thecorpulence of her person, and the wantof expression in her face. Her comicwalk is more particularly that of broadhumour, devoid of all sentiment, andeven of refinement. In tragedy, she hasattempted much ; and on two or threeoccasions, at the most, successfully.One of her most approved efforts, intragedy, was the character of QueenElizabeth, in King Richard the Third.But these few instances of partial success,by no means justify her continuingWILLIAM Berry.4.3.5to play parts so foreign to her talentand appearance. Her features are sotruly comic, that it is not possible forthem to be worked up fairly into tragicexpression. Her figure, too, "is very littleconsistent with the dignity and elegancewhich should characterize thetragedian, and which, in fact, is absolutelyrequisite to give effect to acting.Besides, she has but very indifferentnotions of tragic acting ; she over-colourseverything, from the intimateconviction that she can, in no otherway, produce effect of any kind. Inother words, her violence is the violenceof weakness ; just as a personwith a weak voice, is forced to exertthat voice to the utmost before it canbe fully heard. To sum up the whole,without entering minutely into the variouscauses, she has no genius for tragedy; and it really is lamentable tosee her acting thus in opposition to hertalent, robbing her of fair fame, andlowering in public estimation, one ofthe first actresses of the present day."WILLIAM Berry.WILLIAM Berry was born inCornfields, on the 18th of December,1784. His father was an auctioneer;and, after giving his son the benefit ofa good education, placed him, at theage of fourteen, under an artist ofeminence. Painting, however, was notto his taste ; and bookselling, to whichhe was afterwards introduced, still less.He was next placed with a printer;where, finding his master fond of theatricals,he avowed his own mania thesame way ; and the shop soon became astage for their mutual exhibitions.Oxberry made his first appearance inaregular play at a stable near QueenAnne's Street, and afterwards at BerwickStreet ; his earliest characters beingsuch as Hassan, in The Castle Spectre,and Rosse, in Macbeth. In 1802, havingpersuaded his master to give him uphis indentures, he obtained an engagementat Watford, where he appearedas Antonio, in The Merchant of Venice ;and continued to fill similar parts, untiltowards the close of the season, whenhe played Dan with immense success.Still, however, he thought tragedy hisforte; and, accordingly, on his arrivalat Calming, he made his first appearancethere as Richard the Third.At length, on receiving an offer fromMr. Trotter, manager of the Worthingand Hythe theatres, he went his circuitas a low comedian ; although he occasionallyplayed Shylock, and othertragic characters. He also sang betweenthe pieces; and, altogether, hadhis hands pretty full of business.In 1806, he married a Miss Hewitt,then only sixteen years of age ; and,in the following year, was engaged,through the recommendation of Mr.Siddons, at Covent Garden, for threeyears, at a salary of 5, 6, and 8per week. " To town," says one ofhis biographers, " our comedian came;arid there became infected with a disordernot peculiar to actors, namely,modesty. So little reliance did he placeon his own powers, that he went a dozentimes to the stage door of the theatre, erehe once mustered resolution enough tocross the threshold. At last he passedthe Rubicon, had an interview with JohnKemble, and fixed Robin Roughheadfor his opening part. When the momentarrived for his appearance, hewas actually forced from the wing;and he remained for some seconds beforea metropolitan audience, in a state ofcomplete stupefaction : his performancewas cold, constrained, and ineffective."The next morning (November 8th, 1807)he was 'cast for Ezekiel Homespun ;but fearing to tread in the steps ofEmery, he assumed Lord Puberty instead; and in this performance he hadto contend against the recollection ofSuettt's inimitable personation of thesame character. The motive of themanager in engaging our comedian wasto fill the place of Emery ; who, inconsequenceof a quarrel, was aboutquitting the theatre; but the lattergentleman, prudently arranging hisdifference, Oxberry was shelved, orplayed as Munden's or Emery's double,ACTORS.in case of the indisposition of either ofthese established favourites.Under these circumstances, Oxberrywas glad to obtain from Mr. Harris arelease from his articles, and to acceptan offer of performing at Glasgow, at5 per week. Here he made such ahit in Sir David Daw, in The Wheel ofFortune, that the town's people everafterwards called him Sir David; andhis benefit was so well attended, thathe cleared 70 ; an immense swim forany one but an established star. On thegetting up of Adelgitha, he was cast forMichael Duces; but not wishing torisk the reputation he had acquired incomedy by a return to tragedy, refusedthe part. The influence, however, ofMrs. Beaumont, the manager's wife, atlength induced him to consent; andhe is said to have made so great animpression in the character, that tragedywas considered his forte ; and hesubsequently played, there, Macbeth,Shylock, Richard the Third, andGlenalvon, with great applause.About 1812, Mr. Oxberry made hisdebUt at the Lyceum, in an opera, calledThe Russian Impostor; and, thoughnot much accustomed to singing, wentthrough both his vocal and spoken partswith decided success. He had not performedmany nights, before Mr. Arnoldre-engaged him for three years, at 7,8, and 9, per week. His serviceswere afterwards secured, upon the sameterms, at Drury Lane ; and, at the expirationof the first engagement, heentered into a second, for four years, at9 per week for the first year; lQfor the second; and 12 for the last.In 1820, however, when Mr. Ellistonreduced the salaries, Oxberry quittedDrury Lane ; and was, for some time,the comic star of the Surrey, and otherminor theatres. He afterwards becamestage-manager of the Olympic; buthis management brought the affairs ofthe theatre into much embarrassment.In December, 1821, he took the Craven'sHead chop-house, in Drury Lane, whichwas chiefly frequented by persons connectedwith the theatres, either asauthors or actors ; and to whom thefacetious host used to say, " We vocalizeon a Friday, conversations on a Sunday,and choice every day."Mr. Oxberry died of an apoplectic fit,on the 9th of June, 1824. 'His bestcharacters were, Leo Ruminate, Slender,and Abel Day, in which he was superiorto all other actors. Emery surpassedhim in Tyke, and little Knight,in Robin Roughhead ; but he was secondto no other performer in these parts.He was the author of an entertainment,called The Actress of All Work, andother theatrical pieces ; and edited TheMonthly Mirror, and a collection ofplays, published with his name. Insocial conversation he retailed a fund ofanecdote ; and accompanied his numerousstories of Cooke, Incledon, &c.,with excellent imitations of the men.In person," says his biographer,he was five feet nine inches in height,and, latterly, very corpulent; of a darkcomplexion, with a small eye, that waspeculiarly expressive. He could notsing; and was as long acquiring oneair, as he was in studying a character.He was of a passionate temper, whichcreated him many enemies, and conciliationwas not amongst his habits ;but to the wants of mankind, he hadan open and a ready hand. He wasparticularly partial to clean linen ; andused continually to give away his shirts,rather than see the objects of his bountywithout so necessary a comfort. Hehad some peculiarities of diet. Henever took any breakfast; his firstdraught, on waking, was a bottle ofsoda water; an hour afterwards, hedrank a pint of cold milk ; his dinnerwas usually a chop, and ale and brandyand water closed the day. He neverdrank tea, as an evening beverage ;but, during his performances, he tookan amazing quantity of it."EbMUND KEAN43;EDMUND KEAN.THE place of this eminent tragedian'sbirth was Castle Street, LeicesterSquare ; the date has been differentlystated, both by himself and his variousbiographers. The most probable oneis that first assigned by himself, of the17th of March, 1787 ; though he subsequentlyaffirmed, that his birth didnot occur before November, 1790. Heis reported to have been the natural sonof a Mrs. Carey; though he himself issaid to have believed that he owed hisexistence not to Mrs. Carey, but to alady who, through life, assumed thetitle of his aunt; and who, nearly sixtyyears since, was under the protectionof the Duke of Norfolk. His father isgenerally called Aaron Kean, and statedto have" been a tailor; but this hasbeen contradicted by Mr. Lush, ofCharles Square, who says that Kean'sfather was named Edmund, and wasan architect by profession ; but becominginvolved, through intemperance, wasinduced to take a copying clerk's situation,and soon after was killed, by fallingfrom the parapet of the house where helodged.As early as April, 1796, Kean isremembered to have appeared on theboards of Drury Lane, as a supernumeraryin the processions ; and as therepresentative of sundry devils, Cupids,monkeys, &c. A ludicrous anecdote istold of him at this period : whilst performingone of a band of Lilliputiangoblins, introduced in Macbeth, byJohn Kemble, he unfortunately madea false step ; and, to the great amusementof the audience, tripped up himselfand all Ins brother demons.Kemble, in no mind to enjoy a laughwhich had been created by the failureof one of his own introductions, severelycensured little Kean ; who is said tohave excused himself, by begging themanager to consider that " he had neverbefore appeared in tragedy."In the September of the year abovementionedhe played Tom Thumb, tohis mother's Queen Dolalolla, at BartholomewFair ; and is described, by one whosaw him act, as a pretty boy, with a goodvoice ; but unquestionably more like aJew than a Christian child. " Up to thisperiod," says one of his biographers,Kean had received no education whatever;but he was then placed at a littleschool, in the neighbourhood of hisfather's residence, where a very moderateshare of knowledge was instilledinto his mind, vi et armis. The mindof the child had been inoculated with asort of lawless liberty, and restraint becameinimical to its nature ; and aftervacillating between the certainty ofcastigation at school, and severity athome, and the chance of existenceabroad, our hero left his father's house,without a chosen servant to conducthis steps,' and ' went as cabin boy.' Theship in which he entered was bound forMadeira ; but long ere she reached herdestination, Kean discovered his error ;the tyrants of the deck were worse thanthe legislators of the seminary, andthe rope's-end of the one more "painfulthan the birch of the other. His healthbecame impaired under this treatment ;and he was, in consequence, sent tothe hospital at Madeira, where he spenttwo months on a bed of sickness. Uselessto his captain, and a burthen uponthe hospital, he was put on board ahomeward-bound vessel, and placed,penniless, upon his native shore. Hesought his former home, but his fatherwas no more, and his mother had returnedto her original profession, andwas in some strolling company, butwhere, it was impossible to learn.Thus circumstanced, he threw himselfon the protection of his uncle, Moses ;who, with Miss Tidswell, late of DruryLane Theatre, supported and instructedhim ; from the mimic he acquired thoselittle arts, which he even now occasionallyindulges in, i. e. imitating thehorn, knife-grinding, and what is commonlycalled ventriloquism." We donot vouch for the accuracy of the abovefacts ; for the same authority states thatKean passed two years at Eton, whichis certainly not the case. One authority43 SACTORS.says that he escaped from his vessel,by feigning deafness; and Mr. Lushdenies that he owed his education toMoses Kean, or, except in a verytrifling degree, to Miss Tidsweil; butsays that he derived his chief instructionfrom an aunt, Mrs. Price, of GreenStreet, Leicester Square.In 1798 and 1799, he used to act atthe house of Mr. Roach, a theatricalbookseller, residing near Drury Lane,in whose garret he played Richard theThird, and various other parts. InRichard, he had a Scotch lassie for hisLady Anne; whose dialect so annoyedhim, that he fried to teach her English,and she, in return, gave him a lessonin the part of Sir Pertinax Macsyco-pliant. In 1800, at which time he wasknown as " the infant prodigy, MasterCarey," he used to recite at a at the Rolls Rooms, ChanceryLane ; and in such a manner, asto excite the wonder of all present.Indeed, it seems to be admitted, by allwho knew him at this period, that hewas, even then, " a splendid actor ;and that many of his effects were quiteas startling as any of his more maturedperformances." This opinion is confirmedby Lord Byron ; who is made tosay, in the life of him by Moore, " Keanbegan by acting Richard the Third,when quite a boy; and gave all thepromise of what he afterwards became."His talents induced the proprietor ofa private theatre, in Lamb's ConduitStreet, to engage him to play the leadingcharacters, of which he performed avariety in 1801. About the same period,he broke his leg, whilst riding anact of horsemanship at BartholomewFair, but soon recovered from the accident;and, for the next three or fouryears, " was often about different partsof the country, spouting, riding, or ropedancing." In 1806, he was engaged atthe Haymarket Theatre, at a salary of2 per week, for little business; buteven in such parts as were then awardedhim, he contrived to make his geniusapparent. His acting in Carney (acharacter now omitted), in Colman'sWays and Means, is particularly mentionedby Dibdin, in his Reminiscences.It is not worth while to enumerate allthe inferior parts assigned to him atthe Haymarket ; suffice it to say, thatthe most important was that of Rosen-grants,in Hamlet. Such, however,was the peculiarity of his character,that in a few months afterwards hequitted a provincial engagement, ratherthan submit to play Laertes, to theHamlet of Master Betty.At the close of the Haymarket season,Kean joined a company at TunbridgeWells, where he made his firstappearance on the 22nd of October, inthe characters of Lord Hastings, andPeeping Tom, on the same night.Tyke, and Jerry Sneak, were hiscontrasts of the following evening ; andhe subsequently played Mungo, Shac-abac, Douglas, Harlequin, Italia. &c.&c. ; besides frequently singing comicsongs between the acts. About thesame time, he performed, for a shorttime, at Croydon ; and it is recorded ofhim, that coming on the stage, oneevening, as Alexander the Great, someonein the pit cried out, " Alexanderthe Little !" Kean immediately turnedhis head deliberately round, and fixinghis eyes, with a scornful look, upon theindividual who had uttered the expression,exclaimed, " Yes, Alexanderthe Little, but with a great soul."He left Tunbridge Wells in September,1807; and after playing successively atBirmingham, Guernsey, and Cheltenham,at the second of which places he issaid to have been hissed off, was engagedto lead generally in Cherry's company,then performing in the provinces of Ireland.Here he not only acted Hamlet,Richard, and Othello, but Prince orlandoin The Cabinet, Rugantino,Scaramouch, &c. &c. At Clonrnel, heplayed in a piece called Brian Borochine,in which himself was the hero, Mrs.Sheridan Knowles the heroine, andthe author of Virginia (who was engagedas first singer) the High Priest.Whilst at Swansea, Mrs. Hatton, thesister of Mrs. Siddons, better known asAnne of Swansea, wrote a drama forhis benefit; and is said to have fallenin love with him. A piece, called TheIrishman's Hut, acted about this time,at Waterford, was announced in thebills as written by Mr. Kean ; thoughthe manager, Cherry, is said to havedeclared that " Kean wrote none of thatpiece, but the bad English in it." Mr.Grattan, who first became acquaintedwith Kean at Waterford, speaks of hisgood conduct, and presuming man-edmundKEAN.ncrs at that place ; and says, indeed, thathe owed, probably, to this cause, ratherthan to any just appreciation of his professionalmerit, a good benefit, and someprivate kindnesses. He tells us furtherthat after the tragedy (Hannah M ore'sPercy) in which he had appeared for hisbenefit, " Kean gave a specimen oftight-rope dancing, and another ofsparring, with a professional pugilist.He then played the leading part inamusical interlude ; and finished withChimpanzee, or some such name, themonkey in the melo-dramatic pantomimeoaf La Peruse, and in this character,he showed agility scarcely surpassedby Maturer or Gouffe, andtouches of deep tragedy, in the monkey'sdeath scene, which made the wholeaudience shed tears." He producedsome very successful ballets of action,both at Waterford and Swansea, particularlyone called Koa and Zoa, inwhich he fought an admirable combat.Mr. Kean left Cherry's company in1812, in consequence of the manager'srefusal to raise his salary from 25s.to 30s. per week.He subsequently played at Windsor,and recited there, before the royalfamily, Satan's address to the Sun,from Paradise Lost, and the first soliloquyin Sliakspeare's Richard theThird. Whilst performing at Exeter,he attracted the notice of a Mr. Nation,who strained every nerve to promotehis interests, but so little was he appreciatedby the Oxonian, that they usedfrequently to remark, " What can Mr.Nation see in that man to make sucha fuss about ? " By Mr. Nation's invitation,Dr. Drury came over to thetheatre, to see Kean act, and was somuch pleased with his performance,that he promised to use his influencewith Mr. P. Grenfell to procure him anengagement in London. His povertyat this fie, may be conceived fromthe fact, that he borrowed twopence ofthe barber who shaved him, one morning,to pay for a pint of porter to enablehim to sustain the fatigue of his part,saying, he had not twopence himself,and the publican would not give himcredit.It was in the autumn of 1813, whenKean was playing at Dorchester, thatMr. Arnold, deputed by one of thecommittee of Drury Lane Theatre, atthe instance of Mr. P. Grenfell, camedown to witness his performance. Mr.Arnold did not apprise Kean of his arrival,but went immediately to the theatre,and saw him, first, in The Mountaineers,and afterwards in Alexanderthe Great, playing to audiences of ten ortwelve persons. After the second performance,Mr. Arnold introduced himselfto our actor behind the scenes, andinvited him to breakfast the next day.On his arrival at home, he said to hiswife, " I have ruined myself for ever ;Arnold has been in the house these twonights. I have been playing carelessly,and gagging; for who can play to suchhouses?" His wife replied, " It isfortunate for you, that you were ignorantof his presence, or you wouldcertainly have over-acted your part."Kean, however, kept his appointment,in fear and trembling, but was soonrelieved when Mr. Arnold began: " Inmy judgment, Mr. Kean, you mustsucceed upon the London boards ; butyou know the caprice of the public.I make, therefore, two propositions. Iwill either now engage you, successfulor unsuccessful, for three seasons, ateight guineas the first season, ten thesecond, and twelve the third ; or I willpay your expences to and in Londonuntil you can come out, and leave youto make your terms afterwards with thecommittee if you succeed, or pay yourexpences back to Dorchester, if youfail." Kean closed with the first proposition,and, on the 26th of January,1814, was announced, in the DruryLane bills, for the part of Shylock. Awriter in The New Monthly Magazine,has some remarks relative to this eventfulevening for Kean, which are too interestingto be omitted. " Severalill natured stories," he says, " have beencurrently repeated, respecting the insultsKean received ; but his sensitivenessmade him misconstrue much, andhumble as his manner was, it was trulya proud humility. It has been said,that he had no dressing-room assignedhim ; this is untrue : he did not chooseto dress in the place allotted to him byMr. Wrought (then the stage manager),and in dudgeon, went to thesupernumeraries' room, and dressedthere ; but though, only the day previousto his appearance, he had receiveda letter from his theatrical friends,ACT O AS.advising him against his rash attempt,though Mr. Knight had volunteered hisopinion that Mr. Kean had better passhis evenings in the front, trying to improvehimself by witnessing the performanceof good actors. though Mr.Rae had passed him in the hall withoutrecognising him though the committeehad said, 'he could not do,'though a certain set of underlings hadchristened him, in their jocularity, ' Mr.Arnold's hard bargain 1' Kean was notactually dispirited : stung in heart andmind, he certainly was ; but, the nightbefore his appearance, he said, " Letme once set my foot before the float,(the foot-lights) and I'll let them seewhat I am." In fact, he had one greatattribute of genius, its irrepressibility ;all real and all imagined slights (andhe was always too apt to imagine theexistence of neglect towards him) onlyconfirmed his resolution ; he did notcome merely to appear, he came tosucceed ; he relied on his own powers,and on the public judgment, and thelittle, submissive, meek, and frightenedman, that had rehearsed Shylock, waswholly lost when he assumed thegaberdine and beard." At length themoment arrived, when he was to facethe audience ; of them he had no fear,it was only the green-room he dreaded,and he had no sooner quitted the wingsfor the stage, than he seemed perfectlyat home. A warm welcome encouragedhim, and when he came to his greatscene with Tubal, the applause was sotremendous, that all the actors 'rushedout from the green-room, and stoodlooking at him from the wings, inmute admiration and surprise. " Atthe end of this scene," says the writerfrom whom we have just quoted,Kean ran up stairs to the room wherehe had dressed, to avoid his congratulatory,and in the deep recesses of hisown proud heart, bury his joys. Itappeared to those who were unused toKean's enunciation, that he had becomehoarse from exertion, but, in fact, hewas never in better voice. However,after him went Messrs. Raymond andArnold, one bearing negus, and theother oranges ; and the fact of thesegreat functionaries having done this,proves that the impression he hadmade was by no means a slight one.The trial scene (though highly applauded)was rather an anti-climax ineffect : such, in fact, it always was ; forhis scene with Solanum and Tubal, wasso overwhelming, that nothing couldexceed it. Shylock ends in the fourthact, and before the play was over, Keanhad left the theatre." Such was theimpression that his performance madeupon the committee, that they presentedhim with fifty guineas, destroyedthe agreement into which hehad entered with Mr. Arnold, and presentedhim with another engagementat a first-rate salary. His second appearancewas in Richard the Third, andfrom that time, up to the present, hehas continued to rank as the firsttragic actor of his time, if not of thiscountry.In February, 1816, Mr. Kean wasmuch censured by the press for his nonappearanceon the evening of the 27th,which was ascribed to a fall from agig, in consequence, as some of thenewspapers hinted, of inebriety. Thischarge gave rise to the following observationsfrom the pen of Hazlitt.A chasm has been produced in theamusements of Drury Lane Theatre bythe accident which has happened toMr. Kean. He was to have played theDuke of Milan, on Tuesday, but as hehad not come to the theatre at the timeof the drawing up of the curtain, Mr.Rae came forward to propose anothertragedy, Douglas. To this the audiencedid not assent, and wished to wait.Mr. Kean, however, not appearing, norany tidings being heard of him, he wasat length given up, and two farces substitutedin his stead. Conjectures andrumours were afloat ; and it was not tillthe next day that it was discovered thatMr. Kean having dined a few miles inthe country, and returning at a veryquick pace to keep his engagement atthe theatre, was thrown out of his gig,and had his arm dislocated, besidesbeing stunned and very much bruisedwith the fall. On this accident a gravemorning paper is pleased to be facetious.It observes, that this is a very seriousaccident; that actors in general areliable to serious accidents ; that the lateMr. Cooke used to meet with seriousaccidents; that it is a sad thing to bein the way of such accidents ; and thatit is to be hoped that Mr. Kean willmeet with no more serious accidents.EDMUND KEAN.It is to be hoped that he will not norwith any such profound observationsupon them, if they should happen.Next to that spirit of bigotry which, inaneighbouring country, would denyactors Christian burial after death, wehate that cant of criticism, which slursover their characters while living, witha half-witted jest. Actors are accused,as a profession, of being extravagantand intemperate. While they are saidto be so, as a piece of common cant,they are likely to continue so."We know not whether Mr. Hazlittwrote from authority, or his own feelingson the subject ; his remarks do himequal honour, but they are misplaced,we suspect, in the present instance. Awriter, whose sources of informationseem authentic, gives an account of theabove affair, which seems to confirmthe insinuations of the press on thesubject. We learn from him, that onthe evening in question, Mr. Kean wasat Deptford, and there, in company witha strolling comedian, named Wright,became inebriated. Wright, who wasto have performed Mawworm, couldneither stand nor speak when the curtaindrew up ; but Kean being justable to do both, insisted on performing 'the part himself. He accordinglydressed for the character, but becameso noisy and ungovernable, that Trotter,the manager, was forced to thrust himoff the stage, in doing which, Kean wasprecipitated down a flight of steps, andreceived a slight contusion. To deceivethe public, however, he appeared withhis arm in a sling, although quite recovered,and played in that state,Richard, Macbeth, and Othello, on threesuccessive nights, which so ingratiatedthe audience, that they received himwith louder applause than ever.Kean was now in the very meridianof his fame as an actor, and from thistime may be dated the decline of hischaracter as a man. He no longerreceived the homage and attention thatwere every where paid to him. with thesame unassuming demeanour which hadmarked his early career. To be moreconspicuous than he was, he affectedsingularity ; boasted that he had refusedthe invitation of the aristocracy, anddespised their patronage ; and thougha few respectable persons still continuedto visit at his own house, heassociated, out of it, with the mostdissipated and vulgar characters abouttown. "I was sorry," says Mr. Grattan,to see him so evidently drop off fromhis more respectable connexions. Theevil days, on which he fell, I was soonout of the way of knowing the detailsof; but I heard much of his extravagance,his feats of horsemanship, wonderfuljourneys, and rowing matches,freaks of unseemly presumption withregard to authors, affairs of gallantryThames prize wherries, a tame lion,and a secretary.' By the aid of manya foolish ceremony, poor Kean wasgaining his object, and wasting hismeans ; filling the penny trumpet ofan ignoble fame ; squandering thefine revenue arising from his professionalreceipts ; and losing, one by one,his grieved supporters, who clung to himlong, in spite of the frantic obstinacywith which he tore himself away."Still the public heard but little ofhis vulgarity and libertinism, and withthem he continued to be a sterlingfavourite, until the exposition of hisconnexion with Mrs. Cox. In 1822,he gave one of the many proofs, whichhe has shown of a generous spirit, bydevoting the whole profits of his benefitin aid of the starving Irish. In1824, we find him at Boulogne, on hisreturn home from a tour through Switzerland,and before embarking forEngland, he played Shylock, in aid ofthe declining fund of Old Henley'scompany, refusing to accept any remunerationfor his services.In 1818, Mr. Kean paid a visit toFrance; and in 1820, and 1825, he performedin America, where he raised amonument to the memory of G. F.Cooke. The principal characters whichhe has performed since his debfit inthe metropolis, besides the two abovementioned,are, Othello, King Lear,Richard the Second, Macbeth, Hamlet,Romeo, Sir Giles Overreach, SirEdward Mortimer, Jaffier, the Merchantof Bruges, Ludovico Sforza,Zanga, Abel Drugger, Bertram, Coriolanus,Brutus, Leon, Don Felix, in TheWonder, Duke Aranza, the Stranger,Penruddock, Hotspur, &c. His greatestparts, perhaps, are Richard, Shylock,and Othello ; yet scarcely belowthese in excellence, can we call hisHamlet, Lear, and Sir Giles Overreach.ACTOR S.A critic has not inaptly said of tins lastcharacter, that he went through it as ifa fiend were in him ; and that his walkround his daughter, dressed up in silkand jewels to receive Lord Lovel, withhis searching look at her beauty, wasdangerously sensual, yet inimitablyfine." It is told of Kean, that whenon his return home after the first nightof his Sir Giles, his wife inquired howLord Essex (then an active patron ofthe actor) was pleased with his success,he replied impetuously, " D n LordEssex ! the pit rose at me ! " His AbelDrugger was far below his other performances,and he seems to have beenaware of his unfitness for the part, ifthe following laconic correspondenceon the subject between him and Mrs.Garrick be authentic. The widow ofthe great Roscius is said to have writtento Kean on the morning following hisappearance in the above character;"Dear Sir, You can't play AbelDrugger. Your's, &c. :" To which hereplied, " Dear Madam I know it.Your's &c., E KEAN."At this time, the trial between himselfand Alderman Cox was pending;he spoke of the result with great indifferenceto Mr. Grattan, and, indeed,that gentleman was " rather impressedwith the idea that he did not dislikethe approaching contest, which was todisplay him to the world as a man ofgallantry." The disgusting facts, however,which transpired at the trial, producedan impression against him verydifferent from what he load anticipated ;debased, indeed, they proved him to be ;but it is doubtful whether the publicacted either judiciously, or properly, insubsequently hooting him off the stage.It was a blow he never recovered ; itdid not act upon him as a warning or acheck, but as a wound goading him tomadness. " I never," says Mr. Grattan,saw a man so changed ; he had allthe air of desperation about him. Helooked bloated with rage and brandy ;his nose was red, his cheeks blotched,his eyes blood-shot ; I really pitiedhim. He had lodgings in Regent Street ;but I believe very few of his formerfriends of any respectability now noticedhim. The day 1 saw him he satdew to the piano, notwithstanding theagitated state of his mind, and sangto me Lord Latin's Daughter, with adepth, and power, and sweetness, thatquite electrified me. I had not heardhim sing for many years ; his improvementwas almost incredible ; his accompanimentwas also far superior to hisformer style of playing. I could notrepress a deep sentiment of sorrow atthe wreck he presented of genius, fame,and wealth. At this period, I believehe had not ^100 left of the many thousandshe had received. His mindseemed shattered ; he was an outcaston the world."A sort or insanity, indeed, seemed topervade his actions, after his trial withAlderman Cox. He addressed theaudiences, in the course of his provincialtour, on the subject of his privateaffairs ; and, frequently, threw hand-springsand somerset, at rehearsal, exclaiming," I may as well practice, forI suppose I must go back to tin's."Being at the Surrey Theatre, one night,when the identical gig, in which Wearewas murdered by Thurtell was introducedon the boards, he jumped into thegig, instead of the actor who was to playWeare, and drove it furiously round theSurrey stage. It seems he had knownThurtell, and had received a blow onthe face from him with a candlestick,during a row at the Cock and Bottle.The reaction which took place at lengthin his favour, produced little change" inhis sentiments of disgust towards theEnglish public, and he started for America,as was supposed, with the intentionof never returning. In two years afterwards,however,he returned, and was received,on his re-appearance in London,with more rapturous applause than ever.Mr. Grattan immediately called uponhim, and as that gentleman's accountof his intimacy with Kean, assumes, atthis period, a biographical shape, weshall incorporate the chief part of it inthe present memoir.It seems that Kean had been inducedto leave America in consequence of ahoaxing letter, purporting to come fromMr. Price, the then manager of DruryLane Theatre, requesting him to returnforthwith and take possession of the managementof the theatre, which was onlyheld by him (Price) in trust for its " trueinheritor," Kean. He did not discoverthe hoax until his arrival in London,when he was engaged for twelve nights,at one hundred guineas each, andEDMUND K E A N .was received, as we have before said,with enthusiastic applause. At the expirationof the twelve nights, he setout on a provincial tour, and shortlyafter his return, was announced foranew character at Drury Lane thatof Ben Nazir, in Mr. Grattan's tragedyof that name. " His confidence in thepart," says Mr. Grattan, "and in himself,was sufficient to deceive a lesssanguine temperament than mine. Herepeatedly said, that he hoped to reapas much fame from it as from Maturing'sBertram, and that he reckoned onplaying it a hundred nights. His portraitin the part was immediately engraved.A new wherry, which Keanwas then getting built for his annualprize race on the Thames, was to becalled the Ben Nazir. The dress inwhich lie was to appear, was to be themost splendid possible ; and a notionmay be formed on that head, from thefact, that Kean was to pay fifty guineasfor it over and above the allowancefrom the theatre. He read his partwith real energy at the rehearsals,studied intensely every day, went tobed sober every night, suggested oneor two alterations in the play, talked ofnothing but Ben Nazir, and, in fact,seemed to be gathering himself up forhis most glorious dramatic effort. Herequested to be excused attending thelast rehearsal, on the pretext that itwould only confuse and annoy him,and destroy, perhaps, the effect hewished to reserve for the public performanceof the part. Every thing wasnow ready ; Kean declared himselfquite perfect, and Ben Nazir was announced.The house was crowded,and the author, from a private box,waited with anxiety the rise of the curtain.The two first scenes were tolerablyapplauded, and the commencementof the third introduced Kean tothe audience, who received him withthunders of applause. The intentionof the author, and the keeping of thecharacter required him to rush rapidlyon the stage, giving utterance to a burstof joyous soliloquy. What was myastonishment to see him, as the sceneopened, standing on the centre of thestage, his arms crossed, and his wholeattitude one of thoughtful solemnity !He spoke ; but what a speech ! Hislook, his manner, his tone, were, tome,quite appalling ; to any other observerthey must have been incomprehensible.He stood fixed, drawled outhis incoherent words, and gave thenotion of a man who had been half-hanged,and then dragged through ahorse-pond. My heart, I confess it,sunk deep on my breast, I was utterlyshocked * * *. The act closed a deadsilence followed the fall of the curtain ;and I felt that I could not bear thevoiceless verdict of damnation. I soonrecovered myself, and sat out thebutchery to the end." Such was theextraordinary end of the hopes whichKean had excited ; when he saw Mr.Grattan, he hung down his head, exclaiming," I have ruined a fine playand myself; I cannot look you in theface." The reader need not, perhaps,be told, that the scene just describedarose from the utter failure of Kean'smemory ; and his suffering the play tobe announced, with the consciousness,which it seems he had, of this deficiency,cannot be too severely censured.His appearance in Ben Nazir, tookplace in 1827, since which he occasionallyresumed his professional duties,but with visible diminution of his physicalthough none of his mental,powers.Or the private character of Kean enoughhas been related in the foregoing memoir,to enable the reader to form atolerably correct estimate. " No one,"to use the words of one of his biographers," ever had the ball so completelyat his foot as Kean had ; nay,the ball at his foot waited not for theimpelling touch, like the fairy cluewhich ran before the steps of fortunatus,leading him to happiness andfame ; it speeded before him ; but theinveterate whims of genius lured himinto every bye-path of passion audpleasure, and hurried him on,from flower to flower,A v earned chace a wasted hour!"Frank in his nature, impetuous in hissoul, he knew no cilnmess of objectorenjoyment: aut Caesar ant Nu/l/iswas his motto He must either fly orburrow ! and he never disguised hisvices or his virtues. With the geniusto have been more than a Garnck inhis art, he had the follies and passionsat times to reduce him almost beneathACTORS,a Cooke in his habits. He could, atDrury Lane, electrify a Byron, andchill the blood at his heart with thefearful energies of his wondrous genius ;and, quitting the peers, he could, onthe same evening, delight the spiritsof the lower house with his brilliant,dashing gaieties, and acted songs."During the last fifteen or sixteenyears, Kean is said to have received,on an average, for his performances,not less than 10,000 per annum, yethe is well known to be frequently inneed of pecuniary assistance. This isthe more extraordinary, as gamblingis not one of his vices, and a generosityeven more pernicious and prodigalthan his, could hardly have dissipateda sum equal to the above, inso short a space of time. One of hisexpensive propensities is travelling inacarriage and four on all occasions ; butthis may be looked upon as one ofthose silly habits of display which havebeen attributed to him, rather than asan act of extravagance.Many anecdotes have been recorded,and more might be told, of Kean'sgenerosity, both of hand and heart;but there are not wanting instancesin which his conduct appears to havebeen much at variance with the generalestimate formed of his character. Aprovincial manager, who had treatedhim slightingly, previously to his metropolitandebut, afterwards engagedhim, in his circuit, giving him half thenightly receipts of the house. Theseamounted, on an average, to 50 pernight, and were regularly brought toKean in his dressing-room by the manager,who announced his arrival bytapping at the door. Kean, on hearingthe knock, always said to his attendant,See what that man wants;" when thedoor was opened, and the managerhaving put down the money, departedas he had entered, without the slightestnotice being taken of him by the actor.Some years afterwards, the same manager,who had fallen into unprosperouscircumstances, applied to Keanto play for his benefit. He consented,and on the night previous to his appearance,the object of his gratuitousservices, meeting him with other actorsat a tavern in the . town, publiclythanked him for the friendship he hadshown in acceding to his request.Upon this Kean rose, and looking himsteadily in the face, said, " Don't letus misunderstand one another ; I ambound to you by no ties from formeracquaintance ; 1 don't play for youbecause you was once my manager, oramanager. If ever man deserved hisdestiny, it is you ; if ever there wasa family of tyrants, it is yours; I donot play for you from former friendship,but I play for you because youare a fallen man." This severe rebukewas, as Kean afterwards acknowledgedto a friend, under the circumstances,ungenerous; but, he added, " when meand mine were starving, that fellowrefused to let a subscription for me beentertained in the theatre." Somewhatakin to the foregoing, is the followinganecdote :During the recess, which followedKean's first triumphant season at DruryLane, he accepted an offer to play atPortsmouth. He had then become thegreat Mr. Kean, travelled in his ownchariot, gave splendid dinners, andwas an honoured guest at the board ofevery manager. On the morning of theday on which he was to make his appearanceat the Portsmouth Theatre,the manager and two or three friendsinvited Mr. Kean to take a glass ofMadeira and a biscuit at one of theprincipal hotels. The party enteredthe hotel, and seated themselves. Thewine and biscuits were brought, andthe landlord, " albeit a great man,"could not do less for such a guest asMr. Kean, than wait upon him in person.Kean had no sooner perceivedthe landlord, than darting upon himone of those soul-searching looks, forwhich he was so celebrated, he exclaimed," Stop, is not your name?" " Yes, sir," said the landlord,astonished at his looks, and at the tonein which he addressed him. " Then,"said Kean, " I will not eat or drink inyour house. Eight years ago, 1 wentinto your coffee-room, and modestlyrequested a glass of ale ; you surveyedme from top to toe, and, having doneso, I heard you give some directions toyour waiter, who presented me theglass in one hand, holding out theother for the money ; I paid it, sir, andhe then relinquished his hold of theglass. I am better dressed now, Ican drink Madeira, I am waited uponEDMUND KEAN.by the landlord in person ; but am Inot the same Edmund Kean as I wasthen ? and had not Edmund Keanthen the same feelings that-he hasnow ? Away with you, sir, avaunt !your sight pains me !" and, having saidthis, he took his hat, and hastily leftthe apartment. " Now," said Kean,when they had quitted the house, " Iwill take you to an honest fellow, whowas kind to me in my days of misfortune."They entered a third-ratehouse, and, having ordered some wine,desired to see the landlord. He came,but it was not the host of Kean's recollection; he was dead. There was,however, a sort of half-waiter, half-postboy,who had lived at the housewhen Kean frequented it, and who wasa great favourite of his master. Kean,with a tear in his eye, inquired aboutthe family of the deceased landlord ;and, on leaving the house, asked thewaiter what o'clock it was. " I willsee, sir," said the waiter, running tothe stairs at the head of which stood aclock. " Have you no watch ?" saidKean. " No, sir." " Take that, andbuy one ; and, whenever you look atit, think of your late master." Theactor put five pounds into the hands ofthe waiter, who remained mute withastonishment.But if he felt injuries and insultsdeeply, he was equally mindful of, andprone to exaggerate, benefits. For afellow-actor, who had given him adinner and breakfast at Richmond,when he was without money there, heafterwards procured a three years' engagement,equipped him for the theatreat his own expense, and lavished severalother kindnesses upon him. In contrastwith this, we may mention thefact of his borrowing half-a-guinea onhis wedding day, and returning to thelender, some years afterwards, only theexact amount, with " Mr. Kean's compliments."The kindness of his Richmondfriend he would seldom speak of,without adding, bis dat, qui city dat.We mention this for the purpose ofalluding to his fondness for Latin quotations,in order, as it is said, to favourthe fiction of his Etonian education :and a story told of R. Phillips (his secretary),shows how much this weaknesswas remarked by his companions.Kean was at some nocturnal vigil, andPhillips waiting for him, when the followingcolloquy arose:Time Two in the morning.Phillips Waiter, what was Mr. Kean doing, whenyou left the room ?Waiter Playing the piano, sir, and singing.Phillips Oh '. come, he's all right, then.Quarter past Two.Phillips What's Mr. Kean doing now?Waiter Making a speech, sir, about Shakspeare.I'hiliips He's getting drunk; you'd better orderthe carriage.Half-past Two./'/ul/ipj-What's lie at now ?muter He's talking Latin, sir.^/.Uiips-Then he is drunk. I must get himaway.Though Kean passed much of histime with low associates, his contemptof them would occasionally break forth,and it was always doubtful whether hewould be offended or pleased with theirfamiliarity. At a public-house in theStrand, which he used, at one time, tofrequent, one Fuller, a ventriloquistand mimic, was a constant guest, butamid his imitations, never venturedupon one of Kean, when the tragedianwas present. One night, however, afterhe had given some of several eminentperformers, he was encouraged by Keanhimself to imitate him in his presence.Fuller commenced, but before he hadenunciated three lines, Kean threw aglass of wine in his face, declaring thatif he thought he were such a wretch asthe former depicted, he would hanghimself.Kean felt his talents from the first,and although, in his early career, heplayed Harlequin, could not endure thecharacter. He used to say, " I neverfeel degraded, but when I have thatmotley jacket on my back." Whilstat Exeter, playing second parts to Pretty,in 1812, he was met by a friend, onenight, wandering about the town inadrizzling rain, after the performancehad ended. His friend discovered thathe was much chagrined at the successof Betty, and was in too agitated a stateto go home. When his friend expostulatedwith him, he replied, " 1 mustfeel deeply, sir; he commands overflowinghouses, I play to empty benches ;I know my powers are superior to his."His capital fencing induced some of hisfriends to offer to set him up as a teacherin that art before he came out at DruryLane, but he refused, saying, " It never4-16A C T O K S .shall be said that i was a fencing master."He came, one day, to the writerwho tells the anecdote, in great spirits,exclaiming, "My fortune's made ! LordCork has bespoken Othello ; we knowhis reputation as a critic, and I will notlose the opportunity." The next day,he was asked what success he had metwith. " Do not name it, sir," he replied; " I am miserable ; whilst I wasplaying the finest parts of Othello, inmy best style, my Lord Cork's childrenwere playing at hot cockles in front ofthe box, and Lord and Lady C. laughingat them."Mr. Grattan says, that the only lordKean could bear, was Lord Byron"; andthat the example of the poet had abaneful influence on the conduct of theactor. Kean, however, was not sufficientlyprepossessed in favour of LordByron to neglect other and less gifted,but, probably, more friendly, associates.After dining with his lordship, one day,he suddenly left the table, and, as itturned out afterwards, joined a partyat Cribb's tavern, who had assembledthere by the invitation of Incledon.Incledon was a man whose conversationwas so continuously gross, thatmany who admired his talents, wereobliged to forswear his society. LordByron was, therefore, somewhat nettled,when he heard that Kean had quittedhis own society for that of Incledon,and did not speak to him until somemonths afterwards, on the occasion ofseeing him perform Sir Giles Overreachfor the first time. When Kean was carriedoff the stage, he felt once more thepressure of Byron's friendly grasp, asthe noble bard exclaimed, " Great,great, by Jove ! that was acting ! But,hang it ! you should not have treatedme so scurvily, by running off from theKinnairds to such a place as Cribb's !"Kean then explained to the " waywardCivile" his early obligations to In-cleon ; and Byron pardoned the offencefor the kindly gratitude of the motive.On another occasion, his regard forIncledon was more strongly put to thetest. Lord Essex, who had declared hisintention of using his most strenuousexertions in his favour, expressed asmuch to Kean one day ; ' But," continuedthe earl, " i have jut heard,with much concern, a circumstancewhich would interfere with all our intentionsand views in this respect; andI have sent for you, in the hope thatyou may enable me to give an immediatecontradiction to the report, whichis, that you have been seen walking inBond Street, arm in arm with Mr. In-cleon. Now, although Mr. Incledonenjoyed considerable celebrity as a vocalist,yet, as he never did belong toour " set," and as his popularity isnow quite passee, it is a duty which Iconceive I owe to you. as well as tomyself and our friends, to say, thatyour continued intimacy with him maymilitate against your own reception inthe circles in which you have hithertobeen a most welcome guest." Kean'sreply was as prompt as it was ingenuousand manly : " My Lord, Mr. Incledonwas my friend, in the strictest sense ofthe word, when I had scarcely anotherfriend in the world ; and if I couldnow desert him, in the decline of hisregularity, or the fall of his fortune,should little deserve the friendshipof any man, and be quite unworthy ofthe favourable opinion your lordshiphas done me the honour to entertain ofme." And so saying, he rose from hisseat, and bowing to the noble earl, leftthe room.Kean was, one day, invited to dinewith Mr. Grattan and some other gentlemen.The party soon got convivial,when our actor, starting up, said he hadanother engagement for the evening,which he must fulfil, and insisted ontaking Mr. Grattan and his friends withhim. " U e all squeezed," says Grattan,as well as we could into Kean's chariot,which waited at the door, and away wewent, not knowing or caring in whatdirection. After a short time, and afurious drive, the carriage stopped at thehead of a very narrow passage. We gotout without any order of precedence,and followed our leader, with considerableassistance from the walls of thepassage, against which weWent ki.ickct.y knock,Like prbliU-a in Cansl.rook Well.We arrived at an open door, evidentlythat of a tavern or hotel, from the bustlingwelcome awarded to Roscius andto us, who followed him, by the self-announcinglandlord, and Haifa score ofwaiters, women, and attendant gazers,who all struggled for a look at 'theEDMUND KEAN.great man.' He staggered rapidly upstairs,and we three after him ; and he,to the apparent horror of several of thewaiters and others, dashed at once atthe large folding doors of the first-floorapartment, and in we all rushed into aroom where there were assembled fullsixty persons at a long supper table. Ashout of applause hailed Kean as heentered ; but when we popped in afterhim, a loud murmur of disapprobationwas raised. A hustling sort of expostulationand explanation ensued; whichterminated iu our being obliged towithdraw, along with Kean, and fouror five of the party, into an adjoiningroom, where we were made tocomprehend the outrageous violationcommitted by this grand master of theassociation, against the rigid law, ofwhich he was the founder, that nostranger could be admitted into thesociety without a formal introduction,and a regular accordance to its sacredregulations. In short, we each enteredour name in an. expansive register, gota printed card in return, paid two orthree pounds for fees, took a muckoath, blindfolded, on an old book ofballads, and were then announced asmembers, in due form, of the notoriousassociation, or club, or fraternity, calledcollectively, The Wolves.' "The merits of Kean as an actor demandno brief space for consideration;volumes, indeed, might be written ascommentaries upon iu's glorious embodimentof the poet's glorious creations.Despite his diminutive figure,he has only to speak, to move, or tolook, and the outstanding of intellectualmight at once, stamps him as the principalperson on the stage. Who, butfor his previous knowledge of the fact,expects to see Richard, as played byKean, fall beneath Richmond ; fiveRichmond he has already slain, andwe tremble for the sixth, as his foe, witha blood-hound's thirst and a tiger's rage,pants to annihilate him. It is no laughablematter to see the soldiers drivenacross the stage by him ; he is no pantomimePatagonia, terrifying by hisunnatural stature; but a spirit of supernaturalvigour, awful to look upon, andalmost impious to resist; one, whoseeye, smiting swifter and sharper thanhis sword, might paralyze a Hercules,and make an Achilles shudder.His Richard, indeed, from beginningto end, executes with such sublimeenergies his darkest purposes, that wearesurprised into admiration, beforewe have time to remember that " wonderis involuntary praise." As he hurries onwith reckless and shrinking strides,to the goal post of his ambition, crushing,rather than baffling, every obstaclein his path, we are almost forced toacknowledge the omnipotence of willin the creature, as well as in the Creator.So overwhelming does his presenceappear, that all the rest of the dramatispersonae, seem the actual nonentitieswhich he treats them mere instrumentsof his designs, plastic to everyshaping of his thoughts, and equallyunable to comprehend or resist thepower by which they are moulded.Nor is he less despotic in death thanlife ; there is more grandeur and supremacyin his tottering form, andblasting glance at his foe, than investsthe triumphant and grateful form ofRichmond himself. Richard has notyielded to Richmond, but to death ;and even to that enemy, has not cededwithout a preternatural struggle. Ofhis Lear, how shall we speak in adequateterms ? To particularize thenumerous beauties of his acting in thisaffecting character, would be to transcribethe whole part. He was greatest,perhaps, in his scene with Edgar in thestorm ; his delivery of the words,Oh I I have taken too little rare of this, Standhis subsequent discourse with Edgar,whom he calls his " philosopher,"was, to our mind, one of the mostsublime exhibitions on the stage. Therewas something, indeed, about all Kean'sold men, which belonged to no otheractor's representation of them ; hismental powers evidently transcendedhis physical ; and the very feeblenessof the latter, gave an additional forceand pathos to the former. This wasnot more visible in his Lear andShylock, than in his personation ofWalter Scott's Jew, Isaac of York,which Kean played some years ago, inadrama, founded on Ivanhoe. calledThe Hebrew. His Romeo, Macbeth,Richard the Second, and Coriolanus,were fie only in parts, but in thoseparts few ever equalled, none havesurpassed him. \Ve must not omit toACTORSmention his Brutus, Ludovico Sforza,Bertram, Leon, the Stranger, SirEdward Mortimer, Penruddock, Hotspur,&c., in all of which he struck outsome original beauties. But his greattriumphs were, his Richard, Lear,Othello, Hamlet, and Sir Giles Overreach.Of the two first, we have alreadyspoken. Our idea of his Hamletcorresponds perfectly with the followingremarks of a literary critic : " It was,"says the writer, " all, or nearly all, thatit should be, meditative, natural, andsweetly forlorn ; it quite took the heartcaptive. We have seen John Kemble,Young, and others, in the character ; butthey were formally scholastic, or coldlydignified, and impressive only. Keanlooked the young and melancholyprince, wandering in the desolation ofhis own thought and wrecked passion.In him, you saw that slight words,which stirred not those around to him'whispered the overwrought heart, andbade it break ! ' He abandoned himselfto the indolent sadness of the scene,and was more Hesperian in his spiritthan any other actor we have ever witnessed.The interviews with Opheliawere exquisitely touching ; and thestrange one, in which he burst into araving rhapsody, was softened downby an evident suppression of feeling;and was finally touched with the mostdelicate tenderness, by his slowly returning,after an abrupt departure, and,after gazing with inexpressible love andsadness at Ophelia, gently pressing herhand to his lips."His Othello was a performance atonce harrowing, fearful, and sublime.His love, his jealousy, his despair, hisrevenge, and his remorse, were likeso many successive pictures of thosepassions, portrayed in their most glaringcolours and darkest shades. What agush of devotion seems to issue fromhis heart, when he exclaimed, in the returningtransport of passion :Perdition catch my soul, but I do love her !When the jealousy which lago, bywarning him to beware of, has at lengthexcited in his breast, begins to work,how tremendous not to say, awfulare the conflicts in his breast betweenlove and hatred, hope and despair.Doting to excess, he loathes with proportionatevehemence ; and the franticenergy with which he thunders outD her! lewd minx !" only proclaimswith what idolatry he hasloved the woman he now curses.Then, in the scene with lago, when,after listening to the villain's insinuations,till his heart-strings seem on thepoint of breaking, how sublime theimpulse with which he starts from hisagonizing reverie, and springing uponhis wife's slanderer, strives to terrifyhim, by the threatening of inevitabledamnation, into a denial of her guilt.What power seems in his arm, as theheartless Italian shakes in its grasp !we never witnessed this part of hisperformance without being so carriedaway, as with difficulty to restrainourselves from leaping on the stage,and helping Othello to strangle lagoonthe spot. How beautiful a contrastto this furious, but vain ebullition, isthe calm and mournful composure withwhich he used to utter " Farewell ! "&c. ; his tones knelled on the heartlike the moaning of the wintry wind,sighing, as it were, over the departedleaves of summer, that no longer vibratedto its gentlest breathing or itsloudest gusts.We have now only to notice his SirGiles Overreach, a character requiringa very different order of conceptionfrom the one we have just dismissed. Ithas never been our lot to witness hispersonation of this character, whichmany of his admirers pronounce to behis chef-d'oeuvre ; and the followingremarks would seem to have proceededfrom one who was of that opinion.Throughout the whole of the play,"says the writer, " Mr. Kean presents uswith the true conception of his authorand every line, which is beautifully expressedby the author, is renderedstill more strikingly beautiful by hisenergetic and characteristic delivery,accompanied by acting of the mostchaste and natural description. Thesarcastic manner in which he deliversmany of that sort of passages withwhich the part abounds, has perhapsnever been equalled by any other actor,past or present. As in his performanceof Richard, he bends up allhis energies towards the one great endthe aggrandizement of his daughter.Great men choose greater sinsambition's mine,' is his motto through-edmundKEAN.out. He feels not the checks ofconscience, he seeks not to vindicatehis conduct, he has no generousfeelings, no dignified sentiments.He is a knave, and his disposition isviolent ; and the deplorable state towhich lie is at last reduced, is the naturalconsequence of the continual andexclusive application of his mental andbodily faculties to one object that ofambition. In the personification ofsuch a despicable character, it may beeasily seen how well the powers of Mr.Kean assimilate with the idea of thepoet ; his look, his gait, his voice, andhis action, are all suitable to the part ;and when we add to these, his ownpeculiar conception, we are presentedwith a powerfully drawn and highlyfinished portrait, which all who see itmust appreciate. It is in the last sceneof his performance, that he is peculiarlygrand ; it is not acting ; it is the realityof nature. His mental distress andruined look, when he finds his dearesthopes blasted for ever, at the momentwhen he fully expected their completion,his trembling nerves, slackenedsinews, and aguish-shivering, when helearns all is lost ; and the malicious grinof hatred, scorn, and contempt, withwhich he regards the destroyers of hisplans, by whom his hopes and labourshave been defeated and made void,'are gems of acting, the most original,bold, and impressive, ever witnessed,and are striking specimens of his giganticpowers. In fact, in this character,Mr. Kean has no equal norrival : his very physical defects arebeauties ; he is altogether what he appearsto be the character is not assumed.In this performance, the critichas not to wander in search of beauties,or expatiate on errors. The brightnessof the effulgence dazzles the eye thatwould examine it ; the impulse of everyfeeling checks the head that wouldprepare to censure. He stands superiorand alone."We shall conclude our memoir witha few anecdotes relating to Kean andKemble. When the former first appearedat Drury Lane Theatre, manyof the friends and admirers of the latterendeavoured to decry Kean. Onenight, in the green-room, an officiousperformer asked Kemble if he had seenKean ? " 1 have not," was the reply.Oh ! sir, he is nothing but a croaker! "returned the other. Kemble immediatelyrose, and with a dignity peculiarto himself, said, " Probably, that gentleman'scroaking is superior to somepeople's acting."On another occasion, when Kemblewas witnessing the performance ofKean, in Othello, some servile admirerturned round to him, exclaiming, <; Allhumbug ! " upon which, Kemble verysignificantly said, " If so, sir, he is themost extraordinary humbug I ever witnessed."Mr. Kemble, on one occasion,being asked his opinion of Kean, said,Our styles are so totally different,that you must not expect me to likethat of Mr. Kean ; but one thing Imust say in his favour, he is at alltimes terribly in earnest." Beingasked, whether he had yet seen Keanas Othello, Kemble immediately said,I did not see Mr. Kean, but Othello."While Kean was once rehearsing onthe Birmingham stage, a conversationensued regarding the merits of the tworival tragedians ; and, after all presenthad expressed, pretty unequivocally,their likes and dislikes, Kean wound upthe agreeable colloquy, by the followingpiece of dexterity : " I have been told,"said he, striking into the conversation,that most people imagine they cannotpraise me, without detracting, in somemeasure, from the fair fame of JohnKemble ; this is a mistake ; ' let everytub stand on its own bottom,' say I.John Kemble was an actor, a verygreat actor; but however great anactor he was, I can show you one thinghe could not do." So saying, Kean,with the elasticity of an harlequin, cuta somerset, to the no small amusementof the histrionic critics.Mr. Kean married a Miss Chapman,of Waterford, by whom he has one sonliving, Mr. Charles Kean, whose appearanceon the stage is said to havebeen much against his father's consent.ACTORS.WILLIAM Barren.J. HIS celebrated comedian was bornin London, about the year 1787, thoughhis youthful appearance off the stagewould bespeak a much later date. Hisfather, who was also an actor, is saidto have left him a fortune of 8,000.He was educated at the academy inSoho Square, and made his theatricaldebut at Plymouth, about the year 1806,as Lovegohi, in The Miser. He metwith a favourable reception, which alsoattended his performance of his nextcharacter, Sir Adam Contest, a partin which he has since become so celebrated.From Plymouth, he proceededto Dublin, where he received an offerfrom Drury Lane, but thinking theterms inadequate, declined acceptingit. He was, for some time, stage managerof the Dublin Theatre, andperformed there tor several years, withthe most enthusiastic applause. In theIrish capital he was an especial favourite,and was not only caressed on the stage,but moved in the first circles .of privatesociety.On the 10th of September, 1818, Mr.Farren made his debut at CoventGarden Theatre, in the character of SirPeter Teazle. Great expectations hadbeen formed of his acting, and thetheatre was crowded to witness it; hisperformance was worthy of the excitementthat had preceded it, and he wasat once ranked among the first comediansof the day. From that time hisprofessional career has been one uninterruptedcourse of success; and,now that Dowton is upon the wane,he may be considered the only first-raterepresentative of old men in comedy,on the British stage. He haslatterly played at the Haymarket andDrury Lane ; and some of his performancesat the latter theatre, have addedconsiderably to his popularity. Amongothers, we may mention his Mr.Primrose, in Popping the Question,a rich and genuine piece of comicacting.The finest performance of Mr. Farrenis his Lord Ogleby, but he is scarcelyinferior in Sir Peter Teazle, Sir AnthonyAbsolute, Sir Fretful Plagiary,Sir Bashful Constant, Baillie NicolJarvis, and a few others. We shouldnot omit to mention his Isaac, in theplay of Ivanhoe. " It was," in thewords of a critic, "a very talentedassumption ; affecting, to a high degree.His making up, too, for this part, wasadmirable. You iliad before yon, themiserable victim of bigotry, fanaticism,and intolerance, hunted and hopeless,his every glance was the glance offear, he had a bow of servility evento his own shadow, and his sigh, as hegazed on his beautiful Rebecca, wastrue, indeed, to nature."Mr. Farren is about five feet tenincites in height, and walks with astoop, contracted, probably, from hisfrequent assumption of the charactersof old men. He is married, but, accordingto report, separated from hiswife. The circumstances are given atfull length by one of Mr. Farren 'sbiographers, but we do not think thisa proper place for transcribing the account.T. P. COOKE.this gentleman was born about theyear 1788 in Lichfield Street, OxfordStreet, where his father practised as asurgeon, but died soon after the bindof the subject of our memoir, who wasleft without any provision. At anearly age, he, in consequence, enteredthe navy, and was present at theblockade of Toulon, and the victory oJSt. Vincent. After being wrecked inT. P. COOKE.40 1the Raven, near Cuxhaven, he joinedthe Prince of Wales, which formed partof the squadron employed in theblockade of Brest. At the peace ofAmiens, he was paid off, and left thenavy.His first appearance on the stage wasin January, 1804, at the Royalty Theatre,where he played a few subordinatecharacters in such a manner as to procurehim an engagement at Astley'sAmphitheatre, and, subsequently, at theLyceum, under the management ofLaurent, the celebrated clown. In 1808,he became stage manager of the Surrey,and performed there a variety of charactersin melo-drama. During therecess, he joined Mr. H. Johnstonee'scompany, at the Peter Street Theatre,Dublin ; and among other parts, is saidto have added considerably to his reputationby his performance of Clownin a harlequinade. On his return tothe Surrey-he evinced great pantomimicpowers as Obi, in Three-fingeredJack; and, in conjunction with Cobham,personated a variety of tragic heroes.In September, 1816,"he made his debutat Drury Lane, as Diego Confers, in amelo-drama, called, Quito Gate, and waswell received. His second appearanceat that theatre, was in the part ofBagatelle, in The Poor Soldier, one ofhis most effective performances. It wassucceeded by his Hans Settler, in TheInnkeeper's Daughter, an admirablepersonation, that alone stamped hima sterling actor.After having re-appeared at theSurrey, Mr. Cooke transferred hisservices successively to the Lyceum,Covent Garden, the Coburg, and theAdelphi. The Lyceum, and theAdelphi stages, have afforded the bestdisplays of his abilities ; and his performanceat the former, of Frankenstein,and at the latter, of Long Tom Coffin,in The Pilot, are still amongst themost popular exhibitions on the respectiveboards of those theatres. Of hisFrankenstein, a critic has not inaptlysaid, " the thing is a creation of hisown brain it is an embodying of apoetical and supernatural vision. Itcontains no trust of the theatre noshade of anything that has been donebefore he comes to our view a massof moving matter, without stimulus orintellect he seems to have eyesightwithout vision he moves as if unconsciousthat he is moving, and presentsus a perfect and appalling picture ofan immense machine, moving withoutany direct or appropriate purpose.What can be more dreadful than hismanner of walking against the balustrade,as if unconscious of the natureof the wooden obstruction, until forcingit down by mere manual power, hefalls to the ground ? What can be moreharrac-sing than the respiration whichsupplies the place of speech ? a featurein the performance as novel as it wasnatural. Were we inclined to minutelyparticularize beauties, we should namehis seizing the sword, gazing on thechild, &c., &c. ; but description can donojustice to an effort like this, orconvey any idea of a performance, everyiota of which is fraught with extraordinaryindications of intellect and acquirement.The dressing of this unearthlybeing, is another point in whichour hero has been pre-eminently successful.The creature, raised from theparticles of human remains gatheredfrom the charnel-house, is broughtbefore you in the green ghastly hue ofpubescent flesh. It is, indeed, therealization of a walking corpse ; andhis lack-lustre eye, and wild andwithered air, render it upon the wholethe most finished outre exhibition thatthe stage of this country ever beheld."Mr. Cooke's other prominent charactersare, the Vampire, Gordon theGypsey, Dirk Hatterick, Epaulette, inFontainebleau, Orson, in The Iron Chest,Rinaldo, in Gil Bias, and the Duke ofArgyle, in The Heart of Mid Lothian.Alter Decamp and Mathews, and a verylittle way behind them, he is consideredthe best Frenchman on the stage ; inmelo-drama, he is equal to Wallack; andin serious pantomime, superior to anyactor now upon the stage. His performanceof Frankenstein, at Paris, createda sensation in that capital, which isyet remembered. One of his mostarduous performances, the public are,perhaps, not generally aware of; weallude to the part which he is said totake, annually, in the lord mayor'sshow, as the Man in Armour.In person, Mr. Cooke is within aninch of six feet he is married, and,said to be of domestic habits, and unassumingmanners.ACTORSWILLIAM CHARLES MACREADY.WILLIAM CHAS. MACREADYwas born in the year 1789. His fatherwas originally an upholsterer in Dublin,but became, subsequently, an actor andmanager of the Bristol, Newcastle, Birmingham,and other provincial theatres.The subject of the present memoiris said to have been designed for thechurch, but " circumstances " whichare not explained by the biographerwho uses the word, induced him finallyto choose the profession of an actor.After having made a great impressionat Bath, and other towns, where hisfather was manager, Mr. Macready appeared,for the first time, at CoventGarden, on the 16th of September,1816, as Orestes, in The Distrest Mother.His debut caused much excitement in thetheatrical world, and Kean, and othereminent actors, were among the crowdedaudience who witnessed and applaudedhis performance. A critic of the daythus notices him : " Mr. Macready'spersonation of Orestes is, in many parts,very fine. Not being used to such alarge theatre as Covent Garden, anallowance must be made for his voicebeing occasionally too low; some ofhis tones remind us of Mr. Elliston's,who, we apprehend, has been Mr. Macready'smodel. Those who recollectMr. Holman's Orestes, will be delightedwith the superiority of this young man'sperformance : his love, his apprehensions,his hopes, and his despair, wereadmirably depicted ; and his mad scenewas a natural picture of insanity." Theoccasional lowness of Mr. Macready'svoice, above noticed, has no longer thesame excuse ; yet it is a fault of whichhe has still to cure himself; for, in someparts, he might as well be without anyvoice at all, for anything that the majorityof the house hear to the contrary.His low tones, as a critic hassomewhere said of a certain singer'sinnuendo notes, are so exceedingly confidential,that they seldom penetratebeyond the ear of the orchestra.At the conclusion of the tragedy ofThe Distrest Mother, the announcementof Mr. Macready's re-appearance washailed with three distinct rounds ofapplause, yet his second performance ofOrestes did not prove very attractive.During the next four years, he continuedrather stationary than rising in reputation;but, on the production of Rob Roy,he added another feather to his plumeby his masterly representation of theromantic outlaw. HisCoriolanus, also,increased the number of his admirers ;and his Virginis, Miranda, Hamlet,and Richard the Third, were consideredvery masterly personations.On removing from Covent Garden toDrury Lane, he became the originalrepresentative of the respective heroesof Mr. Knowles's Pains Gracchus, andWilliam Tell, the last of which is, perhaps,his most popular character. Here-appeared at Drury Lane in 1826, andfrom that time to the present has continuedto hold that high rank in publicestimation, to which his merits so fullyentitled him.Many stories have been recorded ofMr. Macready's hauteur and arrogancebehind the scenes, and in private society; but we do not feel ourselveswarranted in giving publicity to statementswhich belong rather to gossipthan biography, and do not certainlyaffect the merit of the subject of ourmemoir as an actor. We shall, therefore,only state, that Mr. Macreadymarried, about the year 1824, a ladywhose mind is said to have been formedunder his own instruction. We devotethe remainder of this memoir to thefollowing just estimate of his professionalmerits :Respecting Mr. Macready's histrionictalents there is a considerablediversity of opinion. About five-eighthsof London declare Kean to be the firstEnglish actor; two of the remainingthree, perhaps, vote for Young; andone-eighth for Macready ; but, singularto say, all the Granites say Macreadyis next to their favourite, and allthe Youngster rank Macready aboveKean ; so that, in fact, Mr. Macready isJOHN PR ITT HARLEY.more generally considered a great actorthan either Kean or Young. If youexamine an actor by particular parts,however satisfactory this sort of criticismmay be to the million, you neverarrive at any real conclusion. Othelloand Richard, for instance, are decidedlyKean's ; yet in lago (who contains atouch of the Richard quality) Young(failing in Richard), succeeds eminently.Macready, though peculiarly great indeclamatory parts, fails in Rolla. It issaid that Mr. Kean deems Lear, andMessrs. Macready and Young reckonHamlet, their best personations. If so,they are all mistaken. Pierre, isYoung's chef d'ceuvre ; Othello, Kean's ;and Rob Roy, Macready's. Mr. Macreadyis not generally successful inShakspeare. Othello, lago, and Jaques,prove our assertions ; and his Hamletis not satisfactory ; though his Coriolanusand Richard, were excellentindeed. The latter, to parody the remarkson Paradise Lost, " was onlynot the greatest Richard, because itwas not the first." Mr. Macready, likeKean, succeeds best where he has muchto do, much to imply, little to enunciate; for though a fine speaker, heceases to act when he begins to declaim.There is a catching of the breath, andsomewhat resembling a burr in hisenunciation, that is painful to thehearer ; and however skilfully he makesthese defects turn to advantage in thedagger scene of Macbeth, they destroythe part of Hamlet, and lessen theeffect of Virginius. Mr. Macready hasadopted from his rival, within the lastfour years, a system of sudden transition,and carried it to a degree of painfulimitation. These children of adoptionevidently appear strangers to his heart,they seem not to care for him, andonly give occasion for regret, that anoriginal actor should degrade himselfwith seven-eighths of the house, to-pleasesome score rabble in the gallery,who like to hear the voice suddenlyrise and drop, like the water-spout inthe Temple."JOHN Print HARLEY.THE father of this gentleman was asilk mercer in the parish of St ,where his son was born,in February, 1790 ; although one of hisbiographers says, 1786. After havingreceived a good education, he was, atthe age of fifteen, placed with a linen-draper.In this situation he contractedan intimacy with Oxberry, who, we aretold, was the companion of his Sundaywalks, the confidante of his scenicwishes, and the judge of his probationaryefforts. On the departure of hisfriend, however, on a provincial circuit,Harley's ambition for the stage decreased,and leaving the linen-draperybusiness, he was, for some time, a clerkin the office of Messrs. Winds and Holloway,in Chancery Lane.But he had rather postponed thanrelinquished his views with regard tothe^stage, and accordingly, in 1806 or1807, we find him a member of Ferrol'scompany, at Cranbrook, in Kent.He next joined Mr. Trotter's, at South-end,and remained in this circuit formany years, during which he improvedconsiderably as a low comedy actor.He subsequently played at York, andagain at Brighton, and Worthing,where he became acquainted with MichaelKelly, who recommended him toMr. Arnold. Being engaged by thatgentleman, he made his delft at theEnglish Opera House, on the 15th ofJuly, 1815, as Marcellus, in The Devil'sBridge, and Peter Fidget, in TheBoarding House. His reception wasfavourable in the extreme, and hegained such ground in public estimation,by his subsequent performance ofMingle, Leatherhead, Rattle, and Pegthat the Drury Lane managementalmost immediately secured hisservices.Mr. Harley made his first appearanceat the last-mentioned theatre on the16th of September, 1815, as Lissardo,in The Wonder, and made one ofthose decided hits that at once establishthe reputation of an actor. Hissuccess, however, was somewhat dearlyACTORS.bought; for failing to appear, in duetime, at the English Opera House, theproprietor brought an action againsthim for his default, and obtained averdict of 1.000. The payment ofthis sum, however, it is said, Mr. Arnoldhas never enforced. Mr. Harleyhas latterly confined his services in themetropolis to Drury Lane. His bestperformances are, Phantom, in Frightenedto Death, and Poplin, in TheSleeping Draught, in which he is altogetherunrivalled. He is one of themost bustling actors on the stage, andseldom fails to engage the favour ofthe audience by his good humour andcheerful appearance alone. " He never,"as a critic says, " delights us with anystirring touch of nature, and but seldomwith any markings of character, thoughhe frequently extorts our laughter, atthe expense of our sense of propriety,by his eccentricity. In fact, he is anexcellent farce actor, but in comedy heis beyond his depth ; and though hemay keep his head above water bypaddling, he can never bravely breastthe billows. His Phantom, Whimsical,Edward (Haunted Tower), CalebQuotem, Peter Fidget, &c., &c., are allgood performances ; and if he fallsbelow the level of Bannister, Fawcett,and Lovegrove, in them respectively,yet, as an artist, portraying the whole,he rises above any one of them."Mr. Harley is said to be as hypochondriacaland reserved off the stage,as he is lively and cheerful on it Heis unmarried ; though, as we are informed,he has, more than once, beenon the point of marriage.FRANCES MARIA KELLY.FRANCES MARIA KELLY wasborn at Brighton, on the 15th of December,1790. Her father was an officerin the army, and brother to MichaelKelly, under whom the subject of ourmemoir studied music and singing.Being destined for the stage, she madeher appearance in 1800, as one of tl;echorus singers at Drury Lane, and alsoplayed there a few parts suited to herage. From that time till 1807, shestudied her profession with great assiduity,and, in the latter year, made herdebut at Glasgow ; where, in spite ofher timidity, she soon became a great favourite.In 1808, she formed part of Mr.Colman's company, at the Haymarket ;but her confidence vanished before aLondon audience, and she would havebeen doomed, perhaps, to obscurity,had not the penetration of Mr. Arnolddiscovered the latent talent which shepossessed.At the English Opera House shesoon came into notice, particularlythrough her performance of Beatrice,in Tricks upon Travellers. Her Brunette,in Yes or No, added to her reputation; and her performance in FalseAlarms, in the part originally sustainedby Madame Storace, was consideredsuperior to that of her predecessor.From the English Opera House shewent to Drury Lane, but her celebrityhas arisen chiefly from the appropriatecast of characters selected for her bythe judicious manager of the formertheatre.Miss Kelly's attractions (if we mayapply that term to a lady with moretalents than beauty), endangered herlife upon the stage on two occasions.Whilst performing at DruryLane, a person, who had previouslydeclared his attachment towards her,fired at her from the pit, and an attackof a similar nature was made uponher on the Dublin boards. In neithercase did she receive any injury; andat Drury Lane she insisted on goingthrough her performance, and after shehad recovered from the shock, " cameforward amidst a welcome, not merelyof hands, but of voices and tears."As an actress, Miss Kelly has showna versatility displayed by scarcely anyother performer on the stage. In genteelcomedy she is more than respectable; in domestic tragedy, unrivalled ;and in opera, capable of sustaining afirst-rate part, though not with first-ratepowers. She once played Man-williamHENRY WEST BETTY,dane, in Artaxerxes, and sang all thesongs with great effect, not omittingThe Soldier Tired. Her romps arescarcely inferior to Mrs. Jordan's, andher waiting maids upon a par with Mrs.Orger's. But it is in domestic melodrama,such as The Sergeant's Wii'e,The Maid and the Magpie, The Innkeeper'sDaughter, &c. that she chieflyexcels. Her natural style of acting inthese pieces never (ails to produce themost powerful effect upon her audience; indeed, though she may notastonish or thrill, like Mrs. Siddons,we question if she does not much moreeffectually interest our affections andawaken our sympathies.Miss Kelly has a pleasing countenanceand symmetrical figure, but isby no means handsome. She is saidto have been on the point of marriage,twenty years ago, with Mr. Phillips,the Dublin vocalist; but, for some reasons,which we have been unable toascertain, the match was broken off.Great part of her professional emolumentshave been devoted to the assistanceof her family ; her father,after having availed himself of hergenerosity to a considerable extent,closed a gamester's life, at Paris, someyears ago, by self-destruction.Her merits, as an actress, drew thefollowing poetical compliment from Mr.Charles Lamb, as long ago as 1818.You are not, Kelly, of the common strain,That stoop their pride and female honour downTo please that many-headed beast, the town,And vend their lavish smiles and tricks to gain ;By fortune thrown amid the actor's train,Yon keep your native dignity of thought;The plaudits that attend you come unsought,As tributes due unto your natural vein ;Your tears have passion in them, and a grace,A genuine freshness, which our hearts avow ;Your smiles are wind?, whose ways we cannot trace,That vanish and return we know not howAnd please the better from a pensive face,A thoughtful eye, and a reflecting browWILLIAM HENRY WEST BETTY.WILLIAM HENRY WEST BETTYwas born in St. Chad's parish, Shrewsbury,on the 13th of September, 1791.He is descended from a respectablefamily; his grandfather was a physicianof some eminence, at Disburse, in Ireland; and his father, who inherited asmall patrimony, carried on the businessof a farmer, first at Horton Wafers', inSalop, and afterwards near Ballyna-hinc, in the county of Down, Ireland.In this county, Master Betty was educated,and under the care of his mother,who frequently read to him, imbibed adecided taste for recitation. The firsttime he saw a play was in 1802, inwhich year he went with his family tothe Belfast Theatre, on the occasion ofMrs. Siddons's performance of Elvira,in Pizarro. The boy was so struck byher acting, that he imitated her manner,accents, and attitudes, in variousdramatic speeches, which he learnt forthe purpose, and he at length becameso infected with a passion for the stage,as to declare " that he should dieif he were not permitted to become aplayer."Under these circumstances, his parentsintroduced him to Mr. Atkins,the manager of Belfast, who, afterhearing him recite some passages inthe part of Elvira, assigned him over tothe superintendence of Mr. Hough, theprompter, to whose exertion, it is said,he was not a little indebted for hissubsequent success. Young Bettystudied, under this gentleman, the partsof Osman, young Norval, Rolla, andRomeo; and, on the 1st of August,1803, made his debut at the BelfastTheatre, in that of Osman. He wasreceived with great applause, and afterhe had appeared in the other threecharacters above mentioned, " was allowedto have satisfied credulity, andsilenced scepticism."After completing a lucrative engagementat Cork, he quitted Ireland forScotland, and was received at Glasgowand Edinburgh with enthusiasm. LordMeadowbank paid him some very flatteringattentions ; Mr. Home pronouncedhim to be " the genuine offspring andthe son of Douglas," and prophesiedthat he would soon be one of the firstACTORS.actors that had ever appeared on theBritish stage. From Edinburgh heproceeded to Sheffield, Liverpool,Chester, and other provincial towns ;and at length, in the latter part ofNovember, 1804, was engaged at CoventGarden, for twelve nights, at fiftyguineas a night u and a clear benefit ;while he agreed to perform at DruryLane, during the intervening nights.Such was the excitement created bythe announcement of his appearance,that as early as one o'clock on the dayof his debut (December the 1st), peoplebegan to crowd the passages to thetheatre, and the rush that took placeon the opening of the doors, was attendedwith the most dangerous consequences.Numbers sprang from theboxes into the pit, whilst those in thelatter, were almost suffocated, andseveral were carried out apparentlylifeless ; whilst the utmost clamour andconfusion prevailed, arising from thecontests of those who found their seatstaken by others, and the shrieks offemales, crying to be removed. Theplay selected for his debut was Barbarossa,but, as he did not appear tillthe second act, not a word was audibleof the first. At length he came on asAchmet, and was received with oneshout of enthusiasm. " He did not,"says Mr. Boaden, " seem to have theslightest embarrassment, nor to think ofhis audience. He turned himself, likea veteran, to his work his eye neverwandered from the true mark, andthough not dark, it was quick andmeaning. He did not wring his featuresinto distortion at any time, to lookimpressive ; nor rotvl his eye, as is thepractice, to imply subtlety." His performancewas applauded throughout,and houses almost as full attended hisrepresentations of Tancred, Romeo,Frederick, Octavian, Hamlet, Osman,&c. Mr. Smith, the celebrated actor,commonly called Gentleman Smith,came to town on purpose to witnessBetty's performance of Achmet andDouglas, and after seeing him in theseparts, sent the young actor a letter ofadvice and approbation, with a presentof a cornelian seal, on which was engravedan impression of the head ofGarrick. All, indeed, who witnessedthe performance of the young Roscius,thought it extremely wonderful, andhe was, in consequence, presented tothe king, and noticed by the rest ofthe royal family and the nobility, as aprodigy. Prose and poetry were putin requisition to celebrate his praise ;prints of his person were circulatedthroughout the kingdom ; and even theUniversity of Cambridge was sufficientlyhurried away by the tide of themoment, as to make the subject of SirWilliam Browne's prize medal " Quidnoster Roscius get."It was even in public contemplationto erect statues to him, and Opie painteda full length portrait of him, in whichthe young Roscius was represented ashaving drawn inspiration from the tombof Shakspeare. But the best proof ofthe sensation he created, is the fact,that the amount which twenty-eightnights of his performances at DruryLane brought into the house, was17,210 11s. ; an average of 614 13s.3d. " I have not," says Mr. Boaden,the receipts of Covent Garden housefor the same number of nights ; but theresult must be something near in total ;and thus, probably, in fifty-six nights,a youth of thirteen drew 34,000 intoa theatre, to see him act the principalcharacters in tragedy, and snatch, atall events, one house, from impendingruin."To take a rational view of Betty'smerits as an actor requires no veryprofound powers of observation. Undoubtedlyhe possessed many of thechief requisites for forming a perfectactor ; but that he was a perfect actor,or at all approaching towards one, noone now ventures to assert. His youthgained him applause, upon the sameprinciple by which a child is applaudedwho stands upon a horse at Astley'scircus, and is able to hold up a hand orfoot without losing its balance, uponthe galloping animal. But if Ducrow,or even a far less experienced voltigeura cheval, were to give a similar exhibition,he would not be tolerated for amoment : and this illustrates the case ofour young Roscius ; who, though veryadmirable as Master, would, in the displayof no greater powers as Mr. Betty,be hissed off the stage.No one, indeed, of taste or discernmentseems to have considered him, atthe time of his appearance, as anythingbut a precocious youth, who was ableMISS O N E ILL.to do much, and in whom excellencemight be anticipated but at a greatdistance. Lord Meadowbank, who presentedhim with Beattie's Minstrel, accompaniedit with a letter, in which,speaking of that work, he says, " itexhibits a most interesting picture ofthe inspirations of youthful genius, andof the anticipations of future excellence,while it delineates, in delightful andtrue colours, that immense field ofstudy, which years must cultivate andmaster, before you can be entitled tothe highest honours of your profession."After having performed a sufficienttime to realize a handsome independencefor the remainder of his life,Master Betty retired from the stage,for the purpose, as was said, of invigoratinghis health, but with nointention of quitting his profession altogether.At all events, the press of thatday anticipated his return to the stage,and put forth, on the occasion, manyspeculations as to his future career.Premature powers," says one of hisbiographers, writing in 1806, " afterblazing forth like a meteor, have suddenlybecome dim, as if Nature hadbeen exhausted. It is by a judiciouscourse of study, by toil and industryalone, that lasting fame can be attained".With the assistance of these, the youngRoscius may attain the summit of theart; while, without it, he may provebut the wonder of the day." Such hasMr. Betty proved; for the experiment,when he had become a man, of his reappearanceat Covent Garden, was mostdecidedly unsuccessful, and was, webelieve, not repeated. Mr. Betty doesnot stand alone in his ephemeral fame ;Clara Fisher and Little Burke, thelatter of whom is decidedly his superior,have had their share of applause; butwith their youth, their celebrity isvanishing, as Mr. Betty's has vanished.The person of the young Roscius isthus described by the writer from whomwe have quoted above. His person,considering his age, is rather tall. Hisfeatures, when off the stage, are notvery expressive, yet his limbs are finelyturned, and happily formed. He possessesa piercing eye, but his nose isnot prominent, while his face is ratherflat. His hair, on the other hand, isnot only luxuriant, but of a most beautifulhue, somewhat between a flax ncolour and a brown. He is not unconsciousof this, and takes care to displayhis ringlets, on critical occasions, witheffect. He dances well, and fences withgrace and dexterity. In respect to hismemory, he, perhaps, excels all hiscontemporaries, and even most of hispredecessors ; it is in no common degreeretentive, and scarcely requires, inthe course of a whole night, the aid ot aprompter in one single instance.MISS O'NEILL.THIS eminent actress was born inIreland, about the year 1791, and educatedat a small school at Drogheda,where, it is said, by one who knew herin infancy, she might occasionally beseen running barefoot about the streets.Her father, who was stage manager ofthe Drogheda Theatre, introduced heronthe boards at an early age, and,although the parts allotted to her wereof minor importance, she soon createda favourable impression. At the age oftwelve, she was seen by Mr. Talbot,the actor, and then manager of the BelfastTheatre.whowassomuch fascinatedby her performance, that he obtainedpermission of her father, to enlist heramong his own company. She accordinglyaccompanied him to Belfast,and, after having played there withapplause several first-rate characters,both in tragedy and comedy, was engaged,through the influence of Mr.Talbot, at Dublin, where she made herdebut as the Widow Cheerly. MissWalstein was, at this time, the star ofthe Irish metropolis, and Miss O'Neill'sacting, powerful as it was, could onlyelicit the praise of being a tolerablesubstitute for that of the lady. In Jane Shore, however,and Juliet, it was unanimously adac r o K s .mitted that she excelled Miss Walstein,although lie might be inferior to thatlady in Lady Townley and LadyTeazle.A ludicrous circumstance occurred,one night, whilst Miss O'Neill wasperforming Juliet, at Dublin. WhenConway, as Romeo, came to the lines,Ob '. that I were a glove upon that hand,That 1 might touch that cheek !the actor, being very tall, and the balconyon the stage particularly low, laidhis hand upon the balcony. A fellowin the gallery perceived this, and immediatelyroared out, " Get out wityour blarney ; why don't you touch herthen, and not be preaching Parson Saxethere ?"It was the reputation which MissO'Neill established by her acting inJuliet, that induced the Covent Gardenmanager to think of engaging her, but notuntil he had offered the same, or higherterms to Miss Walstein, who thoughtproper to decline them. Our actressmade her first bow to a London audience,on the 6th of October, 1814, inthe part above-mentioned, and her reception,when in the zenith of herfame, was scarcely more enthusiastic.She drew such crowded houses, thather salary was progressively raised to30 per week, and her benefit wasattended to overflowing. In the provincesshe was equally attractive ; and,at Portsmouth, is said to have receivedas much as ,15 for one week's salary.Her Juliet, however, was not the onlycharacter in which she touched thehearts of her audience ; her Belvideraand Isabella put as many pocket handkerchiefsin requisition ; and both thefair and the wrctair sex, might be seenwiping away their tears at the overwhelmingspectacle of distress presentedby this accomplished actress.In the spring of 1816, she made hermetropolitan debfit in comedy, as LadyTeazle. The house was more thanusually crowded to witness her performance; but curiosity, probably, ratherthan anticipations of a favourable result,was the exciting cause of so full anattendance. Indeed, the mournful cadenceof her voice was alone sufficientto mar her comic efforts, which, inother respects also, fell considerablyshort of her tragic ; so that, after shehad played Lady Teazle, Lady Townley,the Widow Cheerly, and someother characters in that line, few wereattracted by the announcement of hername in comedy. It is but justice toadd, that her Lady Bell (Know yourown Mind), and Bizarre (The Inconstant),neither of which parts wereplayed by her in London, were consideredby the Irish critics to be inimitable.Nor did the specimens whichshe gave of her comedy in the Englishmetropolis, deserve so equivocal an epithetas respectable ; although, as comparedwith her tragedy, it could not becalled first-rate. The conception, insome instances, might have left little todesire, but the execution failed for thewant of constitutional requisites. Whileon the subject of her merits, in otherthan tragic characters, we may mentionher performance of Maria, in TheCitizen, for her benefit, in which, itis said, she sang tolerably, and danceddelightfully.After a brief and almost unexampledcareer of dramatic popularity, MissO'Neill, to the regret of all lovers ofthe drama, gave her hand to W. Beecher,Esq., Map., without alleviating the blowby taking a farewell leave of the stage.She had earned, it was calculated, at thetime, not less than 12,000 a-year, byher professional talents, the whole profitsof which, it is said, was distributed byher among her numerous relations.Some years ago, it was reputed that shehad to endure the united afflictions ofblindness, and of an unkind husband ; butthe statement, in either particular, is,we believe, totally without foundation.Her generosity to her family frees herfrom the charge of avariciousness ; yet,it is said, that she refused, previously toher retirement, to play gratis for thepoor, at Birmingham. She escaped thecontamination to which a theatrical lifeso unavoidably exposes an actress,though the lures of titled and wealthylibertines were not unemployed totempt her, and, in one case, she declinedthe offer of an earl's fortune,though accompanied by that of hishand.As an actress, she has had no successorworthy of comparison with her;and, at her secession from the stage,may be said to have departed tliJuliet of the poet, though many anaspirant has since become the JulietJAMES Wallace.of the stage. The same remark willapply to her Jane Shore, Belvidera,Mrs. Beverley, and Monimia ; to saynothing of her Evade, the tragedy ofwhich name has never been revivedsince her retirement ; and, but for herexquisite acting, would not, probably,have survived a second night's performance.Of Lady Constance, LadyRandolph, and Columna, in Coriolanus,we have had, perhaps, moreappropriate representatives. Sadness,rather than grandeur, was her forte ;youthful passion, rather than maternalaffection. Yet, occasionally, there wasa dignity about her which approximatedto the majesty of Mrs. Siddons.Miss O Nell, it has been aptly saidof her by a critic, in a comparison ofher with Mrs. Siddons, " was a lovelyardent creature, with whose griefs wesympathized, and whose sorrows raisedour pity. Mrs. Siddons was a wonderfulbeing, for whom we felt awe, veneration,and a more holy love : she wasso great in her sufferings, her soulnever seemed subdued; we almostfeared to offend by compassion. Wealways felt with her the existence of anextraneous being; while we bowed tothe emotions caused by the character,we had a feeling in reserve in regard tothe woman. Miss O'Neill turned mostupon our affections; but Mrs. Siddonsmade an impression on our minds, thattime never eradicated. We feel pleasurein stating, that these ladies lived onterms of friendship, and that Mrs. Siddonsalways declared the highest opinionof Miss O'Neill's talents."JAMES Wallace.JAMES Wallace was born in1792, and, to use the language of onewho knew him in his infancy, wascradled in a theatre, nursed in a greenroom,and suckled at a side-scene."In other words, his father and motherwere performers, and introduced theirson upon the stage as soon as he wasable to speak. His earliest theatricalattempts took place at Princes Street,Soho, where different dramatic pieceswere performed by children. On arrivingat manhood, he made his debut atDrury Lane, but, for some years, wasintrusted with no character of moreimportance than Courtly, in The Belle'sStratagem, Captain Manly, in HonestThieves, and Seymour, in The Irishmanin London.At length, in 1816, he was assigneda few parts, that brought him intofavourable notice. He played Milford,Richmond, Macduff, and lago, withgreat applause, and in the followingyear, Oroonoko, Captain Absolute,Colonel Lambert, Bassariio, &c. Hisreputation gradually increased, andprocured him an offer of going to America,which he accepted, and performedthere, both in tragedy and comedy,with decided success. He returned toDrury Lane in September, 1820, andduring that season, was thetragedian there. He made, however,no particular impression, except in hisHamlet, and Rolla. He afterwardsmade a second trip to America, wherehe had the misfortune to have his legbroken, by a fall from a coach ; theeffects of this accident are still slightlyapparent. Whilst supporting himselfon crutches, he gave, in America, anentertainment of songs, imitations, recitations,&c. &c., and appeared as CaptainBertram, in The Birth-day, withthe support of a stick and a crutch.Soon after his return to London,Mr. Wallack became stage manager ofDrury Lane, a situation for which he iseminently qualified. Both in comedy andtragedy, and occasionally in melodrama,he plays leading characters, but thoughan actor of unanimously acknowledgedtalent, he has never been considereda first-rate actor. The following remarkson his acting, will enable thereader to form a fair estimate of hisabilities. " Mr. Wallack," says a critic,possesses capabilities for becoming thefirst light comedian in the world ; andhe is certainly now above the vapidefforts of Ellison, and some of theclumsy attempts of C. Kemble ; buthis performances cannot be compared4<iOA C T R Swithwhat Elliston's were, with whatwe recollect Lewis's to have been, orwith the few performances we yet rememberof Palmer. There is something(indescribable though discernible) wantingto finish his pictures. 1 1 is Dorisdelights, and dazzles, and pleases,but it does not satisfy you you feelthat Doricourt would have done thingsdifferently in fact, you may think youhave seen Doricourt, but you feel youhave not seen him to advantage. HisHarry Dornton is much better; andthis, we think, he plays as well asElliston ever played it ; which is tantamountto saying, that he performsit admirably. But Harry Dornton,though actually in the line, contains, infact, very little light comedy ; thereforeno conclusion can be drawn from thepersonation of such a part. CaptainAbsolute, is one which Wallack is veryhappy in, but he wants that delightfulironical gravity, that others havecharmed us with, in the reconciliationscene with his father. He is not sogood a light comedian as we have seen,but he is the best now in London, andbetter than any provincial actor weknow. Having thus accorded him thepalm, under circumstances not veryhonourable, for the London stage neverwas so miserably destitute of gentlemenas it now is, let us proceed to an investigationof his tragic powers.His Richard, is a lifeless readingcold and ineffective has taken up allthe faults of his predecessors he hasattempted nothing new ; and even inthe last act, he failed to bring his melodramaticpowers into play. His Richardis worse than Booth's, Young's, andBennett's. His Hamlet, though notoriginal, is, perhaps, the second uponthe stage; but the fact is, the presentstage has no Hamlet. His Romeo is,beyond all question, the best of theday so is his Rolla, but of his Brutus,we really can say nothing favourable.Presuming Kean to be admitted as thefirst, Macready as the second, andYoung as the third, tragedian of theday, Wallack has more claim to thetitle of the fourth, than Ward, C.Kemble, Booth, or Cooper; and forour own parts, we are inclined to think,on a fair range of the regular drama,setting aside parts peculiarly romanticor declamatory, that our hero is on apar with Macready and Young. If hehas not so many beauties, he has fewerfaults ; and though he may not delightby starts, as Macready does, on thewhole he will frequently please youmore."Mr. Wallack is married to a daughterof the celebrated J. Johnstonee, and hasseveral children. Some time ago hetook the benefit of the insolvent act,but, after his release, voluntarily gavehis creditors fresh securities ; in consequenceof which, he again fell into difficulty,from which he was relieved bya commission of bankruptcy.MADAME Vestries.THIS popular actress is the granddaughterof Bartolozzi, the celebratedengraver, and was born in the parish ofMary-le-bone, in January, 1797. Hereducation enabled her to obtain an earlyacquaintance with the French and Italianlanguages ; she learnt also music andsinging (though with no view of comingon the stage), and at fifteen, was consideredequally charming and accomplished.She was suffered by herparents to attend a ball, theatre, orconcert, almost nightly, and she wasamong the few virgins at the ItalianOpera, whose heads were turned bythe dancing of the celebrated ArianVestris. She became his wife on the28th of January, 1813; and soon after,with the aid of a few lessons in singing,from M. Corri, made her first appearance,for her husband's benefit, at theKing's Theatre, on the 20th of July,1815, as Proserpina, in Winter's operaof that name.Madame Vestris was received withrapturous applause, notwithstanding theimpression that had been made in thesame character by Grasping, for whomthe part was expressly composed. Shewas warmly applauded in all her airs,M A Dame Vestriesand ii'. the exquisite duet, Vaghi coll,was enthusiastically encored. The sensationshe had created, did not abateon her repetition of the character ; andthe Princess Charlotte attended theopera a second time expressly to seeher re-appearance in Proserpina. Inthe next season, Madame Vestris playedSusanna, and a few other characters;but the enthusiasm she had excited,was now somewhat abated.In 1815, she accompanied her husbandto Paris, and in the followingyear, appeared at the Italian Operathere, but could hardly be said to besuccessful. She had not been long inthe French metropolis, before the neglectand infidelity of her husband rouseda similar spirit in herself, and leavinghim, she plunged into a course of life,too notoriously unchaste to warrant oursilence respecting the fact. This is not,however, the place to enter into condemnationsor exposures ; delicacy forbidsthe latter, as charity does theformer. We pass over, therefore, what,if stated at all, would, perhaps, foundedas it is on report only, be mis-stated,and continue our account of MadameVestris's professional life.In 1820, she appeared at Drury LaneTheatre, and played there, in succession,the operatic characters of Lille,Adela, and Artaxerxes, in all of whichshe acquitted herself admirably, exhibiting,it is said, all the archness andvivacity, without any of the grossness,of Storace. Her next important characterwas Don Giovanni ; her appearancein which unfeminine part, drewthe following remarks from the penof a periodical critic. " We pity MadameVestris from every considerationby which her performance of DonGiovanni has been attended. Thedisgusting woman (the masculine Mrs.Gould) who undertook this libertinecharacter at its outset, prepared us veryfully for the only result that can everbe drawn in the purest hands, fromits loathsome repetitions ; and we,therefore, feel bound to treat it as apart which no female should assume,till she has discarded every delicatescruple by which her mind or personcan be distinguished. We could traceno reluctance to the part in the efforts ofMadame Vestris; who seemed to haveswathed her slender form in rolls andbandages, to fill out the garb of thecharacter, and testified altogether thatsort of ease and gaiety, against which,for the honour of our sex, we shall deemit our duty to protest."It is in such characters as these,however, that Madame Vestris hasgained her chief celebrity, which is notalittle owing to her personal attractions.Her Paul and Apollo have becomefavourites with the public, less,perhaps, on account of the powers ofthe vocalist and the actress, than thefine figure which the respective partsafford her an opportunity of displaying.One of her best parts is Maria Darlington; but, for genteel comedy, sheis neither fitted by Nature nor art. Hervoice is a sweet and powerful contralto,and is heard to great advantage in suchsongs as The Light. Guitar, Rise, GentleMoon, &c. On the whole, she is oneof the cleverest actresses this countrycan boast, being able to sustain comiccharacters more than respectably, eitheron the French, Italian or English stage.MRS. YATES.THIS lady is the daughter of Mr.Brunton, an actor of some celebrity inhis day, and was born at Norwich, onthe 21st of January, 1799. She madeher first appearance on the Lynn stage,of which her father was manager, inthe character of Desdemona, to CharlesKemble's Othello, and though only sixteenyears of age, performed will/greattaste and feeling. After playing a fewother characters, it became evident thather powers were rather suited to comedy,than tragedy ; and in the formerdepartment, she soon established a provincialreputation. She appeared successivelyat Birmingham, Worcester,Shrewsbury, and Leicester ; and was atlength engaged at Covent Garden,4G2ACTORS,where she made her debftt on the 12thof September, 1817, as Letitia Hardy,in The Belle's Stratagem. She was receivedwith enthusiastic applause, andthe daily critics, with a few exceptions,ware equally warm in her praise. Ofthe remarks on her acting at this time,however, perhaps the least favourablecontains the most truth. " Miss Brun-ton,"says one of the periodical censors,has advantages of youth and figure,that operate very powerfully upon thegeneral taste, and her toleration tiimportant business, is no mean specimenof the value attached to thoserequisites. Her Letitia was just sucha performance as candour could attendwithout disgust. She seizes the broadand vivid points of the character itshoyden airs and masquerade dancingwith that celerity which experiencewould enable her to command ; but asto any deep and scientific managementof its duties, we loudly disclaim theimputation which has been so lavishlyheaped upon her exertions, by theshameful venality of the diurnal press."Her next important character wasRosalind, in which she surprised anddelighted the audience by her. executionof the Cuckoo song. Her Violante,Olivia, Beatrice, Miss Hardcastle, &c.,added to her reputation, though shedisappointed the expectations of thosewho had seen Mrs. Davison in the samecharacters.After Miss Brunton had appeared inmostof the principal parts in comedy,her attraction grew less, and the managerkept her in the back ground forthe remainder of the season. At itsclose, she went to the provinces, andafter her return to London, made herdebut at the West London Theatre,of which her father had become lessee,on the 9th of September, 1822. Shewas now put into good parts, and wasrapidly improving, when Mr. Bruntonwas obliged to give up the theatre, froma want of sufficient encouragement.His daughter returned to the provinces,and at Cheltenham, in 1824, we findher playing Rosalind, as Mrs. Yates,her husband being then manager of thetheatre there. She subsequently performedat Drury Lane, but no charactersof importance were assigned herduring the latter seasons of her appearance.It ie at the Adelphi, that Mrs. Yateshas been afforded a field for some ofher happiest personations. The sizeof the stage is just suited to her powers,and the line of characters she hasadopted, is that in which she mostexcels, the domestic. There is anaivete and simplicity about her actinghere which are truly genuine and delightful; to astonish or to thrill is notwithin her compass, but she affects andinterests us more deeply, perhaps, thanaSiddons, or an O'Neill. Under anycircumstances we sympathize and arepleased with her, for, whether as the finelady, the forsaken mistress, the livelychambermaid, or the capricious coquette,she is always natural, and neveroutsteps the bounds of decorum.A critique on her performances, in1818, is not less applicable to her at thepresent moment. " Her principal claim,"says a critic of that time, " to generalapprobation, is founded on her naturaland spontaneous adoption of the bestschool of acting : too young to playfrom imitation, she brings to mindstrong recollections in the old admirersof Mrs. Abingdon and Miss Farren.That chaste, lady like style of acting,which displays all requisite buoyancy,removed from forwardness and flippancy,a natural and fascinating playfulness,an interesting naivete, and arefined vivacity combined with all necessaryenergy and correct feeling, arethe qualifications we admire in MissBrunton; and there is added to thisa charm, which we can resolve into noother than the old expressive Frenchepithet, of a je ne sais quoi, whichpervades her acting, and distinguishesit from that of any other performer ofthe present day."Mrs. Yates, to her other stage attractions,adds those of a pleasing singerand a good dancer ; her person is, whatwe should call, interesting ; being morethan pretty, though not beautiful. Inprivate life, she is said to be as amiable jand unassuming, as in public she istalented and entertaining.JOHN REEVE.JOHN REEVE.JOHN REEVE was born in LudgateHill, London, in the year 1799. His fatherwas a citizen and common councilman,but what business he followed, wehave not been informed. Master Reeve,after having completed his education atthe same school with Frederick Yates,was apprenticed to his father ; but hisinsubordination and nightly visits tothe theatre, led to a removal from hispaternal home, to that of Messrs. neville,wholesale hosiers, in Maiden Lane,Wood Street. The top of the warehouseof these gentlemen, was a leadenflat, and here Reeve nightly declaimed,at first alone, and afterwards in conjunctionwith a fellow apprentice, who,like himself, had become stage-struck.From declamation they proceeded tofencing, singing, &c., and the neighbourshad already begun to be disturbedby their nocturnal proceedings.These were, at length, broughtto a close, by the circumstances relatedin the following anecdote, which, as itis amusingly told, we shall relate in thewords of the writer.During the run of Brutus, Messrs.Reeve and friend learned the principalscenes of the play, and rehearsedthem at their usual rendezvous. Theirperformance disturbed the rest of one,who fain would have slumbered in theadjoining house ; and, opening thewindow of his attic, he thrust his frontispiece forth, and requesteda cessation of hostilities.Reeve's friend suggested the proprietyof retiring, and our hero acceded ; buthis patience soon became exhausted ;and he resolved once more to go forthand finish the scene. They did so.The stars were bright above them, andthe window of the adjoining attic beingclosed, they presumed that its occupantslept soundly; and, they, therefore,gave vent to their ' outbreathings.'The before-mentioned inmate of thesky-parlour had, it seems, like IsaacShove,Lone time keptHn character Tor p:iti-n< v very lamlablv :but this was beyond endurance ; and,finding eloquence unavailing, and thatit was useless to expend air upon them,he resolved to try the effect of anotherelement ; and seizing an utensil, whosename, whilst our greatest English comicactress has existing admirers, can neverbe forgotten, he hurled the contentsover the two actors, whilst they wereengaged in the most passionate passageof the scene. Now, Jack Reeve wasnot the man to endure this visitation Ofthe briny fluid tamely ; and whilst hisfriend ' shook thousand odours fromhis dewy clothes,' he vented his reproachesupon the deluge. The angryaltercation awakened the surroundingtenantry, many of whom had been previouslyannoyed by Reeve's nightlyrehearsals. The neighbours now madeone common cause, and pelted ouryoung hosier with every missile theycould muster; at length, the noble Brutuswas fain to seek shelter from theshowers which fell around him at everyside. Ere he had descended, the nextmorning, his persecutors of the previousnight had represented his conduct toMessrs. Neville and Co, ; the result wasexplanation, altercation, and departure."Reeve now obtained a situation, asclerk in the banking-house of Messrs.Gosling and Co., Fleet Street, and was,soon after, introduced to Mr. Pym, theproprietor of a small theatre, in WilsonStreet, Gray's Inn Square. Here hepaid 3*. 6d. per week, to be allowed toperform, but produced no impression,and was assigned very inferior characters.His turn for humour, however,displayed itself even in these triflingparts. One night, during his personationof a servant, in The Wheel ofFortune, Weasel said, " You, gentlemen,must have your little comforts."To be sure we must," said Reeve,we must have our little carraracomfits."Finding himself intrusted with charactersfar beneath his ambition, hehired the theatre for one night in hisown name, and performed Othello andSylvester Daggerwood. In the Moor,Vie was, as his biographer says, certainlyperplexed in the extreme'' hut hisSylvester Daggerwood so pleased Mr.Lowell, father of the late proprietor ofthe Adelphi, that he requested Reeveto play the character for him at DruryLane." Accordingly, on the 8th o"fJune, 1819, he appeared at that theatreas Sylvester Daggerwood, and was receivedwith enthusiastic applause. " Hisimitations," said one of the critics, " wedo not hesitate to pronounce to bethebest we have hitherto seen. Theydo not consist in the mere adoption ofsome single characteristic of an actorthey embody the whole of his peculiaritiesof voice, gesture, and manner;they identify the man and you mightpersuade yourself he stood before you.So excellent was his imitation of Fan-en,that were we not acquainted with thatgentleman, we should have thoughthim on the stage."He repeated the character of SylvesterDaggerwood on the following night,for the benefit of Mr. Lanza; and soonafter, was engaged by Mr. Arnold toappear at the Lyceum, in a piece writtenexpressly for him, called " 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,by Advertisement," in which five characterswere announced to be performedby Mr. *****. He made his debitin this part, on the 17th of July, in theabove year, and at once became a favouritewith the public ; critics approved,and spectators applauded. Onthe 18th of October, he became a memberof the Adelphi company ; and atthe close of the season, went to Cheltenhamand Bristol, where he was, forsome time, first low comedian. Hesubsequently played at Drury Lane,the Surrey, Coburg. and re-appeared atthe Adelphi, towards the end of 1822.in conjunction with Mr. Wilkinson, inan entertainment, called, Trifles Lightas Air. In 1826, he was engaged at theHaymarket, for five years ; and he stillcontinues to act also at the EnglishOpera House and Adelphi; the lattertheatre is that where he is seen to mostadvantage.Mr. Reeve is decidedly the greatestcomic favourite on the stage after Liston,and many prefer him to that actor.The characters best suited to his talents,are such as Abrahamide?, in The Quadrupeds,Lord Grizzle, in Tom Thumb,Bombast, Pedrillo, &c. He is not lightenough for Caleb Quotem, nor quietenough for Paul Pry ; he was excelledby Listen, in the one, and Harley, inthe other. His Acres, too, is, comparativelyspeaking, a failure ; indeed, it i*only in broad farce, burlesque, and thecomic parts of melo-drama, that he ischiefly successful. He has the bestvoice "of any comedian on the stage, ofwhich he occasionally gives a proof inhis admirable song of First vit deGrace Extraordinaire. We have alreadyspoKen of him as an imitator :he cannot do so much, perhaps, in thisrespect, as either Mathews or Yates, birthspictures, though fewer, are morefinished than those of his rivals.Mr. Reeve was married in 1821, buthis wife died in the following year,after she had given birth to a son. Thesubject of our memoir is about fivefeet ten inches in height, and, to use thewords of his biographer, " certainly infigure peculiarly fitted for the heavybusiness, as his weight is about fifteenstone."POLITICAL ECONOMISTS.SMITH, (CHARLES,) a very ablewriter on the policy of the corn trade,&c. was born at Stephen, in 1713. Hereceived such an education ' as suitedhim, on his father's retirement, tosucceed to the trade of a miller, whichhe, for some time, carried on at Barking,in Essex. Having acquired, however,a competent fortune, he married, in1748, and removed to Stratford, wherehe directed his attention to the operationsof the corn trade, and the policyof the corn laws. During the scarcityof 1757, he was induced to lay theresult of his labours before the public,in three valuable tracts, which were firstprinted during 1758-9. These werenot only well received, but an editionof them was printed by the city ofLondon. Dr. Adam Smith quotedthem in his celebrated Wealth ofNations ; and the subject of ourmemoir had also the satisfaction ofseeing his recommendations adoptedby parliament. He died, in consequenceof a fall from his horse, on the8th of February, 1777, leaving anonly son. who afterwards sat in parliamentfor the borough of Westbury, inWiltshire. His valuable tracts werere-published, with the addition of amemoir of his life, by George Chalmers,Esq. in 1804, at which time they hadbecome very scarce.ANGERSTEIN, (JOHN JULIUS,)was born at St. Petersburghh, in theyear 1735, and came over to Englandin 1749, under the auspices or' aneminent Russian merchant, the lateAndrew Thompson, Esq., in whosecounting-house he passed most of thefollowing seven years of his life. Hesoon became eminent as a broker andunderwriter, especially in the lattercharacter ; for when his name appearedon a policy, it was taken as a sufficientwarrant for the rest to follow, withoutfurther examination ; and those sanctionedby his subscription were emphaticallydenominated Julian. Hisintegrity, industry, and attention tobusiness, gave great weight to hisname in the commercial world, andthe establishment, known as Lloyd's,derived most of its celebrity from thezeal of Mr. Angerstein. He appliedfor, and obtained from, parliament, anact for prohibiting a change in theoriginal names of vessels, in consequenceof which, such as had acquireda bad name from their imperfect state,were no longer able to escape detection.It was he who suggested to theminister, the establishment of a state-lottery,in imitation of the continentalones, himself and friends engaging tobuy half the tickets issued, and anact of parliament passed accordingly,since happily repealed. The successof this project led to his taking anactive part in the public loans requiredby the exigences of the state, duringthe protracted war with France; andthe high commercial consideration hehad attained, made his lists, it is said,include the wealthiest portion of boththe banking and trading world. Hedid not, however, confine himself topursuits leading alone to gain. Hewas the first who proposed a reward of2,000 from the funds of Lloyd's, forthe invention of the life-boat ; andboth privately and publicly gave manyproofs of hi? munificent liberality,previous to his death, which occurredon the 22d of January, 1823. Thename of Mr. Angerstein is well knownto the public as the original proprietorof the splendid collection of pictures,which were purchased by government,from his executors, for j57,000, as thecommencement of a national gallery.He enjoyed the acquaintance of Dr.Johnson. Sir Joshua Reynolds, Garrick,and other eminent men, and therespect and esteem of a very largecircle gf intimate friends. He married,first, the widow of Charles Croats,Esq., by whom he had one son and oneApple N DIX.daughter: and secondly, Mrs. Lucas,the widow of a merchant of that name,by whom he had no issue. He left aprincely fortune, comprising estates inKent, Norfolk, Lincoln, and Suffolk;and personal property sworn underhalf a million.YOUNG, (Sir WILLIAM,) the sonof a baronet, to whose title he succeededin 1788, was born at Charlton,in Kent, in 1750; and, after havingcompleted his education at UniversityCollege, Oxford, passed some time inFrance and Italy, where he ardentlycultivated the literature of those countries.In 1777, he commenced author,and political economist, by the publicationof The Spirit of Athens, in onevolume, octavo, of which an improvededition subsequently appeared,under the title of The History ofAthens, Political and Philosophical,considered. In 1784, he came intoparliament, for the Cornish borough ofSt. Makes, through the interest of theGrenville, to whom he was related ;and in 1788, on the agitation of thesubject of the poor laws, he publisheda pamphlet, in reply to Mr. Gilbert'sprojected amendment of them. Hisnext work was The Rights of Englishmen; followed by an able Letter,addressed to Mr. Pitt, on the subjectof poor and workhouses. During hissubsequent parliamentary career, heopposed both parliamentary reform,and the abolition of the slave trade, butoccasionally voted in support of liberalmeasures, and in opposition to governmentHe went out as governor of theisland of Tobago, in 1807, and diedthere, on the 10th of January, 1815.He had been married, first, in 1777, toSarah, daughter of Charles Laurence,Esq., by whom he had four sons andtwo daughters; and secondly, in 1792,to Barbara, daughter of Richard Talbot,Esq., of Malade Castle, by whom hehad no issue. Besides the worksbefore mentioned, he wrote The WestIndia Common-place Book, and editedThe Contemplate Philosophical of hismaternal grandfather, Dr. BrookTaylor.TAT HAM, (WILLIAM,) was bornin 175'2, at Hutton, in the forest ofCumberland, of which place his fatherwas rector. After receiving a scantyeducation, he was, in 1769, sent toNorth America, and became clerk tosome merchants, on James's River,Virginia. He afterwards commencedmerchant himself, but on the breakingout of the revolt, joined the colonists,and accepted a captaincy, in theAmerican army. He also took partin the war with the Cherokee Indians,had some share in the treaty whichwas entered into with them, and wrotethe memoirs of some of their mostcelebrated chiefs. Having attainedthe rank of major-commandant, hequitted the army for a time, andstudied the law. In 1780, he repairedto Richmond, in Virginia, where hewas taken particular notice of by thecelebrated Jefferson, and in conjunctionwith Colonel John Todd, compiledthe first regular account of WesternCountry, that was ever submitted tothe Americans. On the invasion ofVirginia, by Generals Phillips andArnold, he again marched against theenemy, in the suite of General Nelson ;and, at the siege of York, he acted asavolunteer with that body of theAmerican army. After the recognitionof American independence, he led anitinerant sort of life, for the next twelveor thirteen years, in the course ofwhich he was called to the Americanbar ; was shipwrecked on a voyage toCuba; went on a diplomatic "missionto Spain ; and also made a voyage toEngland. To this country he returneda second time, in 1796, and immediatelyturned Its attention to the means of"increasing," as he himself stated, "mechanicalpowers, and of contributingto the extension of agriculture andcommerce." To this end he published,in succession, his Plan for Insulatingthe Metropolis, by means of a NavigableCanal ; Remarks on Inland Canals ;Political Economy of Inland Navigation; Irrigation and Drainage, withThoughts on the Multiplication ofCommercial Resources ; Communicationconcerning the Agriculture andCommerce of the United States ofAmerica; Historical and PracticalEssay on the Culture and Commerceof Tobacco ; An Essay on the ComparativeAdvantages of Oxen for Tillage,in Competition with Horses ; and,National Irrigation, or the VariousPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS.Methods of Watering Meadows. Thecelebrity he obtained by the publicationof these works, seems to havegained him the appointment, in 1801,of superintendent of the London Docks,at Napping; but he lost this situationshortly afterwards, in consequence ofthe remaining works being agreed tobe done by contract. Much disappointed,and having failed to realize acompetence by any of his numerousspeculations, he, a third time, left thiscountry, and proceeded to America.He arrived at Alexandria, in Virginia,some time in 1805 ; and, on the day ofthe celebration of the anniversary ofthe Revolution, put an end to hisexistence, by placing himself beforethe muzzle of an eighteen pounder,whilst in the act of being fired, andwhich, it is said, literally blew his headto atoms. His works exhibit greatingenuity, in reference to all the subjectsof which he treats, and show that,had he confined himself either to law,politics, science, or agriculture, hewould, probably, have attained eminencein either department.BELL, (ANDREW,) eras born at St.Andrew's, Cheshire, about the year1760. He was educated at the universitythere for the ministry of the churchof England ; and, after having receivedordination, he went out to theEast Indies, as a chaplain on the Company'sestablishment. It was herethat his observation of the Hindoomode of writing in sand, and otherpeculiarities of tuition, led to his introducinga similar practice into the MaleAsylum, at Madras, of which he wassuperintendent. On his return to England,in 1798, he published An Experimentin Education made at the MaleAsylum, at Madras ; and, in 1799,Instructions for Conducting Schools onthe Madras System. The utility of hisplan was acknowledged ; but the creditof it was, for some time, usurped byMr. Lancaster, whose system, thoughbut a counterpart of Dr. Bell's, wasimmediately adopted, and put intopractice as original. Each had hispartisans, and a controversy was forsome time carried on by both parties,which ended in the formation of twosocieties : one called the National Society,for the establishment of schoolson the plan of Dr. Bell ; and the othercalled the British and Foreign SchoolSociety, for establishments on that ofLancaster ; in our memoir of whomwe have pointed out the differencebetween the two. Dr. Bell was, forsome time, rector of Swanage, in Dor-seashore; and was subsequently presented,by the Bishop of Durham, tothe mastership of Shirburn Hospital.in that diocese and county. Besidesthe works before-mentioned, he is theauthor of A Sermon, preached at Lambeth,on the 28th of June, 1807, onthe Education of the Poor under animproved system; The Madras Schools;Elements of Tuition ; and Elements ofTuition, containing the English School,or the History, Analysis, and Applicationof the Madras System of Education.WAKEFIELD, (EDWARD,) eldestson of Mrs. Priscilla Wakefield, theauthoress, was born about 1765 ; andhaving adopted agriculture as hiscalling, he, tor some years, held an extensivefarm in the county of EssexHe, however, has become more celebratedas a writer than as a practicalagriculturist. He possesses an extensiveknowledge of agriculture, asconnected with political economy ; andhis information has, on various occasions,been sought by committees ofthe house of commons. In 1808, hewas engaged in a controversy with Mr.Cobbett, relative to the importation offoreign corn, and the capability of thecountry to raise a sufficiency of foodfor its inhabitants. He was subsequentlyengaged in making a surveyof Ireland, the result of which appeared,in 1812, in two large quartovolumes, with the title of, An Accountof Ireland, Statistical and Political.This work has, by some of the partisansof the present system in Ireland,been accused ot* want of candour; butit is undoubtedly a valuable production ,and contains a mass of information,which is not to be met with elsewhere.'* Mr. wakefield," says one of theauthors of Public Characters of al!Nations, " ranks high among the philanthropistsand genuine patriots of hisday, and was one of the gentlemenwhose inquiry into the state of mad-housesproduced the dismissal of Dr.APPENDIX.Monro and Mr. Hallam from BethlehemHospital."SPENCE, (WILLIAM,) is known asthe originator of the political economydoctrine called Spencer, and as presidentof the Wilderness AgriculturalSociety. He was born in Yorkshire,near Hull, about 1770. At the beginningof the present century, he attractedmuch notoriety by an attempt to removethe popular prejudices of thiscountry from their favourite pursuitsof trade and commerce, to a love ofthe practice of agriculture ; in aid ofwhich doctrine he advanced opinionswhich were ingeniously supported, butthe general fallacy of which were soonexposed, so that the impression madeby his Britain independent of Commerce,printed in 1807, soon disappeared.He is also the author of TheRadical Cause of the Present Distressof the West India Planters, 1807 ; and,in 1808, he reiterated, but with littlesuccess, the principles laid down in hisfirst work, in a publication, entitled,Agriculture the Source of the Wealthof Britain.WEST, (SiR EDWARD,) was bornin 1783, and losing his father, whenyoung, was brought up under the careof Sir Martin Folkes, and his grandfather,Admiral West. He was educatedat Harrow, and University College,Oxford, where he obtained a fellowship,and, in 18 >7, took the degree of M. A.He had, in the meantime, entered himselfa student of the Temple, and shortlyafter his call to the bar, he published avery admirable Treatise on the Law ofExtents. He then turned his attentionto political economy, but, apprehensiveof injury in his profession, published thefruits of his labours in an anonymouswork, entitled An Essay on the applicationof Capital to Land. This is avery superior performance, and thenext, perhaps, in importance to thecelebrated work of Adam Smith. Fromthis great political economist, however,our author differs in many points, andhe, in particular, refutes the propositionof the former, also adopted by Malthus,Say, and others, that the fall of profits,as countries advance in opulence, is aconsequence of the accumulation of capital.His reputation for knowledge andintegrity in his profession continued tuincrease till 1822 ; when he received theappointment of Recorder of Bombay,and was, at the same time, knighted,He arrived in India, in February, 1823,and on the establishment of the SupremeCourt of Judicature, at Bombay,he was appointed chief justice. Hisconduct in this character was, at thesame time, enlightened, liberal, andconstitutional. He refused to sanctionthe regulation of the court of Calcutta,for fettering the liberty of the press ;reformed the police; and amelioratedthe condition of prisoners at Bombay.In 1826, he published a tract,On the Price of Corn and the Wagesof Labour; originally designed as arefutation of some of the errors of Mr.Ricardo's Protection to Agriculture,and suggesting, it is said, the preciseplan upon which the late Mr. Canning'scorn bill of 1826 was framed. He diedof a fever, at Poona, on the 18th ofAugust,. 1828, leaving a widow, whodid not survive him quite two months,and an only daughter.PARNELL, (Sir HENRY,) son ofthe late Sir John Parnell, chancellor ofthe Exchequer, and grandson of thepoet of the same name, deserves mentionas a political economist of no ordinarytalent. He was born in Ireland,about 1784; and, after havingcompleted his education at TrinityCollege, Dublin, was early introducedinto the house of commons as memberfor Queen's County. In parliament hehas been always distinguished by hisfinancial knowledge, and by the activepart he has taken in all measures relativeto political economy. He is anadvocate for the abrogation of the cornlaws, and his writings upon this subjecthave gained him merited reputation.Besides his Treatise on the Corn Tradeand Agriculture, he is the author of AHistorical Apology for the Roman Catholics; History of the Penal Lawsagainst the Irish Catholics ; and ThePrinciples of Currency and Exchangeillustrated. But he is best known as awriter on finance, by his Observationson Paper Money, Banking, andOvertaking ; one of those works, saysa writer in The Edinburgh Review,that was called forth from the ruinouseffects that had resulted to allPOLITICAL ECONOMISTS.classes of persons, from the tamperingwith the currency ;" and in which willbe found many pertinent and importantobservations. Few members are listenedto with more attention in thehouse, on the subject of finance, thanSir Henry ; and his writings on thesubject, may be ranked among themost useful, if not the most brilliantof their class.M'CULLOCH, (JOHN ROBERT,) oneof our most talented writers on thescience of political economy, &c., wasborn in Scotland, about 17S8, and therereceived his education. He seems tohave early turned his attention to ournational policy, and in 1816, he publishedAn Essay on the Question of Reducingthe National Debt ; which was followed,in the same year, by his Essay on aReduction of the Interest of the NationalDebt; proving that this is theonly possible means of relieving thedistresses of the commercial and agriculturalinterests. He is, however,principally known by his work On PoliticalEconomy; in which he opposes,with great ability, the theory of Mr.Malthus, respecting population. Awriter in The Edinburgh Review, saysof ir, ' With some of the controversialspirit, from which it is so difficult todisengage such a work, with some dogmatism,now and then, on debateableground, the knowledge condensed in it,the clearness of conception, the vigourand reach of thought, and the earnestness,simplicity, and strength of style,make it a book valuable to its readers,and, what is of the highest consequence,readable with pleasure." Mr. M'Cul-loch has lately been appointed professorof political economy at theLondon University.SADLER, (MICHAEL THOMAS,) wasborn about the year 1790, at Leeds, inYorkshire, where he now carries on thebusiness of a banker. The prominentpart he had been in the habit of takingat all public meetings of the town,on the Tory side, at length attractedthe attention of the Duke of Newcastle,who procured his return to parliamentfor Newark. In the debates on theIrish poor laws, and the Catholicquestion, he was a frequent speaker;and his speech in opposition to theDuke of Wellington's bill for CatholicEmancipation, was printed, and produceda considerable temporary impression.In 1829, he published awork, entitled Ireland: its Evils, andtheir Remedies, &c. ; in which he contends,that emancipation is not thepanacea required for the improvementof that part of the United Kingdom;but the introduction of the poor laws ;and the cultivation, upon a large scale,of the waste and bog lands, &c. Earlyin 1830, he published, in three volumes,octavo, The Law of Population :a Treatisein six books, in Disproof of theSuperfecundity of Human Beings, anddeveloping the Real Principle of theirIncrease; written principally in oppositionto the principles developed by thecelebrated work on population, by theRev. R. T. Malthus, whose theory he denouncesas inconsistent with Christianity,and even with the purest forms ofdeism. The Edinburgh Review, whichhad unfavourably criticised his work onIreland, was still more severe upon this.We did not expect," says the reviewer,a good book from Mr. Sadler ; and itis well that we did not ; for he has givenus a very bad one." Justice, however,is by no means done to Mr. Sadler'sbook ; which, though deficient, perhaps,in logical precision, and scientific technicalities,contains a bold and far fromsuperficial attack upon the theory ofMr. Malthus. A very able critic, inThe Atlas Newspaper, has given amasterly review of the work in question,in which the captious objectionsof The Edinburgh Review are forciblyrefuted. Mr. Sadler is the author ofsome fugitive verses, of which a specimenappeared in The Amulet, for 1829.As a speaker in parliament, Mr. Sadlerhas not realized the expectations heraised by his first address ; but, as awriter on political economy, he is, ifnot the most powerful, amojig the leastsophisticated of the present day.SENIOR, (WILLIAM NASSAU,) wasborn in 1790; and, about 1808, was sentto Magdalen College, Oxford, where hegraduated B.A. in 1811 ; M.A. in 1814;and obtained a fellowship and a venetianscholarship. He appears to haveearly given his attention to the studyof political economy ; his known predilectionfor which procured him theAPPENDIX.of political economy, onIts establishment at Oxford, in 1825, byHenry Drummond, Esq. His introductorylecture was printed in 1827 ;and, in 1828, appeared his three lectureson the transmission of the preciousmetals from this country, andthe mercantile theory of wealth. In1829, he published two lectures onpopulation, with a correspondence betweenhimself and the celebrated R.Malthus ; and, in 1830, in which yearhe was obliged to resign his professorship,according to the stipulations ofits founder, he printed three lectureson the cost of obtaining money ; andthe same number on the rate of wages,The Quarterly Review justly calls Mr.Senior "a political economist of weightand name ;" and adds, speaking of hislectures on the rate of wages, " we aregratified to find this able writer completelyagreeing with us on several ofthe points in which we ventured todiffer most widely from the prevailingopinions ; as, for instance, on the doctrineof absenteeism the limitation ofthe principle of free trade the separationof national wealth from nationalwelfare and the paramount importanceof a sufficiency of food to all otherconsiderations."RURAL AND DOMESTIC ECONOMISTS.BRADLEY, (RICHARD,) was bornabout 1676, and first made himselfknown by the contribution of twopapers to the Transactions of theRoyal Society : one on the motion ofthe sap in vegetables ; the other on thequick growth of moodiness in melons.Of this body he was chosen a fellow onthe 10th of November, 1724; and, inthe same year, is said to have procuredhis election as botanical professor, inthe University of Cambridge, by a pretendedverbal recommendation fromDr. Sheppard to Dr. Bentley. Hisignorance of the learned languages wassoon discovered, and, neglecting toread lectures on botany, a course wasdelivered by Dr. Martin. His conductgave great dissatisfaction to theuniversity, and it was in agitation todismiss him from his professorship,when he died on the 5th of May, 1732.Notwithstanding his classical deficiencyin his capacity of professor, he undoubtedlypossessed considerable botanicalknowledge, and had the meritof being the first who treated the subjectsof gardening and agriculture inaphilosophical manner. His workswere so numerous, that they comprisedtwo folio ; four quarto, and nearlytwenty octavo volumes; enumerated inNichols's Life of Bowyer. Amongstthem may be mentioned, his NewImprovement of Planting and Gardening,both Philosophical and Practical ;The Gentleman's and Gardener'sKalendar; Philosophical Accounts ofthe Works of Nature ; General Treatiseof Husbandry and Gardening;and his Dictionaries Botanical ;which, Dr. Pulteney says, was the firstattempt of the kind in England.These, though for the most partingenious compilations, were heldin high temporary repute, and wentthrough several editions ; but the progressof science has rendered thegreater part of his works, both onbotany and horticulture, obsolete.MILLER, (PHILIP,) called, for hisbotanical and agricultural knowledge,Hortulanorum Princeps, was born inNorth Britain, in 1691. He was educatedby his father, who was superintendentof the garden, at Chelsea,belonging to the Apothecaries' Company,to which appointment he himselfsucceeded in 1722. He soon becanircelebrated for his superior mode o!raising exotic plants ; and gave a proofRURAL AND DOMESTIC ECONOMISTS.of his knowledge of vegetation as ascience, by his two successive publicationsof The Gardener's and Florist'sDictionary, two volumes, octavo ; andThe Gardener's Kalendar, a singleoctavo, which has gone through numerouseditions. To one of them, in1761, he appended A Short Introductionto a Knowledge of the Science ofBotany, with five plates, illustrative ofthe system of Linnaeus, to which hehad, at this time, become a convert ;though formerly a staunch disciple ofTournefort and Ray. He had previouslycommunicated some papers tothe Transactions of the Royal .Society,of which he was a fellow, and publishedA Catalogue of Trees, Shrubs,Plants, and Flowers, both exotic anddomestic, which' are prepared for salein the gardens near London ; accompaniedwith twenty-one coloured plates,after the drawings of Van Huysen. Itwas succeeded by his celebrated work,The Gardener's Dictionary; whichmay be said to have laid the foundationof all the horticultural taste and knowledgein Europe. It went througheight editions during the life of theauthor ; and a very excellent one hassince been published by the late regiusprofessor of botany at the Universityof Cambridge, the Rev. ThomasMartin, B. D. who incorporated withit the substance of all modern botanicaldiscoveries. In 1755, Miller commencedpublishing his Figures ofPlants, adapted to his Dictionary,which he completed in 1760, havingextended them to three hundredcoloured plates, with descriptions andremarks, making two volumes, folio.His object was, to give one or moreof the species of each known genus,all from living plants; which he accomplishedas far as possible, and hisplates exhibit more dissections than anythat had appeared previously, in thiscountry. He continued to attend tohis duties and favourite pursuits, tillageobliged him to resign the chargeof the Company's garden ; and hedied soon after, at Chelsea, on the18th of December, 1771. No Englishbotanist, perhaps, ever had a morethorough acquaintance with its principles,as a science, than Mr. Miller;and his works exhibit that excellencewhich render them authorities in allsubjects upon which they profess totreat. His Gardener's Dictionary is amonument of intellectual and acquiredknowledge and perception, of whichEngland may be proud. Linnaeusbestowed upon it his unqualified praise,and pronounced it a botanical as wellas a horticultural work. Miller wasa member of the Horticultural Societyof Florence, and maintained an extensivecommunication relative to seedswith all parts of the world. The ampleHerbarium, which he left behind him,was purchased by Sir Joseph Banks.BROWN, (LANCELOT,) known by thesoubriquet of Capability Brown, fromhis constant use of that word in referenceto the sites submitted to hisjudgment, was born at Kirkwall, inNorthumberland, in 1715. He cameearly to London, where he soon obtaineda high reputation as an ornamentalgardener, and established aschool, the chief merit of which consistedin its nearer approach to naturethan that of his predecessors. By histaste and management, and the greatcelebrity he obtained, he realized agood fortune ; and, in 1770, had thehonour to serve the office of high sherifffor the county of Huntingdon. He died,in great respectability, in 1773. Hedoes not seem to have written anywork ; but, as a practical horticulturaldesigner, was considered the mosteminent man of his day. " Nor washe," says a writer in The AnnualObituary, for 1819, " only an ableartist, but an honest man ; for, onbeing requested to improve the groundsat Hampton Court, he actually declinedthe hopeless task, out of respectto himself and his profession."DUFF, (JAMES, Earl of Fife,) thesecond son of W william, Earl of Fife, byhis second wife, was born at Banff, inScotland, in 1729. He was educatedwith a view to the law as his profession,and studied at the University ofEdinburgh ; but the death of his elderbrother, leaving him heir to the familytitle and honours, he returned home",and with the title of Lord Braco, commencedthe life of a country gentleman.A taste for agriculture, highly conduciveto the improvements of his patrimonialfortune, soon developed itselfAPPENDIX.in his lordship ; and in the course ofa fess years, the sides and tops of hills,on his father's lands, nearly inaccessible,and hitherto unproductive, beganto assume an aspect of fertility.Having previously sat in parliament,for the county of Moray, he succeededto his father's title and estate, in 1763,and immediately commenced a seriesof agricultural improvements upon theimmense possessions which he inherited.In the meantime he was notapassive spectator of political events ;and having given his support toministers, on the subject of the FrenchRevolution, he was, in 1793, created aBritish peer, try the title of Baron Fife.Towards the conclusion of the warwhich preceded the peace of Amiens,however, he openly declared hishostility to Mr. Pitt, and continued tooppose the measures of governmentuntil the accession to office of LordSidmouth, then Mr. Addington, towhom he gave his unqualified support,as well as to the subsequent administrationof Fox and Grenville. Hislabours, as an agriculturist, excitedthe wonder of the country in which hisestates lay. Previous to his death, whichtook place in 1809, he planted fourteenthousand acres; and so profitable didthis become, even during his own time,that the thinning alone sold, in oneyear, for 1,000. He also undertookworks of great public utility; dug acanal, from sixty to eighty feet wide,between a lake and the sea; and itmay be said, in direct opposition toNature, erected a harbour on theborders of the Moray Faith. He wasa frequent contributor to the annualvolumes of the Society for the Encouragementof Arts, &c., and during theprogress of his agricultural labours,received from that body two or threegold medals. He married, in 1760,Lady Dorothea, sole heiress of theEarl of Caithness; and is remarkablefor having made a will after the modelof the celebrated Mr. Thelluson, as faras the act of parliament to which thelatter gentleman's testament gave risewould permit him.HUNTER, (ALEXANDER,) wasborn at Edinburgh, in the year 1733,and received both his classical andmedical education at that university.In 1754, he studied his professionin London, arid went afterwards toFrance, where he became the pupil ofLaban, at Rouen, and of Petit, at Paris.On his return from abroad, he took hisdegree of M. D., at Edinburgh; andafter practising for a short time atGainsborough, removed to Beverley,where he remained till 1763, when hesettled at York, and continued to enjoyan extensive practice till his death,which occurred in May, 1809. Hewas a fellow of the Royal Societiesof London and Edinburgh, and distinguishedhimself by several publications,chemical, agricultural, andmedical. He was the founder of anagricultural society at York, and publishedthe writings of the variousmembers, in six volumes octavo, underthe title of Georgia Essays. He alsoprojected the plan of the Lunatic Asylum,in that city, which was openedfor the reception of patients, in 1777.In addition to the Georgia Essays, hepublished several other small agriculturaltreatises, and edited Evelyn'sSylva and Terra, in which he waspartially assisted by Sir Joseph Banksand others. Among his remaining worksare, A Lecture on the Sulphur Water ofHarrogate, and a singular publicationentitled, China Famulatrix Medicine ;or, Receipts in Cookery, worthy theNotice of those Medical Practitionerswho ride in their Chariots, &c.ANDERSON, (JAMES,) the son of afarmer, was born at Hermiston, nearEdinburgh, in the year 1739. At anearly age, he lost both his parents, andafter having received an ordinaryeducation, commenced the study ofagriculture on his paternal farm. Hesubsequently removed to another ofone thousand three hundred acres, inAberdeenshire, where he made someexperiments, of which he gave anaccount, in The Edinburgh WeeklyMagazine, under the name of Agricola,It was succeeded by his Inquiry intothe Nature of the Corn Laws; andEssays relating to Agriculture andRural Affairs, in three volumes, octavo,which procured him much reputation,and reached a fifth edition in 1800.In 1779, appeared his Inquiry intothe Causes that have retarded theAdvancement of Agriculture in Europe;K U K A L AND DOMESTIC ECONOMISTS.and in the following year, the Universityof Aberdeen conferred upon himthe degree of L. L. D. In 1783, hetook up his residence near Edinburgh,and, about the same period, printedProposals for establishing the NorthernBritish Fisheries, which produced arequest to him, from government, tosurvey the western coast of Scotland,with a view to obtain further informationon the subject. His report of thesurvey, which he, in consequence, made,was presented to the Treasury, in 1785,but he does not appear to have receivedany other reward than that oftheir approbation. He now resumedhis literary labours, and printed, in1789, Observations on Slavery ; and, in1791, commenced a weekly publication,called The Bee, which he carried on till1794, making eighteen volumes, octavo.In this, he not only supplied thegreater part of the anonymous papers,but all those signed Senex, TimothyHairbrain, and Alcibiades. After publishing,among other works, Remarkson the Poor Laws in Scotland, and APractical Treatise on Peat Moss, heremoved to London, and commenced aperiodical work, entitled, Recreationsm Agriculture, which, having reachedsix octavo volumes, he discontinued inthe month of March, 1802. These,and other publications too numerous tomention, procured Dr. Anderson considerablereputation as an agriculturist,and led to a correspondence betweenhim and Washington, which appearedin 1800. His writings, which evinceconsiderable learning, energy, andpenetration, led the way to many improvementsin agriculture ; and, inpolitical as well as rural economy,tended to important and beneficial results.He died on the 15th of October,1808, leaving a widow, who was hissecond wife, and six children, the survivorsof a family of thirteen, by hisfirst. He was a contributor to severalperiodicals besides those of which hewas the establishes and wrote thearticles Dictionary, Winds, Monsoons,&c., for the Encyclopaedia Britannica.COLQUHOUN, (PATRICK,) a talentedwriter on civil and domesticeconomy, was born at Dumbarton, inScotland, in 1745, and went, early inlife, to America, to enter upon a commercialoccupation. He returned toScotland; at the age of twenty-three,and settled at Glasgow, as a merchant ;in which city he became lord provost,and chairman of the chamber of commerce.In 1792, he removed to London,where he was made a police magistrate;a post in which he displayed greatjudgment, activity, and application ;and, in 1796, he gave the world theresult of his experience, in a publication,entitled, A Treatise on the Policeof the British Metropolis; a work thatattracted general attention, and forwhich the University of Glasgow honouredhim with the degree of L. L. D.This was followed, in 1800, by a workOn the Police of the River Thames,suggesting a plan, afterwards adopted,for the protection of property on thatriver, and in the adjacent parts of themetropolis. He resigned his officialsituation, about 1818, and died, on the25th of April, 1820. Besides the aboveworks, he published A Treatise onIndigence ; A Treatise on the Population,Wealth, Power, and Resourcesof the British Empire ; and a Tract onthe Education of the LabouringClasses.MARSHALL, (WILLIAM,) an ingeniouswriter on agricultural and ruraleconomy, born in 1745, was, as hehimself says, " a farmer bred to traffic,and returned again to the plough."Having turned his attention to theadvancement of agricultural knowledge,he printed, in 1778, Minutes ofAgriculture, made on a farm of threehundred acres, of various soils, nearCroydon, in Surrey. This singularlywritten, but practically useful work,was succeeded by a quarto volume ofExperiments and Observations concerningAgriculture and the Weather ;and an octavo one, entitled, ArbutusAmerican ; or an Alphabetical Catalogueof Forest Trees and Shrubs,natives of the United States of America.This appeared in 1785, about whichtime he commenced a journey intovarious counties of England, agriculturalhistories of which, he continuedto publish from 1787 to 1796. In theprogress of these labours, he turned hisattention to planting and ornamentalgardening, upon which subjects he6 o uAPPENDIX.published A Practical Treatise, whichreached a third edition. In 1801,he published a pamphlet on TheAppropriation and Enclosure of Commonableand Intermixed Lands; in1804, a work on The Landed Propertyof England ; also, on the Managementof Landed Estates; and, in 1808, appearedhis Review of the Reports ofthe Board of Agriculture, in the formationof which he aided. He died, atPickering, in Yorkshire, in 1818.COCHRANE, (ARCHIBALD, Earlof Dundonald.) This scientific andtalented agricultural and domesticeconomist, father of the celebratedAdmiral Lord Cochrane, and descendedfrom an ancient Scotch family of thename of Blair, was born on the 1st ofJanuary, 1748-9. In 1764, he enteredas a cornet in the third dragoonguards, which he soon resigned for thepost of midshipman, under CaptainDouglas, and he was afterwards actinglieutenant on board a vessel stationedon the coast of Guinea, where he wasremarkable for always appearing withouta hat, when off duty, for the purpose,he said, of " keeping his headcool." He succeeded to his familyhonours on the death of his father, in1778, and having already addictedhimself to scientific pursuits, he nowdetermined to devote both his time andfortune to the trial of a variety ofuseful experiments. His first discoverywas that of the virtue possessed bycoal tar, to secure ship timber from theravages of the worm, for the exclusivemanufacture of which he obtained apatent. He then turned his attentionto the preservation of ship bottoming,and having discovered a very durablewood for that purpose, it was adoptedby the British government, and thesubject of our memoir had the patentsecured to him for twenty years; butprevious to the expiration of thatperiod, his improvement was supersededby the introduction of copperbottoms. His next great discovery wasthe use of refuse salt for the manure ofland, which he first recommended tothe notice of agriculturists in 1785. Hisrecommendation has since been actedupon; and he further enforced itsutility, in 1795, by the publication ofhis Treatise on the" Connexion, betweenAgriculture and Chemistry. In 1802,he took out a patent for extractingfrom lichens, and from certain otherplants, a substitute for gum Senegal.He made a variety of experiments uponalum stone ; and procured a patent forimproving the method of preparinghemp flax, by which the improved sailcloth,used in the royal navy, waspreserved from mildew. Lord Dun-donaldhas expended nearly his wholefortune in speculations, the invariablefailure of which, as a matter of profit,is said to have reduced him to greatnecessities. Of the extent of these,some idea may be formed from the followingnotice, in The Annual Addressof the Registrars of the Literary Fund,in 1823. " A man born in the highclass of the old British peerage," observesthat record, " has devoted hisacute and investigating mind solely tothe prosecution of science ; and hispowers have prevailed in the pursuit.The discoveries effected by his scientificresearches, with its direction altogetherto utility, have been in manyinstances beneficial to the community,and in many, have been the sources ofwealth to individuals. To himself alone,they have been unprofitable ; for, witha superior disdain, or (if you please,)a culpable disregard of the goods offortune, he has scattered around him,the produce of his intellect, with alavish and wild hand. To this man,thus favoured by nature, and thuspersecuted by fortune, we have beennappy to offer some little alleviation ofhis sorrows ; and, to prevent him frombreathing his last under the oppressivesense of the ingratitude of his species."Besides the work already named, he isthe author of A Treatise on the Manufactureof Salt ; another on Coal Tar ;A Memorial to the Directors of theEast India Company ; and, The Principlesof Chemistry applied to theImprovement of the Practice of Agriculture.He has been thrice married :first, in 1774, to Ann, daughter ofCaptain James Gilchrist, R. N., bywhom he had six sons and onedaughter; secondly, to Mrs.Mayne, in1788; and, thirdly, in 1819, to AnnaMaria, the eldest daughter of the lateFrancis Powder, Esq., of the MiddleTemple, the Irish historian, by whomhe had one daughter.RURAL AND DOMESTIC ECONOMISTS.REPTON, (HUMPHREY,) a writeron rural economy, and the inventor ofslides and sketches, to shew the effectsin landscape and scenery, was born atBury St. Edmund's, Suffolk, in 1752.He early distinguished himself for asuperior taste in landscape scenery andpicturesque gardening; in connexionwith which pursuit, he published severalpopular works : the chief of thesewere, Sketches and Hints on LandscapeGardening; Observations on theTheory and Practice of LandscapeGardening, including some Remarkson Grecian and Gothic Agriculture,&c. with a view to establish fixedprinciples in the respective arts ; and,A Treatise on the Introduction of IndianArchitecture and Gardening. Healso published a literary work, called,Variety, a Collection of Essays. Hedied at his residence, in Essex, on the24th of March, 1818. Most of his productionswere embellished with platesfrom his own drawings ; and his pencil,for twenty years, furnished the vignettesto The Polite Repository.Bellman, (JOHN,) was born aboutthe year 1755, and has long been consideredone of the most eminentagriculturists in the kingdom. He was,for many years, one of the judges ofthe Smithfield cattle show, and was theconfidential adviser of Bakewell, whosemanner of treating sheep was pursuedby Mr. Bellman in the south, where heeffected those changes in the habitsand constitution of the South downsheep, which gave them the high reputationthey at present enjoy. In 1800,twenty-seven of the nobility, and principalland owners, in the county ofSussex, presented him with a silvercup, for " his exertions and assiduity inmaking the merits of this valuablebreed of sheep generally known anddemanded ;" and, in 1805, he was presentedwith a silver cup, by his Gracethe Duke of Bedford. In 1819, theBoard of Agriculture awarded him thegold medal, for the best cultivated farmin Sussex ; and several medals, at variousperiods, have also been presentedto him, for the exhibitions of his breedof sheep at Smithfield. During theexistence of the Board of Agriculture,Mr. Bellman was frequently consultedby the members, and was several timesexamined as a witness before the Houseof Commons, on agricultural questions.He retired from his labours in 1829,when the principal agriculturists presentedhim with a silver tureen, " forthe zeal he had, at all times, evinced,for upwards of half a century, and hisreadiness to come forward, on everyoccasion, to promote the cause ofagriculture, and particularly, to improvethe breed of South-down sheep."CURWEN, (JOHN CHRISTIAN,) wasborn in July, 1756, and at the age oftwenty, married a Miss Tasman. Hispaternal name was Christian, but, onhis second marriage, he took the nameof Curwen, being that of his wife'sfather. He was made high sheriff ofCumberland, in 1784, and, in 1786, hewas returned to parliament for Carlisle.He retained his seat till 1812, when hewas thrown out by Mr. Fawcett, butin1816, was re-elected; and also, in1818. At the general election of 1820,he was returned for the county ofCumberland, and again in 1826. Hedied on the llth of December, 1828, athis seat, Warrington Hall. Mr. Curwenwas a staunch Whig, but did not oftenspeak in parliament. He is principallyknown as the father of what is calledthe " soiling system ; " or confininganimals to the spot where they arefed, by which means a more abundantquantity of dress is collected and prepared,to be returned to the partly exhaustedsoil, whence the food has beenproduced. The drill husbandry wasalso successfully adopted by Mr. Cur-wen,who appears to have neglectedno expedient, which could in any waytend to the perfection of agriculturalscience. He published two speeches,made by him in parliament, anda pamphlet, entitled, Hints on theEconomy of Feeding Stock, and Betteringthe Condition of the Poor.BROWN, (ROBERT,) was born atthe village of East Linton, in Scotland,in the year 1757. Relinquishing tradefor agricultural pursuits, he commencedhis career as such, at Misfortune, butsoon after removed to his more celebratedabode, at Marble. Here hefollowed the bent of his genius withthe most singular success, and has becomecelebrated throughout Europe,APPENDIX.for his excellent writings on subjectsconnected with rural economy. HisTreatise on Rural Affairs; and hisarticles in The Edinburgh Farmer'sMagazine (of which he was conductorduring fifteen years), display greatpractical knowledge, and intellectualenergy. Many of his articles havebeen translated into the French andGerman languages ; and, " RobertBrown, of Marble," says a writer inThe Gardener's Magazine, " is quotedby continental writers, as a standardauthority on agricultural subjects.STEUART, (Sir HENRY, Baronet,)said to be a descendant of Robert theSecond, the first sovereign of the line ofthe Stuart, was born in Scotland, inthe year 1759, and received his educationprincipally at the schools anduniversities of his native country. Hemarried, in 1787, Lillian, daughter ofHugh Seton, Esq., of Touch ; and onthe 22nd of May, 1815, was created abaronet of Great Britain, with remainder,in failure of male issue, in favourof his only daughter. He early turnedhis attention to the improvement of hisestate, Wharton House, in Lanarkshire,where he has succeeded, to a wonderfulextent, in the transplanting of treeswithout mutilation, only losing oneout of forty-five upon an average. Hisestate was visited, in September, 1823,by a committee of The Highland Society,in whose Transactions, the observationsmade on the occasion, havebeen inserted. From this report itappears that Sir Henry has contrivedto produce, from a soil of clay, loam,and gravel, extensive plantations ofthe most exuberant luxuriance, to raiseup the fir-tree instead of the thorn, themyrtle instead of the briar, and toirrigate dry grounds, with floods ofwater. " How has he effected all this ?"says a writer in The Quarterly Review,the solution is easy: by investigatingthe laws of vegetable life, and givingfacilities to the operations of nature ;by tracing the relation of plants tosoils, and of soils to plants ; by studyingthe conditions under which vegetationadvances or declines ; and by placinghis subjects in the condition required."A particular account of Sir HenryStewart's agricultural theory, and hismode of putting it into practice, isgiven in his Planter's Guide; or aPractical Essay on the best Methodof giving immediate effect to Wood,by the removal of large Trees andUnderwood ; being an attempt to placethe Art, and that of General Arboriculture,on Phytological and Fixed Principles; interspersed with Observationson General Planting, and the Improvementof Real Landscape; originallyintended for the. Climate ofScotland. This is a very valuablework, full of ingenious remarks andcurious learning, and is so skilfullywritten, that any one reading it withattention, could never fail to imbibe ataste for phytological study.LAWRENCE, (JOHN,) was born atColchester, in Essex, about the year1759. He devoted the early part ofhis life to literature, and pursued it, atintervals, during his subsequent careeras an agriculturist. He had, for sometime,a farm in Essex, where he obtainedthat accurate knowledge of livestock,and particularly of the horse,which is displayed in his writings onthe subject. His Philosophical andPractical Treatise on the Horse appearedin 17%, and reached a thirdedition in 1809. It is a very popularwork, and contains many suggestionswith respect to the jus animation, orright of animals, which have beenadopted by parliament, and carried intoeffect in Mr. Martin's Act. His otherpublications are, Rights and Remedies,or The Theory and Practice of Politics ;The New Farmer's Kalendar, whichhas reached a fifth edition ; The ModernLand Steward ; A General Treatiseon Cattle; History of the Horse,and Declination of the Race Horse inEngland ; and The Farmer's PocketKalendar. Some other minor worksare ascribed to him, under fictitiousnames ; besides which, he was theauthor of several tracts on the slavetrade, &c., and of several articles inthe Medical Journal, and Agricultural,and other magazines.SOMERVILLE, (JOHN SOUTHEY,Baron,) was born in 1765, and educatedat Harrow and St. John's College,Cambridge, where he graduated M. A.in 1785. He was one of the lords ofthe bedchamber to George the Third ;RURAL AND DOMESTIC ECONOMISTS.-177and, in 1796, was elected one of thesixteen representative peers for Scotland.His agricultural knowledgecaused him to be elected president ofthe Board of Agriculture, on its establishment; but ill health soon obligedhim to resign this situation. He thenwent to Spain and Portugal, where hisattention was directed to the Merinosheep, a stock of which he broughtwith him to England. To him mayalso be given, it Is said, the credit offounding the Smithfield Club; and,during the latter part of his life, hedirected the public attention very muchto the improvement of the fisheries onour coasts, for the supply of the Londonmarkets. He died on the 5th ofOctober, 1819, at Vevay, in Switzerland; and his remains being broughtto England, were deposited in thefamily vault, at Somerville Aston, Gloucestershire.His publications consistof An Address to the Board of Agricultureon the subject of Sheep andWool ; System of the Board of Agriculture; and Facts and Observations relativeto Sheep, Wool, Oxen, Ploughs, &c.London, (JOHN CLAUDIUS,) wasborn in Scotland, about 1768, wherehe was brought up to rural employments,and first distinguished himself,in 1804, by the publication, at Edinburgh,of his Observations on theFormation and Management of Ornamentaland Useful Plantations ; or,the Theory and Practice of LandscapeGardening, and on Gaining and EmbankingLand from Rivers, or theSea, illustrated by ten plates. In 1805,he was encouraged to print a secondoctavo volume, at Edinburgh, entitled,A Short Treatise on some Improvementslately made in Hot-houses, towhich he subsequently added twovolumes on the same subject. In thefollowing year, 1806, about which periodhe commenced farmer, in the vicinity ofLondon, he printed a work, in twovolumes, quarto, with thirty-two engravings,entitled, A Treatise on Forming,Managing, and Improving CountryResidences, and on the Choice ofStations appropriate to every class ofPurchasers. This was followed, in1811, by a work, illustrated with fortyplates, entitled, Designs for Laying outFarms arid Farming Buildings in theScotch Style, adapted to England ;comprising an Account of the introductionof the Berwickshire Husbandryinto Middlesex and Oxfordshire. Hisnext works, in succession, were, apamphlet on the mode of Roofing withPaper ; An Immediate and EffectualMode of obtaining the Rental of theLanded Property in England, and renderingGreat Britain independent ofother Nations, for a Supply of Breadand Corn ; Encyclopaedia of Gardening;and Encyclopaedia of Agriculture.This was followed by his Gardener'sMagazine, and Register of Rural andDomestic Improvement ; which stillcontinues to appear periodically, and isthe most popular, as well as the mostuseful, work of its class. In 1829, heprinted, in two volumes, octavo, hisMagazine of Nati-al History ; and inthe same year appeared his Encyclopaediaof Plants Mr. London is a fellowof the Linnaean, Horticultural,Geological, and Zoological Societies ;and has long been esteemed one of thebest writers on rural economy andlandscape gardening of the presentcentury.KNIGHT, (THOMAS ANDREW,) wasborn about 1768, and having receiveda good education, became early attachedto the study of natural history,and, in particular, directed his attentionto the economy of vegetation. In1797, he published, in one volume,duodecimo, his work On the Culture ofthe Apple and Pear, and on the makingCyder and Perry, which reached afifth edition ; and, in 1802, appearedhis Doubts respecting the Efficacy ofDr. Forth's Plaster in RenovatingTrees. In 1803, he published, in onequarto volume, his Pomona Here-forensic; besides which, he is theauthor of numerous articles in thePhilosophical Transactions, and othermiscellaneous collections. On the deathof the Earl of Dartmouth, he succeededhim as president of the HorticulturalSociety ; and some of the most valuablepapers in the possession of that bodyare from his hand. On the subjects ofwhich he treats, few writings are moreingenious than Mr. Knight's, and theyhave done much to turn public attentionto vegetable physiology, as importantto the advancement of horticultureAPPENDIX.PARKINSON, (RICHARD,) was bornin Yorkshire, about 1768; and, accordingto remarks in one of his own works,was many years a practical farmer inEngland, two in America, and two inIreland. His writings on the subjectsof rural, practical, and experimentalagricultural economy are, The ExperiencedFarmer, printed in two volumes,octavo, 1798 ; between which year and1805, he produced his Tour in America,also, in two volumes, octavo. Inthe following year appeared his EnglishPractice of Agriculture exemplified inthe Management of a Farm in Ireland,in one volume, octavo ; followed, in1808, by his Observations on Gypsumas a Manure. In 1810, in two volumes,octavo, he produced A Treatise on theBreeding and Management of LiveStock; and, in 1811, A General Viewof the Agriculture of Huntingdonshire.MACDONALD, (ALEXANDERWENTWORTH, Lord,) was born in December,1773, and spent the early partof his life as an officer in the tenthHussars. He afterwards raised a corpsof Fencible, of which he continued incommand as long as that descriptionof force was considered necessary forthe protection of the kingdom ; having,in the meantime, been returned to parliamentfor the borough of Salts,which he represented for several sessions.On the 12th of September,1793, he succeeded his father in thetitle and family estates, which he continuedto hold till the 19th of June,1824, when he died unmarried, withoutissue. We have included him inthe present class, on account of theextensive rural and agricultural improvements,which he introduced uponhis large estates in the Hebrides. Heconstructed, with the assistance of government,one hundred miles of publicroad in the isle of Skye, and built tenhandsome piers, for the encouragementof trade, and the protection of ships.He was also greatly instrumental inpromoting the manufacture of kelp,and the cultivation of hemp, amonghis tenants ; not one of whom, he usedto boast, was ever compelled to emigratefrom his land.Mocks, (WILLIAM Alexander,)was born in Wales, about 1774,and completed his education at AllSouls' College, Oxford, where he obtaineda fellowship, and took the degreeof M. A. in 1799. In 1802, hewas returned to parliament for Boston,in Lincolnshire, and continued torepresent that town till 1820, when hetook his seat as member for Cheltenham.He took an active part in politicson the Whig side, but is accordeda place in this work on account of hisspirited and extensive exertions inrecovering land from the sea. This heeffected, in the first instance, on a veryconsiderable tract, on which he builtthe town of Tre Madoc, in Wales.He next undertook the Herculean taskof shutting out the waves from theTraeth Mawr, a large bay, on theverge of Caernarvonshire, covering anextent of four thousand acres, by anembankment of nearly a mile in length,and wide enough for carriages to passwith safety. The completion of thisscheme has been retarded by difficultiesarising from the times ; but it haslong been in a state of forwardnesssufficient to admit of its being traversedby persons on foot and on horseback.So successful a barrier to the ocean hasseldom been produced ; and it is to belamented that Mr. Mattocks has notpublished some account of the principlesupon which he has proceeded.PAINTERS.RICHARDSON, (JONATHAN,) wasborn about the year 1665, and, afterhaving served his apprenticeship to ascrivener, entered himself a pupil withRiley, the portrait painter. But thoughhe had a strong and natural inclinationfor art, he was deficient in genius,and, but for his writings, would scarcelyhave been entitled to biographical commemoration.The dearth of talent,however, at the period he lived, causedhim to rise to the summit of his professionafter the death of Kneller andDahl ; of a head, indeed, he was justlyreckoned one of the best English paintersthat had hitherto appeared ; butthere, it is said, his excellence ended ;for he drew nothing well below it, andwas void of imagination, dignity, andgrace. No one, however, knew betterhow to lay down maxims for attainingexcellence in art ; and had Richardsonpainted as well as he wrote, few nameswould have stood higher among artists.His Essay on the Whole Art of Criticism,as it relates to Painting, and AnArgument in Behalf of the Science ofa Connoisseur, published in one octavovolume, in 1719, are too well known torequire eulogium, both to the studentand the general reader. Mr. Richardsonhad a son, to whom he was mostaffectionately attached ; and in conjunctionwith whom he published AnAccount of some of the Statues, BasReliefs, Drawings, and Pictures, inItaly, &c. ; arid Explanatory Notes andRemarks on Milton's Paradise Lost,with the Life of the Author, and aDiscourse on the Poem. " With respectto the notes," says Bishop Newton,"there are strange inequalities inthem, some extravagances, and manyexcellences ; there is often better sensethan grammar or English; and hesometimes hits the true meaning of theauthor surprisingly, and explains itproperly." Mr. Richardson retiredfrom business for some years before hisdeath, in consequence of a paralyticstroke in one arm. He died at the ageof eighty, in 1745, universally respected.His domestic character was singularlyamiable ; and it is an interesting testimonyof his parental affection, thatafter his retirement, he used almostevery day to draw his son's portrait.We should not forget to mention avolume of poems by Richardson, published,with notes by his son, in 1776,chiefly on moral and religious topics.They are deficient in poetical merit;yet, as Mr. Walpole observes, " Sucha picture of a good mind, serene inconscious innocence, is scarcely to befound. It is impossible not to love theauthor, or not to wish to be as sincerelyand intentionally virtuous."Jervis, (CHARLES,) was born inIreland, about the year 1675, andstudied, for a short time, under SirGodfrey Kneller, but derived morebenefit, it is said, from being allowedby Norris, frame-maker, and keeperof the pictures to King William andQueen Anne, to copy from the picturesin the royal collection. A gentleman,who purchased some of his drawingsfrom the cartoons at Hampton Court,furnished him also with money to visitFrance and Italy ; on his return fromwhich, he was hailed, in the eighthnumber of the Tatler, (April 18, 1709.)as " The last great painter Italy hadsent us." Pope, who took some lessonsfrom him in painting, has praised himin some lines, equally well known, andinapplicable to the subject of them. Hispretensions to merit were, indeed, despicable; yet, we are told by Lord Oxford,that " from the badness of the age'staste, and the dearth of good masters,Jervas sat at the head of his profession,and his own vanity thought no encomiumdisproportionate to his merit :yet he was defective in drawing, colouring,and composition ; and even inthat most necessary, and, perhaps, mosteasy talent of a portrait-painter like-appendix.ness. In general, his pictures are alight, flimsy, kind of fan painting, aslarge as life." Jervas was not onlyvain of his professional, but of his personalqualifications : after distressingthe form of Lady Bridgewater's ear,with whom he affected to be violently inlove, he displayed his own, as the modelof perfection. A copy of a picturewhich he had drawn from Titian, somade him in love with his own performance,that, looking first at the oneand then at the other, with parentalcomplacency, he exclaimed, " Poorlittle Tit, how he would stare !" Jervaslaid claim also to the reputation of anauthor, in a translation of Don Quixotic,which he produced, as Pope saidof him, without understanding Spanish.Jervas died about the year 1740.THORNHILL, (SiR JAMES,) descendedfrom an ancient and respectablefamily in Dorsetshire, was born atWeymouth, in that county, in the year1676. Circumstances having compelledhis father to sell his paternal estate, itbecame necessary for young Thornhillto be educated for some profession,when he adopted that of painting, byhis own choice. The guardianship ofhim in London was undertaken by hisuncle, the celebrated Dr. Sydenham;who placed him under an artist of littlenote, and less merit. His own talent,however, supplied the want of properinstruction, and he had already acquiredsome reputation as a painter ofhistory, when he left England for thecontinent. After having visited theschools of Holland, Flanders, andFrance, he returned to England, andwas soon fully employed in historypainting, and the decorations of publicbuildings and palaces. Queen Anneappointed him to ornament the cupolaof St. Paul's, and to decorate an apartmentat Hampton Court with someemblematical subjects, relative to herown history, and that of her consort,George, Prince of Denmark. For thecupola of St. Paul's, he painted the historyof that apostle, in eight compartments,composed and designed in agrand style, and every way worthy ofhis pencil ; yet, for this, he could onlyobtain 40.v. a square yard, whilst LaFosse, the French painter, was paid2,000 for his work at Montague House.Thornhill was also state-painter to KingGeorge the First, as well as QueenAnne, by the former of whom he wasknighted ; and, in that monarch's reign,he acquired property enough to re-purchasehis family ebiate, and was electeda member of parliament for his nativetown. In 1724, he proposed to LordHalifax the foundation of a royal academy; but, his lordship taking no stepsto establish it, Sir James opened anacademy at his house in Covent Garden.He died in 1734, leaving a son,James, for whom he had procured theappointment of sergeant-painter, and adaughter, who was married to Hogarth.Among his principal productions, besidesthose already mentioned, are thegreat saloon and the refectory, atGreenwich Hospital ; the hall, at Blenheim; the altar-piece of All Souls'Chapel, Oxford ; the chapel at LordOxford's, at Simple ; the saloon, atMore Park, Hertfordshire ; and copiesof the cartoons at Hampton Court,which were purchased, after his death,by the Duke of Bedford, who subsequentlymade a present of them to theRoyal Academy. The works of SirJames Thornhill display a bold andinventive genius, tasteful design, andgreat firmness and freedom of pencil ;and he only wanted a greater degree ofcorrectness, and a more perfect tone ofcolouring, to make him equal to anyartist of his time. He left behind hima few etchings, executed in a lightspirited style ; among which, we maymention one representing Adam andEve.\VOOTTON, (JOHN,) a painter ofmore celebrity than talent, was bornabout the year 1680, and flourished inEngland from 1720, until within a fewTears of his death. He was a pupil ofjohn Wick, and was much employedin painting animals engaged m thechase. Walpole, by whom he is praisedextravagantly, says, that he was paidforty guineas for a single horse, thesize of life, and twenty guineas, ifsmaller. Seven of his pictures, relativeto fox-hunting, have been engraved byCanot, and there is one by Bacon, ofhis Battle of Culloden, though heseldom attempted historical painting.Wootton amassed a handsome fortune,which enabled him to build a house inPAINTERS.Cavendish Square, where he residedtill his death, in 1765.A IKM AN, (WILLIAM,) the son ofan advocate at the Scot's bar, was bornat Carne, in Scotland, on the 24th ofOctober, 1682. He was intended forhis father's profession, but devotedhimself, from choice, to the fine arts,and particularly to painting, which hestudied first in England, and afterwardsat Rome. Whilst abroad, hetravelled to Constantinople and Smyrna,and was absent from his native country,for a space altogether, of five years.He settled as an artist in London, in1723, under the patronage of the Dukeof Argyle, the Earl of Burlington, SirGodfrey Kneller, &c. &c. His pictures,which consist chiefly of portraitsof persons of the first rank of thatperiod, are to be met with in the collectionsof the Duke of Hamilton, theDuke of Argyle, and other Scotch noblemen.Mr. Aikman died in London, onthe 4;h of June, 1731, and was buriedat Edinburgh. Among his intimatefriends, were the poets Mallet, Somerville,Allan Ramsay, and Thomson ; eachof whom paid an elegiac tribute to hismemory, and the first-mentioned wrotea poetical epitaph for his tomb. In hisstyle of painting, Mr. Aikman is saidto have aimed at imitating Nature inher pleasing simplicity ; his lights aresoft, his shades mellow, and his colouringmild and harmonious. Possessingneither the force nor harshness ofRubens, nor the adventitious graces ofReynolds, his compositions are distinguishedby a placid tranquillity ofease rather than a striking brilliancy ofeffect; and his portraits, it is said, maybemore readily mistaken for those ofKneller, than any other eminent artist ;not only because of the general resemblancein the dresses, which were thoseof the times, as they were contemporaries;but also for the manner ofworking, and the similarity and blandmellowness of their tints.SCOTT, (SAMUEL,) recorded in allthe scanty notices, which are the onlyones that exist, of his life, as the firstpainter of his own age, was born aboutthe year 1700, and resided in Londonfrom 1725, until the period of his death,which was caused by the gout, in 1772.He was famous for his sea pieces : inwhich, says Lord Orford, " if he wasbut second to Vandevelde, he excelledhim in variety, and often introducedbuildings into his pictures with consummateskill. His views of LondonBridge, the Quay, at the Custom House,&c., were equal to his marines, and hisfigures were judiciously chosen andadmirably painted ; nor were his washeddrawings unequal to his finished pictures."HUDSON, (THOMAS,) son-in-lawand pupil of Jonathan Richardson, wasborn in Devonshire, in 1701. He inheritedthe popularity of Jervas andRichardson, and reigned supreme, notwithstandingthe temporary rivalshipof Liotard and Vanloo, till the appearanceof his pupil, Reynolds, who soonthrew into the shade his " honest similitudes,with the fair tied wigs, bluevelvet coats, and white satin waistcoats,which he bestowed liberally on hiscustomers." Hudson retired from thepractice of his profession about 1756,soon after finishing his capital work,the family-piece of Charles, Duke ofMarlborough. He passed the latteryears of his life, which terminated onthe 26th of January, 1779, at a villa, atTwickenham, which he left to hissecond wife, Mrs. Rennes.SEYMOUR, (JAMES,) an artist, who,in the design of a horse was thoughtsuperior to Wootton, was born in London,in the year 1702. His father wasa banker, and no mean artist, and fromhim, probably, the subject of our memoirderived his taste for art ; but whowere his instructors, we are not informed.Seymour died in 1752. Ananecdote is told of him by Walpole,which the reader may, perhaps, alreadyhave met with. Seymour .being employedby Charles, the haughty Dukeof Somerset, to paint a room, at Pet-worth,with portraits of his horses; theduke, one day, at dinner, drank to him,saying, with a sneer, " Cousin Seymour,your health." The painter modestlyreplied, that he really believed he hadthe honour to be of his grace's family ;which so offended the duke, that herose from table, and sent his stewardto pay Seymour, and dismiss hiw.Another artist was immediately serAPPENDIX.for to complete the work which thesubject of our memoir had left unfinished;but the new painter honestlytold the duke, that he was unequalto the task, and recommended him torecal Seymour. This the duke atlength condescended to do, when hisci-devant cousin answered his summonsin these words; " My lord, I will nowprove I am of your grace's family ; forI won't come."MOSER, (GEORGE MICHAEL,) wasborn at Schaffhausen, in Switzerland,in 1705. Making, when young, avoyage to Canton, he went from thenceto England; where he followed, forsome time, the business of a chaser ingold. He also attained considerablereputation as a painter and sculptor; sothat, on the institution of the RoyalAcademy, in 1768, he was appointedkeeper. " He may," says his biographer,be said to have been the father ofthe present race of artists; for, long beforethe Royal Academy was established,he presided over the little societieswhich met first in Salisbury Court,and afterwards in St. Martin's Lane."Mr. Moser was one of the best medallistsof his day ; painted in enamel withgreat beauty and accuracy ; and was alsowell skilled in the construction of thehuman figure. He died on the 24th ofJanuary, 1783, leaving a daughter, whomarried a Mr. Lloyd, and, becomingcelebrated as a flower painter, was admitteda member of the Royal Academy.Mr. Moser is characterized, by SirJoshua Reynolds, as a man of sincereand ardent piety, who left an illustriousexample of the exactness withwhich the subordinate duties may beexpected to be discharged by him,whose first care is to please God.Layman, (FRANCIS,) born at Exeter,in 1708, was an artist of muchcelebrity, in his day. After havingstudied under Robert Brown, he cameto London, and was employed in paintingscenes for Drurjt Lane Theatre,and in decorating the gardens of Vaux-hall; for which he executed some ofhis best pieces. He also made designsfor the booksellers, and furnished,among others, drawings for editions ofivfoore's Fables, Congreve's works,.Newton's Milton,' Manner's Shakspeare,Smollett's Don Quixote, &c. &c.Hayman was, for some time, presidentof the Incorporated Society of Artists,and subsequently became a member,and librarian of the Royal Academy ;which situation he held till his death,in February, 1776. Hayman was consideredthe best historical painter inthe kingdom, before the arrival of Cipriani,though he was far from attainingexcellence in any light as an artist. Inother respects, he is described as " arough man, with good natural parts,and a humorist."SMITH, (GEORGE,) was born atChichester, in 1714, and devoting himselfwith great ardour to the study ofpainting, he gradually became one ofthe most eminent artists of his time.He excelled chiefly in landscape, andis said to have been the first who rescuedthe English name, in art, fromthe odium cast upon it by foreigners,and prepared the way for the brilliantefforts of Wilson. Several of his pictureshave been engraved, and, in particular,one by Woollett, which presentsa conception almost worthy of Claude.His colouring, however, was inferiorto his design, and his touch was toominute and trifling. He died in 1766.PENNY, (EDWARD,) was born atKnutsford, in Cheshire, in the year1714, and educated for the professionof an artist under Hudson, the masterof Reynolds. He afterwards went, forimprovement, to Rome, where he becamea pupil of Ma co Benifial. Onhis return to England, he joined theIncorporated Society of Artists of GreatBritain, of which he was, for sometime,vice president ; and, at the foundationof the Royal Academy, he wasone of the original members. He wasalso elected their first professor ofpainting, in which situation he read anannual course of lectures with greatapplause, till ill health compelled himto resign, in 1783. From this time lieretired to Chiswick, where he resideduntil his death, on the 15th of November,1791. Mr. Penny was chiefly employedin small portraits in oil, and healso painted several sentimental andhistorical subjects, which were muchadmired. The } principal of them areThe Death of General Wolfe, ThePAINTERS.Marquess of Granny relieving a SickSoldier, Virtue Rewarded, and ProfligacyPunished ; all of which have beenengraved.KIR BY, (JOHN JOSHUA,) was thesou of a schoolmaster, and born atParian, near Wickham Market, in1716. About 1738, we find him settledas a house painter, at Ipswich, andknown as the publisher of twelve printsof ancient buildings in Suffolk, with adescriptive pamphlet. An intimacywith the artist Gainsborough increasedhis natural taste for painting, which hecultivated with sufficient assiduity tomake himself a tolerable landscapepainter. It is, however, as the authorof his works on perspective, that hisname' is chiefly known. He had madeconsiderable progress in his investigationsrespecting this branch .of art,when he met with Dr. Brook Taylor'sbook, from which he took so manyhints, that his modesty and candourwould only allow him to publish hisown work under the title of Dr.Brook Taylor's Method of Perspectivemade Easy. It appeared in 1754;and in the same year, he read lectureson the subject before the Society ofArts. Removing from Ipswich to London,he was introduced by Lord Buteto the king, and, soon after, was madeclerk of the works at Kew. In 1761,was published, in two volumes, folio,Mr. Kirby's Perspective of Architecture; a work containing " new principlesfor a complete system of thePerspective of Architecture, both asrelates to the true delineation ofobjects, and the doctrine of light andshadow." Mr. Kirby succeeded Hay-man,as president of the CharteredSociety of Artists, but soon resignedthe chair, and was a member of theRoyal and Antiquarian Societies. Hisdeath took place on the 20th of June,1774.BROOKING, (-,) a veryeminent English marine painter, whowas cut off before he could enjoy thefruits, or know the extent, of his reputation,was born about the year 1720.He is said to have been bred in somedepartment in the Dock Yard at Dept-ford; but where, or under what circumstances,he learnt the art of painting,no accounts of him have informedus. Like other artists, who, at thattime, worked for the shops, he paintedseveral pictures for a person residingin Castle Street, Leicester Square, themajority of which were purchased by agentleman, who was struck by theirmerit, in accidentally passing that way.On inquiring the name of the artist, heonly received for answer, that anynumber of pictures could be procured,which he might require, from the sameartist ; who, it seems, was accustomedto write his name upon his performances,from which, however, it wasalways obliterated by the shopkeeper,before he placed them in his window.At length, Brooking having brought apicture, one day, when the dealer wasfrom home, his wife exposed it for salewithout effacing the signature, andthe same gentleman who had purchasedthe former ones happening to pass by,thus discovered the artist's name. Heimmediately advertised for Brookingto meet him at a certain place; andupon obtaining an interview with him.tendered him his friendship and patronage.Of this liberal offer, Brookinghad little opportunity left to availhimself; he had painted but a few picturesafter it had been made, when hefell a victim to consumption, dying inthe spring of the year 1759, under fortyyears of age. As a painter of sea pieces,he is said to have excelled all his countrymenwho preceded him ; nor " hasany artist," says Bryan, "since WilliamVandevelde, equalled his productionsin that department of painting."STUBBS, (GEORGE,) a very eminentanimal painter, and an associate of theRoyal Academy, was born at Liverpool,in 1724. At the age of thirty, he visitedRome fqr professional improvement,and, on his return, settled in London,where he became one of the first horse -painters of his day. In 1766, he publishedThe Anatomy of the Horse ;including a particular description of thebones, cartilages, muscles, &c. &c. ineighteen tables from nature; and, beforehis death, which took place in1806, three numbers of a work, entitledA Comparative Anatomical Impositionof the Structure of the Human Body,with that of a Tiger and a CommonFowl. An eminent critic says of Stubbs,APPENDIX.That his skill in comparative anatomynever suggested to him the proprietyof style in forms, if it were not eminentlyproved by his Phaeton with theHorses of the Sun, would be evidentfrom all his other figures, which, whenhuman, are seldom more than the attendantsof some animal; whilst thestyle of the animals themselves dependedentirely on the individual beforehim : his tiger, for grandeur, hasnever been equalled ; his lions are, tothose of Rubens, what jackals are tolions : but none ever did greater justiceto the peculiar structure of that artificialanimal, the race-courser ; and toall the mysteries of turf tactics; though,unfortunately for the artist, they dependmore on the fac-similis's precisionthan the painter's spirit." Mr.Stubbs, however, was not only distinguishedfor correctness, but for a characteristicspirit in most of his paintings ;ami this is particularly remarkable inthe portraits which he draws of thecelebrated racers of his time.Cyprian, (JOHN BAPTIST,) wasborn at Florence, about the year 1727.He is said to have received his firstinstruction in art from an Englishartist, named Beckford, who was thensettled in Italy. His next master wasAntonio Domenico Gabbiani, underwhom he became a very able designer.He resided at Rome from 1750 to 1755,when he accompanied Mr. Wilton andSir William Chambers to England,which thenceforth, and indeed altogether,became the theatre of his art.When the Duke of Richmond openedthe gallery of his house, at Privy Gardens,as a school of art, Cipriani waschosen to instruct the students in painting; and, at the foundation of the RoyalAcademy, he was elected one of themembers, and employed to make thedesign for the diploma which is givento the academicians and associatesat their admission. He executed thiswork with such taste and elegance,that the president and council presentedhim with a silver cup, "as an acknowledgmentfor the assistance theAcademy received from his great abilitiesin his profession." Mr. Ciprianiwas employed to repair the paintingsof Verrio/at Windsor, and those ofRubens, at Whitehall. Four of hisown paintings are on the ceiling of theRoyal Academy ; and his admirable designshave been disseminated all overEurope, by the graver of Bartolozzi,and his pupils. Of the few pictureswhich he left, the most eminent will befound at Mr. Coke's seat, at Holkham,in Norfolk. Among some plates engravedby Cipriani, are portraits of Al-vernonSydney, Edmund Ludlow, theparliamentary general, John Locke,John Milton, Thomas Hollies, and AndrewMarvel ; The Mother and Child,from his own design; The Death ofCleopatra, after B. Cellini ; and TheDescent of the Holy Ghost, after .This eminent artist died, universallyrespected, on the 14th ofDecember, 1785. To quote 4 the wordsof Fuseli, " the fertility of his invention,the graces of his composition, and theseductive elegance of his forms, wereonly surpassed by the probity of hischaracter, the simplicity of his manners,and the benevolence of his heart."BARRET, (GEORGE,) was born inDublin, about the year 1728, and issaid to have begun his attempts at art,by colouring prints for a vendor ofpictures in his native city. He afterwardsattended the drawing academyof Mr. West ; but he derived his chiefimprovement in the study of nature,which he preferred to that of pictures,though advised to the contrary courseby his friend and patron, the celebratedMr. Burke. Procuring, through him,an introduction to the Earl of Powers-court,Barret passed much of his timein the charming vicinity of that nobleman'sseat, where he found constantand beneficial employment for his pencil.His improvement was rapid, and,encouraged by having awarded to himthe Dublin Society's premium of 50for the best landscape, he, in 1762, tookup his residence in London. About ayear after his arrival, he gained a premium,of the same value as the onejust mentioned, from the Society forthe Encouragement of Arts, given forthe best landscape in oil. He took anactive part in the foundation of theRoyal Academy, of which he formedthe plan, and was one of the earliestmembers. As an artist, it is said ofhim, " he had two decided manners ofpainting, both with regard to colourPAINTE RS.and touch ; his first was rather heavyin both, his latter much lighter.Scarcely any painter equalled him inhis knowledge or execution of thedetails of nature ; the latter of whichwas particularly light, and well calculatedto mark most decidedly the truecharacters of the various objects herepresented, forest trees in particular.His attention was chiefly directed tothe true colours of English scenery ; inwhich, in his best works, he was veryhappy, as he got all that richness anddewy freshness, that so particularlycharacterizes the verdure of this climate,especially in the vernal months,and which is so totally different fromthe colouring of those masters whohave formed themselves on Italianscenery or Italian pictures. This strongdesire sometimes tempted him to usecolours rich and beautiful, when firstapplied, but which no art could renderpermanent; which, in some of hisslighter works, prevailed to such adegree as to leave scarcely any tracesof the original colouring." His bestpictures in his first manner are to befound in the houses of the Dukes ofBuccleugh and Portland, &c. ; andthose of his latter at Carbury Park,Surrey, where he painted a large roomwith a continued scene entirely round.This is his principal work ; and forcomposition, breadth of effect, truth ofcolour, and boldness of manner in theexecution, may vie with that of anymodern painter. Mr. Barret also excelledin water-colours and in chalk,Indian ink, and black-lead pencildrawings. When Mr. Burke came intooffice, he obtained for the subject ofour memoir the place of master painterto Chelsea Hospital, which he held tillhis death, in March, 1784. He left awidow and nine children, and was buriedat Paddington, where he had residedthe last ten years of his life. As aman, he is said to have been remarkablykind and friendly ; gentle in manners,with a vast flow of spirits, evento playfulness, and a strong turn towit and humour. -HONE, (NATHANIEL,) was born inDublin, about the year 1730, but passedthe greater part of his life in England.He first followed his profession at York,where he married a lady of some property,and soon after he settled in London.He practised with great reputation,both as a painter in oil and inminiature, particularly enamel, in whichbranch of art, he ranked among theprincipal artists of his day after thedeath of Since. On the foundationof the Royal Academy, in 1768, he waschosen one of the members, and maintainedhis reputation till his death,which took place on the 14th of August,1784. As a painter in oil, we are told,he was by no means an inferior artist;yet the colouring of his pictures wastoo red for the carnations, and theshadows not sufficiently clear."GILPIN, (Sawney,) a descendantof the celebrated Bernard Gilpin, andson of a captain in the army, was bornat Carlisle, in the year 1733. He caughta taste for drawing from his father,who had some knowledge of the art,but was at first apprenticed to a ship-painter,in London, with a view ofturning his talents to a profitable accountin the way of trade. He did notsuffer, however, his genius to lie dormant; and some animals which he haddesigned, being shown to the Duke ofCumberland, that prince immediatelytook him tinder his patronage. Gilpinaccompanied the duke to Newmarket,where he painted portraits of the favouriteracers of his patron, in whosestud he acquired that knowledge ofthe horse, which he has displayed withsuch superior spirit and beauty. Heapplied his talents in this departmentto historic painting, and his beautifulcompositions of The Triumph of Camillus,The Election of Darius, andthe story of Phaeton, may vie withthe highest efforts in this style of art.His drawings of animals, in pencil andwater-colours, are also replete withtaste and skill ; his chefd'oeuvre is saidto be a groupe of tigers. Among hisetchings are, a set of oxen, cows, &c. ;a small book of horses ; and some headsfor his brother's book, The Lives of theReformers. Mr. Gilpin was one of theearliest members of the Royal Academy,and died, highly respected both as anartist and a man, on the 8th of March,1807.WRIGHT, (JOSEPH,) commonlycalled Wright of Derby, was born inAPPENDIX.that city on the 3rd of December, 1734.He was the son of an attorney, and, inearly life, shewed a taste for mechanics,but, fixing on the arts as a profession,came to London in 1751, and was article.!to Thomas Hudson. Contemptibleas was the style of his master, Wrightmade considerable progress during theterm of his apprenticeship, and paintedboth portraits and historical pieces in avery superior style. Among others,we may mention, his Blacksmith'sForge, Air Pump, &c. &c. Soon afterleaving Hudson, he married, and, tocomplete his education as an artist,visited Italy, where he passed abouttwo years. In 1775, he fixed his residenceat Bath, but, in 1777, removed tohis native town, where he passed theremainder of his life. He was electedan associate of the Royal Academy in1782, but resigned his diploma in disgust,in consequence of Mr. Garvey'sbeing chosen royal academician beforehim. Mr. Wright excelled chieflyin landscape, subjects by candle-lightand fire-pieces ; of which he exhibitedseveral at the Royal Academy. Theeruption of Vesuvius, which he had anopportunity of witnessing during hisabode at Naples, was also one of hisfavourite subjects; "and his differentpictures of this sublime event," sayshis biographer, " stood decidedly chefd retires in that line of painting ; forwho but Wright ever succeeded in fireor moonlights ?" Among his historicalpictures, we may mention, The DeadSoldier, a beautiful composition, madefamiliar to almost every one, by Heath'sadmirable print. One of his latestworks was a View of the Head of Ulls-water; a painting which has been comparedto the highest efforts of Wilson.In this department of his art, his worksare characterized by elegance of outline,judicious management of light andshade, and truth and delicacy of colouring.He nude an exhibition of twenty-fourof his pictures at the great roomin the Piazza, Covent Garden, abouttwelve years before his death, whichtook place on the 29th of August,1797.WRIGHT, (RICHARD,) was born atLiverpool, about the year 1735. Hewas bred to the humble occupation ofa house and ship painter, but, havinga taste for art. became at length, bygreat industry, and the force of his owngenius, a very respectable painter ofsea pieces. He gained, in 1704, fromthe Society for the Encouragement ofArts, &c., thei premium for the bestpicture of a sea view; and, in 1766,he was awarded the first premium offifty guineas, for a sea piece, fromwhich VVoollett engraved his celebratedprint of The Fishery. Wright was amember of the Chartered Society ofArtists, and died about the year 1775.Tiffany, (Jovian, or JOHN,) wasborn at Frankfort, about the year 1735,and came to England when he wasnearly thirty years of age. Meetingwith little or no encouragement, hesoon became deplorably distressed, andappears to have lived for some time inequal poverty and obscurity. The firstplace where he resided in London, ofwhich we have any account, was inShort's Gardens, Drury Lane, wherehe lodged with an Italian, namedBellows, famous for pricking of thebarrels of what were, at tl>at time, calledTwelve tuned Dutchmen Clocks." Byhim Zoffany was recommended to oneReinbauld, a musical clock maker,Bellows describing him as " a poor man,an artist, who was almost starving in agarret, and an inmate of his house."Reinbauld engaged him in painting thefronts of his clocks, and soon after, hegave a proof of his skill in a higherdepartment of art. by painting a portraitof his employer. His talent, inthis respect, was at length discoveredby Benjamin Wilson, an artist, whowas deficient in drawing figures, andhe accordingly engaged the subject ofour memoir to assist him, at a salaryof 4Q a year, and on condition ofprofound secrecy. A picture, however,which Wilson exhibited of Garrickand Miss Bellamy, as Romeo and Juliet,displayed such unusual marks ofability, in the artist, whose name wasattached to it, that Garrick, suspectingit to be the production of anotherhand, determined to find out the realartist, and at length discovered him inZoffany. The great actor henceforthbecame his patron, and immediatelyintroduced him to Sir Joshua Reynolds,and other artists of distinction. Aportrait which he, soon after, paintedPAINTERS.of the Earl of Barrymore, laid thefoundation of his future fame, and healso acquired considerable celebrity bythe portraiture of the most eminentdramatic performers in their favouritecharacters. Among the principal ofthese were, his pictures of Garrick,in Abel Drugger, of Foote, in MajorSturgeon, of Jacob, in Jacob Gallop, ofFoote and Weston, as Dr. Last andthe President, &c. &c. all admirablycoloured, and designed and paintedwith surprising truth and expression.Having obtained the patronage ofGeorge the Third, that monarch andhis consort sat to him, for a large picture,in which the whole of the royalfamily were introduced. He alsopainted for the king, his celebratedpicture of The Members of the RoyalAcademy ; into which body Zoffanywas, about the same time, admitted.During a visit which he paid to Italy,he was employed by the Grand Dukeof Tuscany ; and, whilst at Florence,painted his famous picture of the FlorentineGallery, now in the king'scollection. Shortly after his returnfrom Italy, he went to the East Indies,where he became a great favourite ofthe Nabob of Ode, and amassed ahandsome fortune by the exercise ofhis profession. He settled at Kew,upon his return to England, and diedthere on the llth of November, 1810.Dixon, Finlayson, Green, and othereminent artists, have engraved severalof his theatrical portraits.RUNCIMAN, (ALEXANDER,) theson of an architect, was born at Edinburgh,in the year 1736. Fuseli says,that he served an apprenticeship to acoach-painter, and acquired a practiceof brush, a facility of pencilling, andmuch mechanic knowledge of colours,before he had attained any correctnotion of design. Mr. Cunningham,following the account given of Run-cimon,in Stark's Biographia Scotia,says, that he was placed, at the age offourteen, in the studio of John andRobert Norris, the former of whom wasreputed to be a celebrated landscapepainter. Whoever may have been hismasters, he commenced landscapepainter, on his own account, as earlyas 1755, and, in 1760, he attemptedhistorical painting; " where," says hisbiographers in delineating humanpassions, hisenergetic'mind had greaterscope than in portraying peacefulfields, the humble cottage, and the unambitiousshepherd." It would seem,however, that he had taken a scopebeyond his powers, for his earliestlandscapes were decided failures ; and,in his history, his compositions broughthim but little fame, and less fortune.Under these circumstances, he determinedon paying a visit to Italy, wherehe arrived in the latter end of theyear 1766. He remained at Rome aboutfive years, having, during that period,gained the friendship and approbationof Fuseli, and "not only increased infacility and truth in drawing, but acquirednew general principles, and amore refined and correct taste." Hereturned home in 1771, and, in thefollowing year, was appointed professorto the Edinburgh Academy of Arts,recently established in that city, wherehe painted some historical pictures,among which was the Ascension, inthe Episcopal church. His chief worksare in the mansion of Pennywick ; thehall of which he was employed todecorate by the owner, Sir James Clerk.Runciman chose his subjects fromOssian, of which he painted twelvescenes ; The Death of Agandeca, isconsidered the best. His other principalpictures are, King Lear, Andromeda,Agrippina, landing with theAshes of Germanicus, and Ulysses, surprisingNausea at Play with her Maids ;which last, it is said, exhibits, with thedefects and manners of Julio Romano,in style, design, afcd expression, a tone,a grace, and breadth of colour, resemblingTitian. Edwards mentions twoetchings of this artist from his owndesigns : Sigismundaa Weeping over theHeart of Tancred, and A View ofEdinburgh, executed with great spiritand taste. Runciman died on the 21stof October, 1785. Different accountshave been given of his character, bothas an artist and a man. " My father,"says a correspondent of Allan Cunningham's," was acquainted with Runci-man, whose sketches, I think, areinfinitely better than his pictures.Look at his etchings, and rememberhis gallery at Pennywick, and thenjudge if I am severe such long legs,such distorted attitudes, and such aAPPENDIX.total want of knowledge or contemptof drapery ! I always thought I sawRunciman revived in Fuseli. Myfather said he was a dissolute, blasphemousfellow, and repeated some ofhis sayings, which are better forgottenthan remembered." One of his biographers,on the other hand, gives himcredit for real worth and goodness ofheart, and a candour and a simplicityof manners which caused his companyto be courted by some of the mosteminent literary characters of his time.With respect to his merits as tin artist,his friend, John Brown, celebrated fordesign, says, " His fancy was fertile,his discernment of character keen, histaste truly elegant, and his conceptionstruly great. Though his genius seemsto be best suited to the grave andserious ; yet many of his works amplyprove that he could move, with equalsuccess, in the less elevated line of thegay and the pleasing. His chief excellencelay in composition ; the noblestpart of the art, in which, it is doubtfulwhether he had any living superior.With regard to the truth, the harmony,the richness, and the gravity of colouring,in that style, in short, which isthe peculiar characteristic of the ancientVenetian, and the direct contrast of theEnglish modern school, he was unrivalled.His works, it must be granted,like all those of the present times, werefar from being perfect ; but it was Run-cimon'speculiar misfortune, that hisdefects were of such a nature, as to beobvious to the most unskilful eyes,whilst his beauties were of a kind,which few have sufficient taste or knowledgein the art to discern, far less toappreciate."EDWARDS, (EDWARD,) the son ofa chair-maker and carver, was born inCastle Street, Leicester Fields, on the7th of March, 1738. He was intendedfor his father's business, but discoveringan inclination for drawing, waspermitted to attend the Duke of Richmond'sGallery ; and, on the death ofhis father, in 1760, he opened a drawingschool, for the support of himselfand his family. In the following year,he was admitted a member of theAcademy, in Peter Court, St. Martin'sLane, where he studied the humanfigure, and made such progress as toobtain a small premium for a drawingfrom the Society for the Encouragementof Arts, &c. In 1763, he wasemployed by Alderman Boydell tomake some drawings for his publicationof engravings from the old masters ;and, in 1764, the Society of Arts, &c.,awarded him another premium, for thebest historical picture in chiar-oscuro.In 1770, he was employed by theSociety of Antiquaries to make a largedrawing from the picture at Windsor,of the interview between Henry theEighth and Francis the First, at Calais.In 1773, he was elected an associate ofthe Royal Academy ; and, in 1775, theliberality of a friend, who was one ofhis patrons, enabled him to visit Italy,where he remained about thirteenmonths. He did not manifest muchimprovement after his return, yet hecontinued to hold a respectable rankamong his professional brethren ; and,in 1781, he obtained a third premiumfrom the Society of Arts, for a landscapepainting. One of his greatestworks was the painting of three arabesqueceilings, in the house of theHonourable Charles Hamilton, at Bath,on which he was engaged for aboutnine months. He was next employedby Horace Walpole ; as a supplementto whose work, he wrote his Anecdotesof Painters, published after hisdeath. In 1788, he was appointedteacher of perspective in the RoyalAcademy, a situation for which he waswell qualified, as was made apparentin his Treatise on Perspective, publishedin 1803, quarto with forty plates.His other works, besides those alreadynoticed, are, his picture of A HuntingParty ; a collection of etchings, fifty-twoin number ; Commemoration of Handel,in Westminster Abbey ; and TheTwo Gentlemen of Verona, painted forthe Shakspeare Gallery. Mr. Edwardsdied, universally respected, on the 19thof December, 1805. " He had seenmuch," says his biographer ; " and hisopinions, which were given with undeviatingintegrity, were always respected,but his productions seldomexcited much approbation, nor havethere been many instances where anartist, with so much general capacityand vigour of mind, has not been al-it*to make greater proficiency."PAINTERSKAUFFMAN, (MARIA ANGELICA,)was born at Coire, in the Orisons, in theyear 1740. Her father, who was anartist, taught her the rudiments of design,for which she had manifested anearly propensity, and in her eleventhyear, she drew several portraits incrayons, which were much admired.In 1754, she studied for a short timeat Milan, and, revisiting Italy in 1758,completed her professional education atRome, where her remarkable talentsattracted the notice of all the distinguishedpersons in that capital. TheAbbe Winkelman, writing of her to hisfriend, Franck, in 1764, says, " I havebeen just painted by a stranger, a youngperson of a rare merit. She speaksItalian as well as German, and expressesherself with the same facility inFrench and English ; on which accountshe paints all the english who visit Rome.She sings with a taste which ranks heramong our greatest virtuose. Her nameis Angelica Kauffman." From Romeshe proceeded to Venice, ami, afterpassing a year in that city, accompaniedthe lady of the English ambassadoron her return t London, whereshe arrived in 1765. She passed aboutseventeen years in this country, whichwas the chief theatre of her professionallabours, employed among persons of thehighest rank, and distinguished by thosehonours, to which her merits justly entitledher. She was made a member ofthe Royal Academy ; and her fame wasstill further extended by the numerousengravings of Bartolozzi, who devotedhis powers, chiefly to the works of Angelica,and of his countryman, CyprianIn 1780, she married Signor AntonioZucchi, a Venetian painter, who hadresided for some time in England,though she still chose to retain hermaiden name. This gentleman was hersecond husband, if we may credit awriter in Rees's Cyclopaedia, who tellsus, that after some years' residence here,,she was deceived by a footman of aGerman count, who, coming to England,personated his master, contrivedto be presented at court, and persuadedAngelica to marry him. The cheatwas soon discovered, and the husband,who treated her very ill, was induced,by a payment made to him of 300, toreturn to Germany, with a promisenever to molest her any more. He accordinglyleft England, and Angelica,not hearing of him for seven years, gaveher hand to the artist above-mentioned.She left England with Signor Zucchiand her father, in 1781, and after passinga short time in Germany, fixed herabode at Rome, where she receivedvisits from the Emperor Paul, of Russia,and the Emperor Joseph, and hadcommissions from various courts, forwhich she executed several historicalpieces. Though her residence waschiefly at Rome, she occasionally visitedother parts of Italy, and during hersojourn at Naples, she was appointedhonorary court painter, and drawing-mistressto the princesses. When theFrench entered Rome, in 1798, severalof her pictures were seized by them,as English property, and she underwentother considerable losses. She died atthe age of sixty-seven, in 1807, havingsurvived her husband about twelveyears, and leaving the chief part of herfortune to a pious foundation at hernative place. She was honoured with apublic funeral, which was conductedprincipally by the celebrated sculptor,Canova, and attended by all the academiciansof St. Luke, and literary corporations.She was herself a member ofthe Academy of St. Luke, and belongedalso to those of Venice and Florence,and the Clementine Academy at Bologna.Angelica, who is said to havebeen handsome in youth, bore an excellentmoral character ; was of a vivaciousdisposition, but sober and retiredin her manners; and, though muchcourted, kept little company, exceptthat of relations and particular friends.Among her paintings we may mentiona piece for the sanctuary of Lorenzo,by commission from Pius the Sixth;Religion ; and the four large oval paintingsat the extremities of the ceiling ofthe Royal Academy, representing Composition,Invention, Design, and ColouringShe also made several spiritedetchings, both from her own designs,and those of other artists. With respectto her abilities as a painter, therehave been various opinions: the Germanscalled her the painters of minds(scheme mahlerin) ; but this does notcertainly convey the best characteristicidea of her style, though the expressiondoes not, perhaps, deserve the contemptwith which it is treated by Fuseli. Upon.u yAPPENDIX.the whole, her merits seem to have beenjustly summed up in the followingwords : " The merit of Angelica," saysa critical biographer, " has been sohighly rated by the zeal of her eulogists,and, perhaps, so severely judgedby the stern tribunal of criticism, thatit is probable a just and candid estimateof her faculties will best be proved bysteering a temperate course betweenboth. That her powers were considerable,none will deny; that they weretranscendent, few of the intelligent willbe disposed to acknowledge. In herhistorical pictures, in which the figuresare generally much smaller than life,her compositions are ingenious andpoetical ; her design is neither incorrectnor ungraceful; and her colouring,at least, as mellow and harmonious asthe best painters of the Italian school.She was not unacquainted with thebeauties of the antique, nor did sheneglect them, especially in her femaleforms. Her pictures are distinguishedby an air of mild and virginal dignity ;but there is a total want of variety inher forms, of impassioned and characteristicexpression in her heads, and ofenergy in her attitudes. Her figures,both male and female, are cast in thesame mould, and appear to have beendrawn from an ideal model she hadformed of what she conceived to be perfect; hence she could not avoid fallinginto the foibles of a mannerist."LOUTHERBOURG,or LUTHER-burg,(PHILIP JAMES DE,) was born atStrasbourg, on the 1st of November, 1740.He was the son of a miniature painter,who afterwards established himself atParis, where Philip became a pupil ofFrancesco Casanova, having previouslystudied under Tischbein. He soon becameknown as a painter of battles,hunting-pieces, sea-pieces, and landscapeswith figures and cattle, in whichlast he is said to have imitated the styleof Nicholas Berghem. In 1763, he wasmade a member of the Academy ofPainting, at Paris; but notwithstandingthe encouragement he received inFrance, he quitted that country in 1771,and came to London, where he settledfor the remainder of his life. He wasengaged at Drury Lane Theatre for severalyears, in designing and paintingscenes, in which department he displayedabilities never before witnessedon the stage, and produced some noveland remarkable effects, scarcely equalledby those of Cranfield in our owntime. Among other things, he contrivedan exhibition, called the Eido-phusicon, somewhat on the plan of theDiorama. He was elected an academicianabout the year 1785, and enjoyeda very high reputation till his death,which took place at his residence, atHammersmith Terrace, on the llth ofMarch, 1812; leaving a widow, whodied in 1828. He was buried in thechurchyard of Chiswick, not far fromthe tomb of Hogarth, and immediatelyadjoining that of Sharpe, the celebratedengraver. Among his larger picturesmay be mentioned, his Review of WarleyCamp ; Lord Howe's Victory of theFirst of June; and The Siege of Valenciennes.As a painter of history, headded to his reputation by his picture ofThe Assyrian Host, and The UniversalDeluge, painted for Mr. Macklin's editionof The Bible. His merits as anartist have been thus summed up by a-critical biographer: " Mr. Gothenburgexhibits an uncommon example of thepossession of faculties directly opposedto each other. In his landscapes, and,indeed, in his performances in general,he is not less remarkable for the mostadmirable dexterity of hand, and themost captivating facility of pencil, thanfor a seductive, though a meretriciousgaudiness in his colouring, which is toofrequently in opposition to the chasteand sober tinting of nature. Thereadiness with which he composed andexecuted his pictures, could scarcelyfail of betraying him into the foibles ofa mannerist. Individual parts of hispictures are frequently uncommonlyfine ; but, either from an inattentionto, or an ignorance of, the best principlesof the chiar-oscuro, there is oftena want of generality in the effect,which is frequently scattered andfluttering, and we look in vain for thattempered harmony in the whole, whichdistinguishes the most admired productionsof the art." His character wasnot free from eccentricity ; and he wasso far infatuated with the reveries ofanimal magnetism, as to have accompaniedthe impostor, Caglivitio, toSwitzerland, with the intention ofremaining there.PA INTERS.HAMILTON, (GAVIN,) descendedfrom an ancient Scotch family, was bornat Lanark, about the year 1740. Afterhaving received a liberal education, hewent to Rome, where he pursued thestudy of historic painting, under AugustineMassuchi. With the exception ofa few visits to Scotland, he passed theprincipal part of his life in the Romancapital, and died there in 1797. Thoughpainting occupied the chief portion ofhis time, he was latterly much employedin the discovery of antique monuments.He opened caves at Centum-cells,Velletri, Ostia, and Tivoli, amongthe ruins of Adrian's villa, and madesuch valuable contributions to the M useClementine, as to render it the next inimportance to that of Belvidere ; indeed,the best collections scattered overRussia, Germany, and this ' country,owe, it is said, many of their principalornaments to his discoveries. Modernart is also indebted to him for a valuablepublication, entitled, Schola ItalicsPicture, in which is traced the progressof its styles, from Leonardo daVinci to the successors of the Caracci.In the dearth of biographical matter thataccompanies every existing memoir ofthis artist, whose kindness to his youngcountrymen at Rome is probably yetremembered by many, we quote Fu-self'sgenerally adopted estimate of hisprofessional character : " He had not,perhaps, the genius of an inventor, butthe advantages of a liberal education,and of a classic taste in the choice ofhis subjects ; and the style at which healways, and often successfully, aimed,made him at least equal to his most celebratedcontemporaries. Some of thesubjects which he painted from theIliad, bear ample evidence of this. Achillesgrasping the body of Patroclus, andrejecting the consolation of the Grecianchiefs, and Hector tied to his chariot,have something of Homeric sublimityand pathos : the moment chosen is thecrisis of the fact, and the test of thehero's character. But in this last he isnot always happy, as in Achilles dismissingArises, where the gesticulationof an actor supplants the expression ofthe man. Of his women, the Arises, inthe same subject, is the most attractive.Neither his Andromache mourning overHector, nor the Helen, in the same, orthe scene with Paris, reach our ideas ofthe former's dignity and anguish, orthe form and graces of the latter. Indeed,what idea can be supposed toreach that beauty, which, in the confessionof age itself, deserved the tenyears' struggle of two nations? Andyet, in the subject of Paris, those gracesand that form are to be subordinate tothe superior ones of Venus. He wouldrank with the first names in art, who,from such a combination, should escapewithout having provoked the indignation,contempt, or pity, of disappointedexpectation. Though he was familiarwith the antique, the forms of Hamiltonhave neither its correctness nor characteristicpurity : something of the modernscholastic principle prevails in hisworks, and his composition is, not seldom,as much beholden to commonplaceornamental conceits and habits,as to propriety."PARRY, (WILLIAM,) son of the celebratedblind performer on the Welchharp, was born in London, in 1742. Hereceived his first instructions in drawingin Shipley's academy, and afterwardsstudied from the plaster-casts inthe Duke of Richmond's gallery. Thatnothing might be wanting to completehis professional education, he became apupil of Sir Joshua Reynolds, and aboutthe same time entered the academy inSt. Martin's Lane. After having obtainedseveral premiums from the Societyfor the Encouragement of Art, hewas enabled, by the patronage and liberalityof Sir Watkin Williams Wynne,to visit Italy, where he remained from1770 until 1775, during which time hepainted for Sir Watkin, a copy of theTransfiguration, by Raphael. In 1776,he was chosen an associate of the RoyalAcademy ; but not finding the employmenthe had expected in London, hereturned to Rome, where he remainedseveral years, and met with all the successhe could wish. In 1791, he wascompelled by ill health to visit his nativecountry, where he died, on the 13thof February in that year.PARS, (WILLIAM,) was born in London,in 1742, and educated at Shipley'sdrawing school, and the academy inSt. Martin's Lane. In 1764, he obtainedthe third premium of twenty guineasfor historical painting ; and, soon after,APPENDIX.was selected by the Dilettanti Societyas draughtsman to an expedition aboutto be sent out by them to make antiquarianresearches in Ionia. This employmentoccupied him three years, atthe expiration of which time he accompaniedLord Palmerston in a tourthrough Switzerland and Italy, to makedrawings of the most remarkable viewsand antiquities. Mr. Pars was electedan associate of the Royal Academy in1770, and in 1774 he was sent as theDilettanti Society's student to Rome,for a certain number of years, upon apension. He died in Italy, in the autumnof 1782. Several of his views inGreece have been engraved by Mr.Byrne, and some of those in Switzerlandand Italy have been executed in aqua-tintaby Paul Sandby.ALLAN, (DAVID,) was born on the13th of February, 1744, at Alloa, inStirlingshire, where his father held theplace of schoolmaster. He was sent,for education, to the parish school, andthere first displayed his taste for drawingin a caricature of the schoolmaster,which procured him a soundthrashing, and his removal from theschool. When his father admonishedhim for having thus ridiculed his preceptor,he replied, "I could nae helpit, he looked sae queer ; I made it likehim, and a' for fun." It was determined,however, that his predilection for artshould be encouraged, and he wasaccordingly, in February, 1755, placedat Foulis' academy, at Glasgow, wherehe was initiated in drawing, painting,and engraving. In 1764, the liberalityof some noblemen and gentlemen, in theneighbourhood of Alloa, enabled himto proceed to Rome, where his meritsoon became apparent. Among otherhonours he obtained the gold medal ofthe Academy of St. Luke, for the besthistorical composition. The subjectwas The Origin of Painting, and was soadmirably executed, that Wilkie is saidto have pronounced it one of the besttold stories that colour and canvas everunited to relate. Whilst at Rome, hepainted The Prodigal Son, Herculesand Omphale, &c.; but his four sketchesof The Carnival at Rome, and which,with a few others, gained him the nameof the Scottish Hogarth, chiefly deservet,o. be mentioned. There was much humourin these pictures, and the engravingsthat were made from them, bySandby, became very popular. Fewparticulars of Allan's life are related,for some years, after he left Scotlandfor Italy. He appears to have been inLondon in 1777; and in 1786, his reputationhad become so great, that he wasinstalled master of the Academy ofArts at Edinburgh. About the sametime he commenced a series of illustrationsfor Allan Ramsay's Gentle Shepherd,of which he published an editionin quarto, accompanied by his engravings.His skill lay principally in rusticsubjects, and he continued to employhis pencil upon them, until within ashort period of his death, which tookplace on the 6th of August, 1796. Heleft one daughter and a son, by hiswife, the daughter of a carver and gilder,to whom he had been united in 1788.In person, he was far from prepossessing; being short and slender, andhaving a long, coarse, pock-markedface, a wide mouth, long nose, largeinanimate eyes, and sand-coloured hair.As a painter, he is considerably abovemediocrity, but is still far below thefirst rank of artists. He was completelyat home in the delineation ofgrave humour and open drollery; andBurns, some of whose subjects he illustrated,said, that himself and Mr. Allanwere the only genuine and real paintersof Scottish costume in the world.Hearse, (THOMAS,) was born atMansfield, in Gloucestershire, in 1744.Soon after, his parents removed - toBrickwork, in North Wiltshire, wherehe received his education ; but he wasnot, as stated by some, a native of thatplace. He was sent to London, to beapprenticed to Woollett, the engraver,but his indentures had not long expiredbefore he relinquished the graphic artto become draughtsman to Sir R.Payne, afterwards Lord Langton,then about to go out as governor of theLeeward Islands. Hearne returnedfrom the West Indies in 1776, and continuedto practise as a draughtsman tillwithin a short period of his death, whichtook place in London, on the 13th ofApril, 1817. The best of this artist'sworks are to be found in private cabinets,but some fine specimens of hisdrawings may be seen in a publication jPAINTERS.entitled, The Antiquities of Great Britain,and other collections of engravings.Hearne was one of the first whopractised landscape painting in watercolours,and indeed he has been consideredas the original source of all whichis truly great in that art.Wheaten, (FRANCIS,) was bornin London, in the year 1747, and instructedin drawing at Shipley's academy.He obtained several premiumsin his youth, from the Society of Arts,though it is not stated for what descriptionof pictures. He learnt how topaint without a master, but improvedhimself considerably by his acquaintancewith Mortimer, whom he assistedin painting the ceiling at Brocket Hall,the seat of Lord Melbourne. His earlytaste inclined to figures and landscapes,but he was chiefly employed in the moreprofitable pursuit of painting smallwhole length portraits, in which hewas very successful. He resided forsome time at Dublin, where he painted,among other pieces, a large picture, representingthe Irish House of Commons,in which portraits of many of themost remarkable political characterswere introduced. Shortly after his returnto London, he painted a picture ofthe riots in 1780, from which Mr. Heathengraved an excellent print for AldermanBoydell. He was also one of theartists employed by that spirited publisherto paint for the Shakspeare Gallery.Mr. 'NYheatley executed twelvepictures, from which his merit, as a colouristand a composer, may be bestestimated. Some of his rural and domesticsubjects were much admired,and became very popular ; though ithas been objected to them, that, in hisfemales, he adopted too much of theFrench costume. The subject of ourmemoir, who was elected an associateof the Royal Academy in 1790, and aroyal academician in the following year,died in 1801. He is said to have beenhandsome, of elegant manners, andgenerally a favourite in genteel company;and one who not only understoodhis art, but spoke with greattaste and precision on every branch ofIBBETSON, (JULIUS Caesar,) wasborn at Scarborough, in Yorkshire, aboutthe year 1750. He was originally aship painter, but finding himself qualifiedfor filling a higher grade, he becamean artist by profession, and eventually,an eminent landscape painter. Littleis recorded of the particulars of his life ;he accompanied Colonel Athwart onhis oriental mission, but returned inconsequenceof the death of that gentleman.In 1805, he published a work,entitled, An Accidence, or Gamut ofOil Painting, for Beginners, in whichis shown the most easy way of imitatingnature, by means of a simple system,the result of many years' practice ; witha landscape painted in oil, and all thetints in pattern, 1805, octavo. Mr. Ib-benson, who died at Bashan, in Yorkshire,in 1817, was termed, by West, theBerghem of England. His manner, asan artist, is said to be clear and firm,but sometimes a little hard, and his colouringrather defective. His best picturesare those in which his cattle(which are always touched with greatspirit) constitute a principal feature.BARKER, (ROBERT,) was born aboutthe year 1750. He deserves notice inthe present class as being the inventorof the exhibition called a Panorama.The first picture of this kind which heexhibited was a view of Edinburgh,though he did not, at the time, call it aPanorama, reserving that name for aview of London from the top of theAlbion Mills, which was much admired,and patronised by Sir Joshua Reynoldsand other eminent artists. He wasenabled, partly by subscription, to buildthe present rooms in Leicester Square,where views of the principal cities, andof all the great battles, both by sea andland, that have occurred in the last century,have been from time to time exhibited.Mr. Barker died in April,1806, leaving a son, who inherited histalent, and continued the exhibition.HAMILTON, (WILLIAM,) was bornin London, of Scotch parents, in the year1751. At an. early age he studied underZucchi, the painter of arabesque ornamentsat Rome, and although Mr. Edwardstrunks he was then too young toreceive any material benefit from thistour, it served, at least, to increase histaste for, and he caught a pleasant mannerof, painting, much in the style ofAPPENDIX.his master. On his return to Englandhe practised chiefly in history, and attemptedportrait painting, but in thelatter branch he did not succeed, thoughhis portrait of Mrs. Siddons, as LadyRandolph, was allowed to have greatmerit. Alderman Boydell employed Mr.Hamilton in many of his spirited undertakings; he assisted in illustratingShakspeare; and, for Mr. Macklin's editionof The Bible, he painted The Womanof Samaria, one of his best pieces.Another of his capital works was a pictureof the Queen of Sheba entertainedat a Banquet by Solomon, designed horawindow in Arundel Castle. His arabesques,in the mansion of the Earl ofBute, at High Cliff, Hampshire, havealso been much admired. His coloureddrawings emulate the fulness of his oilpaintings, with more freshness, andmay, it is said, be placed among themost tasteful and effective efforts of thearts in that style. He was elected anassociate of the Royal Academy on the8th of November, 1788 ; a royal academicianon the 10th of February, 1789;and died, generally beloved and lamented,on the 2nd of December, 1801.His manner of painting was light, airy,and pleasant, and he excelled in ornaments,to which he gave a propriety,richness, and a classic air. With respectto his private character, it is observed ofhim, that "his politeness covered noinsincerity, nor his emulation envy."BEAUMONT, (SIR GEORGE Howland,)was born on the 6th of November,1753. He was educated at Eton, where,besides becoming a tolerable classic, hedisplayed a love of drawing, and performedso well on the boards of a privatetheatre, "that friends," says AllanCunningham, " were not wanting whothought he more than approached Garrick."He married, in the year 1784,a grand-daughter of Lord Chief justiceWillis, and soon after, made the tour otItaly, in company with his wife. Whilstabroad, he painted some pictures notunworthy of comparison with those ofWilson, and on his return to England,was considered a very promising landscapepainter. In 1790, he visited Paris,and, it is said, only escaped destructionfrom the revolutionary mob, by thekindness of some one who fixed a tri-colouredcockade in his hat. In 1819,and again in 1822, he passed a shorttime on the continent, where he madeseveral valuable purchases of works ofart, with the intention of giving themto the public as soon as a national galleryshould be established. This institutionwas one of the great objects ofhis wishes, and his exertions mainlypromoted the foundation of the presentgallery. Sir George died at his seat,Coleorton Hall, on the 7th of February,1827. As a landscape painter he hastolerable merit ; he was an enthusiasticadmirer of Claude and Wilson ; and ifhis works fall far short of the perfectionattained by these great masters, theywere superior to those of many otherartists, with names of higher reputationi than his own.Warrington, (GEORGE,) son ofthe Rev. William Farington, rector ofWarrington, and vicar of Leigh, inLancashire, was born in the year 1754.He studied drawing under his brotherJoseph, the royal academician, and subsequentlybecame a pupil of the celebratedBenjamin West. W r whilst studyingat the Royal Academy, he obtained,in 1779, a silver medal, arid, in the followingyear, the gold medal, for the besthistorical picture, the subject of whichwas the cauldron scene, in Macbeth.In 1782, having received some advantageousoffers, he embarked for theEast Indies, where he painted severalpictures, particularly a large work representingthe Durbar, or court of theNabob, at Mershoodabad. A diseasewhich he contracted in India, by stayingout too late at night, to observesome ceremonies of the natives, terminatedthe life of this promising artist,in 1788, at the age of thirty-four.BOURGEOIS, (SiR FRANCIS,) descendedfrom a Swiss family, was bornin London, in the year 1756. LordHeathfield offered to procure him acommission in the army, but the subjectof our memoir, though not insensibleto ideas of martial glory, hadpre-conceived a taste for art, which hedetermined to follow as a profession.He was fixed in this resolution by theapprobation of Mr. Gainsborough, andSir Joshua Reynolds, to whom some ofhis early drawings were shown. Thesubjects of them were chiefly militaryPAINTERS,being descriptive of different reviewsand military evolutions which he hadwitnessed. He had already receivedsome instruction in the rudiments ofdesign, from an obscure animal painter,when it was determined that he shouldbecome a pupil of the celebrated .With this artist, however,he only remained a sufficient time toacquire a correct knowledge of theprinciples of his art. having resolved tocomplete his studies by the contemplationof nature, and the works of thecontinental masters. Yet he must haveattained to no ordinary skill previouslyto his departure from England, as hisbiographer tells us, he had scarcelyreached the nineteenth year of his age,when he had acquired considerablereputation as a painter of landscapes,battles, and sea-pieces. In 1776, he setout on a tour through the Netherlands,France, and Italy, and upon his returnto England, showed, in the numerouspictures which he exhibited, how muchimprovement he had derived from astudy of the old masters. His worksmade such an impression on the PrincePrimate, brother to the unfortunateLadislaus Augustus, King of Poland,when he visited this country, that hemade our artist very liberal offers toaccompany him to "Poland. He wasappointed painter to the King of Polandin 1791, and at the same time made aKnight of the Order of Merit, a titlewhich was confirmed to him by his ownsovereign, on his being presented atcourt. In the following year, he waselected a royal academician, and, in1794, appointed' landscape painter tothe king. On the death of Mr. NoelDesenians, Sir Francis found himselflegatee to a considerable property lefthim by that gentleman, together withhis splendid collection of pictures, which,at his own death, in 1811, he bequeathedto Dulwich College. " The number ofSir Francis Bourgeois' pictures," saysone of his biographers, "is considerable,and many of them possess distinguishedmerit. It is, however, to beregretted, that his various pursuits didnot allow his powers to take that extensiverange for which they were evidentlysufficiently qualified; and inseveral of his productions, a slight andhasty finishing is .observable, whichdiminishes the admiration we shouldotherwise feel for the ingenuity of hiscompositions, and the facility of hisexecution."BOYNE, (John,) was born in thecounty of Down, Ireland, about theyear 1759. His father originally carriedon the trade of a joiner, but wassubsequently appointed to a situationin the Victualling Office, at Deptford,from which he retired on a pension assuperannuated. The subject of ourmemoir was about nine years of age,when he came to England, where hewas apprenticed to Mr. William Byrne,the engraver. At the time of the expirationof his apprenticeship, his masterdying. Boyne succeeded him in hisbusiness, but finding the confinementnecessary to his success too much forhis buoyant spirit, he soon lost all hisconnexion. Henowspent his eveningsin dissipation, and, having at lengthsold all his tools, joined a company ofstrolling players near Chelmsford. Inthis situation he sustained, for a time,with tolerable applause, the joint characterof actor and author, but returnedto London in 17<S1, and taking lodgingsin Shoe Lane, commenced businessas a pearl-setter, in which he wasvery skilful. He next became masterof a drawing school, first in Holborn.and afterwards in Gloucester Street,Queen Square, where he had, among hispupils, Messrs. Holmes and Heathy.Yet he still continued to work as apearl-setter, and also turned his literaryabilities to some account. Several ofhis productions were inserted in TheOld London Magazine, and he alsopublished a letter to Richard BrindledSheridan, Esquire, on his late proceedingsas a member of the Society of theFreedom of the Press ; Observationson French Politics ; and Touchstone,or A Defence of those Artists who arelashed by Peter Pindar. For the firstwork, an anonymous correspondent senthim a present of \(). Boyne livedin a sottish and extravagant manner,and though, what with his engravingof caricatures, tuition in drawing, andpearl-setting, he obtained an amplesufficiency, he was always poor. Heused generally to frequent, in an evening,a public-house in West HardingStreet, where he entered himself, " although,"says his biographer, "a veryAPPENDIX.clean man," a member of the DirtyShirt Society. As an artist, thoughsoon forgotten, he attracted, or ratherhis productions attracted, some noticein their time. They consisted chieflyof heads from Shakspeare's plays, inwater colours, a branch of art then inits infancy. His biographer specifiesthe following subjects, also from hispencil, as possessing much merit : TheAssignation ; A Sketch to the Memoryof the Duke of Bedford; The MuckWorm, and the Glow-Worm, beingportraits of a miser and a voluptuary ;and his Meeting of Connoisseurs, acomposition full of humour. Boyne,who was a Roman catholic, died on the22nd of June, 1810, at his house inFenton Place, Pentonville.Bridge, (HENRY,) was born atPaddington, in the year 1768, and, atthe age of fourteen, was placed with Mr.Peter, the mezzo tinto engraver andlandscape painter. In 1784, he was admitteda student of the Royal Academy,and two years afterwards he obtaineda medal for the best drawing of anacademy figure. Sir Joshua Reynoldswas much pleased with the performancesof Edridge at the Academy, particularlywith a copy, in miniature, ofone of Sir Joshua's own pictures, whichhe insisted on purchasing from the subjectof our memoir, who would willinglyhave given it as a present. He notonly paid Edridge twice the sum asked,but meeting him a few days afterwards,insisted upon making him a still furtherpresent ; observing, that he hadsince sold the drawing to a noblemanfor a considerable profit,, and he wastherefore his debtor for the difference.During his apprenticeship with Peter,Mr. Edridge, having little or no tastefor mezzo tinto engraving, made anarrangement with his master to permithim to study miniature painting, whichbranch of business he commenced onhis own account, about the time of hismarriage, in 1789. His earliest workswere miniatures on ivory, and portraitson paper with black lead and Indianink. " It was only of late years," sayshis biographer, " that he made thoseelaborately high-finished pictures onpaper, uniting the depth and richnessof oil-paintings with the freedom andfreshness of water-colours, and of whichthere is perhaps scarcely a nobleman'sfamily in England without some specimens."Mr. Edridge, who was electedan associate of the Royal Academy in1820, died, much respected, on the 2.3rdof April, 1821.BURNET, (JAMES,) was born atMusselburgh, in 1788. His father wasgeneral surveyor of Excise in Scotland,and had married the sister ofCruikshank, the celebrated anatomist.On leaving school, he was placed underthe care of Liddell, the wood carver,but on the termination of his apprenticeship,resolved to study painting, andfar that purpose removed to London in1810, and took up his residence withhis brother John, the engraver. Thelatter was at the time employed uponan engraving of Wilkie's Blind Fiddler,and James was so struck with it,that Wilkie and the Dutch masters immediatelybecame his favourite studies.He drew sketches from nature in excursionsnear London, and was particularlysuccessful in his drawings ofanimals, which he seldom failed to introducein his landscapes. Consumptioncut short his very promising career ;he died on the 27th of June, 1816. As apastoral painter he has left few equals.Among his best pictures are, Cattlegoing out in the Morning, and Cattlereturning home in a Shower. In thelatter, which was purchased by SirThomas Ba-ring, Burnet is said to haveintroduced everything that could in anywaycharacterize the scene. " Therainbow in the sky," says an excellentjudge, "the glittering of the rain uponthe leaves, the dripping poultry underthe hedge, the reflections of the cattleon the road, and the girl with the gownover her shoulders, all tend with equalforce to illustrate his subject. His colouringhad the depth of Rembrandt,and the luminousness of Cuyp: hecould employ either with equal success.His pictures display considerable poeticfeeling, and a thorough acquaintancewith nature; his cowboys and milkmaidsare not without grace, and hiscows, a favourite animal with him,seem to enjoy the grass they feed upon."SCULPTORS.Shoemakers, (PETER,) wasborn at Antwerp, some time in the year1690. After having studied sculptureunder old Delvaux, he determined onvisiting Italy for further improvement,and possessing very inadequate fundsfor that purpose, set out to walk to Rome.He left Antwerp in 1728, but before hehad arrived at the 'eternal city,' hadbeen obliged to part with one or two ofhis shirts from his knapsack, in order toprocure him the means of subsistence.It seems, however, that before proceedingto Rome, he worked as a journeymanin some town in Denmark, wherehe was detained some time by illness.He was much noticed and encouragedin Italy, where he employed himself inconstructing models from most of thecelebrated statues and groupes in andabout Rome. With these he came toEngland, and after a short stay there,returned to Rome, where he remainedabout two years. At the expiration ofthis period, he settled as a statuary inLondon, and was soon employed uponseveral important works, which he executedin a manner that procured for hima high reputation. " Scheemakers, on hisway to England," says Smith, " visitedhis'birth-place, bringing with him severalroots of brocoli, a dish till then littleknown in perfection at our tables." Hefirst resided in Westminster, near St.Margaret's Church ; and afterwards, inDecember, 1741, removed to Vine Street,Piccadilly. He returned to his nativecity in 1769, and died there shortlyafterwards; "having," says Nollekens,grown so fat, that when he was kneelingdown to say his prayers, he placedhis legs under him with his hands."The principal works of Scheemakersare as follow : Dr. Chamberlain's monumentin Westminster Abbey; thestatue of Sir John Barnard, in the RoyalExchange ; of Admiral Cock, MajorLawrence, and Lord Clive ; in the IndiaHouse; of Guy, in Guy's Hospital; and ofEdward the Sixth, in the court-yard ofSt. Thomas's Hospital ; the two last inbronze. To these we may add the monumentsof Dr. Mead, in the TempleChurch, the statue of Shakspeare, inWestminster Abbey, and a variety ofadmirable busts in private collections.He was also employed in the decorationsat Stowe, where there are, besidesother of his works, life-size statues ofLycurgus, Socrates, Homer, and Epaminondas." Of Scheemakers' models,"says Smith, in allusion to the sale ofthem, " I have frequently heard myfather speak with considerable pleasure,when he used to state, that they wereplaced upon tables, stands, and shelves,covered with green baize, round theauction-room, and made a most beautifulappearance. One of them was a smallcopy of the Laocoon, in marble, whichwas bought by the Earl of Lincoln."RYSBRACH, (JOHN MICHAEL,)was the son of a landscape painter atAntwerp, according to Walpole atBrussels, according to Smith in one ofwhich cities he was born, about the year1694. He studied under Theodore galant,an excellent sculptor, and cAme toEngland about the year 1720, where hesoon obtained employment, reputation,and profit. He resided in Vere Street,Oxford Street, and died there on the 1 thof January, 1770. His principal worksare, the monuments, in Westminster Abbey,of Mrs.Oldfield, Sir Isaac Newton,Duke of Newcastle, Matthew Prior, AdmiralVernon, Earl Stanhope, and SirGodfrey Kneller ; the statue of Locke,in Christchurch College, Cambridge ;George the Second, at GreenwichHospital, &c. Several of his worksare also in our best private collections,especially the busts of the Englishworthies at Stowe, which have beenimproperly attributed, by Smith, toScheemakers.WILTON, (JOSEPH,) the son of awealthy plasterer, was born in London,APPENDIX.on the 16th of July, 1722, and at an earlyage, placed with a sculptor, at Neville,in Brabant. In his twenty second yearhe went to Paris, where he gained theAcademy's silver medal, and learnt towork in marble. He removed to Romein 1747, and, in three years, made progressenough to obtain the Jubilee goldmedal. On his return to England, hewas appointed state coach carver to theking, and dire or of the gallery openedby the Duke of Richmond, in SpringGardens. At the time of which we arewriting, it was the general custom forarchitects to design, and sculptors tocarve, so that the merit of the executionwas frequently overlooked in that ofthe invention. Wilton, however, whohad been left a large fortune by hisfather, at length resolved both to executeand design for himself; with whatsuccess, may be seen in his first publicwork the monument of General Wolfe,in Westminster Abbey. This was succeededby his monument of AdmiralHolmes ; of the Earl and Countess ofMonteith; of Pulteney, Earl of Bath;and a statue of George III., at the RoyalExchange. These performances havebeen rewarded with at least temporaryadmiration; but Wilton succeeded betterwith the chisel, in single figures from theantique, than in monumental groupes.His copies of the Venus, the DyingGladiator, the Laocoon, and the Apollo,are said to have been beautifully executed.He also modelled a few busts,but his talent in this way was completelyeclipsed by that of Noll-kens. On theestablishment of the Royal Academy,Wilton was appointed keeper, and continuedto hold that situation till hisdeath, which took place on the 5th ofNovember, 1803. He is said to havebeen a perfect gentleman, a warm friend,and an agreeable companion : SirJoshua Reynolds, and Dr. Johnson,were among the number of his guests.He was married, and had a daughterwho married Sir Robert Chambers, andstill survives. She presented the bustof her father, by Roubiliac, to theRoyal Academy. As a sculptor, Wiltonhas been excelled by many ; though, atthe time of his popularity, he had fewrivals, ;md possessed sufficient merit towarrant the very favourable receptionwhich his works met with. -DAMER, (ANNE SEYMOUR,) thedaughter of Field-marshal General Conway,was born in 1748. Her attachmentto sculpture is said to have beencreated by the following circumstance.When about eighteen years of age, shewas walking with the celebrated DavidHume, who excited her satirical observationsby giving a shilling to an Italianboy for some " paltry plaster images,"as she called them. " Be less severe,"was the historian's reply, ' these images,at which you smile, were not made withoutthe aid of both science and geniuswith all your attainments, now, you cannotproduce such works." Side shortlyafterwards showed Hume a head",which she had modelled in wax, thentried it in marble, and succeeded incalling forth the wonder and praise ofthe philosopher. Miss Conway now resolvedto pursue sculpture zealously andambitiously ; put herself under the tuitionof Cerrachi and Bacon ; and even consentedto learn the elements of anatomyfrom Cruikshanks. In 1767, she marriedthe Honourable John Darner, eldestson of Lord Milton ; the union broughther no happiness, and was terminatedby the suicide of her husband, an extravagantprofligate, on the 15th August,1776. She then set off on a tour to thecontinent, and after visiting Madrid,Rome, and Paris, returned to London,and, in conjunction with Mrs. Creweand the Duchess of Devonshire, canvassedamong the butchers and bargemenof Westminster, in behalf ofCharles Fox. As a sculptures, she hadalready attained some note, and fashionand royalty were loud in appreciationof her talents. At the peace of Amiensshe revisited Paris, and was introducedto Napoleon, who promised to sit to herfor his own bust, and treated her withmarked attention and respect. The emperorhaving spoken enthusiastically ofKnox, she returned to London, made abust of the English patriot, and goingback to Paris, presented it to Napoleon,who gave her, in exchange, a magnificentsnuff-box with his portrait set in diamonds.This is now in the BritishMuseum, having been left by herself tothat institution, together with a bust, inbronze, of Sir Joseph Banks, and otherof her own works. In 1797, she took upher residence at Strawberry Hill, in thewell-known villa which had been leftSCULPTORSher by Horace Walpole, but resignedit, in '18 IS, to Lord Landgrave, andremoved to York House, in the sameneighbourhood. Her enthusiasm forart continued unabated to the last: shefinished a bust of Nelson, in bronze, forthe Duke of Clarence, only a few daysprevious to her death, which took placeon the 28th of May, 1828. In person,Mrs. Darner was lightly and elegantlyformed ; her manners were fascinating,and in youth she is said tohave been very beautiful. Besidesmany accomplishments, she possessedno ordinary share of learning: Homer,Herodotus, Plutarch, Cicero and Livy,were among her favourite authors.Her principal works, in addition tothose already mentioned, are bustsof her father, Fox, Queen Caroline,and one of Nelson, in the Common-councilroom in the city of London ;two colossal heads of Thames and Isis,on the key-stones of Henley Bridge;a statue of George III., in the EdinburghRegister Office ; two marble kittens,and an osprey, in terra-cotta, forHorace Walpole, who has inscribed thefollowing pentameter on the latter :Non me Praxiteles fecit, at Anna Damer."Of the merits of Mrs. Damer, little, accordingto Allan Cunningham, is to besaid. He treats her as a vain, enterprisingwoman, who is constantly failingin all she attempts, and as constantlyimagining she has succeeded. A quotationfrom Smith is also brought in toassist an insinuation that the finesttouches in her works were not made byher own hand ; but sneers and conjecturesdo not afford us sufficient groundfor coming to .such a conclusion. Thather performances are of the highest orderhas never been insisted on ; but awoman of fortune and fashion, who devotesherself voluntarily and enthusiasticallyto a laborious and difficult art,and achieves in it so much as Mrs.Damer has done, must be surely one ofno common genius, and, among her ownsex, at least, almost a prodigy.LOCATELLI, (JOHN BAPTIST,)was born at Vienna, about the year1750, but came to England early in life,and settled in London, under the patronage,chiefly of Lord Orford. The celebratedMr. Rossi was, for some time,his pupil, but acquired from him, if wemay credit the assertion of Smith, nopart of his present excellence as a sculptor.Locatelli was employed occasionallyby Robert Adam, the 'architect, forwhom he executed, among other commissions,a chimney-piece for HarewoodHouse, in Yorkshire. He does not seemto have been an artist of eminence,though, in a pamphlet which he published,he asserts that he had been muchnoticed by the English at Verona andVenice ; and that, during his residenceat Milan, he was employed by CountVernier, M. Pilot, and Cardinal Crescent; and that he had executed upwardsof seventy statues and groupes for thebrothers 'Barton, &c. His name wasmore notorious than distinguished, inthis country, in consequence of a disputewith Lord Orford, and which gaverise to the pamphlet above mentioned.It appears that this nobleman had behavedwith great kindness to Locatelli ;but after having advanced him as muchas 350 on account of a gruupe of Theseusand Hercules, refused to receive it,when complete, on account of the badmanner in which it was executed lieagreed, however, to take the opinion ofa committee of artists on the subject:this was decidedly unfavourable to Lo-catella; to whom, however, Walpole generouslypaid a further sum, and, uponreceiving the groupe, sent it to Houghton,where it was subsequently destroyed inthe conflagration of that mansion. Nol-helensused to say of this groupe, that'' the figures looked like the dry skinsof two bricklayers, stuffed with clottedflocks from an old mattress ;" and, atother times, that " Locatelli must havestudied Goltzins's Hercules, a figurewell known to the collectors of engravings,under the appellation of the PotatoesMan, in consequence of his muscles appearingmore like that root than anythingproduced either above or belowthe earth." Locatelli left England in1796, for Milan, where he was patronizedby Buonaparte, and granted a pensionfor life. The time of his death isuncertain.PROCTER, (THOMAS,) an artist ofgreat promise, both as a painter andsculptor, was born at Settle, in theWest Riding of Yorkshire, on the 22ndof April, 1753. He was at first apprenAPPENDIX.tired to a tobacconist, at Manchester,but subsequently came to London, andbecame a clerk in the counting-houseof Messrs. Lawson and Ansley, merchants.He quitted these gentlemen tostudy painting and sculpture, and wasassisted and encouraged in his pursuitsby his late employers, who furnishedhim with money, and treated him, inother respects, with great kindness andliberality. In September, 1777, he wasadmitted a student at the Royal Academy,where he gained the silver medalin 1783, and, in the following year, thegold medal, for a historical picture.He also gained a prize from the Societyof Arts. He seems to have been a greatfavourite with the other students ; forwhen the gold medal was awarded tohim, they carried him down stairs intriumph, and rushing with him upontheir shoulders into the quadrangle ofSomerset House, shouted out " Procter !Procter!" Upon hearing them, Harryexclaimed, with an oath, " The lads havecaught the true spirit of the ancientGreeks." The chief pictures which hehad painted, at this time, were, Adamand Eve, and The Approach of Venus tothe Island of Cyprus. As a sculptor, heacquired great reputation at the Academy,by an admirable model of Ixion onthe Wheel, and a fine model of Diomedesthrown to his Horses. The former waspurchased by Sir Abraham Hume, butthe size of the latter prevented it frombeing sold, in consequence of which,Procter, being unable to pay for a placeto keep it in, actually knocked it topieces. In 1794, he was chosen by theAcademy as their student, to be sent toRome, but no one could find him, to informhim of the appointment. He wasat length discovered by Mr. West, in anobscure lodging, and in a deplorablestate of poverty, from which he wastemporarily relieved by that benevolentartist ; but before he was ready to startfor Italy he was found dead in his bed.He died in his forty first year, and wasburied in Hampstead Church-yard.Procter's countenance indicated the geniusand intelligence of his mind, whichwas well stored with classic reading.Mr. West ranked him with the first-ratemodellers ; but, as a painter, hismerit seems to have been equivocal. Heonce sent an immense picture, on thesubject of the druids, to Somerset House ;but the academicians thought it so feeblea performance that they declined givingit accommodation. They all, however,thought highly of his abilities, and, unwillingto wound his feelings in the presentinstance, by the appearance of rejectinghis picture, told him that it wastoo large to be admitted into any oftheir show-rooms. Nollekens said, ofhis Ixion, " I don't see why Ixion shouldbe made going round on the wheel withhis eyes almost closed ; I am sure I couldnot sleep under such torture." WhatNollekens really thought of Procter'smerit is not very clear; for, in one place,Smith says, " As a painter, Mr. North-coteassured me he could not praiseProcter ; but, as a modeller, he spoke inthe highest terms of his talents : " and,in another, " Mr. Nollekens used to saythat Procter had less merit as a modellerthan a painter." Mr. Westmacott,however, thought highly of Procter asasculptor, and, in one of his lectures, exhibitedhis groupe of Spirituous, and Ixionon the wheel, expatiating upon themas works of true genius, and in everyrespect worthy the attention of thestudent in sculpture.ARCHITECTS.EDWARDS, (WILLIAM,) was bornin the parish of Eglwysilan, in Gladwhere his father kept asmall farm, about the year 1719. Hisearly education was confined to theWelsh language ; he, subsequently,learned to read English from a blindman, with whom he lodged, at Cardiff,whilst employed in building an ironforge there. The first indications whichhe gave of his taste for architecture wasin his fifteenth year, when he amusedhimself in repairing the stone fences ofthe country; which he executed in sosuperior a manner, that he began to beemployed as a house builder. He wasremarkable, at this period of his career,for the firmness and neatness of hismasonry ; the principles of which he issaid to have formed upon a carefulstudy of the remains of CaerphillyCastle, in his native parish. In hiseighteenth year, he obtained from aneighbour some instruction in arithmetic;and, soon after, by erecting amill, acquired his first knowledge ofthe principles of the arch. This enabledhim to undertake, in 174fi, thebuilding of a bridge over the Taaf;which he finished, with three arches, inastyle of elegance never before seen inthat country. Unfortunately, however,a flood, of unusual height, swept thebridge away, not long after its completion; and having contracted to upholdhis work for seven years, he wasobliged to begin a new bridge ; inwhich, says his biographer, he adoptedthe daring design, inspired by truegenius, of throwing a single arch acrossthe river, the span of which was onehundred and forty feet, and its altitudethirty-five feet; supposed, at that time,to be the widest arch in the world. Hehad only the parapets to finish, whenthe pressure of the heavy work over thehaunches caused it to spring up in themiddle, so as to force out the key-stones;a disaster which he remediedby making three cylindrical aperturesin the work above the haunches, whichreduced the weight so much, that futuredanger from the same cause was fullysecured against ; whilst the contrivanceimparted to the bridge an additionalair of elegance. The whole work wascompleted in 1755 ; and " has sincestood the wonder of Wales." He was.soon after, employed to bird severalother bridges in South Wales, makingnew improvement! as he proceeded, inaccordance with i is three leading principlesof bridge architecture, durability,free passage of the water under, andcommodious passage for travellers over.In addition to these labours, whichcomprised, besides bridge architecture,the building of forges and smelting-houses,for the numerous metallic worksin that part of the country, he officiated,on Sundays, as a dissenting minister.His congregation rewarded him with aweekly salary ; but his circumstanceswere such, that he was enabled togratify his charitable desires by distributingthe whole of it among the poor.He died in 1789, leaving a large family,and highly respected for his talents,probity, and piety.ADAM, (ROBERT,) was born atKirkcaldy,in Fifes hires the year 1728.He was 'the son of an architect, andreceived his education at Edinburgh ;whence he proceeded, for professionalimprovement, to Italy, and remainedthere for some years. In 1762, he wasappointed architect to the king andqueen ; and, in 17C4, published, infolio, the result of some researches hehad made at the ruins of the EmperorDiocletian's palace, at Spalatro, in VenetianDalmatia. The work is enrichedwith seventy-one plates, all executedin the most masterly manner ;and may be considered a worthy companionto Mr. Stuart's Athens, or Mr.Wood's Balbec and Palmyra. In 1768,Mr. Adam was elected member forthe county of Kinross; in consequenceof which* he resigned his office ofarchitect to their majesties. He hadAPPENDIX.been, for some time, employed, inconjunction with his brother, in embellishingmany ancient mansions, andconstructing modern ones; and, in1773, they published a joint work, entitled,The Works in Architecture ofRobert and James Adam, Esquires ;No. I. containing part of the Design ofSion House. &c. In the preface, theyremark, that with respect to the noveltyand variety of the designs, they havenot trod in the paths of others, norderived aid from their labours. "Inthe works," they write, " which wehave had the honour to execute, wehave not only met with the approbationof our employers, but even withthe imitation of other artists, to sucha degree, as, in some measure, tohave brought about, in this country, akind of revolution in the whole systemof this useful and elegant art." Thislanguage is somewhat assuming; yet ithas been confirmed by subsequentwriters on the same subject. In 1774,appeared the second ; in 1775, the third ;and, in 1776, the fourth number, oftheir architectural works. Mr. Adam,.who was a fellow of the Royal andAntiquarian Societies, died at his house,in Albemarle Street, London, on the3rd of March, 1792, and was buried inWestminster Abbey ; his pall beingsupported, at the funeral, by six noblemen.Among the many elegant publicand private buildings erected by thesubject of our memoir, were : theAdelphi ; the improvements at Whitehall,Edinburgh, &c. ; Lord Mansfield'svilla, at Caenwood ; Luton Park House,&c. &c. " Mr. Adam," says hisbiographer, " introduced a total changein the architecture of his country ; andhis fertile genius in elegant ornament,was not confined to the decoration ofbuildings, but has been diffused intoalmost every branch of architecture.His talents extended beyond the line ofhis own profession : he displayed, inhis numerous drawings in landscape, aluxuriance of composition, and an effectof light and shadow, which have scarceever been equalled. To the last momentof his life, he displayed an increasingvigour of genius, and refinementof taste ; for, in the space of oneyear, preceding his death, he designedeight great public works, besidestwenty-five private buildings ; so variousin their style, and so beautiful in theircomposition, that they have been allowed,by the best judges, sufficient ofthemselves to establish his fame unrivalled,as an artist."EMLYN, (HENRY,) was born aboutthe year 1730, and having adopted theprofession of an architect, manifestedsuch abilities, that he was employedby King George the Third, in thewhole management of the architecturalimprovements in St. George's Chapel,Windsor. " To enter on a description,"says his biographer, ' of thechapel, in its present state, wouldfar exceed the purpose of this smalltribute to his memory. It may bebetter to excite a curiosity for visitingthat chapel, by stating, that no edificeof the kind in Europe is, perhaps, equalto it in beauty. The taste and judgment,also, in preserving the harmonybetween the old and new parts of thebuilding, have scarcely ever beenequalled, and never have been excelled."Mr. Emlyn gives an account of a neworder of architecture, of which he declaredhimself the inventor, in a workpublished in 1784, folio, with plates.This design consists of a double pillar,from a single pedestal, and originatedfrom his observation of the twin trees ;as the idea of the single pillars in theother orders has supposed to have beenderived from the single trunks of othertrees. Mr. Emlyn, who was a fellowof the Society of Antiquaries, died atWindsor, on the 10th of December,1815, and was interred in St. George'sChapel.Milne, (ROBERT,) was born inEdinburgh, on the 4th of January, 1733.His father was an architect and magistrateof his native city ; and from himthe subject of our memoir received thefirst part of his professional education.He afterwards visited Italy, where hebecame a member of the Academies ofRome, Florence, and Bologna ; and, atthe first place, gained the highest prizein the architectural class, at the Academyof St. Luke. On his return home, hecommenced the practice of his profession; and, among other undertakings,engaged in the erection of Black friarsBridge ; which was completed, accordingto his design, in 1765, and for theARCHITECTSvery sum specified in his estimate,namely, 153.000. It was the firstwork of the kind executed in this country,in which arches approaching to theform of an ellipsis, were substituted forsemicircles ; by means of which theroadway is brought much nearer to alevel surface than in bridges constructedon the old plan. In 1762. he wasappointed engineer to the New RiverCompany ; and, in 1767, was chosen afellow of the Royal Society. He wasalso appointed surveyor of St. Paul'sCathedral ; and, after" his death, whichtook place on the 5th of May, 1811,was himself buried there, near the tombof Sir Christopher syren.DANCE, (GEORGE,) son of GeorgeDance, Esq., architect of the presentMansion House, London, was bornabout the year 1740. Having beeneducated for the same profession, thesubject of our memoir purchased, on thedeath of his father, in 1768, the officehe had. held, of clerk of the works tothe city of London, and resigned it in1816. Mr. Dance was early elected aroyal academician ; was one of thecouncil from 1795 to 1797; and formany years professor of architecture tothe Royal Academy, although he neverlectured. He was appointed auditor in1798; and continued to hold that situationuntil his death, which tookplace on the 14th of January, 1824.GANDON, (JAMES,) was born aboutthe year 1742 ; and, after having receiveda good education, became thepupil of Sir William Chambers, andmade rapid progress under that celebratedmaster. He was the first studentwho obtained the gold medal at SomersetHouse, for architecture; and acquiredconsiderable reputation in hisprofession, by various building, bothin England and Ireland. At Dublin,he constructed the magnificent CustomHouse, the four courts, King's Inn, andthe portico to the Bank (formerly theHouse of Lords), all of which displaymuch classic beauty and originality.Few architects," says his biographer,have been more fortunate in beingemployed on so many important publicworks, or more successful in availingthemselves of the opportunities offeredthem ; for almost every one of hisbuildings are eminently beautiful, combiningmuch picturesque effect, withcorrect taste." Besides the buildingsabove-mentioned, he was the architectof the Court House, Nottingham, andthe Court House, at Waterford. Healso acquired great reputation as anauthor, by his publication of VitruviusBritannica; to which, in conjunctionwith Mr. Wolfe, he added two supplementaryvolumes. He was a fellow ofthe Antiquarian Society, and of theRoyal Irish Academy ; and died atCannonbrook, near Lucan, Ireland, onthe 29th of January, 1824.HARRISON, (THOMAS,) was bornat Richmond, in Yorkshire, in the year1744. Having shewn a taste for drawing,he went to Rome, about the year1769, where he studied with great successfor several years. Some designswhich he made for the embellishmentsof the square of Santa Maria del Po-polo,were particularly admired, andobtained him, from the hands of PopeGanganelli, a gold and silver medal,and admission into the Academy of St.Luke, by a special order. Mr. Harrisonreturned to England in 1766. andwas soon after employed in building abridge over the Lime, at Lane-aster,consisting of five arches, being the firstlevel bridge constructed in this country.He also designed and executed the improvementsand alterations in LancasterCastle, rebuilt the gaol, and countycourts of Chester, and gave designs orthe new bridge across the Dee, to beformed of one arch of two hundred feetspan. His other principal works are,the column at Shrewsbury, erected inhonour of Lord Hill ; the triumphalarch at Holyhead, built to commemoratethe king's landing there; the jubileetower upon Model Mamma, to commemoratethe fifty years of the reign ofGeorge the Third; The Athenaeum,and St. Nicholas's Tower, in Liverpool ;and the Theatre and Exchange buildingsin Manchester. He also designseveral noblemen's houses ; and amongothers, Brome Hall, the residence ofthe Earl of Eljjin. Mr. Harrison diedat Chester, on the 29th o. March, 1829.ENGRAVERS.PLACE, (FRANCIS,) son of Mr.Rowland Place, of Distal, in thecounty of Durham, was born about theyear 1650. At a proper age he wasarticled to an attorney in London, butthe house where he resided being shutup, in 1665, in consequence of theplague, he took this opportunity of desertinga profession he disliked, andof following," says Lord Orford, " theroving life he loved, and the arts forwhich he had talents." He is 1 supposedto have studied under Barlow, thoughsome have named Collar as his master.He drew and engraved views of Tine-mouthCastle and Light-house ; the Cathedralof York ; Scarborough Castle ;several plates for Thereby's Topographyof Leeds, besides various otherviews in England, Wales, Scotland,and Ireland, and the figures for Go-darius'sBook of Insects. Lord Orfordalso mentions a book, containing " sixty-sevenexcellent and useful prints ofbirds and beasts," executed by Place,who died in the manor-house of York,in the year 1728. During the reign ofCharles the Second, he was offered apension of 500 per annum, to drawthe royal navy, but declined acceptingit, having amassed a competence without.STURT, (JOHN,) was born in Londonin the year 1658, and died in 1730.He is chiefly celebrated for his excellencein the engraving of letters, ofwhich he gave an admirable specimenin his Book of Common Prayer, engravedon silver plates. In this work,each page is headed with a vignette,and prefixed thereto, is a portrait ofGeorge the First, in which the lines ofthe king's face are expressed by writing,so small, as scarcely to be readable withthe aid of a magnifying glass. Besidesthis work, which came out by subscription,in 1717, he published A Companionto the Altar, executed in thesame manner. Another ingenious productionof Sturt's was, an elegy onQueen Mary, so minutely engravedthat it might be set in a ring.PINE, (JOHN,) was born in 1690,and after having received a classicaleducation, devoted himself to the art ofengraving, in which he became veryeminent. Little more has been statedrelating to him, than a list of his works,of which the principal are, ten admirableprints, representing the tapestryhangings in the House of Lords, whichwere so highly approved, that the parliamentpassed an act to secure to himthe emoluments arising from them.To accompany them, he engraved fiveother plates ; namely, A View of theCreation of Charles Brandon, Duke ofSuffolk; The House of Peers, withHenry the Seventh on the Throne ; thesame, with the reigning king on thethrone, and the Commons at the bar ;The House of Commons; and, TheTrial of Lord Lovat, in WestminsterHall. He also engraved the whole textof Horace and Virgil's Bucolics andGeorgic, illustrated with ancient bas-reliefsand gems. He died on the 4thof May, 1756; having been previouslyappointed blue mantle to the Herald'sCollege, and engraver of signet sealsand stamps.WORLEDGE, (THOMAS,) was bornin the year 1701, and at first practisedminiature painting and portraits in oil ;but not meeting with encouragementin either of these departments of art,he abandoned painting, and devotedhimself entirely to engraving. Hefinished his plates with the point ofthe graver, or the scratching of a drypoint, and was very successful in imitatingthe style of Rembrandt. Besideshis prints, which are very numerous,and possess considerable merit, he executeda considerable number of antiquegems, and left some highly esteemeddrawings on vellum in Indian ink andKKO&AVKK8.black lead. Two of his best prints are,Marcus Nullius Cicero, after the marbleat Oxford, and The Installation ofthe Earl of Westmorland, as Chancellorof the University of Oxford.MAJOR, (THOMAS.) was born inLondon, in the year 1719, and was,according to the account given of himby Thomas Wilson, Esq., an eminentcollector of engravings, " directly descendedfrom that Richard Major, ofHarley, whose daughter was marriedto the 'Protector, Richard Cromwell."He went, early in life, to Paris, wherehe studied engraving under Le Bas,and engraved several plates afterBerghem, Wouvermanns, &c. Duringhis residence at Paris, the battle ofCulloden was fought, and in consequenceof the capture of an Irish regimentin the service of France, theFrench, by way of reprisal, imprisonedsuch Englishmen as they could find intheir own country. Major was, in consequence,arrested, and confined in theBastille, hut was released, after aboutthree months of durance, by the interferenceof the governor, the Marquessd'Argenson, several of whose picturesMajor afterwards engraved. On hisreturn to England, he was appointedengraver to the Prince of Wales, andsubsequently to the king, and die-engraverto the Stamp office. When thegreat seal was stolen, on the 24th ofMarch, 1784, Major was commissionedto provide another, and completed oneof brass in twenty-four hours. This,upon his making one of silver, wasreturned to him in 1792, and "wasconverted," says his biographer, " intoa tea-urn, in which state it remains ;and, as it is seldom used, produces,perhaps, less hot water than it wouldhave done as a great seal," Major's residencein London was, successively,West Street, St. Anne's, Soho, St. Martin'sLane, and lastly, Tavistock Street,Covent Garden, where he died, in theyear 1799. Major engraved in a neatfirm style, and has been justly complimentedby Walpole. in the last pageof his Catalogue of Engravers in England.He was intimate with Hogarth,Strange, Nollekens, and other eminentartists of his day. His principal worksare, a set of twenty-four prints, entitled,The Ruins of Rectum, otherwiseFosidonia, in Magna Grecian. alter tiedesigns of J. B. Barra ; The Departureof Jacob, after F. Laura ; TheGood Shepherd, after Murillo ; twolandscapes, after Gaspar Poussin ; alandscape, with a man driving sheep,after Rubens ; two Flemish Festivals,after Teniers ; The Menage, afterWouvermanns ; The Travellers, afterN. Berghem ; and portraits of JohnCarteret, Earl of Granville, and CardinalPole.BERRY, (WILLIAM ) was born inScotland, about the year 1730, and, asastone and seal engraver, held toodistinguished a station to be omitted inthe present class. He commencedbusiness at Edinburgh, and for severalyears confined his views to the usualdrudgery of his art ; but having studiedsome ancient intaglios, he at lengthdetermined to venture into a higherwalk. His first essay was a head ofSir Isaac Newton, which he executedwith a precision and delicacy thatastonished all who beheld it. Thefriend to whom he consigned thisspecimen of his talents, by showing itto others, spread abroad the name andtalents of our artist; yet so ill was herepaid for the few works of this kindwhich were intrusted to him, that hefelt it to be his duty, for the sake of hisfamily, to confine himself to the morehumble branch of his art. " When," sayshis biographer, " he was occasionallyasked to undertake some finer work, hegenerally found, that, though he onlydemanded perhaps half the moneywhich he could have earned in humblerwork during the same space of time,yet even that was grudged by his employers;and he, therefore, felt thatmere considerations of worldly prudencedemanded his almost exclusive attentionto the ordinary walk of his profession."He could not, however,abstain altogether from following theimpulse of his genius; and in thecourse of a few years, he executedvarious heads, any one of which, it issaid, would have been sufficient to gainhim immortal fame among judges ofexcellence in this department. Themost striking of these heads were,Thomson, the poet, Mary Queen ofScots, Oliver Cromwell, Julius Caesar,a young Hercules, and Mr. Hamilton ofHappen Dix.Bangor. The whole number of headsexecuted by Mr. Berry did not exceedtwelve, yet the beauty of his workmanshipsoon made his name known in theworld of art, and his performances wereat length compared with, and, by manydistinguished cognoscenti, preferred to,those of the celebrated Richer, at Rome.This success, without relieving him fromthe drudgery of seal cutting, was themeans of rendering that occupation stillmore irksome ; it, however, enabledhim to gain his family a subsistence,and to die unembarrassed, though inanything but affluent circumstances.He expired on the 3rd of June, 1783,leaving a numerous family, and not lessrespected for his private virtues thanremarkable for his abilities as an artist.Of his merits and modesty, as anheraldic seal cutter, though indisputablythe first of his time, the following anecdote,related in Chambers' Scottish BiographicalDictionary, will give thereader some idea: Henry, Duke ofBuccleugh, on succeeding to his titleand estates, was desirous of having aseal cut, with his arms properly emblazonedupon it; but as there wereno fewer than thirty-two compartmentsin the shield, which was of necessityconfined to a very small space, so as toleave room for the supporters, and otherornaments within the compass of a sealof ordinary size, he found k a matter ofgreat difficulty to get it executed.Though a native of Scotland himself,the noble duke had no idea that therewas a man of first-rate eminence in thisart, in Edinburgh ; and, accordingly, hefirst applied to the most eminent sealengravers in London and Paris, all ofwhom declared it to be beyond theirpower. At this time, Berry was mentionedto him, with such powerful recommendations,that he was induced topay him a visit, and found him, as usual,seated at his wheel. The gentleman,who had mentioned Mr. Berry's nameto the duke, accompanied him on hisvisit. This person, without introducingthe duke, snowed Mr. Berry the impressionof a seal which the duchessdowager had got cut many years before,by a Jew in London, then dead, andwhich had been shown to others as apattern, asking him if he could cut aseal the same as that. After examiningIt a little, Mr. Berry answered himreadily that he would. The duke, atonce pleased and astonished, exclaimed,Will you indeed!" Mr. Berry, whothought this implied some doubt of hisability to perform what he undertook,was a little piqued, and turning roundto the duke, whom he had never beforeseen, he said, " Yes, sir ; if I do notmake a better seal than this, I willrequire no payment for it." The duke,highly pleased, left the pattern withMr. Berry, and went away. The originalcontained, indeed, the variousdevices of the thirty-two compartmentsdistinctly enough to be seen ; but noneof the colours were expressed. Mr.Berry, in proper time, finished the seal,on which the figures were not onlydone with superior elegance, but thecolours of every part so distinctlymarked, that a painter could delineatethe whole, or a herald blazon it, withperfect accuracy. For this extraordinaryand most ingenious labour, hecharged no more than thirty-twoguineas, though the pattern seal hadcost seventy-five.BASIRE, (JAMES,) was born inLondon, in the year 1730, and studiedengraving, at first under his father, andsubsequently under Richard Dalton,with whom he travelled to Rome.Nothing has been recorded of theparticulars of his life, except that hewas engraver to the Royal and AntiquarianSocieties. He died in 1802.Among his engravings are, CaptainCook, after Hodges ; Lady Stanhope,as the Fair Penitent ; Lord Camden,after Reynolds ; Orestes and Placesbefore Iphigenia, after West ; and TheField of the Golden Cloth, after thepicture at Windsor. This last is thelargest print that has been engraved onone plate, about twenty-seven inchesby forty-seven inches. Basire was avery eminent artist in his time ; buthis works, in point of accuracy andfinish, bear no comparison with theprincipal architectural engravers of thepresent day.Liar, (MATTHEW,) was born atParis, in 1736, but came to Englandwhen very young, where he was employedin engraving some plates forMr. Boydell's collection. Such, at least,is the statement of Bryan ; but SmithENGRAVERS.asserts, upon good authority, that hewas born in London, where his fatherwas a maker of surveyors, a relishingkind of sausage." He studied underHaven't, the engraver, and drew at theRoyal Academy, where he gained asilver medal for the drawing of a figurefrom the life. He also obtained a prizefrom the Society of Arts, and seems tohave been an artist of no ordinarytalent Mr. West thought highly of histalents, and predicted his success inhistorical composition, if he would studythat class of art. He died in 1782,and was buried at Paddington. His bestengravings are from Mr. West's picturesof Venus and Adonis, and Cephalicand Proclus.GREEN, (VALENTINE,) was bornin Warwickshire, in 1739, and intendedby his father for the profession of thelaw. He was accordingly articled to asolicitor at Evesham, in Worcestershire,but soon abandoned the desk, and,without his father's concurrence, becamea pupil to an obscure line-engraverat Worcester. In 1765, he cameto London, where he became eminentas a mezzo tinto engraver, and sharedwith Earlom and M c Ardell, the meritof being the first to give consequenceand variety to that particular mode ofengraving. In 1789, Mr. Green obtainedfrom the Duke of Bavaria apatent for the exclusive privilege ofengraving and publishing prints fromthe pictures in the Dusseldorf gallery ;but after he had published twenty-twoprints of that collection, the Frenchinvasion of Bavaria put a stop to thefurther prosecution of his plan. In 1767he was elected a member of the IncorporatedSociety of Artists of GreatBritain; in 1774, one of the six associateengravers of the Royal Academy; and onthe foundation of the British Institution,he was appointed keeper. During aperiod of upwards of forty years, Mr.Green produced nearly four hundredplates, engraved from the most celebratedpainters, ancient and modern.His best are those of Hannibal andRegains, after West ; which may rankamong the ablest and most energeticefforts of mezzo tinto. As an author, hemade himself favourably known by hispublications of A Survey of the City ofWorcester ; A Review of the Polite Artsin France, under Louis the Fourteenth,compared with their present state inEngland, 1783; and the History of theCity of Worcester. Mr. Green' died inJuly, 1813.HALL, (JOHN,) was born at Ivanhoe,near Colchester, Essex, on the21st of December, 1739. He came toLondon at an early period of his life,and was at first engaged in paintingornaments upon china for the manufactoriesat Chelsea, then under thedirection of Sir Stephen Janson. Afterwards,turning his attention to engraving,he was placed under the care ofMr. Haven't, with whom he remainedtwo years beyond the stipulated time.During his apprenticeship he gaveproofs of very superior skill and ingenuity; and is said, when only seventeenyears of age, to have executed a drawingin pen and ink, in imitation ofengraving, in such a manner, that noone but a nice judge could distinguishit from an engraving. Mr. Hall residedfirst in Berwick Street, and afterwardsin Cumberland Street, near the NewRoad, where, it is said, he never enjoyedhis health, from suffering so much forthe loss of his son-in-law, Storace, thecelebrated composer. Upon the deathof Woollett, he was appointed historicalengraver to the king, and, on that occasion,presented to his majesty, atWindsor, his print of The Battle ofthe Boyne, from a picture by West. Hedied on the 7th of April, 1797, leavingseveral children, one of whom becamemaster of Pembroke College, Oxford.Hall excelled in that department of artwhich is called the line or stroke engraving.His principal works are,Pope Clement the Ninth, after CarloMarattiti ; Sir Robert Boyd, Lieutenant-governorof Gibraltar; William Warburton,Bishop of Gloucester, afterHare ; Richard Chenevix, Bishop ofKillaloe; Richard Brindled Sheridan,M. P., after Reynolds; Sir WilliamBlackstone, Lord Chief-justice of theCommon-pleas, after Gainsborough ;George Colman, after the same; EdwardGibbon, historian, after Reynolds ;Timon of Athens, after Dance; WilliamPenn, treating with the Indians for theProvince of Pennsylvania, after West;Oliver Cromwell dissolving the LongParliament, after the saint ; and TheA 1' P E N D I X .Death ot the Duke of Schomberg, at theBattle of the Boyne, after the same.Earldom, (RICHARD,) was bornin London, in the year 1743. Hisfather was many years vestry clerk ofthe parish of St. Sepulchre, and livingnear to an eminent coachman, wherethe .lord mayor's carriage occasionallycame to be repaired, his son there imbibeda predilection for art, by seeingthe allegorical paintings on the panels.Being placed as a pupil with Cipriani,he acquired a mastery in the art ofdesign, and in 1765, was employed byAlderman Boydell to make drawingsfrom the Houghton collection, andafterwards to engrave them in mezzo-tinto.Mr. Earlom had been his owninstructor in this branch of art, and heintroduced into the practice of it improvementsand instruments before unknown.He died on the 9th of October,1822. Among Mr. Earlom's best worksare, his exquisite fruit and flower pieces,after Van Huysum; Agrippina, afterWest; the Cock Match at Lucknow,the Embassy of Hyderbeck to meetLord Cornwallis, and the Tiger Hunt,all after Zoffani. He also publishedthe first and second parts of Claude'sLiber Veritatis,SMITH, (JOHN RAPHAEL,) the sonof Mr. Thomas Smith, of Derby, thelandscape painter, was born about theyear 1750, and died in 1811. He particularlydistinguished himself as amezzo tinto engraver, and executed agreat number of plates of differentkinds, both from his own designs andthe compositions of other masters, ofwhich his portraits are particularlyadmired. Among the most esteemedare, the Duke of Devonshire, WilliamMarkham, Archbishop of York, LadyBeaumont, Mrs. Musters, and someothers, all after Sir Joshua Reynolds.Among his historical engravings, wemay mention one of The Bard, fromGray's celebrated ode, and others fromthe designs of Fuseli. Mr. Smith,besides engraving, drew portraits incrayons with great success.LEGAT, (FRANCIS,) was born inScotland, in the year 1755, and waseducated at Edinburgh, where hestudied under Runciman, the artist.He came to London in 1780, and looklodgings in Charles Street, Westminster,where he engraved a plate of MaryQueen of Scots resigning her Crown,and Northcote's celebrated picture ofThe Children in the Tower. For thelatter, he was so amply remunerated byAlderman Boydell, that he was enabledto send to Scotland for his mother, towhom his conduct throughout life wastruly exemplary. In 1790, he removedto Sloane Square, and thence, successively,to Camden Town, and CharlesStreet, Middlesex Hospital, where hedied, on the 4th of August, 1809, andwas followed to the grave by a respectablebody of mourners, among whomwas Stothard, the academician. Accordingto Smith, his decease was hastenedby a disappointment which he had Isustained in being unable to obtainsubscribers to a plate which he hadcommenced of Stothard's Death of Aber-crosbie,Legat, though an artist ofability, seems to have died poor, as wearetold by Smith, that his debts werepaid by his steady friend, the father ofthe present General Kemp. " His styleof engraving," says the same authority,is powerful and clear, particularly in thefigure of Cassandra (after a picture byRomney), but 1 do not mean to compareany of his works to Strange's extraordinaryprints after Guido, orWoollett's La Hogue, or Sharpe's JohnHunter; but next to those specimens,I know of no work of engraving executedwith more skill and effect, thanthe head and helmet of one of themurderers, from Northcote's picture, thechiaro-scurf of which, unquestionably,is most admirably calculated for a fineprint." His chief works besides thosealready mentioned, are, his engravingof Ophelia, from a picture by West ;The King, Queen, and Laertes, fromthe same artist ; The Continence ofScipio, after Poussin ; The Death ofCordelia, from a picture by Barry ; andtwo vignettes for Bell's British Theatre.Legat is described, by his biographer,as a sensible, intelligent man ; gentle inhis manners, and serious, except whenenlivened by the conversation of hisfriends. He drew better than thegenerality of engravers ; and is said tohave written, though he never published,some tolerable pieces of poetry,jE N G k A V L II 6 ,THEW, (ROBERT,) the son of aninnkeeper, in Yorkshire, was born inthat county, in the year 1758. Afterhaving passed some years as a commonsoldier in the Northumberland militia,he settled at Hull, as an engraver, employinghimself, at first, on cards, shopbills, &c. At length he attempted historicalengraving, and succeeded sowell in the head of an old woman, afterGerard Dow, and other pieces, that hewas, through the recommendation ofCharles James Fox, and other noblepatrons, appointed engraver to thePrince of Wales. He was then employedby Alderman Boydell, for whomne engraved, besides other works, nineteenlarge plates from the paintings ofReynolds, Shee, &c., for Boydell'sShakspeare. Mr. Thew died at Stevenage,in Hertfordshire, in July, 1802.SMITH, (JOHN THOMAS,) the sonof a sculptor, who afterwards kept aprint shop, was born in a hackney-coach,on the 23rd of June, 1766. In 1779,he entered the studio of Nollekens,and after studying three years underthat celebrated sculptor, attended theRoyal Academy. He completed hisprofessional education under the eminentengraver, John Keys Sherwin,but seems to have given "up, for sometime,the burin for the pencil, and was,for many years, a drawing master.In 1816, he was appointed keeper ofthe prints of the British Museum, whichsituation he still 'holds. His principalworks are, Antiquities of London andits Environs, &c. ; Remarks on RuralScenery, with Twenty Etchings ofCottages from Nature, &c. ; Antiquitiesof Westminster, &c., containingtwo hundred and sixty-six engravingsof topographical objects, of which onehundred and twenty-two no longer remain; Ancient Topography of London,&c. Mr. Smith published, in 1828, awork called Nollekens and his Times,which went through three editions.It contains a vast deal of amusinggossip, and much information, not to bemet with elsewhere, respecting thecontemporaries of Nollekens ; but, as abiographical work, it has but littlemerit. In an autobiographical sketchof himself, the following paragraph issaid to have been written by Mr. Smith;I can boast of seven events, some ofwhich great men would be proud of.I received a kiss, when a boy, from thebeautiful Mrs. Robinson was pattedon the head by Dr. Johnson have frequentlyheld Sir Joshua Reynolds'sspectacles partook of a pot of porterwith an elephant saved Lady Hamiltonfrom falling, when the news arrivedof Lord Nelson's death threetimes conversed with George the Thirdand was shut up in a room withMr. Kean's lion."COOKE, (GEORGE,) was born inLondon, in January, 1781. His fatherwas a native of Frankfort-on-the-Maine,but had settled in England early in life,and acquired a handsome competencyby his business, as a wholesale confectioner.The subject of our memoirlearnt the profession of an engraver,under James Basire, and not long afterthe termination of his apprenticeship,he was employed to execute severalplates for The Beauties of England andWales. He was engaged for manyyears in contributing to Pinkerton'sCollection of Voyages and Travels, andother works, chiefly topographical ; andfrom 1814 until 1826, in executingplates for The Southern Coast of England; a work, to use the words of acritic, " memorable on many accounts,and of incalculable importance for itsaction both on the public taste and theart of engraving." It was planned byMr. Cooke, in conjunction with hisbrother William, their object being tomake the public acquainted, by thispublication, with the works of Turner,then more generally talked of thanknown. Of the plates, Mr. GeorgeCooke engraved one-third, namely,Poole, Land's-end, Corse Castle, Black-gangChine, Nether Abbey, Teign-mouth,Brighton Beach, BrightonChain Pier, Pendennis Castle, WalworthCastle, Dover, Margate, Hythe, TintagelCastle, and Watched, together witheight vignettes. He also contributedthree admirable plates to his brother'sedition of The Thames, and engravedthe plates affixed to the Transactions ofthe Geological Society, until they disusedcalcographic, and adopted lithographicillustrations. His masterly executionof the plates in The Southern Coast ofEngland, caused him to be engaged onBakewell's Italy, and the ProvincialAPPENDIX.Antiquities and Picturesque Scenery ofScotland. In the latter, Edinburgh,from the Canton Hill, after Turner ;Edinburgh, from St. Anthony's Chapel,and Edinburgh, from the Braid Hills,both after Callcott, rank with the happiestefforts of art; of the Edinburghviews, in particular, " it is not," says acritic, " too much to assert, that, at thetime of their appearance, they wereunequalled." Mr. Cooked preparedthe publication of a series of engravingsfrom drawings by Callcott, but the lossof a large sum, by the defalcation of thepersons whom he had deputed to receivefor him the profits arising fromthe sale of his plate of Rotterdam,prevented him from carrying his planinto execution. He also began a work,entitled, London and its Vicinity, buthe was not able to carry it beyond thetwelfth number, in consequence ofthe opposition of a cheap periodicalwork, but every way inferior in execution.For the last fourteen years, hehas been engaged in engraving platesfor The Botanical Cabinet, undertakenby him, in combination with the Messrs.Lodges, of Hackney, and the firstnumber of which appeared in May,1817. Besides the works above-mentioned,we should not omit to noticeMr. Cooke's admirable engraving, froma drawing by Alexander, of Bacon'sStatue, at St. Albans ; some cleverplates for the Society of Dilettanti ; forAllison's Pola ; Mr. Stanhope's Topographyof Olympia; and the engravedMarbles and Terra-cotta, published bythe trustees of the British Museum.SCOTT, (JOHN,) was born at ,in the year 1784, and,at an early age, was apprenticed toMr. Greenwich, a tallow chandler in hisnative town. Devoting his leisurehours to drawing and engraving, heshowed some of his productions to aneighbouring friend, by whose recommendationScott applied to Mr. Pollard,the engraver of Newcastle, who consentedto take the former as his pupil,gratuitously. Here he made rapidprogress in his art, and coming toLondon, became one of the most famousanimal engravers of his day. Latterly,he was unable to work, in "consequenceof ill health, and he lost his reason forsome time before his death, which tookplace at Chelsea, in February, 1828.He was one of the eight artists whomet together in the years 1809-10, toform a fund for the benefit of decayedartists ; and he himself became an objectof its bounty. His master-pieceswere, the Fox-chase, from Heinagleand Marshall's painting, and the Dearof the Fox, from a picture by GildingCOMPOSERS.CREIGHTON, (ROBERT,) a celebrateddilettanti composer, and son ofthe learned Bishop of Bath and Wells,Dr. Robert Creighton, famous for hisattachment to Charles the First, wasborn in 1639. On his return from thecontinent, where he accompanied hisfather on his flight from England, heentered into holy orders, and appliedhimself so sedulously to the study ofchurch music, that he attained a proficiencywhich has entitled him to rankamong the ablest masters of his day.He was raised to the dignity of a canonresidentiary of the cathedral of Wells,and was also made a chanter, in 1674.He proceeded to the degree of D. D.previously to his death, which took placein the city of Wells, at the advancedage of ninety-seven, in 1736. His beautifulanthem of " I will Arise, and go tomy Father," which no one can perusewithout regretting that it should be soshort, is inserted in Page's HarmoniaSacra ; and several of his compositionsfor the church are yet extant in manuscript,in the books of the cathedral ofWells.PEPUSCH, (JOHN CHRISTOPHER,)was born at Berlin, in 1667, where hisfather was minister to a dissenting congregation.After having studied thetheory and practice of music, under twodifferent masters, he was sent for tocourt at the age of fourteen, and employedto teach the harpsichord to thePrince of Prussia. He came to Englandsoon after the Revolution, and was engagedin the band at Drury Lane Theatre,employing the remainder of histime in pursuing his musical studies,and in composing and adapting operasfor the stage. In 1713, he obtained thedegree of doctor of music, from theUniversity of Oxford, and, about thesame time, was appointed Maestro diCapella to the Duke of Chandos, atCanons. In 1722, he married anItalian actress, with a fortune of 10,000,but still continued his professionallabours. He joined some other performersin laying the plan of theAcademy of Ancient Music ; and when,in 1724, Bishop Berkeley formed hisProject of a college at the Bermudas,;push embarked as one of the professors,but returned home in consequenceof his vessel being wrecked.Besides other dramatic music, he selectedthe tunes for The Beggar's Opera,and furnished them with excellent basses.The public taste for the new music ofHandel and Bononcini beginning toprevail, the subject of our memoir, whopossessed little invention, and was prejudicedin favour of antiquity, gave upcomposition, and applied himself chieflyto the theory of music; in which, indeed,he was equal to the greatestmusicians of modern times. In 1737,he was appointed organist to the CharterHouse, and was soon after appointed afellow of the Royal Society; to whoseTransactions, he contributed An Accountof the Ancient Genera of Music.He lost his wife in 1740, and devotedthe remainder of his life to researchesconnected with his favourite science.Attaching himself," says Dr. Burney,"to the mathematician, De Moivre, andGeorge Lewis Scott, who helped himto calculate ratios, and construe theGreek writers on music, he bewilderedhimself, and some of his scholars, withthe Greek genera, scales, diagrams,geometrical, arithmetical, and harmonicalproportions; surd quantities, apo-tomes,lammas, and every thing concerningancient harmonics, that wasdark, unintelligible, and foreign to commonand useful practice." He died in theyear 1752, leaving his manuscript compositionsto the Academy of Ancient Music.His very valuable musical library,which he had spent great part of hislife in collecting, was dispersed afterhis death. No one was better acquainted,than Pepusch, with the theory of modernmusic down to the sixteenth century ;APPENDIX.and he was so thoroughly versed, it issaid, in the mechanical laws of harmony,that, in glancing his eye over a score,he could at once reduce the wildest andmost incoherent notes to melody. Wemay mention, as a proof of his industry,that he told Dr. Burney, that when hewas a young man, he determined neverto go to bed at night till he knew somethingthat he did not know in themorning. His most valuable publicationis considered to be his edition ofCorelli's Sonatas and Concertos in Score,and a short treatise of his own on Harmony,first published by the Earl ofAbercorn, one of his pupils, in 1731.ECCLES, (JOHN,) son of SolomonEccles, a performer on the violin, wasborn about 1668. He first becameknown as a composer for the theatre, ofact tunes, dance tunes, and some incidentalsongs ; a collection of which heprinted, and dedicated to Queen Anne.He also set to music Congreve's Ode forSt. Cecilia's Day, performed in 1701,and was awarded the second prize forthe music of that author's masque, entitled,The Judgment of Paris. About1698, he was appointed master of thequeen's band, and soon after retiredto Kingston, in Surrey, where he died,some time previously to the accession ofGeorge the Second. The most popularpieces of his writing, are Fill, fill allyour Glasses ; Wine does Wonders everyDay; and A Soldier and a Sailor, inCongreve's comedy of Love for Love,which has been adapted to the wordsin The Beggar's Opera, A Fox maysteal your Hens, Sir.KING, (CHARLES,) a musical composerof some celebrity, was born about1669, and educated in the choir of St.Paul's Cathedral, under Dr. Blow.After having officiated as a supernumerarysinger in that cathedral, he tookthe degree of bachelor of music, in1704, at Oxford ; and, on the death ofJeremiah Clarke, succeeded him asalmoner and master of the children ofSt. Paul's. In 1730, he was elected avicar-choral of that cathedral, and at thetime of his death, which occurred inMarch, 1745, was also organist of St.Bennet Finch, in London. He was thecomposer of some anthems, and a greatnumber of services; whence Dr. MauriceGreene used to say, that " Mr. Kingwas a very serviceable man." Four ofhis anthems are inserted in Page's HarmoniaSacra, and two in Stevens'sSacred Music; but his writings are notheld in any very high degree of estimation.CLAYTON, (THOMAS,) the earliest,perhaps, who attempted to improve thetaste of the English school of music,was born about 1670, and became amember of the royal band of music inthe reign of William and Mary. Hewas a man of very inferior talents, butmust have possessed devotion for thescience he professed, since he, early inlife, undertook to travel into Italy forimprovement. Having persuaded himself,it is said, that he could reform thebad taste of the English school, by hisown compositions in the Italian style,he feo far imposed on the good sense ofthe public, on his return to England,as to obtain the reputation of an eminentmusician ; and several persons ofdistinction were persuaded into a belief,that by means of his assistance, rusticitywould no longer be the characteristic ofEnglish music. "He had brought vviihhim," says the author of The MusicalBiography of the three last centuries,"a collection of Italian airs, which heset a high value on. Some of these hemangled and adulterated, and then,adapting them to the words of thedrama of Arsinoe, had it performed inthe theatre of Drury Lane, in 1705, asan opera composed by himself." Inthis composition, Dr. Burney tells us,not only the common rules of musicalcomposition were violated in every song,but also the prosody and accents of thslanguage in which they were written.Public prejudice, however, caused iito be favourably received ; but hisadaptation of Addison's Opera of Rosamondwas condemned on the thirdnight. It was, indeed, an execrableperformance, and Clayton's reputation,such as it was, sank to rise no more ;he died about the year 1730.BARRETT, (JOHN.) born about1674, was a pupil of the celebrated Dr.Blow. He obtained the appointment ofmusic-master to the boys of Christ'sHospital; of organist of' St Mary atHill, London, and died about 17?.J.COM POS F RS.He was a good musician, and wasthe composer of several popular songsin plays performed in his time. Amongothers, lie composed that sweet air,laurie the lovely, adapted to thewords in The Beggar's Opera, Whenhe holds up his Hand, arraigned for hisLife, and there are some of his compositionsin The Pills to purge Melancholy.WELDON, (JOHN,) was born inChichester, about the year 1680. Hewas a pupil of Purcell's, and, afterhaving officiated, for some time, asorganist of New College, Oxford,removed to London in 1701. In thesame year he was made a gentleman-extraordinaryof the Chapel Royal, and,seven years afterwards, he succeededDr. Blow, as organist there ; being, atthe time, organist of St. Bride's, FleetStreet. In 1715, upon the establishmentof a second composer to the ChapelRoyal, he was selected to fill the post,and gave ample proof of his fitness, bythe composition of a communion-service,and several anthems, agreeably to theterms of his appointment. He was agreat favourite with George the First ;and, when that prince presented theparish of St. Martin-in-the-Fields withan organ, he was chosen organist, probably,in compliment to his majesty.He died in 1736, and was succeeded, inhis place at the Chapel Royal, by Dr.Boyce. Weldon has scarcely been excelled,by any of our early composers ofchurch music, for taste and sweetness.His solo anthems have considerablemerit ; but are inferior to his full anthems,particularly those to the words,In Thee, O Lord, and Hear my crying;" of which it is difficult to say,whether the melody or harmony of eachbe its greater excellence. One of hissolo anthems, I will lift up mine eyes,is inserted in the first volume of Page'sHarmonia Sacra ; and, with another,O Lord, rebuke me not, is also inprint as a single anthem. His studies,however, were not entirely confined tosacred pieces : for he set to music Congreve'smasque, The Judgments Paris,and thereby (brained the first of lourprizes, paid out of a sum of 200, subscribedby persons of quality, to begiven for the best compositions on theabove subject.Islam, (JOHN,) a composer of considerable,but ill-appreciated merit, wasborn about 1685. Under what masterhe received his musical instruction isnot known, but he was the friend andcontemporary of Dr. Croft, whose deputyhe was for many years ; and when thatlearned musician resigned his place oforganist of St. Anne's, Westminster, in1711, he procured I sham to be electedin his stead. He had the degree ofBachelor of Music conferred upon himby the university of Oxford, in 1715,and in 1718 he was elected organist ofSt. Andrew's, Holborn, which he subsequentlyresigned for St. Margaret's,Westminster. He died in 1726, leavingbehind him, in manuscript, several valuableservices and anthems for the church.The words of two anthems, composedby him, namely, Unto Thee, O Lord,and, O Sing unto the Lord a New Song,are in the collection made by Dr. Croft,and published in 1712, entitled, DivineHarmony.ROSEINGRAVE, (THOMAS,) wasborn about the year 1695, in Dublin,where his father was one of the vicars-choralin the cathedral of St. Patrick.He received the first part of his musicaleducation in his native city, whence hewas sent, at the expense of the chapterof St. Patrick's, to Italy. How long hestudied at Rome, where he arrived in1710, is uncertain, but in 1720, he appearsto have had some concern in themanagement of the opera at the Hayward; for, in that year, he brought upon thestage, with some additional songs of hisown, Scarlatti's opera of Narcissus. Heafterwards became a teacher of music,in the principles of which he was deeplyskilled ; though his style, both of playingand composing, is said to have beenharsh and forbidding. About 1725, hewas appointed organist of St. George's,Hanover Square, then newly erected ;and shortly afterwards, being rejectedby a lady 'on whom he had fixed hisaffections, his intellect became deranged,in a singular, but irrecoverable, manner.He declared that he heard the strings ofhis heart crack, at the time he receivedthe lady's refusal, and on that accountused to call the disorder of his intellectshis relation, from the Italian verbprepare, to crack. After this unfortunateadventure, he was never able to hearA P P K N D I X .any noise without emotion; and if,during iii performance on the organ, anyone.near him coughed, sneezed, or blewhis nose with violence, he would instantlyquit the instrument, and run outof the church, seemingly in the greatestpain and terror, crying out, that it wasOld Scratch that tormented him, andplayed on his creation. On account ofthis occasional insanity, he was, in 1737,superseded as organist of St. George'sChurch, by Feeble, who, up to the periodof Roseingrave's decease, in 1750,generously divided his salary with him.Roseingrave, who was such an enthusiasticadmirer of Palestrina, that he usedto decorate his bedchamber with scrapsof passages from his works, published acollection of Scarlatti's Lessons for theHarpsichord, in which are containedalso two or three of his own, besidessome Voluntaries and Fugues for theOrgan and Harpsichord ; and TwelveSolos for a German Flute, with a thoroughnessfor the Harpsichord.COOKE, (BENJAMIN,) born about1730, was son of Benjamin Cooke, a in New Street, Covent Garden.His father, who died when he was butnine years of age, placed him with Dr.Pepusch, under whom his progress wasso rapid, that, at twelve, he was competentto the duty of deputy-organist ofWestminster Abbey. After the foundationof the Academy of Ancient Music,he was a constant attendant at their performances,and on the decease of Dr. Pegin 1752, became conductor, apost he continued to hold for thirty-sevenyears. In the same year, he succeededBernard Gates, as lay clerk, andmaster of the boys at WestminsterAbbey, and in 1762, he was appointedorganist. In 1775, he proceeded to thedegree of doctor of music, at Cambridge,where he performed, as an exercise, hisanthem, Behold, how good and joyfully !originally composed for the installationof the late Duke of York as a knightof the Bath. In 1782, he was electedorganist at St. Martin's-in-the Fields ;and two years afterwards, George theThird nominated him to be one of thegiib-dirertors of the grand commemorationof Handel. From the age ofthirty, he had been subject to occasionaltits of the gout, and to dissipate theireffects, the summers of 1790, and threefollowing years, were passed by him inexcursions to Ramsgate, Brighton, Oxford,and Windsor. On his return fromthe latter place, in the autumn of 1793he was seized with an attack in thelegs, and died on the 14th of Septemberin that year, leaving two sons. Hisprivate character was extremely amiable,and he is described by Miss Hawkins,daughter of Sir John, as one of the worthiestand best-tempered men that everexisted. Dr. Cooke's compositions,which were chiefly written for the Academyof Ancient Music, the choir, orCatch Club, are characterized by correctness.But though he is alwayselegant, he is seldom deeply impressive,and rarely evinces a genius that couldsoar beyond the bounds of education.His chief printed works are, two booksof canons, glees, rondos, and duets ;Milton's Morning Hymn, and Collins'sOde on the Passions. Amongst themost popular of his secular productions,have been the exquisite duets, Thyrsus,When he left Me; and, Let RubinelliCharm the Ear; his chorus, I havebeen Young ; and his glees, Hark theLark, As the Shades of Eve, How Sleepthe Brave, In Paper Case, and, In theMerry Month of May.HAYES, (WILLIAM,) was born aboutthe year 1708, and was appointed, earlsin life, organist of St. Mary's Church,Shrewsbury, which situation he retainedtill a vacancy occurring at Christchurch,Oxford, he was chosen to fill it. Here ,he was admitted to the degree of doc ;tor of music, and he afterwards became ,organist of several of the colleges, andwas elected to the dignity of musicalprofessor. He had the sole conduct and jmanagement of the concerts and music-meetingsat Oxford, from his entry onhis professorship, till the time of hisdeath, which happened in 1779. Hewas considered a studious and activeprofessor, as well as an excellent performeron the organ ; was liberal in hisviews, and so learned in his profession,as to have assisted in the publication ofDr. Boyce's Cathedral Music. Whilstat Shrewsbury, he composed and printeda Set of English Ballads; a few of hisglees, catches, and canons, have alsobeen published. When Avison's bookappeared, in which Geminiani andMarcello were preferred to Handel,COMPOSERS.Hayes answered him with some acrimony,not only de f ending Handel, butaccusing Avison himself of ignorance ofcounterpoint.KENT, (JAMES,) was born in Winchester,on the 13th of March, 1700.He received the first part of his musicaleducation in the choir of that cathedral,under the tuition of Vaughan Richardson; but, after some time, was removedto London, and admitted one of thechildren of the Chapel Royal, underDr. Croft. His first public situationwas as organist to the church of Fenton,in Northamptonshire ; from which heremoved, on being appointed to a similarpost at the chapel of Trinity College,Cambridge. In 1737, he quitted it tobecome organist of Winchester Cathedral,and of the chapel of WinchesterCollege, on which occasion the Societyof Trinity College presented him withan elegant piece of plate. He died inhis native place, universally respected,in the year 1776; having, a short timepreviously, published in score a volumeof twelve' anthems. As a composer ofsacred music, he ranks among the mosteminent masters of this country, especiallyfor a due intermixture of thatharmony and melody which rentersthis species of music interesting bothto learned and unlearned auditors.His Hearken unto this, O Man! and,When the Son of Man, are trulysublime compositions in the solemnstyle. The fourth verse in The Lordis my Shepherd, as a bass solo, andthe sixth verse, in which the twovoices unite, produce a striking andmost pleasing effect ; the one by its majesticsimplicity, and the other by itspastoral, yet elegant harmony. Fewanthems have obtained more celebritythan, O Lord, our Governor, My Songshall be of Mercy, and, Hear my Prayer ;nor, it may be added, are the works ofany composer more frequently heard inour cathedrals, and the chapels of collegesand collegiate churches, or moredevoutly listened to, than are those ofJames Kent. After his decease, Mr.Corse, the organist of Salisbury Cathedral,published a second volume of hisworks, containing A Morning and EveningService, and Eight Anthems, inaddition to the twelve he himself printed.Some of these have been printed separately,and a few of them have beenadmitted into the Harmonia Sacra :and other editions of his compositionshave also been printed for the use of ourcathedrals and churches.TRAVERS, (JOHN,) was born about1703, and commenced his education inthe choir of St. George's Chapel, Windsor,where, attracting the attention ofDr. Henry Godolphin, Dean of St.Paul's, and Provost of Eton, that gentlemanapprenticed him, at his ownexpense, to the celebrated Dr. MauriceGreene, under whom and Pepusch, hecompleted his musical education. About1725, he became organist of St. Paul's,Covent Garden, and afterwards of Fulham.In 1737, he succeeded JonathanMartin, as organist of the Chapel Royal,which situation he held till his death,in 1758. In the chapel books are sundryanthems of his composition ; but asacomposer, he is best known to theworld by eighteen canzonets, beingverses and songs, chiefly taken from theposthumous works of Prior, which heset for two and three voices, in a styleas elegant as it is original. Amongstthese is the much admired duet ofHaste, my Nanette. He likewise publishedthe whole of the Book of Psalmsfor one, two, three, four, and five voices,with a thorough-bass for the harpsichord.SMITH, (JOHN CHRISTIAN,) thefriend and associate of Handel, underwhom his talents were principallyformed, and several of whose oratorioshe produced, was born about 1705. Hewas conductor of several grand concertsbetween the years 1732 and 1768, includingeight performances of Handel'sSamson. Amongst his own compositionsare, Teraminta, an opera, producedin 1732; Rosalind, in 1739; The Lamentationof David, or, The Death ofSaul and Jonathan, an oratorio; andSix Sets of Lessons for the Harpsichord.We have been unable to ascertain thetime of the death of Smith, whose reputationwas greater than the veryscanty memorials, which are to be foundrespecting him, would lead us to imagine.NARES, (JAMES,) brother of SirJames Nares, one of the Judges of theCourt of Common Pleas, was born about1.516APPENDIX,1710. Nothing is recorded of his earlyeducation, and the first menti n ofhim, as a p illic character, is as organistof the cathedral church of York, wherehe composed several anthems and services,and obtained a celebrity thatcaused him, on the death of Travers,in 1758, to be promoted to the post oforganist and composer of the ChapelRoyal, London, having, the year previously,had the dignity of doctor ofmusic conferred upon him at Cambridge.He afterwards succeeded BernardGates, as master of the childrenof the Chapel Royal, but resigned thissituation in 1780. The former he retained,with great credit, till his decease,which happened at his residence inGreat James Street, Westminster, onthe 10th of February, 1783. Dr. Nares'scompositions display great genius, anda thorough knowledge of the science ofmusic. They are not numerous, andwere principally for the church. Amongthe principal are, his anthems, Behold,how good and joyful ! and O Lord myGod ! which are inserted in Stevens'ssecond volume of Sacred Music, and abeautiful service in the key of C.ALCOCK, (JOHN,) was born inLondon, on the llth of April, 1715.At seven years of age, he was entered achorister of St. Paul's, under CharlesKing, and at fourteen, was articled tothe celebrated blind musician, Stanley.Jn 1737, he' was elected organist of St.Andrew's Church, Plymouth, where hepublished, by subscription, twelve songs,and six suites of lessons, for the harpsichord.In January, 1742, he removedto Reading, to fill the situation of organist,by Mr. Stanley's recommendation.Here he published six concertosfor instruments, a set of psalm tunesand hymns, which he had composedfor the use of the charity children;also, a collection of old psalm tunes,and several canons. Jn 1749, he wasoffered, and accepted, the place oforganist of Litchfield Cathedral, withthose of vicar-choral and master of theboys. In 1755, the University of Oxfordconferred upon him the degree ofbachelor, and, ten years afterwards, thatof doctor of music. In 1761, he waschosen organist of Sutton Colfieid, inWarwickshire ; and in 1765, of Tarn-worth,in Staffordshire; both of whichhe was allowed to hold, with his post ofvicar choral. Being fond of retirement,and but little disquieted with passingevents, it was not till 1770, that he learntthe existence of The Nobleman's andGentleman's Catch Club, when he waspersuaded to become a candidate fortheir several prizes. This was so latein the year, that the period allowed fordelivering in performances had nearlyexpired, added to which, he was closelyengaged in correcting the proof sheetsof a volume of Anthems he was aboutto publish. Under these circumstanceshe produced his pleasing, scientific,and successful glee, Hail ! ever pleasingSolitude, to which the medal wasadjudged. In the two following years,the prize medals for the best canonswere also awarded to him : but aftergaining a fourth medal, for anotherflee, he declined further competition,n 1 77 1 , appeared his volume of twenty-sixanthems, which have been occasionallyperformed in almost every choirin the kingdom ; and in 1791, was publishedhis Harmonia Festa, a collectionof canons, glees, and catches. In1793, he experienced a severe shock inthe loss of his wife, to whom he hadbeen married upwards of fifty-five years.In 1802, he published his collection ofOne hundred and six Psalm Tunes, entitled,The Harmony of Sion, the worksof different composers, harmonized forsoprano, tenor, and bass, forming anexcellent collection of what is calledthe good old psalmody." He died atLitchfield, in March, 1806, in the ninety-firstyear of his age, leaving a son, organistof Newcastle-undermine, andthree daughters. He was a most amiableand conscientious man, a goodmusician, and a learned and scientificcomposer ; by no means wanting in theelegances of his art, but attached moreto sacred than secular composition.For twenty years before his death,"says the author of Musical Biography,he was the oldest vicar-choral inLitchfield Cathedral, yet he was scrupulousin the performance of his dutiesas such; though frequently remindedof his right to indulgence by the deanand chapter, and latterly afflicted withgout and disease, brought on by ageand infirmity ; he was seldom knownto avail himself of his privileges, exceptamonth or two in the winter, whichCOMPOSERS.he was accustomed to spend withhis daughters in London." Besides theworks already named, he composeda church service in the key of E,published in 1753, and a set of fifty-fivedouble and single chaunts.Alison, (CHARLES,) an eminentcomposer, but of whose life few particularsare known, is supposed to have beenborn at Newcastle, about the year 1720.He visited Italy in his early days,where he studied music with industry ;and on his return, became a pupil ofGeminiani, then resident in England.He was afterwards elected organist ofNewcastle upon-Tyne, but he firstbecame known to the public in 1752,when he published his well-knownEssay on Musical Expression, which,says the author of Musical Biography,contains some judicious reflections onmusic ; but his divisions of the modernauthors into classes, is rather fanciful."Throughout the whole of this work,Marcello and Geminiani are lavishlyeulogized ; the latter frequently to theprejudice of Handel, in whose defencea pamphlet was published, theensuing year, by Dr. William Hayes,professor of music in the University ofOxford, entitled, Remarks on Mr. Alison'sEssay on Musical Expression.Soon after Avison re-published hisbook, with a reply to Dr. Hayes, inwhich he displayed no new powers asan antagonist, but added a letter, containingmany detached particulars relativeto music. His other compositionsextant are, five collections of concertosfor a full band (forty-four in number),some quartets and trios, and two sets ofsonatas for the harpsichord and twoviolins, a species of music little knownin England till his time. The characterof the music of Avison is light and elegant,but deficient in originality, a necessaryconsequence of his too closeattachment to the style of Geminiani.It is said that, when that eminent composeraffected to treat with contempt thecompositions of Handel, he used to say,Charley Alison shall make a betterpiece of music in a month's time." Ofhis Essay on Musical Expression, awriter in The Harmonicon says, " itattracted the notice, not only of thedilettanti, but of general readers ; for,being written in easy and rather elegantstyle, avoiding, as much as possible, allterms purely technical, and treating thesubject in a manner that rendered itinteresting to the philosophical inquirerinto the rationale of composition, itfilled up, for a time, at least, a chasm inliterature, and not only laid down rulesfor the guidance of the composer thatis to say, the composer capable of thinkingbut furnished the lover of musicwith some means of reasoning on an artthat afforded him pleasure, for whichhe had, till then, been unable to accounton anything like fixed principles." Inthe second edition which appeared ofthis work, in 1753, was added an ingeniousand learned letter to the author,concerning the music of the ancients,since known to be written by Dr.Fortin. Mr. Avison died at Newcastle,on the 10th of May, 1770.HARRINGTON, (HENRY,) of thesame family as the author of the Oceana.and the translator of Orlando Furioso,was born at Nelson, in Somerset-shire,in 1727. After having receive.!the early part of his education undera private tutor at home, he wasplaced under the care of his uncle,William, vicar of Kingston, in Wiltshire,and by him sent to Queen's College,Oxford, in 1745, where he discoveredsuch an acquaintance with mathematics,music, and poetry, as astonished hisfellow collegians, and created so great.a feeling of jealousy amongst them,that many felt ashamed, it is said, attheir inferiority to what they called(the college being mostly filled withmen from the north,) a " west-countryboy." He graduated B. A. in 1748;and having abandoned all thoughts ofthe church, commenced the study ofmedicine, on the recommendation ofan eminent physician at Bath, hisuncle, from whom, however, he receivedno assistance. He remained atOxford till he commenced M. A. in1751, soon after which, he proceededto that of doctor of medicine, and leftcollege with the reputation of being oneof the first classical scholars of his day,though he owed it rather to quicknessof comprehension, than a habit ofstudy, for which he was never remarkable.He had been previously electeda member, and was one of the " chiefornaments," it is said, of the OxfordAPPENDIX.Society, founded by the celebrated Dr.William Hayes, the professor of music,known as " the Gentlemen Musicians,"none of whom were permitted toperform, unless they could both playand sing at sight It was this connexion,probably, and his great loveof music, that was the cause of hisfounding, after he settled at Bath, thecelebrated Harmonic Society, the objectof which was the performance of glees,catches, &c., though none but gentlemenof character were ever allottedfor. The number of subscribers becamevery great ; and besides many ofthe first nobility, George the Fourth,and his brother, the Duke of York,were constant attendants during theirsojourn in Bath. Harrington attainedthe uncommon age of eighty-nine ;Sing on the 15th of January, 1816.2 was a man of great abilities andalmost universal acquirements ; of ahumane and benevolent disposition ;and highly respected as a physician,in which character he practised formany years, both with advantage tohimself and the public. A tew yearspreceding his decease, he was selectedto fill the office of mayor of Bath, theduties of which station he dischargedwith credit and dignity. The characteristicsof his compositions are,originality, tenderness, and correctharmony. In some of his humorousproductions, particularly Old ThomasDay, and The Alderman's Thumb, hewas very successful ; but if he reallywas the composer of that charmingduet, How sweet in the Woodlands,which has been universally ascribed tohim, though some say upon doubtfulauthority, that alone would have givenhim a high reputation, as long as themusic of our native composers shall bepreserved to us. Among other of hisproductions of a high character, is hiscatch, How great is the Pleasure ; andhis Egyptian love song, printed in theHarmonicon for 1830. " The city ofBath," says Parke, in his MusicalMemoirs, speaking of the time whenthe doctor had produced such an effectupon society there by his spirited example," formerly teemed with musicalexcellence, and many striking compositionswere given to the public, byseveral of its distinguished residents,among whom may be noticed the Earlof Mornington, who composed thebeautiful glee, Here, in cool grot ; Dr.Harrington, celebrated for his largewig, and the favourite duet, How sweetin the Woodlands, &c."AYRTON, (EDMUND,) the son of arespectable magistrate, was born atRipon, in Yorkshire, in 1734. He wasintended for the church ; and with thatview, was placed at Ripon grammarschool, .where he was contemporary withBishop Porteus for five years. Hisearly display of a strong passion formusic, induced his father to removehim to York, where he was placedunder the organist of the church, Dr.Nares. His progress was such, that hewas, at an early age, elected organist,and rector chore of the collegiatechurch of Southwest, in Nottinghamshire,where he resided some years,and married a lady of family. Heremoved from thence to London, in1764, on being appointed gentleman ofthe Chapel Royal; he was, shortlyafter, installed a vicar-choral of St.Paul's Cathedral, and he subsequentlybecame a lay clerk of WestminsterAbbey. In 1780, Bishop Louth madehim master of the children of the ChapelRoyal, upon the resignation of Dr.Nares. In 1784, the University ofCambridge conferred upon him the degreeof doctor of music, to which rankhe was, some time afterwards, admittedin the University of Oxford. His exerciseon this occasion, which he afterwardspublished in score, was a grandanthem for a full orchestra, which wasordered to be performed at St. Paul's,on the occasion of the general thanksgivingfor the peace, on the 29th ofjuly of the above year. In the sameyear, he was chosen one of the of the celebrated commemorationin Westminster Abbey, apost he sustained in all the subsequentperformances in the Abbey. In 1805,he relinquished the mastership of thechildren of the Chapel Royal, havingfor many years previously been permittedto execute the duties of all hisappointments by deputy. He died in1808, and was buried 'in the cloistersof Westminster Abbey, near his wife'sremains and those of several of hischildren. " Dr. Ayrton," says tt eauthor of The Dictionary of Musicians,COMPOSE US*was an excellent musician, of whichhis compositions for the church bearindubitable evidence. The performanceof these has been confined chiefly to theRoyal Chapel ; but the publication ofthem, which has been long expected,would usefully augment the musicalresources of our various choirs, and addno small lustre to the name of thisauthor."HAYES, (PHILIP,) son of the eminentprofessor, Dr. William Hayes, wasborn in Shrewsbury, in 1739. Hereceived the principal part of his musicaleducation under his father, andwas, early in life, admitted one of thegentlemen of the Chapel Royal, inLondon. He resided in the metropolistill about 1779, when he succeededhis father as professor of music at Oxford,having previously taken his degreeof doctor of music. He presided atall the celebrated music meetings atOxford, till 1797, in the March of whichyear he came to London, for the purposeof attending the ensuing festivalof the Musical Fund. He had dressedhimself on the morning of the 19th, inorder to attend the Chapel Royal, butwas suddenly taken ill, and expiredsoon after. His body was deposited inSt. Paul's Cathedral, where several of themost eminent musical men attended asmourners. Mr. Hayes is described byParke as resembling'Falstaff in bulk andgood-humour ; and he is said to havenearly equalled in weight the celebratedMr. Bright, the miller of Maiden,in Essex. When he came from Oxfordto London, he had two places taken forhim in the stage-coach, from which,after he was got in (a work of somedifficulty), he was not removed till hearrived "at his journey's end. Thewriter of an article respecting him, inRees's Cyclopaedia, however, so farfrom allowing him a character for goodhumour, says of him, " with a verylimited genius for composition, andunlimited vanity, envy, and spleen, hewas always on the fret ; and, by hissituation, had the power, which henever spared, to render all musiciansuncomfortable. No one entered theUniversity, occasionally, or from curiosity,who did not alarm him." Respectinghis compositions, little isknown ; they consist chiefly of anthemsand services, and are said, in manyrespects, to possess great excellence.ARNE, (MICHAEL,) son of the celebratedDr. Arne, was born about 1740,and was able to execute, on the harpsichord,at the age of ten or eleven, thelessons of Handel and Scarlatti, withwonderful rapidity and correctness. Sogreat, indeed, had been his practice,and such was his perfection on this instrument,even at this early age, thatit was (nought he could play betterthan any other living performer. Afterhaving produced his opera of Cymon,his professional pursuits were, for awhile, interrupted by his devotion tochemistry, in which he carried his researchesso far as to entertain somehope of discovering the secret of transmutingmetals into gold. He subsequently,however, composed for CoventGarden, Vauxhall, and Ranelagh ; hutof his other works, or at what time hedied, there seems to be no record.As a composer," says his biographer,Dr. Arne did not, indeed, possess thatlofty taste, nor that power of writingbeautiful melody, which were so conspicuousin his father ; yet there is acertain good sense which pervades allhis works : though it must, at the sametime, be observed, that if some of themwere less complex, they would, perhaps,be more pleasing. Upon thewhole, however, his merits very justlyentitle him to a high and distinguishedrank amongst the modern English composers."Solomon, (JOHN PETER,) wasborn about the year 1740, at Bonn, inthe electorate of Cologne. He waseducated for the law, but soon desertedthat profession for music, and was, forsome time, in the service of PrinceHenry of Prussia, at Berlin, where hecomposed several French operas. In1781, he visited Paris, but not meetingwith sufficient encouragement, came toLondon, where he soon became a popularviolin player. In 1791, he gavethe first of a series of concerts, at whichHaydn was expressly engaged to preside,and which introduced Mr. Brahminto public notice, for the first time.These concerts, which were very wellattended, and contributed to the improvementof the musical taste of theOAt>wVA P P E N I) 1 X.town, were discontinued in 1796. In1798, he brought out Haydn's Creation,at the Opera Concert Room ; and, in1801, he took the Haymarket Theatre,in conjunction with Dr. Arnold, for theperformance of oratorios. Mr. Salomonwas a constant attendant at the privateconcerts of the Prince of Wales, whodirected a pension of 200 a-year to beassigned to him ; but Lord Liverpoolwould not sanction the grant. He wasa principal originator of the PhilharmonicSociety, and continued to attendits meetings, till within a short periodof his death, which took place on the28th of May, 1815. " Salomon," saysa writer in The Harmonicon, " wasone of the few whose right to contendfor the honour of being the greatestperformer in Europe on the violin, wasundisputed : his ' taste, refinement,and enthusiasm,' to use the words ofDr. Burney, were universally admitted ;and his judgment and vigour, as aleader, are fresh in the memory of ourbest orchestral performers." Salomon'scompositions are, a masque, entitled,The Marriage of Peleus and Thetis,two sets of canzonets, some violin solosand concertos, and a variety of songs,glees, &c. His private character washighly estimable ; and, although heused to be called a Jew, he appears tohave been liberal to indiscretion andexcess.FISHER, (JOHN ABRAHAM,) wasborn in London, in 1744, and arrivedat such excellence in his art, that hebecame leader of the band, and composerof Covent Garden Theatre, andtook the degree of doctor of music, atOxford. Amongst his operas producedwere, The Monster of the Wood, andThe Sylphs, both published by Clement; as were his nine concertos forthe piano-forte ; four concertos for thehautboy ; advertisements for two flutes ;and a 'violin solo. He likewise publishedviolin trios, operas 1 and 2, andsome canzonets. Parke says, of Dr.Fisher, that " Imagining Dr. Arne'sinspiration to proceed from the attitudeof his instrument, and wishing toget possession of the secret, he saidto him, When you composed yourfine opera of Artaxerxes, doctor, didyou write with the lid of your harpsichordup or down ?' "HOOK, (JAMES,) father of the celebratedDean Hook, and of TheodoreHook, was born in the city of Norwich,in the year 1746. He was intended tcbe brought up to some mechanical employment,but an accident, which deprivedhim of the use of one of hisfeet, when a child, frustrated this design.Having shown a taste for music,he was placed with an organist of hisnative city, named Garland, underwhom he made rapid progress in thefirst principles of his art. Proceedingto London, he was, shortly after hisarrival, engaged as organist, at thecelebrated Mary-le-bone Gardens ; andhe was subsequently appointed to thesame post at Vauxhall Gardens, whichhe held for more than half a century,with great reputation. He was also,for some years, organist of St. John'sChurch, Horsleydown, in the Borough.As a composer, lie made himself favourablyknown by the music of severaldramatic pieces, among which may bementioned, Cupid's Revenge, an Arcadianpastoral, The Lady of the Manor.Too Civil by Half, The Double Disguise,The Fair Peruvian, Jack of N 7 newbury,The Soldier's Return, Catch himwho Can, Tekeli, Music Mad, TheFortress, and The Siege of St. Question.He also composed an oratorio, underthe title of The Ascension, besidesseveral concertos, sonatas, and duets,for the piano-forte, and published anexcellent work, entitled, Guida di Musica.Many of his songs became verypopular, and Dr. Burney and Parkepraise his compositions highly, thoughthe latter says, he was considered to beaplagiarist. He died at Boulogne, in1827. He was a cheerful and facetiouscompanion, and fond of a jest, eventhough the subject was his own infirmity.An instance of this is relatedin a memoir of him by Parke, whogives the following account, in thewords of Hook. " Being, one evening,with a party of particular friends, andthe conversation turning on pretty feet,it was agreed that each one present,male and female, should put one forward,to ascertain who had the handsomest.When it came to my turn, 01'course, I put my best foot forth, whichcreating a general laugh, I said to thegentlemen present, ' I'll bet any one ofyou 5 that there's a worse foot inCOMPOSERS,company than this ;' and the bet beinginstantly accepted, I produced my otherfoot, and won the wager." " Walking,one day, with him in the Strand,"says Parke, and " observing a hackneychariot, remarkable for its clean andneat appearance, with its No. 1, I remarkedto Hook, that it was almost asgood as new. ' There is nothing extraordinaryin that,' was his reply,for every body takes care of No. 1.' "DAN BY, (JOHN,) born about the year1750, was one of the most celebratedglee composers of his time, and gainednumerous prize medals for his compositions.Few memorials have beenpreserved of him besides his works,though he was scarcely less eminent inhis peculiar school of music than SamuelWebbe, with whom he was contemporary.His death is said to havetaken place whilst a concert was performingfor his benefit. His principalworks are, La Guida alia Musica Vocale; When Sappho tuned, glee forthree voices ; VV hen generous Wineexpands, three voices; When Floodsretire to the Sea, three voices; Thefairest Flowers the Vale prefer, threevoices ; Sweet Thrush, four voices ;Shepherds, I have lost my Love, threevoices; Go to my Anna's Breast, fourvoices ; Fair Flora decks, three voices ;Come, ye party jangling Swains, fourvoices ; and Awake, aeolian Lyre, fourPARSONS, (SiR WILLIAM,) wasborn about the year 1746, and receivedthe rudiments of his professional knowledgein the choir of WestminsterAbbey, under Dr. Cooke. He completedhis musical education in Italy ;and, in 1786, he succeeded. Stanley, asmaster of the king's band of musicians.In 1790, the University ofOxford conferred upon him the degreeof doctor of music, but what his exercisewas on that occasion, is not recorded.He went to Dublin in thesuite of the Earl Camden, when thatnobleman was appointed lord-lieutenant,and from whom, in 1795, he receivedthe honour of knighthood. Onreturning to England, he was, in 1796,appointed inimical instructor to theprincesses royal ; and, in the samewear, his name was inserted in the listof magistrates for Middlesex, in whichcharacter he attended for many years,at the public office, Bow Street. Hedied about 1817. "By the suddendeath of Sir William Parsons," saysParke, in his Musical Memoirs, " theprofession was deprived of one of itsmost distinguished members. This eventwas, 1 believe, sincerely regretted by allwho knew him."MARSH, ( ,) the eldest son ofa captain in the navy, was born in1752, at Dorking, in Surrey. In his' sixthyear, he accompanied his father toGreenwich, where he heard an organ,for the first time, in the hospital chapel,and was so struck with the performance,that he was obliged to be removed byforce, from the pew, whilst the lastvoluntary was playing. Two yearsafterwards, when he was at school, hegave the following proof of the correctnessof his ear. Being at church, oneSunday, "his attention," says his biographer," was invited to the bells, ofwhich he had heard there were eight.It being, however, the custom, as soonas the chiming to church had ceased,to raise the little bell, and to begin tollingthe largest when the minister enteredthe church, by comparing thetwo sounds of these together, he perceivedthey extended the octave, and,in fact, formed the interval of a tenth,not that he had then ever heard, orwas aware of there being, any suchterms. On his mentioning his discovery,that the peal consisted of ten bells, tosome of the boys, it was quite unintelligibleto any of them how he couldpossibly ascertain this, without hearingthem altogether, and counting them.The fact, however, turned out to bejust as he had inferred." In 1761, hisinclination for music was still furtherincreased, by his hearing the famousorgan at Harlem ; and on his leavingschool, in 1766, he wished to learn thatinstrument, but his father would onlyconsent to his being taught the violin,with which he might accompany hissister on the piano-forte. In 1768, hewas articled to a solicitor at Ramsey,but continued to improve himself in hismusical studies, as far as he was able,during the period of his apprenticeship,previously to the expiration of which hisfather died. In 1774, he married ; and,APPKN Dix.shortly after, removed to Salisbury,where he formed one of the orchestrain the fortnight subscription concertunder the superintendence of Mr.Harris, and, in 1780, he was appointedleader. In the following year, cominginto possession of an estate, near Bar-hamDowns, he quitted his profession,and removed thither. He subsequentlyresided for a short time atCanterbury, and frequently officiatedat the cathedral, on the organ, on whichinstrument he had become a tolerableproficient. In 1787, he settled at Chichester,where he continued to lead thesubscription concert for a quarter of acentury. He has composed a variety ofinstrumental music, chiefly sacred andmilitary, and has published, among othertreatises., Hints to young Composers;Essay on Harmonies ; and Instructionsand Progressive Lessons for the Tester.BUSBY, (THOMAS,) was born inWestminster, in 1755, and studied hisart under Battishill, for a period of fiveyears, during which he made greatprogress, both in the theory and practiceof music. He had not long beenrelieved from his articles, before heattempted the composition of an oratorio,which he improved afterwards,from time to time, as his knowledgeand experience became more matured,and at length, in 1799, it was performedwith applause, at the Haymarket Theatre,under the title of The Prophecy.He had been previously appointedorganist of St. Mary, Newington, Surrey,and St. Mary Woolnoth, LombardStreet ; and published, in twelve numbers,folio, his Divine Harmonist, consistingpartly of selections from thegreat ecclesiastical composers, and partlyof his own compositions ; which wasso favourably received, that he wasinduced to undertake another musicalwork, entitled Melodies Britannica, orThe Beauties of British Song; which,however, from want of sufficient support,he did not complete. Not longafter the performance of his Prophecy,he set to music, under the title of BritishGenius, Gray's Progress of Poesy; Pope'sOde on St. Cecilia's Day ; and Omaha,a dramatic poem from Ossian. Aboutthe year 1800, his oratorio of Britanniawas performed with great applause,for the benefit of the Royal HumaneSociety, at Covent Garden Theatre;and in the same year appeared, Cumberland'sJoanna, a dramatic romance,with Busby's music. In the summerof 1800, the University of Cambridgeconferred upon him the degree ofdoctor of music; as an exercise forwhich, he set to music a ThanksgivingOde for the Victories obtained by theBritish Navy, written by Mrs. Cres-pigmy.In 1801, on the death of hismaster, Mr. Battishill, he composed anexcellent funeral anthem, which was performedat the interment of the latter, inSt. Paul's. In the following year, hesupplied the music for the melo-dramaof A Tale of Mystery; in 1802, for theopera of The Fair Fugitives ; and in1805, for the melo-drama of Rugantino.His latest publications in connexionwith his art, were, his Grammar ofMusic, and his New and Complete MusicalDictionary. The latter is characterizedas a highly useful work, andhas been reprinted. He is also said toconduct the musical department in TheMonthly Review, and other periodicalpublications ; but the work by whichhe has rendered himself best known tothe public, in a literary capacity, is histranslation of Lucretius. As a man anda composer, he is deservedly esteemed,and may undoubtedly be classed amongstthe most learned professors ofhis art. As an instance of his wonderfulmemory, it is related of him, thathe wrote out the score of the opera ofRosinaa, after having heard it only twice,and supplied all the accompaniments socorrectly, that no alteration or omissionwas perceptible to the band.LINLEY, (THOMAS, the younger,)was born at Bath, in 1756. He displayedextraordinary powers on theviolin at a very early age ; and, at eight,performed a concerto on that instrumentin public. At seventeen, he composedan anthem, in full score, to thewords, " Let God arise;" which wassung at Worcester Cathedral, at themeeting of the three choirs, on the 8thof September, 1773. After having completedhis musical education under Dr.Boyce, he went to Florence, to makehimself master of his favourite instrument,the violin, under the celebratedTartini, and not Tartini, as is erroneouslystated by Parke, in his Musical0*O Ai P O t> H S .Memoirs ; but Martini introduced hispupil to Mozart, between whom andLinley so strong a friendship was formed,that they parted with tears. He nowreturned to Bath, where he became theleader of his father's concerts and oratorios,and astonished his hearers bythe precision and animation of hisstyle of playing. His own solos andconcertos, which he occasionally introduced,also gave evident tokens of hiscontinental studies, being full of imaginationand spirit; but requiring, inalmost every bar, the touch of a finishedmaster, to do justice to their merit. Asatheatrical composer, he obtained greatapplause by the share he had in theopera of The Duenna, and the musicwhich he wrote for The Tempest, on itsrevival at Drury Lane Theatre ; wherehe led the band, when his father, andSheridan, (his brother-in-law,) wereproprietors. But his most delightfulproduction was the music to Dr. Lawrence'sOde on the Witches and Fairiesof Shakspeare; which was performedat Drury Lane the first year of hisappearance in that orchestra. " Therich variety of the contrast in the witchand fairy music," says the author ofThe Dictionary of Musicians; " thewild solemnity of the one, and thesportive exuberance of the other, keepthe attention alive from the first bar ofthe overture, to the close of the ode."This promising and amiable musicianand composer met his death under verymelancholy circumstances, on the 7thof August, 1778. Being on a visit, withhis sisters, at Grimsthorpe, in Lincolnshire,the seat of the Duke of Lancaster,he, in conjunction with three otheryoung men, embarked on board a sailingboat in the duke's canal ; which, bysome accident or other, was overset.The companions of Linley clung to thekeel, whilst he swam off for assistance;but just as he was on the point ofreaching the bank, he sank, to rise nomore. An edition of his posthumousworks was published by Preston, inwhich is to be found the greatest partof his miscellaneous music ; consistingof songs, elegies, and cantatas. Mozart,in the course of a conversation withMichael Kelly, respecting Thomas Lin-ley,junior, declared, that if he hadlived, he would have been one of thegreatest ornaments of the musical world.Webb, (SAMUEL,) son of the celebratedcomposer of that name, was bornabout the year 1770; and, under theinstruction of his father, and dementi,became an excellent performer on thepiano-forte and organ. He obtainedseveral medals from the Glee Club forhis compositions ; and, about the beginningof the present century, wasappointed organist of the Spanish ambassador'schapel, in London. He ismarried, and has two daughters. Besideshis glees and songs, he is thecomposer of a Pater-noster, and othermusic for the catholic church ; some ofwhich are in Novello's collection ofMotets. Amongst his glees, are : OneMorning very early ; Come away, Death ;Gentle Stranger, have you seen, &c.LA Tribe, (CHRISTIAN Ignatius,)was born in 1758, at Fulnec, nearLeeds, in Yorkshire. His father, theRev. Benjamin La Trobe, was formany years superintendent of the congregationsof united brethren in England.The subject of our memoirreceived the chief part of his educationat the college of the united brethren atNiesky, in Upper Lusatia, whence hereturned to London, in 1784, and tookorders in the same church. His variousprofessional duties prevented him fromcultivating music as a profession ; yethis compositions display a taste andknowledge, of which many who havemade it their calling, might be justlyproud. Accustomed by education, andled by conviction, to estimate the valueof an accomplishment, from its applicabilityto the purposes of religion, hedetermined to devote his talents principallyto sacred music, his first idea ofwhich, he is said to have derived fromthe Tod Jesu (death of Jesus), ofGrain, and the Stabat Mater of Haydn.He is, however, less celebrated for hisoriginal compositions, than his Selectionsof Sacred Music, commenced in theyear 1806, which are said to have contributed,more than any other work, tothe introduction into this country, of ataste for the church music of Germanyand Italy. His own published compositionsconsist of three sonatas for thepiano-forte, approved by, and dedicatedto, Haydn ; the Dies Frae, a hymn onthe last judgment ; The Dawn of Glory,a hymn on the bliss of the redeemed ;APPENDIX,A Jubilee Anthem for the fifteenthanniversary of the accession of KingGeorge the Third ; A Te Deum, as performedin the cathedral at York; MisererePsalm Fifty-one ; various anthemspublished in a collection of anthems inuse among the united brethren ; andsix airs, the words by Cowper, and MissHannah More. " Mr. La Trobe," saysa critic, " is certainly no copyist ; but ingeneral displays a character of his own.His taste was originally grounded uponthe simple yet majestic modulations,and the rich harmonies, which characterizethe psalmody of the Lutheranarid Moravian churches."REEVE, (WILLIAM,) was bornabout the year 1758, and commencedlife as a writer in the office of a lawstationer, where he was contemporarywith Munden. He soon left this situation,to become a pupil of Richardson,organist of St. James's, Westminster,who instructed him in the principlesand practice of music. After his studieswere completed, he, in 1781, acceptedan organist's place at Witness, in Devonshire,where he continued about twoyears, and then left it to accept the offerof the more tempting post of composerof music for the pantomimes, and dramaticspectacles, performed at Astley's.He is also said to have passed a greatportion of his time as an actor, and, in1789, is stated to have appeared in thecharacter of Grinder, in the EnragedMusician, at the little theatre, Hay-market,with great applause. In 1791,however, whilst the pantomime ofOscar and Melvin was in preparationat Covent Garden Theatre, a disagreementtaking place between the managersand Shield, the latter sent in hisresignation as composer, and Reeve,at that time a chorus-singer of theestablishment, was requested to completethe piece, by writing an overtureand some of the vocal music. This hedid so much to the taste of the public,that from this period he became apopular and successful dramatic composer;and in the following year producedhis Orpheus and Eurydice. In1792. he was elected organist of St.Martin's, Ludgate, a post he subsequentlyresigned, on becoming jointproprietor of Sadler's Wells. Theother pieces for which he composed themusic, are, The Apparition, a musicaldrama, produced in 1794; British Fortitude,musical drama; Hercules andOmphale, pantomime; Merry Sherwood,a pantomime ; Harlequin andOberon, a pantomime; Pantry Boy,a musical interlude ; The Hound Tower;the historical ballet of Joan of Arc ;The Embarkation, a musical entertainment;Harlequin Almanac; amusical romance, called The Caravan ;The Dash, a musical farce ; The WhitePlume, a musical romance ; An Breach;Rajah Droop, a comic opera, in conjunctionwith Mazzini ; The TurnpikeGate; and Paul and Virginia; Tricksupon Travellers ; Outside Passengers ;and part of the music in Thirty Thousand,and The Cabinet. His chief forte,is in the composition of comic songs,in which he has been eminently successful.Besides the above works, hepublished The Juvenile Preceptor, orEntertaining Instructor; a completeand concise introduction to the pianoforte,with twenty-four lessons and foureasy duets, in which the fingering isaccurately marked, whilst the rules areconcise and easy of comprehension, thewhole being well adapted to the instructionof youth.Mazzini, (JOSEPH,) descendedfrom an ancient Corsican family, wasborn about the year 1765, in London,where his father was established as amerchant. Having shown an earlytaste for music, he was placed under thecelebrated John Christian Bach, andmade such progress, that when he wasbut ten years old, he received the appointmentof organist to the PortugueseChapel. He subsequently receivedinstruction from the three celebratedcomposers, then resident in England,Bertolini, Sacchini, and Anfossi. Atnineteen, he obtained the appointmentof composer and director of music at theKing's Theatre, a situation he heldseven years ; during which he producedII Tesoro, and various other operas,songs, duets, &c. ; the principal of whichwere, Paul et Virginie, Les Trois Sultanes,La Belle Arsene, Sappho andPhaon, and Eliza. The destruction ofthe Opera House, by fire, in 1789, gaveoccasion to a wonderful exertion ofMazzini's memory. Among othermusic which was consumed, was theC O M P O S E K S .score of Paesiello's opera of La Locanda,very popular at that time, and whichthe managers were very desirous of reproducing.In this dilemma, Mazziniactually undertook to re-produce thewhole of the instrumental accompanimentsfrom memory : and he so farsucceeded, that, with very few exceptions,they were considered to be almostthe same as the originals. His otherlabours for the Italian Opera includedseveral ballets; one of which, was thepopular one of Labour et Psyche. Healso set to music various pieces both forCovent Garden and Drury Lane Theatres,including A Day in Turkey, TheMagician, The Exile, and The FreeKnights; also, in conjunction with Mr.Reeve, the operas of Carnal Droop;The Turnpike Gate; Paul and Virginia; The Blind Girl ; and Chains ofthe Heart. He had the honour to beappointed music-master to the lateQueen Caroline, when Princess ofWales, to whom he dedicated threesonatas ; and he had the entire conductof the original Sunday concerts, whichfor several seasons were held alternatelyat the houses of the principal nobility,and for which he not only composedvarious vocal and instrumental piecesof music, but likewise performed on thepiano-forte. His works, which includealmost every species of music, thoughnot of equal excellence throughout, exhibit,it is said, numerous traits ofgenius and originality. Among hislessons, sonatas, songs, duets, and glees,have been some of the most admired andmost popular of the day, and many ofthem are still deservedly so. Theirtitles are enumerated, at length, inThe Dictionary of Musicians, wherethey occupy eight closely-printed columnsof a large octavo.Atwood, (THOMAS.) This eminentmusician and composer is the sonof a coal-merchant, and was born in1767. His early indication of a musicaltaste, caused him to be admitted intothe choir of the Chapel Royal, wherehe studied during a period of five years ;first under Dr. Nares, then master ofthe boys, and afterwards under his successor,Dr. Edward Ayrton, When hewas about sixteen, he was appointed toperform at Buckingham House, beforethe royal family ; and so pleased Georgethe Fourth, then Prince of Wales, thathe proposed sending him to Italy at hisown expense, and appointed him ahandsome income out of his own privatepurse. Accordingly, in 1783, he set outfor Naples, where he resided two years,receiving instruction in his art fromFilippo Cinque and Matilda. He thenproceeded to Vienna, where he studiedunder Mozart for three years, returningto England in 1786. The prince nowappointed him one of his chamber musicians; and, on the marriage of hisroyal highness with the late QueenCaroline, Attwood was also chosen hermusical instructor. In 1796, he wasappointed organist of St. Paul's Cathedral,and composer to the Chapel Royal,and was afterwards made one of theking's band. On the coronation ofGeorge the Fourth, he composed ananthem for the occasion, which showedhis profound knowledge of orchestraleffect, and was justly admired by themusical critics. In 1821, his majestyappointed him organist to the privatechapel of the Pavilion, Brighton ; andcontinued to distinguish him by hispatronage throughout the remainder ofhis reign. Mr. Attwood's performancesconsist of several theatrical pieces, numerousservices and anthems for theChapel Royal, songs, glees, sonatas, andother pieces for the piano-forte. Hismusic for the stage was well received,but most of the pieces in which it wasintroduced, were, unfortunately, unsuccessful.The only one that has retainedpossession of the stage, is The AdoptedChild. The most popular of his songsare-the Soldier's Dream, The Adieu.Sweet Charity, and The Convent Bells :of his glees and trios, The Curfew, InPeace, love tunes, To all that breathe,Qual Silenzio, and Oh ! heavenly Sympathy! " My friend Attwood (a worthyman, and an ornament to the musicalworld," says Kelly, in his Reminiscences," was Mozart's favourite scholar,and it gives me great pleasure to recordwhat Mozart said to me about him : hiswords were, ' Attwood is a young manfor whom I have a sincere affection andesteem ; he conducts himself with greatpropriety, and, I feel much pleasure intelling you, that he partakes more ofmy style than any scholar I ever had,and I predict that he will prove asound musician.' "A P P E N D I X .SPOFFORTH, (REGINALD,) wasborn in 1767, at Southwest, in Nottinghamshire,and gave very early indicationsof musical genius, which wasencouraged by his uncle, organist at thecollegiate church of the town, forwhom he soon became able to officiate.His duty of attending twice a day atchurch, left him but a small portion oftime for study and practice : but hedevoted his leisure to musical studieswith such zeal, that his progress wasgreat ; and the habits he imbibed of application,frequently set him by hisuncle, were of great value to him throughlife. Before leaving his native place,he had many opportunities, both thereand at the neighbouring towns, of exhibitinghis skill on the harpsichord,at concerts that were occasionally givenby the amateurs and professors, and inconcerted pieces he sometimes assistedon the tenor and violin. It was thedelight with which the late Sir RichardPayne, Dean of Lincoln, listened tohim, on one of these occasions, thatcaused his being invited to Lincoln ; andso much was that dignitary struck withhis manners and powers, that he appointedhim organist of the cathedral,and recommended him to scholars inLincoln and the neighbourhood. Hisprospects, however, were not such asinduced him to remain ; and, havingobtained a release from his engagement,he proceeded to London, with a letterof introduction to the celebrated composerand organist of WestminsterAbbey, Dr. Cooke, under whom hestudied three or four years, officiatingfor him occasionally in the abbey. In1793, he became a candidate for theannual prizes given by the Noblemen'sCatch Club, for the best serious andcheerful glees, and was fortunate enoughto obtain them both. This encouragedhim to publish a set of canzonets for thevoice, with a piano-forte accompaniment; and he was, soon after, so extensivelyemployed in teaching infamilies and schools, that, in order toget through his engagements, he wasobliged to rise at four o'clock. Fromthis time till eight, he practised andcomposed, and after he had been employedten or twelve hours in teaching,he would often sit up till one or twoo'clock, to revise and perfect his manuscriptsor study the Italian and Frenchlanguages, of which he contrived to makehimself master. These exertions broughton such a state of ill health, as compelledhim, in 1819, to renounce teachingaltogether, though he still continuedto compose. His uncle dying in April,1826, left him his fortune; but he did notlive long to enjoy it, being carried off byparalysis in the following September,at his residence at Bromp'.on. Mr.Spofforth, though a composer of greatability, has left few published worksbehind him, in consequence of a naturalfastidiousness respecting his own merits,and a dread of public criticism. Thecharacteristics of his compositions aresweetness of melody and simplicity ofharmony. Among the most celebratedof them, are, his glees for four voices,Where are those Hours ; Hail, SmilingMorn ; Lightly o'er the Village Green,for three voices ; and the popular duet,Hark, the Goddess Diana, &c.CARTER, (THOMAS,) was born inIreland, about the year 1768, and afterhe had obtained some reputation as anorganist in that country, travelled intoItaly for improvement. He subsequentlywent to India, and conductedthe musical departments of the theatreat Bengal, till his declining healthobliged him to come to England, wherehe took up his abode in the metropolis.He gained a livelihood with difficultyby composing the music for severalserious pieces which were played atDrury Lane, and died on the 8th ofNovember, 1800; leaving two childrenby his widow, a daughter of the Rev.Dr. Wells, of Cookliam, in Berkshire,whom he had married in 1793. Carter'smost celebrated compositions are, thecelebrated ballad of O Nanny, wiltthou gang with Me ; Stand to yourGuns, my Hearts of Oak ; and a ca-ricci,beginning. Fairest Deronda ;in which he united all the elegances ofmusical science with the most humorouscomic expression. " As economy,"says one of his biographers, " was notamong the virtues which he cultivatedin early life, he was often reducedto those straits and difficulties fromwhich genius and talent can plead noexemption. In one of those moments ofembarrassment, his means and resourceshaving been exhausted, he ransacked thevarious species of composition he hadc o vi p o s i: R s .by him, but finding that none, nor allof them, would produce a single guineaat the music shops, he hit upon the followingexpedient for the immediatesupply of his most pressing necessities.Being well acquainted with the characterof Handel's manuscript he procuredan old skin of parchment, which heprepared for the purpose to which hemeant to turn it, and imitating as closelyas he could the hand-writing as well asthe style and manner of that great master,he produced, in a short time, apiece, which so well deceived a music-seller,that he did not hesitate to givetwenty guineas for it; and the piecepasses, this day, among many, for agenuine production of Handel."WHITFIELD, (JOHN CLARKE,) isa native of the city of Gloucester, wherehe was born, in 1770. He commencedhis musical education in Oxford, in 1783,under Dr. Philip Hayes; but, in 1789,removed to Ludlow, under the patronageof the Earl of Powys, and was thereelected organist of St. Lawrence. Hegraduated musical bachelor at Oxford,in 1793, and, two years afterwards, wentto Ireland, where he was elected organistof the metropolitan cathedral atArmagh ; and, in the same year (1795),took the degree of doctor of music, atTrinity College, Dublin, and was electedmaster of the choristers of Christchurch,and St. Patrick's Cathedral. He leftIreland, in 1798, on the breaking outof the rebellion, and settling at Cambridge,was there elected organist andmaster of the choirs of Trinity and St.John's College ; appointments which heheld for upwards of twenty years. In1799, the year of his election, he wasadmitted doctor of music, at Cambridge,and received the same honourat Oxford, in 1810. In 1814, on thedeath of his maternal uncle, HenryFatherly Whitfield, Esq., of Rickmans-worth Park, Hearts, the subject of ourmemoir took the name of Whitfield, byroyal sign manual. In 1820, he waselected organist and master of the choristersof Hereford Cathedral ; and, inthe following year, he succeeded Dr.Hague, as professor of music, in theUniversity of Cambridge. About thesame time he resigned his organist'ssituation at Trinity and St. John's College,and soon after, says a criticalauthority, " made a spirited, but unsuccessfulattempt, to create or revivea love of music in the university, bygiving some really excellent concerts,which, I have been informed, it wasboth his wish and intention to continueat regular intervals, had he receivedany cordial and effectual support; butfinding himself minus to a considerableamount in his first attempt, itnaturally damped his ardour." Hiscompositions consist of, four volumes ofcathedral music, in score ; several setsof glees ; two volumes of vocal pieces,with original poetry by Sir WalterScott, Lord Byron, Joanna Baillie,Hogg, &c. ; various songs and gleesfrom The Lay of the Last Minstrel,Marion, Rokeby, The Lord of theIsles, The Pirate, "&c.; and an oratorio,in two acts, the subject of the first beingThe Crucifixion, and the Resurrectionthat of the second. Besides the abovemusical labours, he has edited fifteenvolumes of Handel's oratorios and coronationanthems, with a compressed accompanimentfor the organ or pianoforte; the beauties of Purcell, in twovolumes ; two volumes of anthems, bycelebrated composers ; the Artaxerxesof Dr. Arne ; Matthew Lock's music inMacbeth ; and numerous other pieces ;in all of which he has displayed taste,judgment, and a comprehensive knowledgeof the principles of his art.WELSH, (THOMAS,) is a native ofWells, in Somersetshire, where he wasborn about 1780. He became a choristerat Wells Cathedral at the age ofsix, and, by the sweetness of hissinging, attracted crowds to hear himfrom Bath, Bristol, Bridgewater, andstill more distant towns. The fame ofthe young vocalist soon reached themetropolis, and he was, in consequence,engaged by Mr. Linley, to sing at theoratorios at the Hay market Theatre,where he first appeared in February,1792. The attraction of his voice andstyle of singing was so great, that itinduced the manager to engage him forthe stage, judiciously causing operas tobe written expressly to exhibit hispowers. He first appeared in Attwood'sopera of The Prisoner, produced at theHaymarket, by the Drury Lane company,in the spring of the same year;and in the following one, 1793, the s&n\aAPPENDIX.composer wrote, for his appearance, themusical farce of The Adopted Child.He also appeared in The Prize, composedby Stephen Storace, who is said,by the author of The Dictionary of Musicians,to have betrayed a wish to suppressthe boy's growing reputation, andeven to have refused to compose for him,till Mr. Kemble, then manager, insistedon the production of The Cherokees, acomic opera, in which he appeared atDrury Lane, in 1794. Mr. Kemble alsobrought him into some notice as anactor, conceiving, on his performance ofPrince Arthur, in King John, that hedisplayed no common abilities for thestage. He devoted, however, his chiefattention to music, and considerably improvedhimself by studying under theelder Horn, J. B. Cramer, and Baum-garden.At about twenty years of age,he became a composer for the theatres;and produced at the Lyceum Theatre,now the English Opera, the farces ofThe Green Eyed Monster, and TwentyYears Ago; which were followed byhis opera of Kamschaika, at CoventGarden Theatre, a production that didnot prove successful as a drama, butdisplayed to great advantage the powersof the composer. Bishop's success andpopularity, however, probably inducedhim to abandon a rivalry with him incomposing for the stage, and he nowdevoted himself to the profitable occupationof a singing-master, a departmentin which he, perhaps, standsunrivalled. Among his pupils we maymention Sinclair, Horn, Miss Stephens,Miss Merry, and Miss Wilson, whichlast lady became his second wife, bywhom, as well as his first, he has afamily. He originated, in conjunctionwith Mr. Hawes, the Royal HarmonicInstitution, under the design of givingcomposers an opportunity of publishingand reaping the benefit of their ownworks, and whence most of his ownoriginal compositions have issued : theyinclude glees, songs, and piano-fortemusic of a highly pleasing character.Amongst the most celebrated of hiscompositions are, a sonata, with WaterParted from the Sea; another withVaghi Coll ; and the songs, BoundingBillow, cease thy Motion ; Forget MeNot, Henry ; I've seen the sweet Delightsof May ; Poor Zayda ; and ThePledge of Truth.LANZA. (GESUALDO.) is the son ofGuiseppi Lanza, an able composer andmusician, who resided many years inthis country, and, for a .time, in thefamily of the late Marquess of Abercorn.His son, if not actually born about 1780,in London, was brought over to Englandat a very early age, and was chieflyinstructed in the science of music by hisfather. He soon became known as acomposer of some tasteful music, butmore particularly as a singing-master,in which character he has for manyyears maintained a very high reputation.His Elements of Singing familiarlyexemplified, is considered one ofthe best works on the art of singingwhich has appeared in this country.Among his vocal pupils he has the honourto number Miss Stephens : but hiscapacity for bringing talent to perfectionis not the only distinguishing feature ofMr. Lanza's preceptors career. Agentleman, wishing his niece to beinstructed in the art, brought her toLanza, who was not alone satisfiedwith the prospect of pocketing the 100,but first requested to hear the younglady's voice. This was complied with ;but the trial had such an effect upon hisdelicate organs, that he stuffed hisfingers in his ears, exclaiming, " Oh !miss, you do sing like de oyster wench !Dat will never do!" and honestly refusedto attempt the impossible task ofcultivating, where nature had deniedthe required powers.ESSEX, (TIMOTHY,) was born inCoventry, about the year 1780. Hecommenced playing upon the flute andviolin at thirteen years of age, for hisown amusement; but the rapid proficiencywhich he made induced hisfather to let him study music as a profession.In 1806, he took, at Oxford,his bachelor's, and, in 1812, his doctor'sdegree, in music; the subject of hisexercise, on the latter occasion, beingan entire oratorio in bass. Dr. Essexis a very able teacher, and has obtainedsome popularity as a composer. Amonghis best works are : The Sea-side Sonnet;The Juvenile Sonnet ; The MoonlightSonnet, from Mrs. Radcliffe's Romanceof the Forest ; Mine be a Cot,from Rogers's poems ; a set of six duets,for two German flutes; a set of slowand quick marches, for the piano-forte,COMPOSERS.with the full scores added for a militaryband ; a variety of rondos for the piano,and piano and flute, and an introductionand fugue for the organ.NOVELLO, (VINCENT,) was bornin London, of Italian parents, in theyear 1781 ; and has attained to greateminence in this country, both as acomposer and instrumental performer.As organist of the chapel of the Portugueseembassy, in South Street, ParkLane, he has attracted, perhaps, agreater number of admirers of sacredmusic, than any other contemporarymusician. His publications consist of ASelection of Sacred Music, in two volumes;A Collection of Motets for theOffertory, and other pieces, principallyadapted for the morning service, intwelve books ; three volumes of Twelveeasy Masses for Small Choirs; GregorianHymns for the Evening Service ;eighteen books of Mozart's Masses ;eighteen books of Haydn's Masses;besides various original songs, cantos&c. In the absence of any biographicalmatter that has been publishedrespecting Novello, we quote the observationsof an eminent critic, relativeto his musical abilities : " The generalcharacteristics of Novello's style appearto us to be suavity, elegance, and boldand varied modulation. His melodies donot rise with extraordinary felicity ororiginality, yet they are ever flowing andagreeable ; mixing much of the soberdignity of the church style with a lightermanner, that gives relief, while it assertswell with the graver foundation andmore solid materials of the work. Weshould be induced to hazard an opinion,that Haydn is a favourite with Novello ;and that he often finds himself drawn,by an irresistible impulse, to the study,and to an indirect imitation of Haydn'swritings. Our notion is formed fromthat leading and general assimilationwhich attracts men of common feelingsby a common sympathy ; of which wenot only imagine we perceive considerabletraits in the motets of Novello,but that they prevail* in other thingswe have seen from his hand. We mustdo Novello the justice to say, that weconsider him to be of the school ofHaydn ; for we do not find a singlepassage that leads us to think ofHaydn, otherwise than through theresemblance; which only, by a largeand broad acceptation, impels us to theprinciple, that they hold in common,namely, sweet, flowing, and ornatemelody ; supported and diversified byfrequent, and often curious and unexpectedchanges in the harmony. Novello,then, is Haydn's scholar; not aplagiarist or direct imitator."CLIFTON, (JOHN C.) was born inLondon, in 1781, and was intended formercantile life, but his strong inclinationfor music caused his father, thoughnot without great reluctance and manyefforts to alter his son's mind, to allowhim to be educated for the latter profession.In this his predilection was sostrong, that although he obtained alucrative situation in the governmentstationery office, he resigned .it, aftertwo years, to follow his favourite pursuit.His principal master was the celebratedCharles Wesley, but he derivedvery considerable improvement in histaste, from his acquaintance with Spag-noletti, and other distinguished musicians.He commenced his professionalcareer at Bath, as conductor of themusical department of the HarmonicSociety, for which he set to music aLatin grace, Seu Camus, written byDr. Morgan. In 1802, he visited Dublin,where he met with great encouragement,and published many of his works,during a period of fourteen years. Healso produced, at the Crow StreetTheatre, a musical piece, called Edwin,and conducted, in conjunction with hisfriend, Sir John Stevenson, severalconcerts, for the benefit of the poorof Ireland. These concerts were conductedupon a very grand scale, theorchestra consisting of four hundred performers,collected chiefly by Clifton,who was publicly thanked by the committeeon the occasion, and offered aprofessor's degree, which his modestyled him to decline. He settled inLondon, in 1818, where he has becomean eminent teacher of singing, and ofthe theory and practice of harmony.He had previously published his Theoryof Harmony simplified, and inventeda machine, called the Eidomusicon,which, being fastened to the pianoforte,over the action, produced thenotes and chords as they were struck ;and by giving the different intervals soAPPENDIX.distinctly that the eye and ear wereengaged at the same time, renderedvocal distances easily attainable forsight-singing. He gave public lectureson this new invention, and was onlyprevented by the expense from publishinga book explanatory of his design.Besides various songs, glees, andduets, he has published British Melodies,Irish Songs, one volume of FrenchSongs, and one volume of Moral Songs.WALMISLEY, (THOMAS FORBES,)was born in London in 1783, and isthird son of the late William Walmisley,Esq., clerk of the papers in the Houseof Lords. He was bred to music in thechoir of Westminster Abbey, and pursuedhis classical studies in WestminsterSchool. He was first instructed in playingby the Honourable John Spencer,and afterwards by Attwood, underwhom he there studied the piano, organ,and counterpoint. In 1805, he producedhis popular songs, The Sailor,and The Soldier, both in a better style,it is observed, than the generality ofsuch compositions ; the former partakesof the character of the cantata, andcontains many good passages. Thesesongs were succeeded by, Oh! Memory !To Hope, To Morrow, Oh ! Woman !The Tear, Thyrza, Flowers are fresh,Dear is the Dawn, and The WeirdSister of the Lake, duets. His otherworks are, The Fairy of the Dale, forthree voices, which is light, elegant,and expressive ; Ye Mariners of England,for four voices, with a doubleaccompaniment for the piano-forte ;Underneath this Stone doth lie, a rondfor four voices, in a chaste, subduedstyle, rich in harmony ; O'er the gladWaters, a rond for four voices ; and-sixglees, dedicated to his master, Atwood,entitled, No more with unavailingLove. Hail ! Lovely Power! The1? ride's Wreath; As those we LoveDecay ; Busy, Curious, Thirsty Fly ;and From Flower to Flower; the threefirst and fifth, for four voices ; thefourth, for three voices, and the last forfive voices. " The latter," says theauthor of The Dictionary of Musicians,4i is considered a smooth and flowingtheme, answered in the several partswith considerable skill and facility ; itsgeneral character is taste, rather thanenergy, level general effect, rather thanforce." This, indeed, seems to be thechief characteristic of his compositions,many of which were very popular 'intheir day, and have been performed atall our "most esteemed concerts andmusic meetings. In the meantime, in1812, he had become assistant-organistof St. Martin's-in-the-Fields, a situationhe still retains. He married in 1810, theeldest daughter of William Capon, Esq.(draughtsman to his late Royal Highnessthe Duke of York), by whom hehas five sons and three daughters.BURGHERSH,(JoHN FANE, Lord,)only son of the Earl of Westmoreland,by his first wife, Miss Child, daughterof the eminent London banker ofthat name, was born on the 3rd ofFebruary, 1784. He entered the armyat an early age, and now holds therank of a major-general, having receivedthe distinctions of G.C.B. andCab., and for several years held thepost of British minister at Florence.He is president of the Royal Academyof Music in London ; an establishmentwhich, in a great degree, owes its originof his lordship's exertions and influence.He is said to have studied musicin England, in Germany, and in Italy ;and has composed an oratorio, entitled,Bajazet, and published variouscantatas, which are spoken highly ofby the musical critics. The names ofhis principal compositions, besidesthose mentioned are, La Primavera; IIprimo More ; L'Amor Timid ; Cantata,by Leonii ; Cantata, by Count Girard; LaGelosia; L'lnciampo; 'Tisdone, 'Tis done; Day set on Gorham'scastled Steep-seven canzonets, duets,&c. ; Spirit of Bliss ; Fly to the Desert ;Tenderer's Stream; Why so pale?and a song and catch for four voices.His lordship is married to Priscilla Anne,'fourth daughter of Lord Maryborough,and her ladyship is said to be " one ofthe best musicians that the large circleof the amateurs of the present day canboast."ADDISON, (JOHN,) is the son ofan ingenious mechanic, and was bornabout the year 1785. He manifesteda propensity to music, when a boy,by learning successively the flageolet,flute, bassoon, and violin, and is said tohave made a conspicuous figure in theC O M P USE R S .choir of his native village. The receptionof a young lady, who had been left anorphan, into the family of Mr. and Mrs.Addison, decided the subject of ourmemoir, as to the choice of his futurepursuit. Miss Williams (the name ofthe young lady, and who was niece tothe celebrated Reinhold), inspired himwith an attachment which ended inhis marrying her, and as she had afine voice and considerable taste, hedetermined to study music as a profession,for the purpose of giving him anopportunity of cultivating her talent.She became a very accomplished singer,and was, for many years, a chief favouriteat Vauxhall, Dublin, Liverpool,&c. In the orchestra of the theatreat the latter place, Mr. Addison commencedhis career as an instrumentalperformer. The violoncello was hisfavourite instrument at this time, butbeing asked by Heine, the leader, if hecould not play the double-bass, he immediatelymade an attempt, and soonimproved so much as to become secondto few performers on it. He was subsequentlyengaged to play the double-bassat the Italian Opera, at the Ancient,and at the Vocal Concerts ; which situationshe held for several years. As acomposer, he has acquired much reputationby his music to the operas of Upall Night; My Uncle; My Aunt; TwoWords, or Silent not Dumb ; and Freeand Easy. We should not omit to mention,also, the share he had in the musicof The Sleeping Beauty, written byMr. Kensington. Kelly having pausedin his labours on this piece, in consequenceof the illness of Mrs. Crouch,Mr. Addison ventured to attempt thecomposition of some songs for the piece.Mr. Kensington was, however, veryanxious that the words of The WoodlandMaid, should be adapted to an airof Mozart's, to which the subject ofour memoir consented, provided thatit should be preferred by the personwho was to sing it, to one composedfor the words by himself. Gibbon, thesinger, heard both, and without knowingto whom either composition belonged,at once selected that of Mr.Addison. Some time ago, Mr. Addisonhad the misfortune to lose a large sumin some mercantile speculations, atManchester. He has, of late years.been chiefly employed in testedii 1singing. Among his pupils are, LeouiLee, Pearman, Millar, &c. &c.Darnley, (JOHN Pelham,)was born in 1786, at Rockingham, inBerkshire. His father, who lu Id asituation in the choir at Windsor, washis first musical instructor, and hesubsequently became the pupil of C.Knyvett and of Samuel Webbe. Fromthe former he learnt the piano-forte,from the latter, thorough-bass. He relinquishedhis musical studies at theage of seventeen, to reside with awealthy uncle, but his relation dyingtoo suddenly to make a will, as he hadpromised, in favour of his nephew, thelatter was left without a provision.Under these circumstances, he resumedhis professional pursuits, and completedhis musical education under thecelebrated Woelfl and C. Neat. Hethen went to reside with his mother atOdium, in Hampshire, where he continuedtill his twenty-sixth year, whenhe accepted the situation of organistat the church of St. Mary of the Tower,in Ipswich. At the commencementof the peace, he visited Paris, wherehe studied under Antoine Reika andRather, and was introduced to thecelebrated Cherubini. Darnley possessesastonishing facility as a sight-player,and has published, among othercompositions, Queen of every movingmeasure ; Col also d'un ciglio ; Militarydivertimento ; Waves of Oriel,duet ; Military divertimento, rondoin C ; Violets, a song; and Pallinodiaa Nice, a set of twelve Italian duets,dedicated to His Royal Highness theDuke of Sussex.Burrows, (JOHN FRECKLE-ton,)was born in London, on tree 23rdof April, 1787, and first became knownto the public by the production of anoverture, and several vocal pieces atthe Hanover Square and PhilharmonicConcerts. They displayed so "muchknowledge of instrumental effect, as, inthe opinion of a musical critic, torender it equally blameable and unaccountable,that he should have abandonedthe higher branch of art, for theless exalted one of composing lor thepiano-forte. For this instrument, he haspublished several sonatas, with accompaniments,besides a variety oi london, IAPPENDIX.divertimentos, &c., and has adaptednearly the whole of Mozart's operas.He is also the author of the elementaryworks, The Piano Forte Primer, andThe Thorough-Bass Primer, said to bestrongly recommended by the greatmasters, as indispensable to students.WHITTAKER, (JoHN,) was bornabout the year 1790. No particulars ofhis life are recorded, but he deservesmention in a work like the present, asthe author of the celebrated ballad, Oh !say not Woman's heart is bought," andother songs, which have attained ahigh share of popularity. " He assistedBishop in the composition of the musicof Guy Mannering, and also of theHeir of Verona. Whittaker's knowledgeof his art is manifested by thetasteful accompaniments, in score, thataccompany his published pieces.Close, (F. J.) was born in London,about the year 1790, and wasearly instructed in the rudiments ofmusic. He studied principally underthe celebrated Francesco Tonic ; andbecoming an able instrumental performer,was engaged for the piano-fortein the Opera, and other "metropolitanorchestras. As a teacher on that instrument,he is celebrated for the abilitywith which he imparts to his pupilsa sure elementary foundation. Hischief compositions consist of ballads ofthe sentimental and pathetic cast, suchas The Rose had been washed, byCowper ; Lord Byron's My NativeLand ; and Canst thou bid my Heartforget? from the novel of Glenarvon.He has also composed several balletsfor the King's Theatre, and besides thepieces above-mentioned, has publishedPractical Hints for acquiring Thorough-bass;Instruction Book for Piano-forte,and a variety of sonatas, diverting&c., &c., for the piano-forteand violin.CUTLER, (WILLIAM HENRY,) wasborn in London, in 1792. The hearinghis father play upon an old spinner,gave him his first taste for music, inwhich art he was educated as soon ashewas capable of receiving instruction.After having learnt the violin andpiano, he took lessons in singing andthorough-bass, of Dr. Arnold, at whoseoratorios he frequently sang. Aboutthe year 1800, he played a concertoof Viotti on the piano-forte, at theHaymarket Theatre, for the ChoralFund Concert ; and, in the followingyear, he went to Cambridge, to sing theprincipal airs in the exercise on theoccasion of Dr. Busby's receiving thedegree of musical doctor. He subsequentlybecame a chorister of St. Paul's,and after having studied the theory ofmusic under Mr. Russell, took 'hisbachelor's degree, at Oxford, in 1812;and in 1818, was elected organist of St.Helen's, Bishopsgate. Shortly after thearrival of Logierr in England, Cutlerpaid him one hundred guineas to learnhis system, and then opened an academyfor teaching it himself. He attempted,in 1821, to sing at the oratoriosin Drury Lane, but his voice was deficientin power, and he has never sincesung in public. About three years ago,he resigned his organist's situation atSt. Helen's, for a similar one at QuebecChapel, Portman Square, for which hehas written a Te Deum, Jubilate, anda four part anthem for Christmas Day.He has published a variety of rondos,songs, divertimentos, airs, with variations,duets, marches, &c., chiefly forthe piano-forte.POTTER, (Cyprian,) was born inLondon, in the year 1792, and wastaught the piano-forte by his father, ata very early age. Having previouslydisplayed a taste for composition, hestudied counterpoint under Attwood,and he was, for some time, the pupilof Dr. Callcott and Dr. Crotch. He received,however, his principal instructionsin composition from Woelfl, underwhom he took lessons for nearly fiveyears. At the age of fourteen, Potterwrote violin quartets, symphonies, andpiano-forte sonatas, and showed, at thisearly period, a preference for Beethoven'smiu-ic. He made his debit inpublic, at the Philharmonic, where heplayed a sestet of his own compositionwith tolerable applause, but his subsequentperformances were so coldly receivedthat he determined to travel forayear or two on the continent. Heaccordingly visited the principal townsof Italy and Germany, and at Viennarenewed his studies in counterpoint andcomposition, under Forster. On hisCOMPOSERS.return to London, he succeeded littlebetter as a composer than before* hisdeparture, some objecting that he wasa servile imitator of Beethoven, andothers, that he sacrificed too muchfor originality. The consequence was,that he preferred playing Mozart's andBeethoven's concertos at the Philharmonicand other concerts, though hedid not entirely relinquish composition,and generally produced, each season,a symphony for the Philharmonic trials.His works, however, have been highlyspoken of in The Musicalische Zeitung,published at Leipsic, and other Germanpublications, though scarcely noticedby the London critics.HART, (JOSEPH.) born in London,in 1794, was, at the age of seven, entereda chorister of St. Paul's Cathedral, andshis twelfth year, acted as deputy forthe organist, Mr. Attwood, on severaloccasions. He remained in the choirnearly nine years, during which period,he took lessons on the organ from S.Wesley, and on the piano-forte fromJ. B. Cramer. In his seventeenth yearhe was elected organist of Waltham-stowChurch, Essex, and subsequentlyof Tottenham, Middlesex. He was, forthree years, domestic organist to thelate Earl of Uxbridge, and it was nottill that nobleman's decease, that Mr.Hart commenced teacher and composer.In the latter character he has renderedhis name very celebrated in the fashionableworld by his numerous sets ofquadrilles. He also composed the musicto the farce of Amateurs and Actors,The Vampire, and other pieces performedat the English Opera, at whichtheatre he was chorus master andpiano-forte player, during three years.CIANCHETTINI, (Piu,) was bornin London, of foreign parents, in 1799.In his sixth year he performed, in public,a sonata of his. own composition ;passed the next in travelling with hisfather through Germany, France, andHolland ; and, on his return, resumedhis musical studies with great ardour.A variety of instrumental pieces wererapidly composed by him, which procuredgreat applause, particularly agrand concerto, executed by himself, ata concert in the metropolis, in 1809.When Madame Catalani first came toEngland, he attended her in several ofher musical tours, as her composer andconductor of her concerts, and he wasparticularly happy in adapting hismusic so as to display the most brilliantpowers of that distinguished vocalist.In his other vocal compositions, he hasaimed at a higher style of sentiment,both in the words and music, than thatgenerally attempted by our modernsong writers; among them we maymention his music to Pope's Ode onSolitude, and his cantata for two voices,the words of which are taken fromMilton's Paradise Lost.VOCAL PERFORMERS.BEARD, (JOHN,) was born in 1716;he received his musical education inthe Chapel Royal, under Bernard Gates,and first became a great favourite of thetown by his style of singing Galliard'shunting song, With early Horn. In1736, his name appears in the dramatispersona of Handel's operas, performedat Covent Garden Theatre, where hesang with great effect, with a rich tenorvoice. In the following year, he appearedat Drury Lane, in the part ofSir John Overrule, and soon after marriedLady Henrietta Herbert, widow ofLord Edward Herbert, and only daughterof the Earl of Landgrave, withwhom he lived very happily during aperiod of fourteen years. After herdecease, he united himself to a daughterof Rich, then patentee of Covent Gar-happenDix.den "Theatre, at whose death, in rightof' his wife, he became one of its proprietors,but he soon sold his share, andretired from the stage in 1768. Hedied in 1791, in the seventy-fifth yearof his age, esteemed by a large circleof friends, for his many amiable privatequalities. He was long a favourite vocalist,both in oratorio and stage music ;he sang the compositions of Handelwith a feeling and pathos only equalledby Harrison ; and, in 1759, his performanceof Macheath to Miss Brent'sPolly, filled the theatre for fifty-twosuccessive evenings.NORRIS, (CHARLES,) was bornabout 1740, and educated as a choristerof Salisbury Cathedral, a situation inwhich he was fortunate enough to attractthe notice of Mr. Harris, the celebratedauthor of Hermes This gentleman,in order to introduce Morris lothe notice of the public, wrote an after-piece,in the style of a pastoral opera,the songs of which he adapted to themost popular Italian airs of the day.At this time "his voice was a soprano ;but he did not meet with the successanticipated in this attempt to fix himon the stage, and his patron then recommendedhim to confine himself toprivate concerts and music meetings.Following his advice, he settled in Oxford,where he was admitted to thedegree of bachelor of music, and electedoi^aiiist of St. John's College. He wassubsequently, for many years, a principaltenor-singer at the London oratorios,and exhibited such excellence inhis hurt, as to have been honoured withthe especial approbation of (George theThird and his queen. Unfortunately,however, he had, in early life, cherishedan attachment for a young lady, distinguishedfor great personal attractionsand musical acquirements, which itmay be presumed was not reciprocal,as she married another. Tria event, itis said, drove him to " convivial consolations,"in which he indulged to a degreethat not only impaired his healthand fortune, but materially injured hisvoice. Indeed, for several years, hishealth gradually broke up, and at theAbbey commemoration of 1789, beinginjudiciously brought forward, his voicefailed, so decidedly, as to excite thedeepest emotions of pity. He, however,engaged himself to sing at theBirmingham music meeting of the followingyear, but his exertions provedfatal, and he died ten days after theperformance, at Henley Hail, the seatof Lord Dudley and Ward, near Stourbridge,in Worcestershire, on the 5th ofSeptember, 1794. He was an excellentmusician and a skilful performer onseveral instruments. His principal compositionsconsist of a few full concertos,and some glees ; one of which, on thedeath of that patron of music and musicalgenius, William, Duke of Cumberland,brother of George the Third,will long continue to be sung andadmired.DAVIES, (CECILIA,) was born inEngland about 1752, and went, whenyoung, to France, in company withher sister, whose performance on themusical glasses was much admired. Sheafterwards went to Germany and Italy,and becoming connected with thefamily of the celebrated composer,Haste, and Faustina, at Vienna, considerablyimproved her vocal powers.She first appeared on the stage in Italy,where she was thought little inferior toGabrielle ; and, indeed, Miss Davies, or1'lnglisina, as she was called abroad,sang with a degree of neatness, sonearly equal, that common hearerscould scarcely distinguish the difference.According to Parke, her successon the continent was not so completeas to prove, that by sending a jlady to study in Italy, she must necessarilycome back an accomplishedsinger, any more than the act of sendinga youth to college, ensures hisreturning an enlightened scholar. Onher first appearance, however, at theItalian Opera in England, which tookplace in 1773, in Sacchini's opera ofLucia vero. she was received with rapturousapplause, and, altogether, metwith a success that procured for lurthe distinction of being thought secondalone, amongst female English vocalists,to Wilmington. After bein<r a fewyears in England, she returned to thecontinent with her sister, but was inLondon in 1787, and sang with. Ru-belliand Mrs. Wilmington, at the professionalconcerts of that year. Hername again occurs with that of Mrs.Crouch as one of the principal vocaiis;sVOCAL PERFORMERS,at the Drury Lane oratorios in 1791 ;the period of her cleaih we have beenunable to ascertain. " Her voice," saysBurgh, in his Anecdotes of Music,though not of a great volume, orperhaps sufficiently powerful for a largetheatre, was yet clear, and alway. perfectlyin tune. Her shakes excellent,open, distinct, and neither sluggish,like the French cadence, nor so quickas to become a glutton. The flexibilityof her throat rendered her executionof the most rapid divisions fair andarticulate, even beyond those of instrumentsin the hands of the ablest performers.The critics, however, thoughunanimous in tins particular, did notso readily allow her to be equally excellentian the cantabile style. Shetook her notes judiciously, they readilygranted ; sang them perfectly in tune ;but wanted that colouring, passion, andvariety of expression, which render anadagio truly pathetic."SALE, (JOHN,) was born in Londonin 1758, and, at the age of nine, wasadmitted a chorister of Windsor andEton, where he continued under thetuition of Mr. Webbe, the organist, till1775. In 1777, he returned to thesame choirs as a lay-vicar, in whichsituation he continued to officiate tillthe year 17S6, when he became a memberof five choirs, including those ofWindsor, Eton, the Chapel Royal, Set.Paul's, and Westminster. His situationin the two first he resigned at the latterend of the year last-mentioned. In1799, he succeeded the elder Bellamyas almoner of St. Paul's, and master ofthe choristers, which united offices heresigned in 1812, when they were conferredon Mr. Hawes. In 1818, hebecame senior gentleman (or father)of his majesty's Chapels Royal; bywhich, according to immemorial custom,he was excused from all duty orattendance. During his long publiccareer, he was a principal bass-singerat the king's concert of Ancient Music,at the Academy of Ancient Music, theLadies', the Vocal, and other concertsand oratorios in London, as well as atCambridge, Oxford, Liverpool, Chester,Worcester, Birmingham, York, Hull,Norwich, &c., for above thirty years.He was patronized in a peculiar manner,by both George the Third andFourth, and by most of the members ofthe royal family, many of whom werehis pupils in singing. He was, forseveral years, during the latter part ofhis life, secretary to the Nobleman'sand Gentleman's Catch Club, held at theThatched House Tavern, St. James'sStreet, and conductor of the Glee Club ;both of which posts he retained till hisdeath, which took place at his house, inMarshal Street, Westminster, on thellth of November, 1827. He was buriedin St. Paul's, with solemnity and markedrespect, on the 19th of the same month,Mr. Attwood presiding at the organ,and the several choirs singing Greene'scelebrated funeral anther. He wasthe composer of many excellentglees, and published some, of the lateEarl of Mornington's, including the favouriteone, Oh! Bird of Eve. Hisvoice was a genuine bass, of fine tone,and sufficient compass to do everyjustice to part singing. He has lefttwo talented sons, one of whom, JohnBarlow Sale, is organist of St. Margaret's,Westminster, and teacher of the pianoforteto the Princess Victoria. Hisvoice is a powerful bass, and he haschiefly accustomed himself to sing anthemsand part songs. His most admiredcomposition is the duet of TheButterfly. His other son, GeorgeCharles, is organist of St. Mary's,Newington.BANNISTER, (CHARLES,) was bornin Gloucestershire, about the year 1760,In his eighteenth year, he joined acompany, then performing at Deptford ;and played Romeo, Richard, &c., withgreat applause. Garrick, however, declinedto comply with his applicationfor art engagement ; but he was morefortunate at Norwich, where he led thetragic business, for some years, withgreat success. His first appearance, inLondon, was at the Haymarket, asWill, in Foote's play of The Orators ;and he made a decided hit in the character.In his imitations of Tenducci andCheapness, he showed considerableability as a singer; and was, in consequence,soon after engaged at RaneeMary-le-bone Gardens, &c. Hecame out, afterwards, at Drury Lane,in the part ot Merlin, in Cymon ; butleft this theatre, on the refusal of Garrickto increase his salary, and went toAPPENDIX.Covent Garden, in 1782. He returnedto Drury Lane in 1785, and afterwardssang at the Royalty, and various provincialtheatres. " In this gentleman,"says a critic, in 1802, " the actor andsinger formerly combined ; but, in hispresent performance, he only remindsus of what he was : still, however, heremains a cheerful, witty companion,and a kind friend."ABRAMS, (Miss,) composer of thepopular and pathetic air of CrazyJane, was born in 1760, and early becamea pupil of Dr. Arne. Accordingto the author of The Dictionary ofMusicians, she was first heard by thepublic, with her sister, .Miss TheodosianAbrams, at the opening of the AncientConcert, 1776: but Parke says, it wasin the early part of that year she madeher debut at Drury Lane Theatre, in anew operatic piece, called, May Day, orThe Little Gipsey, the words by Garrick,and the music by her master, Dr.Arne. She sang at Handel's commemorationin 1784; and, in the winter of1791, conducted a series of concerts,denominated The Ladies' Concerts, atLord Vernon's. What her subsequentperformances were, is not recorded :for many years she has retired fromprofessional duties. Miss Abrams,though not possessed of great power ofvoice, sang with much sweetness anddelicacy.OLDMIXON, (Lady,) more celebratedas Miss George, was born about1768. Of the particulars of her life, littlehas been recorded. She was singingand playing in Ireland, with eclat, in1789 ; and Parke, in his Musical Memoirs,relates, that a curious contesttook place between her and Mrs. Wellington,in the summer of that year,when the latter was engaged in Dublin,and first appeared there in Polly, inThe Beggars' Opera. " Miss George,"he says, " had a voice of such extent,that she sang up to B in alt, perfectlyclear and in tune. Mrs. Billington,then in the very halo of her popularity,was received with acclamation, andsang her songs delightfully, particularly,Cease your funning, which was tumultuouslyencored. Miss George, whoperformed the part of Lucy (an up-hillsinging part), perceiving she had littlechance of dividing the applause withthe great magnet of the night, hadrecourse to the following stratagem :When the dialogue duet in the secondact, Why, how now, Madame Flirt?came on, Mrs. Billington gave herverse with great sweetness and characteristicexpression, and was muchapplauded. Miss George, in reply,availing herself of her extraordinarycompass of voice, and setting proprietyat defiance, sang the whole of her versean octave higher, her tones having theeffect of the high notes of a sweet andbrilliant flute : the audience, taken bysurprise, bestowed on her such loudapplause, as almost shook the walls ofthe theatre, and an unanimous encorewas the result." She was a principalsinger with Mrs. Crouch, then MissPhillips, at the Drury Lane oratorios,in 1785 ; also with Miss Forster, inthose under Dr. Arnold's management,in 1786; and again in 1788, with Mrs.Crouch and Madame Mara. Whenor how she became Lady Oldmixon,the brief notices which exist of her donot record.KNYVETT, (CHARLES,) descendedfrom an ancient and respectable family,was born about 1768, and received hisvocal education as a chorister in WestminsterAbbey, under Sir WilliamParsons, at the same time that he attendedWestminster School. He wasnext placed under Mr. S. Webbe, tostudy the organ, an instrument uponwhich he afterwards excelled ; and, in1802, he obtained the appointment oforganist to St. George's, H hanover Square.He was subsequently chosen one of thegentlemen of the Chapel Royal, a directorof the vocal concerts, at the HanoverSquare Rooms, in conjunction withMessrs. William Knyvett, Greatorex,and Bartleman ; and he was, for manyyears, secretary to The Nobleman'sCatch Club, held at the Thatched HouseTavern, St. James's Street. In 1789,he had, jointly with Harrison, the directionof the oratorios at Covent Garden,which were remarkable for beingthe first that were lowered to play-houseprices ; and, in 1792, he, with the samesinger, originated the Vocal Concerts.He conducted the glees at a grand vo<'alconcert, given by Miles Peter Andrews,Map., says Parke, in 1812; "and whenVOCAL PERFORMERS.it is considered that Kny vent is one ofthe best singers in that line, and thathis friend who gave the concert, is agood judge of music, and a manufacturerof gunpowder, it is no wonder they wentoff in fine style." During the latter partof his life, Mr. Knyveit has been principallyoccupied as a teacher of thorough-bass,and the piano-forte. He has beendescribed by Parke, as the best catchsinger in England, evincing in them allthe genuine comedy of an Edwin."Kny vent," he adds, "lived among thehigher circles of society and his eminentprofessional friends, and was, forhis talent and worth, highly esteemed.He informed me, the last time I dinedwith him, that he had ate his Christmasdinner with Lord Dudley and Ward,at his lordship's mansion in Park Lane,or at his seat in Worcestershire, for thelast twenty-five years! and that, bymutual agreement, he was to do thesame till death dissolved the meeting."BELLAMY, (THOMAS Bedford,)was born in the parish of St. John's,Westminster, in 1770; and receivedhis early musical education from hisfather, Richard Bellamy, a celebratedbass singer of his day. His next instructorwas Dr. Cooke, and afterwards,when his voice changed to a bass, hebecame a pupil of the celebrated Tasca ;who, unfortunately, died a year precedingthat in which his pupil was tohave gone with him to the continent.Pursuing his studies in London, he wasappointed deputy to his father andothers, in the king's Chapel Royal, St.James's, and in the choirs of St. Paul'sand Westminster Abbey. He was likewise*employed, from time to time, atthe Ancient Concerts; and, some timepreceding the last commemoration ofHandel, says one of his biographers,was instructed in singing ancient music,by Noah Bates ; in consequenceof which, his performance at theseconcerts was crowned with the mostflattering success. He was also aprincipal singer at the oratorios atDrury Lane Theatre, in 1791, withReinhold, Dignum, Mrs. Crouch, andthe celebrated Miss Davies. In 1794,finding little hopes of promotion, heaccepted the offer of an agency to anobleman's estate in Ireland, but soonleft that situation, and, in 1797, becamestage-manager to the Dublin Theatre.In 1800, he purchased some sharesin the Manchester, Chester, Shrewsbury,and Litchfield Theatres, but soldthem in 1803-4, when he became soleproprietor of the theatres at Belfast,Londonderry, and Newly. This lastspeculation proving unfortunate, heaccepted an engagement at CoventGarden Theatre for five years; beingappointed a member of the Ancientand Vocal Concerts, and engaged tosing at the oratorios. In 1812, lie wasengaged at Drury Lane for a period offive years also, and upon the deceaseof Bartltman, he was appointed hissuccessor at the Ancient Concerts, asprincipal bass-singer. In 1818, he establisheda musical academy, on theAlgerian system ; and in 1819, hereceived the appointment of master ofthe choir of his catholic majesty'schapel in London, attached to theSpanish embassy. Mr. Bellamy is, nextto Bartleman, considered the finestbass-singer of sacred music, which thiscountry has produced, although inferiorto his great contemporary, bothin taste and power.SECOND, (MARY,) whose singing issaid to have been only inferior to thatof Mrs. Billington, is of the family ofthe Masons of Oxford, and aunt to thecelebrated Mrs. Salmon ; she is thedaughter of a clarion player of celebrity,and was born about 1777. Afterhaving been well received as a concertsinger, she determined to try the stage,and, on the 17th of September, 1796,she made her debut at Covent Garden,in the character of Emily, in the operaof The Woodman. Her singing wasloudly applauded, but after her marriagewith Mr. Second, which tookplace about 1800, we hear little of herupon the stage. " This lady's voice,"says Parke, "was rich, powerful, andof great compass. She sang up to Fnatural in alt, with ease, and her stylewas of a superior order."VAUGHAN, (JOHN,) was, born ofhumble parentage in the city of Norwich,about 1779, and was taught therudiments of his art under Dr.'Beck-with, the organist of the cathedral andof St. Peter's Church. He was early accustomedto sing at the amateur societyAPPENDIX.in his native city, and soon became sodistinguished a vocalist, as to be inrequisition at all the principal musicmeetings in the kingdom. He hasheld for many years an appointment inthe Chapel Royal, and has long beenconsidered the chief concert and sacredmusic tenor of his day, being equallyremarkable for his correct intonation,agreeable tone, grace, polish and sublimity.In comparing him wuh Harrisonand Braham, a writer in The Harmonicsays, " that in Total Eclipse, in thedelivery of which Harrison was sounrivalled, and Braham defective, he,as in Comfort ye my People, holds amiddle path : his reading is nearly thesame as Harrison's, but he brings moreof physical power to the task ; thoughin this quality he is vastly inferior rBraham ; and his conception wantsthat vivid light, which the latter greatmaster throws over some passages.Yet Vaughan has not unfrequently deliveredTotal Eclipse with such pathosand expression, as to draw tears fromhis auditors. He may be said to beone of the last of the school of singerswho were taught to comprehend andexpress the beauty and grace ofHandel's melodies, by those who hadstudied it of Handel himself."TAYLOR, (EDWARD,) was born atNorwich, in Norfolk, about 1779, andis a son of the late John Taylor, Esq.,of that city. He was educated in theUnitarian persuasion ; his family, longopulent and influential in Norwich,having been amongst the leaders of thatsect. Being designed for a mercantilelife, he was engaged, first in the wooltrade, and afterwards in that of an ironmonger: but his early taste for musicever predominated over all other occupations,and he was associated with allthe musical movements of his nativecity; for many years conducted on ascale scarcely surpassed by the performancesof the metropolis. At the amateurconcerts in Norwich he took vocalparts in both glees and duets, and sangItalian scenes and bass songs, with ataste and knowledge of the art scarcelyinferior to that of the best vocalists ofhis day. He uas several times electeda common councilman for his nativecity, and once served the office of sheriff;but the unfortunate death of his father,in Ireland, by a fall from his horse, andthe fluctuations of trade, so reduced thisonce opulent citizen of Norwich, thathe was constrained to throw himselfupon his musical resources for himselfand family's support ; with what successis well known. He is, indeed, now,perhaps, at the head of English vocalists,as a bass-singer; and as such, is engagedat all the oratorios, both in Londonand at the provincial towns, and hasseveral times conducted the triennialmusic meetings, at his native city,with a success and ability that reflectsthe highest credit on the art of whichhe has now been many years a professor." No one has done more topropagate the knowledge and extendthe cultivation of classical music in thiscountry," says a writer in The Harmoniconon,"than Mr. Edward Taylor."He was a contributor to the pages ofThe Musical Quarterly Review ; and isunderstood to write the able musicalcriticisms for The Spectator Newspaper;and to have contributed to the pages ofThe Harmonicon, and other works. Ofhis published compositions, the mostpopular are a collection of songs, includingAs I roam, Hoary Ocean, &c.KNYVETT, (WILLIAM,) brother ofCharles, was born in London, about1780. Who his musical instructorswere is not stated, but he early arrivedat vocal eminence, and, like his brother,has long been remarkable for correctnessin the musical enunciation of theEnglish language. He first commencedorchestral singing at the Concert ofAncient Music about 1795, since whichperiod, he has assisted at all the mostimportant concerts and music meetingsin the metropolis and the provinces.As a counter-tenor singer, he has beenmany years admired, equally for thesweetness of his voice, as for the highfinish and delicacy of his style in partsinging; and the celebrity he has obtainedon that account, as well as hisknown extensive acquaintance withmusical science, procured for him, onthe decease of Greatorex, the appointmentof conductor of the Ancient Concert.But his merits are not confinedto his vocal powers alone ; he has displayedgreat taste as a writer of glees,many of which are airy und elegant,and a valuable addition to our nationalVOCAL PERFORMERS.music. The wife of Mr. Knyvett.formerly Miss Travis, is a native ofShaw, a village near Oldham, in Lancashire,and has, for many years, delightedall admirers of genuine Englishsinging. Her style, says a critic, " is,amongst the females, what Vaughanis amongst the male singers of theday ; simple in her manner pure in hertone, accurate in her intonation, chastein her declaration, and, with so muchscience, that her auditor is never distressedby any apprehension of herfailure or extravagances. As a singerof glees, she is, perhaps, the very bestof her time ; for her tone, from its richnessand volume, blends and assimilateswith male voices better than thatof any female now before the public, andshe is, moreover, practised in the finestschool for this department of vocal art."COOKE, (THOMAS,) was born inDublin, about the year 1780, and firstimbibed a taste for music in the shopof his father. In 1803, he was composerto the theatre, and leader of theband, and in both departments appearsto have been a favourite, although hispopularity excited the jealousy of some,if we may judge from a lampoon uponhim, in a work called, Familiar Epistlespublished in 1804. He is here described,in a note to some lines referringto him, as " the modest and diffidentMr.Tom Cooke, who played on eight instrumentsfor his own benefit ; I amsure it was neither benefit nor pleasureto any one else. This person writesnew overtures to all the operas whichare imported to our stage, beginninggenerally with chords, and ending withan Irish jig; and this he calls composition.'1 he young man, however, hassome merit ; and if he went to London,would, probably, earn two or threeguineas per week, by playing countrydances at the winter balls. Seriously,1 wish he could be taught a little science,a little taste, and a little modesty, andhe might be a very useful and agreeablefiddler." At this time, we believe Mr.Cooke had not appeared upon the stage,but, at length, at the particular desire ofseveral persons of distinction, he madehis debut for his own benefit, as theSeraskier, in The Siege of Belgrade.He was received with enthusiastic applause:Philips, (the Uruham of Ireland)was pronounced a rush light to abonfire, in comparison ; and our hero,says one of his biographers, " wasextolled as the son of song, who shouldshed a lasting lustre on the emeraldisle." Mr. Cooke soon after quittedDublin, and made his debut in the abovecharacter, at the English Opera House,on the 27th of July, 1813, his wife atthe same time appearing as Lille. In1813, he was engaged as leading vocalistat Drury Lane Theatre, where hisperformance of Macheath was warmlyapplauded, and in the opinion of many,was, on the whole, superior to Indedon'srepresentation of the same character.He gave," says one of the critics ofthe time, " the beautiful airs, whichbelong to the part most expressivelyand chastely ; rejecting all meretriciousornament, and judiciously adoptingthe plain straight-forward style ofsinging, suitable to the character." Mr.Cooke subsequently sang at the Co-bourgTheatre; and made a travellingtour with Mr. De Camp, giving an entertainmentcalled, Road-side Adventures,in which Mr. De Camp sustained themimetic and oratorical portion, whilstMr. Cooke played the instrumental andvocal. His chief occupation, of lateyears, has been as leader of the band atDrury Lane, although on the productionof Der Freischutz, he assumed thepart of Adolph in a manner that hasbeen styled "the greatest triumph everknown of art over nature." His voice,however, has latterly much declined,and certainly, in a large theatre, is tooweak for even taste and science likehis to render effective. Mr. Cooke losthis wife in 1824, but has, we understand,married again. One of his childrenby his former wife, Mr. GrattanCooke, is well known in the musicalworld as one of the most exquisite performersupon the hautboy which thiscountry has produced. As a musicianand composer, Mr. Cooke ranks veryhigh ; indeed, he may be said, for skillin the one, and knowledge in the other,to surpass all his contemporaries. Heis a member of the Philharmonic Society,of the Royal Academy of Music, ofthe Nobleman's Catch Club, and of theGlee Club ; and, as director and leaderat Drury Lane Theatre, is admitted tohave excelled all his predecessors. Hehas composed two operas: FrederickAPPENDIX.the Great, and The King's Proxy, anda variety of other vocal arid instrumentalmusic, which has been published.SAPIO, (Mr.) This talented vocalistis the son of Signer Sapio, a celebratedItalian professor of singing, who waschapel master to the unfortunate queenof Louis the Sixteenth, Maria Antoinette.Whilst resident in Paris, hemarried a French lady, with whom heemigrated to England, on the breakingout of the French Revolution, and settledin London, where the subject ofour memoir was born, in 1792. Mr.Sapio at first studied music, simply asan accomplishment, being classicallyeducated and intended for the army,in which he held a commission for ashort time. The expensive habits, whichit led him to contract, a small fortuneenabled him for awhile to indulge in,but, as these habits were aided by agenerosity equally boundless and promiscuous,he soon found himself compelledto seek some other source ofincome than his pay. This determinedhim to cultivate his musical abilities,and as he possessed a fine voice, to turnit to the best advantage. His firstattempts were confined to the concertand oratorio ; and on the 20th of January,1822, at the oratorios under thedirection of Mr. Bochsa, he made hisfirst appearance in the opening recitative,Comfort ye my People, andthe following air, Every Valley. Heexecuted them with a tenor of considerablepower and compass, and intasteful style, but he was deficient inthat beautiful requisite in sacred musicagood shake. He also sang at theoratorios, under the same management,in 1823, with great effect, and, in thefollowing month of September, at theYork festival, in company with Catalani,Miss Stephens, Braham, and Vaughan.In 1824, he made his debut on theEdinburgh stage; and on the 1st ofDecember in the same year, came outat Drury Lane, as the Seraskier, inThe Siege of Belgrade. From that timeup to the present, he has continued toappear as principal tenor-singer invarious operas. His performance ofSydney, in Winter's UninterruptedSacrifice, at the English Opera House,was one of the parts which greatly increasedhis reputation. His powers as avocalist have thus been summed up bya professional critic. " Mr. Sapio is adeclamatory singer, and his manner ismore rhetorical and effective than thatof most concert singers. Concerningscience, Mr. Sapio displays an ease anda steadiness, that indicate a generalacquaintance with the arrangements ofthe orchestra. His cadences and ornaments,if they exhibit no uncommonerudition, are yet not deficient, eitherin invention or skill in adaptation.Upon the whole, Mr. Sapio is unquestionablythe most promising tenor singerthat has for many years appeared inthis metropolis. With less power fromnature and science than Braham oncepossessed, and with more dramaticstrength, but less polish, than Vaughan,he has a manner of his own, as diversifiedas pleasing. He is energetic,manly, and often touching; and thesequalities, with the elegance of his exterior,have won for him, very deservedly,the approbation of both thefashionable and scientific auditors."PEARMAN, (WILLIAM,) was bornat Manchester, in the year 1792, and, atan early age went to sea as a cabin boyin the naval service. He received awound in the leg. at the bombardmentof Copenhagen, which disabled him forfuture service, and he accordingly leftthe navy with a pension. His leg wasnot so severely injured as to preventhis appearance "on the stage, and as hehad already shown superior vocal capabilities,he determined to turn them toaccount as an actor. He made his firsttheatrical essay at Tooting, in Surrey,but neither there, nor at the Sans Pareil,where he subsequently appeared, did hecreate any impression. He next joinedMacready's company at Newcastle, butwit!) no better success, and it was notuntil he was engaged by Dibdin atSadler's Wells, that his vocal abilitiesbegan to be appreciated. He gavegreat effect to Dibdin's nautical songs,particularly, Bound 'Prentice to a Waterman,and Powder Monkey Peter, whichderived additional celebrity from hismode of singing them. Some instructionswhich lie received, about this time,from Mr. Addison, considerably improvedthe taste and style of Mr. Pearman,who, after having sang as leadingvocalist at Newcastle, Bath, and Bristol,VOCAL PERFORMERS.made his debut at the English OperaHouse, on the 7ih of July, 1817, in thepart of Orlando, in The Cabinet. Nothingcould be more favourable than his reception; almost all his songs werehonoured with an encore, and he, atonce, became a favourite. His Apolloin Midas, Leander, in The Padlock, andCaptain Macheath, were among hismost effective performances ; in thelatter, he was not more conspicuous forthe excellence of his singing, than of ihis acting. " In the prison scene," says |a critic, " he was peculiarly impressive ;the delinquent overawed by the fate hecannot avert, yet endeavouring to assumethe appearance of indifference andjocularity, was forcibly depicted ; andthe shake of the hand given to hisbrother robber on taking leave, wasworthy of any performer. We would !willingly forego a few unmeaning ithough beautiful cadences, for onetouch of nature like that." In theseason of 1819, Mr. Pearman was en !gaged at Drury Lane, and subsequentlyat Covent Garden, but his powers werenot shown to so much advantage at thelarge houses, as at the English Opera.Latterly he has disappeared altogetherfrom the metropolitan boards, but wearenot aware whether he has determinedon retiring from the stage. Thecompass of Mr. Pearman's natural voice,which is a soft and pleasing tone, doesnot exceed E, though he occasionallystrains it to G. He seldom uses hisfalsetto, which is extremely sweet, butso deficient in power as to be almostinaudible. " It is rather remarkable,"says one of his biographers, ' that Mr.Pearman has no shake, but it is muchmore remarkable, that wherever a passageoccurs where that ornament iscommonly introduced, he should invariablymake what is termed the preparationfor the shake, and then, afterraising the expectation, quietly concludewith a turn."CAREW, (Miss,) was born on the16th of October, 1799, of respectableparents, who cultivated the early tastewhich she developed, for music, butwithout any view to her abilities beingexercised on the stage. At length,however, she was articled to Mr.Welsh, and, at the age of fourteen, wasplaced in. the chorusses at CoventGarden, where she played Maria, inThe Spoiled Child, and" a few similarparts, for the purpose of learning thebusiness of the stage.' The illness ofMiss Stephens, during the run of GuyMannering, was the cause of MissCarew's first attracting notice. Sheassumed, for a night or two, the part ofJulia Mannering, and was received withsuch applause, as to induce Mr. Morristo engage her as prima donna at theHa market. She made her debit thereinJuly, 181G, but the paucity of operaticrepresentations at the Haymarket,gave little scope for a display of hertalents, and it was not until her appearanceat the English Opera, in 1818,that she came fairly before the publicas a vocalist. She subsequently becamea member of the Drury Lane company,and continued a favourite until herretirement from the stage, which tookplace a short time ago. Miss Carew'svoice was well sustained up to D or E,but beyond these notes, there was areedy thinness in her tones. She excelledchiefly in serious ballads ; andexecuted, in a very effective manner,the songs of Clara, in The Duenna,Polly, Rosinaa, Rosetta, &c, &c. On thewhole, she has been described as a feeling,sensible singer, always pleasing,never surprising, capable of sustaininga secondary station in any establishment,but by no means calculated tohold the situation of prima donna.Poney, (Miss,) was born at Birmingham,in the year 1804, and madeher theatrical debut on the 3rd of June,1817, when she sang for the benefit ofher musical instructor, Mr. T. Cooke.She had previously, it is said, receivedgratuitous lessons from Madame Maraand Mr. Bartleman. In 1819, she wasengaged for three years at Drury Lane,and at the expiration of that period,performed at the English Opera House,and again at Drury Lane. She was,at one time, patronized by the firstcircles, and not less respected for herconduct in private, than admired forher vocal abilities. As a singer, sheis celebrated for the chasteness andsimplicity of her style, and succeedschiefly in ballads, although possessinga voice of more natural power, thanmany vocalists, who have since filledthe situation of prima donna.APPENDIX.Grandson, (Miss,) was born atBishop's Lydia, near Taunton, inSomersetshire, about the year 1804.After having studied under T. Cooke,she sang at Vauxhall, in 1822, and inthe following year made a successfuldebut at Dublin. She was next engagedat Liverpool and Manchester, andon the 23rd of October, 1824, appearedat Drury Lane, as Susanna, in TheMarriage of Figaro. She was well received,but did not establish her reputationuntil her performance of Linda,in Der Frieschutz, which gained universalapplause. From Drury Lane,she went to Covent Garden, and againto Vauxhall, and latterly, has been engagedas leading female vocalist at theSurrey. Miss Grafton may be consideredat the head of our second-ratesingers ; she is more distinguished forbrilliancy than taste, and in bravurasinging, comes very near to Miss PatonLike that lady," says a critic, ' whenshe commences any difficult and brilliantpassages, she seems to revel in hercapabilities, and pours forth the notesin the very exuberance of her power,she lives in cadences they seem torevive her; when the melody alonehas, as it were, palled her ear, andslackened her exertions, she awakensupon one of her own introductionsdashes boldly on again retouches theair reverts to the ornament and playsaround it, as loth to quit the scene ofher triumph." But notwithstandingthis redundancy of ornament, she cansing a ballad with a simplicity trulypleasing; as an instance of this, we maymention the song of Love was once alisle Boy, in which she generallyreceived a double encore.INSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.HESLETINE, (JAMES.) a pupil ofDr. Blow, and considered one ofthe finest extempore performers andchurch composers of the day, was bornabout 1663. He was appointed organistof Durham Cathedral in 1690, apost he retained for near half a centurywith great reputation, during which he,composed many beautiful anthems forthe use of the choir; but on some misunderstandingtaking place betweenhim and the dean and chapter, he torethem all out of their books, and destroyedthem. He then came to London,and was elected organist of the collegiatechurch of St. Catherine, near theTower. He died at a very advancedage, about 1750. He was a mostexcellent musician, and composed agreat number of anthems, some ofwhich are to be found in the choir-booksof most of the cathedrals of the kingdom.He married a daughter of SirGeorge Wheeler, and left considerableproperty.CORBETT, (WILLIAM,) a celebrated*English violin player of tuteighteenth century, and leader of thefirst opera orchestra in this country, wasborn about 1669. Who were his instructors,it is not said, but in his youngerdays, he published two or three sets ofsonatas for violins and flutes, twelveconcertos for all instruments, and severalsets of tunes for plays. At thetime of the establishment of the ItalianOpera, in the year 1710, lie belonged tothe king's band, and shortly afterwardsto Italy, for the ostensible purposeof collecting instrurrr neal music, andengaging instrumental performers foethe opera. " Those, however," saysDr. Burney, " who were acquaintedwith his circumstances, at a loss to accountfor his being able to lay out suchsums as he was observed to do, in thepurchase of books and instruments,confidently asserted, that besides hissalary, he had an allowance from government,and that his business atINSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.Rome was to watch the motions of thePretender." Upon his return to England,about the year 1740, he issuedproposals for publishing by subscriptiona work, entitled, Concertos, or UniversalBizzarries, composed on all thenew Custos during many years' residencein Italy, in three books, containingthirty-five concertos, in seven parts ;in which he professes to have imitatedthe styles of the various kingdoms inEurope, and of several cities and provincesin Italy. However ridiculoussuch a proposal may seem to have been,the author determined to try the experiment,and, with little or no encouragement,published his work, ofwhich very few copies were sold. Hedied in 1748, at an advanced age.He was not only considered an excellentperformer on the violin, but also, agood composer, and was a great collectorof music and musical instruments.The latter he bequeathed to GreshamCollege, with a salary of 10 a year foraservant to show them.SHUTTLEWORTH, (OBADIAH,)the leader of the established concert,at the Swan Tavern, Cornhill, whichincluded some of the greatest musicalgeniuses of the day in its performers,was born about the year 1675. He became,successively, organist of St.Michael's, and of the Temple Church,London, and was also one of the mosteminent violin-players of his time. Dr.Burney speaks highly of his compositions,none of which are in print, excepttwo concertos formed from thehurst and eleventh solos of Corelli. Hedied in 1735.TESTING, (MICHAEL CHRISTIAN,)was born in Germany about 1680, butbecame located in England, as a distinguishedviolinist and composer, duringthe first half of the eighteenth century.He originally studied under Geminiani,and after he settled in England, wasappointed leader of the king's band.On the building of the Rotunda inRanelagh Gardens, he had the solemanagement of the musical performancesthere. He was eminent bothas a solo player and leader, and wrotesome excellent solos for the violin,wmcn are but little known, having beenoriginally c-old only by private subscription.He died in the year 1752,having a son in the church of England,the Rev. Dr. Michael Testing, Rectorof VYyke-Regi-, in Dorsetshire. Mr.Festing, however, principally deservesmention as the chief founder of thefund for the support of decayedmusicians and their families. " Thissociety," says the author of The Dictionaryof Musicians, " took its rise inthe year 1738, from the following occurrence: Festing, then resident inLondon, being, one day, seated at thewindow of the Orange Coffee-house,at the corner of the Haymarket, observeda very intelligent-looking boydriving an ass, and selling brick-dust.He was in rags, and, on inquiry, wasfound to be the son of an unfortunatemusician. Struck with grief and mortification,that the object before himshould be the son of a brother professor,Festing determined to attempt somethingfor the child's support, with theassistance of Dr. Maurice Green. Theseworthy men soon after established afund towards the support of decayedmusicians and their families."B A BELL, (WILLIAM,) who has themerit of being the first who simplifiedmusic for keyed instruments, and ofdivesting it of that crowded and complicatedharmony with which it hadbeen embarrassed, w as born about 1700,and was the son of a bassoon-player ofDrury Lane Theatre. He became anexcellent performer on the harpsichord,and was, for some time, organist ofthe church of Shallows, Bread Street,London. His first essay in compositionwas. to turn the favourite airs inPyrrhus and Demerits, Hydaspes,and some other operas, into lessons forthe harpsichord ; and, from the opera ofRinaldo, he composed a set of showyand brilliant lessons, which few couldplay besides himself. There are alsoextant, of his composition, twelve solosfor a violin and hautboy ; twelve solosfor a German flute and hautboy ; sixconcertos for flutes and violins ; andsome other works, ' enumerated inWalsh's Catalogue. Babelll died prematurely,in 1722, having shortened hisdays by intemperance.DUBOUIIG, (MATTHEW,) one of themoat eminent performers 011 the violinAPPENDIX.which this country has produced, wasthe son of a dancing-master, and wasborn in 1703. At an early age he wasplaced under Geminiani, and whilstquite a child, he is said to have playedone of Corelli's solos at the famousconcerts of Bretton, the small-coleman,upon a stool, and in the presence ofsome of the most celebrated musiciansof the age. Before he had completedhis seventeenth year, he had acquiredsufficient strength and steadiness, tolead at several of the public concerts ;and in 1728, he was appointed composerand master of the state music inIreland, a situation that had been previouslyoffered to his master, Gemi-niani, who refused it on account of hisbeing a Roman catholic, it not beingtenable by a member of that persuasion.On the death of Testing, in 1752, hesucceeded that eminent musician asleader of the king's band, having beenpreviously taken into the service of thePrince of Wales, father of George theThird ; he himself died in 1767, inpossession of both his appointments,and was buried in the churchyard, atPaddington, near London, where hisexcellences, as a musician, have beencommemorated in the following couplet:Though, sweet as Orpheus, touch could'st bringSoft pleadings from the trembling string,Unchained the king of terror stands,Nor owns the magic of thy hands."It has been erroneously stated,"says the author of The Dictionary ofMusicians, " that Dubourg was no composer; he was, indeed, no publisher;but the odes which he set for Ireland,and innumerable solos and concertoscomposed by him for his own publicperformances, are now in possession ofone of his pupils, and some of themare excellent."HOWARD, (SAMUEL,) was bornabout the year 1710, and educated atthe Chapel Royal. He held the twosituations of organist of St. Clement'sDanes and of St. Bride's, till his death,which occurred in 1782. He had thedegree of doctor of music conferredupon him, at Cambridge, in 176'J. Hewas chiefly distinguished as an organist; but his ballads, says a musicalauthority, were long the delight ofnatural and inexperienced lovers ofmusic, and had, at least, the merit ofneatness and facility to recommendthem.PINTO, (THOMAS,) was born inEngland, of Italian parents, about 1710.He was described as having, when aboy, been a miraculous player of theviolin, and was employed as a leaderof various concerts long before he wasof age. " At this time, however," saysthe author of The Dictionary of Musicians," he was very idle, incliningmore to the fine gentleman, than themusical student ; kept a horse ; wasalways in boots of a morning, with aswitch in his hand instead of a fiddlestick; till the arrival of Giardini, whosesuperior playing roused his ambition,and induced him for some time to practisediligently. He then acquired sufficientcelebrity, to lead at the Opera,whenever Giardini was absent, till hewas engaged as first violin player atDrury Lane, where he led many years,but subsequently went to Ireland tosettle, where he died in 1773." " Witha very powerful hand, and an astonishinglyquick eye," says the aboveauthority, "he was, in general, socareless a player, that he performedthe most difficult music at sight betterthan even after he had learnt it byheart, for he was then obliged tolook at the notes with some care andattention ; but afterwards, trusting tohis memory, he frequently committedmistakes, and missed the expression ofpassages, which, if he had thoughtworth looking at, he would have executedwith certainty." His first wifewas a German singer, named Sybil ;but at her death, he married the famouspupil of Dr. Arne, Miss Brent. Agrandson of Thomas Pinto, G! F. Pinto,was a surprising instance of precocityin a musical genius. He studied underSalomon, ami, at fifteen, wa* enabled tolead an orchestra, in the performanceof the symphonies of Haydn, nearlyas well as his master. He was wellversed in counterpoint, as appeared byseveral vocal pieces he published atseventeen, of great merit and originality.He died in the twenty-firstyear of his age, a martyr to dissipation.in 1808.INSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.CRAMER, (WILLIAM,) founder ofthe celebrated family of that name, wasborn at Manheim, in Germany, about1730. His father was in the suite ofPrince Maximilian, who having observedin the youth a strong indication ofmusical talent, was at the expense ofproviding him with proper instructors.He had, indeed, arrived at such excellence,as to be considered the first violinplayer in his country, and was employedat the chapel of the Elector Palatine,from 1750 to 1770. It was in the latteryear he obtained permission to travelfor two years, the Duke of Wittenbergallowing him to retain his salary duringhis absence, on condition of his returnto Stuttgart. The reception, however,which he met with in London, inducedhim to settle in that metropolis, wherehe became, successively, chamber-musicianto George the Third, leader of theorchestra at the Opera, and leader atthe Ancient Concerts. He had no. beenlong in London before he was engagedto superintend the Sunday concertsof the Duke of Queensberry, at oneof which he was so startled by suddenlyfinding opposite to him the Dukeand Duchess of Wittenberg, who hadjust arrived in England, that the momenthe had done leading the concerts,he took the lead out of the room with thegreatest celerity. In 1787, he led theorchestra of eight hundred musicians,at the commemoration of Handel.Towards the latter end of his career,he was dispossessed of his post of leaderat the Italian Opera, not in the handsomestmanner, and the circumstance issaid to have so far affected his spirits,as to have hastened his death, whichhappened on the 5th of November,1805. He was an excellent master of hisinstrument, and justly celebrated forhis fine tone, and certainty of touch :as a leader, he was, in his early career,perhaps, without an equal. By Germanwriters, he is said to have united in hisplaying the brilliancy of Lull, with theexpression of Bend. He composed andpublished a great deal of violin mu.<ir,well known to professors and dilettantimusicians. Cramer being engaged tolead the band at a music-meeting, atManchester, says Parke, in his MusicalMemoirs, was invited to dine with aresident professor of the divine art,Dr. Bush, when he very much praisedsome turnips, for which Lancashire isfatuous, which happened to be on thetable. In the early part of the followingyear, Cramer received a letter, advisinghim of a present of a few, and shortlyafter arrived a hogshead at Cramer'sresidence in Newman Street, for thecarriage of which he had to pay twoguineas !MILLER, (EDWARD,) was born inone of the northern counties of England,in 1731, and although he, at first,received the principal part of his musicaleducation under Dr. Burney, distinguishedhimself as a flutist. He was,at the age of twenty-five, elected organistof Doncaster, in Yorkshire,where he settled, and played and taughtwith great success, till his death, In1807. He had received the degree ofdoctor of music from the University ofOxford, and published six solos for theGerman flute, six sonatas for the harpsichord,a set of elegies, with accompaniments,and new tunes for the Psalmsof David. But his most successful workwas his Institutes of Music for youngbeginners on the Harpsichord, whichhas gone through fifteen or sixteen editions,and, together with his Elementsof Thoroughness and Composition, isstill highly esteemed.Depuis, (THOMAS SAUNDERS,)was born in England, of French parents,in 1733. His father, holding some appointmentin the court of George theSecond, was, probably, the reason ofhis being early placed in the king'sChapel Royal. He studied music, successively,under Gates and Travers, forthe latter of whom he officiated asorganist of the Chapel Royal. Hesucceeded to this situation himself, in1799; was, soon after, created a doctorof music by the University of Oxford ;and died at his house, in Park Lane,on the 17th of June, 1796. As a performeron the organ, Dr. Depuis is saidto have been excelled by few Englishmenof his own time. As a composer,he is known by several publications, andmany of his pieces are still in manuscriptat the Royal Chapel. The former consistprincipally of two or three sets ofsonatas for the piano-forte, two grandconcertos for that instrument, organpieces, intended principally for youngP h N DIX.persons, two sets of chants performed atthe Chapel Royal, and several anthems.Two of the latter, The Lord, even themost mighty God, and, I cried unto theLord, are inserted in Page's HarmoniaSacra.Parke, (JoHN,) one of the mostcelebrated oboeists of his day, was bornin 1745. and studied that instrumentunder Simon, having been previouslyinstructed in the theory of music byBaumgarten. In 1776, he was engagedas principal hautboy at the Lentoratorios ; and he successively occupieda similar post at Vauxhall, andMary-le-bone Gardens. He subsequentlyperformed in the orchestras ofthe Italian Opera and Drury Lane, andwas appointed a member of the CarltonHouse band, with a salary of 100 perannum. He was, for some time, unrivaledas an oboeist, and his performanceswere considered a chief featureat the professional, ancient, and otherconcerts, and music meetings of notethroughout the kingdom. He is saidto have composed many concertos ofgreat merit, but could never be prevailedupon to print and publish them.Parke, in his Musical Memoirs, says ofhis brother John, " he was a protegeof the old Lord Tyrawley, and, aboutthe year 1768, first attended his concerts.On one of these occasions, hewas shewn into a large waiting roomtill the preparations were completed,and, while standing by the fire-place,he was astonished and terrified by beholdinga large tiger issue from behinda lofty screen placed before the door.The animal, with majestic deportment,walked quietly round the room, occasionallyobserving him, whilst he, ' almostdistilled to jelly with his fears,' wasrelieved from his agitation, by the partywho sent the beast in, following, almostbursting with laughter at the trick theyhad played."Crossbill, (JOHN,) " unquestionably,"says Parke, in his MusicalMemoirs, " the greatest player of histime in Europe," was born in London,in 1755. He was educated atWestminster School, and was a memberof the choir in the abbey, but underwhom he studied his favourite instrument,we have no account. About1782, he was appointed chamber musicianto Queen Charlotte, and teacherof the violoncello to the Prince of Wales;and on the first institution of the AncientConcerts, he was appointed principalvioloncello player, a character inwhich his name is associated with almostall the great musical undertakingsof his day. He retired from the practiceof his profession, on his marriagewith a lady of fortune, in 1790, butstill continued to perform on the violoncelloat musical parties at his ownhouse, where the Prince of Waleswas frequently a guest. For manyof the latter years of his life he wasdomiciliated with B. Thompson, Esq.in Grosvenor Square. He died atthe seat of his friend's nephew,Thompson, Esq., at Crick, in Yorkshire,in 1825, leaving a handsomefortune to his only son, Lieutenant-colonelCrossdill, who, by his father'sdesire, presented 1,000 to the RoyalSociety of Musicians. As a violoncelloplayer, he was little inferior to Lindley,though his performances were not alwaysappreciated as they deserved. Ata private party, one evening, after hehad finished playing a concerto, all expressedtheir delight but an Italiansinger, who being asked his opinion ofwhat he had just heard, exclaimed, " Itwas very well for an amateur !"POWELL, (THOMAS,) was born inLondon, in 1766, and in due time becamea memb.^of the Royal Society ofMusicians. He is chiefly eminent forhis performances on the violoncello, butplays also the piano, harp, and violin.Going over to Dublin, after his marriage,in 1811, he acquired great celebrityin that city as a teacher, and healso performed at the Rotunda andCastle Concerts, and composed manypieces of music in different styles. Onhis return to England, he made hisfirst public appearance in the Britishmetropolis, at the Haymarket Theatre,where he played a concerto of his owncomposition on the violoncello, for thebenefit of the Choral Fund. He haslately resided at Edinburgh, where heholds the same rank as a violoncelloplayer, which Lindley does in London.Hellas composed a variety of pieces forthis instrument, too num rous to mention,besides some vocal jieees, and anII U M N T A L PERFORMERS.overture, composed under the followingsingular circumstances: " Walking inafield near Glasgow," we are told,he met with some colliers working inacoal-pit, when his curiosity being excitedby the baskets ascending and descending,sometimes with coals, and atothers with men, he felt a wish to makean arrangement with the master forhis own descent to the regions below ;but the conversation concerning thisintended trip was soon put an end to,his attention being arrested by four distinctsounds, which continued in regulartime and tune, and were producedby the crane, which was thenworking by steam. From the peculiarcircumstance by which these soundswas produced, and a certain pleasingeffect in them, Powell was desirous tocompose a piece of music founded onthese same notes, and accordingly didwrite an overture for a full orchestra,in eighteen different parts, commencingwith the four notes in question." Thecomposition is said to be one of his bestpieces, and the two last passages in the&iow movement, are characteristic, theascending and descending scales together,conveying to the mind an idea ofthe baskets ascending and descendingat the same time in the coal-pit."Powell's style of playing the violoncellois said to resemble that of thecelebrated B. Rom berg, and he isconsidered the best performer onthat instrument in this country, afterLiiidleyRENNET, (WILLIAM,) the son ofthe organist of St. Andrew's Church,Plymouth, and descended from a respectablefamily in Devonshire, wasborn about the year 1767, and educatedfor the musical profession atExeter, under Bond and Jackson, liecompleted his professional studies inLondon, under Christian Bach andSchroeter, from the latter of whom, lielearnt to play the piano forte, in a manner>o superior, as to cause it to superde the use of the harpsichord atPlymouth, upon his going to settle therebyinvitation. He is said to have beenthe first person that introduced a grandpiano-time into that town, and to havehad some uirticnlty in overturning theprejudice of me natives and piott.s.-orsfor harpsichords. He was appointedorganist of St. Andrew's, Plymouth, in1793; and has long been considered oneof the best extempore performers onthe organ in this country. He hasafamily by his wife, who was thedaughter of John Deball, Esq., of Guilford,and to whom Mr. Bennet wasmarried in 1797. As a composer, thesubject of our memoir has made hisname favourably known by his publicationsof several sonatas, concertos,divertimentos, duets, glees, &c., besidesa variety of overtures and fugues, andvoluntaries for the organ. Among hismost recent works, are, The Collects ofthe Church of England, in score ; andnew version of Psalms, in four parts.He is likewise the composer of ananthem for the coronation of Georgethe Fourth ; and of the celebratedAmerican glee, When shall v. e Threemeet again?GUEST, (GEORGE,) was born in1771, and was instructed in the rudimentsof music by his father, RalphGuest, a tolerable organist and composer.George began to practise thediatonic scale when only two years old ;and at five, he sang in public at St.James's, Bury, Handel's song, He shallfeed his Flock. Being engaged losingat the opening of the organ at Stow-market,he was heard by Mr. Taylor,the organist of Chelmsford, who recommendedhim to Dr. Nares. He wasthen only seven years of age, but hissinging so pleased the doctor, that heimmediately appointed him to a situationamong the boys in the King'sChapel. Dr. Ayrton, who succeededDr. Nares, was equally struck by hisabilities, and brought him to sing twosongs before the king, in an oratorio,who expressed great approbation, andordered that master Guest should alwayssing two songs in the succeedingoratorios. At the commemoration ofHandel, in 1784, he distinguished himselfas a treble singer, and was biddingfair to. run the race of fame with hiscontemporary, Bargeman, when, in 1787,he left the King's Chapel to accept theorganist's situation at Eye, in Suffolk.In 1789, he became a candidate for. thesame office at Wisbeach, in Cambridgeshire; eighteen musicians, besides hiin-seif, had at first aspired to the honourof election, but, upon understandingAPPENDIX.that they had to contend with Guest,and were to undergo an examinationby Dr. Randall, in St. Mary's Church,they all, except three, withdrew theirclaims. From' these three, Guest wasselected, and he has ever since continuedto reside at Wisbeach, where heis celebrated as a teacher of the pianoforte,as well as for his admirable performancesupon the organ. " To athorough knowledge of his art," saysa critic, " and a complete mechanicalcommand of his instrument, is superaddedthe further excellence of a chaste,yet brilliant original conception of musicalideas, which he never fails todevelop with precision and effect."He is the author of Fugues and Voluntariesfor the organ, an anthem forChristmas Day ; a set of hymns for theservice of the church; and six grandpieces for a full military band, besidesseveral admired glees, duets, andsongs.CRAMER, (FRANCIS,) son of William,and brother of John BaptistCramer, was born at Schwetzinger,near Manheim, in Germany, in 1772.Having been previously instructed inthe rudiments of violin playing, heleft his native place at the age of seven,to join his father and brother in London.Here it was intended that heshould follow up his studies on theviolin, but the change of climate operatedso powerfully on his naturallydelicate constitution, that the then greatphysician of the day, Sir Richard Ebb,advised his entire discontinuance of thepractice and study of that instrument.This advice was strictly followed forseven years, at the expiration of whichtime, his health being restored, it wasthought that he might resume, withoutdanger, the studies which he had discontinued.He accordingly did so ; butupon resuming them, it was found, thattime had so obliterated all traces of hisformer proficiency, that he was actuallyobliged to learn even the gamut. He,however, by assiduity soon overcameevery difficulty, and was, in a fewmonths, able to take a part in someeasy duets for two violins, and to accompanyhis brother in some familiarsonatas for the piano-forte and violin.His next attempt was on the music ofCorelli, the solos of which great master,he studied with avidity, together withthe solos of Geminiani and Tartini, andthe capriccios of Bend, and old Stamina.The next school in which his fatherplaced him, was, the orchestra of theOpera, where he at first played gratuitously,in order to acquire the facultyof playing at sight. His proficiencywas rapid, and in a few years, he wasengaged as principal second violin, notonly at the Opera, but at the AncientConcert, the ladies' concerts, and allthe great music meetings and festivalsthroughout the kingdom. In 1800, hesucceeded his father as leader of theAncient Concerts, at the express desireof the king, and he had the honour ofbeing appointed to lead the band at thecoronation of George the Fourth, by theroyal command. All the principal metropolitanconcerts, and provincial festivals,have been led by him for manyyears. His style is bold, precise, andfull of self-possession, and he is said topossess the confidence of his orchestraas much as a Wellington or aBuonaparte did that of their armies.LINLEY, (FRANCIS,) was born atDoncaster, in 1774, and was blind fromhis birth. His parents were in a situationthat rendered it necessary thattheir children should be taught themeans of getting their bread, andFrancis, having a musical turn, wasplaced with Dr. Rather, then organistof Doncaster. Having completed hismusical studies under this able master,he went to London, and offered himselfone of the sixteen competitors forthe place of organist of PentonvilleChapel, and proved the successful candidate.He soon after married a ladyof considerable fortune, as blind as himself,and embarked in the trade of amusic-seller; but his business did notsucceed, and his wife deserted him.Under these circumstances, he wasinduced to make a voyage to NorthAmerica, where his performances andcompositions soon brought him fameand better fortune. He returned toEngland in 1799, and died at Doncaster,in October, 1800, at the earlyage of twenty-six. He is describedas having been a man well acquaintedwith the works of eminent authors,both ancient and modern. His compositionsinclude several songs, and someINSTRUMENTAL PERFORMERS.sonatas for the piano-forte, which possessa considerable degree of merit.RUSSELL, (WILLIAM,) was bornin London, in the year 1777. After havingbeen placed under different masters,he became a pupil of Dr. Arnold, and,in 1789, he was appointed his father'sdeputy as organist of St. Mary's, Alder-danbury.In 1793, he was electedorganist of Queen Street Chapel, inLincoln's Inn Fields, which situationhe retained, till the chapel was convertedinto a methodist meeting house,in 1798. In the September of the sameyear, he was elected organist of St.Ann's, Limehouse ; of the Foundling,in 1801 ; and, in 1807, he becamea candidate for the organist's place atChristchurch, Spitalfields, but was unsuccessful.Mr. Russell was, for aseason or two, piano forte player andcomposer at Sadler's Wells, and atCovent Garden Theatre, arid took thedegree of bachelor in music, a shorttime before his death, which occurredin 1813. Besides several voluntaries,glees, and songs, he composed twooratorios, the Redemption, and Job,and four odes. " As a composer," sayshis biographer, " he had great excellence; and it is only to be wished thatthe managers of Covent Garden hadput into his hands things of greater importancethan pantomimes. As a per-former on the piano-forte and organ,he had few equals."SMART, (HENRY,) brother of thepresent Sir George Smart, and son ofthe proprietor of a music warehouse inLondon, was born in that city, in 1778.After having studied the violin underWilliam Cramer, he was engaged asprincipal performer on that instrument,in the orchestra of the Italian OperaHouse, where he played with greatapplause. About 1803, however, hequitted the musical profession to becomea brewer, in conjunction with hisfather ; but the concern not answering,he resumed his musical profession, andwas much employed as a teacher ofthe piano-forte. He subsequently ledthe band at the English Opera-houseand Drury Lane, the orchestra of whichtheatre presented him with a silver cup,in June, 1819. He continued to leadthe Drury Lane band, till 1821, aboutthe beginning of which year he opened,in Berne Street, Oxford Street, amanufactory of piano-fortes, upon anew and peculiar structure, having previouslyobtained a patent for an improvementof great importance in the touchof those instruments. He died oftyphus fever, in Dublin, in November,1823, at the age of forty-five, and wasburied in St. James's Chapel, HampsteadRoad. We are not aware of anyof his compositions, except a balletcalled Laureate, for the Italian Opera,the music of which is very agreeable.KIALLMARK, (E.) the son of aSwedish officer, was born at LynnRegis, in Norfolk, in 1781. Losingboth his parents when young, he wasadopted by his maternal grandfather,who spared no expense in giving hima good musical education. He commencedhis professional career as ateacher of the piano forte, harp, andviolin, appropriating part of his profitsto the acquirement of musical instructionunder Parthenon, Colour,Spagnoletti, &c. He performed in theorchestra at various oratorios, concerts,&c. till his twenty-third year,when his marriage with a Scotchlady, and the extent of his privateconnexion as a teacher, induced himto give up all public engagements. Asapiano-forte instructor, few have hadmore employment or success. Amonghis most admired compositions for thisinstrument are, Introduction and Variationsto Roy's Wife; Introductionto the Last Rose of Summer ; Fantasia,Temperance ; Fantasia, Pour Amour ;Fanfare and German airs ; Home, sweetHome, variations ; Les Fleur de Printemps,Song Book, &c.EAGER, (JOHN,) was born at Norwichin 1782. His father had been asoldier in one of the regiments ofGuards, but, at the time of the birth ofthe subject of our memoir, carried onthe business of a musical instrumentmaker, and excelled particularly inorgan building. From him, Eager receivedhis first instructions in music,and he had learnt to play the violin tolerably,when he was introduced to theDuke of Dorset, a musical amateur,who was so pleased with his perform-appendix.once on that instrument, that he assuredhim of his patronage, and offeredhim a residence in his house at Knoll.The young musician removed thitherin his thirteenth year; but, though thelibrary of his patron enabled him toimprove himself in his musical studies,he benefited himself, in other respects,but little from the change. The dukewas prevented from fulfilling his intentions,by insanity ; and after his death,Eager was told, by, the duchess, that hispresence was no longer necessary at thehouse. He accordingly left it the nextmorning, and going to Yarmouth, endeavouredto procure a subsistence byteaching the violin. His marriage,at the early age of eighteen, with ayoung lady of some property, relievedhim from immediate want ; but at theexpiration of three years, he " foundhimself father of two children, withevery prospect of becoming entirelypenniless." By great exertions, however,and by teaching dancing as wellas music, he, at length, freed himselffrom his difficulties. When Logierr'ssystem began to be received in thiscountry, Eager devoted much of histime to the investigation of it, and wasfinally induced to become a pupil, andone of the most zealous coadjutorsof Logierr. " The opposition," says hisbiographer, " he encountered on thisoccasion, would have overwhelmed almostany other man : he was attacked,ridiculed, and abused by the countynewspapers, and various pamphlets,which were written purposely to annoyhim ; but he steadily supported thecause he had undertaken, and repliedto the abuse and invectives levelledagainst him, by publicly challenginghis accusers to an examination of pupilsinstructed by himself and Logierr, asto their knowledge of theory and fundamentalprinciples of harmony; theresult of which may be found in apamphlet, published by him on the occasion.Logierr, indeed, had been oftenheard to declare, that Eager was notonly the boldest and most enthusiasticchampion and advocate of his system,but also had a more perfect knowledgeof it, than almost any other individual."Eager has, for many years, been thecorporation organist at Yarmouth ; andit is said, there is scarcely an instrumentwhich he does not play, or hasnot taught professionally. A concertofor the piano-forte of his, and a collectionof songs, have been much admired ;and it is the opinion of a musical critic,that had opportunity or necessity renderedthat branch of the science necessary,the talents of Eager would haveenabled him, if not to rank among first-ratecomposers, to have followed theirsteps at no very humble distance.Hewitt, (JONATHAN,) was bornin London, in 1782. , His father was anorganist of some note, and the authorof the first treatise on the organ, publishedin England. The subject 01 ourmemoir received the chief part of hismusical education from Battishill, whowas his godfather, and at eleven yearsof age, he was appointed deputy-organistto his father. He subsequentlyofficiated in the same capacity at Haver-hill,Suffolk, Brecon, Sheffield, andlastly, at St. Andrew's, Dublin. Hefirst visited Ireland in 1811, and afterresiding some time in the family ofLord Cahir, became composer and directorto the 1 theatre Royal, in Dublin,and has since U en appointed, by theDuke of Leinster, grand organist to themasonic body of Ireland. Hewitt wasthe first to join Logierr in propagatinghis system of musical instruction in thesister country ; and being an able lecturer,and possessing sound musicalknowledge, he soon procured the greatmajority of musical tuition in Dublin.When his majesty, George the Fourth,visited this city, the subject of our memoirconducted the coronation concert,given on that occasion. He is chieflyadmired for his performance on theorgan, especially his extemporaneousones in the fugue style ; but he alsopossesses merit as a composer. Amonghis numerous works are, The Corsair,an opera ; The Magician, an opera;The Vocal Assistant, voluntaries for theorgan, besides concertos and sonatasfor the piano-forte, and a variety ofsongs and duets.Challenger, (NEVILLE Butler,)was born in London in 1784, andat nine years of age, performed a concertoon the violin, on which instrumenthe had been taught by Duboeck, anative of Brussels. About three yearsafterwards, he assisted ia the orchestraINSTRUMENTAL PERFORM Es.at Covent Garden Theatre, and RaleighGardens; and, in 1799, led theband at the Richmond Theatre. Hesub-frequently led the band at Birmingham,and at Sadler's Wells Theatre,and having studied the harp andpiano-forte, he was engaged to playthe former instrument in the orchestraof the Italian Opera House. In1813, he was engaged as principal secondtenor at the Philharmonic Concerts,and subsequently opened a musicshop in Regent Street, by which, togetherwith the profits arising from privatetuition, he is said to have acquireda handsome competence. In the musicalworld, Challoner is not onlyknown as an able teacher and instrumentalperformer, but also as the authorof Four Preceptors for the piano,violin, harp, &c. which have experienceda very favourable reception, andmet with a very extensive sale.Bottomless, (JOSEPH,) was hornat Halifax, in Yorkshire, in' 1786, andcommenced the study of music at anearly age. He played the violin atseven, and the piano at eight years ofage; but did not receive any regularinstruction until his twelfth year, whenhe was placed under the tuition ofGrimshaw, organist of St. John's, Manchester;and, in the same town, tooklessons in the violin from Amenity.At fifteen, he was apprenticed to Wanton,organist of St. Peter's, Leeds; and completedhis musical education in London,under the celebrated Woelfl. Bottomlesswas appointed organist of Bradford, in1807; hut he resided principally atHalifax, where he was engaged inteaching and leading sacred and miscellaneousperformances, till his removalto Sheffield, on his accepting thesituation of organist of the parish church.He is said to have made himself acquaintedwith several languages, besidesthe mathematics, and most of thesciences ; and is considered very skilfulin his profession, both as a musicianand composer. Besides several duets,songs, rondos, &c,, for the piano, hehas published a small dictionary ofmusic ; and is the author of numerousmusical productions, still in manuscript.MORI, (NICHOLAS.) This eminentleader and violin player, justly calledone of the most shining ornaments ofthe great school of Viotti, was born inEngland, of Italian parents, about 1795 ;and studied under that eminent master,upon whose style he was entirely formed.His progress was rapid ; and, in 1808,he played concertos on the violin, inpublic, with so much ability, thathe was called The Young Orpheus.This successful display of musical superiorityhe continued to maintain, andfrequently appeared as a solo player inconcerts, and other performances, tillhe has at length become to be knownas one of the first orchestral leaders inthe British metropolis, He was severalyears leader of the ballet at the Italianopera, and occasionally led at the Philharmonic.He has likewise led withgreat applause, as well as performedconcertos, in the highest style of hisart, at the great music meetings of York,Worcester, Norwich, &c. He has, asyet, published but few of his compositions,though several of his concertosfor the violin, played in public by himself,are allowed to possess great merit.He is now understood to be at. thehead of the firm of Lavenu and Co.,music publishers, of Bond Street, havingmarried the widow of the late publisherof that name; and is editor and proprietorof the tasteful annual, known asThe Musical Gem. In describing histalents and powers, a musical criticobserves, in society, his conversationis the most agreeable imaginable, andpartakes of all the original characteristicswhich mark the man. Itabounds with humour; and the writerof this notice remembers hearing himrelate characteristic incidents of hismusical friends and contemporaries,with a humour of that genuine kind,which never fails to please.ANDERSON, (Lucy.) was born atBath, in the year 1797, and is thedaughter of Mr. John Pilot, music-seller,and professor of music. Thoughnow one of the most eminent pianistsof her sex, she is said to have beenalmost her own teacher; the only instructionshe received on that instrumentbeing some few lessons given, inan irregular manner, by ht-r cousin, Mr.Windsor, of Bath. Before changingher name, she played, with great success,at the concerts of her native place ;Apple Nix.and was received with equal applauseon her coming to London, where shesettled, and married, in 1820, a musicalgentleman, of the name of Anderson.Mrs. Anderson has played at all theprincipal metropolitan concerts ; and issaid to be the first female who has performedon the piano-forte at the Philharmonic.HANDLES, (ELIZABETH,) was bornon the 1st of August, 1800, at Wrexham,in North Wales. Her father, who wasorganist of the church in that town, hadbeen blind from the age of three years ;and hearing, one morning, one of hiselder daughters, as he supposed, tryingto play the Blue Bells of Scotland, hebegged her to desist, as he did not feelvery well. Being informed, however,that it was Bess who was playing, hedesired that she might proceed ; andshe accordingly went through the air,by striking the keys by the side of herhand. She was then but sixteen monthsold ; and, long before she could speak,she would run to the instrument, andtouch any note her father sounded withhis voice. With a very little instruction,she was able to play several tunes,treble and bass ; and, in 1802, she madeher debut at the Wrexham Theatre, forthe benefit of Staunton, the manager.She performed, on the occasion, TheDownfal of Paris, being led, by a littledaughter of the manager, to the piano,where she was placed with an apple onher right side, and a cake on her left,both of which she was to receive, if sheplayed well. Her performance, whichshe went through with wonderful correctness,was received with enthusiasticapplause ; at hearing of which herfather cried out, whilst tears trickleddown his cheeks, " I never regrettedthe loss of sight till this moment. Oh !what would I give to see my darlingchild." In the following year, a concertwas given for her own benefit; whenshe not only played, but sung; and wasreceived with rapturous applause, bothin her vocal and instrumental performances.In her fourth year, she accompaniedher father to London, to bepresented to George the Third, whogave her a hundred guineas ; and,soon after, a public breakfast was givenat Cumberland Gardens, for her benefit,which was attended by upwardsof five hundred persons of rank in thekingdom. Miss Randies became anobject of interest, not less for herpleasing manners, than her musicalabilities; and before her return to Wales,she was invited to spend a few dayswith the Princess of Wales, at Black-heath.Here she became a playmateof the Princess Charlotte ; who, saying,to her, one day, " Do you know thatmy grandfather is King of England,and my father is Prince of Wales ?" sheis said to have replied, " Well, and myfather is organist of Wrexham." Afterleaving London, she accompanied herfather, and her instructor, Mr. Parry, inaprovincial tour; and returned to themetropolis in 1808, when a concert wasgiven for her benefit, at the HanoverSquare Rooms, at which Madame Catalans,Lindley, Naldi, &c. &c., gave theirgratuitous aid. For the next eight ornine years, she pursued her musicalstudies with great assiduity ; and, inthe course of that time, became a masterlyperformer not only on the piano,but also on the pedal harp, and theorgan. In 1818, she paid Londonanother visit, and took a few lessonsfrom Diei, on the harp, and from Kalk-brenner on the piano, to see, as she expressedherself, whether she could findanything new in the art. She nextproceeded to Liverpool, having receivedinvitations from several families there,who promised her as many pupils asshe could find time to attend to. Sheaccordingly settled there; and, after thedeath of her father, which took place in1820, found herself in possession of anincome sufficient to ensure both herselfand her sister a most comfortable maintenancefor life. Besides the extraordinarytalents of Miss Randies, herbiographer observes, that " her lady-likedemeanour, placid and affectionate disposition,together with a well-cultivatedmind, very deservedly render her anobject of the warmest regard and esteem."ACTORS.Dogged, (THOMAS,) was born inCastle Street, Dublin, about the yearK570; and made his theatrical debutin that city. Meeting with but littleencouragement, he came over to England; and, after having played a shorttime with a company of strollers, wasengaged at Drury Lane, where he appearsto have performed, with greatapplause, the part of Solon, in TheMarriage Hater, in 1692. Fondlewife,in The Old Bachelor, and Ben, inLove for Love, were two other of hisearliest and best characters; the latterplay, indeed, is said to have beenwritten by Congreve, for the expresspurpose of giving scope to Dogged'speculiar style of acting. On the openingof the new theatre, in Lincoln's InnFields, by Betterton, Dogget removedthither; and continued with the manager'scompany, when it was removedto the Haymarket. He returned, subsequently,to Drury Lane, where hecontinued to act; until thinking himselfill used by the patentee, he quittedthe stage, and would perform no more.This was a great loss to the manager,who applied to the lord chamberlainfor an authority to bring up our actorrom Norwich, where he then was.Dogget willingly accompanied thechamberlain's messenger; but, uponhis arrival in London, he immediately'nate application to Lord Chief-justiceHolt, who ordered him to be released :and censured the parties who had authorisedthe proceedings by which hehad been taken. In 1708, Doggetwas chosen one of the managersof the Haymarket Theatre, and continuedso for twenty years ; at the expirationof which time, the admission<<f Booth to a share of the concerncaused him to retire with indignation.Boot', however, was allowed a shareof the management by the other partners,Cibber and Wilks ; but Doggetstill persisted in drawing his thirdshare; and, at length, filed a bill inChancery against the two former. Theresult was so little satisfactory toDogget, that he could hardly, afterwards,bear the sight of Wilks orCibber ; till an accidental circumstanceled to a renewal of friendship withthe latter. Some one, who knew theirmutual coldness, wrote to Cibber, bywayof jest, to inform him that Doggetwas dead; and thus drew from theformer some expressions favourable tothe subject of our memoir ; which beingshown to him, he became reconciled tohis. quondam partner. Dogget's lastappearance on the stage was in TheWanton Wife, for the benefit of Mrs.Porter: he died at Etiam, in Kent,whither he had retired upon a comfortableindependence, on the 22nd ofSeptember, 1721. The coat and badgeannually rowed for, on the 1st of August,was left, by Dogget, to mark hisveneration for the house of Hanover ;that day being the anniversary of itsaccession to the throne. Dogget isdescribed as a smart, lively, littleman, of great natural intelligence;but somewhat peculiar in his opinions,and insufferably obstinate in maintainingthem. Steele, in The Tatler,calls him the best of comedians.He was a faithful copier of nature ;and was judicious enough to declineevery part to which his abilities werenot well adapted. He is famed, sayshis biographer, for the exactitude withwhich he dressed his characters, andalso in colouring the different degreesof age, a circumstance which led Sir jGodfrey Kneller to tell him, one day.that he was a better painter than him.I," said Sir Godfrey, " can only copynature from the originals before me ;while you vary them at pleasure, andyet preserve the likeness,"RYAN, (LACY,) was born in Westminster,about the year 1694; ur-d,after having been educated at St. Paul'sSchool, was articled to an attorney !A Open IHX.Preferring, however, the stage to theprofession to which he had been destined,he procured an introduction toSir Richard Steele, who gave him anengagement at the Haymarket ; wherehe appeared as Marcus, in Cato, in1712. He afterwards performed atCovent Garden and Drury Lane, avariety of characters, both in tragedyand comedy, till within a few years ofhis death ; which took place at Bath,on. the 15th of August, 1760. Ryanwas more esteemed for his privateworth than celebrated as an actor ; hewas the particular friend of Q ruin, whohad bequeathed him 1,000 in his will ;but Ryan did not survive, to receivethe benefit of the bequest. " In hisperson," says his biographer, " he wasdeemed handsome, and his judgmentwas esteemed accurate and critical ; noone could understand his author better,nor deliver his part with more correctness,or with more musical propriety.His feelings were strong; and, whenindulged, often produced a great impressionon his audience; but theywere sometimes obtuse, and the effectsof his performance were not alwayssimilar, far less uniform, in the samepart. His chief defect was in his voice,which he never could master, even tohis own satisfaction ; and he had themisfortune, on two several occasions,to sustain severe injuries in that mostessential organ."WALKER, (THOMAS,) familiarlycalled Tom Walker, was born in theyear 1698 ; and made his first theatricalessay in a Mr. Shepherd's company,where he attracted the notice of Booth ;who found him acting the part of Paris,in the droll of The Siege of Troy.Soon after, he appeared at Drury Lane,in subordinate characters ; but, in thefollowing year (1717), established hisfame at Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre,by his performance of Macheath, inThe Beggar's Opera, His success onthis occasion gave rise to a saying, thatBooth found him a hero, and Gaydubbed him a highwayman. Theapplause with which he was receivedin Macheath, may be said to haveproved his ruin ; for being introduced,in consequence, to a circle of dissipatedyoung men of fashion, he becameso frequently intoxicated, and sorreg'ilar in his attendance at thetheatre, that he was at length dismissed.He then went over to Dublin, wherehe produced a piece of his own, calledLove and Loyalty, besides which hehad previously brought out, at Goodman'sFields, a tragedy, called TheFate of Villany, and The Quaker'sOpera, at Bartholomew Fair. He diedat Dublin, in a state of great distress,in 1744. He possessed great versatilityas an actor; being a good singer andactor, both in tragedy and comedy.He understood little or nothing ofmusic as a science ; but supported hissinging by so much expression of countenance,and inimitable action, as renderedhim, in Macheath, a great favouritewith the public. The followinganecdote has been told of him. Onenight, whilst he was performing Fal-cambridge,in King John, one Bowmanacted the part of Austria; when, inhis reply to Falconbridge's insults, he,either through ignorance or haste, in aloud, vulgar tone, exclaimed, " Well,ruffun, I must pocket up these wrongs."The impropriety was at first unnoticedby the audience ; till Walker, in theBastard, by changing the word breechesinto pocket, imitated Bowman's manner,look, action, and tone of voice, soludicrously, as almost convulsed theaudience with laughter, and so confoundedpoor Bowman, that he wouldnever afterwards appear on the stage.Hazard, (WILLIAM,) was the sonof a vintner, and born in Dublin, aboutthe year 1710. He served an apprenticeshipto a surgeon, but quitted hisprofession, to turn actor ; in which capacityhe made his debut at Goodman'sFields, and, subsequently, played atDrury Lane and Covent Garden ; wherehe appears to have sustained, for manyyears, the reputation of a useful andrespectable actor, both in tragedy andcomedy. Davies devotes a greaternumber of pages to him, in his Life ofGarrick, than his station as an actorwould seem to war-rant. He wrotesome pieces for the stage, of more thanordinary merit, and which were allsuccessful, particularly his Scanderbeg.He retired from the stage in 1769 ; anddied on the 20th of February, 1778.He was," says one of his biographers,a great favourite with the public, andA C T O 11 Sdeservedly. His person was comelyand genteel : his voice clear and articulate; and, in every character he represented,he displayed a critical judgment,and perfect understanding of themeaning of the author. He did notwant feeling; but, from a degree ofmonotony, which seemed natural to hisvoice, he sometimes fell short withrespect to impassioned execution. Hewas, however, always decent, sensible,and perfect; and acquired an ease inbis manner and deportment, which it isuncommon to meet with ; and whichrendered him, if not capital, at least avery useful performer."Chare, (CHARLOTTE,) wasthe youngest daughter of the celebratedMr. Colley Cibber, and bornabout 1715. In very early life shecommenced a course of education,which gave her so great a distaste forall feminine occupations, that with thevarious uses of the needle, she, to herdying day, was unacquainted. Afterdisplaying, on various occasions, specimensof her masculine mind, she wasplaced, when eight years old, at acelebrated school in Park Street, Westminster; where she appears to haveacquired a knowledge of the Latinand Italian languages, music, singing,aid the use of the globes. Her educationwas completed by masters at home,where her extraordinary conduct excitedequal surprise and alarm. Whilstresiding with her mother at Hillingdpn,she would go out with a gun on shootingexpeditions ;and, on beingsenttoThovly,in Hertfordshire, the residence of Dr.Hales, an eminent physician, manifesteda strong predilection for the useof a currycomb, and the society affordedby a stable. On her return to Hillingdon,she induced her mother to appropriatea closet to her for the purposes ofa dispensary, having, during her residencewith Mr. Hales, acquired a passionfor medicine, and, in a short time,she states, that all the poor of theparish flocked to her for advice. Afterpractising many tricks, this mania subsided,and was succeeded by a love ofgardening and grooming. The servant,who occupied these two situations,having been dismissed, she took hisoffice into her own hands, and withsuch gratification to herself, that shewould place herself at the garden-gate,for the purpose of denying all such assought to supply the dismissed servant'splace. After many other extravagantproceedings, she became acquaintedwith Mr. Charke, the violin player, andsoon afterwards gave him her hand.He proved a worthless husband ; and,for the first twelvemonths of her marriage,she is said to have been sufficientlyemployed by tracing him inhis various amours. They, at length,separated ; and Mrs. Charke was leftdependent on her sole exertions forher own support and that of a littlegirl to whom she had given birth. Shenow resolved to try the stage, whereshe appeared, for the first time, on the28th of April, 1730, in the character ofMademoiselle, in The Provoked Wife;a part then rendered famous by Mrs.Oklfield's performance. She appearsto have been highly successful ; and,shortly afterwards, in consequence ofMrs. Porter having been overturnedin her chaise, and rendered incompetentto act, she filled her part in JaneShore, sustaining the character of Alicia.Subsequently, when the companywas under the management of herbrother, Theophilus Cibber, she playedAndromache, in The Distressed Mother; and was the original Lucy, inGeorge Barnwell ; her success in whichcaused her salary to be raised from 20*.to sos. a week ; and she was soon afternominated stock reader to the company.On accepting an engagement atthe Haymarket, she was received withgreat applause, but, at length, growingweary of a theatrical life, she left hostage,and opened a grocers shop inLong Acre. Having got together 500,she quitted her shop, and purchasedsome puppets, of which she made anexhibition, but soon sold them for 20and removed to Tunbridge WellsMystery and misfortune next attendedher) having lost her first husband, shemarried, as she alleged, a second,under a promise never to reveal hisname ; became again a widow; walkedthe streets in male attire ; was arrestedfor debt ; and, at length, liberated, bya subscription among some noted prostitutes.On her release, she was engagedto play a short distance fnrv.town, and, continuing in male costume,she assumed the name of Mr. Brown,Her attire so well became her, that arich heiress is said to have fallen inlove with her, and to have been muchdisappointed on learning her real sex.She then became valet to a nobleman,but her sex being recognised, she wasdischarged after a few months' service.Having, in vain, sought a reconciliationwith her father, she next tried toearn a livelihood by making and sellingsausages ; but this also failing, she tookto acting at Bartholomew Fair, andeventually became manager of a strollingcompany of actors. Some money,given her by one of her uncles, enabledher to open a public-house in DruryL-uie, but this speculation also failed. Itwould be tedious to recount the numerousvicissitudes to which she was nextexposed in succession ; suffice it to say,that after a variety of sufferings, andpursuing, at intervals, the differentavocations of farmer, pastry-cook, hog-merchant,and manager, she took upher pen, and, in 1755, published thehistory of her own life. Of her subsequenthistory, little is known; shereceived ten guineas for a novel, inmanuscript, in 1755, at which time sheresided in a wretched hovel, near Islington,and where she probably remainedtill her death, which happenedon the (with of April, 1760. The subjectof the above memoir affords amemorable instance of the dangerouseffects of a refined education and greatmental powers, in a woman withoutstability of principle, and a feminineturn of thought. Born in affluence,and endowed, as she undoubtedly was,with talents of no ordinary stamp, herfate and follies cannot be recountedwithout feelings of sympathy and regret.Had that rapidity of mind, andquickness of intellect, which so distinguishedher, but been in some degreetempered with steadiness and decision,it is difficult to say where her capacitywould have failed. Of dramatic pieces,she was the authoress of The Art ofManagement, a dramatic poem, 8vo.,1735 ; The Carnival, a comedy ; andTit for Tat, 1743,DIGGES, (WEST,) one of the sonsof a colonel in the guards, was bornabout the year 1720. His father, aman of family and fortune, lost thegreater part of the latter in the South-istascheme, and, at his death hobreathed his son to the guardianship ofthe Duke of Montague and the Earl ofDelaware, to whose title and estateyoung Digges was the presumptiveheir. This expectation was, however,frustrated by the birth of a direct heir,which happened in his eighteenth year,when a commission in the army wasprocured for him. To relieve him, however,from the embarrassments whichhis expensive habits had induced, hesold his appointment, and having beenintroduced by Theophilus Cibber toSheridan, obtained a theatrical engagementat Dublin, where he appeared asJaffier, on the 27th of November, 1749.His success was so great, that he wasengaged for two seasons at a risingsalary of 300 and 400. He quittedhis situation, however, from pecuniarydifficulties, and proceeded, in companywith Mrs. Ward, who had eloped fromher husband, to Edinburgh, where heplayed, among other characters, that ofDouglas, on the first night of the productionof that tragedy. Some yearsafterwards, he formed a connexionwith, and assumed the name of, thefamous Mrs. G. A. Bellamy ; and, inthe summer of 1784, whilst rehearsingthe part of Pierre, at Dublin, with Mrs.Siddons, he was seized with a paralyticstroke, which terminated his professionalcareer. After this, he becamethe confidential assistant to Mr. Daly,the manager, and died at Cork, on the18th of November, 1786. Digges possessedevery requisite for his professionexcept voice ; his manners were unembarrassed,and bore the stamp of afinished gentleman. In private life, heis said to have been hypocritical, extravagant,and debauched. He is reportedto have sworn upon the Bible " that hehad been lawfully married to Mrs.Bellamy ;" and yet with this falsehoodin his mouth, he would never dinewithout saying grace, and would frequentlyrepeat it twice the same mealfor fear of having forgotten it.MOODY, (JOHN,) was born aboutthe year 1726, but whether in Englandor Ireland is uncertain. He is said tohave made a voyage in early life, toJamaica, and there to have made thefirst trial of his theatrical powers. Hisfirst appearance at Drury Lane, was onACTORS.the 12th of January, 1759, when heperformed Thyrsus, in Antony andCleopatra, in place of Mr. Holland,who had been taken ill. In the followingMay, he played Henry theEighth ; and soon after fixed his reputationas an actor, by his performanceof Captain Cutter, in The Jealous,Wife, and the Irishman, in The RegisterOffice. During the tumults thattook place at the theatre in 1763, respectingthe time of half-price admission,Moody showed great spirit inresisting the violence of some of theaudience, and being called on to apologize,positively refused. Garrick was,in consequence, obliged to dismiss himfor a time* but he was afterwards restoredto public favour, and continuedto maintain it until his retirement fromthe stage, in 1796. " Latterly," sayshis biographer, v ' he seemed too negligentof his fame, and, however greathis early representations of the Hiberniancharacters might have been, hislate performances of them were tameand indifferent." Yet, in Churchill'stime he must have possessed bothspirit and humour, as he is said, inThe Rosciad, to have createdMirth from their follies, from their virtues, praise.FtTZHENRY, (Mrs.) was thedaughter of an Irishman, named Flavian,who kept a public-house, inobey Street, Dublin. She was bornabout the year 1728, and for some timecarried on the business of an embroidered,supporting, by the profits, bothher father and herself. Among the gentlemen,who occasionally lodged at herresidence, was a Captain Gregory, thenengaged in the Bordeaux trade, andwho, in a short time, became the husbandof Miss Flanagan. He was soonafter drowned on a voyage to Bordeaux,and Mrs. Gregory's fatherdying about the same time, she resolvedon attempting the stage as ameans of support. She accordinglywent to London, and having obtainedan engagement, made her debut atCovent Garden, on the 10th of January,1754, as Heroine, in The DistrestMother. She afterwards performedAlicia, in Jane Shore, but her provincialaccent marred the effect of heracting so much, that she almost immediatelyreturned to Dublin, and wasengaged by the then Irish managers,Victor and Sodden, at 300 for theseason. She instantly became a favourite,and was so much improved, in 1757,that she re-appeared at Covent Gardenin that year, and became as popular inLondon, as she had been in Dublin.She took, for a second husband, a gentleman,named Fishery, who, a fewyears after their union, left her awidow with two children, after havingamassed a competence for whom, byher professional exertions, she retiredfrom the stage, and died at Bath,highly respected, in 1790.ROSS, (DAVID,) was the son of awriter to the signet at Edinburgh, whoafterwards settled as a solicitor in London,where the subject of this memoirwas born, in the year 1728. He waseducated at Westminster School, whichhe had no sooner left, than, for somereason or other, his father renouncedhim, and refused him any assistanceto enable him to get his living. Accordingto one of his biographers, heoffended his father by going upon thestage ; but another and earlier authoritystates, that Ross was compelled toturn actor, in consequence of his father'sabandonment of him. Howeverthis may be, he came upon the stageearly in life, and, from the year 1760 to1778, was considered a very respectableactor, both in tragedy and comedy.The incidents of his domestic life wereremarkable. He had not been longon the stage before, says one of hisbiographers, " Lord Sp r threwhis eyes on him as a proper personto accomplish an act of benevolenceand humanity that will ever reflectthe highest credit on his lordship'sheart: the celebrated Fanny Murrayhad been debauched by his father;to atone for such a. fault, he lookedupon as an act of justice ; he thereforeproposed her as a wife to Mr.Ross, with a settlement of 200 perannum." Ross accepted the oftener, but,by his extravagance, soon became embarrassed.He afterwards purchasedthe Edinburgh patent, and was thenadvised to take proceedings for therecovery of the estate which his fgthtrhad willed away from him. He succeeded,and thus got an accession toAPPENDIX.his fortune of nearly 6,000. He subsequentlyreturned to Covent Garden,where he continued to act till the yearlast-mentioned, when the accident ofbreaking his leg compelled him toretire from the stage. Notwithstandingthe recovery of his estate, and hiswife's annuity, Ross seems to havebeen much embarrassed ; so much so,that an unknown friend annually senthim a present of j60. He discoveredthis benefactor to be Admiral Barrington ,who continued the above donation untilthe death of Ross, which took placeon the 14th of September, 1790.As an actor he had claims to greatpraise in tragic characters of themixed passions, as well as lovers ingenteel comedy ; but from indolence,or the love of pleasure, he was notalways equal to himself. His performanceof George Barnwell had such aneffect upon a young gentleman whosesituation was somewhat similar to thehero, that it wrought an immediateconversion in him, and every year ofRoss's benefit, he received a note containingten guineas inclosed, as " Atribute of gratitude from one who wassaved from ruin, by seeing Mr. Ross'sperformance of George Barnwell."HOLLAND, (CHARLES,) was bornat Chiswick, in Middlesex, in the year1733, and at the proper age, was placedapprentice to a turpentine merchant inthe city. A passion for the stage immediatelyseized him, on witnessingone of Garrick's performances, andafter passing a year or two in spoutingat a club, and studying at home, hemade his debut at Drury Lane, in 1754,as Oroonoko. He was well received,and, in the course of the same season,played Eugene, in Merope, and severalother characters ; in all of which heobtained great applause. In 1763, hewas engaged by Mossop, at the SmockAlley Theatre, Dublin, where he performedfor ten nights, for which hereceived the sum of .100 and a benefit.After his return to England, he reappearedat Drury Lane, and subsequentlybecame joint proprietor withPowell, of the New Theatre in Bristol.7t was in contemplation to admit himto a share in Drury Lane Theatre, andhe had, for the purpose, raised, by thehelp of friends, ^15,000, but Mr. Lacydeclining to retire, the negociationwent off. Soon after Mr. Holland wasseized with the small pox, and died,after twelve days' illness, on the 7th ofDecember, 1769, when in the zenith ofhis fame. His principal characterswere, Richard the Third, Hamlet,Pierre, Timor, in Zinghis, and Manly,in The Plain Dealer. He had a fineappearance, a strong, melodious, articulatevoice, which, together with anexcellent understanding, and a mostretentive memory, contributed to renderhim a great favourite with the public,by whom his premature end wasmuch lamented,POWELL, (WILLIAM,) was born inthe city of Hereford, in the year 1735,and educated at the grammar school ofthat town, and at Christ's Hospital,London. At the age of fifteen, he enteredthe counting-house of Sir RobertLadrone, and soon after, being introducedto a spouting club, by Holland,the actor, he imbibed a strong predilectionfor the stage. Sir Robert, inorder to divert his attention from theatricalpursuits, procured a dissolutionof the spouting society above-mentioned; behaved with additional kindnessto Powell, and increased his salaryupon his marriage in 1759. Our actor'sinclination, however, was too strong tobe checked ; and, accordingly, after hehad devoted some time to study, underthe direction of Garrick, he made hisdebit at Drury Lane, in October, 1763,as Pilaster, in Beaumont and Fletcher'splay of that name. He wasreceived with enthusiastic applause,and, in the course of the season, performedthe same character twentynights, drawing, each time, a crowdedhouse, so that the receipts were greaterthan had been known for many yearsbefore. His salary was, according toagreement, at this, time, only 2'lQs.per week, but, at the conclusion of theseason, the managers made him apresent of a hundred guineas, and ultimatelyhis allowance was increasedto the sum of 12 per week. In 1767,he was admitted to a fourth share ofCovent Garden Theatre, for which,by the help of his friends, he paidjgl,000, and immediately became partproprietor and manager. He forfeited,by this step, ^1,000 penalty to theACTORS.Pruiy Lane managers; but this sum wasof little comparative consequence to himat the time. His elegant style of living,however, which led him into some excesses,and his indiscriminate generosity,at length began to underminehis fortune and his health. In 1769,he went to Bristol, where he had ashare in the New Theatre ; and, afterperforming there a few nights, wasseized with a fever, attended by delirium,which carried him off, to thegreat regret of his friends and the public,on the 3rd of July, in the last mentionedyear. He was buried in thecollege church, with funeral honours,attended by the dean and the wholechoir, who sang an anthem on the occasion.REDDISH, (SAMUEL.) was the sonof a respectable tradesman at Frome,and was born there about the year1735. After having received a goodeducation, he was apprenticed to asurgeon at Plymouth, but soon quittedhis master, and joined a theatricalcompany at Norwich ; having beenpreviously refused an engagement atPlymouth. He subsequently becamethe star of the Richmond Theatre ;and, after failing to impress either theCovent Garden or Drury Lane managerswith a sense of his merits, acceptedan offer from Woodward, forthe Crow Street Theatre, in Dublin.From the Crow Street, he went to theSmock Alley Theatre ; but he had notperformed many months, before hefound his creditors so pressing, that hemust either flee, or submit to arrest.In this exigency he called his creditorstogether, and, after persuading themto liquidate in part their demands, bytaking tickets for his benefit night,promised them that they should receivethe remainder from the treasurer ofthe theatre on the following morning.When the night, however, arrived, allthe tickets were refused, and Reddishhad, in the meantime, decamped toLondon. Here he married a lady withan annuity of 200 per annum; whichhis extravagance soon made it necessaryfor her to dispose of, and he wasagain on the point of arrest, when hewas engaged by Mr. Powell, to appearat Drury Lane Theatre. He made hisdebut as Posthumus, in Cymbeline ;and was so well received that he wentto the expense of sixty-five guineas forawhole length portrait of himself inthat character. A critic of the day observes,that he displayed no inconsiderableabilities in tragic characters, butascribes his stage consequence to thedeath of Holland, and adds, " thoughvanity has more than once promptedhim to declare himself second to nonebut Mr. Garrick, till he can divesthimself of a stiff, heavy figure, a setface, and a broken monotony of voice,he may assure himself the critical publicwill rate him many degrees inferiorto Mr. Barry." After this period, wehave no particular account of Mr. Reddish; who, in the latter part of his life,became delirious, and died in a lunaticasylum at York, in December, 1785.Reddish was a very violent actor, inparts requiring the least display ofpassion ; and once, when performingCastalio, in The Orphan, was in suchhaste to attack Polydore, after beingcalled by him " Coward," that he didnot give him time to. repeat the word,as in the play, but stabbed him at once,and with such vehemence, that hissword nearly killed his antagonist inreality.LEWES, (CHARLES LEE,) was bornin New Bond Street, London, on the19th of November, old style, 1740. Hewas born of highly respectable parents ;and, at the age of seven, was sent toschool at Amalekite, in Westmoreland,where he remained until he was fourteen; when he went home, to use hisown words, the most volatile and carelessof beings. " The first stage applauseI received," he tells us in hisautobiography, " was by playing Cash,in Every Man in his Humour, in theHaymarket, about the year 1760." Henext appeared for a benefit in Mr.Linnet's company, at a public housenear Chelsea Church, in the characterof Matthew Mug, in The Mayor ofGarrett. From Chelsea, he proceededto Chesterfield, in Derbyshire, wherehe made himself so useful to the manager,one Parsons (not the comedian),that he found some difficulty in gettingaway from him. Parsons prevailedupon an apothecary, to whom Leweswas indebted a few pounds, to arresthim ; and our actor was obliged to leapA P P K N D I X.out of a window, to escape primi thebailiffs, who pursued him through severalfields, until he baffled their pursuit,by swimming across a river. Thefollowing day he returned to Chesterfield; and, finding Parsons in a tavern,dozing, over a half emptied bowl ofpunch, drank up the contents, and thenthrew a pail of water over the manager ;who, he says, " must have fanciedhimself fallen into the river, and indanger of being drowned ; for he instantlybegan sprawling with his armsand legs, as if in the act of swimming.and called out, lustily, a boat ! a boat !' ""For this exploit, Lewes was put in thecage; but soon procured his release,and returned to London. He, subsequently,joined Whiteley's company, atDoncaster, where he performed Romeo,Barnwell, Castalio, &c. &c. It wouldbe foreign to the purpose of thiswork, to relate all the anecdotes whichLewes tells during his stay withWhiteley ; but his account of that singularindividual is one of the most interestingand amusing we ever read.Whilst Lewes was acting at Doncaster,Herbert, the manager of the Sheffieldcompany, was so pleased with his performance,that he immediately engagedhim for his own theatre. On hearingthis, the wife of Whiteley told her husbandthat he was going to lose the bestactor he had. " You lie," my dear,replied Whiteley, " I am the best actor ;he s fit only for a puppet-show, to hehung upon a peg, and taken downwhe wanted. Lewes opened, atSheffield, in the part of Castalio ; and,for two years, was a great favourite inthat town, not only in tragedy and comedy,bu' as Harlequin. Whilst playingthis character, one night, he leapedwith such unusual vigour through ahole in the scene, that he passed thecarpet intended to catch him; and,falling on his head, remained for sometimeinsensible. The audience, notseeing lira re-appear, began to hiss;when the manager came forward, andcried out, when he could procure silence,D -n y u a11 ' w . nat wouldyou have? the man has killed himself."Lewes was ten months confinedto his room and one month before hecould bear he rays of light, so violentwas the concussion. " However," ashesays, ' rey reputation as an Harlequinreached the metropolis ; and Jwas invited, by a letter from Mr. heard,to a situation in Covent Garden, assecond Harlequin to Mr. Woodward,which 1 embraced." He also attemptedhigher characters; and, on the deathof Woodward, in 1776, became one ofthe principal comedians of the company.He assisted Palmer, at theRoyalty Theatre; and, on the failureof that unprofitable scheme, acceptedan engagement at the EdinburghTheatre; but in April, 1788, findinghis affairs somewhat embarrassed, setsail for India, where he performeduntil the end of 1789. In 1792, hereturned to England, and resumed hisprofessional duties at Edinburgh, wherehe was arrested by Jackson, the manager,for 200; who claimed thatsum as a fine for his having goneabroad, and violated his engagement.It seems, however, that there had beena parole understanding between Jacksonand Lewes, that the latter mightconsider his engagement with theformer at an end, provided he wouldundertake not to perform in any othercountry but India; but this not beingadmissible evidence in law, Lewes wascondemned in the whole fine of 200 ;although, upon appeal to the lord* ofsession, it was reduced to .>0. In1793, he performed at Dublin, und atthe provincial theatres, with great success; though unable to acquire a sufficiencyto free him from pecuniary embarrassment.He took his farewell benefit,at Covent Garden, on the 24th ofJune, 1803, " in consideration," as thebill announced, " of seven years illhealth, and consequent embarrassments."On this occasion, he playedLeonardo, in The Wonder, when hewas received by the audience with theloudest plaudits ; and retired with moresubstantial tokens of their esteem thantheir applause. He did not long survivehis retirement; being found deadin his bed, at the Middleton's Head,Sadler's Wells, where he had takenlodgings for the benefit of his health,on the 22nd of July, 1803. " His sensibility,"says his son, " had been severelywounded by the contumeliousand repulsive behaviour he had experiencedfrom tyrannic managers, anda series of unpropitious circumstances,which attended him through the in-actors,sondress of his professional career. Hisspirits were broken, and his powersevidently on the decline, by a melancholyconcomitants of mental inquietudeand bodily suffering." Mr. Leweswas, perhaps, less celebrated as anactor, than for his puns, and his happymanner of delivering ludicrous recitations; such as Stevens's Lecture onHeads, and Johnny Gilpin. In theseperformances, he was generally receivedwith great applause; but, oneevening, after reciting the latter, expressedhimself much disgusted, thatthe audience had evinced no signs ofmerriment. A friend observed to him,that if he had worn a comical citizen'swig, and thrown it off, when he wasdescribing Gilpin's fall from his horse,he would have made all the peoplelaugh. " My dear sir," replied Lewes,it is not wigs the people want nowadays,but heads."WILKINSON, (TATE,) was bornabout the year 1740. He was the son ofthe Rev. Dr. John Wilkinson, chaplainof the Savoy; where, continuing to solemnizemarriages, by virtue of his ownlicence, notwithstanding the marriageact of the 26th of George the Second,he was transported. Tate had imbibed,from his boyhood, a predilection forthe stage ; and, consequently, when inhis seventeenth year, he was offered byhis mother's friends a commission inthe army, he refused it, having determinedto turn factor. He had alreadydistinguished himself, in private,by his theatrical imitations ; and hewould have been engaged, it is said,by Rich, but for the interference ofMrs. Wofflngton, who was offended athis having made her one of the subjectsof his mimicry. His first appearance onthe stage was at Covent Garden, on the28th of March, 1757, when he played-theFine Gentleman, in Lethe, for the benefitof his friend, Shuterr. He afterwardsjoined Mr. Weignell's summercompany, at Maidstone, where he performedthe chief characters in tragedy ;and " received, on his first benefit, oneshilling and sixpence, and two piecesof candle." In the seasons, 1758-9,he was engaged at Drury Lane ; butwas assigned no parts that gave him anopportunity of displaying his abilities,I of which Foote, unlike Garrick, entertaineda very high opinion. The former,in consequence, procured him sixweeks' leave of absence ; and, takingWilkinson to Ireland, brought him outin his " Tea," in which performance hewas eminently successful. Sheridanengaged him, for a short time, at asalary of three guineas per week ; and,after his return to England, althoughstill kept in the back ground, at DruryLane, starred it, during the summer,at Bath, Portsmouth, and other provincialtowns, with great applause. Onthe termination of his engagement, atDrury Lane, in 1759, Garrick offeredhim an increase of salary ; but Wilkinson,thinking he had been ill treated,declined remaining at the theatre uponany terms; and, for a short time,played at Covent Garden, in the samecharacters as Foote was performing atthe other house. He, subsequently,joined Mossop's company, in Dublin ;and, in 1763, made his debut at theHaymarket, in Foote's play of TheMinor. Here he acquired both fameand profit, which he increased by asecond visit to Dublin ; and by hisperformances in various provincialtowns. In 1763, he was admitted intoa share of the York circuit; and subsequentlyexpended '500, in obtaining-patentsfor the York and Hull theatres.He married a Miss Doughty, in 1768;and died, much respected, in 1803.Tate Wilkinson was one of the mostpopular managers of his day; and hehas the merit of having brought forwardsome of the most eminent actorsand actresses that the British stagecan boast. To appear at his theatre,was generally a passport to metropolitanfavour ; for if the individual possessedanything like talent, Tate wassure to give it full play, and encourage,as well as employ it. He was eccentricin his manners, but exceedinglygood hearted ; and a rough speech wasgenerally immediately followed by akind action. As an author, he is knownby his Memoirs, an interesting work,relative to the stage ; but too vagueand scanty in its biographical information,to afford satisfactory materials foralife of the author ; which, it is to beregretted, has not yet been published.DODD, (J. W.) was born in London,about the year 1740. The applauseAPl'EN Dix.which he received at school for hisperformance of Davis, in Terence'sAndrea, first turned his thoughts tothe stage. At the age of sixteen, heplayed Rodrigo, at Sheffield, whencehe proceeded to Norwich, where he performedwith applause a variety of characters,both in tragedy and comedy.He next appeared at Bath, where hedevoted himself entirely to Thalia,and soon gained a high reputation as acomic actor. In 1765, he made hisdebut at Drury Lane in the characterof Faddle, in The Foundling ; in thishe made a decided hit, and subsequentlyestablished himself in othercharacters, particularly genteel fops, inwhich line he stood unrivalled. About1784, he formed a connexion with Mrs.Berkeley, but suspecting her fidelity, aseparation ensued, after they had livedtogether for many years. Mr. Dodddied on the 17th of September, 1765.Dodd's personal qualifications admirablyfitted him for sustaining the part of acoxcomb. " His voice, manner, and,above all, his figure," says one of hisbiographers, " was most happily suitedto express that light degree vivacity,so necessary to finish the character."BADDELEY, (SOPHIA,) born in745, was the daughter of Mr Snow,Serjeant-trumpeter to King George theSecond. She received a good education,and having a remarkably melodiousvoice, was instructed with a viewto becoming a vocalist. At eighteen,however, she eloped with art actor,named Baddeley, and soon after, in1764, made her debut at Drury LaneTheatre, as Cordelia, in King Lear.She assumed this part in consequenceof the illness of the actress announcedfor it, and never having seen the playbefore, was so shocked by the appearanceof Edgar, as Mad Tom, that shescreamed and fainted. She afterwardssang at Vauxhall, and Ranelagh, whereher vocal attractions were sufficientto procure her a salary of twelveguineas per week. At the theatre, shegenerally acted in genteel comedy, butonce, during the illness of Mrs. Barry,performed the part of Mrs. Beverley, inThe Gamester, with great effect. Theking \v;is so pleased with her acting ofFanny, in The Clandestine Marriage,that lie had her portrait painted byZoffany. But Mrs. Baddeley is lessmemorable as an actress, than as abeautiful and depraved woman. Shevery soon separated from her husband,and entered into a variety of intrigueswith an unblushing openness, whichrendered her the talk of the town.Her attachments were, for the mostpart, mercenary ; yet she was once somuch affected by the desertion of oneof her admirers, as to swallow poison.She, however, squandered the moneybestowed by her paramour, with recklessprofusion, and was not backwardin assisting her friends, as well as gratifyingherself. " She always," saysone of her biographers, " wore twowatches with valuable trinkets, one ofthem was very costly, and the other,a little French watch, hung to a chainset with diamonds ; she had also fournecklaces of brilliant ; she wore enamelledbracelets encircled with diamonds,and a diamond bow with ringsout of number; she had a sideboard ofplate, and silver candlesticks. Herhouse was elegantly furnished, thewalls of the drawing room were hungwith silk curtains, drawn up in festoons,in imitation of Madame du Barre's, atVersailles, and every thing about herestablishment was of the most splendidkind ; she kept nine servants, and herliveries were suitable to her establishment."The immorality of her careercaused her parents great disquietudeof mind; and when her mother wassupposed to be on her death-bed, shesent for Mrs. Baddeley, and exhortedher to amend her course of life. Mrs.Baddeley wept, and promised to reform,but had no sooner left her parent'sbedside, than she started off to Paris,to meet one of her paramour. Sheplunged into all the gaieties of theFrench metropolis, and returned toLondon, more confirmed in her viciousinclinations than ever. When remonstratedwith by a friend, she replied,it would be time enough to think,when age came on ; but, for her part,she would have her frolics and pleasures,convinced she would not liveto be old. At length, when pressedfurther on the subject, she burst intotears, and said, " 1 know, too well, myfaults, and my imprudence; but onefolly led to another, and vanity, whichis my greatest failing, encouraged byACTORS,the attention I met from men of rankand fortune, induced me to accept offerswhich should have been spurned.Thus introduced into a bad plan oflife, necessity kept it up, and I havebecome a sacrifice to my own folly.Though in the highest splendour, Ioften look down, and envy the situationof the lowest of my servants, andfancy her far more happy. She earnsher bread by her industry, and whenher daily work is done, can sit downwith a quiet conscience clear fromvice. Many a cottage have I lookedon with a wishful eye, and thought thepeople within, though poor, and perhaps,without a chair to sit upon, muchmore happy and contented than I, whopassed it in a coach and four, attendedwith a suite of servants." These convictions,however, did not operate inproducing any change in her conduct,and soon after she went down to Brighton,where people exclaimed, as shewalked upon the Sterne, " There isthat divine face ! that beautiful creature !what a sweet woman !" Embarrassmentsat length succeeded, and shebecame more frequent and less circumspectin her amours. A publicsubscription procured her temporaryrelief, but not sufficient to prevent herrecurrence to the same degradingmeans of subsistence. She died atEdinburgh, in the most deplorablecircumstances, on the 1st of July,1801.MATTOCKS, (ISABELLA,) was bornin the year 1746. Her father, Mr. Hallam,was at that time manager of thetheatre in Goodman's Fields ; but whenhis daughter was only four years old,was compelled, in consequence of pecuniaryembarrassments, to quit Englandfor America. The subject of thismemoir was left under the care of heraunt Harrington, an actress of merit,and who is said to have given herniece " an expensive and finished educations!four years and a half old, MissHallam performed, for her uncle'sbenefit, at Covent Garden, the part ofthe Parish Girl, in Gay's What d'yeCall It. She played with great spirit,but appeared so diminutive on the stage,that a gentleman whimsically said, " hecould hear her very well, but he couldriot see lier without a glass." In hersixteenth year, she appeared at thesame theatre, as Juliet, and met withso much applause, that she was immediatelyengaged, at a good salary, bythe managers of Covent Garden, atwhich theatre she continued, with theexception of one winter passed inLiverpool, for the next twenty years.Besides sustaining a respectable linein tragedy, Mrs. Mattocks was theRosetta, Polly, &c., of the theatre ; " butshe has latterly," says a critic, writingin 1800, " devoted herself entirely to thecomic muse, whose cause she supportswith admirable spirit, and with a peculiarityof humour, which, though it maysometimes exceed the precise limitationsof critical propriety, is richlycomic, and perfectly original." Shedied on the 26th of June, 1826."VVEWITZER, (RALPH,) was born,about the year 1748, in London, wherelie carried on, for some time, the businessof a jeweller. His sister was afavourite actress and singer, and forher benefit, he made his first appearanceon any stage, at Covent Garden,as Ralph, in The Maid of the Mill.The low comic humour which lie displayedin this part, induced the managerto engage him, and he soonestablished his reputation by his whimsical,but just, representation of Jewsand Frenchmen. He subsequentlyperformed at Dublin; and in 1789,undertook the management of theRoyalty Theatre, on the failure ofwhich concern, he appeared at DruryLane. He also played, during thesummer, for several seasons, at theHaymarket, and partly invented somenew pantomimes. Wewitzer was theoriginal Jew in The Young Quaker,and by his performance of it, contributedmuch to the success of the piece.During the latter part of his life, whichterminated in 1824, he was a pensioneron the Theatrical Fund. He was theauthor of a jest book, entitled, TheSchool of Wit, and was himself remarkablefor many witty sayings.MURRAY, (CHARLES) was bornat Cheshunt. in Hertfordshire, in 1754.His father, Sir John Murray, of Brough-ton,acted as secretary to the Pretender,and was arraigned for high treason forhis share in the rebellion, but APPENDIX,wards received a pardon. The subjectof our memoir was educated in France,and, on his return to London, was apprenticedto a surgeon ; but almost immediatelyquitted his profession for thestage, making his debut at York, inApril, 1775, under the assumed nameof Raymur. He subsequently performedat various provincial towns,and was a great favourite at Norwichand Bath. In 1796, he made his debutat Covent Garden, in the part of Shylock,and was well received, but neverbecame a first-rate actor. Duringthe latter part of his life, he was managerof the Edinburgh Theatre, anddied in that city on the 8th of November,1821. He was the author of twodramatic pieces, produced at Norwich,called, respectively. The New Maid ofthe Oaks, and The Experiment.iRYDER, (THOMAS,) is said to havei been born about the year 1735, at Notgingham, where his father was a printer.Thomas was brought up to the sametrade, but abandoned it for the stage,and made his first appearance at Dublin,as Captain Plume, in December,.1757. In 1771, he succeeded Mossop,as director of the Crow Street Theatre,and shortly afterwards, setting up atheatrical newspaper, performed theduties of manager, actor, and author.After losing large uns of money byhis theatrical and other speculations,he came to London, and appeared atCovent Garden, as Sir John Brute, in1787. Low comedy was his principalline of acting, and he is said to haveexcelled in it. He wrote two dramaticpieces, Like Master like Man, and,Such Things have been. He died atDublin, on the 26th of November, 1791.KEMBLE, (GEORGE STEPHEN )was born at Kingstown, in Herefordshire,on the 3rd of May, 1758, thoughone of his biographers says, in 1756.His mother, who was an actress, is saidto have played on the very night of hisbirth, the part of Anne Sullen ini Henry the Eighth, and to have been putto bed just at the time when, as queen,she was supposed to have given birthto the princess Elizabeth. At the ageof fourteen, Stephen was apprenticedto a chemist, but soon became dissatisfiedwith his profession, and joined astrolling company of players. Hegained little fame in the provinces, butthe great attractions of his sister, Mrs.Siddons, who was now (1782) drawingcrowded audiences to Drury Lane, inducedthe Covent Garden managers toengage one of her brothers, who wasreported to possess equal abilities.They accordingly made a liberal offerto Stephen, who made his debut, in1783, in the part of Othello, but theperformance was a failure, and afterone or two equally unsuccessful efforts,he remained comparatively unemployedduring the remainder of the season.He afterwards became manager of theEdinburgh, Glasgow, Liverpool, andNewcastle Theatres; and, in 1817, wasappointed to fill the same situation atDrury Lane, where he performed SirChristopher Curry, within a fortnightof his death, which took place on the20th of May, 1822. Stephen Kemblewas remarkable for playing FalstafFwithout stuffing, but in all except thephysical requisites for a representationof the merry knight, he was inferioreither to Fawcett, Dowton, or Hartley.His Sir Christopher Curry was consideredhis chef-d'oeuvre, yet he imaginedtragedy was his forte, and his Kent, inKing Lear, Old Norval, King Henrythe Eighth, &c., are said to have beenmore than respectable. His reading ofMacbeth, Hamlet, and a few other ofShakspeare's heroes, was very beautiful; but his performance of the lattercharacter, when he was eighteen stone,was more ridiculous than sublime. Itgave rise to a ludicrous caricature likenessof the actor with the followingline beneathOh '. that this too, too solid flesh would melt 'He traversed the provinces for someyears, giving public recitations, at whichhe always, amongst other things, reada chapter from the Bible. la person,Mr. Stephen Kemble was about fivefeet nine inches in height, and in youthresembled his brother John. He wasmarried to a Miss Satchel, by whom hehad Mr. Henry Kemble, who was, forsome time, one of the heroes of the minortheatres. The following anecdotehas been told of Mr. Stephen Kemble.He was playing," says one of his biographers," Job Thornberry. and admirablyhe performed the part ; but, alas !ACTORS.he and Gibbon, the historian, bothfailed, in different efforts, from thesame cause. When he threw down thewaistcoat, in the scene with John Burr,the house melted into tears ; but thethroe of grief was quickly converted toroars of laughter, when the audienceperceived the corpulent comedian vainlyendeavouring to pick it up again. Hemade as many efforts as Mathews'sDandy, in La Diligence, to raise theboot, but in vain. There the waistcoatlay, perfectly out of the manager'spower, and John Burr, who should enterand discover it upon his master's back,was forced to enter and give it into hishand."GIBBER, (THEOPHILUS,) son of thecelebrated Colley Gibber, was born onthe 26th of November, 1703, and educatedat Westminster School. The highrank his father held in the theatricalworld, in addition to his own talents,induced him to become an actor, and heaccordingly made his appearance uponthe stage, in 1721. His line of actinglay in fops and feeble old men, butthough his talents were more thanrespectable, he never became a favouritewith the public. After losing hisfirst wife, he married Miss Arne, sisterof the celebrated composer, andwhom lie some time afterwards accusedof a criminal connexion with a gentlemanof property. He. in consequence,brought an action for damages, butonly recovered lQ ; strong groundfor suspicion having arisen that he hadbeen accessory to his wife's dishonour.His creditors now arrested him, andduring his confinement in the King'sBench Prison, he is said to have writtenThe Lives of the Poets, a work generallyattributed to him, but, with goodreason, supposed to have been principallycomposed by Shield. Havingprocured his liberation by the aid ofbenefit plays and other means, he attemptedto establish an independentcompany, but his petitions for a licencewere unattended with success. Hisattempts to procure an engagement atany of the theatres also tailing, he, forsome time, led a life of alternate distress,dissipation, and extravagance.At length, in 1758, he was engaged bySheridan to go over to Dublin, but waswrecked in his passage on the Scottishcoast, and perished with others of thecrew. The person of Theophilus Gibberwas far from pleasing, and his castof countenance rather repulsive thanotherwise. His voice was more shrilland discordant than his father's, andwanting that softness and melody which,rendered that of the latter attractive.He was a man of great shrewdness andcapacity, which, added to a pleasing*vivacity of style, would have renderedhim a very eminent and popular actor,had not his dissipated and unprincipledconduct impeded his progress. He wasan extravagant and foppish dresser :and his father, one day, seeing himmost ridiculously accoutred, observedwith contempt, as he took a pinch orsnuff, " Indeed, The. I pity you !" towhich his son replied, " Don't pity me.sir; pity my tailor." Theophilus Gibher altered for the stage some ofShakspeare's plays, and was the authorof a few dramatic pieces, and a workcalled, Gibber on the Stage.RUSSELL, (SAMUEL THOMAS,) wasborn in London about the year 1769.His father was a provincial actor, andyoung Russell himself manifested ai;early predilection for the stage. Atseven years of age he was considereda dramatic prodigy, and at nine, performedwith great applause at theSurrey Theatre. About 1788, he gavean entertainment by himself, after thestyle of Henderson and Lee Lewes, consistingof readings from Milton, Swift,Goldsmith, &c. We next hear of himat Eastbourne ; where he played youngNorval, by particular desire, and afterwardsat Dover, where he married MissMate, the daughter of the manager.He subsequently performed at Margatewith his father, whose Jerry Sneakwas, at that time, considered the best onthe stage. The prince being at Margateabout this time, went to see Mr.Russell, senior in this part ; and, on hisreturn to London, recommended himto King, who immediately sent to Margateto engage him. The letter, however,being directed to S. Russell, Esqthe subject of our memoir, imagined itrelated to himself, and, in consequence,went up to London, when articles of jengagement were signed, and he madehis debut at Drury Lane on the 21stof September, 1795, as Charles, in 1 lie {APPENDIX.School for Scandal, and Fribble, inMiss in her Teens. The prince took abox for the evening, and was muchastonished to find the young Mr. Russellhad been engaged instead 'of hisfavourite, but applauded his Fribblevehemently, although he disapprovedof his Charles Surface. Mr. Russellafterwards took the Richmond Theatre,and was, for some time, joint managerwith Elliston, of the Surrey, and stagemanager of the Olympic. He was avery popular performer in the provinces,and, indeed, on the metropolitanboards, his Jerry Sneak wasconsidered an unrivalled performance.Among other characters which he hasplayed, are, Joseph Surface, YoungRapid, Vapid, Rover, Frank Heartily,Bob Handy, Jeremy Diddler, Fickle,&c. &c. It is in parts of broad humour,such as Billy Lackaday, Paul Pry, &c.,that he is chiefly successful. He is,we believe, now manager of the BrightonTheatre.HARLOWE, (Mrs,) was born aboutthe year 1770, and in 1787, whilst performingat Windsor, attracted the noticeof Mr. Waldron, an actor ofmediocrity, and the author and adapterof several dramatic pieces. This gentleman(with whom she formed a connexion,which, in all but the ceremony,amounted to a marriage), procured heran engagement at Sadler's Wells,where she soon became a favourite,both as a vocalist and an actress. Sheafterwards appeared at Drury Lanein second-rate comedy and farce characters; and, at the Haymarket, insmart chambermaids, romps, and, occasionally,old women. Mrs. Harloweranks as a second-rate low comedyactress ; her Mrs. Sneak is consideredone of her best performances, but, inall her assumptions, she only just exceedsmediocrity. She has had a largefamily by Mr. Waldron; whether thename by which she is known to thepublic is assumed, or not, we havebeen unable to ascertain.GIBBS, (Mrs.) was born in Ireland,in the year 1770 ; her maidenname was Logan. Her first appearancebefore a metropolitan audiencewas on the 18th of June, 1783, whenshe made her debut at the HaymakersSally, in Man and Wife. At theclose of the season, she joined JohnPalmer's company at the Royalty Theatre; and, as he was her godfather,exerted herself most strenuously in hisbehalf, during his contest with thelarge theatres. She opened on the20th of June, 1787, with Miss Biddy,in Miss in her Teens, being advertisedin the bills as Mrs. Gibbs. She wasreceived with great applause, and continuedat the theatre during Palmer'smanagement, performing the principalparts in serious pantomime, after theintroduction of the regular drama. Onthe secession of Mrs. S. Kemble, fromthe Haymarket, she was engaged atthat theatre, where her vivacity inchambermaids, and her simplicity incountry girls, was long considered unrivalled.Colman, with whom she issaid to have been many years tenderlyconnected, brought her forward in thebest characters he could assign to her,besides writing expressly for her thoseof Mary, in John Bull ; Cicely, in TheHeir at Law ; Annette, in Blue Devils ;and Grace Glove, in The Review.Next to Mrs. Jordan," says a critic,Mrs. Gibbs was decidedly the bestactress in her line. Her Curiosa, in TheCabinet, is one of the richest specimensof comic acting extant. In such partsas Nell, she is capable of rivalling Mrs.Davison or Fanny Kelly ; and we cannotsay anything that would give greatervalue to her exertions. Her figure andface too, contain more vivacity and hervoice has more of the fulness and jollityof humour in humble life, than eitherof the other ladies. Mrs. Gibbs is oneof the best laughers on the stage ; and agood and judicious laugher may leadher auditors where she pleases." Inprivate life, Mrs. Gibbs is much esteemed,and her amiable dispositionand good-nature are proverbial intheatrical circles.KEMBLE, (Mrs. CHARLES,) whosemaiden name was De Camp, was bornat Vienna, on the 17th of January,1775. At the age of six, she appearedat the Italian Opera House, where shesupported the characters of Cupids, &c.She was, subsequently, through the recommendationof the Prince of Wales,engaged by Mr. Colman, at the Hay-market,where she made her debit, inrACTORS.the ballet of Jamie's Return. In herthirteenth year, she removed to DruryLane, when, for want of an Englisheducation, the characters she sustainedwere absolutely taught her by dint ofrepetition. Two ladies of rank, however,are said to have become her instructors,and to have taught her not onlyreading, writing, and arithmetic, butFrench, Italian, music, and geography.In the summer of 1792, she playedCaptain Macheath, and gained universalapplause, both for her singingand acting. She remained at DruryLane until the conclusion of the season1805-6, when she entered into anengagement at Covent Garden, and, onthe 2nd of July, was married to Mr.Charles Kemble. She appeared, for thefirst time, at that theatre, on the 2ndof July, 1808, as Maria, in The Citizen,where she was greeted with three distinctrounds of applause. Mrs. CharlesKemble possessed no ordinary requisitesfor the stage ; she had a finecountenance and graceful figure, actedwell, danced well, and sang with suchtaste, that she frequently sustained theparts of Storace and Mrs. Crouch. Herprivate character is untainted, and withfascinating external attractions, she issaid to possess an intelligent and accomplishedmind. She is the author ofFirst Faults, a comedy ; and the interludeof The Day after the Wedding ;a comedy, called Match Making, is alsoattributed to her.MELLON, (HARRIET, Duchess ofSt. Albans,) was born in the city ofWestminster, about the year 1775. Herfather was a gentleman in the EastIndia Company's service, but died beforethe birth of the subject of ourmemoir. Her mother, taking, for asecond husband, Mr. Entitle, a musicalprofessor of some celebrity, andwho subsequently became leader of theband at the York Theatre, Miss Mellonimbibed, early, a taste for dramaticpursuits, and, at five years of age, performedseveral juvenile characters oncountry stages. In the meantime, hereducation w r as not neglected, and byMr. Entitle's perseverance, and theassistance of a wealthy family at Halifax,his step-daughter rapidly progressedin improvement. Removingwith her family to Staffordshire, shethere became a member of Mr. Stanton'stheatrical company, and performedvarious characters in that gentleman'scircuit, with an ability whichelicited much applause. She was altogethera most interesting child, andseveral of the first ladies in the countyof Stafford became her warm patronesses,and, in some cases, her warmfriends. One of these introduced herto Mr. Sheridan, then on a visit tohis constituents at Stafford, and thatgentleman, after seeing her performRosalind and Priscilla Tomboy, engagedher for Drury Lane. Shemade her debut at that theatre, in 1793,as Lydia Languish, in The Rivals, andwas received with the most flatteringapplause. " It was not assumed," saysone of her biographers, " that MissMellon was a perfect representative ofthe character ; but the vivacity of herair, the good sense she discovered inthe dialogue, as well as her pleasingcountenance and figure, were sufficientlyadmired to render her metropolitandebut decidedly a successfulone. She immediately took her stationat the head of the second-rate actressesof Drury Lane, and often was intrustedwith first-rate comic characters." In1794, she is said to have gained a prizeof 10,000 in the lottery, when sheimmediately made a donation of 10(1to the Theatrical Fund. Some accountssay that this was a present from Mr.Coutts, the rich banker, whose repeatedvisits to her, and the substantialinterest he took in her welfare, gaverise to a rumour that she resided underhis protection for some years previousto her retirement from the stage. Thisevent took place in 1815, in which year,she became the wife of Mr. Coutts, whoappears to have been devotedly attachedto her, and at his death, in1822, left her in sole possession of hisimmense property. This brought hervarious noble suitors, and, if we maycredit report, offers from a royal one;but she chose to give her Stand to theDuke of St. Allan's. This lady hasbeen the subject of much gross and disgustingcalumny, which is equally unworthyof credit and notice. On allhands, she is admitted to devote tocharitable purposes a great portion ofher wealth, her possession of whichis certainly no ground for the infamousAPPENDIX.and malignant abuse with which a certainportion of the press has assailedher.POPE, (MARIA,) was the daughterof Mr. Campion, a respectable merchant,and was born in Waterford, about theyear 1775. Her father dying withoutleaving an adequate support for hisfamily, Miss Campion was taken underthe care of a relative, whilst stayingwith whom, she went, one evening, tosee the tragedy of The Orphan, and wasso struck with the performance, that onher return home, she could talk of nothingelse, "and the house rung with thesighs of Monimia." Mr. Daly beingimmediately applied to for an engagement,he referred the fair candidate tothe stage manager, Mr. Hitchcock, whopronounced her a fine promising child,but told her, she was too young for sodifficult a profession, and was about todepart, when she seized him by theskirt of the coat, and in a truly tragictone, exclaimed, "Oh! sir, but hearme !" The tender and impressive mannerin which she pronounced thesewords, induced him to consent, whenMiss Campion recited some passagesfrom The Orphan, with such feeling andability, that Mr. Hitchcock was quitecharmed, and determined to give heratrial on the stage. She accordingly,in the year 1792, made her debut atthe Dublin Theatre, in the part ofMonimia; but she was so timid, whenthe night arrived, that Mr. Hitchcockwas obliged to force her before theaudience, and though she was receivedwith enthusiastic cheering, she was soovercome, that she fainted in the stagemanager's arms. On recovering herself,however, she delivered her first speechwith a tenderness, so conformable tothe character, that the applause wasredoubled, and thus encouraged, shewent through the whole in a style thatat once stamped her reputation as atragic actress. She afterwards playedJuliet, Kstifania, Desdemona, Rutland,in The Earl of Essex, &c., with decidedsuccess. From Dublin, she proceededto York, where, for family reasons, sheassumed the name of Spencer, but stilldrew crowded houses, and after performinga few nights at Liverpool, returnedto Dublin with additional reputation.Upon her re-appearance on thestage in this city, she was seen by Mr.Lewis, the comedian, through whoserecommendation she was immediatelyengaged for Covent Garden, whereshe made her debut in 1797, in her favouritecharacter of Monimia. In thefollowing year, she married Mr. Pope,the actor, and under that name, attainedto great eminence as a tragicactress. Speaking of her Juliet, a criticsays, " it is one of the most interestingwe ever saw. The delusion of thescene is not necessary to make us fancyher the very character the authordesigned to exhibit ; but her feeling,her delicacy, her animation where thepart required it, are above all praise.The scene in which she swallows theBison, was never executed with morePigment ; but there were other excel-iceswhich our limits will not allowus to notice. The vindication of herlord's conduct, ' Blistered be thy tongue,'to the nurse; and the majestic contemptwith which she treats her, when shediscovers the selfishness of her motives ;'Amen! Amen!' together with all thescenes with Romeo, were admirable.Indeed, the whole performance is sofull of beauties, and so free from defects,that we are not surprised at the play'shaving run eight nights already, withoutthe attraction of a new dress, scene,dirge, procession, or any other adventitiouscircumstance whatever."LOVEGROVE, (WILLIAM,) wasborn at Shoreham, on the 13th ofJanuary, 1778. At an early age hewas apprenticed to his father, who wasa plumber and engineer ; but imbibinga fondness for theatricals, relinquishedthe shop for the stage. He appeared firstat Richmond, and afterwards at Dublinand Manchester. Whilst travelling tothe last named city, he met with a severeaccident t, from the going off of two loadedpistols in the stage-coach, which delayedhis performance for some time.Anhalt, in Lover's Vows, Douglas, andother characters in this line, he had 'hitherto played ; but on going to Bath,he changed his style of acting, andappeared as Lazariflo, in Two Stringsto your Bow. He met with a most enthusiasticreception, and at the conclusionof the farce, the Duchess of York,who had witnessed the performance,sent him an especial message, expressiveof her gratification. He continuedto act at different provincial theatresuntil 1810, when he accepted an offerfrom Mr. Arnold to join the DruryLane company at the Lyceum ; andon the re-building of Drury Lane, heranked among the principal performers.At his last benefit, which took placein 1815, when he played Sir PeterTeazle, the applause on his entrancewas so great, that he was completelyovercome by it, and exclaimed, " They'llkill me with kindness!" As a proofof the great estimation in which histalents were held, the committee ofDrury Lane continued to pay him hisfull salary during the whole period ofthe illness which preceded his death.This took place at Bath, on the 29thof June, 1816.Barley, (GEORGE,) was bornabout the year 1780, and, after at Margate, and otherplaces, made his debit at Drury Lane,on the llth of December, 1802, asOrlando, in As You Like It. He was receivedwith great applause, and playedvarious characters in comedy duringthat and the following season. In 1804,the managers refusing to raise hissalary, he quitted Drury Lane, andjoined Incledon in giving an entertainmentat the Lyceum, called AVoyage to India. After making severalprovincial tours, and acting as stagemanager for Elliston, at various theatres,he re-appeared at Drury Lane,and added considerably to his reputationby his performance of Falstaff; theMajor, in What Next ; and other characters.He subsequently visitedAmerica, in company with his wife,formerly Miss Smith ; and on his return,in 1822, made a most successfuldebit at Covent Garden, in the part ofSir Toby Belch. He then removed tothe English Opera House, where hehas been, for many years, stage-manager; and has delivered annually,during Lent, lectures on the structureof the earth, &c. His best charactersare, Mr. Courtly, in Free and Easy ;Old Mirabel, Jobson, Joe Steadfast,Fitzharding, Sir Christopher Curry,Sir Anthony Absolute, &c. &c.Mattie, (HENRY,) was born aboutthe year 1780 ; and was, originally,>KS. 569bred to trade. Being a good singer,he made his debut on the stage,in vocal characters ; and, after variousperformances, was engaged at Bath,where he came out as Paul, inPaul and Virginia. His musical abilitiesmet with little encouragement;but in the part of old men, Frenchmen,and footmen, he soon became a favourite} and, being engaged at the Lyceum,in 1813, played there the same line ofcharacters with equal applause. Fromthe Lyceum, he removed to DruryLane, where he has, ever since, continued;having added nothing to hisfame, excepting by his performance ofMonsieur Morbleu, in the farce ofMonsieur Jonson. Excellent, however,as was Mr. Mattie's acting in thispiece, it is the opinion of many thatMr. Mathews plays it with infinitelymore humour, and infinitely morepathos. Various eccentricities havebeen attributed to Mr. Mattie, by oneof his biographers ; but as they are altogetherof a personal and privatenature, we do not feel ourselves justifiedin relating them.SIMMONS, (Mr.) was born inLondon, about 1777, and, at an earlyage, made his debut at Covent Garden,as the Duke of York, in King Richardthe Third. This character is usuallyplayed by a mere juvenile automaton,but little Simmons infused a spirit intohis part, that showed his feelings aswell as his lips were at work. He wassoon after intrusted with the Boy, inThe Contrivances, the Page, in TheOrphan, &c. ; and, on his arriving atmaturity, became, in certain parts,one of the most popular actors of hisday. His Mordecai, in Love-a la-mode; Master Mathew, in EveryMan in his Humour; Fainwould, inRaising the Wind ; and Alibi, in TheSleep Walker, are characters in whichhe was perfectly unrivalled. His exclamationof " What do you think ofthat, eh ?" is said to have been as greata bye-word, at one time, as the " Hope1 don't intrude," of Liston's Paul Pry.Nothing could be more simple andnatural than his mode of acting; hedisplayed little variety either of look oraction; his happiest expression, it hasbeen said, was that of a silly importancehurt by neglect. " This performer,"APP E Nix,observes a modern critic, " for the sakeof effect, may very well be contrastedwith Fawcett ; his ability is not sovarious, nor, perhaps, so originallystrong, but his style is unassuming,correct, and delicate ; he never thrustshimself upon attention by vehemenceor confidence, nor constrains it by distortionof feature, voice, or limb. Ifthere be a quaintness in his manner, itis a natural, not an affected one, and itluckily suits his characters, for he doesnot attempt many, and what he undertakeshe always performs." Mr. Simmonsdied suddenly, in consequence,it is said, of a fall down the stone stepsof an area, which dislocated his neck.DAVISON, (MARIA,) whose maidenname was Duncan, was born aboutthe year 1783, at Liverpool, where herfather was an actor of some celebrity.She appeared on the stage as soon asshe was able to walk; and, in herfourteenth year, played Priscilla Tomboy,at Dublin, with enthusiastic applause.Miss Farren, who was performingat the same time, was muchstruck with the acting of the subject ofour memoir, and predicted that shewould soon rise to the head of her profession.In 1797 and 1798, she was amember of Tate Wilkinson's company,with whom she established her reputationas a light-comedy actress; performingat York, Edinburgh, and Glasgow, withdistinguished applause. After havingrefused more than one offer from theLondon managers, she accepted an engagementat Margate, and from thencecame to the metropolis, upon a liberalsalary; and made \\erdebtit at DruryLane, in the character of Lady Teazle.Such was the impression she producedin this part, that The School for Scandalwas performed for sixteen nights. Sheafterwards acquired additional eclat, byher Nell, in The Devil to Pay, andPeggy, in The Country Girl, in whichshe was not inferior to Mrs, Jordan.She was the original representative ofJuliana, in Robin's comedy of TheHoneymoon ; which has justly beenconsidered her chef-d'oeuvre. Her acting,says a critic, during the dance withLopez, is the finest piece of pantomimethe stage ever witnessed.It almost might be laid, (he body thoughtHer personation of Foggy M* Gilpin.in The Highland Reel, is another excellentpiece of acting 5 whilst in sentimentalcomedy, her Julia stands unrivalled.Mrs. Davison's vocal powersare also of no mean order: few cansing a ballad more sweetly; and, inthe opera of The Travellers, she astonishedthe audience by singing a duetwith Braham, in a style that shewedher capable of sustaining, with a littlestudy, a first-rate operatic character.Mrs." Davison was married to a gentlemanof that name, on the 31st ofOctober, 1812; but her conjugal life issaid to be much embittered by thegambling propensities of her husband.She is above the middle size, with prominent,but very expressive features;and, altogether, may be called a handsomewoman.COBHAM, (THOMAS,) was born inLondon, in the early part of the year1786. His father is said to have beena devoted lover of science, a profoundalgebraist and mathematician, and celebratedas an architectural draughtsman.The subject of our memoir wasapprenticed to a printer, but imbibed astrong predilection for the stage, bywitnessing Cooke's performance ofShylock ; and could not rest until hehad himself played the same part at aprivate theatre. This was in Lamb'sConduit Street, where he became acquaintedwith Kean, under whose adviceand guidance he relinquished theprinting business; and, in 1803, becamea member of Mr. Ferrol's company,then performing at Watford, inHertfordshire. Here he played a varietyof characters, including Sir GilesOverreach, Captain Macheath, Sir AnthonyAbsolute, &c. r and, occasionally,Harlequin. He next played, successively,at Margate, Guernsey, Exeter,Weymouth, Wisbeach, Portsmouth, andSalisbury; at which last place he marrieda Miss Drake. In 1810, he wasengaged by Mr. Henley to appear atthe Tottenham Street Theatre, wherehe played Marion forty nights; andsustained, with great applause, all theleading tragic parts. The East Londonwas the next scene of his performances,where he gained such reputation,as Richard the Third, that the CoventGarden managers immediately offeredAC TO KS.him a handsome sum for two nights ;and, if he should succeed, an engagementfor three years, at an advancingsalary of 12. He made his debut atthat theatre, in Richard the Third ; butthe Granites made a party againsthim ; and so much opposition was manifestedtowards the man, that he hadno fair chance of displaying his abilitiesas an actor. What, however, could beheard of his performance, made a veryfavourable impression upon the majorityof the audience ; and, in the tent scene,he was honoured with no less thannine rounds of applause. From CoventGarden, Mr. Cobham returned tothe East London, and, subsequently,to Dublin ; where he divided the leadingbusiness with Mr. Ward. In proofof his versatility, we may here mention,that he once played, instead of Mr.Horn, who had been suddenly taken ill,the part of Lord William, in the operaof The Haunted Tower ; and sang withsuch effect, that he was encored inseveral of his songs; one of which wasthe celebrated bravura of Spirit of mysainted Sire. The manager was sopleased with his exertions on this occasion,that he sent him, the nextmorning, a present of 25. Latterly,Mr. Cobham has appeared, chiefly, atthe Surrey and Cobourg theatres, andhas long been considered the tragicstar of the minors ; a preference thathas tempted him to indulge in a habitof ranting to a most pernicious extent ;for, undoubtedly, he possesses many ofthe qualifications for a first-rate tragedian,though few opportunities havebeen afforded him of displaying themin the legitimate drama. In such characters,however, as Rob Roy, he is notUlterior to Macready j and in Richardand Sir Giles Overreach, he is, or ratherwas, no inefficient substitute for Keanhimself,Order, (Mrs,) whose maidenname was Mary Ann Rivers, was bornon the 25th of February, 1788, andappeared on the stage before she wasable to walk, as the child, in KingHenry the Eighth ; but at what theatre,her biographer does not state. In 1793,'she performed, at Newbury, the girl, inThe Children of the Wood. Afterhaving been some years a member of aprovincial company, she married, inJuly, 1804, Mr. Thomas Orger, of HighCombe, Bucks, a member of theSociety of Friends, and said to be agentleman of considerable literary attainments.She then retired from thestage ; but at the latter end of the followingyear, resumed her professionalcareer at Glasgow. Bannister, whoplayed with her at that theatre, in 1808,was so struck by her acting in Nell,Josephine, Ann Lively, &c., that herecommended her, on his return totown, to the London managers. Sheaccordingly obtained an engagement atDrury Lane Theatre, where she madeher debut on the 4th of October, in theabove year, as Lydia Languish, in TheRivals. She met with a flattering, butnot an enthusiastic reception ; nor wasit till her appearance in a piece calledThe Highgate Tunnel, as Peggy Lar-king,that she began to rise in publicestimation. This was in 1812; andfrom that time to the present, she hascontinued a favourite with the public ;though, in theatrical language, she hasnever attained to the rank of a star.She is an excellent second in comedy ;and, in burlesque acting, such as Mollusca,in Amoroso, and Dorothea, inThe Tailors, is unrivalled. In thechambermaids of broad farce, and inall characters of vulgar humour, shealso displays considerable talent, and anaivete truly genuine.HUNTLEY, (FRANCIS,) was bornat Barnsley, in Yorkshire, in the year1787. He lost his father, whilst yet aninfant, and coming to London about theyear 1800, was, as stated by one authority,but denied by another, articled toa surgeon. However this may be, hetook an active part in the theatricals ofBerwick Street, in 1801 and four followingyears, and in 180(5, had an engagementat Brecknock, but soon returnedceaseless to the metropolis. Hethen appeared at the Lyceum, andafterwards at Stamford and Nottingham,but met with little or no applause.At length, he made a verysuccessful debUt at Birmingham, asOthello, to the lago of Kean, then actingunder the name of Carey, In 1809,he was engaged at the Surrey Theatre,where the manager, determined tomake the most of his talents, assignedto him, at various times, the veryA r r E N i) t x .incongruous parts of Earl Esmond,Locket, Richard, Macheath, and Pantaloon.On the 27th of November,1811, he made his first appearance atCovent Garden, as King Barnes, in TheKnight of Snowdon, but returned, inthe following Easter, to the Surrey,whence he removed to Dublin, and ledthe business there for two seasons. Hesubsequently played at the Olympic,Cobourg, East and West London Theatres,and^for a short time, at Astley's.What Mr. Huntley could be, or ratherwhat he might have been," says abiographical critic, " is not now ourpurpose to inquire what he is maysoon be told. A powerful portrayedof the easily defined emotions a gloriousactor of straight-forward delineations.Give him rage, despair, fear, orany strong and decided passions, andhe will communicate its throes to hisauditors with the fidelity and fire ofKean ; but when he comes to the nicershades of character to the mixed emotionsto those pithy speeches withwhich Shakspeare abounds, where, inone line, many differences and conflictingpassions are to be portrayed,he hurries over the passage, as if hefelt a consciousness of insufficiency.Nothing on earth can exceed his ' Oh !that the slave had twenty thousandlives!' in Othello, but in the words,Not a jot, not a iot,' he produces noeffect at all." Mr. Huntley is saidto be a great sufferer from rheumaticgout, brought on by a career of dissipation,which has lately producedsuch ruinous effects upon his health,as to prevent his appearing upon thestage, or to make use of his legs withoutthe aid of a stick. If we maycredit his biographer, he is nearlybent double, and his hands are socovered with chalk stones, that he canwrite his name on a wall with his ownfingers. The entreaties of his friends,and the warnings of his physician, haveproved alike in vain, in restraining himfrom the constant use of spirituousliquors. Latterly, it is said, his engagementat the Surrey, with Honey-man,who kept a public-house as wellas the theatre, was one guinea a night,and as much brandy as he coulddrink. Although a married man, hisconnexions with other females than hiswife were numerous. In proof of whichb ludicrous anecdote has been told. Hiswife's name having been left at thedoor for admittance, he sent round, indignantly,to know why Mrs. Huntleyhad been refused an entrance ; " Why,what am I to do, sir ?" said the money-taker," I have passed nine Mrs. huntleyalready."RAYNER, (LIONEL BENJAMIN.)was born at Keckmondwicke, a villagein Yorkshire, on the 10th of October,1738. A perusal of the tragedy ofAlexander the Great, which he got byheart, first gave him a predilection forthe stage, and it was irrevocably confirmedby witnessing, at Leeds, theperformance of Mathews, in FarmerShield. He joined a small company,at Cradle, in Staffordshire, where heopened as Jeremy Diddler, but soonaspired to the principal parts in genteelcomedy. Being refused this wish,he joined another company, at Stratawhere his acting inSolomon Lob, in Love Laughs at Locksmiths,brought him into some notice,and procured him a rise of salary.From Stratford, he went to Manchesterand Nottingham, where he was paidl 10s. per week, and had such profitablebenefits, that, at the end of a year,he found his receipts averaged a guineaper day. His fame soon reached themetropolis, and on the 16th of June,1815, he made his deb&t at the Hay-market,as Frank Garlands, in A Curefor the Heart Ache. He met with amost flattering reception, and amplysustained his reputation by his successiveperformances, during the season,of Ezekiel Homespun, Andrew Bang,Sin, Stephen Narrowly, Sheepface,&c., &c. At the close of the Hay market,he returned to the provinces, anddid not appear again on the Londonboards, until December, 1822, when heopened with Dandie Diamond, at DruryLane. He was received with enthusiasticapplause ; but, as it is said,Elliston only wanting him to sustainthat particular part, the other charactersin Rayner's line being filled by Knight,our actor was shelved, and left DruryLane in disgust. After a professionaltrip to Lynn, he appeared in July,1823, at the Lyceum, in the part ofFixture, in which he made but littleimpression. His Giles, in The Miller'sA C '1 O K S .Maid, however, was a decided hit, andraised his reputation so much, that hereceived offers both from the CoventGarden and Drury Lane managers.He closed with the former, under anengagement for three years, at 10,ll, and 12 per week, and made hisdebut, on the 8th of October, as Tyke.A writer, in The Times, thus noticeshis appearance : " Last night, Mr.Rayner, who has played rustic charactersat the English Opera House,with considerable success, made hisfirst appearance at this theatre, asTyke, in The School of Reform. Thedeep impression left on the publicmind, by the admirable performance ofEmery, made this attempt arduous, butwe are happy to say it was completelysuccessful. Except that Mr. RayneVwants some of the personal advantageswhich Emery possessed, for representingthe stout-hearted ruffian, we donot think his performance at all inferiorto that which we were accustomed toregard as the perfection of rude tragedy.From first to last, he retainedentire possession of the part ; never relapsinginto himself, or trying to raisea laugh, by trickery or burlesque, andgiving all the more quiet parts of thedialogue in a natural and unforcedmanner, which is rarely to be perceivedon the stage. In the more trying passages,he gave a picture of remorseworking in a long-seared conscience,and agitating an uncultivated, but powerfulmind, which was positively terrific.His vain attempts to assume theappearance of indifference ; the half-stifledutterance which the ' climbingpassion' forced; his frightfully vividdescription of his old father fallingdown lifeless as he saw him conveyedto the ship ; and, perhaps, above all. theinterview with his father, where theold affection quivers on his lip, anddissolves him in welcome tears, wereso powerful and true, that we almosthesitate to call them acting. The audiencenot only testified their sense ofhis excellence in the principal scenesby loud applause, but by the stillmore unequivocal testimony of tears,and by the deep silence which theykept, whenever he appeared towardsthe close of the play. Mr. Abbott cameforward, to announce the performancesfor the next night ; but his voice wasdrowned in applause and cries of ' .'He persisted, however, in theexecution of his task, but the call wasrenewed, when he retired, and, aftersome very becoming hesitation, Mr.Rayner appeared, evidently much affected,and announced, that, ' with thekind approval of the audience, the playwould be repeated on Friday,' and retiredamidst the cheers of the house.It is really gratifying to record successso genuine and so fairly earned ; andto perceive a line where so much excellencewas lately displayed, filledagain by a real and an original actor."Since that time, Mr. Rayner has performeda variety of characters, but hasnot been assigned that prominent situationto which his merits entitle him. Indeed,he can hardly be called a popularmetropolitan actor, though, in the provinces,few are received with more enthusiasm.His provincial benefits arebetter attended than those of any otheractor ; whence it has become a sayingamong the profession, that he " couldmake a benefit upon Salisbury Plain."One night, the demand for tickets wasso great, that he sold more than thehouse would contain. Those who couldnot gain admission at the doors, determined,at least, says one of his biographers," to see and hear theirfavourite, and actually insisted on hiscoming to them, which he did, and withhis usual good sense and good humour,asked how he could oblige them."Sing us a song, Rayner," was thereply, " and we'll go quietly home."Rayner mounted a tub, and with theaccompaniment of one violin, sang oneof his best comic songs, for which hereceived three hearty cheers, and hispatrons dispersed. Mr. Rayner is saidto be. in private life, a warm friend andmost delightful companion ; he is fondof fox-hunting, horse-racing, &c., andis a regular subscriber at TattersalPs.He was married, in 1812, at Shrewsbury,to Miss Margaret Remington, bywhom he has one son.M Arden, (Mrs.) was born about theyear 1789, and is, we believe, a nativeof Ireland. Her parents being in humble icircumstances, she was obliged to get jher living in the capacity of housemaid, iWhilst in this situation, at Plymouth, ja mutual attachment took place be iA P I' E S D I Xtween herself'and a young midshipman,whose death, soon afterwards, is said tohave "embittered her day of life, andbeen the everlasting bitter in the cupof sweets that public favour presented."We are not informed what circumstanceled to her appearance on the stage, butin1811, we find her married to a Mr.Mardyn, and playing, at a small salary,at the West London Theatre. She wasat Bath, in 1814, and in September,1815, made her debut at Drury Lane,being engaged there, as it is said,through the influence of a person of someimportance in the theatrical world,with whom she had formed a connexion,after separating from her husband.She made her first appearance,at Drury Lane, as Amelia Blenheim,in Lovers' Vows, and was received withthe most enthusiastic applause. Therewas a girlish gaiety and ingenuouswildness of youth about her performance,that completely took the audienceby surprise, and forced them intoadmiration, when, perhaps, the judgmentwas not altogether satisfied. Hernext character, Albina Mandeville,gave almost equal satisfaction ; as didher Peggy, in The Country Girl, inwhich she was pitted against Mrs. Alsop.The palm was generally awardedto Mrs. Mardyn, who played, thoughsomewhat too boisterously, with all thefreshness of originality, whilst Mrs.Alsop's Peggy was manifestly a copyof Mrs. Jordan's. Mrs. Mardyn haslatterly disappeared from the stage,and is, perhaps, less celebrated as anactress, notwithstanding her talents,than for her supposed connexion withLord Byron. The acts, says the lady'sbiographer, are these: Mrs. Mardyncalled on his lordship to solicit his interference,we think, to obtain her thepart of the heroine in Diamond's Brideof Abydos, but, at all events, on somesubject of that nature. During theperiod of their conversation, a violentshower came on, and his lordship,seeing that Mrs. Mardyn could notleave the house, was anxious to inviteher to dinner : his lady, however,could not condescend to dinewith an actress, and Lord Byron, accordingly,ordered his carriage for Mrs.Mardyn to depart in. These circumstanceswere construed into a matter ofvery grave charge against Mrs. Mardyn,who was said to have caused aseparation between the noble bard canohis lady, and was, in consequence, receivedwith great disapprobation at hernext appearance on the stage. Shecame forward with tears in her eyes,and protested her innocence ; her innocentlook, and melodious voice, weretoo powerful to withstand, and she wasat once restored to favour. After thisperiod, however, she played but little,and is, we believe, now residing on thecontinent. An anecdote is told of herbeing duped into a belief of her husband'sdeath, under the following circumstances: After her separation fromhim, she allowed him two guineas perweek, but being in want of moremoney, he got a friend to write to hiswife an account of his death, and, atthe same time, to request a certain sumto defray the expenses of the funeral.Mrs. Mardyn complied, and went intomourning, but had not worn her weedsmore than three days, before she mether husband, staggering towards DruryLane, in a state of intoxication. " OfMrs. Mardyn's talents as an actress,"says a critic, " we entertain a veryhigh opinion. We think she possessesgenius, which is the greatest endowmentany one can boast ; but she lackedstudy, attention, and practice. Heranimal spirits ran away with her; hervery walk was buoyant ; her run was adance; she seemed for ever juvenile;she was a complete exemplification ofthe breaking up of a boarding school ;in short, her spirits wanted the curb ofpropriety, and yet her very gracelessnesshad such a grace, that we couldnot bear to check her ; and whenevershe strove to reduce her acting to thestricter bonds, we mourned the absenceof the very gambols that delighted uswhilst we condemned them."BOOTH, (SARAH,) was born at Birmingham,in 1793; and, at the age ofeleven, was engaged at the ManchesterTheatre, principally as a dancer. Shenext performed at Doncaster, whenceshe came to London ; and sustainedthe principal female characters, in melodrama,at the Circus, under Elliston.Her debut at Covent Garden, tookplace on the 23d of November, 1810,when she played Acanthus, in Theture. " She was received,"Child of Nature.ACTORS.says an acute critic, " with all the violentrapture of the return of an establishedfavourite. She is about eighteen ;her figure small, but very well formed ;and a face (if we may use the expression)full of tongues. All her featuresare lit up with expression ; and conveyher thoughts before her tongue canutter them. The tones of her voiceare very flexible and pleasing ; heraction is graceful ; and she displayedso much ability on this occasion, that,while she remains at this theatre, it ishoped that we shall never more see thepart played by Mrs. H. Johnston." MissBooth added to her reputation by avariety of other parts; among themwere, Little Pickle, Dolly Bull, in Fontainebleau,Annette, in The Maid andthe Magpie, and, as Florio, in The Dogof Monarchs ; she displayed great powersin serious pantomime. She subsequentlyplayed at Drury Lane, theOlympic, Haymarket, &c., chiefly inthe tragedies of humble life, andin romps, chambermaids, &c. Shehas latterly disappeared from the Londonboards, but until within a year ortwo was considered a star in the provinces; and she is said to have acquireda very handsome competenceby her professional labours.Reeled, (ROBERT,) was born inGrange Court, Carey Street, about theyear 1794. On leaving school, he wasapprenticed to Mr. Hansard, the printer,but a mania for the stage induced him,after three years' experience as a compositor,to relinquish all other pursuits.His first appearance on the stage wasat the Surrey Theatre, where he undertookto sing The Bay of Biscay, forthe benefit of a friend ; but he was soalarmed at the sight of the audience,that he had scarcely got through twonotes, before he ran off the stage. Hethen re-commenced printer, but in ashort time gave up the business altogether;and in 1813, obtained a-nengagement at Richmond, and subsequently,at various provincial towns,but acquiring little applause, except atLynn, where we find him a great favourite,in 1817. He afterwards dividedthe low comedy business, at the WestLondon, with H. Beverley ; and wasnext engaged by Elliston, at theOlympic, where he was the originalLeporello, in Giovanni in London, andplayed this and other low comedy partswith great applause. In 1819, he removedto Drury Lane ; but the engagementof Knight at the same theatre,prevented Keeley from coming beforethe public in parts of importance. In1821, he appeared at the Adelphi, andadded considerably to his reputation,by his performance of Jemmy Green, inTom and Jerry. From Sadler's Wells,where he next played, he removed toCovent Garden, making his debit thereonthe 26th of October, 1822, as Darby.He was well received, but did notcompletely establish himself until hispersonation of the Tailor, in Peake'sfarce of The Duel. Speaking of thisfarce, a magazine critic says, "No oneunderstands the stage, or what is technicallycalled, situation, so well as Mr.Peake. He shuffles Farren, Jones,Condor, Keeley, (a most amazingminor !) and Blanchard, together, withadmirable sleight of hand, and turnsthem all up trumps. As for Keeley, hemeasures him for such a suit of clothesas no dramatic habit-maker ever beforefitted him with. Keeley, in the Tailor,was the sublimity of impoverishedmanhood the true ninth part of aman." From this time Mr. Keeley hascontinued a favourite, and, like Listonand Reeve, his mere appearance onthe stage, is sufficient to create a roarof laughter. He is inferior, in mostparts, to the two last-mentioned actors,but in characters where the expression ofpusillanimous fear, stupid astonishment,or vulgar chuckling is required, he is,as far as his voice and features areconcerned, wholly unrivalled. His performancesin The Frozen Lake, TheSergeant's Wife, Jonathan in England,Frankenstein, Jemmy Green, "was,I, The Bottle Imp, &c., &c. will fullyexemplify these remarks.WEST, (Mrs.) is the daughter of aMr. Cooke, and was born at Bath, onthe 22nd of March, 1795. She is cousinto Mrs. Waylett, and from her, it issaid, imbibed a predilection for thestage, where she made her debut onthe 22nd of May, 1810, in her nativecity, as Miss Hardcastle. She continuedto play there with applause tillthe summer of 1812, when she joinedthe Cheltenham company, and soonA P P K N D I X.sifter, at the recommendation of Mr.Charles Kemble, was engaged at CoventGarden, where she made herdebut, in the part of Desdemona. Shewas well received, and played, duringthe remainder of the season, severalimportant characters, both in tragedyand comedy. In the following year,she returned to her native city, andmarried Mr. West, whom she preferredto two other gentlemen who were hersuitors at the same time. On the 17thof September, 1818, she appeared atDrury Lane, and performed there forseveral seasons, the principal charactersin tragedy and serious comedy, untilshe was superseded by Mrs. Burn.Her best parts are, Cora, in Pizarro,Cordelia, Jane Shore, Juliet, Mrs. Haller,Lady Townley, Desdemona, &c.all of which she plays respectably, butnone of them in a manner to entitleher to the appellation of a first-rateactress.BOOTH, (JuNius BRUTUS,) wasborn at St. Pancreas, near London, onthe 1st of May, 1796. He is the son ofan attorney, and for some time studiedthe law ; but abandoned this profession,as well as that of painting and sculpture,to which he subsequently applied himself,for theatrical pursuits. After for a year or two, he accompaniedMr. Henley to the Netherlands; and, whilst playing at Brussels(where his performance of Megrimwas much admired), married a nativeof that town. In 1815, he obtained anengagement at Covent Garden, at 2per week ; and, on the 12th of February,1817, played, at the same theatre,Richard the Third, with such decidedsuccess, that the manager offered him 5per week, which Booth declined; and,soon after, concluded an agreement, atDrury Lane, for three years, at a salaryof 8, 9, and jglOper week. He madehis debut as lago, to Kean's Othello, andwas received with thunders of applause;and the announcement of his name, forthe same part, the following evening,drew an overflowing house ; " in somecases," it is said, " a guinea was offeredfor a single seat, and expectation wasat its highest point." When the curtaindrew up, however, Mr. Booth wasnot forthcoming, being unable to appear,as he stated in a note which Mr.Rae read to the audience, in consequenceof ill health The fact was,that Mr. Booth had entered into anengagement with the Covent Gardenmanagers, Upon their offering him thesame terms as those upon which hisservices had been retained at DruryLane, and a violent opposition to himwas, in consequence, manifested, on hisre-appearance at the former theatre.For four successive nights, he playedRichard in dumb show; for the tumuliwas so great, that not a word could beheard from the stage. The clamour, atlength, died gradually away, and withit much of the excitement that Mr.Booth's acting had, at first, produced.He drew but thin houses to witness hissubsequent performances, and, on hisbenefit night, when he played Shylockand Jerry Sneak, the total receipts, it issaid, amounted only to 67 Ws. Mr.Booth next appeared at the Cobourg,and in the season of 1820, we find himagain at Drury Lane, dividing the leadingbusiness with Wallack and Cooper.Soon after he went to America, but resumedhis professional labours on themetropolitan boards, at Drury Lane, inOctober, 1823. where he was engagedfor three nights. As an actor, Mr.Booth is a decided copyist of Keanexcept in a few portions of the respectivecharacters of that great tragedian.Booth's tent scene, in Richard,for instance, is said to be a magnificentand original piece of acting; on thewhole, he ranks, perhaps, in genius,next to Young, as a tragedian ; though,for want of due cultivation of his talents,he is, in many respects, inferior toWallack and Cooper.YATES, (FREDERICK), was born inLondon, on the 4th of February, 1797,and educated at the Charter HouseSchool. At the age of seventeen, heentered the Commissariat department,but soon after turned his thoughts tothe stage, and obtained an engagementat Edinburgh, where he performedboth in tragedy and comedywith applause. His first appearance,however, " on any stage," was at Bologna,where he played Fustian, to theSylvester Daggerwood of Mathews. In1818, he made his debut at CoventGarden, in the part of lago, but receivedonly the applause merited byACTORS.respectability; his representation ofFalstaff, in April, 1819, was more successful." In several passages," says acritic, " he discovered great genius,and was altogether very well received.His dress and look we're particularlyhappy ; his manner of bowing his acknowledgmentsfor the repeated applauseof the audience, was much relished.The scene in which he isdetected in his lies, was very effective.His soliloquies were by no means histriumphs they were laboriously executed.His laugh, although good, andmuch applauded, was violent ratherthan jovial rather the determinationto be boisterously jocular, than naturallygay. His scene with Percy waswell executed ; and the audience wereso well satisfied with his performance,that Mr. Condor was obliged to comeforward after the dropping of the curtain,and assure them that Mr. Yateswould shortly appear before them again,both in tragedy and comedy." Hisnext character of importance was Ber-told,in Maturing's tragedy of Freebut the immediate condemnationof the piece, prevented Mr. Yates'srepetition of his part, which is said tohave been sustained by him in a veryimpressive manner. Soon after, hegave a favourable specimen of hiscomic powers, as Dick Mutable, in Mr.Beadle's farce of Cozening, or, Halfan Hour in France. In 1822, he wasengaged at Vauxhall, to give an entertainment,after the manner of Mathews,called Hasty Sketches, or VauxhallScenery ; but on the very day of performance,he fell through a trap, whilstrehearsing, and broke his leg. In 1825,he took the Adelphi, in conjunctionwith Mr. Terry, and has himself continuedat that theatre, both in thecapacity of manager and actor, up tothe present time. Mr. Yates is one ofthe most versatile performers on thestage, which may account, perhaps, forthe fact of his having no decided forte.In tragedy, comedy, farce, and melodrama,he is occasionally capital, andalways respectable. In burlesque he isexcellent a little too broad, perhaps,and given to exaggeration, which issometimes not less vulgar than ludicrous.He is a better buck than fop,and a better rake than either ; indeed,his performance of the latter characteronly wants refinement to render it unexceptionable.FOOTE, (MARIA,) was born atPlymouth, in June, 1798, and is thedaughter of an officer in the army, saidto be descended from the celebratedSamuel Foote. Previously to the birthof his daughter, he sold his commission,and became manager of thePlymouth Theatre, where, at the ageof twelve, Miss Foote appeared in thecharacter of Juliet. Her performancewas considered wonderful for one soyoung, and in the following year sheadded to her reputation by the mannerin which she played Susan Shield,Zorayda, Emily Worthington, &c.The secession of her father from thePlymouth Theatre, and his subsequentfailure as an hotel keeper, at Exeter,brought Miss Foote to the metropolis,in 1814, and in the May of thatyear, she appeared at Covent GardenTheatre, as Acanthus, in The Child ofNature. Her reception was enthusiastic,and she was immediately engagedat a liberal salary ; the characterswhich the managers assigned her,were not of first-rate importance, butMiss Foote's name in the bills seldomfailed to draw a good house. In thesummer of 1815, she was engaged atCheltenham, where an offer from ColonelBerkeley to play at her benefit,led to a connexion with that gentleman,which was only dissolved, a few yearsago, on her receiving an offer of marriagefrom Mr. Hayne, against whomshe received j3,000 damages, on hisfailing to fulfil his engagement. MissFoote has had two or three children bythe colonel, who, if we may credit oneof the lady's biographers, only gainedher favours by a promise of marriagethe moment he could do so, withoutinjuring the hope of his earldom."Miss Foote is a pleasing actress, butnot equal to first-rate parts in any regulardepartment. She plays Aladdin,and other male characters, with moredelicacy, perhaps, than the generalityof actresses; and her Maria Darlington,is, as far as the gentility of the part isconcerned, superior to that of eitherMadame Vestris or Mrs. Waylett ; butthis is the only character in which shehas attained anything like celebrity.APPENDIX.Burn, (MARGARET AGNES,) is thedaughter of a biscuit-baker, in Mary-le-bone,named Somerville, and was bornat Lanark, on the 26th of October, 1799.She developed a taste for dramaticperformances at a very early age, andwhen only sixteen, was introduced toMr. Kinnaird and John Kemble, whodid not then think her abilities sufficientlymatured to engage her. Abouta year afterwards, however, she gavea specimen of her powers in the part ofBelvidera, in Venice Preserved, beforethe Drury Lane committee, when LordByron at once recommended that herservices should be secured. She accordinglymade her debut at the abovetheatre, on the 9th of May, 1816, asImagine, in Bertram, in which shewas so successful, that the managersgave her a liberal present for her performance,and then engaged her forthree years, on very advantageousterms. In the following season, shere-appeared in Bertram, and began tostudy several other parts in which shewas to perform with Kean. If we areto credit one of the lady's biographers,however, that gentleman declared he\\oultL-not act with her, except in Bertram,o'n the ground that she " was toobig for him." Be this as it may, thecharacters which she had commencedstudying were all withheld from her,and-he at length became so disgustedwith her situation, as to request asurrender of her articles, which beinggranted, she obtained an engagementat Covent Garden. In the meantime,she had appeared at Cheltenham, Birmingham,and Bath ; and, at the latterplace, made an unprecedented impressionon the town, by her performanceof Bianca, in Milan's tragedy ofFazio, of which she was the originalrepresentative. She opened in thesame part at Covent Garden, where ithad been previously played by MissO'Neill ; but the Bianca of Miss Somervillewas, by many, preferred to thatof the former actress ; and among otherfavourable notices of her performance,was the following: " Miss Somerville'sBianca is great, as it is singular ; it isthe effort of unconquerable powers ofmind of rare and astonishing capacitywith the assistance of the fullestbounty of nature. The situation towhich her abilities have at length exaltedher, is the highest and proudeststation of histrionic ambition ; and themeans by which she has obtained it,most praiseworthy and honourable.This lady, as the only tragic heroineborn in Scotland, is risen, as it appears,to redeem the histrionic character ofher country's stage." Miss Somervillehad not long been in the metropolis,before she gave her hand to Mr.Alfred Burn, manager of the BirminghamTheatre. Under that name shehas lost somewhat of the celebritywhich attended her as Miss Somerville ;but her Elvira, Lady Macbeth, Emma,in William Tell, and a few others ofthis cast are still superior to the performanceof all other actresses in theaane parts.TREE, (ELLEN,) was born in theyear 1805, and first turned her attentionto the stage, it is said, in consequenceof the success of her sister,Maria. She appeared at Covent Gardenin 1823, for her sister's benefit, asOlivia, in Twelfth Night, and gavepromise of becoming a very interestingactress. After provincializing sometimewith her sister, playing the lead jing parts in comedy, at Bath andBirmingham with great success, shewas engaged at Drury Lane, in 1827 ;during which season she performedLady Teazle, Jane Shore, Albina Mandeville,&c. ; but she ceased to drawafter a night or two, and since thatperiod, has much decreased in managerialestimation, though still a favouritewith the public.END or VOL. ivy,Briton: n.i'A Co Fleet Street, London..JGENERAL INDEX.THE NUMERAL INDICATES THE VOLUME; THE FIGURE, THE PAGE.THE ROYAL FAMILY.Adelaide, Duch. Clarence, i. 135Elizabeth Adelaide, Prss. i. 473Louisa Anne, Princess, i. 103 *Adolphus, F. Duke Camb. i. 139Elizabeth Caroline, Prss. i. 55Louisa, Queen of Denmark, i.61Alfred, Prince, i. 473Elizabeth Caroline, Prss. i. 473amelia, Prioress, i. 141Elizabeth, of HesseHomb.i.473Mary, Duch. Gloucester, i. 140amelia Sophia, Princess, i.54Elizabeth, Princess, i. 473Mary, Princess of Hesse, i. 61line, I'ri.irrss of Orange, i.53Ernest Augustus, Duke ofngusia, Les. Brunswick, i. 62Cumberland, i. 131Octaves, Prince, i. 473ugusia, Ds. Cambridge, i. 139augusta, Princess Wales, i. 47FredericaCharl D.York,i.lC9Sophia Chart. Q. Geo. III. i. 63ugusiusFred. D. Sussex, i. 139Frederica,Ds.Ci,mberland,i.l3SSophia Dorothea Q. Geo. lei 17Frederick Aug. D. York, i. 129Sophia Dorothea, Queen ofCaroline Aug. Princess, i. 473Frederick, Prince of Wales, i. 47Prussia, i. 46Caroline Mr.til'la, Oaten ofFrederick Wm. Prince, i. 473Sophia Matilda, Princess ofDenmark, i. 103Gloucester, i. 473Caroline. Princess, i. 4/3George the Fir? t, i. 17Sophia, Princes, i. 473Caroline, Q. of George II. i. 29George the Second, i. 29Caroline, Q, of George IV i.105George the Third, i. 63Victoria, Duch. of Kent, 1. 138Charlotte, Princess of SaxeGeorge the Fourth, i. 105Victoria, Princess, i. 473Coburg, i. 141George Frederick,. Prince, i. 473Charlotte, O.Uirtemberg,i.l37George, Prince, i. 473W.Aug.D of Cumberland, 1.55George William, Prince, i.473W. Fred. D.of Gloucester, i.HOEdward Au S . D. of York, i. 100Wm. H. D. of Gloucester, i. 101Edward, Duke of Kent, i. 133H. Fred. D. Cumberland, i. 101Wm. Hen. D. of Clarence, i. 13MISCELLANEOUS.Abercromhy, Sir Ralph, ii.84Amherst, Lord, ii 56Askew, Anthony, iii. 544Abernethy, John, ii 4J6An.hurst, Nicholas, iii. 520Astell, Mary, iii. 512Abingdon, Frances, iv. 375Anderson, Robert, i. 478Aston, Harvey, ii. 476Abrams, Ming, iv. 535Anderson, James, iv.4/2Canterbury, Bp. Rochester, i.204Adam, William, ii.542Anderson, Lucy, iv. 551Atwood, George, iii. 493Adam, Alexander, iii. 559Ami re, John, ii. 467Attwood, Thomas, iv.525Adam, Robert, iv. 501Angerstein, John Julius, iv. 463Au hmuty, Sir Samuel, ii. 474Adams, Joseph, ii. 435Angles, Marquess of, ii. 109Auckland, Lord, i. 549A<idiso:i, Joseph, iii. 271Anson, Sir George, ii. 485Austin, William, ii. 582Addison, John, iv. 530Anson, Lord George, iii. 15Avison, Charles, iv. 517Adolph us, John, ii.550Arbuthnot, Harriot, ii. 179Avonmore, Lord, ii. 538Aikin, John, iii 393Arbuthnot, John, iii. 245Ayrton, Edmund, iv. 518Aikman, William, iv 481Argyle, Duke ,,f, ii. 40Akenside,Mark, iii. 342Arkwright, Sir Richard, iii. 183Babelll, William, iv 543Albemarle, A. J. Earl of, ii. 462Armstrong, John, iii. 306Bacon, John, iv 170Albemarle, Geo. Earl of, ii. 73Arne, Thos. Augustine, iv. 342Hancock, Samuel, iii. 566Aibemarle.W.A. Earl of, ii. 4'JArne, Michael, iv. 519Baddelev, Sophia, iv. 562Alcock, John, iv. 516Arnold, Samuel James, iii. 579Baillie, Matthew, ii. 442A an, David, iv 492Arnold, Samuel, iv. 253Baillie, Joanna, iii. 575Aston. Charles, iii. 479Asgill, John, iii 508laird, Sir David, ii. 101Thorpe, Viscount, i. 5 joA-hburton, Lord, ii 2S9Baker, Sir George, ii. 567Alvauley, Lord, ii. 541Ashe, Andrew, iv. 313Bakewell. Robert, iv. 47GENERAL INDEX.Ralcarros, F.arl of, ii. 469Bentinck, Lord, ii. 488Brewster, Davies, iii. 239Balguy, John, i 496Beresford, Viscount, ii. IllBridgewater, Earl of, iii. 572Balgu'y, Archdd. Winches, i. 504Berrmiau, William, i. 498Bridgeport, Viscount, ii 197Ball, Sir Alexander, ii. 516Berkeley, Bp. of Cheyne, i.219Brindled, James, iii. 167Ballard, George, iii. 546Berkeley, G. Cranfield, ii. 513Brisbane, Sir Charles, ii. 243Balmerino, Lord, i. 1/9Berkeley, Earl of, ii. 163Nickleby, Richard, ii 394Banks Sir Joseph, iii. 217Berkenhout, John, iii. 488Broke, Sir P. Bowes Vere, ii. 2f6Banks, Thomas, iv. 167Bernard, John, I. 474Brooke, Henr\,iii. 531Bannister, John, IT. 407Berry, William, iv 505Brooking, iv. 433Bannister, Charles, iv. 535Berry, Sir Edward, ii. 253Bromfield, William, ii. 563Barhauld, Anne Letitia, iii. 381Bertie, Albemarle.ii. 515Broome, William, iii. 519Bashan, Lord, ii. 504Berwick, Duke of, i. 474Browne, Sir VVilliam.ii 5f>0Barker, Robert, iv. 493Betty, \Vm. H. West, iv. 45SBrowne, M julian Geo. iii. 51Barnard, Sir John, i. 535Bevis, John, iii. 133Browne, Isaac [law kinship. 532Barre, Colonel, i. 544Bexley, Lord, i. 397Brown, Simon, i. 5/1Barret, George, iv. 484Pinkerton, Richard, ii. 500Brown, John, iii. 328Barrett, John, iv. 512Billington, Elizabeth, iv. 291Brown, Thomas, iii. 503Harrington, Up Durham, i. 510Birch, Thomas, iii. 530Brown, John, ii. 404Barren K ton, Viscous, i. 540Bird, Edward, iv. 132Brown, Robert, iv. 475Barrington, Samuel, ii. 193Birkbeck, George, iii 501Brown, Lancelot, iv. 471Barrington, Daines, ii. 537Bishop. Henry Rowley, iv. 273Browning, William, iii. 1C3Barrington, Sir Jo ah, ii.337Basset. Charles, iii. 484Brougham, Henry, ii. 352Barrington, Viscount, iii. 516Black, Joseph, iii. 181Bruce, James, iii. 35Barrow, John. iii. 469Blai-kbunie, Archdeacon, i. 237Bryant, Jacob, iii. 539Barry, James, iv. 98Blab Mock, Thomas, hi. 540Bygone, Patrick, iii 464Barry, Stranger, iv. 35fiBlackmore, Sir Richard, iii. 242Buchan, William, ii. 568Bartlemaii, James, iv. 295Blackstone, Sir William, ii. 286Buchan, David, iii. 471Barley, George, iv. 569Bl;u-kwell, Alexander, ii. 557Buckingham, JamesSilk, iii. 70Bartolozzi, Francis, iv. 212Blackwood, Sir Henry, ii. 261Buc-ki.ijrham, Duke of, iii. 507Basire, James, iv. 506Blair. Patrick, iii. 482Bndgrll. Eustace, iii. 281Bate, Julius, i.503Blair, Hugh, iii. 335Bull, r, Sir Francis, ii. 303Bateman, Thomas, ii. 454Blake, William, iv. 113Bulwer, Edward Lytton, iii. 588Bales, Noah, iv 252Blarney, Lord, ii 33Dunn, Margaret Agnes, iv. 57SBath, Earl of, i. 285Bland, Mrs. iv. 297Biirckhardt, John Lewis, iii. 72H,ithurst,Bp. of Norwich, i.518Blame, Sir Gilbert, ii. 577Bullet, Sir Francis, i. 40<JBathurst, Earl, i. 535Blai.tyre, Lord, ii.490Burgess, Bp. Salisbury, i. 5-'0Battle, William, ii. 559Hewitt. Jonathan, iv. 550Burgh, Walter [his ey, ii. 540Battishill, Jonathan, iv. 250Bromfield, B of London, i. 264Burghers, Lord, iv. 530Baxter, Andrew, iii. 523Bloomfield, Robert, iii. 420Burgoyne, Lieut-general, ii.82Bailey, Sir John, ii. 549Bold, John, i. 494Burke, E.lniund, i. 318Braroroft, Edward, ii. 536Bolingbroke. Viscount, i. 281Burlington, Earl o<, iv. 191Beard, John, iv. 533Bone, Henry, iv. 107Turned, Bp. of Salisbury, i.196Beattie, James, iii. 366Bonington, R. Parker, iv. 160Burnet, Thomas, i. 483Beauclerk, Lord Amelia, ii. 529Boscaweu, Edward, ii. 176Burnet, James, iv. 496Beauclerk, Lord Aubrey, ii. 499Boswell, James, iii. 558Burney, Charles, iv. 245Beaumont, Sir George, iv. 494Booth, barton, >v. 334Burns, Robert, iii. 411Beechey, Fred. William, iii. 94Booth, Junius Brutus, iv. 5?6Burrows, J. Freckleton.iv.531Beechey, Sir William, iv. 106Booth, Sarah, iv. 574Burton, John, 1.500Beckford, William!. 637Kottomley, Joseph, iv. 551Busby, Thomas, iv. 522Beckwith, Sir George, ii. 469Boulter, Alp. of Armagh, i.492Bute, Marquess of, i. 307Bedford, Duke of, i. 539Boulton, Matthew, iii. 182Butler, Bp. of Durham, i. 224Bcddoes, Thomas, ii. 437Bourgeois, Sir Francis, iv. 494Butler, Charles, i.i.5(i8Bell, John, iii. 9Bodice, Thomas Edw. iii. 86By.ip.John, ii. 166Bell, Andrew, iv. 467Boyce, William, iv. 243Byron, the Him John. iii. 26Bellamy, Mrs. iv. 368Bo dell, John, iv.209Byron, Lord, iii. 440Bellamy, Thos. Bedford. iv. 537Boyne, John, iv. 495BrUham, Thomas, i. 581Bracken, Henry, ii. 561Cadogan, Karl, ii 28Belong, John Baptist, iii. 62Bradbury, Thomas, i. 568Cadogan, W william, ii. 564Bennett, Bp. of Cheyne, i. 514Bradley, James, iii. 12-iCalais, Kdmuiut, i. 424Bennet, William, iv. 547Hr.nl Icy, Kii-hard, iv. 470Alcott, John Wall, iv. 271Benson, Christopher, i. 523Brady, Nicholas, iii. 510Calder, Sir Robert, ii. 206Benson, Joseph, i. 580Braham, John, iv. 299Camden, Marquess of. i. .VOBenson, George, i. 574Braithwaite, John, iii. 495Cameron, ArcliibaM, i.186Bentham, Jeremy, iv. 33Bra inch, Joseph, iii. 494C : .nirr< J. fLorhiel,i 1S5Bentley, Richard, iii. 252Brande, William That. iii. 504Campbell, Sir A. Bart. ii. 478GENERAL INDEX.Campbell, Sir Neil, ii. 439Clarke, 1 hs. Mansfield, ii. 5S6Coventry, John, iii. 491Catnpbtll, Rev. John, iii. 472lare, Earl of, ii.SIUCoward, William, iii. 475Campbell, John, iii. 304Clapperton.Hugh, iii. 82Cow-ley, Hannah, iii. 561Campbell, Thomas, iii. 435Clayton, Thomas, iv. 512Cowper, Earl, ii. 276Camden, Karl, ii.2S3Cleaver, Bp. of St.Asaph, i.511Cowper, William, iii. 357Cunning, George, i 401Leghorn, George, ii. 565Come, William, iii. 394Canton, John, iii. 17-dementi. !\lu7.io, iv. 259Cr.thbe, George, iii. 404Carew, Sir B. Hallo well, ii.231Clarke, Charles, iii. 463Craggs, James, i. 536Carew, Miss, iv. 541Carry Henry iv. 240Clifton, John C. iv. 5i9Cli'ie* Henry ii 5S1Crawford, Adair, iii. 494< carleton, Viscous -i, ii.540Clin on, Sir Henry, ii. 435Craig, James Henry, ii. 466Carlisle, Earl of, i. 554Clinton, Sir Henry, ii.90Cn,nii-r,JohiiBaptis'e, iv. 322Carlisle, Sir Anthony, n. 588Active, Lord, ii.74Cramer. William, iv. 545Caruwath, Earl of, i. 175Clive, Catherine, iv 346Cramer, Franc is, iv 548Carpenter, Lord, ii. 23Clonmell, Earl of, ii. 539Reeves, Thomas, i 562Carpue, J. Constantine, ii. 458Cobbett, William, iy. 35Creighton, Robert, iv.511Carr, Sir John, iii. 578Cobham, Viscount, ii. 32Crewe, Bp. of Durham, i. 481Carrol, Sir VV. darker, ii. 492Cobham, Thomas, iv. 570Croft, Sir Richard, ii. 445Cane, Thomas, iii. 522Cochrane, Sir A. Innlis, ii. 222Croft, William, iv. 231Carteret, Philip, iii. 460Cochrane, 1 ord, ii. 247Cromartie, Earl of, i. 192Carter, Elizabeth. iii. 537Carter Thomas iv 526Cochrane, John Uundas, iii.474Crossdill, John. iv. 546Crotch William iv 275Cartwr'ight.John, ivesCockl.i.rn, George, ii. 532Crouch, Anna Maria, iv. 287Carver, Jonathan, iii 451r.ulri-.g.on. Sir Edw. ii. 242Croxall, Samuel, iii. 521Cates, Mark, iii. 478Coffin, Sir Isaac, ii. 519Cruikxhank. William, ii 575Athwart, Earl, ii. 472Cogan, Thomas, iv. 48Criiikshank, George, iv 226Catley, Ann, iv. 283Coke, Thomas William, iv. 50Sullen, William, ii 388Cavalry, Tiberius, iii. 496Coil-heater, Lord, i. 558Cumberland, Bishop, i. 431Cave, Edward, iii. 525Cole, Sir G. Lowry, ii. 487Cumberland, Richard, iii. 550Cavendish, Henry, iii. 186Coleridge, Sam Taylor, iii.424Cunningham, Allan, iii. 685Centlivre, Su anna, iii. 512Collins, William, iii. 344Curran, John Philpot.ii. 306Chandos, Duke of, i. 534Collins, Anthony, iii. 277Currie, James, ii. 431Chalmers, Thomas, i. 582Collins. Peter, iii. 479Curtis, Sir Roger, ii. 215Chalmers, George, iii. 560Collingwood, Lord, ii. 211Curtis, Job n.ii. 583Challoner, N. B. iv. 550Collingwood, Thomas, ii. 428Cm tis, William, iii. 492Chambers, .Sir Robert, ii. 297Colman, G. the elder, iii. 362Curwrn, J. Christian, iv.475Chambers, Sir William, iv. 194Colors, Sir John, ii 512Cutler, Win. Henry, iv. 532Chamberlain, Hu*h,ii.363Colquhoun, Patrick, iv. 473Chandler, Samuel, i 428Cotton, Caleb, iii. 582Dale, Samuel, iii. 475Chandler, Kit-hard, iii. 4 r 3Combe, Hares Christian!. 556Dalhousie, Earl of, ii. 436Chantrey, Francis, iv. 178Combermere, Lord, ii. 493Dallas, Sir Robert, ii. 54:iChapman, Edmund, ii 555Congreve, William, iii. 275Dalrymple, Sir Hew, ii. 95Chapom-, Hester, iii. 547Coiiiiiffsby, Earl of, i. 530Dalzell, Andrew, iii. 567Charke, Charlotte, iv 555Conway, Marshal, ii. 61Darner, Anne Seymour, iv. 498Claremont, Earl of, i. 544Conybeare, Bp. of Bristol, i. 499Darby, John, iv. 521Charnock, John, iii. 572Cook, Captain James, iii. 33Dance, George, iv. 503Chatham, Earl of, i. 300Cooke, George, iv. 509Dan.,eley,J.Fa(ham,iY.531Chatham, Karl of, ii. 474Cooke, George Fred, iv.396Dartmouth, Earl of, i. 557Chatterton, Thomas, iii. 393Cooke, T. P. iv 450Darwin, Erasmus, iii. 360Chiselled, William, ii. 376Cooke, Benjamin, iv. 514Daubed, Archdeacon, i.513Chesterfield, Earl of, i 296Cooke, Thomas, iv. 539Davenport, Mary Anne, iv. 414Chester, Robert, ii. 578Cooks, George, ii. 473Davies,CeciIia, iv. 534Cheyne, George, ii. 370Conte, Sir Fire, ii. 80Davison, Maria, iv. 5?0Chisholm, Edmund. 491Cope, Sir John, ii. 43Davy, Sir Humphrey, iii. 233Christian, Sir Hugh, ii. 507Folkestone, Bp. Llandaff, i. 526Davy, John, iv. 26?Chin-hill, Charles, iii 354Copley, John Singleton, iv.83Dawe, George, iv. 136Ciancliettini, Piu, iv. 533Coppice, Thomas, i. 478Dawes, Abp of York, i. 493Cihlit-r. Colley, iii. 267Corbet!, William, iv. 542Dawson, James, i 479Cibber,TheophiIu,iv 56aCornish, Sir Samuel, ii. ISODay, Thomas, iii 566Cibber, Sns. Maria, iv.353Corn wallis, Marquess, ii. SJDeare.John. iv. 174Cipriani, J. Baptist, ir. 484Cornwallis, William, ii. 205De Courcy, Hon. Mich. ii. 514Clarke, Samuel, i 212Cosway, Richard, iv. 93Peering, Charles, iii. 480Clarke, Adam, i. 4C.2Cotes, Roger, iii. 478Defoe, Daniel, iii. 247Clarke, Matthew, i. 5<7Cotton, Sir Charles, ii. 510Delay, Dean of Down, i. 496Clarke, Edw. Daniel, iii. 52Courtesy. John. i. 543Denham, Sir J. Stewart, ii. 467GENERAL INDEX.Deuham, Lieut-col. iii. 1">Eldon, Lord, ii. 31SForrest, Robert, iv. ISODenham, Sir J. Stewart, iv. 17Ell<-nbrough, Lord, ii. 316Forsier,Thi.ni!M,i. 175Penman, Thomas, ii. 343Elliott, Sir Gilbert. Bart, i.556Forster, Gorge, iii.48Delian, Thomas, ii. 400Elliott, John, ii. 505Foster, James, i. 573Dennis John, iii. 509Ellison, John, ii. 587Foster, Mr Michael, ii. 535Durham. William, i. 485Ellis, Henry, iii. 459Fothr.,.ill, Anthony, ii. 570Derwentwater, Karl of, i . 182Ellis, John, iii. 482Fotbergili, John, ii. 385Depart, Edw. Marcus, ii. 468Ellison, Robert Wm. iv. 413Fox, Charms James, i. 345Dibdiu, Churls, iv.255Litany John. iv. 475Francis, Sir Philip, i. 336Dick, Sir Alexander, ii. 381Klmsley, Peter, iii. 578Francis, Philip, iii 5:Dickons, Maria, iv. 302Emerson, William, iii. 138Franklin, Sir John, iii. 78Dickson, Serjeant!. 478Emery, John, iv. 423Franklin. Benjamin, iii. 142Digby, lion. Robert, ii. 502Emlyn, Henry, iv. 502Freeman, William, ii. 508Digges, West, iv. 556Knfirld, William, iii. 559Friend, John, ii. 375Dignum, Charles, iv. 286Erskine, Ebenezer, i 570Fronde, Philip, iii. 520Distal, Thomas, ii. 562Erskine, Henry, ii. 542Furneaux, I h, lip, i. 577Disney, John, i. 494Erskine, Lord, ii. 313Fuseli, Henry, iv. 90Disney. John, i. 580Essex, Timothy, iv. 528Dodd, William, i. 244Etty, William, iv. 150Gage, Thomas, ii. 67Dodd, George, iii 504Eus.len, Lawrence, iii. 519Gainsborough, Thomas, iv. 73Dodd, Ralph, iii. 503Evatis, John, i. 570Gale, John, i. 5.69Dodd, J.W.iv. 561Evans, John, i. 581Gallway.Ear) of, ii. 21Doddridge, Phillip, i. 429Evans, Sir W. David, ii. 547Gait, John, iii. 581Dudley, Robert, iii. 529Mouth, Viscount, ii. 218Gambier, Lord, ii. 517Doguet, Thomas, iv. 553Eyre, James, ii. 537Gaston, J ames, iv. 503Holland, John, iii. 150Gardiner, Colonel, ii. 46Don, Sir George, ii. 470Falconhridge, Alex. iii. 463Gardiner, Lord, ii. 509Donoughmore, Earl of, i. 557Falconer, William, ii. 416Garnett, Thomas, iii. 498Dunoughmore, Earl of, ii. 475Falconer, William, iii. 549Garrick, David, iv. 349Dorchester, Lord, ii. 71Fanning, Edmund, ii. 465Narrow, Sir William, ii.322Dough*, James, ii. 554Farington, George, iv.494Garth, Sir Samuel, iii. 256Douglas, John, iii. 541Farmer, Richard, iii. 553Hartshorn, Maxwell, ii. 399Douglass, Charles, ii. 506Farren, Miss, iv. 405Gatti,Mr. iv. 5f>!)Douglass, Sir James, ii. 499Farren, W billiard, iv. 450Gay, John, iii. 290DowtoD, William, iv. 115Faulkner, Robert, ii. 521Gtddes, Alexander, iii. 555D'Oj ley, George, i. 525Fawcett, William. ii.4G3Gib, A<<am, i. 576Draper, Sir William, ll. 62Fawcett, John, iv. 416Gibbon, Inward, iii. 369Drummond, Sir Wm. iii. 573Feare, Charles, ii. 543Gibbons, Grinling.iv. 163Drury, Wm. O'Brien, ii. 520Teuton, Elijah, iii. 520Gibbs , Sir Victory, ii. 318Drury, Robert, iii. 457Ferguson, James, iii. 159Gibl-s, James, iv. 188Grander, Jonas, iii. 493Ferguson, Adam, iv. 24Gibbs, Mrs. iv. 566Dubourg, Matthew, iv. 543Festing, Michael, iv. 543(sins. n, lip. ol London, 1.209Duckworth, Sir J. Thus. it. 209Fielding, Henry, iii. 302Giilbrd, Lord, ii. 350Duigenaii, Patrick, i. 546Fife, Earl of, iv. 471Gifford, William, iii. 405Duncan, Viscount, ii. 199Fisher, Up. of Salisbury, i 516Milton, Charts, iii. 511Duncan, Andrew, sen. ii. 575Fisher, John Abraham, iv. 520Gill, John, 1.572Duncan, Daniel, ii. 553Fitzgerald .Lord Edward, n 479Gilpin, Sawney, iv.485Buncombe, William, iii 524Fitilienry, Mrs. iv. 557Girtin, Thomas, iv. 132Dundas, Sir David, ii. 89Fitzpatrick, Richard, i. 553Gisborne, Thomas, i. 521Dundonald, Earl of, iv. 474I itzailham, Earl, 1.553Gienbervir, Lord, ii. 540Dupuis,T Saunders, iv. 545IVIJrf**ir Thftmo* ;:; CATFlamsteed, John, iii. 107Glover, Richard, iii. 535Glover, Julia, iv. 433u uriey, 1 noraas, 111. 507Dyer, John, iii. 527Fleet* good, Bishop of Ely, i.485Gottcnch, Viscount, i. 417Fleming, Caleb, i. 574Godwin, William, iii. 409Eager, John, iv. 543Fletcher, John William, i.579Godwin, Mary, iii. 416Earlom, Richard, iv. 508Fletcher, Andrew, iv. 14Goldsmith, Oliver, iii. 351East, Sir Edward Hyde, ii. 548Flinders, Matthew, iii. 59Gooch, Robert, ii. 456Eccles, John, iv. 512Foley, Sir Thomas, ii. 526Goose, John Mason, ii. 448Edgeworth, Richard, iii. 561Folkes, Martin, iii. 125Gordon, Lord, i. 555Edridge, Henry, iv. 496Foote, Jesse, ii. 5/4Gou^h, Richard, iii. 553Edwards, Thomas, i. 508Foote, Samuel, iv. 559Gow, Neil, iv. 315Edwards, George, iii. 128Foote, Maria, iv.577Gw, Nathaniel, iv. 321Edwards, William, ir. 601Edwards, Edward, iv. 483Forbes, Lord, i. 1/9Gra.idon, Miss, iv. 542Edwin, John, iv. 385Fordyce, George, ii. 408Graft" , Chas. Duke of, i. 2e3GENERAL INDEX.Graham, George, iii. 476Narrowly, Earl o^.i. 560Holmes, Dean of Winches, i.518Grainger, James, iii. 544Hart, Joseph, iv. 533Home, John, iii. 545Granny, Marquess of, ii. 65Hart, Sir Anthony, ii. 550Home, Sir Everard, ii. 584Granger, Jane, iii. 536Hartley, David, iii. 140Hone, Nathaniel, iv. 485Grant, Charles, i 552Haywood, Edward, i. 573Hood, Sir Samuel, ii. 233Grant, Colquhoun, i. 4/9Hastings, Marquess of, ii. 99Hood. Viscount, ii. 188Grant, Sir William, ii. 328Hazard, William, iv. 554Hook, James, iii. 576G rant ley , Lord, ii. 285Hawes, William, ii. 409Hook, James, iv. 520Granville, Earl of, i. 289Hawes, William, iv. 279Hooke, Nathaniel, iii 529Grattan, Henry, i. 361Hawke, Lord, ii. 171Hole, John, iii. 547Graves, Lord, ii. 195Hawker, Robert, i. 519Hooper, Bishops of Bath, i. 484Gray, Thomas, iii. 331Hawkesworth, John. iii. 330Hope. John. iii. 176Greatorex, Thomas, iv. 261Hawkins, Sir John, iii. 538Hop, Sir William, ii. 528Green, Valentine, iv. 507Hawley, Major-general, ii.48Hopetown, Earl of, ii. 4S1Greene, Maurice, iv. 241Haydon, Richard lien iv. 141Hoppner, John, iv. 115Gregory, James, ii. 582Hayes, Philip, iv. 519Home, Bp of Norwich, i. 247Gregory, John, iii. 544Hayes, William, iv. 514Horner, Francis, i. 565Grenville, George, i. 306Hogarth, John, ii. 411Hornby, Thomas, iii. 490Grenville, Lord, i. 393Hayley, William, iii 5f,3Horsey, Bp.of St.Asaph, i. 250Grey, Earl, ii. 81Hanau, Francis, iv. 482Horsley, William, iv. 274Grey, Earl, i. 394Hazlitt, William, iii. 396Hosier, Francis, ii. 497Grew, Richard, I. 228Hearne. Samuel, iii. 45Hoste, Sir William, 4i.2fi2Grew, Zachary, i. 498Hrarne, Thomas, iii 517Gotham, Sir Henry, ii. 267Grierson, Constantia, iii.531Hearne, Thomas, iv. 492Houston, Major, iii. 42Grimaldi, Joseph, iv. 429Heathfield, Lori), ii. 53Howard. John, iii. 28Grosvenor, John, ii. 57?Heber.Bp. of Calcutta, i. 262Howard, Samuel, iv. 544Guest, George, iv. 547Heberden, William, ii. 333Holden, Baron, ii.4.9Guest, Jokhua.il. 461Guildford Earl of i. 315Hemans, Felicia, iii. 586Howe, Earl, ii. 193Howe Viscount ii 68Henniker. Sir Fred. iii. 473Howley.Archnis'li'p, 1.523Hadley, John, HI. 478Henry, Robert, iii. 53SHuddart, Jose-ph, iii. 464Hague, Charles, iv. 272Henry, Thomas, iii. 200Huddesford, George, iii. 5<7Heighten, John, ii. 52Herring, Archbishop, i. 223Hudson, Thomas, iv. 481Hales, Lord. ii. 538Herschel, Sir William, iii. 211Hudson, William, iii. 486Hales, Stephen, iii. 477Hervey, James, iii. 325Hughes, John, iii. 516Afford, Sir Henry, ii. 451Hervey, Lord John, i 538Hughes, Sir Edward, ii. 11Halifax, Earl of, i. 531Heseltine, James, iv. 5421 lull,, k, Sir John, ii. 548Hall. Captain Basil, iii. 473Hewson, William, ii. 571Hulme, Nathaniel, it. 5/0Hall, John, iv. 507Hey, \\ william, ii. 406Hume, Davicl, iii. 320Hall, Robert, i. 463Heywood, Peter, ii. 531Hume, Joseph!. 564Hall. Robert, ii. 585Hick, s, George, iii. 505Humphrey, Ozias, iv. 101Halley, Edmund, iii. 110Highmore, Joseph, iv. 58Hunt, Leigh, iii. 584Hamilton, Gavin, iv. 491Hill, Aaron, iii. 283Punter, Alexander, iv. 473Hamilton, William, iv. 493Hill, George, ii. 288Hunter, John, ii. 395Hammond, James, iii. 533Hill, Lord, ii. 142Hunter, William, ii. 392Handel, Geo. Fred. iv. 232Hill, Rowland!. 460Huntington, William!. 455Hanway, Jonas, iii ISHill, Sir John, iii. 536Huntley, Francis, iv. 571Harcourt, Earl i f, ii.466Hill, Sir Richard, Bart i 546Hurd. Up. ff Worcester!. 243Harcourt, Viscount, ii. 533Hildesley, Bishop, i. 501Huskisson, William, i. 400Harding, George, ii. 300Hinchcliffe, Bishop, i. 508Hutcheson, Francis, iii. 130f lardwicke, Lord, ii. 278Bishop, Sir Thomas, Ii. 481Hutchinson. John Held, i. 543Hardy, Sir Thomas, ii. soHotly, Bp. of Winches. I. 214HntchiiiM.il, John, iii 118Hare, Bp. of Chichester, i.493Hadley, Benjamin, iii. 530Hutton, Charles, iii. 2U9Hr.re, James, i. 555Hobday, W m. Afield, iv. 129Hutton, James, iii. 178Hargrave, Francis, ii. 293Hodgson, Studholm, ii. 463Iluxham, John, ii. 559Harley, John Print, iv. 4. r >3Hogarth, William, iv. 60Harlow, George Henry, iv. 147Hogg, James, iii. 432Ibbetson, Julius Caesar, iv 493Hai-lowe, Mrs. iv. 566Holcroft, Thomas, iii. 385nchbald, Elizabeth, iii. 410Harrington, Henry, iv. 517Holland, Charles, iv. 558iicL-don, Ben. Charles, iv. 289Harris, James, iii. 481Holland, Henry, Lord, i. 299ii-j.-nhou/., John, iii. 486Harris, John, iii. 476Holland, H.Rich.Lord.i. 414ring, Edward, i. 463Harris, Lord, ii. 93Ilollis, Thomas, iii. 23rain, Eyes, iii. 465Harmon, John, iii. 129Holloway, Thomas, iv. 217sham, John, iv. 513Harrison, Samuel, iv. 284Holman, Joseph Geo. iv. 406ives, Edward, iii. 460Harris-n, Thomas, iv. 503Holmes, Charles, ti. 498i584 GENERAL INDEX.Jackson.Dean of Christen, i.514King, Charles, iv. 512Lewis, William, iii. 464Jackson, John, iv. 135King, Lord, ii. 534Lewis, William Tho. i.3S4Jackson, Handle, ii. 548King, Richard, i. 518Liar, Matthew, iv. 506Jackson, Robert, ii. 580King, Thomas, iv 365Clifford, Viscount, ii. 536Jackson. William, iv. 246King, William, iii 503Ligo,,ierEar),ii.45Jacob, Benjamin, iv. 324Kingsley, William, ii. 465Ligonier, Francis, ii. 463James, Bp. of Calcutta, i. 527Kingsmill, Sir Robert, ii. 506Lille, George, iii 526James, Robert, ii. 380Kippis, Andrew, iii. 545Lind, James, ii. 577Jay, William, i. 4-7Kirby, John Joshua iv. 43Lindley, Hubert, iv 323Ebb, John, iii. 554Kirkland, Thomas, ii. 567Lindsey, Theophilus, i. 449Ebb, Sir Richard, ii. 568Kirwan, Dean ot Killala, i. 259Linley, Francis, iv. 548Jeffrey, Francis, ii. 345Close, F. J. iv 532Linley, Thomas, iv, 247Jekyll, Joseph, ii. 305Kneller, Sir Godfrey, iv. 57Linley, Thomas, iv. 522Jenner, Edward, ii. 422Knight, Edward, iv. 4'20Liston, Mr. iv. 427Jennings, Sir John, ii. 151Knight, Thomas A. iv. 477Liverpool, Chas. Earl of, i 310Jenyns, Some, iii. 530Knight, Sir William, ii. 5S5Liverpool, R. B. Earl of, i 413Jervas, Ch-rules, iv. 4/9Knowles, Sir C. II. Bart. ii. 516Livers-ge, Henry, iv. 161Johnson, Samuel, iii. 308Knowles, James, S. iii 5S4Lloyd, Bishop of Oxford, i. 526Johnson, Sir William, ii. 52Knowles Sir Charles, ii. 169Lloyd, Robert, iii. 551Johnstonee, Chevalier de. i. 478Knox, Vicesimns, iii. 5:>9Lobo, Theophilus, ii. 554Johnstonee, Charles, iii. 550Knyvett, Charles, iv. 536Locatelli, John Baptist, iv. 199Johnstonee, George, ii. 185Knyvett, William, iv. 533Lockhart Ross, Sir John, ii. 501Johnstonee, James, ii. 569Laing, Alex Gordon, iii. 91Loft, Cape, iii. 569.lone, Richard, iv. 417Lake, Viscount, ii. 92Londonderry, Marq. of, ii. 144Jones, Sir William, iii. 387Lamb, Charles, iii. 680Long, Richard Ballard, ii. 486Jones, William, i. 507Lancaster, Joseph, iv. 42Long, Roger, iii. 477Jones. William, iii. 120Landed, John, iii. 173London, John Claudius, iv. 477Jordan, Dorothy, iv. 409Lander, Richard Leman, iii. 65Louis, feir Thomas, Bart. ii. 524Fortin, Archdd. of London, i 233Ganglion, John, iii. 552Louthcrbourg, 1'. J. de iv. 490Turin, James, ii. 555Lansdown, I ord, iii. 511Lovat, Lord, i. 169Lausdowne, H. Marq. of, i. 416Lovcgrove, William, iv. 568Kame, Lord, iv. 15Vanstone, W. Marq. of, i, 332Lowe, Sir Hudson, ii. 490Kauffraan, Angelica, iv. 489Lanza, Gesualdo, iv 528Low man, Moses, i. 570Kate, bishop of Lincoln, i. 526Lard ner, Nathaniel, i. 427Lowry, Wilson, iv. 224Kean, Edmund, iv. 437Nathan, John, ii 585Loath, Bp. of London, i. 238K.-ats, John, iii. 583La Trope, Christian I. iv. 523Loath, Will: m, i.486Keats, Sir Richard, ii. 510Lauderdale, Earl of, i. 559Lucas, iii. 467Kreley, Robert, iv. 5/5Laurence, Thomas, ii. 3S4Lnmley, Sir William, ii. 483Neil, James, ii. 554L::vingtoo, Bp. of Exeter i. 495Burlington, Stephen, ii. 359Kill, John, iii. 117Law, Bishop of Carlisle, i. 234Lyndhurt, Lord, ii. 340Keith, James, i. 476Law, William, i. 497I.ynedoch, Lord, ii. 476K. with. Viscount, ii. 207Lawrence, French, ii. 54G1 yon, Francis, iii. 85Kelly, Frances Maria, iv 454Lawrence, John; iv 4.6Lytteltoii, Lord, i. 304Kelly, Hugh, iii. 557Lawrence, Sir Sudden, il. 547Macartney" Karl iii. 40Kelly, Michael, iv. 263Kemble, Charles, iv. 422Leach, Sir John-ii 341Macbride, David, ii 567Kemble, Geo. Stephen, iv. 564I cake, John, ii 569Maccartney, General, ii.30Kemble, John, iv. 399Leake, Sir John, ii. 149Macclesfield, Earl of, ii. 274Kemble, Mrs. Charles, iv. 566Edward, John, iii. 47Macdiarmid, John, iii. 581Kempenfelt, Richard, ii. 1-3Lee, Samuel, i i 585Macdonald, Angus, i. 477Kenmnre, Viscount, i. 165Lee, Sophia, iii. 564Macdonald, Flora, i. 480Bennett, Bp. Peterboro 1 , i. 203Leeds, Duke of, ii. 497Macdonald, Lord, iv. 473Kenney, James, iii. 680Legal, Francis, iv. 503Macdonald, Sir A. Bart. ii. 542Kennicotl, Benjamin, i. 241Leland, John, i. 572Macgregor, Malcolm, i. 4/8Herrick, William, iii. 546Leland, Thomas, iii. 543Mat-kay, Robert, ii. 482Knit, James, iv 515lempriere.John, i i. 573Mackellar, John, ii. 241Kent, Will m, iv. 190Lens, John, ii. 546Mackenzie, Henry. iii. 5G2Kenyon, Lord, ii. 292Leslie, Charles Robert, iv. 159Mackenzie, Sir Alex. iii. 463Keppel. Hon. G. T. iii. 4/4Leslie, John, iii 499Jackie, John, ii. 4C1Keppel, Viscount, ii. 190Stock, Richard, ii. 161Mackintosh, Brigadier, i. 178Kelt, Henry, i.522Lettsom, John Oakley, ii. 417Mackintosh, Sir James, ii. 331Kiallmark, E. iv. 549Levrtt. Robert, ii. 558Macklin, Charles, iv.337Kil narnoch, Earl of, i. 188Lewes.^Charle* Lee, iv 559Maclaurin, Colin, iii. 134Kil jvardeu, Viscount, il. 533Lewis, Matthew G. iii. 573Carnally, Leonard, ii. 545GENERAL INDEX. 5S5Ma. pierson. James, iii. 556Middleton, Confers, i. 218Neal, Sir H. Bernard, ii. 251Macready, Wm. Chas. iv-152Middleton, Viscount, ii. 533Needham, John T. iii. 483M'( earthy, Sir Charles, ii. 496Millar, John, iv. 27Necle, Henry, iii. 587M'Culloch, Jh,. R. iv. 469Miller, Edward, iv. 545Nelson, Viscount, ii. 223Maddox, Bp. of Forces. i 501Miller, philip, iv. 470Newton, Bp. of Bristol, i. 236Ma.lo.-ks, Win. Alex. iv. 478Milan, Sir Francis, ii. 577New ton, John, i. 506Magee,Archb. of Dublin, i.523Milne, Sir David, ii. 525Newton, Sir Isaac, iii. 101Maitland, Fred. Lewis, ii. 263Miller, Dean of Carlisle, iii.495Newcastle, Duke of, i. 294Maitland, Sir Thomas, ii. 4/7Miller, Jos-ph. i. 512Nicholl,Sir John, ii. 323Major, Thomas, iv. 505Wordsworth, Viscount, i. 530Nichols, Frank, ii. 557Malcolm, Sir John, ii. 141Monckton. Robert, ii. 70Nichols, John, iii. 561Malcolm. Sir Pulteney, ii 255Money, John, ii. 97Nicholson, William, iii 496MtvXi-t, David, iii. 528Monro, Alex, the elder, ii. 378Nithisdale. Earl of, i. 187Malone, Edmund, iii. 559Monro, Alex. the younger, ii 401Nolan, Michael, ii. 550Malthus, Thomas Root. iv. 44Monro, John, ii. 564Nollekens, Joseph, iv. 168Many, Thomas, ii. 531Mousey, Messenger, ii. 556Norlmry, Earl of, ii. 301Manley, Mrs. iii. 513Montagu, Ed. Worsley, iii. 458Norfolk, Duke of, j 550Manners, Lord, ii. 323Montagu, George, ii. 511Norris, Charles, iv. 534Manning-ham, Sir Rich. ii. 561Montagu, Lady M. W Hi. UNorris, Sir John, ii 158Manse, Bp. of Bristol, i. 518Montague, Basil, ii. 551Northcote, James, iv. 103Mansfield, Earl, ii. 279Montague, Edward, ii. 473Northern, Earl of, ii.olsMansfield, Sir James, ii. 298Montague, Elizabeth, iii. 539Norton. Caroline E S.iii. 5S3Man, Bishop of Down, i. 525Montgomery, James, iii. 430Not, John, iii. 69Mapletoft, John, ii. 553Montrrssor, Ser Henry, ii. 103Novello, Vincent, iv. 529Mar, Earl of, i. 172Moody, John, iv. 556Market, Alexander, iii. 500Moore, Edward, iii. 535O'Beirne, Bp.ofM ath.i S16Mnrchmont, Earl of, i. 529Moore, Jo'?n, iii. 549Ochterlony, Sir David, ii. 102Mardjrn, Mrs. iv. 573Moore. Sir John, i. 106O'Connell, Daniel, ii. 347Marischal, Earl, i. 171Moore. Th-mas, iii. 436Ogden, Samuel, i. 505Marlborough. C. Duke of, ii. 50Mordent, Lord, ii. 536Ogle, SiirC ha loner, sen. ii. 163Marlborough, J. Duke of, ii. 9More, Hannah, iii. 564Ogle, Sir Chaloner, ii. 505Marsh, Bp. of Peterboro', i.521Morgan, Lady, iii. 575Oglethorpe, General, ii. 43Marsh, J. iv. 521Mori, Nicholas, iv. 551O'Hara, Kane, iii. 534Marshall, Andrew, ii. 414Morland, George, iv. 119O'Keefe, John, iii. 535Marshall, William, iv. 473Mornings, Earl of, iv. 248Oldfield, Anne, iv. 336Martin, Benjamin, iii. 481Morris, Sir Jas. Nicol, ii. 526Oldmixon, John, iii. 514Martin, John, iv. 156Mortimer, John H-amil ton, iv.95Oldmixon, Lady, iv. 536Martin, Sir T. Beam, ii. 252Morton, Thomas, iii. 576O'Neill, Miss, iv. 457Martin, John, iii. 137Moseley, Benjamin, ii. 571Onslow, Arthur, i. 537Marty n, Thomas, iii. 207Moser, George Vk-hael, iv. 482Ontlow, Arthur, ii. 330Masters, F. Baron, iii. 483Moss, Dean of Ely, i. 490Onslow, Richard, ii. 509Masklelyne, Nevil, iii. 137Mossop, Henry, iv. 364Opie, Amelia, iii. 577Mason, John, i. 575Mount l-dgecumbe. Earl, ii. 501Opie, John, iv. 117Mason, William, iii. 347Mountain,. Sarah, iv. 293Orford, Earl of, i. 272Mathews, Charles, iv. 423Mti.lpr, John, iii. 485Orford, Earl of, ii.147Mathews, Thomas, ii. 157Mulgrave, Earl of, ii. 472Orger, Mrs. iv.571Maton, Win. George, ii. 587Mulgrave, Lord. iii. 44Orkney, Earl of, ii. 461Mattock*, Isabella, iv. 563Munden Joseph, iv. 401Ormond, Duke of, i. 166Maurice, Thomas, iii. 571Munro, Sir. Bart. ii. 477Orton.Job.i 576Maxwell, Sir Murray, ii. 264Murphy, Arthur, iii. 548Oswald, Sir John, ii. 484Mayo, Herbert, ii. 587Murray, Alexander, iii. 579Otway, Robert Walter, ii.ftfMazzini, Joseph, iv 524Murray, Charles, iv. 563Owen, Robert, iv. 37Mead, Richard, ii. 372Murray, Lindley, iii. 564Owen, William, iv. 125Melos, Sir William, ii. 86Murray, Lord Charles, i 476Oxberry, William, iv. 435Welcome, Lord, i. 293Murray, Lord George, i. 189Oxford & Mortimer, Earl, i. 265Mellon, Miss. iv. 567Murray, Sir George, ii. 113Melmoth, William, iii. 533Margrave, William, iii. 510Pack, Sir Denis, ii. 491Melville, Robert, ii. 464Mylue, Robert, iv. 502Paine, Thomas, iii. 3/3Melville, Account, i.335Pa'ev. Arehd. of Carlisle, i.255Men.lip, Lord, i. 540Nagle,SirEHirund,ii.517Palliser, Sir Hugh, ii. 187Merrimac, Samuel, ii. 452Nairn, Lord, i. 166Palmer, John, i. 578Merry, Robert, iii. 571Research of Carlisle, iii.570Palmer, John, iv. 381Methuen, Sir Paul, i. 533Ores, Jar., iv. 515Park, Mungo, iii. 55Middleton, Bp. Calcutta, i.524Nathan, Isaac, iv. 280Parke, John, iv. 546MidUleton.Chrisiopher, iii. 458Neal, Daniel, i.569Parke, William Thos. iv. 3195 8C GENERAL INDEX.Parker, Richard, ii. 523Poplar, Sir H. Riggs, ii. 235Richardson, Samuel, iii. 292Parker, Sir 11. senior, ii. 178Person, Richard, iii. 418Richmond, Duke of, i. 54;Parker, Sir H. junior, ii. 204Porter, Anna Maria, hi 583Richmond, Legs, i. 5.'5Parker, Sir Peter, ii. 503Porter, Jane, iii. 583Rugby, Edward, ii. 573Parker, Sir Peter, ii. 582Porteus, Bp. of London, i. 249Rugby, Richard, i. 543Park, Samuel, ili. 496Portland, Duke of, i. 334Ring, John, ii.581Parkinson, Richard, iv. 478Pott, A'cbd. of London, i. 522Ritchie, Joseph, iii 472Parnell, Sir Henry, iv. 468Point, Percival, ii. 339Robertson, Joseph, iii. 547Parnell, Thomas, iii. 518Potter, Abp. of Caiiterb. i. 211Robertson, William, iii. 336Parr, Samuel, iii. 389Potter, Cipriani, iv. 532Collins, Benjamin, iii. 152Parry, Caleb Hillier, ii. 429Lovey, Miss, iv. 541Robinson, Mrs. iv. 403Parry, John, iv. 276Powell, Archdeacon, i. 505Robinson, Robert, i. 451Parr, Sir Wm. Ed. iii. 87Powell, Richard, ii. 455Robinson, Sir Chris ii. 549Parry, William, iv. 491Powell, Thomas, iv. 546Robinson, John, iii. 213Pin, William, iv. 491Powell, William, iv. 558Robson, George Fennel, iv. 152Parson*, James, Ji. 332Powell, Thomas, iv. 18Roche, Sir Boyle, Bart, i 548Parsons, Sir M william, iv. 521Provost, Sir Geo. Bart. ii. 483Rockingham, Marq. of, i. 3i9Parsons, William, iv. 374Price, James, iii. 491Roddam, Robert, ii. 503Parley, Sir Thomas, ii . 202Price, Richard, iv. 20Rodney, Lord, ii. 181Palette, Lord, i. 533Priestley, Joseph, iii. 189Rogers, Samuel, iii. 573Paul, James, i. 563Prince, Sir John, iii. 151Rogers, Woods, iii. 457Peake, Rd. Hrinsley, iii. 586Prior, Matthew, iii. 254Romaine, William, i. 240Pearce, Bp. of Rochester, i. 222Pritchard, Hannah, iv. 348Homily, Sir Samuel, ii.324J Wee, Nathaniel, iii. 57Procter, Thomas, iv. 499Romney, George, iv. 76Pearman, William, iv. 540Puller, Sir Christopher, ii. 551Roscoe, William, iii. 402Pearson, George, ii. 580Pulteney, Richard, iii. 183Rose, George, i. 550Peel, Sir Robert, i. 418Purvis, John Child, ii. 515Roseingrave, Thomas, iv. 513Peggy, Samuel, iii. 529Purkis, John, iv. 326Ross, David, iv. 557Pelham, Henry, i. 298Pye, Henry James, iii. 563Ross, Robert, ii. 488Pemberton, Henry, ii. 556Grossly, Earl, ii. 291Pen n, William, iv. 11Quick, John, iv. 383Roubiliac, L. Francis, iv. 165Pennant, Thomas, iii 180Quin, James, iv. 341Rone, Mizalieth, iii. 515Penny, Edward, iv. 482Rowe, Nicholas, iii. 276Pepusch, John, Christ, iv. 511Radcliffe, Ann, iii. 574Rowley, Sir Charles, ii. 259Perceval, Spencer, i. 391Radcliffe, John, ii. 363Rowley, Sir Josiah, ii. 240Penal, Thomas, ii. 412Radstock, lord, ii. 518Rowley, Sir .Joshua, ii 507Percy, Bp. of Promote, iii. 547Rae, Alexander, iv. 432Rowley, William, ii. 573Perry, James, iii. 571Rae, Sir David, ii. 287Roxburgh, William, iii. 229Perth, Earl of, i. 192Raeburn, Sir Henry, iv. 110Ruddiman, Thomas, iii. 515Peterborough, Countess, iv. 282Raffles, Sir T. Stamford, iii. 67Rumford, Count, iv. 52Peterborough, Earl of, ii. 24Ramsay, Allan, iii. 522Runciman, Alexander, iv. 487Phillips, Ambrose, iii. 514Ramsay. Allan, iv. 64Huntington, Charles, ii. 544Eb'llips, Charles, ii. 552Ramsay, Andrew Mich. iii. 524Russel, \\ 11 lam, iv. 5411lAiihps, Henry, iv. 311Ramsden, Jesse, iii. 202Russell, Alexander, ii. 563Picott, Sir Arthur, ii . 544Randies, Elizabeth, iv. 552Russell, Lord John, i. 420Islington, Letitia, iii. 534Radcliffe, Charles, i. 18JRussell, Patrick, iii 485Pine, John, iv. 504Raymond, Lord, ii.535Riissell.Siimu-rihomasiv.565Pinkerton, John, iii. 572Rayner, Lionel Ben. iv. 572Russell, T. Macnamara, ii.507Pinto, Thomas, iv. 544Reddish, Samuel, iv. 559Rutherford, Daniel, ii. 427Piozzi, Hester Lynch, iii. 557Pedestal, Lord, ii. 303Rutherford, Archdeacon, i. 503Pitcairn, David, ii. 576Heed, Isaac, iii. 51Rutty, John, ii. 556Pitt, Christopher, iii. 526Knees, Abraham, iii. 384Ryan, Lacy, iv. 553Pitt, William, i. 381Reeve, John, iv. 463Rider, Thomas, iv 5fi4Place, Francis, iv. 504Reeve, William, iv. 524Ryland, Wm. Wynne, iv. 314Play fair, John, iii. 219Reeve., John, ii 321Rysbrach, John Mich. iii. 497Powder, Francis, ii. 547Reid, Thomas, iii. 154Plumer, Sir Thomas, ii. 545Kennel, Thomas, i. 527Sacheverell,IIei,rv,i.210Po.ock, Sir George, ii. 173Rennie, John, iv. 200Sackville, Viscount, ii. 53Pococke, Richard, iii. 16Repton, Humphrey, iv. 475Sadler, Michael Tho. iv. 4f9Pomfret, Samuel, i. 507Reynell, John, iii. 492Sadler, Wm.Windham, iii. 504Pousouby, Francis, ii. 495Reynolds, Sir Joshua, iv. 68Sale, John, iv. 535Ponsonby, George, i. 567Ricardo, David, iv. 43Sal, George, iii. 534I'ope, Alexander, iii. 285Rich, John, iv. 340Salmon, Mary, iv. 303Pope. Maria, iv. 568Richardson, Jonathan, iv. 479Salomon, John Peter, iv. .'.19GENERAL INDEX.Salt, Henry, iii. 61Sims, James, ii. 572Stillingfleet, Benjamin, iii. 480Sandby, Paul, iv. 75Simsoii, Robert, iii. 124Stone, Edmund, iii. 131Sandwich, Earl of, i. 541Sinclair, John, iv. 305Stafford, Sir Robert, ii. 528Sands, Lord, i. 539Sinclair, Sir John, iv. 53Storace, Anna Salina, iv. 294Sapio, Mr. iv. 540Sloane, Sir Hans, iii. 115Storace, Stephen, iv. 266Saumarez, Sir Jane, ii. 217Smalbroke, Bp.Licl.field, i.493Stothard, Chas. Alfred, iv. 143Saunders, Sir Charles, ii. 175Smalridge, Bp. of Bristol!. 48?Stothard, Thomas, iv. 109Sau n 'hers, William, ii. 5/4Smart, Christopher, iii. 346Swell, Lord, ii. 302Sanderson, Nicholas, iii. ilSmart, Henry, iv. 549Astrachan, Sir Richard, ii. 230Savage, Richard, iii. 295Smeaton, John, iii. 1/5Strange, Sir John, ii. 535Savil.e.Sir Geo. Bart. i. 542Nellie, William, ii. 377Strange, Sir Robert, iv. 211Cambridge, George, i. 545Smith. Adam, iv. 23Strathallan, Viscount, i. 183Scarlet, Sir James, ii. 327Smith, Charles, iv. 465Strutt, Joseph, iv. 221Scheemakers, Peter, iv. 49?Smith, Charles, iv. 304Stuart, Charles Edward, i. 153Schomberg, Sir Alex. ii. 504Smith, Charlotte, iii. 55?Stuart, Gilbert, iii. 382Scott, Helens, ii. 584Smith, George, iv. 482Stuart, James, iv. 193Scott, Jams, i. 509Smith, Horatio, iii. 582Stuart, James Fred. Edw. i. 1451 Scott, John, iv. 510Smith, Hugh, ii. 506Stuart, Sir John, ii. 105Scott, Sir Walter, Bart. iii. 425Smith, John Christian, iv. 515Stubbs, George, iv. 488Scott, Thomas, i. 515Smith, John Raphael, iv. 508Stukelry, William, iii. 524Scott, Samuel, iv. 481Smith, John Thomas, iv. 509Sturt, John, iv. 504Second, Mary, ir. 537Smith, Sir James Edw. iii. 230St. Vincent, Earl, ii. 201Seeker, Abp. of Canterbb. i. 225Smith, Sir W. Sydney, ii. 237Sett, Richard, iv. 395Selwyn, Geo. Augustus, i. 542Smith, Wm. Henry, iii. 81Sudden, Sir Edward, ii. 348Senior, Wm. Nassau, iv. 469Smith, William, iii. 468Sunderland, Earl of. i. 270Settle, Elkanah, iii. 506Smith, William, iv. 3G7Sutton, Abp. of Caut-rb. i. 261Seward, Anna, iii. 565Smollett, Tobias Geo. iii. 338Swill, Jonathan, iii. 253Jewel, George, iii. 519Smith, Jas.Carmichael,ii.572Swinburne, Henry, iii. 463Seen our, James, iv. 481Shape, Andrew, i.492Sykes, Arthur Ashley, i. 221Seymour, Sir Michael, ii. 529Sane, John, iv. 198Symes,Lieut. : colonel, iii. 469Shadwell, Sir Launcelot, ii. 552Solander, Daniel Chas. iii 204Sharp, Abraham, iii. 109Somers, Lord, ii. 273Talbot, Bp. of Durham, i. 486Sharp, Granville, iii. 552Somerset, Duke of, i. 532Talbot, Lord, ii. 535Sharp, Samuel, ii. 565Somerset, Lord, ii. 496Tanner, Bp. of St.Asaph, iii. 515Sharp, William, iv. 219Somerville, Lord, iv. 476Tarleton, Banastre, ii. 4/0Shaw, George, iii. 223Somerville, William, iii. 525Tate, Nahum, iii. 509Shaw, Sir Peter, ii. 555South, Robert, i. 482Tatian, William, iv. 466Shaw, Thomas, iii. 13Southern, Thomas, iii. 511Taylor, Brook, iii. 123Shee, Sir Martin Archer, iv. 127Son they, Robert, iii. 433Taylor, Edward, iv. 538Shelley, Percy Bessie, iii. 452Spence, Joseph, iii. 526T lor, Jane, iii. 583Whetstone, William, iii. 326Spence, William, iv. 468Templeman, Peter, ii. 561Shepard. William, iii. 114Spencer, Earl, i. 559Reason, Abp. Canterbb. i 19oSheridan, Rich.Brinsley, i. 364Spencer, Sir Brent, ii. 477Tenant, Smithson, iii. 231Sheridan, Thomas, iii. 521Spoffbrth, Reginald, iv. 526Tenterden, Lord, ii. 329Sheridan, Thomas, iii. 542Packhorse, Thomas, i. 495Terry, Daniel, iv. 431Sherlock, Bp. of London, i. 215Stair, Earl of, ii. 36Theobald, Lewis, iii. 525Sherwin, John Keys, iv. 222Cranfield, Clarkson, iv. 157Thew, Robert, iv. 5C9Shield, William, iv. 267Stanhope, Chaos. Earl of, iii. 496Thicknessee, Philip, iii. 538Shipley, Bp. of St. Asaph, i. 504Stanhope, Earl of, i. 267Thomas, Bp. Salary, i. 499Shipley, Dn of St. Asaph, i. 514Stanhope, Phil. Earl of, iii. 4881 thompson, Sir Thomas, ii. 53(1Shipp,John,ii. 495Stanley, John, iv. 313Thomson, James, iii. 300Shipped, William, i. 533Stark, William, iii. 491Thorn, James, iv. 181Short, James, iii. 492Staunton, Francis, ii. 489Thornborough, Sir Edw. ii. 513Short, Thomas, ii. 558Staunton, Sir Geo. Bart. iii. 462Thornhill, Sir James, iv. 480Shouldham, Molineaux, 11. 499Steele, Sir Richard, iii. 268Thornton, John Robert, iii. 497Shrewsbury, Duke of. i. 530Sleeves, George, iii. 554Threlkeld, Caleb, iii. 4/6Shuterr, Edward, iv. 366Stephens, (Catherine, iv. 307Thurlow. Lord, ii. 294Shuttleworth, Obadiah, iv. 543Stevenson, Sir J. Andrew, iv.262Tickell, Thomas, iii. 523Sil.thorp, John, iii. 227Sterne, Laurence, iii. 323Tierce, George, i. 378Siddons, Mrs. iv. 388Stewart, Sir Henry, iv. 476Tierce, Sir Matthew, ii. 586Sidmouth, Viscount, i. 377Stewart, A. of Invariable, i.476Ifndal, Matthew, iii. 244Hmeon, Sir John, Bart. ii. 549Stewart, Uugald, iii. 224Tindal, Sir Nicholas, ii. 55-JSimmons, Mr. iv. 569Stewart, John. iii. 466Robin, John, iii. 576Simmons, Samuel Koart, ii. 5/6Stewart, Matthew, iii. 170Toland, John, iii. 264Simpson, Thomas, iii. 156Stewart, Sir William, ii. 488Tomline.Bp.WmchesJtr, i.519588 GENERAL INDEX.Tooke, John Home, iii. 363Toplady.Aug.MonUgue, i.511Wellesley, T. Forbes, iv. 530Walpole, Horace, iii. 333Wilkes, John, i. 3)2Wilkie, l)a%id, iv. 139Torrens, Sir Henry, ii. 494Torriiigton, Viscount, ii. 153Toulon, Joshua, i/579Towers, Joseph, iii. 556Osgood, Micajab, i. 5/5Townshend, Charles, i 309Townshend, Marquess, ii. 72Townshend, Viscount, i. 268,Johnson, Archdeacon, i. 504Traps, Joseph, iii. 517Traders, John, iv 515Travis, Archdd. of Chester, !.511Warburton, Bp. Hosier. i. 229Ware, James, ii. 583Waring, Edward, iii. 198Warner, Joseph, ii. 565Warren, Richard, ii. 569Warren, Sir J. Boreas, ii. 210Warren, Sir Peter, ii. 498Wanton, Joseph, iii. 542Wanton, Thomas, iii. 349Waterman, Daniel, i. 217Watson, Bp. of Llandaff, i.252Watson, Charles ii. 4'J9Wilkins, William, iv. 205Wilkinson, 'I ate, iv. 561Wilks, Robert, iv. 331Willan, Robert, ii. 583Williams, Daniel, i. 423Williams, Helen Maria, iii. 574Willis, Rev. Francis, ii. 5<i6Wills, Sir Charles, ii. 461Wilmot, John Hartley, ii. 543Wilmot, Sir John, ii. 536Wilson, Bishop of Sodom, i. 48*Wilson, John, iii. 585Tree, Eben, iv. 5/8Trollop*, Sir Henry, ii. 512Trowbridge, Sir Thomas, ii. 245Trumbull, Sir William, i. 529Tucker, Dean of Gloster, i. 5(/2Turkey, Jas. Kingston, iii. 471Tull, Jethro, iv. 46Tullibaniine, Marq. of, i. 475Turner, James Mallard, iv. 134Watson. Henry, ii. 558Watson, Sir William, iii. 166Watt, James, iii. 205Watts, Isaac, i. 425Waylett, Mrs. iv. 308Webb, Lieut-general, ii. 31Webbe, Samuel, iv. 251Webbe, Samuel, iv. 523Wedgwood, Josiah, iii. 487Wilson, Richard, iv. 66Wilson, Sir Robert Thos. ii. 143Wilton, Joseph, iv. 497Windbam, William, i. 360Wiiuoun, Earl of, i. 181Wiiitringham, Sir C. ii. SCOMitchell, George, iii. 486Withering, William, iii. 491Woffington, Margaret, iv. 35bSwiss, Richard,' iii. 465Tyrawley, Lord, ii. 463Tyler, Sir Charles, ii. 527Welchman, Archdeacon, i. 4S9Weldon, John, iv. 513Wellington, Duke of, ii. 114Wells, Edward, i. 489Woman, Nicholas!. 474Wolcot, John, iii. 378Wolfe, General, ii. 78Wollaston, Wm. Hyde, iii. 4<J8Lewis, Daniel, ii. 536Wells, William Charles, ii. 436Wood, Matthew, i. 563Welsh, Thomas, iv. 52?Wood, Sir George, ii. 540Valencia, Viscount, iii. 470Wesley, Charles, i. 575Wood, Sir James Athol, ii. 52iVanbrugh, Sir John, iv. 186Wslev, Charles, iv. 317Wooddeson, Richard, ii. 541Vancouver, George, iii. 49Wesley, John, i. 433Woo<lville, William, ii. 581Vandyke, Harry Stone, iii. 597Wesley, Samuel, senior, i. 486Woodward, Henry, iv. 354Van Milder, Bishop, i. 523Wesley, Samuel, junior, i. 499Woodward, John, ii. 369Vassal), Lieut-colonel, ii. 486Wesley, Samuel, iv. 269Woohett, William, iv. 216Vaughan, John, iv. 537West, Benjamin, iv. 86Woolstou, Thomas, i. 491Vernon, Edward, ii. 165West, Sir Edward, iv. 468Wootton, John, iv 480Vertue, George, ir. 207West, Gilbert, iii. 532Wykeham. Sir William, i. 53f,Vestris, Madame, iv. thoWest, Mrs. iv. 575Wright, Samuel, i. 571Villette, William Anne, ii. 4?1Wrstmacott, Richard, iv. 17?Wjrnford, Lord, ii. 338Vince, Samuel, iii. 502Weston, Thomas, iv 377Wright, William, ii. 402Vincent, William, iii. 557WVtherell, Sir Charles, ii. 342Wordsworth, William, iii. 422Viner, Charles, ii. 534Wewitzer, Ralph, iv. 503Worgan, John, iv. 314Vivian, Sir Richard Bart. ii. 492U barton, Duke of, i. 477Worledge, Thomas, iv 504Whatever, Thomas, ii. 579Wren, Sir Christopher, iv. latWade, Marshal, ii. 34Wheaten, Francis, iv. 493Wright, Joseph, iv 485Wa K r, Sir Charles, ii. 155Winston, William, i. 206Wright, Richard, iv. 4S6Watchman, Robert, i. 561Whitbread, Samuel, i. 379Wyatt, James, iv. 197Wake, Abp. of Canterbb. i.201Whitby, Daniel, i. 484Wyatville, Sir Jeffry, iv. 2C4Wakefield, Edward, iv 467Whites Henry Kirk, iii. 433Wycherley, William, iii. 241Wakefield, Gilbert, iii. 407White, John, iv. 325Wakefield, Priscilla, iii. 569White, Joseph, iii. 565Yaldeii, Thomas, iii. 513Wales William, iii. 4S8Whitefield, George, i. 443Yates, Frederick, iv. 576Walker, Adam. iii. 489Whitehead, John, ii. 5/9Yates, Mrs. iv. 3/6Walker, George, iii. 490Whitehead, Paul, iii. 532Yates, Mrs iv. 461Walker, Jam., ii. 520Whitehead, William, iii. 536Young, Arthur, iv. 49Walker, John, iii. 551Whitehurst, William, iii. 165Young, Charles, iv. 425Walker, Thomas, iv. 554Whitelocke, John, ii. 475Young, Edward, iii. 279Wall, John, ii. 5iOWhitfield, John Clarke, iv. 527Young, Sir William, iv. 466Wall, Joseph, ii. 466Whittaker, John, iv. 532York, Cardinal, i. 164Wall, Martin, ii. 576W hitworth, Earl, i. 550Yorke, Sir Joseph, ii 256Wallack, James, iv. 459Whytt, Robert, ii. 391Wallis, Captain Sam. iii. 461Warrington, Lord, i. 187Zoffany, John, iv 486Wellesley, Charles, iii. 4-3Wilberforce, William, i 3*97-ouch, Thomas, iii. 555