THEHISTORY OF PARTY;FROM THE RISE OFTHE WHIG AND TORY FACTIONS,IN THE REIGN OF CHARLES II.,TOTHE PASSING OF THE REFORM BILL.GEORGE Mangrove COOKE, Esq.,BARRISTER AT LAW,AUTHOR OF " MEMOIRS OF LORD BOLINOBROKE," &C.VOL. I.1714.A. D. 1666— 1714. V; ^LONDON: ^ VJOHN Machine, ST. JAMES'S SQUARE.MDCCCXXXVI./a-■yWhiting, Beaufort House, Strand.PREFACE.The conduct and revolutions of our two nationalparties occur but incidentally, even in the mostcomprehensive of the general Histories of England :it is the object of the following work to separatethem from the mass of circumstances with whichthey are mingled, and weave them into a connectedand detailed narrative.A review of the principles and practice of thetwo classes of statesmen which alternately govern amighty empire, must, under any circumstances, beinteresting. A contrast of the opposing theories ofgovernment which they profess, of the opportunitieswhich have occurred to each for the developmentof these theories, and of the results obtained,must, in all cases, be instructive. But to a citizenof the state, where these principles of governmentare still in active contest, and where these partiesstill are struggling, such knowledge is indispensable :without it he can look only to the events of thepresent moment, he can trust only to the fallaciousprofessions of individuals ; with it he can deduceinferences from the more certain testimony of seriesof events, and he can contrast the results of theprinciples between which he is called upon to judge.VI PREFACE.Eminently important as such knowledge is, andforming as it does, the most important reward ofaccurate historical study, its particular cultivation isvery far from being general. The organs of thedifferent factions put forth, without hesitation, themost extraordinary propositions upon this subject,and rely with confidence upon the credulity of theirreaders. In a recent number of the ** QuarterlyReview" (vol. liv., p. 370) it is said, " We talknow as we did then" (in the reigns of Anne andGeorge I.) *' of Whig and Tory, but the tenets ofthe two parties have been so completely counterchanged(as the heralds express it) that a Whig ofthat day very much resembled a Tory of ours, andvice versa*' The reader who contrasts this passagewith the authorities cited in the following pages,will be inclined to wonder whether it proceededfrom deplorable ignorance in the reviewer, or from-hisassumption of ignorance in his readers ; but hewill admit that, in either case, no attempt to dispelsuch ignorance can be unworthy of attention.The space devoted to this work is only sufficientfor a compressed history of the parties. A know vledge of those portions of the English history Iwhich are not directly applicable to this subject 1has been always presumed.I have already said that a history of the Whigand Tory parties involves a contrast of two opposingprinciples. He would be but little capable of drawsPREFACE. Lingthat contrast, who, having studied the subject,could himself arrive at no definite judgment. If hehas awarded his preference to one party, his biasmust necessarily appear in his narrative. I havethought it more ingenuous to avow mine than toattempt to cover it with the usual veil of a simulatedimpartiality. A preference of the principle uponwhich the Whigs profess to act is acknowledged;but I have never knowingly allowed that preferenceto distort facts, or to influence the narrative of particulartransactions. The sentiments and inferencesof an author are his own ; he has a right to offer,his reader may entertain or reject them.In preparing this volume I have obtained lightupon some obscure points of history from MartyrsLife of the first Earl of Shaftesbury ; and the kindnessof the present earl has enabled me to authenticatethe most important quotation by a reference toMr. Stringer's manuscript, which formed the basis ofthat work. I am also much indebted to Mr. R.Mackintosh, who has, with great liberality, openedto me the splendid collection of historical materialsmade by his father. I have been thus enabled tostate, with precision, the conduct of the last ministryof Queen Anne with respect to the succession, andto adduce evidence which established upon this pointa decision the very opposite of that which probabilitiesbefore favoured. Some of the quotationshere made have, however, already appealed in a veryVil PREFACE.able article in the *' Edinburgh Review" upon the** Memoirs of Lord Bolingbroke." I have repeatedthese extracts where they suited my purpose, becausethe Mackintosh collections are now a very valuableprivate property : their national importance wouldinduce the hope that this obstacle to their copioususe may not long continue.Habits of literary composition are not easily brokenoff. I have chosen to send forth this work in singlevolumes, in order that the arrangement of the materialsI have collected may be restricted to a refreshingrelaxation from the studies of an arduous profession.Inner Temple Lane,October 1836.ERRATA.Page 10 line 20, for now, read not.17 22, insert ?185 8, for their assembly, read it assembled.186 20, for was far off, read was not far of.236 16, for Escrie, read Escric.265 1 4, for to, read of.324 13, for with, read into.411 4, for subjects, read objects.418 for Aldrich, read Aldrich.419 note line 3, for the, read that.44 1 6, for 6irangcrs, read Strangers.CONTENTS.CHAPTER I.^ PAGEState of parties at the restoration of the monarchy — The Cabal administrationIts members — Preparations of Charles against the religionand liberties of the nation . , , .1CHAPTER H.■ Origin of the Iwo pasties, which were afterwards called Whigs andTories — Composition of the court and country parties — Founders ofthe Whig party — In the commons — In the lords — Allies of the Whigs 20CHAPTER III.Intrigues of the Whigs with the court of France — Charge of corruptionagainst the ^Vhig leaders — Examination of this charge. . . 62CHAPTER IV.Occurrences during the long recess of 1679 6c fiO — Connexion of theWhig leaders with France — Examination of the charges of corruptionb sought against t them — Qriginof the terms Whig and Tory . . 107CHAPTER V.The Tory par ty — Seen in the debates on the Exclusion bill — In thecommons — In the lords — Trial of Stafford — Prorogation and dissolutionof parliament — Burnet's scheme of limitations — Fitzharris'slibel . 141CHAPTER VI.Meeting of the^Oxford^^arliame^ — Exclusion bib — Fitzharris's impeachmentLoss of popularity sustained by the Whigs — Secrettreaty with France — Dissolution of the Oxford parliament — Grey'shistory of the Rye-house plot — Designs attributed to the Whigs —Prospects of Charles and the Tories — Declaration of reasons fordissolving the two last parliaments — Reply of the Whigs — Theirjust and modest vindication." . . . 175Vlll PREFACE.able article in the ** Edinburgh Review" upon the** Memoirs of Lord Bolingbroke." I have repeatedthese extracts where they suited my purpose, becausethe Mackintosh collections are now a very valuableprivate property : their national importance wouldinduce the hope that this obstacle to their copioususe may not long continue.Habits of literary composition are not easily brokenoff. I have chosen to send forth this work in singlevolumes, in order that the arrangement of the materialsI have collected may be restricted to a refreshingrelaxation from the studies of an arduous profession.Inner Temple Lane,October 1836.ERRATA.Page 10 line 20, for now, read not.17 22, insert ?185 8, for their assembly, read it assembled.186 20, for was far off, read was not far off.236 16, for Escrie, read Escric.265 1 4, for to, read of.324 13, for with, read into.411 4, for subjects, read objects.418 for Aldrich, read Aldrich.419 note line 3, for the, read that.441 6, for 6iximgcrs, read stranger*.CONTENTS.\\CHAPTER I.PAGEState of parties at the restoration of the monarchy — The Cabal administrationIts members — Preparations of Charles against the religionand liberties of the nation . , . .1CHAPTER II.Origin of the two parties, which were afterwards called Whigs andTories — Composition of the court and country parties — Founders ofthe Whig party — In the commons — In the lords — Allies of the Whigs 20CHAPTER III.Intrigues of the Whigs with the court of France — Charge of corruptionagainst the Whig leaders — Examination of this charge. . . 62CHAPTER IV.Occurrences during the long recess of 1679 fic^ — Connexion of thewhig leaders with France — Examination of the charges of corruptionb sought against^em— O origin o fjhe terms Whig aadTor y . . 107CHAPTER V.The TorY Party — Seen in the debates on the Exclusion bill — In thecommons — In the lords — Trial of Stafford — Prorogation and dissolutionof parliament — Burnet's scheme of limitations — Fitzharris'slibel . 141CHAPTER VI.Meeting of the Oxford parliament nt — Exclusion bill — Fitzharris's impeachmentLoss of popularity sustained by the Whigs — Secrettreaty with France — Dissolution of the Oxford parliament — Grey'shistory of the Rye-house plot — Designs attributed to the Whigs —Prospects of Charles and the Tories — Declaration of reasons fordissolving the two last parliaments — Reply of the Whigs — Theirjust and modest vindication." . . . 175X CONTENTS.CHAPTER VII.PAGEEffects of the declaration and the reply — Strength of the Tories — Toryaddresses — Trial of Plunket— Of Fitzharris — Persecution of theWhigs — Trial of College — Committal of Shaftesbury — Practices ofthe court to procure evidence — The association paper — The grandjury throw out the bill — The Shaftesbury medal — Dryden's Polishmedal — Abhorrers — Affair of the corporations — Contest in the electionof sheriffs 198CHAPTER Vni.Intrigues in the cabinet — Supremacy of the Tories — Designs of theWhigs — Resistance contemplated — The Rye house plot — Accountsof it — Grey's — Sprat's — Shaftesbury's activity — Disappointment andflight — Anecdote concerning Lord Howard — Its authenticity andimportance . . • . . • • 236CHAPTER IX.Councils of the Whigs — Members of the council of six — West and hisassociates — Connexion of the two Cabals — Meeting at Sheppard's —Discovery of the meetings — Depositions of Keeling — West and Ramsey'sdiscoveries and inventions — Trial and execution of those whowere denounced — Discovery of the council of six — Arrest of LordRussell — Of Algernon Sidney — Conduct of Lord Howard . . 255CHAPTER X.Trial of Lord Russell — The evidence — The objections taken by theprisoner — Death of Lord Essex — The king's obduracy — Dying declarationsof Walcot and his companions — Lord Russell's paper — Trialof Algernon Sidney — The evidence — Defence — Monmouth's surrenderand pardon — His confession, repentance, and banishment —Hampden's trial — Prosecutions on account of the plot in Scotland-sirThomas Armstrong's execution. . . . . 280CHAPTER XLPersecution of the Whigs and of the dissenters — Summary of the evidenceas to the Rye-house plot — Changes in the ministry — Influenceof the Duke of York — Intrigue against him — Death of Charles —Review of the conduct of the two parties during his reign — The\l Oxford decree. . . . . . .319CHAPTER XII.State of political literature during the reigns of Charles II. and James II. 357 ^CHAPTER Ni.Accession of James — The Rochester administration — Degrading humiliationto the French ambassador — Arbitrary levies of customs —/Contents. XIPAGEApproved by the Tories in their addresses — Immediate views of theTories with regard to religion — A Tory parliament — Its submission —Its management by prerogative — Cautious opposition of the Whigs —Argo-le — Monmouth — Exemplification of the principles of the Tories,afforded by the conduce of the bishops at Monmouth's execution . 373CHAPTER XIV.Estrangement of the king from the high church Tories — Decline of theinfluence of Rochester — Increase of that of Sunderland — Massacres inthe west — Conduct of James — Dismissal of Halifax — Suspicion of theTories — Conduct of the Whigs and Tories in the commons — Creationof peers — State of parties in the lords — Prorogation of parliament —Hostility of the clergy to James— Ecclesiastical commission . , 402CHAPTER XV.Parties in the cabinet — Declaration of indulgence — James makesadvances to the Whigs — Repulsed by that parts Junction of theWhigs and Tories — Embarrassment of the king — Trial of the sevenbishops — Birth of the Prince of Wales — Invitation to the Prince ofOrange — Conduct of the party leaders — Flight of James . . 428Ni\CHAPTER XVI.hews of the two parties — fleeting of the convention parliament —Debates upon the settlement of the government — Somers — Separationof the parties upon the question of a regency — Election ofWilliam and Mary to fill the vacant throne. . . .474CHAPTER XVII.Formation of the Shrewsbury administration — Intrigues of the ToriesLiberal policy of the Whigs, towards the Catholics, in favour ofthe dissenters — War with France — Corporation bill — Williamchanges his policy and the Tories obtain a majority in the commonsAn election — The Carmarthen administration . . . 492CHAPTER XVIII.State of the Jacobite interest — Correspondence of the Tory ministrywith James — Compounders and non com pounders — Views of thosewho corresponded with James — Intrigues in the cabinet — Fall of theTory ministry — Shrewsbury and the Whigs recover their interestin the cabinet — Montague — Triennial bill passed — Dissolution ofparliament — Administration of the Whigs — Supplanted by the ToriesShrewsbury and Montague displaced — New arrangements — Impeachmentof the Whig ministers — Act of succession — Intrigues of/ the Tories — Robert Harley — The Tories lose their popularity — Are\ distrusted by the king — Return of the Whigs to power — Death of\ William 513JtU CONTENTS.CHAPTER XIX,PAGEProspects of the parties upon the accession of Anne — Formation of theGodolphin administration — Its Tory character — Character of thenew house of commons — Measures of the Tory majority — Oppositionof the lords — Contest upon the occasional Conformity hill . . 542CHAPTER XX.Secession of the high church Tories from the Godolphin administrationModification in that ministry — St. John — Violence of the Toriesagainst the house of lords — They propose to tack the occasional Conformityhill to a bill of Supply — Examination of the division uponthis proposition — Collision between the houses — Dissolution —Elections favourable to the Whigs — Marlborough and Godolphinfavour that party — The Godolphin administration becomes a Whiggovernment — Measures of this government — Intrigues of Harley andMrs. Masham — Their success — Estrangement of the queen from herministers — Retirement of Harley and his party — Walpole — Politicalerrors of the Whigs — Their rejection of peace — Their impeachmentof Sacheverell — Consequences of their errors seen in the loss of theirpopularity and the overthrow of their administration. . . 552CHAPTER XXI.Formation and character of the Harley administration — State of politicalliterature — An election — Tory majority in the commons —Charges against the late ministry — Guiscard's attempt to assassinateHarley — Opposition of the lords — Creation of a majority in thehouse of lords — Prosecution of Marlborough, and expulsion of WalpoleThe treaty of Utrecht — Jealousy of Oxford and Bolingbroke —Intrigues against each other — Decrease of the influence of Oxford —Difficulties of the ministry — Their cause — Conviction that ministerswere plotting the introduction of the pretender — Examination of thecharge — Sir James Mackintosh's MS. historical collections — Accountof the Jacobite intrigues — Interrupted by the rivalry of Bolingbrokeand Oxford — Views of Bolingbroke — Dismissal of Oxford — Suddenillness of the queen — Conduct of Shrewsbury and the Whigs — Dismayof the Tories — Death of Queen Anne . . . 579THEHISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER I.State of parties at the restoration of the monarchy — The Cabaladministration — Its members — Preparations of Charles against thereligion and Liberties of the nation.The latter part of the reign of Charles II. is an chap.epoch whence we may date not only the rise of theWhig and Tory parties, but also the origin of the " to 1671.principles which they severally profess. The lastgreat distinction which had divided the nation wasthe warring factions of the Roundheads and Cavaliers,and the convulsion which then took place wrought achange in the national sentiment that has never sincebeen effaced.Among the Cavaliers, there were many who wouldhave opposed the claims to absolute power made byCharles I., and among the Roundheads were manyVOL. I. BTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, who would have been content to live under a sovereignbound to respect their civil and religious libere'to 1671. ties. But the sentiments of the great majority weresufficiently marked to render the conflict a wartwo principles of Monarchy and Republicanism.It was the temporary triumph of the latterprinciple that secured its eventual defeat and theutter annihilation of the party that espoused it. Theceaseless commotions that ensued harassed and exhaustedthe nation, a violent reaction took place, andCharles was seated upon his father's throne by theact of an unanimous people.Since that time there has never been any republicanparty in England ; the Commonwealth leaders,who yet survived, were terrified by the fate of thregicides, or overborne by the stream of popular loyalty,which ran too rapidly to be stemmed ; theirparty was broken and dispersed, and as the membersof which it had been composed died away none succeededto their tenets. If these tenets have sinceoccasionally obtained an advocate, it has generallybeen in an ignorant or an enthusiastic man, who hasfound few followers to applaud his declamations, andnone to assist him to realize his dreams.For some time after the restoration, we find nothingbut an exuberant and incautious loyalty. The representationwas intrusted to the known supportersof the new king, and if a whisper of opposition wasTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 3sometimes heard from the remnant of the Republican chap.party, it was immediately drowned amid the accla- !nations of the people. ' to ig71.It was nn1yjyraJ22^IlyJJ2£Lth^s tnrmiltlinus loyaltysubsided, alit j'equired.^ears of misgovernment todiscover to his subjects the j;eaLcharacter ofjthe soye-rgi£;n they had recalled. The administration of Clarendonhas been regarded with more indulgence thanit deserved; partly because he has been his ownhistorian, but chiefly because it has been contrastedwith the far more flagitious conduct of his successors :but when we remember that one of the ordinary expedientsto which he had recourse was the illegaldetention of his political adversaries in foreign prisons,that it was his bigotry which gave effect to the resentmentwhich the dominant party naturally felttowards the dissenters, and that it was his influencewhich assisted Charles in many of his mos t uncoii stirdesigns, we can have little respect for hisconduct as a domestic minister. With regard tothe foreign relations of England, he is yet more reprehensible.The sale of Dunkirk* is a blot uponClarendon never disguised the all the cannon, arms, and ammu-reason of the sale of Dunkirk, nation, to be delivered into theHe writes to Degrades — " How possession of the King of France,ever his majesty, even contrary to and will lend him such of thethe advice of most of those with troops as he shall desire, upon thewhom he hath consulted, will payment of five millions readycause the town of Dunkirk, with money ; the present payment beingB 2THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the annals of the country; but he had not completedhis master's infamy or the national dishonour until heto 1671. taught a King of England to become the pensionedpuppet of a foreign prince, and to submit to be theservant of an enemy in order that he might renderhimself the tyrant of his people.Misgovernment at home and dishonour abroadwere the substitutes for those happy effects which thepeople had persuaded themselves would flow from therestoration of the monarchy. The dissenters whohad confided in the royal declaration, found themselvesharassed and persecuted by penal enactments,and the old Royalists, who had sacrificed every thingfor Charles and his father, found in their new monarcha mere selfish voluptuary, who had neither the meansnor the will to satisfy their importunate demands uponhis gratitude. It was not wonderful, therefore, thatdiscontent and disappointment should succeed to theexcitement of highly-wrought expectation, nor is itsurprising that a prince like Charles should havesacrificed his minister when his loss of popularity hadrendered him no looser useful.SO absolutely necessary for his had not been made'" — Clareaffairs, that the confide State Papers, Supplementhence he hath in the King of to Vol. iii., p. xxiv. — This volumeFrance's friendship woiild have contains abundant evidence thatpersuaded him to have hoped for Clarendon taught Charles how« good part thereof, hy tray of gold could be obtained fromloan, if this overture of Dunkirk France.\THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 5Thus far the credit of the sovereign was with the CHAP.I.great majority of his subjects unimpaired. The oldRoyalists, indeed, accused him of ingratitude, but * to isti.the popular indignation was directed only against hisminister. It was, however, soon discovered thatCharles had abandoned Clarendon only that he mightsurround himself with less scrupulous and moredesperate men. The Cabal administration nowcommenced its infamous career. Sufficient soontranspired to show the ultimate tendency of theirdesigns, and the nation became thoroughly awakenedto the danger which threatened their liberties andtheir religion.The circumstances which the papers, since publishedby Dalrymple, have now fully brought to light,were then generally suspected. It was whisperedthat the king was m his heart a Catholic, and hisbrother, the Duke of York, no longer hesitated toavow his conversion to that religion. Every circumstancecoincided to show that some design was already ' r' ^on foot to re-establish popery as the national faith, ^f^'\and that a favourable opportunity only was sought in -f '^ l^*'*"' v^^''^order to unmask the conspiracy. The most com- ci*\ c^ t-pliant ecclesiastics were preferred to vacant sees, andall who sought advancement were zealous in inculcatingthe doctrines of divine right and pass iveobedience. So quickly was the direction of courtpatronage observed, that a portion of the clergy5 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, seemed to vie with each other in their approach tothe Romish doctrines, determined to leavei(i7i. selves as little as possible to recant when the propermoment should arrive for renouncing the errors ofProtestantism.The people observed the conduct of these ductiledivines with indignant contempt, and spoke of themby the nickname of Tantivies, to indicate how rapidlythey were posting upon the road to Rome.Of Clifford, Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley, andLauderdale who composed the Cabal, the two firstonly were admitted into the full confidence of theroyal brothers. At a conference held at the duke'scloset, between these four and Lord Arundel of ardour,on the 25th of January, 1669, the undertakingwas formally resolved upon, and it was determined toapply to France for assistance in the enterprise.Lord Arundel undertook the negotiation, and thetreaty soon assumed a definite shape.On the 18th of December, 1666, a memorial wasdelivered to the French court, containing a project ofthe contemplated alliance. The first article has thefollowing stipulations :The King of Great Britain, being convinced ofthe truth of the Catholic religion, and resolved todeclare himself a Catholic, and be reconciled to theChurch of Rome, thinks the assistance of his MostChristian Majesty necessary to facilitate his design.I.A.D. 16G6to 1671.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.It is therefore agreed and concluded upon, that his chap.Most Christian Majesty shall furnish to the King of.England, before the said declaration, the sum of£200,000 sterling ; the one-half of the said sura shallbe paid three months after the reciprocal ratificationof the present treaty, and the other half three monthsafter the expiration of that time. And further, thatthe said Lord the Most Christian King shall assisthis Britannic Majesty with ships and money as oftenas there shall be need, in case the subjects of thesaid Lord the King shall not acquiesce with the saiddeclaration, but rebel against his said BritannicMajesty (which cannot be believed). And to theend that the said declaration may have the wished-forsuccess, and be executed with the greater safety,it is likewise agreed, that the day for executing thedesign shall be entirely at the option of the King ofEngland"*This was a demand which far exceeded what Louiswas inclined to offer, and the treaty was at lengthconcluded with a reduction of the £200,000 to twomillions of livres tortoises, a sum equal to £150,000.This treaty, as finally agreed upon, has been sincepublished from the original preserved among the Cliffordpapers, partly by Lord John Russell, t and sinceverbatim by Dr. Lingard.t The French ministerDalrymple vol. ii., p. 50. f Life of Lord W. Russell, p. 30.I History of England, vol. vii., p. 629.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, was more attentive to appearances than the Englishconspirators, and threw a veil of hypocrisy over theA.D. 1666 ,to 1671. transaction.Charles was also bound to make war upon theDutch, whom it was the interest of his kingdom tosuccour ; to supply Louis with an auxiliary force of6000 men, and to maintain a fleet of fifty men of war;in return for which he was to receive annually, duringthe continuance of hostilities, three millions of livres.The secret treaty was signed at Dover, whitherCharles had repaired to meet his sister the fair andunfortunate Henrietta, the 22d of May, I67O, andbears the seals of Arlington, Arundel, Clifford, andBoiling, on the part of Charles ; and of Colbert onthat of France.There are few periods of our history that presenta more important crisis than that which the date ofthis secret treaty marks. In the present age, theCatholic religion is in England merely the faith ofa sect. Their views are bounded by the prospect t of j»J ^'a perfect equality with their fellow-subjects, and they "^are no more dangerous to our constitution than anyother of those numerous religious sects \Ndth which thekingdom is so rife. But in the reign of Charles II.n it was far different. Popery was then only anotherf name for unlimited power in the monarch, and unlimited^/ \ oppression to the subject. The object of its adherentswas not equality, but ascendancy, and sinceTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.this could not be obtained but by force of arms, they cHAP.were ready to barter their civil liberties for the royalfavour, and assist Charles to become the master of his * ^^ ^jy],people, upon the condition that he should make aCatholic Hierarchy one of the instruments of histyranny. The patriotic party dreaded the Catholics,not as religionists, but as agents of despotism.*That the indolent monarch himself had any seriousaffection for a particular religion, or was actuated byany ambitious desire of absolute power, his generalconduct forbids us to imagine ; but there werereasons equally powerful to a mind like his, to inducehim to intermit his pleasures for a short time, andto engage in a desperate enterprise, which, if successful,would at once put an end to all his difficulties.A court, like that of Charles, could not existwithout great scandal to the nation, or be supported,without a vast expense ; the people laughed at theirking's excesses, but they were very reluctant toThis was well expressed by alteration of the government andJohn Hampden during the de the introducing instead thereof,bates upon the Exclusion Bill, superstition and idolatry, and aI do not understand," he said, foreign and arbitrary joiner. Ifhow it can be construed, because it were not for that, I am apt towe go about to disinherit the think the duke's being a papistduke, that, therefore, it must be would not be thought a sufficientfor his religion. For my part, cause for this house to spend timeI do approve of the bill, but it is about this bill." — Collection ofbecause the-opinions and prin Debates in the Session of 1680,cipher of the papists tend to the p. 56.10 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, allow him to squander their money. Charles resentedevery attempt to restrain his prerogative,to ^^6^1 because it had a tendency to abridge his pleasures ;and he was an enemy to his subjects' liberties, becausethese enabled them to resist his designs upontheir purses. The haughty spirit of a Stuart couldill brook that inferiors whom he despised, should constitutethemselves censors of his conduct ; and whenhe remembered the unlimited authority of the othergreat European potentates, he felt humiliated by thereflection that he was obliged to endure what theyhad the power to punish.What little religion he had was Catholic. Itwas the professors of this faith who had been thestanchest supporters of his family ; they heldthose doctrines which are ever most pleasing to a^^.''^ sovereign, and they looked to him as their onlyprotection against the persecuting spirit which wasnow raging against them. /A councillor was sew wanting to stimulate hiscold regard for religion, by dwelling upon the refractoryspirit of his parliament. James, Duke of York,was not destitute of private virtues, but these weremore than counterbalanced by vices which unfittedhim for any influential station in a free country.Adding the bigotry of a monk to a more than ordinaryshare of the high monarchical ideas of theStuartssss, he was eminently qualified to sustain hisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 11brother in the resolution he had formed. The diff chap.fervent characters of the two brothers were well and 'wittily described by Buckingham, when he said that ' to i67i.Charles could see things rightly if he would, andJames would if he could.That Charles was actuated rather by political thanreligious motives in the intrigue which he had nowcommenced, is evident from his whole conduct. Hisdesire of power is well portrayed in his own words.He did not wish, he said, to sit like a Turkish sultanand sentence men to the bowstring ; but he could notbear that a set of fellows should inquire into his conduct,*and examine his ministers as well as his accounts.His impatience of such interference sometimes betrayedhim into methods of revenge which were littleconsonant with the royal dignity. The jest whichwas received with a laugh from Killigrew or Buckingham,was intolerable in the mouth of a mere commoner.Wien Sir John Coventry asked in theHouse of Commons, in answer to an observation thatthe players were the king's servants and a part of hispleasure, whether the king's pleasure lay among themen or women players, it is well known thatCharles was so much enraged, that he caused thejester to be waylaid, and his nose slit with a penknife,to remind him of the danger of jesting uponthe pursuits of royalty.!Burnet, vol. i., p. 345. f Ibid.12 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. To repress such annoyances, and to obtain money'- to satisfy his wants, required either a reformationto 1671. which Charles was Utile likely to attempt, or a powerwhich the constitution had not given him. Thelatter Charles thought himself able to obtain. Heflattered himself that he would have been able totocrush at its birth the insurrection that had destroyedhis father. To declare himself a Catholicwas, he well knew, the most certain means of rousinghis people to rebellion ; and he was assiduous inproviding against as he was to bring on this event.she told Colbert, that he was pressed by his conscience,and by the confusion he saw increasing fromday to day in his kingdom, to the diminution of his/ authority, to declare himself a Catholic ; and thatI besides the spiritual advantage to be derived fromthis step, he considered it to be the only means ofre-establishing the monarchy.* To this able ministerhe seems to have opened himself without reserve.Hull, Portsmouth, Plymouth, and Windsor, he consideredfaithful to his interests ; the army, he thought,he could rely upon ; and he declared that he shouldseize every pretence of increasing the number andefficiency of his forces.Such was the state of the empire in the year I67O.A conspiracy headed by the king, supported by theDalrymple, p. 32.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 13court, the government, and the whole influence of chap.I.the state, waited but the proper moment for developmentto loose all the horrors of civil war upon the ' to ig7I.land. Six thousand foreign troops were ready todisembark at Dover, to give weight to the proposeddeclaration of Catholicism, and Louis was furtherbound to support his royal dependant with all hisforces until the rebellion should be ended.*To resist these mighty preparations, England hadonly a corrupt parliament and a disunited people.The nation was, indeed, imbued with a thoroughhatred of popery, and would, doubtless, have resisted;but the struggle must have been dreadful, andvictory, to whichever side it eventually inclined,must have been preceded by scenes at which humanitywould shudder.Although these engagements with France wereconducted with the greatest possible secrecy, some ^cause of suspicion almost immediately arose. Charles ,,j,t- owas anxious to obtain the assistance of Ashe y and ^ p ^'Buckingham, his two le last obnoxious ministers, tohis projected enterprise. It was arranged, therefore,that these ministers should be led to propose andeffect a similar treaty to that already concluded, withthe single omission of the article for the king'sdeclaration, which they knew Ashley would neverDalrymple, App. p. 54.14 . THE HISTORY OF Part.CHAP, agree to, and with which they thought Buckingham'. could not safely be trusted. Buckingham eagerly,to 1671. and Ashley unwillingly, fell into the snare ; theformer was despatched to Paris, and his presencethere confirmed the Dutch in the suspicions theyalready entertained of the sincerity of the Englishcourt.In August of this year, Sir William Temple, thenambassador at the Hague, writes to Secretary SirJohn Trevor, who was ignorant of the whole intrigue,and as Sir William afterwards found, wasbarely in the skirts of business," " I shall notfail of performing all the offices you please to enjoinme towards the preserving our mutual confidence inthis conjuncture, which I have endeavoured in allmy discourses here upon the Duke of Buckingham'sjourney into France since I first heard of it." Andhe tells the duke, who was yet in Paris, that theDutch were indulging " in doubtful and mysticalreflections."In September, Temple had received an orderto return to England, and he retired fi'om hisembassy, telling De Witt that he found himselfbetter turned for making a good gardener, thanan able minister. De Witt was then more explicit.*' He reflected," he says, " upon a coldness inall our negotiations ever since Madame's journeyinto England, and upon the late journey of■iHE HISTORY OF PARTY.the Duke of Buckingham to Paris, which he couldnot think was jour voir le pays ou apprendre la .langue, and desired I would tell him what I couldmake of all this laid together. " *His reception by Sir Thomas Clifford, upon hisreturn, opened Temple's eyes, t But De Wittwanted no additional proof. Some years afterwards,Louis, in a fit of resentment against Charles, sufferedan Abbe Primi X to publish a full accountCHAP.I.A.D. 1666to 1671.Letters, vol. ii.t Ibid.f One of the historical anecdotesin the works of Louis XIV.is an account of this Abbe Primi.He was a clever charlatan, whopretended to tell the fortunes ofpersons by the character of theirhandwriting. There is an amusinginstance given of the occasionalutility of his art.Primi was a native of bologna,the son of a hosier ; hewas handsome and clever, and ashehad a strong ambition ofmaking a fortune, he resolved togo to Paris. He travelled toLyons, and from thence, by coach,onwards. In the same vehiclewas a man of considerable influence,named Duval, who likedhis conversation, and, at last, evenconceived a friendship for him.Among the passengers was a man,who was personally so unpleasanta companion, that all the otherpassengers were combining amongthemselves how they should ridthemselves of him. After concertingmeasures, M. Duval askedPrimi if he credited the reportwhich was current in France, concerningthe facility with whichsome persons in Italy could tellthe fortunes, or misfortunes, whichwould happen to others, by lookingat their writing. Primi repliedthat he did not think thescience was absolutely certain, butthat, undoubtedly, in most cases,it was correct ; " and, in fact," saidhe, " I have myself, during leisurehours, made that science myamusement and my study." M.Duval now presented his writing,and desired Primi to try his skillTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.I.A.D. 1666to 1671.of these intrigues, and althoughrthe book was, at theinstance of the English ambassador, immediatelysuppressed, yet an account of it was preserved in atract originally printed in the year 1689, and sincein Lord Somers's Collection.*From this we learn that the Hollanders had sureadvertisement of what was going on from their ownupon it. After examining it forashort time, he began to enumeratea long list of extraordinaryevents, of diseases, accidents, andaffairs of gallantry ; all which M.Duval declared had come to pass.The other passengers likewise presentedtheir writings, and Primitold them what had, and whatwould come to pass ; lastly, thethe obnoxious individual, surprisedat Primi's success, and curiousto know his own fortune,presented his writing. Primi'svisage became very gloomy uponits perusal, and he returned thewriting without saying a word.The man, however, insisted thathe should tell his fortune, whenPrimi said, with a very gravecountenance, that he auguredmost dreadful calamities to happento the writer of the last paper,and that if he went to Paris, hewould certainly be assassinatedthere. The man, who was assuspicious and cowardly as hewas otherwise disagreeable, becamevisibly disquieted ; and, atthe next stage, the passengerswere relieved of their unpleasantcompanion, who returnedwith all haste home. Duval,charmed with the address Primihad shown in this affair, took himunder his protection, and introducedhim to th Abbe de laBaume. Primi continued thecharlatan tricks he had commencedwith so much success,and soon became deeply immersedin all the intrigues of the court.Primi now pretended to the officeof court historian, and Louis tookhim with him in his march uponHolland, It was a miserable accountof the first campaign of thiswar, written in Italian, which containedthe exposure of the secretof the treaty of Dover. — Oeuvresde Louis XIV. vol. vi., p. 476.Vol. viii., p. 16.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. IJand the other ministers at the court of London, chap.and it is said that De Witt was so alarmed atthe danger in which these intrigues placed his * ^^ jgyjcountry, that he swooned in the Start House uponreading a letter that gave him secret information ofthem.Schemes, which thus became known to one ofthe objects of their hostility, could not long beconcealed from the others. De Witted only resourcewas an appeal from the king to the peopleof England, and those who could inform him thata treaty had been signed at Dover, could, doubtless,give him some idea of the scope of it.The conduct of the court justified every suspicion.After Charles had prorogued his parliament,he ordered the war to be commencedwithout any formal declaration, by a piraticalattack on the Dutch Smyrna fleet (March 13),and four days after was issued the declarationof war.This was preceded by other measures calculatedto advance the objects of the secret treaty. Theparliament was not to be assembled. How then wasthe war to be maintained. Sir Thomas Cliffordsuggested an expedient worthy of the cause forwhich the money was to be procured. Charles hadobtained from his parliament an ample supply inorder to support the triple alliance, and, upon theVOL. I. c18 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, faith of this grant, the bankers had advanced large'■ sums of money to be repaid with very large profits ;to 167 J. Shaftesbury afterwards said 20 or 30 per cent.*As the levies were returned into the Exchequer,Clifford's expedient was to stop these payments, andto convert the whole of the returns to the purpose ofthe war. The suggestion was well adapted to thetemper of the man to whom it was addressed : it wasan easy and a profitable act. Charles had no soonerreceived the hint, than he acted upon it. Clifford,by his order, proposed it in council, and Shaftesburywas the only member of the Cabal who dared toraise his voice against this scandalous violation ofnational honouredThis councillor was more easily brought to coincidewith another expedient which was adopted, forthe double purpose of conciliating the Dissenters andprotecting the Catholics. Charles, by an act ofabsolute authority, declared the penal laws againstall dissenters to be suspended ; and Shaftesbury wasnot ashamed to tell Mr. Locke, that in this act theking was only exerting an inherent prerogative, tMartyn's Life of Shaftesbury, to put his seal to this declaration,vol. i., p. 480. and that Shaftesbury was made■}■ Ibid. 416. lord chancellor for that purpose.J Letter to a person of quality. But this assertion is disproved inBurnet says, that the lord-keeper Martin's Life of Shaftesbury,was dismissed, because he refused vol. i., p. 429.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 19The first effects of Charles's conspiracy with Louis chap.were, therefore, a dishonourable and disastrous war.an assumption of absolute power and a national ' to i67i.bankruptcy.c 220 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER II.Origin of the two parties, which were afterwards called Whigs andTories — Composition of the court and country parties — Founders ofthe Whig party — In the commons — In the lords — Allies of theWhigs.CHAP. Thus was commenced the campaign against theliberties of Eng-land. The evident necessity forA.D. 1672 . 1 T . 1 .to 1678. a strenuous resistance brought into being a newschool of legislators. It has been said that thehouse of commons, which was elected after therestoration, consisted almost entirely of the Cavalierparty; the great majority were unflinching advocatesof those principles which came afterwards to bedesignated Toryism. They would defend their kingagainst any demands of his people, but they couldnot endure that he should be independent of themselvesthey hated the alliance with France, becauseit reduced the importance of their services ; and theywere sparing in their grants of the public money,because they knew that their influence dependedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.II.A.D. 1672to 1678.upon the necessities of the king. They were vehementin the persecution of the Catholics, but notsolely because they dreaded from them danger totheir liberties, for they were equally violent againstthe Dissenters, from whom they could expect none.They, in fact, formed a middle class, between the |court and the people, now hostile to both, but natumrally belonging to the former.Charles and his minister soon found that the mosteffectual means for securing such capricious allies,was bribery. He was insatiable in his cravings afterbribes himself, he bribed his ministers;* it is no lc*'^ >,.rThe commissioners for arrangingboth the secret treatiesreceived large sums from Francefor their good offices. Arlingtonhad a pension of 10,000 crowns,and the Countess of Shrewsbury(Buckingham's mistress), 10,000livres. Lauderdale, Buckingham,and Ashley Cooper, were also to be[offered presents; but the characterof Shaftesbury forbids us to supposethat he accepted his. Amidall the discoveries that have beenmade of the venality of publicmen of this age, this is the onlyhint that appears against him.These wages were earned andpaid with the approbation ofCharles.On the 16th of October and 3dof November, 1670, Colbert writesthat he had given the presents tothe commissioners of the firsttreaty, and that King Charles hadordered them to take them. —Dalrymple, App., p. 82.In 1681, Barillon writes, thatwhen Shaftesbury, at the end ofthe Dutch war, was advisingCharles to quit the French andmake a Spanish alliance, Charlesasked him " How much the Spaniardshad given him?" He answered,Nothing at all." " Tien,"said the king, " you owe themnothing, for they offered Arlington^640,000.22 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, wonder that he should extend his favourite system to )the commons. Andrew Marvell's pamphlet, called )^ to\*6V8. " ^ ^^^^ ^^ ^^^ principal Labourers in the greatDesign of Popery and arbitrary Power," enumeratestwo hundred and fifteen of the members of this ;house, who received pensions from the court — aphalanx, which, if properly managed, was sufficientto render the influence of the crown paramount inthat assembly.Many of these, however, were suffered to remainamong the ranks of the opposition, and appeared asthe supporters of the court only when their voteswere absolutely necessary, and when, of course, theirdesertion was most severely felt.The expediency of this system of tactics was !particularly evident at the commencement of the \session of 1703. The opposition had agreed togrant the king a subsidy of £600,000, and appointedMr. Garroway and Sir Thomas Lee, who wereconspicuous members of their party, to move asupply to this amount. The court wanted at least£1,200,000 to carry on the war, and Garroway, tothe astonishment of the house, named that sum.When this proposition was seconded by Lee, hisparty was so taken by surprise, that this extraordinarysum was voted without opposition. *Burnet, however, character that valued himself upon artrises Sir Thomas Lee, as " a man and cunning, in which he wj1^THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 23Another instance is necessary, to show the nature chap.of the opposition which this house of commonsoffered to the designs of Charles, and to demonstrate ' ^Q ^gyg.that they who could compel the king to abandonhis claim to a dispensing power, when exerted infavour of the dissenters, who could refuse himsupplies, impeach his ministers, and condemn hisacts, were yet deemed capable of enacting a law,that Charles the First, in his brightest dreams ofextended power, would hardly have thought ofproposing to an English parliament.This measure was called " An Act to preventthe Dangers which may arise from Persons disaffectedto the Government." By this bill, all members of thelegislature, and all who held any public office, whethercivil, military, or ecclesiastical, were obliged, undera penalty of £500, to take an extraordinary oath,which had already been enjoined, in a modified form,by an act passed while the commons were yet eagerin their loyalty. This oath consisted of a declaration,that if "-"" sot lawful, upon any pretence whatever,arms against the king ; and that the^ it abhorred that traitorous position ofgreat master, without being out of these two men, although discountenancewhen it was disco piously rewarded by the court forvere. their treachery continued to actThe most extraordinary cir- with the leaders of the opposingin this affair is, that tion.24 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, taking arms, by his authority, against his person,or against those commissioned by him, in pm-stanceto 1678. of any commission ; and that he would not, at anytime,endeavour the alteration of government, eitherin church or state.The operation of the Test Act, and the tempermanifested by the nation, had scattered the membersof the Cabal. The Earl of Danby was the ministerwho originated this infamous attempt to render thedogma of passive obedience a part of the Englishconstitution, and to fetter even the members of thelegislature. The freedom of debate was, indeed,reserved, but the ministry did not hesitate to avowthat it was their intention to restrain them fromspeaking or wi-sting upon affairs of state without thewalls of their several houses.Yet this bill passed the House of Lords, and thereis reason to suppose, would have passed the houseof commons, but for the energy and ingenuity oflone man. Shaftesbury, although long held by hisungovernable ambition in the trammels of the court,and, although an active and a guilty member ot theI Cabal, was naturally a friend to the liberties of hisi country. His love of power had seduced him intomany unjustifiable acts, but it could not lead himbeyond a certain point. When he found that therecould be no longer any doubt as to the ultimatetendency of the designs of the royal brothers, heTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. \ 25\at once conquered the delusion that hung over him. "chap.No offers of pecuniary recompense from France ; no '-promise of favour from the king, not even the offer ' to 1678.of the treasurer's staff could allure him to the side ofCharles and Louis. Henceforward he is to be foundamonff the friends of the constitution.*oThis man found means, by bringing about a collisionbetween the two houses, to defeat the bill, andthus effected, by manoeuvre, what the country partyin the commons had despaired of accomplishing byopen opposition.An opposition which would have allowed such ameasure as this to pass, could not be very patriotic,or at least very constitutional, in their principles.It is manifest that the majority consisted of zealotsof the church of England who hated the Catholicsand the dissenters, because they obstinately differedfrom them in religion ; and France, because hermoney and influence protected the former of thesetwo Db je c l s of • lire tr per sectionLee, Garroway, Meres, and a part of their followers,are treated with indulgence, when theseare assigned as their motives of opposition ; butnumbered among the country party was a littleband whose conduct proceeded from other andpurer principles. These were the first professorsMartyn's Life of Shaftesbury, vol. ii., p. 87.26 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. ' of a political creed which was at this time newII.to England. Taught by the events which hadto 1678. so lately passed before their eyes, they no longerindulged in visionary schemes of republican governmentbut while they were firm in their attachmentto the monarchy, they regarded it as an institution of |expediency, not of divine appointment, established !for the benefit of the governed, not for the pleasure6f the prince.f This section of the opposition represented thesentiments of a great portion, although, perhaps, notof the majority, of the nation ; for this house ofcommons had sat so long that they had ceased to bein any way influenced by public opinion, and beganto consider that they held their seats at the pleasureof the crown.Of the popular leaders, some had been drawn fromprivate life by the impending danger, others camefrom the best remnants of the old republican party,and many also belonged to those families which had,in the time of danger, proved the stanchest supportersof the Stuartssss.At the head of this band stands the well-rememberedname of Lord William Russell, a worthy leaderfor a party which disclaimed every other motive thanthat of patriotism. Determined to defend his libertyand his religion, he yet bounded all his views ofopposition by the necessity of that defence, he hadTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^7no wish for a republic, no thought of injury to the chap.monarchy; but he had resolved never to bow to an '.absolute master, or to a popish priest. Although * to 1678.himself a conscientious member of the establishedchurch, he was fret tolerant towards the dissenters,and if his zeal was hot against the Catholics, it wasnot because they differed from him in religion, butbecause he knew them to be dangerous conspiratorsI against his country. Russell was gifted with nogreat powers of eloquence, nor, indeed, with anyevidently superior talent ; but he had that sterlingsense which well supplies its place, and a judgmentwhich never received its bias from another.* Butthe circumstance which gained for Russell the confidenceof the nation, was the universal belief in hishonesty of purpose. Whether we receive his characterfrom friends or foes, his fame is equallyspotless. Temple laments his influence in thehouse of commons, as being " a person in generalrepute, an honest worthy gentleman, without tricks,or private ambition, and who was known to ventHe had so just a soul, so could discern, he never went intofirm, so good, he could not warp any thing considerable upon thefrom such principles that were mere submission to any one'sso unless misguided by his under particular judgment."—Z,e«er^omstanding, and that his own not Ladi/ Russell to Dr. FitzwUliam.another's : for I dare say, as he28 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ture as great a stake, perhaps, as any subject in"• England"*"^'^to\^6'78. Even Bishop Sprats, the author of that tissue oftruth and fiction, which, after undergoing therevision of James, was published under the title ofa " History of the Rye House Plot," did not dareto become the calumniator of Russell ; but when therevolution had enabled him to speak with freedom,described him as a person of great probity and constantabhorrence of falsehood. When we find thistestimony in his favour, given by those who littleloved the cause in which he was engaged we maycredit the eulogy bestowed upon him by Burnet.** Lord Russell," says the bishop, " was a man ofgreat candour, and of a general reputation ; universallybeloved and trusted, of a generous and obligingtemper. He had given such proofs of an undauntedcourage, and of an unshaken firmness, that I neverknew any man have so entire a credit in the nationas he had. He quickly got out of some of thedisorders t into which the court had drawn him, andTemple's Memoirs, Works, courage which the bishop men-vol.ii., p. 532. tions. Lord John Russell hasspit was probably these irre- preserved two letter, each irregularitieswhich gave Mr. Russell - ten when about to engage in a(he did not become Lord Russell duel : and one of these contests,until afterwards, when his elder we learn, was with a very dan-brotherdied) that reputation for serous adversary.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 29ever after that his Kfe was unblemished in all respects, chap.He had, from his first education, an inclination to 'tfavour the Non-conformists, and wished the laws I ' t© 1678.could have been made more easy to them, or theymore pliant to the law. He was a slow man, and oflittle discourse ; but he had a true judgment, whenhe considered things at his own leisure. His understandingwas not defective, but his virtues wereso eminent, that they would have more than balancedreal defects, if any had been found in the other."The first public act of Russell's life was worthy ofhis after career. His name first occurs, in theparliamentary history, as a speaker against the Cabal,inveighing against the corruption of these ministers,the influence of France — the dishonourable commencementof the war with Holland — and the fraudpractised upon the bankers. He is ever after to befound conspicuous wherever the designs of the courtcould be traversed, or the cause of constitutionalliberty befriended.Second only to Russell among the chiefs of thisinfant party, was Lord Cavendish, afterwards the firstDuke of Devonshire. Like all the nobility of thisreign, his early youth had been devoted to thegaieties of the court ; to which, indeed, he had beenearly initiated, since he was one of those eldestsons of peers who bore the king's train upon therestoration.30 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Descended from a family eminent for their loyalty,a son of the pupil of Hobbs, and himself his intimate,to 1678. ^® might have been expected to second all thedesigns of the court, and to pass through Use afavoured courtier of the two last Stuart kings. Butloyalty to Charles involved a meanness of spiritwhich was foreign to the character of this Englishnobleman ; possessed of a sound understanding, apenetrating judgment, indomitable courage, anda resolution which nothing could shake, he wasjust the man to penetrate the disgraceful designsof the court, and having discovered these to becomea constant and a dangerous enemy.Lord Cavendish was now in the prime of manhoodan eloquent and somewhat' violent debater ;and holding, throughout the nation, a reputation forintegrity, which rendered him worthy to be as hewas, the inseparable friend of Lord W. Russell.His speeches, like those of many others of thepopular leaders, were eagerly caught up and published,and their influence was sufficiently great toobtain for them the condemnation of the house oflords.The patriotism of Lord Cavendish bore no featureof austerity ; an elegant scholar, a handsome suitor,graceful in his address, he mingled in the gallantriesof the court, without any compromise ofhis principles, and would often appear in the king'sTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 31presence just after he had, in the house of commons, chap.been violently opposing his measures. *| Sir William Coventry was another active member " to less.of the opposition in the commons ; he was experiencedin all the forms of the house, having sat inparliament since 1661. Sir William had commencedhis career in the service of the court ; he held theoffice of secretary to the Duke of York, and whilstin this situation, was knighted by the king. Hisfortunes seemed daily augmenting. The duke waslord high admiral, and Coventry became secretary tothe navy, and afterwards one of the commissionersfor executing the office of lord treasurer. But thetime then arrived when none but unscrupulous in-Kennett, in his " Funeral several wounds, until a sturdySermon," and his " Memoirs of Swiss of my Lord Ambassadorthe Family of Cavendish," re- Montagu's caught him up in hishates several anecdotes of this arms and threw him over thenobleman. " While he was at stage into the pit. In his fall,Paris," he says, " he was most one of his arms was caught by anrudely affronted at an opera, by iron spike, which tore out thethree officers of the king's guard, flesh, and left a scar very visiblewho came full of wine upon the to his dying day." Upon anotherstage. One of them coming up occasion, he led a Colonel Multohim with a very insulting ques pepper, who had insulted him,tion, my lord gave him a severe out of the presence chamber byblow upon the face, upon which the nose, and being fined <£30,000they all drew and pushed hard for this exploit, he escaped fromupon him. He got his back prison, and imprisoned the sheriffagainst one of the screens, and who came to arrest him, until hemade a stout defence, receiving had made his peace with the law.32 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, instruments of their new. designs could remain nearII. . .the duke or his brother. Sir William was dismissedto 1671. ^i^ office, because he was found intractable, andmade way for Clifford and the rest of the Cabal.The sacrifice which he thus made was decisiveevidence of his sincerity, and he met with proportionableconsideration from the country party. Hehad, ever since he left office, exerted the whole ofhis great abilities to draw the king from his Frenchalliances, and to engage him in a war with thatpower ; and in these attempts he was ever assistedby the best and soberest part of the house of commons.*His conduct in opposition seems to justifythe character given him by Lord John Russell, whodescribes him as *the model of a country gentlemanopen, honest, and sensible, not swayed either byambition or animositiesIf we look upon these three men as the leaders ofthe opposition in the commons, we must rememberthat Hampden, Littleton, Powle, and Birch, heldalso prominent situations among their party, andyielded to none in zeal. Hampden, wise andtemperate, seemed to emulate the firmness ofhis illustrious father. Littleton, profoundly skilledin the history of his country, and thoroughly acquaintedwith all her institutions, joined to theWood's Then. Ox.— Tern f Life of Lord William Rustle'sMemoirs. sell, p. 37.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 33merit of an eloquent speaker, a logical style of chap.reasoning which is eminently appreciated in an !assembly constituted like a British house of com- ' to 1678.mons. Powle was a practised debater, and a goodparliamentary tactician. Colonel Birch was theopposite of the two last : violent and declamatoryin his harangues, he was calculated rather to leada popular meeting than to convince a deliberativeassembly. He was a remnant of the old Roundheadparty, and had risen to the station which henow held by the courage and conduct he had discoveredduring the civil wars.* Birch's originaloccupation had been that of a carrier, and he wasaccused of affectedly retaining the phrases in hisspeeches in parliament which he had been accustomedto use in his early occupation. Hewas, however, a vigilant and an useful memberone of those memorials of the revolutionwhich were not without their utility, since theyserved to refresh the memory of a king, who,in his strides towards arbitrary power, was in dangerof forgetting that such a thing had bennetBurnet. rough, and congratulating himf Birch's personal appearance upon his success at Challenger,seems to have been very forming says, " Your name is so terrible inable. Many years later than the these parts, that in this holy igno-time we are now treating of, the rant city, they have an idea of youDuke of Shrewsbury, writing from as Tamerlane, and had I a pictureRome to the Duke of Marlow of old Colonel Birch, with hisVOL, I. D34 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. We must not forget to number among the foundersof the Whig party in the house of commons, theto \%a celebrated Andrew Marvell, who, although so littlegifted with eloquence, that he never addressed thehouse, except upon the occasion of a quarrel intowhich he was forced during a debate, was yet ofgreat assistance to the cause of that party. Hesupported them with his assiduous attendance andconstant votes in parliament, and by his powerfulwritings without.Andrew Marvell was the son of a clergyman,whom Echard styles " the facetious Calvinistic Ministerof Hull." In his youth, his strong andunregulated mind bore him into many extremes.He was, at one time, seduced from Cambridge bythe Jesuits, and, although reclaimed by his father,his conduct was so little satisfactory to that university,that, in 1641, the authorities of his collegedeprived him of the exhibition he held.After many years spent in travel and private Hfe,we find Marvell the friend of John Milton, and associatedwith that illustrious man as assistant Latinsecretary to Cromwell. In 1660, the electors ofhis native town sent him to parliament, and herequited their confidence by writing to them, byevery post, a history of the proceedings ofwhiskers, I could put it off for by Raphael." — Shrewsbury Corridors,and change it for one done spo7ide7ice.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. Zthe assembly of which they had made him a chap.member. '.At the time of the formation of the \VTiig party, " ^ 1673.Marvell had spent the slender patrimony he hadreceived from his father, and was compelled to acceptthe wages, which, according to ancient usage, therepresentatives of boroughs and counties were entitledto receive from their constituents. Marvellwas the last who ever received these wages. Such,however, was the affection which subsisted betweenhim and his constituents, that this was cheerfullypaid, and we find him constantly thanking them forother presents which he had received.Marvell, although poor, was incorruptible. Hewas at this time living on the second floor, in acourt near the Strand, in rooms that had littlepretension to comfort, and none to respectability ;but his wit and talent, although employed againstthe court, rendered Charles curious to enjoy thecompany of a man so much spoken of Marvell wasintroduced, and the king found his wit and addresshad not been overstated. Willing to disarm sopowerful a satirist, or to gain so useful an ally,he sent Lord Danby, then his lord treasurer,to him on the following morning. Lord Danby,says Mr. Dove, from the darkness of the staircase,and its narrowness, abruptly burst open thedoor, and suddenly entered the room in whichD 236 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, he found Marvell writing. Astonished at the sightof so noble and unexpected a visiter, Marvell asked^ to\%ahis lordship, with a smile, if he had not mistakenhis way. " Not since I have found Mr. Marvell,"replied the treasurer, continuing that hecame with a message from the king, who wished todohim some signal service, on account of the highopinion his majesty had of his merits. Marvellreplied with his usual pleasantry, that his majestyhad it not in his power to serve him. But, becomingmore serious, he told the lord treason-er that heknew the nature of courts too well not to be sensible,that whoever is distinguished by a prince's favour isexpected to vote in his interest. The Lord Danbytold him, he only desired to know whether there wasany place at court he would accept. He told thelord treasurer he could not accept any thing withhonour; for he must be either ungrateful to theking, in voting against him, or false to his country,in giving in to the measures of the court. Therefore,the only favour he begged of his majesty was,that he would esteem him as dutiful a subject as anyhe had, and more in his proper interest in refusinghis offers, than if he had accepted them. The LordDanby, finding that no argument could prevail,told Marvell that the king requested his acceptanceof £1000 ; but this was rejected with the samesteadiness ; though soon after the departure of hisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 37noble visiter, he was obliged to borrow a guinea from chap.a friend. \A pamphlet printed in Ireland about the year " to i678.1754, and quoted by the same author, gives a moreparticular account of the rejection of this £1000.The treasurer, at parting, it is said, slipped intoMarvell's hand an order upon the treasury for thatamount, and was moAdng towards his carriage, butMarvell stopped him, and taking him again upstairs,called his servant boy, when the following colloquyensued : *' Jack Child, what had I for dinner yesterday?" — " Don't you remember, sir, you had thelittle shoulder of mutton, that you ordered me tobring from the woman in the market ?" " Veryright, Child, what have I for dinner to-day?" —Don't you know, sir, that you bid me lay by theblade-bone to broil ?" " 'Tis so, very right. Child,go away." — " My lord, do you hear that AndrewMarvell's dinner is provided ? There's your pieceof paper, I want it not ; I knew the sort of kindnessyou intended. I live here to serve my constituents ;the ministry may seek men for their purpose, I amnot one."Marvell did not always, however, dine thus scantily.The Gentleman's Magazine for 1738, hasthe following anecdote : " Marvell frequently dinedat an ordinary in the Strand, where, having one dayeaten heartily of boiled beef, he drank his pint of38 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, port ; and, on paying the reckoning, he took a pieceout of his pocket, and holding it between his fingerto 1678. and thumb — ' Gentlemen,* said he, ' who would lethimself out for hire, while he can have such a dinnerfor half-a-crown ?' "Amid the charges of corruption which are showeredupon both parties of the public men of this period,it is pleasing to linger over such a character as thatof Marvell. But although one of the founders ofthe Whig party, he never knew that party name.He died on the loth of August, I678, before it^ was applied to the opposition in the English parliament.r These are the leaders in the commons who havebeen mentioned as the founders of that party whichcame afterwards to be called Whigs. The partywhich supported them in all their measures was small,although, whenever the question was upon France orpopery, they were joined by those who, upon otheroccasions, voted with the court, and then constituteda majority.If this party was humble in its origin among thecommons, it was yet more so in the lords. Theseconsisted, generally of men who had endured exileDove's Life of Marvell — the procurement of the court, inThompson's Life of Marvell, revenge for the pamphlet he hadWorks, vol. iii. Thompson in- written, called " The Growthminutes that he was poisoned by of Popery."THE HISTORY OF PARTY.and proscription, who remembered the prevalence chap.of popular notions of government only as the har —r r & J A.D. 1672finger of their former sufferings, and considered to i678.that their existence as a body depended upon theirintimate connexion with the crown. It may bereadily conceived that very Httle of the principleupon which the conduct of the new party wasprofessedly founded could enter into such an assemblyas this.Still, however, there were some few, even amongthese, who hated the tyranny of a king as sincerely ias that of a people, and were worthy to contend bythe side of Russell and Coventry. It is remarkablethat several of the best and most disinterested of thesepatriot noblemen were descended from families eminentfor their loyalty to the Stuartssss, and for the devotednesswith which they had adhered to them when inadverse fortunes. Of these, one of the most illustriouswas the popular and unfortunate Earl of Essex. *This nobleman was, perhaps, of all others, the onewho might have been supposed to be most wedded tothe court j he was the son of that Lord Capell whoseloyalty to Charles the First brought him to thescaffold, and who there declared that there was notamore virtuous and sufficient prince known in theworld than that king. This nobleman, however,although he bore as his device a sceptre and crown,40 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, with the motto, " Perfectissima gubematio,*' hadbeen, in the earlier part of his career, one of thoseto 1678. ^^^ opposed the usurpations of Charles the First.His son chose to follow the example of his father'syouth. Although high in favour with the restoredmonarch, who rewarded in the son the merit of thefather, he could be bribed neither by honours orlucrative appointments, to become a servant of thecoquet. An embassy to Denmark, a seat at theprivy council board, and, lastly, the lord lieutenancyof Ireland, had been bestowed upon him, as evidencesof the anxiety of the king to withdraw him from theparty which opposed his measures. But Essex wassoon discovered to be very unfit for this last office. Therevenue of Ireland, like every other branch of thenational accounts, was looked upon as a lawful preyby the minions of the court : the Duchess of Portsmouthdrew from it a large yearly pension, and theking himself embezzled a still larger sum. Charleswas astonished at the scruples which induced hisviceroy to refuse to pass accounts calculated to disguisethese practices, but they were scruples far tooinconvenient to be tolerated, and Essex was soonsuperseded by a lord lieutenant of more accommodatingprinciples. Thus, after a short respite of five years,from her usual curse of misgovernment, Ireland wasagain abandoned to the rapacity of the undertakersTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 41for the court.* England was, however, the gainer, chap.for the earl returned at a critical period, and placed 'himself among the opposition in the house of lords * l^ j^Jts.at a time when his aid was not a little wanted topreserve the semblance of a liberal party there.The ]^rl of Essex was of a thoughtful and cautioustemperament j he was studious in his habits,but his speeches in parliament were free, sometimeseven eloquent, and his opponents were cautiousof provoking his sharp and ready repartee. Hispolitical opinions were founded upon the fundamentalprinciple that the obligation between thesovereign and the subject is mutual, and that anyimportant breach of that obligation on the part ofthe former cancels the allegiance of the latter. Hewas constant in his defence of the protestant religion,^*^? 1^^^^PP°^^^^^^ ^^ popery, a conduct which issaid to have been dictated entirely by politicalmotivesAfter this nobleman, we may rank Lord Holieswho was associated with him in a compliment madethem by the king, a compliment which was valuableEssex writes to Mr. Harbordd, death of a deer among a pack ofin 1675, " This country has been hounds, where every one pullsperpetually rent and torn since and tears what he can for him-hismajesty's restoration. I can self." — Letters, p. 334. Essex wascompare it to nothing better than recalled in 1677.the flinging the reward upon the f Burnet, vol. i., p. 396.42 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, because undesigned. " The king," says Burnet,who was often weary of time, and did not knowto 1678. how to get round the day, liked the going to thehouse as a pleasant diversion ; so he went constantly,and he quickly left the throne and stood by the fire,which drew a crowd about him, that broke all thedecency of that house ; for, before that time, everylord sat regularly in his place, but the kingcoming broke the order of their sitting as becamesenators. The king going thither had a much worseeffect, for he became a common solicitor, not onlyin public affairs, but even in private matters of justice.He would, in a very little time, have goneround the house, and spoke to every man that hethought worth speaking to ; and he was apt to dothat upon the solicitation of any of the ladies infavour, or any that had credit with them. He knewwell on whom he could prevail ; so being once inamatter of justice desired to speak to the Earl ofEssex and the Lord Holies, he said they were stiffand sullen men ; but when he was next desired tosolicit two others, he undertook to do it, and saidthey were men of no conscience, so I will takethe government of their conscience into my ownhands." *Holies had been in early youth an intimate friendBurnet, vol. i., p. 272.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 43of Charles I., when Prince of Wales, and he chap.was brother-in-law to the unfortunate and guilty Earlof Stratford. Afterwards, as Mr. Dense Holies, he ' ^ ^ Jyghad been one of the great leaders of the presbyterianparty throughout the time of the Commonwealth.Like many others of his sect, he became at lengthconvinced that the monarchical form of governmentwas most adapted to the genius of his country,and he assisted with ardour in the work of therestoration. For his important services during theprogress of this delicate affair, he was created a peer,and he brought with him into the house of lords allhis original enthusiasm for liberty and all his naturalhatred of tyranny. But these were now purged from /any chimerical views towards a republican form of /jgovernment; they terminated in a free constitution! jand a limited monarchy.*Holies had, however, been always moderate in hisviews. During the civil wars, he was ever anxiousto procure an accommodation with the king : hiszeal in this respect, when one of the parliamentarycommissioners at Oxford, brought him under thecensure of the more violent majority, and whenacting in a similar capacity at the Isle of Wight, hewent upon his knees to the king to beseech him toCollins's Historical Memoirs of the Family of Holies.44* THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, listen to the just demands of his people, and to rail.some his crown as a constitutional monarch.to 1678. Holies is described by Burnet* as a man of greatcourage and of as great pride. He appears tohave opposed the tyranny of Cromwell as warmlyas he did that of Charles ; an opposition whichthat dictator returned by a hatred which he couldnot venture to gratify. Faithful in his friendshipsand open in his enmities, he seems to have beena specimen of the sterling English character ; henever flattered a friend, or dissembled his hatred ofa foe. In debate he was vehement, but impatientof contradiction; firm in his resolution, and alwaysconsistent in his policy ; he possessed a skill inargument, which, when his natural passion wouldadmit of its exercise, always produced a visible effectupon the house. Holies was now in his naturalplace among the opposition.The high-spirited and patriotic Earl of Salisburyalso deserves mention, as one of the leaders of thenew party ; nor must Wharton be omitted, whoselife was a scene of violent but honest oppositionto those principles which were at that time thebadge of his order. Wharton was afterwards oneof the first noblemen who joined the standard of theVol. i., p. 97.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 45Prince of Orange, and wherever he appears in the CHAP,public history of his time, we recognise, notwithstandinghis occasional intemperance, the conduct ' ^ its.of a firm and consistent Whig nobleman. It is asingular instance of the uncertainty of fame, thatwhile the reckless and profligate Philip Wharton,has obtained a place in all the ordinary biographies,his more patriotic ancestors are known only by theoccasional mention made of them by the contemporaryhistorians, and by the frequent occurrence oftheir names in the parliamentary history.These," in the words of Burnet, " were thechief men that preserved the nation from a verydeceitful and practising court, and from a corrupthouse of commons. And by their skill and firmness, Ifthey, from a small number who began the oppositionsgrew at last to be the majority."But these illustrious founders of a new school ofpoliticians did not labour entirely alone. They hadallies who must be distinguished from them, because |they differed from them either in their motives orstheir principles. I know not whether this considerabletion should induce us to rank Shaftesbury as second -to Russell. Ambition, although in the eyes of atheorist it may detract from the purity of patriotism,is a powerful and a useful incentive to a statesman yall that can be hoped for is, that it be restrained andregulated by the purer motive.46 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The ambition of Shaftesbury had once borne him faraway,but his after life was spent in atoning for his errorto 1678. — an error which will admit of much palliation, whenwe consider the character of the man, the confidencewhich he placed in his own extraordinary abilities ;the proof which exists that he always used his influencein opposition to the most mischievous of thedesigns of his colleagues, and the manner in whichhe withdrew from their side, when he found thatthese could no longer be withstood.Shaftesbury found himself, before he arrived atmanhood, in uncontrolled possession of a propertywhich gave him considerable influence in his county.The country was upon the eve of a civil war, andboth parties courted his alliance. Scarcely twentyyears old, the young baronet formed the chimericalidea of becoming mediator between the two contendingparties ; and he submitted his scheme to theking, who listened to him with more politeness thancould have been expected, and promised that itshould have a trial. It, of course, failed, and SirAshley Cooper considered himself ill-used. Hisexpressions of discontent would probably have costhim dear, had he not received information fi-om afriend that the royal order was issued to secure him.Upon this he made his escape to London, and becameone of the most eminent of the parliamentaryleaders in the council, and not the least active in theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 47field; possessed of a most persuasive address anti chap.II.gifted with a powerful eloquence, the scenes in which]he now found himself, were those most congenial to \ ' ^ i678.his restless spirit. With a tact which never desertedhim, he contrived to avoid all those violent measureswhich brought subsequent ruin upon their authors,and to maintain his influence throughout all thechanges of this unstable period. The same foresight ^which protected him through the time of the Com- fe^'S-^v^mon wealth, enabled him to anticipate its end. He wj*^saw the nation ripe for a restoration, and he resolvedto have a conspicuous part in bringing it about.The event concurred ^;vith his usual fortune ; hesucceeded in baffling all the designs of the Republicans,eluded the vigilance of the committee of safety,influenced the irresolute mind of Monk, and joinedin the triumph which he had so materially assisted toobtain.His buoyant genius had borne him safely over thestones of the Commonwealth ; he was not lessfortunate under the restored monarchy. His ownengaging address, the service he had performed,and the friendship of Monk, obtained him the favourof the king. He was created a member of theprivy council, raised to the peerage, received intothe ministry, and made chancellor of the exchequer,in rapid succession ; and thence he was again ap-theHISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, pointed to be lord chancellor, with the earldom of11.Shaftesbury.to 1678. In return for all these favours he sacrificed largelyat the shrine of prerogative ; his conduct was, atleast, indecent, when he sat as one of the commissionerswho condemned the regicides. He showedlittle tenderness for the constitution when he advisedthe declaration of indulgence ; but he completedthe climax of his crimes against his country, whenhe suffered himself to be put forward as the championof the Cabal and the advocate of their foreignpolicy ; when he defended the iniquitous Dutchwar, and denounced Holland as a nation which itbehoved England to destroy.*His supporters have defended him by saying,that in pronouncing this speech, he was merelydelivering the sentiments of the ministry, and thatthe address he spoke was substituted by the restof the Cabal for another which he had himself prepared.But the fallacy of such an excuse is tooapparent to need exposure ; the first expedientwhich occurs to an honourable man is to resign anoffice, when he finds its duties such as he cannotconscientiously fulfil.Shaftesbury's speech, in which land, is well known both for itshe applied the words of Cato — tenour and its effects.Defend est Carthage"— to Hoi-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 49This, as it was the greatest, so it was his last chap.sacrifice to the court. We have already seen, that1 P 1 1 1 -1 1 A.D. 1672as soon as he hound that the question between the to 1678.king and his commons was one of absolute or limitedmonarchy, and of a catholic or protestant establishment,he at once deserted the court and ranked ,himself among" the friends of the constitution.*It may be considered strange that I have thus .excluded this able and influential man from the listof the founders of the \VTiig party. He was certainlythe leader of the great body of the opposition, ]and has often been cited as one of the oracles of thefirst Whigs ; but he would be more correctly consisttered the head of a section, acting, indeed, with thaiparty, but differing from them both in their motives',and principles. Shaftesbury's opposition to the-courtwas, doubtless, productive of important ser ^.vice to his country. As the father of the Habeas >Corpus Act, and the originator of that measure iwhich afterwards purified our corrupted comets ofjustice, by rendering the judges independent of thecrown, he would alone deserve the gratitude of all jgenerations of his countrymen.But his exertions in favour of these measures, jgreat and meritorious as they were, proceeded from Ino fixed principles of constitutional liberty. TheMartyn's Life of Shaftesbury.VOL. I. ' E50 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, i man who could write and publish a defence of the'- ^ declaration of indulgence, and premeditatedly assertA.D. 1672 ,, ,.,to 1674 ^^^^ there is inherent m the crown a power to suspendthe force of the acts of the legislature,* hasmuch to learn before he can assent to the comprehensivedoctrines of the early Whigs. Shaftesbury,therefore, although looked upon by the Whigs as animportant ally, was never treated with that cordialityand confidence which can only be the resultof an entire community of sentiment. His ambitiousspirit, and his commanding talents, procuredfor him an influence which those who felt it endeavouredin vain to resist ; but they never forgot thathe had been a member of the Cabal, and the nicknameof Alderman Shaftsbury, by which he wasgood-humouredly designated by the people, showed,that although they valued his present services, theywere not confident of their continuance.Buckingham's character is far less mixed, although \he is another of those who must be classed as occa- \signal allies of the Whig party. This nobleman wasnaturally and essentially a minion of the court ; everypopular vote he gave was prompted either by resentmentagainst the king, or fear of the commons. He,Lord Percy, and the philosopher Hobbes, formed theLetter from a person of qua written, if not by Shaftesburycity, printed among Locke's works, himself, at least under his imme-but well known to have been date direction.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 51triumvirate, who enjoyed the reputation of having chap.made Charles what he was, and the proficiency of,. , ,. , ,.*', A. D. 1672their pupil certainly did credit to their assiduity and to 1078,address. Without one principle of friendship, morality,or patriotism, utterly destitute of religion, yetdiscovering in some instances the credulity of achild,* Buckingham continued for a long time to holdimportant influence in the government of England.His bold and natural wit captivated Charles, whofound in him also an unscrupulous instrument, bothof his political crimes and his private pleasures. Inthe latter capacity, his address was admirable ; andCharles testified his approval of his courtier's taste,by the honours he lavished upon Louisa de ,who owed her title of Duchess of Portsmouthto the introduction of Buckingham. In the former,however, he was less successful : his great inducementto undertake the conduct of the *' traite simple"was a promise from the king of the command of a body• Burnet says that the only bury. Buckingham soon found thatknowledge Buckingham possessed all the best qualities of the philo-wassome skill in chemistry, which sophie's stone were to be found inwas the fashionable study of the the favour of the French king,time. The duke had very san-j- Dalrymple's App. — Bucking-guidehopes of discovering the ham should have known betterphilosopher's stone. This, how than to trust a promise fromever, was a favourite accusation Charles ; he was duped throughoutwith the bishop ; he advances a the whole progress ofthe treaty, andvery similar one against Shafts cheated of his expected reward.E 252 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Qf troops which, by one of its provisions, was to• ~ be placed at the disposal of the French king. Evento 1678. Charles hesitated to confide the secret of his granddesign to Buckingham, not that that pliant courtierwas likely to have any scruples as to the iniquity ofthe scheme, but he could not be depended upon tokeep the secret. Such was one of the men whomthe severe circumstances of these times obliged thepatriot party to acknowledge as an ally.Infinitely superior to him, but belonging to thesame class of uncertain politicians, was Lord Halifax,whose character is so well drawn by Burnet, that Ishall give it in the words of that historian : "SirGeorge Seville, who rose afterwards to be Viscount,Earl, and Marquis Halifax, was a man of a great andready wit, full of life and very pleasant, much turnedto satire. He let his wit run much on matters ofreligion, so that he passed for a bold determinedatheist, though he often protested to me he was notone, and said he believed there was not one in theworld ; he confessed he could not swallow down everythingthat divines imposed on the world ; he was aChristian in submission ; he believed as much as hecould, and he hoped that God would not lay it to hischarge, if he could not digest iron as an ostrich did,nor take into his belief things that must burst him.If he had any scruples, they were not sought for norcherished by him, for he never read an atheisticalTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 53book. In a fit of sickness, I knew him very much chap.touched with a sense of religion ; I was then very 'often with him, he seemed full of good purposes, but ' ^.^ ^^q^qthey went off with his sickness ; he was always talkingof morality and friendship ; he was punctual inall payments, and just in all his private dealings ;but with relation to the public, he went backwardsand forwards, and changed sides so often, that inconclusion no side trusted him. He seemed fiiU ofCommonwealth notions, yet he went into the worstpart of King Charles's reign ; the liveliness of hisimagination was always too hard for his judgment,a severe jest was preferred by him to all argumentswhatsoever, and he was endless in consultations ; forwhen after much discourse a point was settled, if hecould find a new jest to make even that which wassuggested by himself seem ridiculous, he could nothold, but would study to raise the credit of his wit,though it made others call his judgment in question.Ashen he talked to me as a philosopher of his contemptof the world, I asked him what he meant bygetting so many new titles, which I called thehanging himself about with bells and tinsel ? He hadno other excuse for it but this, that since the worldwere such fools as to value such matters, a man mustbe a fool for company ; he considered them but asrattles, yet rattles please children, so these might beof use to his family. His heart was much set on54 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, raising his family, but though he made a vast estatefor them, he buried two of his sons himself, andto 1678. almost all his grandchildren.** The son that survived was an honest man, butfar inferior to him."There is yet one man, who, although of incorruptiblepatriotism, and well cultivated talent, can beplaced only among the allies of the new party.Algernon Sydney was not a Whig but an enthusiasticRepublican. He had fought for the parliamentduring the civil wars ; and, so eminent werehis services, that he at one time held the offices oflieutenant-general of the horse in Ireland, and governorof Dublin. Sydney entered into the mostviolent measures of his party, with the single exceptionof the death of the king. He was namedin the commission for the trial of the king. Hisname occurs twice in the " Clerk of the Court'sBook," and he was, therefore, accused of beingone of the regicides.* The following is his ownIn the pamphlet called " Re- father, that he favoured it. Heelections upon Colonel Sydney's wrote, in the Album of the uni-lastPaper," the circumstance of verity of Copenhagen (whenhis name appearing in the " Clerk ambassador from the Englishof the Court's Book" is much in- Commonwealth at the court ofsister upon, and the supposition Denmark), these lines :that he sat upon the trial, although " Manus haec inimical tyranniserroneous, was general. He ac Sense petit placid sub liberateknowledges in a letter to his quieter."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 55account of his conduct upon this occasion : "I chap.do not know the particulars, but the truth of [what passed I do very well remember. I was " ^^ jgy^at Penhurst when the act for the trial passed, andcoming up to town, I heard my name was put in,and that those that were nominated for judges werethen in the painted chamber. I presently wentthither, heard the act read, and found my own namewith others. A debate was raised how they shouldproceed upon it ; and, after having been some timesilent to hear what those would say who had had thedirecting of that business, I did positively opposeCromwell, Bradshaw, and others, who would havethe trial to go on, and drew my reasons from thesetwo points : first, the king could be tried by nocourt ; secondly, that no man could be tried by thatcourt. This being alleged in vain, and Cromwellusing these formal words, * I tell you we will cut offhis head with the crown upon it,* I replied, ' You maytake your own course, I cannot stop you, but I willkeep myself clear from having any hand in thebusiness ;' immediately went out of the room, andnever returned. This is all that passed publicly, orHe repeated them in the book able, lines contained a revoltsmottoes in the royal library binary sentiment, tore themin the same city. Terlon, the out of the book. — Lord Moles-frenchambassador, being told worth's Account of Denmark, — Pre-thatthese, to him unintelligible56 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, that can be with truth recorded or taken notice of"*- when the sentence was passed, Sydney therefore wasA.D. 1672 1 1 T 1 • 1 . r. tito1678. not present, and as he did not sign the warrant tor theexecution, he escaped being excepted as a regicidefrom the act of indemnity.When the first burst of Republican feeling hadpassed, Sydney continued firm, when others abandonedtheir new principles and submitted to Cromwell.Many of these had only been goaded intopassion by the tyranny of the late king, but Sydneywas zealous for a Republic, because he had madethe science of government the great study of hislife, and had come to the conclusion, that thatform was the best. A man may more easily bebribed to betray his principles than to renounce afavourite theory ; the new dictator had no argumentthat could convince, and no bribe that would buy theenthusiast : immediately upon Cromwell's usurpationof the supreme power, Sydney renounced every publicemployment, and retired to meditate upon thescenes in which he had acted. It was probably atthis period, when he was no longer permitted topropagate his opinions with the sword, that he dis-glencoe'sSydney Papers, by the supposition that Sydney's237. Sydney goes on to say, " I intention was to procure thehad an intention which is not very concurrence of both houses of par-fitfor a letter ;" and Sir James lament in the deposition of theMacintosh interprets the passage king. — lb. 283.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 57covered his ability to defend them with the pen, and chap.commenced that answer to Finer's " Patriarchs,"which was afterwards made use of as the instrument ' to\^67^8.of his death.When the long parliament was restored upon theresignation of Richard Cromwell, and declared thattheir hostility to monarchy was unabated, Sydneyreturned to his post, and became one of the councilof state : but he had no part in those intriguesby which the majority of the members of thisbody were induced to forward the restoration. Itwas probably in order to remove so uncompromisinga character, that he was sent with Sir RobertHoneymoon upon an embassy to Denmark ; theobject of which, was to interpose the mediation ofEngland between the Kings of Denmark andSweden.The Sydney Papers* afford us a history of hisnegotiations at this court, which were protracteduntil the restoration had destroyed his commission,and forbade his return. He, having now no longera country, lived a wandering life, and his lettersto his father are dated from different parts of Europe.The well-known inflexibility of his principles markedhim out as an object of peculiar persecution toVol. ii,, p. 683.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Charles, and wherever English influence could prevail,he was generally obliged to withdraw. LudlowA.D. 1672 -. . ^ ^ - n r^^ 1 1 'to 1678. even tells an improbable story oi Charles having sentten men to assassinate him at Augsburg, and saysthat Sydney only escaped this danger by having accidentallyremoved into Holland before their arrival.In 1677> his father, the Earl of Leicester, wasupon his death-bed, and although he had seldomhitherto exhibited much affection towards his son, henow wished to see him before he died. His relation,the Earl of Sunderland, then in favour at court,interposed, and Charles, who had probably forgottenboth Sydney and his offences, was now easily inducedto permit his return.Sydney immediately came to England, where,soon after his arrival, the death of his father put himin possession of £5100, a sum which enabled him tobecome a candidate to represent the borough ofGuildford : but the court found that his ideas wereexactly what they had been in the time of the Commonwealth,and they took sure means to prevent hisreturn. His next attempt was equally unsuccessful,so that Sydney would hardly appear in the annals ofparty, had not his energy and enthusiastic activityproduced such a known effect upon all with whom hewas brought in contact, and had not his tragical fatestamped his memory with an interest that is rivalledTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 59by no other name, except that of his friend and com- CHAP,panton in misfortune, Lord Russell.*These were the most influential men of the | ' to 1678.third party, and upon these Lord Russell and \his friends were compelled to rely, whenever they \hazarded resistance to ,the well-paid phalanx of ithe king.The opposition to the non-resisting Test Bill wasthe first important success obtained by the newparty, but even this advantage was, as I have alreadyremarked, the result of a clever stratagem, not of realstrength. The commons have been more jealous oftheir privileges as a body than of their liberties assubjects. The parliament which was now sitting,was chosen in I66I, and it is indifferently known asthe long and the pensioned parliament. The twoappellations are equally descriptive of its corruption,j\for none bii t a corrupt parliament could have existed^ fourteen years under Charles II. Yet even this^' infamous assembly were intractable upon a questionof privilege. AVTien the opposition had thoroughlyinvolved them in a quarrel with the other house, theinterposition of the king was vain. He pointed out tothem the real origin of the dispute, and interposeda prorogation : but all his endeavours failed, ShaftsMemoirs of the Lives and Actions of the Sydney —Sydney Papers. '60 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, bury, upon the meeting of parliament, renewed theaffair of Dr. Shirley's appeal with a speech repleteA.D. 1672 . , , p . 1 • T • 1 • -1 £■to 1678. with lofty encomiums upon the judicial privileges oithe house of lords. The wily politician had chosena theme well calculated to bear with it the sympathiesof those he addressed. They entered anew into thequarrel, and appointed a day to hear the appeal.The commons, of course, retaliated ; they denied, notonly the right of the lords to summon one of theirmembers* to their bar, but also their right to hearappeals from any court of equity. None were moreforward in advocating these contested rights of thelords than the Whig party in that house ; none moreloudly exclaimed against them than the same partyin the house of commons. The king, disgusted thatthis parliament should occupy themselves only abouttheir own differences, when he had called them togetherto supply his necessities, prorogued them for theunprecedented space of fifteen months. Thus wasthe Non-resisting Test Bill defeated by the Whigs."-"The COMmittalbT'Biickingham, Shaftesbury, Salisbury,and Wharton, to the tower, at the commencementof the next session, for arguing thatthis prorogation amounted to a dissolution, shows thetemper in which the parliament met. " The lordtreasurer," says Ralph, " had so ordered it, that theSir John Fang, the defendant, was a member.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 6lking's party increased rather than the other, but it CHAP,was much feared that some votes were obtained more — rA.D. 1672by purchase than affection." to 1678This fifteenth session of the long parliament accordinglypassed without any other opposition to thecourt than a visible reluctance to grant supplies, andaddresses to remove evil councillors, and particularlythe Earl of Lauderdale ; addresses which producedonly an angry answer and a prorogation.The next was still less productive of any seriousopposition ; Charles even presumed so much uponthe accommodating spirit which his majority manifested,that he demanded an additional settlement of£300,000 a year for his life. This modest request,however, met with no support ; even the court partysaw in such a grant the destruction of all their influence.The states of France," said Mr. Sacheverell,gave the king power to raise money upon extraordinaryoccasions till their next meeting, and theynever met more"* All parties seemed to regardthis message as a request from the king, that theywould give him power to change the government.It was rejected without a division. An ordinarysupply was, however, voted, and the parliament wasagain prorogued.Pari. Hist., vol. iv., col. 1000.62 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER III.Intercourse of the Whig leaders with the French agents — A secrettreaty — The popish plot — Its origin and progress — Dissolution ofthe long parliament — The Whig leaders admitted into the councilTheir resignation — Clifford's administration — Petitioners andabhorrers — Rupture between Charles and Louis.CHAP. Such had been the close of the sixteenth sessionof the pensioned parliament. The next appearedA. D. 1678.pregnant with danger to all our best institutions.J" The united strength of all the opposition leaders was"^ '^^i e not equal to a contest with the court, and their ranks^ V .( \ v'^^were thinned by continual desertion.^ C ^'^ It was now that that intrigue commenced,u^ tween the Whig party and the French king, whichV has been so much spoken of, and so loudly censured.The marriage of the Prince of Orange with thePrincess Mary, at the end of the year 1677» ^^^the insincere threat of war which Charles was forcedto make, had irritated the French king : thatA.D. 1678.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 63monarch saw the probable consequences of the late chap.alliance, and immediately revenged himself by stoppingCharles's pension.* As this was done, notwithstandingthe most submissive assurances madeprivately to the French ambassador, Charles, whofelt the punishment most acutely, and knew that itwas undeserved, was, of course, indignant ; he nowbegan to have serious designs of a French war, andentertained hopes that a new system of policy wouldrender his brother of France as useful as an enemyas he had been as an ally.But the same consideration which inclined Charlesfor war, rendered the Whigs very reluctant to trusthim with the funds and troops necessary to maintainit. He had, on many occasions, discovered hisaffection for a standing army, and they had alreadyexperienced that men and money supplied for aFrench war could be readily applied to a very oppositepurpose. They looked, therefore, upon thesehostile demonstrations as a mere stratagem, by whichLouis was to allow Charles to declare war againstThis pension was a sum of ments ; but when this subsidy was2,000,000 livres which Louis had stopped, the parliament, whichstipulated to pay, upon the consist had already been prorogued, wasderation that Charles should pro hastily called together in Fe-roguehis parliament from Decem february. — Dalrymple's Appendix,ber, 1677, to April, 1678. The p. 111.money was to be paid by instal-theHISTORY OF PARTY.A.D. 1678.CHAP, him, in order that supplies might be obtained fromparliament, and then when the object was thus obtained,a peace should be concluded, and the moneyapplied to aid the common design of the two kingsagainst the religion and liberties of England. TheWhigs, therefore, were opposed to placing in thehands of the king a weapon which they had but toomuch cause to fear he might wield against themselves.*On this occasion they were in the minority. Thepeople were clamorous for war with France, andthe church of England party in the commons, whosehatred to popery and France so often placed themin opposition to the king, would, on this question,resume their characters of zealous courtiers. Tohave opposed the supply, openly, would haveinvolved the loss of that popularity upon whichtheir slender party depended for its existence. Itwas granted, therefore, with such accompanimentsas it was hoped would render it unwelcome to thecourt. The grasping ambition of France was lookedupon as far less dangerous than the despotic dispositionof Charles, and it was justly thought to be aEven Sir John Reresby could the war. " To say the truth," hethink that jealousy reasonable, says, " some of the king's ownwhich supposed that the king, party were not very sure of theindeed, intended to raise an army, contrary." — Memoirs, p. cl.but never designed to go on withTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 6lfoolish policy that would raise an army for the CHAP.Ttpreservation of Flanders, and place it in hands thatwould use it as an instrument of military despotismat home. To the surprise of Europe, and to thet-error of the Whigs, 20,000* men were already inarms, and this formidable body, raised in six weeks,was entirely at the disposal of the court.France was now thoroughly alarmed. Informedof all those secret circumstances of which the oppositionwere ignorant, Louis knew that Charles wasin earnest, and anxiously looked round for someexpedient to prevent the threatening danger. Hefound it in the distractions which he himself hadwrought : he had destroyed all confidence betweenCharles and his people, and this policy now affordedhim security. Barillon, his ambassador at the Englishcourt, was directed to establish a connexionwith the opposition. Courting had already convincedthe French king of the venality of this parliament,and it was hoped that by concerting measureswith the Whigs, and buying over those whowere ever ready to be bought, a sufficient partymight be gathered to derange Charles's hostile preparations,and so to harass him in all his measuresthat he would soon become tired of his sudden fit ofindependence, and return to his ordinary subserviencyto FranceTemple.VOL. I. FA.D. 1678.66 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The mission of Rouvigny had a similar object,and was eminently successful. This skilful intriguerwas cousin to Lady Russell, and his relationship, ofcourse, procured him access to the leader of theWhig party. In their present depressed state, evenRussell and Hollis did not hesitate to accept theproffered support of the French monarch, and theyrightly deemed it lawful to conspire even with aforeign enemy to defeat the more deadly machinationsof a domestic foe. The object of this temporaryalliance, and the motives which induced these twoleaders to enter into it are well developed in Pavillon'sdespatches to his court upon the subject.*' I have seen," writes Barillon on the 24th ofMarch of this year, " the persons with whom I havecommerce, and M. de Rouvigny has seen LordHollis and Lord Russell : both these and thosespeak the same language, and say they never pretendedto oppose openly the giving money to theKing of England ; that this would be a means ofdrawing upon themselves the hatred of the people,and the reproach of all that might hereafter happen ;that the lower house had added to this act, clausesso contrary to the privileges of his Britannic Majesty,that they had hoped neither the prince nor hisministers would have consented to them ; or at leastthat they would have permitted difficulties to bethrown in the way ; but that the avidity for money.A.D. 1678.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 6jand the desire of having troops on foot, which CHAP.they thought they might dispose of, had made theministers pass the act without any consideration forthe true interests of his Britannic Majesty : thatthis redoubles their fears of the designs of the court,with which they are much alarmed : even althoughthey are at this minute persuaded that your majestyand the King of England act in concert, they arestill under apprehension lest the war should serveonly to bring them under subjection. They see thedanger to which they are exposed, but don't knowa remedy to save them from it. However, thiscabal is not absolutely discouraged, and though thelord high treasurer strengthens himself every day,the others have always for their aim to hinder theparliament granting any more money. They areresolved to seek for every thing that can give thecourt vexation, to the end that it may soon dismissthem, and that the King of England may have noother money than what may arise from this tax,which will not amount, according to the commonopinion, to more than £600,000 sterling."The opposition succeeded in disgusting the kingwith the war. The result was another secret treatyby which Charles bound himself to leave the statesto their fate, to disband his aiTay, to recall his troopsfrom Flanders, and to prorogue his parliament for sixF 2THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, months. In return for all this, he was to receive six'. millions of livres.A.D. 1678.This treaty was dated 27th of May of this year,and the war was at an end. But Charles still remainedmaster of the troops he had raised, and of those alsowhich he had withdrawn from Flanders, and he keptthem on foot under the pretence that there were nofunds to disband them. It appears from Barillon's Correspondence,*that the leaders of the Whigs lookedupon this power as imminently dangerous to themselves,and momentarily expected that their arrestwould be the first presage of a new and more determinedpolicy ; thinking, therefore, that furtherstruggle was in vain, they contemplated retiringinto the country, and preferred rather to abide thecurrent they could not withstand, than to exposethemselves uselessly to the fury of the court.But an event now occurred that dissipated all thebright visions of the court party, and frighted themat once from all their schemes. The popish plotwas one of those frenzies to which nations seem liableas well as individuals, and of which the cause isfrequently as trivial as the effects are incalculable.The circumstances of this extraordinary instance ofnational credulity are well known, they belong toDalrymple's Appendix, p. 138.A.D. 1G7S.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 69the history of the period. It is mentioned here only chap.as it influenced the state of parties.Lord Danby was, like the majority of his party,really opposed to popery and France ; in other respects,he was the mere servant of the king.Having incurred the just resentment of thecommons, and being threatened by them with animpeachment, he beheld the approaching sessionwith misgivings as serious as those of the popularparty. The author of such a discovery as a popishconspiracy against the life of the king, might hopefor impunity for any crimes, and Danby eagerlyseized upon the testimony of Tone and Oates.The king had also good reasons for encouraging theinformers. A conviction that he was an object ofhatred to the Papists would at once recover hispopularity which was now waning among the Protestantadherents of the court party. The nationwas already in a state of anxious alarm, and dailyexpecting some new demonstration in favour ofpopery from the court. A call to arms againstpopery made by a party whom they looked upon asits allies, would recall their confidence in theirmonarch, and what was to Charles of far greaterimportance, would induce them to supply him liberallywith money, and furnish him with an excusefor increasing his army.Charles, whose showy vices and habitual polite-ad.1678.70 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ness have induced posterity to speak of him as agood natured monarch, felt little uneasiness at sacrificinga few innocent persons, if their death wasnecessary to his convenience. The coolness withwhich he sometime afterwards allowed the innocentand venerable Plunket, the Catholic primate ofArmagh, to perish, although fully convinced of theabsurdity of the charges against him,* is a dreadfulindication of his heartlessness. This was an act ofexpediency, lest he might check the loyal feelingwhich was then flowing in his favour, and perfectlycoincided with the conduct which he now adoptedwith regard to the popish plot.When the discovery was first made, it was supportedby evidence that constrained belief. Coleman,the Duke of York's secretary, was almost the earliestvictim ; he had sufficient notice of the depositionagainst him to rescue his papers, but one drawer heoverlooked, and this contained letters which corroboratedthe statements of the informers The violentBurnet, vol, i., p. 502 — State passage : " We have a mightyTrials. work upon our hands, no less thanf In these papers were disco the conversion of three kingdoms,vere, among other letters which and by that, perhaps, the utterbetrayed a correspondence be subduing of a pestilent heresy,tween the duke and the French which has domineered over a greatking, carried on through Coleman part of this northern world a longand the Pere la Chaise, one con time. There never were suchtainting the following remarkable hopes of success since the days ofA.D. 1678.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 71death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, who had received CHAP,the depositions of Oates, precluded further doubt.The nation was now thoroughly wrought into a furyagainst the Catholics, and every party was equallyinfected with this epidemic madness. The courtparty were horrified by the idea of an attack uponthe life of the king, and joined to their former hatredof popery a new and more lively horror of it asthe faith of rebels. The Whigs saw in it the developmentof the conspiracy which they had longdreaded, and which several of their leaders knew toexist.When it was brought before the parliament, bothparties, therefore, were eager in its pursuit, theexcitement throughout the country was unparalleled,and Bishop Burnet* mentions it as an unlooked-forforbearance in the people, that they did not wreaktheir vengeance upon the Catholics who were in theQueen Mary as now is in our is great and the labourers but few.days, when God has given us a That which we rely most upon,prince who is become, I may say next to God Almighty's providemiracle, zealous of being the hence, and the fervour of myauthor and instrument of so cloister the duke, is the mightypious a work ; but the opposition mind of his Christian Majesty."we are sure to meet with is also This was sufficient to excite alikely to be great, so that it im nation which had already justports us to get all the aid and grounds for suspicion,assistance we can, for the harvest * Vol. i., p. 230.A.D. 1678.7^ THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, city.* But the Whigs who were urged on bytheir impatient desire to discover the secret workingsof that conspiracy against which they had been solong contending in the dark, soon became moreviolent than their new allies. These last began todoubt the policy of a pursuit in which they saw theiradversaries so cordially join, but not until a torrentof innocent blood had been shed did they slacken intheir zeal. The absurdities which render it impossiblefor any rational man of the present day tobelieve the story of Oates and his companions cametoo late ; the mischief was accomplished by thosesingular coincidences, the contents of Coleman'spapers, and the murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey.The court were the first to pause, and they soonafter began to discountenance the story of the plot,and to throw discredit upon the testimony of Oates.But they led with them no part of the nation. Thejuries chosen from among the people discovered thereal state of the popular feeling. Terror had had itscustomary effect ; it had made men cruel. To beaccused was to incur a violent presumption of guilt ;to profess the Catholic religion, was a heinous crime ;Even Lord Keeper North, tain that the church of Englandin an extract from his Manu men joined in this cry as hear-scriptMemoranda, quoted by till as any else." — Apj)endLv,Dahyniple, says, " It is carp S-21.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. '^3he who united these causes of misfortune had no chap.chance of escape, he was condemned without hesitation,and died unpitied. Even the judges, subservientas they were to the court in other respects,were furious in their prosecution of the popish plot.*' Gentlemen," said one of them, " you have theking's witness upon his oath ; he that testifiesagainst him is barely upon his word, and he is apapist." An argument that at once brought to theaid of injustice a cruel rule of law and an absurdprejudice.*Integrity was unknown to the judges of this reign,they retained their stations only so long as theysuffered them to be prostituted to the services of thecourt ; how irresistible then must have been thatpopular prejudice which invaded the bench, and howoverbearing the universal cry which they, the creamturns of a Catholic king, felt themselves compelled *>) *^'^-^ 'to join ! It is folly to attribute either the origin orthe extent of this plot to either of the state parties.It was a madness in which they both joined.The people were ready to stone any one who pre-stateTrials, vol. vii., col. 1039. here is on one side the life of anSir Thomas Gascoigne's Trial, ancient gentleman before you ; onBut, notwithstanding the exerted other side there is a conditionsof Jones, Dolben, and Pern- racy against the life of the king,barton, he was acquitted. Jones who is the brcatii of our nos-putthe case thus : " Gentlemen, trials."74 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, sued to doubt the evidence of Dr. Oates, and thedetestable policy of Charles induced him to fall in^^ * with their rage without sharing their delusion.He would save Staley for the liking he has toany one that would murder me," was his observationupon Burnet's endeavour to save this first victim ofthe bloodhounds now cheered on against the Catholics.*Every house now contained arms, every man inthe kingdom held himself in readiness to resist someimminent danger ; none doubted that the crisis wasat hands The Book of Martyrs was every wherefound upon the same table with the Family Bible,and was, perhaps, more diligently read. The scenesthere described were expected to reappear, and thefires that had once blazed in Smithfield seemedalready resuscitated to the morbid imaginations ofthe people. The houses of lords and commons unhesitatinglydeclared their implicit belief in thereality of the plot, and their unanimous votes to thateffect yet remain upon their journals ; the tumultuousexcitement of the day bore through those assembliesvotes and even bills which passed without opposingraising all the militia, and keepsShaftesbury's Character of the ing it under arms for six weeks.Honourable William Hastings. — Each third part to serve a fort-martin'sLife of Shaftesbury night. But Charles could callusi., p. 306. late the probable effects of such aX A bill rapidly passed for measure, and he put his veto upon it.A.D. 1678.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. *J5tion then, but which in ordinary times would have cHAP.been supported only by the Whig minority. Longafterwards Dryden, himself a Catholic and a courtier,did not venture to deny that there was some truthconcealed in the cloud of falsehood that now rolledover the land. Several men of the Whig party,whose honour their countrymen will never be persuadedto suspect, were not only confident of theexistence of a conspiracy, for that was abbacy placedbeyond doubt, but were also firmly convinced thatthey had now discovered the real culprits. LordRussell's word was considered by his contemporariesas sufficient to vouch the truth of any proposition ;upon this subject we have his solemn dying declaration.He wrote in the paper delivered to the sheriffs athis execution, " As to the share I had in the prosecutionof the popish plot, I take God to witness,that I proceeded in it in the sincerity of my heart,being thus then really convinced, as I am stilly thatthere was a conspiring against the king, the nation,and the Protestant religion. And I likewise professthat I never knew any thing, either directly or indirectly,of any practice with the witnesses, whichI looked upon as so horrid a thing that I could neverhave endured it"*The Whigs were not, however, unanimous inState Trials.A.D. 1678.76 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, placing reliance upon the depositions of Oates andhis friends. Like the rest of the nation the greatmajority believed them, but some even of the mostinfluential members of that party regarded themwith the detestation they deserved. Burnet declaresthat he received such an impression from the firstinterviews he had with Oates, that he could haveno regard to any thing he either said or swore.*It was the bishop's advice to restrain the violencewith which the prosecutors of the plot seemed determinedto act ; he pointed out the contradictions thatoccurred in Oates's narrative, and the incredibility ofmany of the circumstances to which he swore ; he recommendedto his friends to take advantage of thepopular excitement, to obtain a measure which shouldsecure the nation from all danger from the papists,but " not to run too hastily to the taking men's livesupon such testimonies"! The liberal and sensibleLord Holies, notwithstanding his usually hasty disposition,agreed with this advice, and Hallifax wasequally incredulous. But these men, usually soinfluential, had no power to stay the conflagrationthat had now commenced. Even the attempt wasdangerous; and Burnet, for the advice he gave, wasexecrated by the people, who said that he was takingthis method to get into the favour of the court.Vol. i., p. 428. t lb. p. 43t.A.D. 1678.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 77Others, however, of the same party, would enter CHAP.III.tain no suspicions of Oates, but shared the enthusiasmof the people ; these entered into all themeasures of Shaftesbury, now their constant ally,and in this affair their leader. Shaftesbury puthimself forward as the chief prosecutor of the plot ;he was diligent in searching out evidence, and tookcare to keep the subject continually before the parliament.This able political leader saw in this pretendedplot a power instrument of opposition.The people were arming themselves to resist theexpected attack of the papists ; those arms wouldserve to defend them against the tyranny of a king.It furnished an excuse for calling out the militia:this body, when assembled, might refuse to disbanduntil the grievances of the commons were redressed.The people were excited to a passion of hatredagainst the Duke of York. The Duke of York wasthe most dangerous enemy that Shaftesbury had.Add to this the pleasure of turning a stratagem ofthe court and ministers against its authors, and offoiling them with their own weapon, and we shallhave sufficient reason why Shaftesbury, if he believedthe testimony of the witnesses, should pursue theinvestigation, and why the court should vainly attemptto stifle an inquiry they found they could notguide.It is not, however, therefore to be concluded thatA.D. 1678,78 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Shaftesbury, or any of those who acted with him,-invented this plot, or that they had afterwards anyprivate understanding with the wretches who sacrificedso many Ives for the sake of their own privategain. The king, indeed, is said to have suspectedthis, and many authors have since asserted it, butthere is not a particle of historical evidence to justifythe charge. North, indeed, has an improbable storythat Shaftesbury, being asked, " What he intendedto do with the plot, which was so full of nonsense aswould scarce go down with tantum non idiots,"replied, " The more nonsensical the better ; if wecannot bring them to swallow worse nonsense thanthat we shall never do any good with them"* Butno one who knows any thing of the character ofRoger North, or of that of Shaftesbury, would everbelieve any fact upon the mere authority of theformer, or suppose that the latter would have givenutterance to such a sentiment even had he conceivedit.Sir John Dalrymple says, in his rhetorical manner,Shaftesbury coined rumours as they fitted his purpose,and had men of his party ready who couldrepeat, and men who could write them so as to makethem circulate through every part of the kingdom.Void of all feeling, he confirmed his inventions byExamen. p. 93.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 79public trials, and, without remorse, saw prisoners led CHAP.to death for charge-es which himself had contrived;engaging thus even the passions of horror andamazement in the public to make things crediblewhich without these could not have been believed"*And again, " It has been doubted whether Shaftesburycontrived the popish plot, or if he only madeuse of it after it broke out : some papers I have seenconvince me he contrived it, though the persons hemade use of as informers ran beyond their instructions"!North's gossiping anecdote is worthy of no considerationwhatever. Sir John Dalrymple's authorityis not much more valuable, since there is proof onthe other side of the extreme improbability, if not ofthe impossibility, of the tragedy which occurred inthe year I678 being the effect of a fiction inventedby Shaftesbury. Bishop Burnet, who was no friendto the memory of the earl, and who is always ready ^^,to ascribe the most violent measures of the party to ^ * w£ •?his influence, acquits him of this dreadful chargeupon very sufficient grounds. Speaking of a conversationhe had had with the king, at Chaffinch's, thepage of the back stairs, he says, that they both -agreed in one thing, that the greatest part of theevidence was a contrivance, but Charles suspectedDal. Mem. p. 45. t lb p. 43.^0 , THE HISTORY OF PARTY.^nt^' that some one had set on Oates, and instructed him,~Tr~~~and he named the Earl of Shaftesbury. " I," remarksthe Bishop, *' was of another mind. I thoughtthe many gross things in his narrative, showed thatthere was no abler head than Oates, or Tone, inthe framing it : and Oates, in his first story, hadcovered the duke and the ministers so much, that,from thence, it seemed clear that Lord Shaftesburyhad no hand in it, who hated them much more thanhe did popery*'These probabilities are amply sufficient to disprovethe charge against Lord Shaftesbury. This noblemanwas a violent and an ambitious man ; but,throughout the many delicate passages of his publiclife, no stain of private dishonour rests upon hismemory. No violence of persecution could provokehim to betray a secret, and even the knowledge ofthe first French treaty, although it came to himfortuitously, and discovered to him the disgracefulduplicity of his master, was still safe in his breast ;and this at a time when such a weapon would haveenabled him to turn upon and crush his most bitterpersecutors. *Yet this improbable charge of unparalleled iniquity,brought against a man whose high sense of honourforbade him to use a secret against an enemy, or toMartyn's Life of Shaftesbury, vol. i., p. 144, and vol. ii., p. 103.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D. 1678.receive a reward even from an ally, is believed by CHAP.Sir John Dalrymple upon the authority of somepapers he had seen. Sometime after the appearanceof his Memoirs, Sir John Dalrymple published thatmuch more valuable volume of Appendix, to which Ihave so often referred. This compilation of originalpapers has shed a great deal of light upon themysterious intrigues of the period to which theyrefer, and the diligence of the collector cannot betoo highly lauded ; but it is singular, that, althoughno paper included in this collection, not even thedraft of the secret treaty itself, would have beenread with greater curiosity than that which shouldclear up the impenetrable mystery of the popish plot,and deliver over its real author to the execration ofposterity, yet no quotation is made from these importantdocuments, no hint of what or where theyare, not even a definite statement of the extent ornature of the evidence they afford.This strong negative proof, when so much lessimportant matter is preserved, is decisive as to SirJohn Dalrymple's authority in this instance ; yet Ithink it right to add part of a recantation whichhe made upon another point in his treatment ofShaftesbury, since this discovers how incautious hewas in adopting any information that appeared tohim original, and how wrong we should be, since hisVOL. I. ' GA.D. 1678.82 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, authorities, when quoted, are not always to be dependedupon, did we admit evidence so much morequestionable as to a fact of so much greater importanceI understand that Lord Shaftesbury's familycomplain of me for injuring the memory of theirancestor, and particularly for founding upon anaccount of his death in the paper-office, written byone Massal, who, they say, was a person of a worthlesscharacter, and for alleging that he died in thearms of Ferguson.** Upon hearing this I inquired at the paper-officeif there were any papers in it relating to Massal.It is a piece of justice to this noble family to say,that if I had known Massal's character to have beenso bad as I now find it to have been, I certainlyshould not have given credit to any thing said byhim.It has been a misfortune to Lord Shaftesbury'smemory that every thing has been written againsthim and nothing for him ; upon which account I amhappy to hear that his family have thoughts ofendeavouring to vindicate his memory in public.Far from the intention to injure it, I flatter myselfthat the papers published in this Appendix will sethis character in several respects in a new light to theworld : they will show that he had no hand in theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. , 85Duchess of Orleans's treaty, made at Dover, for the chap.III.interests of popery ; that Charles first broke the ties '.of honour with him, by deceiving and betraying himinto the second treaty with France in the year I67I,while he concealed from him the first which hadbeen made, in the year I67O, and that Shaftesburytook no money from France, at a time when most ofhis friends of the popular party were doing it. Ifhis Lordship's family, in their publication,* shallsatisfy me that I have injured him in any otherrespect, I will own it as fi-rely as I have done mymistake about Missals."This collection of evidence is abundantly suffi \cent to show that the popish plot, although highlyfavourable in its effects to one party, was the contrivanceof neither ; it was the madness of a nation,having, as its more remote origin, the conduct of thecourt, which had imbued the people with just suspicion,but, as its immediate occasion, the hardyvillany of a ruffian, whose perjuries a series of remarkablecontingencies at first confirmed.The popish plot broke forth in the summer ofthe year I678, and the Whigs quickly madeThe publication here alluded was some time ago placed in theto was an unpublished life of hands of the author of the pre-shaftesbury,written by Mr. Ben sent work , who undertook to editjamie Martyn, under the simpering it, and it has very recently ap-tendencyof the fourth Earl. It feared.G 2THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, use of the power which that circumstance had putinto their hands. The Duke of York was the first.Earl Danby the second object of their attack. Theruin of the latter nobleman was a result of Frenchintrigue. France had found him too scrupulous for)her interests, and, with the ordinary heartless policyof that court, now betrayed a correspondence whichwas quite sufficient to ground an impeachment.The instrument of this vengeance was Montagu,Charles's ambassador at the French court, the negotiatorof the last secret treaty, and through whommany letters, bearing Danby's signature, of coursepassed ; one of these contained the following passage"In case the conditions of peace shall beaccepted, the king expects to have six millions oflivres, yearly, for three years fi:om the time that thisagreement shall be signed between his Majesty andthe King of France, because it will be two or threeyears before he can hope to find his parliament inhumour to give him supplies, after your having madeany peace with France. — Danby."To the secretary you must not mention onesyllable of the money. This letter is writ by myorder.— C. R."*Montagu had aspired to the office of secretaryof states and being disappointed in his ambitionPari. Hist. iv. 1060. f Rapin.A.D. 1678.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 85by the lord treasurer, resolved his ruin. He chap.III.who will conspire' against his country will seldomhesitate to betray his accomplice : having procuredhimself to be elected for Northampton, Montagusuddenly left Paris without the king's consent orknowledge, and having in his pocket a promise fromthe French king of a reward of a hundred thousandcrowns, in case the lord treasurer should be ruinedwithin six months, he took his seat in the houseready to accuse that nobleman of an illicit correspondencewith France.Danby dreaded some such an intrigue, and, upona pretence of suspecting the late ambassador of atreasonable correspondence, seized upon his papers ;but Montagu had been too prudent, the importantdocuments had been placed in safe custody, andwhen the king communicated to the house the seizure,and its ostensible reason, the box which containedthem was produced.This discovery produced the effects that Louisdesired. The commons insisted upon disbandingthe army, and the same day a sum of £206,000 wasvoted for that purpose. Danby was impeached ofhigh treason, the jealousy between the king andhis party increased, and the fears of France wereat an end.France upon this became less lavish of her gold,and Montagu complains bitterly, that although heA.D. 1678.86 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.Chap. had ruined Danby according to agreement, and hadprocured the disbanding of the troops, yet the promisedreward had not been paid.*But the consequences of this exposure were infinitelymore important to England. It added freshfuel to the fire the plot had already kindled.Charles feared that Danby, to secure himself, wouldbetray all he knew of the secret negotiations, andto interrupt the impeachment, he abruptly proroguedthe parliament.Burnett says, that after the prorogation, Danby,who saw little hope of recovering himself with thisparliament, which had already declared so violentlyagainst him, began to look to the country party forsafety. The great object of the Whigs was to obtaina dissolution, and Charles, who was less acquaintedwith the feeling of the country, and was irritated atthe symptoms of independence which this once obsequioushouse of commons now showed, was not veryaverse to the measure. Holies, Littleton, Boscaw^en,and Hampden, were spoken to, and these influentialmembers promised Danby all he could reasonablyexpect, an undisturbed retreat into private life ; butupon the conditions that he should procure the dissolutionof the present parliament, obtain the removalof the Duke of York before the meeting of thenext, and then resign office and retire for everDalr. App. f Vol. i„ p. 44-2,A.D. 1678.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 87from public affairs. The Duke of York, irritated chap.at the sacrifices which the king had been sofrequently compelled to make to this parliament,always at the expense of the Catholic religion, hadlong desired a dissolution and had once beforeeven voted against the government in the lordsupon that question ; he, therefore, threw no obstaclein the way of the accommodation,* whichwas now in treaty.On the 4th of January 1679, the long parliamentwas accordingly dissolved, and writs were issued for anew one. But the king was now thoroughly alarmedat the spirit which the late disclosures had raisedagainst him, and became sensible that some conciliationwas requisite, not only to secure the successionto his brother, but even to preserve his owncrown.The house of commons which met in March, borea very different complexion from that which had solately been dissolved. The members of that hadbeen furious against France and popery, but liberalin their grants to the crown, and admirers of theplenitude of its prerogative. They had been chosenwhile the nation was in a frenzy of loyalty, thesewere elected under feelings of discontent and terror :nearly all who were suspected during the last par-ibid.A.D. 1679.88 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, liament of being the paid servants of the court hadbeen rejected, and the Whigs and their allies foundthey now had an absolute majority.Their first act established an important constitutionalprecedent, that the house possessed theright of electing their own speaker, and that theassent of the crown was a mere formula.* The contestthat took place upon this point, and the imprudenceof Earl Danby in receiving a pardon withintent to plead it in bar of his impeachment, joinedto the suspicious circumstances under which severallarge sums passed from the treasury previous to hisresignation, so inflamed the most violent of theopposition party against him, that the more moderatewere unable to discharge their engagement tohim. A bill of attainder passed both houses, andthe earl surrendered to take his trial.These circumstances destroyed the favourableimpression which had been expected from the removalof the Duke of York ; and the Earl of Not-mereswas named by the king's dignity was saved by thecourt, but Seymour, who had a selection of a third person ; butprivate quarrel with Danby, was it was understood that the pointchosen by the house. The king was settled that the election wasrefused to receive him, and the '" the house, and that the con-lousepersisted in their choice, formation followed as a matter ofThe debates upon the subject course. — Parliamentary Hidorij —lasted a week, but at length the Biiriict.matter was accommodated ; theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.gingham's eloquence was listened to with apathy,when he dwelt upon the goodness of the monarch,who would submit to part with an only brotherrather than he should stand between him and hispeople. Charles found that further sacrifices werenecessary, and, after several changes in the governmenthad been unsuccessfully made, Temple wascalled in to advise how little more would suffice, andhow much might be avoided. That skilful minister,who was a genuine Tory, a lover of prerogative,and a hater of popery, devised a scheme so plausiblethat those to whom it was proposed hailed itas an inspiration.This celebrated scheme was an entire change ofthe privy council, now composed entirely of Danby'screatures, and the creation of a new one to which thepopular leaders should be admitted. It was tcconsist of thirty members, fifteen of whom werealways to be the chief officers of the governmentand household, and of the other fifteen, ten wereto be taken from the peers, and five from thecommons.*CHAP,III.A.D. 1679.Temple's account of the digestion about a month ; butformation of this council is as when the forms and persons werefollows : " This whole matter agreed, and his majesty seemedwas consulted and deduced upon much satisfied with the thing, andpaper only between the king and resolved to go on with it, I ,and lasted in the debate and bl) desired iii not to take aTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.III.A.D. 1679.Of this new council, Shaftesbury was, very muchagainst the will of the original designer, the presidentEssex, Hallifax, Holies, and Russell, wereresolution of that importancewithout first communicating it tothree or four persons of those hismajesty could most rely upon inpoint of judgment, secrecy, andaffection to his service. Theking resolved I should go andcommunicate the whole schemewith all the particulars of it,to my Lord Chancellor (Finch),Lord Sunderland, and Lord Essexbut one after another, andwith charge from him of the lastsecrecy; and should bring himword of their opinions upon it ;and if they concurred with his,should appoint them to attendhis majesty next morning: thechancellor only entering into hislodgings by the common way, butthe other two and I by the privateone below.When I acquainted them withit, they all received it with equalamazement and pleasure. Mylord chancellor said, it looked likea thing from heaven, fallen intohis majesty's breast : Lord Essex,that it would leave the parliamentand nation in the same dispositionsto the king which he foundat his coming in : and Lord Sunderlandapproved it as much as any.Next day we attended hismajesty, and had a very long audience,upon which no difficultyarose but two that were whollypersonal. I had proposed LordHallifax as one of the lords, whomthe king had indeed kicked at, inour first consultations, more thanany of the rest ; but upon severalrepresentations of his family, hisabilities, his estate and credit, aswell as talent to ridicule and unravelwhatever he was spited at, Ithought his majesty had been contentedwith it ; but at this meeting,he raised new difficulties uponit, and appeared a great while invinciblein them, though we alljoined in the defence of it, and athist I told the king, we would fallupon our knees to gain a pointthat we all thought necessary forhis service ; and then his majestyconsented.The other was concerningLord Shaftesbury, who had neverbeen mentioned in our first debates,and the king had not thoughtof him before upon this affair, orTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.members. The design was to interpose the popularityof these men between the king and the parHa- .ment, while Charles yet kept a majority of hiscreatures in the council. It was hoped that theirconfidence in these popular leaders would inducehim to moderate their demands ; or if that shouldfail, would furnish him with an excuse for a prorogation.The experiment, however, failed ; the commonslooked upon it as a mere court stratagem, and theCHAP.III.A.D. 1G79.had not mentioned him to me, asknowing upon all occasions ofprivate discourse with his majesty,what opinion I had of that lord.But after my Lord Hallifax hadpassed, the king said there wasanother, who, if he were left out,might do as much mischief as any,and named Lord Shaftesbury ; towhich the other three agreed, andconcluded further, that he wouldnever be content with a councillor'splace among thirty, and,therefore, it was proposed to addone to the number by making apresident, which should be he.I disputed this point from the firstmention, to the last conclusion ofit, foretelling he would destroy allthe good that we expected fromthe whole constitution : and saidall that I could with so milchearnestness, that when, by hismajesty's agreeing with the otherthree, I saw it would be concluded,I walked away to the other endof the room, not knowing wellwhether I should have gone outor not, if the door had been open ;but turning again, I desired hismajesty to remember that I hadno part in Lord Shaftesbury'scoming into his council or hisaffairs ; that his majesty and theother three lords had resolved itwithout me ; and that I was stillabsolutely against it.The king laughed and turnedmy anger into a jest ; and so wenton with the rest of the constitutionintended, till the whole wasresolved and executed publicly inEaster, 1G79." — Temple's MemoirsWorks, 8vo., vol. ii., p. 496,A.D, 1679.92 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, new councillors did not forget the principles theyhad maintained in opposition. Outvoted at thecouncil-board they appealed to their friends in parliament,and Charles, who now heard with astonishmentthe voice of opposition loud even in hiscabinet, quickly got disgusted with a set of ministerswhom he could not tutor to obedience. We soonfind him imploring the French king to protect himfrom this creation of his own tortuous policy, andplotting the dissolution of that council without whoseadvice he had promised the commons he would undertakeno measure of government.The king's disgust was in some degree justifiedby the ill success of Temple's expedient. Six daysafter the formation of the new council, the commonsresolved that the Duke of York being a papist, andthe hopes of his coming such to the crown, hadgiven the greatest countenance and encouragementto the present conspiracies and designs of the papistsagainst the king and the protestant religion, anda fortnight afterwards they resolved " that a bill bebrought in to disable the Duke of York to inheritthe imperial crown of this realm."On the 15th of May this important bill wasbrought into the house of commons, and read a firsttime. After detailing the particulars of the popishplot it set forth, " That the emissaries, priests, andagents, of the pope had traitorously seduced James,A.D. 1679.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 93Duke of York, presumptive heir to these crowns, to cHAP.the communion of the church of Rome, and had -induced him to enter into several negotiations withthe pope, his cardinals, and nuncios, for promotingthe Romish church and interest ; and by his meansand procurement had advanced the power and greatnessof the French king to the manifest hazard ofthese kingdoms. That by descent of these crownsupon a papist, and by foreign alliances and assistance,they might be able to succeed in their wickedand villanous designs."After further preamble, the bill proceeded toenact :1. " That the said James, Duke of York, shouldbe incapable of inheriting the crowns of England,Scotland, and Ireland, with their dependencies ; andof enjoying any of the titles, rights, prerogatives,and revenues belonging to the said crowns.2. " That in case his majesty should happen to die,or resign his dominions, they should devolve to theperson next in succession, in the same manner as ifthe duke was dead.3. " That all acts of sovereignty and royalty thatprince might then happen to perform, were not onlyto be declared void, but to be high treason, andpunishable as such.4. *' That if any one, at any time whatsoever,should endeavour to bring the said duke into any ofA.D. 1G79.9i THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the aforementioned dominions, or correspond withIII. . , .him, in order to make him inherit, he should beguilty of high treason.5. " That if the duke himself ever returned intoany of these dominions, considering the mischiefsthat must ensue, he should be looked upon as guiltyof the same offence ; and all persons were authorizedand required to seize upon and imprison him ; and,in case of resistance made by him or his adherents,to subdue them by force of arms'*Such were the provisions of the measure whichformed the all-absorbing topic of interest duringthe latter part of the reign of Charles II. Nosooner, however, had it been read a second time,than Charles, whose sole principle, or point of conscience,seems to have been the preservation of thelineal succession, prorogued and afterwards dissolvedthis assemblage of turbulent spirits.One inestimable boon we owe, however, to thisshort parliament. The last act of the king, previousto the prorogation, was to give the royalassent to the Habeas Corpus Act, which had longbefore passed the commons, and which now, favouredby the strenuous exertions of the Earl of Shaftesburyand by the tempest which raged without, had survivedthe ordeal of the lords.Ferguson, in his " Growth of Popery," affirms,that " this bill met with great opposition fromTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.the lords ; that it gave rise to several conferencesbetween the two houses ; and that, though it .was far short of what it ought to have been, itwas almost a miracle that the lords suffered it topass at all.* And so much of truth is there in theseassertions," adds Ralph, after quoting the passage,that the committees of the two houses met severaltimes upon it without coming to any agreement,insomuch that the completing the bill was put off toCHAP.III.A.D. 1G79.The anecdote told by Burntof the passing of this bill is wellknown :The Habeas Corpus Act," hesays, " was carried by an odd artificein the house of lords. LordGray and Lord Norris were namedto be the tellers. Lord Norris,being a man subject to vapours,was not at all times attentive towhat he was doing"; so a very fatLord coming in. Lord Graycounted him for ten, as a jest atfirst, but seeing Lord Norris hadnot observed it, he went on withthis mis reckoning of ten ; so itwas reported to the house, anddeclared that they who were forthe bill were the majority, thoughit indeed went on the other side,and by this means the bill past."Vol. i., p. 485,This rather improbable storyreceives some confirmation fromthe Minute Book of the houseof lords, whence it appearsthat there were 107 lords onlypresent, and 112 counted uponthe division. See Martyrs Lifeof Shaftesbury, vol. ii., p. 221.The author of this work proceedsto say, that " when the numberswere reported from the woolsack,the ministry, who knew theirstrength, were surprised ; butwhile they were whispering amongthemselves, Lord Shaftesbury, whofound there was a mistake, andguessed their intentions, startedup and spoke, on the first thingthat occurred to him, almost anhour. Whilst he was speaking,several lords went out and otherscame in, so that it was of courseimpracticable to tell the house."The parliamentary history isvery meagre in its account of theprogress of this bill.THE HISTORY OF PARTYCHAP.111.A.D. l'J79.'llthe last hour of the sessions, and even then thecommons were salad to admit of the lords' amendmentsthat they mig-ht have the merit, and theirfellow-subjects the benefit of so useful a law."The prorogation of this parliament was advised byEssex, Hallifax, : 1 '^ ii 1 rl^^i. I who, disgustedwith the violence oi .Shanesbmy, and repudiatinghis intrigues for setting Monmouth upon the throne,had formed a separate party, and were called theitriumvirate.^Shaftesbiiry's hostility was increasedand the breach was renderedwas known that he hadby this prorogation,beyond remedy when itdeclared he woidd have the heads of those who hadadvised it. It was probably their apprehensionthat this threat might be accomplished, that influencedthem during the alarming illness of the king,which now took place, to advise the recall of theduke. This step was fatal to their own power. Thefirst use that prince made of his recovered influencewas to thwart and harass those who had restoredhim . Essex, who, when appointed first commissionerof the treasury, had found himself the guardian oftwenty-seven shillings and threepence, unappropriatedmoney,* had, by pursuing the same principleswhich had been his guide in Ireland, in someceo-ree, restored that essential branch of movement.This nobleman now resigned his post, and was fol-secretaryCovent Lord John Russell Life of Russell — Appendix.A.D. 1679.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 97rowed by Lord Halifax, who, retiring to his seat chap.in the north, wi'ote to Sir W. Temple, that, thoughhe could not plant melons, he would plant carrotsand cucumbers rather than trouble himself any moreabout public affairs"*This change in the policy of the king had beencommenced by the dismissal of Shaftesbury from hisplace of president of the council, and it was of courseaccompanied by a perseverance in his engagementswith France. A treaty was now in the course ofnegotiation, conducted by Sunderland and theDuchess of Portsmouth, by which, in considerationof an annual pension, Charles was to agree to assembleno parliament for three years. tIt was the prospect of independence which thistreaty promised him that rendered Charles so absolutein his council ; he suddenly declared that hehad resolved to prorogue his new parliament for atwelvemonth, and forbade any one to speak againsthis decision as he would hear no reasons against it.It was in vain that Sir William Temple representedthe absurdity of creating counsellors who should notcounsel, or that all the other members at the councilboard significantly indicated their disapprobation.Temple's Letters. treaty afforded him, that he offeredf Dalrymple's Appendix, 237. — to lend his own money to LouisThe Duke of York was so de to facilitate the money part of thelighted at the prospect which this transaction,VOL. I. HA.D. 1679.98 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Charles had previously prorogued the parliament tothe 28th of January and confident that he shouldnot need their assistance, he looked upon that dayonly as the date of a future and a longer prorogation.It is not wonderful, therefore, that ministers, whohad any spark of patriotism unquenched, should flyfrom a council in which such designs were agitated.They were succeeded by a set of men who wererestrained from becoming; the slaves of the courtonly by their fear of the people, who had the willbut wanted the courage to do harm, and who, fromtheir imbecility, rather excited the contempt thanaroused the vengeance of the nation. Lord Radnorhad succeeded to the post of the Earl of ShaftesburyLord Hyde was now first commissioner of thetreasury. These, with Lord Sunderland and Mr.Godolphin succeeded to the confidence which Charleshad alternately bestowed upon the best and theworst of his subjects.Clifford's ministry was known as the Cabal, apopular ballad inflicted upon this the nickname ofthe " Chits." *The voice of the nation, however, penetrated toTemple. The ballad has Letters to a Friend in Northbeen attributed to Dryden, but Britain, ascribes it, with moreSir W. Scott thinks erroneously, probability, to the Earl of Dorfind that Managing, in his set.A,D. 1679.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 99the cabinet, and startled these irresolute conspirators cHAP.from their conclave. The Whigs had immediate .notice of the measures in contemplation, for Russell,Cavendish, Powle, and Littleton, were, at themoment of their proposal, members of the council :they now exerted themselves with energy to frustrate,by their exertions out of doors what they couldnot prevent by their votes within. Seventeen peers,names worthy to be cherished by posterity, signed,and ten of them presented a petition to the king,entreating him to consider the dangers that threatenedhis throne and people, and in a crisis of suchimportance to call together and effectually use hisgreat council — the parliament. The petitionersClarendon had law and sense, Shall freebornmen, in humble awe,Clifford was fierce and brave, Submit to servile shame ?Bennet's grave look was a pretence, Who, from consent and customAnd Danby's matchless impudence draw,Helped to support the knave. The same right to be ruled by law,ButSunderland,Godolphin,Lory,* Which kings pretend to reign.These will appear such chits in The duke shall wield his conquer-story,ing sword,'Twill turn all politics to jests. The chancellor make a speech ;To be repeated like John Dory, The king shall pledge his honestWhen fiddlers sing at feasts, word.Protect us, mighty Providence! The pawned revenue sums afford,What would these madmen And then come kiss my breech,have ? So have I seen a king in chess,First they would bribe us without His rooks and knights diligence,drawn.Deceive us without common sense. Shifting about, grow less and less,And without power enslave. With here and there a pawn.Lawrence Hyde, afterwards Earl of Rochester.H 2A.D. 1679.lOU THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, earnestly advised him to allow the parliament to sitat the time appointed, and to give public notice tothis effect, that the minds of his subjects might besettled and their fears removed.Tumultuous petitioning," observes Mr. Hume,was one of the chief artifices by which the malcontentsin the last reign had attacked the crown,and though the manner of subscribing and deliveringpetitions was now somewhat regulated by act ofparliament, the thing itself remained, and was anadmirable expedient for infecting the court, forspreading discontent, and for uniting the nation inany popular clamour."Such is the manner in which this historian characterizesthe exercise of the constitutional expedientthat the people, headed by the most influentialnoblemen of the realm, had recourse to, whenCharles, having sold them to France, was about tofulfil his compact.The monarch held a similar opinion with thehistorian. Alarmed by the influence which mustattend the example of the peers, he determined toattempt to terrify others from its imitation. Hecould find no law against petitioning, but he rememberedthe practices more constantly than the fate ofhis father. Although he could not find a law, hecould fi-ane a proclamation, and it is curious toobserve the characters of the lawyers of the day inA.D. 1679.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 101the advice they gave upon the wording of this chap.document. '-The king had wished to throw the odium of suppressingthese manifestations of popular feeling uponthe authorities of the city of London ; but the lordmayor boldly answered, that *' he knew of no coursewhich they could take by law; for the people took itfor a right in them to petition to his majesty uponany grievance they were sensible of, and they actedupon that principle only, and were very active intheir adherence to it." The infamous Jefferies wasthen recorder of London, and he, willing at once toextricate his clients and propitiate the court, proposeda proclamation, boldly prohibiting the framingand presenting any such petitions, and directing themagistrates to punish all who should contravene thiscommand. Chief Justice North was more cautious ;his scheme was, that the proclamation should by nomeans prohibit petitioning his majesty in any case,much less in case of the parliament. But it mighttake notice of certain ill people who, upon the speciouspretence of petitioning, went about in a seditiousand tumultuous 'manner gathering hands tocertain papers, purporting to be, &c., and then toforbid all such tumultuous and seditious proceedings,enjoining all magistrates to punish the offenders.But even this Jesuitical lawyer was exceeded in cautionbySirCreswellLevine,the attorney-general, who,A.D. 1679.102 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, when ordered to draw up the proclamation accordingto North's idea, said, he did not well understandwhat the lord chief justice meant, and begged to hismajesty that his lordship might draw the proclamationhimself. North at first refused, but ultimatelyhe did supply all the material part ; although, confidentthat he should be afterwards called in questionfor it, he penned every word and syllable as if eachwas to have been made an article of a criminal chargeagainst him.Roger North is delighted with the skill displayedin this document, ** Take an instance or two," hesays ; " one is in the words * relating to the public,*where the word parliament is declined. Then ' notto regulate any such,' — not petitions but ' subscriptions,'nor join in any petitions (not generally, norreferring to the matter, but) in that manner. Herefor a tactician"* But perhaps that which is reallyadmirable is the impudence of the monarch who couldsanction such a document.This proclamation illegal and unconstitutional asit undoubtedly was, did not altogether fail of itspurpose ; timorous men hesitated to provoke theExamen, p. 547. See this ment until the eleventh of No-proclamationin the Gazette for member ; but when it came toge-december15, 1679. It appears ther for that purpose, the pronounthe same number with a pro nation was only continued untilexclamation proroguing the palliate 15th of April.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 103power of an ill-defined prerogative, and moderate chap.I IIImen disapproved of the transparent intrigues anJ !avowed designs of Shaftesbury. The worshippersof unlimited monarchy rallied when they saw theirsovereign at their head, and poured in addresses,denouncing the conduct and the tenets of the petitioners.The proclamation against petitions was, therefore,in the words of North, the Genesis ofAbhorrences. An address from the grand juryand justices of Essex declared an abhorrence ofthe petitions to assemble the parliament, andthis casual phrase, being from its strength wellcalculated to express the sentiments of the addressers,was constantly repeated until it becamethe designation of a party. Petitioners and Abhorrersnow divided the nation into those two classeswhich, a few weeks later, received the names ofWhigs and Tories. The Whigs had no great causeto congratulate themselves upon the success of theiragitation. Mr. Hallam observes, " There can beno doubt that the strength of the Tories manifesteditself beyond expectation. Sluggish and silent in itsfields, like the animal which it has taken for itstype, the deep-rooted loyalty of the English gentryto the crown may escape a superficial observer, tillsome circumstance calls forth an indignant and furiousenergy. The middling and lower orders, participated.1679.104 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, early in towns, were clamorous against the Duke of'- York and-the evil counsellors of the crown. Butwith the country gentlemen, popery was scarce amore odious word than fanaticism ; and, in theviolence of the commons, in the insolence of Monmouthand Shaftesbury, in the bold assaults uponhereditary right, they saw a faint image of thatconfusion which had once impoverished and humbledthem"*It must, however, be remembered that these addresseswere chiefly the declarations of men likely tobe influenced by the court. The magistrates attheir quarter sessions holding their commissions fromthe crown ; the grand juries, selected generally inthe country counties by a courtier sheriff, and preparedby the political charge of the subservientjudges ; the corporations, from their ordinary constitutionsuch ready cultivators of royal favour ; theuniversities, whose public acts were dictated by menwhose profession made them in too many instancesthe assiduous flatterers of an expected patron ; theinns of court, whose authorities were in general menwho already held offices at the pleasure of the crown :these were the bodies whence the most numerousand the most unconditional of these welcome addressescamelCoiihtitutioiuil History, \ol.ii., f It is remarkable that most ofp. 697. the petitions came from inhabitantsA.D. 1679.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 105Among the copies of these documents printed in cHAP.the Gazettes, there is not one which does not proceedfrom a pubic body. They declare abhorrenceof the petitions for assembling the parliament, generallyrepudiating one which had proceeded from thesame place : they denounce them as an unjustifiableinterference with the royal prerogative ; thank theking for recalling the Duke of York, and concludewith the somewhat contradictory declaration of theirreadiness to lay down their lives and fortunes for thepreservation of the Protestant religion and the legalsuccession.The university of Cambridge went further ; theydeclared, that "kings derive not their titles from thepeople, but from God ; that to him only they areaccountable ; that it belongs not to subjects eitherto create or censure, but to honour and obey theirsovereign, who comes to be so by a fundamentalhereditary right of succession, which no religion, nolaw, no fault, or forfeiture, can alter or diminish."only of cities or counties. Charles a company of loose and disaffectedtook advantage of this. " Had people." — Gazette, No. 1480. Toyou directions from the grand others he replied, that they wouldjury?" he asked Sir Walter St. argue the matter over a cup of aleJohn, and some other gentlemen when they met at Windsor ; andwho presented him a petition from he warned one deputation not toWiltshire; and, upon their an need another act of oblivion. Theswearing in the negative, rejoined, addresses are generally printed atWhy say you then you come length, the petitions never,from the county ? You come fromA.D. 1679.106 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. This demonstration of Tory feeling might have- confirmed Charles in his design of doing withoutparliaments, had not the treaty with the Frenchking been broken off. Sunderland and the Duchessof Portsmouth were the negotiators. The formerwas afraid of the Whigs ; the latter had begun tolook with favour upon the bill of exclusion. Shehad been flattered with the hope that the king shouldbe enabled to name his successor by will, and shetoo confidently trusted in her influence to obtain thecrown for her son.Louis's ambassador told him that if he was liberalin his offers, he could not be too high in his demands.For once he was in error ; the cupidity ofthe king yielded to the blandishments of his mistress.Favoured by the extravagance of Louis's demands,Sunderland and the duchess were able, without muchdifficulty, to break off" this treaty, and engage Charlesin a more popular alliance with Spain.Deprived of the aid of France, Charles did notimmediately throw himself upon his parliament.The progress of the elections had too surely discoveredto him that the spirit of that which was justchosen was by no means more moderate than that ofthe one he had dissolved.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 107CHAPTER IV.Occurrences during the long recess of 1679-80 — Connexion of theWhig leaders with France — Examination of the charges of corruptionbrought against them — Origin of the terms Whig and Tory.From May I679, until October I68O, there was chap.no session. The new parliament had been prevented """assembling by continued but short prorogations. In to I68O,the mean time the French king directed his attentionmore assiduously to the connexion which he hadbefore established with the opposition.The papers connected with this transaction, whenfirst published by Sir John Dalrymple, created a sensationwhich few historical discoveries have equalled.It is not that the conduct of Russell, Holies, orShaftesbury, requires defence, when they tookcounsel against a domestic tyrant even with aforeign enemy. It must be a morbid sensibility,indeed, which can be wounded by the idea of holdingintercourse with a foreign prince, in order to108 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, detach him from a party who had long been enabledto consummate their mischievous projects solely byto 1680. his assistance ; but it does occasion both surprise andgrief, when we find others, who have always beendeemed worthy to be placed in the same rank withthese, charged with the serious crime of corruptionby a foreign power.It is unavailing to urge in answer to such a charge,that if Sidney, Hampden, Powle, and Littleton, receivedmoney from the French court, it was only asacompliment for their exertions in a cause with whichtheir sympathies were already engaged, and to whichall their energies had long been devoted. He whoreceives the pay of another, must be subservient tohis employer, and the despatches of the French ambassadorabundantly testify that Louis, at least,would never have countenanced the outlay of a francwithout the expectation of some proportionate advantage.If Louis had not supposed that his goldwould have prevailed upon these men to act in somerespects otherwise than they wovdd have acted withoutit, he would never have authorized Barillon to offerit : if they had not (tacitly, at least) consented tobe so influenced, they would never have received it.If Barillon' s statement be true in any respect, wecannot admit Mr. Hallam's exculpatory suggestion,that the opposition agreed together to receive thesegifts from France rather than offend their new ally, orTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. llQO]excite anv suspicion of their sincerity.* The amass CHAP."^ . . ' IV,sapor distinctly states, that a bribe was proposed foraspecific purpose, that it was earned and received ; " ^^ iq^qand further, that Sidney, that sternest of republicans,was greedy after the contaminating gain.It only remains, therefore, to inquire whether thismoney was thus offered and received. If it was, noingenuity can reconcile the conduct of the recipientswith the dictates of patriotism or honour. For thispurpose, I shall lay before the reader those despatchesin which the charge is contained.The first is dated December 14, 1679- Louis,when he began to entertain serious designs of disturbingCharles's government, demanded of his ambassadorthe success he had met with in the negotiationintrusted to him, and the character of those hehad gained ; the following is the reply :tConformable to the orders your majesty hasgiven me, I have re-entered into a correspondencewith the persons in parliament, who, I thought,might be useful to your service hereafter. I hadalways kept measures with them to make use of themin time of need. I shall at present give your majestythe detail, as you order by your last despatch.I have at all times taken great care to manage LordHolies, and I believe I have kept him in very favour-hallam'sConstitutional History, vol. ii., p. 550, 8vo. ed,f Dalrymple's Appendix, p. 200.110 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, able sentiments for your majesty's interests. He isthe man of all England for whom the different cabalsA.D. 1679 . 1 . TT • 1 •to 1680. have the most consideration. He is respected mgeneral by all parties, but principally by the Presbyterians.Nothing did me so much service with himas the offer I made him on your majesty's part ofa box with your picture set with diamonds. Hemade great acknowledgments for this mark of yourmajesty's esteem ; but he has not accepted thepresent, and I have it still. I have pressed himmany times to take it ; he has always excused himself,and told me that he should serve your majestywith less scruple, and more usefully, if he did notaccept it ; and that he could not resolve to take it,without the permission of the King of Great Britain,being at present of his council. I opposed withvery good reasons the proposal he made to me oftelling his Britannic majesty that your majesty wouldmake him a present under the very improbable pretenceof his not having received one at the expirationof his embassy to France. In the mean time, I canassure your majesty, that in the affair of the hightreasurer, and the disbanding of the army, no personwas more useful to your majesty than LordHolies.Although he does not often go to parliament,he is consulted by many people, and his advice hasgreat weight. He is very moderate upon the sub-ad.to 1680.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. Illsect of the Duke of York, and declares he cannot chap.consent to his exclusion ; but, at the same time, he 'is of opinion, that the power of a Catholic King ofEngland should be limited. He is apprehensive thecourt will always adhere to the design of governingmore absolutely than the laws of England admit, andhe knows that your majesty alone can facilitate thesuccess of such a design. Upon this account, hewishes that the nation may not be stirred upagainst France ; and believes it would be a greatimprudence to give any cause of discontent to aprince so powerful, and who can so easily hurt them.I sometimes see Lord Holies, but not to give suspicionby too frequent visits ; we have correspondedtogether by the Sieur Beer, he is a man who hasgreat credit with Lord Holies, and who is greatlyconsidered amongst the Presbyterians ; he has beenvery useful to me on many occasions, and it isthrough him I have been informed in time of whatpasses in the different cabals. I have had, throughthe same person, a strict connexion with Mr. Littleton,who is one of the most considerable in the houseof commons, and whose opinions have always beenthe most followed. I have also kept a particularcorrespondence with Mr. Powle. He was put intothe council when the persons who opposed the courtwere put there. He has so conducted himself sincethat time, that he will always be useful when the112 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, parliament shall meet ; he is a man fit to fill one ofIV.the first posts in England ; he is very eloquent, andto 1680. ^^^y ^^^^ ' ^^^ ^^^^ correspondence came throughMr. Montagu's means ; but I have since kept it bymy own, and very secretly.Mr. Harbordd is another of those whom I havemade use of, and who bore an active part in theaffair of the treasurer, and the disbanding the troops ;but it would be difficult to employ him at present :he has considerable credit amongst people in thecountry ; he would be more fit if a minister was tobe attacked, than he will be to speak in parliamentagainst an alliance which the court would make, andthe other party hinder.These four have touched what was promisedthem, when the disbanding the troops should befinished, and the high treasurer removed from affairs.*' I send a memorial apart, by which your majestywill see what has been given for this, and some otherexpenses laid out by your orders.Mr. Sidney has been of great use to me onmany occasions. He is a man who was in the firstwars, and who is naturally an enemy to the court.He has, for some time, been suspected of beinggained by Lord Sunderland, but he always appearedto me to have the same sentiments, and not to havechanged maxims. He has a great deal of creditamongst the independents, and is also intimate withTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 113those who are the most opposite to the court in par chap.liament. He was elected for the present one.* I '-11 •-^^ J A.D. 1679gave mm only what your majesty permitted me. & less.He would willingly have had more, and if a newgratification was given him, it would be easy toengage him entirely. However he is very favourablydisposed to what your majesty may desire, andis not willing that England and the States Generalshould make a league. He is upon bad terms withhis brother, who is in Holland, and laughs at thecourt's making use of him as a negotiator. I believehe is a man who would be very useful if theaffairs of England should be brought to extremities.** Since the time that an alliance has been spokenof between the States General and England, I havetaken a great deal of care to nourish the diffidencewhich some of the most considerable persons in parliamenthave of the Prince of Orange ; they areapprehensive that his union with the court will renderthe government more firm, and give it moreauthority : but to say the truth as it appears to me,I do not think it would be possible to prevent theparliament fi'om approving a league made with theStates General to guarantee the peace. All thatMr. Sidney's election was found not to be good.VOL. I. ' I114 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, could be done afterwards (if it should happen) wouldbe to hinder the parliament from giving considerable& 1680. sums ; I therefore do not think I ought to proposeto your majesty the making any new expense at present,the success of which might be very doubtful.It will be always time enough to give and promisenew rewards to those whose services may be wishedfor, when it is seen if the parliament is to be assembled.If your majesty thinks I ought again to pressLord Holies to accept the box of diamonds, I may,by means of Lady Holies, make him accept it ; Idon't presume she will be so difficult as he has been.I shall also wait your majesty's orders for offeringany thing to the others of whom I have made mention,but shall not make use of the permission youmay give unless on occasions which I shall thinkessential to your service.*' I ought to give your majesty an account ofwhat regards Mr. Montagu separate from theothers, being engaged as he is in your majesty'sinterests by particular considerations. I have hadtrouble enough to defend myself for these six monthsagainst his solicitations for the payment of the sumwhich was promised him for the ruin of the hightreasurer. He alleges that the condition is fulfilledon his part. I have always endeavoured toTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. ] 15make him understand that it was an affair not entirely chap.IV.finished, and that being fully assured of what hadbeen promised to him, he ought not to make himself * & less.uneasy whether the payment be made a little sooneror later. He does not give way to my reasons.The two journeys which the Sieur Falaiseau hasmade to no purpose, would have made him resolve togo himself to solicit the payment of the sum he pretendsa right to, if he could have left England at atime when affairs are in so great commotion, and inwhich he has acted so great a part. Yom majestywill remember if you please, that Mr. Montaguspoke to me in the month of January last, to try ifyou would favour the Duke of Monmouth's pretensionsit was the principal motive of his journey toFrance, when he was seized at Dover. Mr. Montaguknew well afterwards by the reservedness withwhich I spoke to him upon that affair, that yourmajesty was not disposed to support so unjust adesign, and which then appeared very chimerical.However, upon other affairs we have always had agood correspondence, and have preserved the greatestunion. He has often spoken to me of getting LordShaftesbury into your majesty's interests, and allegesthat it would not be impossible if a considerablesum were employed. I don't know if your majestywill judge it useful to your service to endeavour at itI 2llG THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, at present ; it would be a very proper means to stirup new embarrassments to the King of England, and& 1680. Lord Shaftesbury would be still more bold, if hefound himself secretly supported by your majesty :but it will be difficult to turn him from his engagementsagainst the Duke of York, and to prevent hisbestirring himself for the elevation of the Duke ofMonmouth, or for that of the Prince of Orange ; forhis designs are difficult enough to penetrate : and,perhaps, his principal end is to endeavour theestablishment of a republic, of which he would aimat being chief.If your majesty will give me leave to say whatI think ought to be done at present with regard toMr. Montagu, I think you might command me togive him positive assurances of the payment of whatwas promised him, and that a certain time be namedon which this payment shall be actually made : if,after this, your majesty will, by his means, and thoseof his sister, Mrs. Hervey, gain any members ofparliament, I can answer that two persons cannot befound more proper to traverse all the designs of thecourt. It was by an intrigue of Mrs. Hervey thatI caused to be continued at Brussels a certain personnamed Bulstrode, who, as Mons. de Louis atthat time informed me, was useful to your majesty'sservice. It has been my principal application withTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. Iithose whom I have at present mentioned, to take chap.away from them the least suspicion that your majesty 'will enter into a treaty with the King of England. "^'^&\%oI have, however, taken care not to use positivewords upon this, especially to my Lord Holies ; Ihave only told him in general that your majesty willnever enter into any engagement with his Britannicmajesty which might be prejudicial to the libertiesand privileges of the English.I will say nothing to your majesty upon the subjectof the Duke of Buckingham, because he is nothere at present, and your majesty knows of yourselfof what use he may be to your service. I don'tdoubt but he is dissatisfied with the refusals I gavehim this summer of the twenty thousand crowns,which he wanted the power of disposing of; I wouldrather let him think that I made this saving of myself,than let him know that I did it by order. AsI saw he had a design of going to France, and doubtnot he has been there, I imagine, when he appearshere, I shall find him disposed to serve your majestywhen occasions shall present. It does not appear tomehe has great credit in parliament, but he may beuseful with regard to the populace, and in times oftroubles. It is not the most regular minds whichalways strike the most considerable strokes."The next is a more particular account of the suratthus employed.118 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.J V. * State of the money employed by M. Barillon, Ambassador from Louis XIV.in England, since the 22d of December, 1678.s.1087 10 sterling543 15543 15543 15543 15543 15A.D. 1679& 1680. gy the memorial which I sent to court the 22d of December, 1678,I had remaining in bills of exchange and ready money, the sum of£21,915 165. Id. sterling, which makes, in French money, 292,21 1 livres.Since the said 22d of December to this day, the 14th of December,1679, I have given, to wit.To the Duke of Buckingham, 1000 guineas, whichmakesTo Mr. Sidney, 500 guineas, which makesFor the support of the Sieur Bulstrode, in his employmentat Brussels, 400 guineas, which makesTo the Sieur Beer, 500 guineas, which makesTo the Sieur Lyttelton, 500 guineas, which makesTo the Sieur Poule, 500 guineas, which makesTo the Sieur Harbordd, 500 guineas, which makes .Total of the expense made to this day, 14th of December, 167^,<£4241 5s. sterling, which makes, in French money, 56,550 livres.The 22d of December, 1678, I had remaining £21,915 16^. Id. sterling,which makes, in French money, 292,211 livres.Since the said 22d of December, I have given £4241 5s., which makes,in French money, 56,550 livres.Thus I have remaining this 14th of December, 1679, only the sum of£17,674 1 Is. Id. sterling, which makes, in French money, 245,661 livres,of which sum I have, in ready money, £2674 1 Is. Id. sterling, whichmakes, in French money, 35,66 livres. The remainder, which is £15,000sterling, or 200,000 livres, French money, is in bills of exchange, whichhave not been negotiated.The last account consists of the following articles :Ideas.William Harbordd. Barillon describes him thus : " Qui a beaucoupcontribue a la ruine de Comte de Dambi" — " Whocontributed greatly to the ruin of Lord Danby" . . 500This is extracted verbatim from Dahyniple's Appendix.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.Mr. Hampden .Colonel Titus .Bertrand. This must have been Sir Thomas Armstrong, becausewhen Barillon gives afterwards an account of Armstrong'sexecution for the Rye-house plot, he called himChevalier Thomas BertrandBennett. Barillon describes him to have been formerly secretaryto Prince Rupert, and now to Lord ShaftesburyHodam. This must have been Gotham, for Barillon describeshim, " Fil de Chevalier Hodam, qui etoit gouverneur deHull" — " Son of the Chevalier Gotham, who was governorof Hull"Hicdal .GatewayFranclandComptonHardie. This must have been Sir Edward Harley, because Ba-dillondescribes him, " Ci-devant gouverneur de Dun-quelque"" formerly governor of Dunkirk"Sacheverell* .FoleyBide. He describes him thus : " Fort riche et accredit" — " Veryrich and in great credit." . . . . .Algernon SidneyHerbert .Baber. This must have been the famous Sir John Baber ; Ba-dillondescribes him thus : " Qui n'est pas du parlement,mais qui a beaucoup des liaisons avec les membres de lachambre basse et qui avoit fait ma liaison avec milordHollis" — " Who is not in this parliament, but who hasmany connexions in the lower house, and who formed myconnexion with Lord Holies"GuineasCHAP.IV.A.D. 1679& 1680.We shall have occasion to how little consonant this charge issee, during the reign of William, with the character of Sacheverell.I'iO THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP Guineas,IV. Phil. This was probably Sir Roger Hill : Barillon says, he wasA D 1679 formerly one of Cromwell's officers . . . 500& 1680. Boscawen . . . . . . .500Du Cross. This was the De Cross, envoy from the Duke ofHolstein, mentioned by Sir William Temple . . 150Le Pin. Barillon calls him one of Lord Sunderland's clerks . 150The question now becomes one of credit betweenBarillon and the leaders of the Whig party.Barillon was obliged to carry on many intriguesthrough third parties, and it is, doubtless, possiblethat some of these sums may have been obtained fromhim by his agents for purposes to which they werenever applied. Such an occurrence was not withoutprecedent. Coleman, when his prosecution was beingurged on by the commons, confessed that he hadreceived from France £2500, to be distributedamong the opposition, but that he had applied thatsum to his own use and rendered a false account ofits expenditure. There can be no reason to doubtthis confession, since it acquitted those who werethen demanding his death ; it did not in any degreemitigate their hostility, as it probably would hadthey been guilty ; and he never withdrew it even athis death.But although the dishonesty of agents might acquitsome of these men, Barillon is too circumstantial toallow of this supposition in the case of all. To acquitthem entirely, we must suppose the dishonesty ofTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 121Barillon himself, and believe that he, like Coleman, chap.embezzled the funds thus placed at his disposal. 'We know little of the private character of Baring " ^^^Jg^n,Ion, which would either strengthen or rebut thissupposition. He was a courtier in the court of anabsolute monarch ; he was, doubtless, also the trustedambassador of an able and discerning prince ; butLouis was little credulous as to the virtues of hissubjects, and, in looking out for a minister to carryon his involved intrigues at the court of England, hewould seek rather for diplomatic talent than merepecuniary honesty.* The court of an absolute kingis not the atmosphere where the purest principles ofpatriotism are found to flourish. There the favour ofthe prince is considered as the door to wealth andhonour, and these are to be gathered in the publicemployments he bestows. Whether such were theviews of Barillon or not, they were certainly those ofthe most celebrated of his friends. On the 20th ofApril, 1673, Madame de Seine wrote from Paris,*' Barillon a fait ici un grand sour : son emploi estadmirable cette anne ; il mangera cinquante mille*" If," says Montesquieu, speak employ him. So true is it thating of the genius of a monarchy, virtue is not the spring of thisand quoting the political testament government" — Esprit des Lois,of Cardinal Richelieu, " there i. \\i^ c. 5. France under Louisshould chance to be some unlucky XIV. was just such a monarchyhonest man among the people, a as the president is here speak-princeshould take care not to ing of.122 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, fi'ancs."* And she at least considered that he hadmade the ordinary use of his opportunities, since, after^ ^& ^1680 ^^^ return, she describes him as rich.Those who will be disposed to reject at once thetestimony of a French minister, interested in misrepresentation,when opposed to the well-establishedcharacter of such men as Sidney, Hampden, andFoley, will find much in the despatches alreadyquoted to justify their incredulity.The high character of Lord W. Russell had, doubtless,reached the French court, and Louis would not,perhaps, have heard of his fall without a surprisewhich might have generated suspicion : but so thoroughlyhad that monarch become accustomed to thecraving importunities of Charles, and the no lessbarefaced demands of his ministers, that his credulitycould have received no shock from the venality ofany other man. Such kings as Charles and Louisare accustomed to consider as inseparable the ideasof honour and loyalty, and to sneer at the honesty offLettres de Seine, torn. i. informed that there are in exist"p. 54. These passages have already ence some papers which inquestquoted by Lord John Russell tionably destroy Barillon's credithis Life of Lord W. Russell, ability, and I have taken consider-spherethis question is very ably able pains in searching for them,handled. but without success. Barillon'sSomerville also speaks of Baring despatches certainly show that heIon as a man of very questionable considered no man capable of withinbut he cites no outstanding a bribe, and this opinioncity for the assertion. I have been is fair evidence against himself.THE HISTORY OF Party. 1^3the patriotic party which opposes them. Louis chap.knew the ideas which were entertained of honour atcourt ; lie could not have considered that those & less.could be more refined which were entertained by theadvocates of the people.Barillon, on the other hand, must have knownthat the persons he named would have engagedfreely, and without any incentive fi^om him, in everymeasure which could weaken the court. The onlysubject upon which he would find them opposed tohis views would be an alliance with Holland, andthis he confesses he should be unable to preventtheir approving. It was easy therefore for him topredict what the conduct of these men would be,but it was not so easy to foretel what might be thatof the less prominent members of the same party,who were inconstant in their support, and sometimeschanged their votes without exciting much publicattention. This remark may furnish an explanationof the remarkable fact, that while the most improbablenames are written as recipients of the Frenchbounty, not one of the less known and more necessitousmembers of the party are mentioned.Nor must we omit the credit which would accrue toa minister fi^om having secured the assistance of membersso important as those Barillon names. The gainto be derived from a false statement would temptan avaricious man, but this hope would tempt an124 , THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ambitious courtier, and influence him, even if he hadexpended the money upon meaner conversions, to& 1680. supply their place in his returns with other andmore important names.In support of the supposition that Barillon neverexpended this money at all in the purposes to whichit was destined by his employer, it will be remarked,among the circumstances of suspicion attached tothe despatch of December 14, I679, that the onlybribe which Barillon reports to have been refused,was a portrait of Louis set in diamonds, worth£1500. This is a specific article, which it wouldbe very hazardous to give a wrong account of; butBarillon takes care to fortify the opinion whichLouis entertained of the venal character of his newallies, by ascribing its refusal to a technical scruple,not an honourable contempt for such base acquisitions.There is another paragraph in this despatch whichis too remarkable to pass without notice. Afterenumerating Holies, Lyttelton, Powle, and Harbordd,and describing their characters and the extent oftheir influence, Barillon adds, " These four havetouched what was promised them when the disbandingthe troops should be finished, and the hightreasurer removed from affairs." Among these•' four," Holies must of course be included ; foralthough Baber and Montagu are incidentally mentheHISTORY OF PARTY. 125toned, it is not in a manner which can render it chap.IVpossible that either of these was intended as one ofthis number, and the sequel shows that Montagu ' ^ ipso.had not received what was promised him, and thathe was sorely discontented thereat. This, if it be averbal inaccuracy, is certainly a very singular one ;but if the ambassador intended to convey the ideathat a man who could steadfastly refuse a bribe, disguisedunder the semblance of a compliment, wouldcoolly bargain for a sum to be paid him by a foreignerfor effecting the ruin of a countryman, few will hesitateto pronounce the statement false.This part of Barillon's despatch, however, ceasesto be obscure, if we suppose that that minister,observing Holies and his party eager in their prosecutionof Danby, and insisting upon the disbandingof the troops, represented to his court that all thisenergy was displayed in consequence of his intrigues,and in fulfilment of a bargain into which they had enteredwith him. Barillon would then have been reducedto the dilemma of reporting the refusal of the portrait,which it would have been too hazardous to haveretained, and at the same time of declaring thatHolies had received the money for which he hadalready reported him to have bargained. The excusessuggested by Holies to enable himself to receivethe offered present will then be readily explained,as a fiction to assist to reconcile these contradictions1^6 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Again, it may be remarked that the conduct imputedto the different persons implicated in this& 1680. affair is not only in its nature entirely at variancewith their general character for patriotism andhonour, but it is in its details particularly repugnantto what we know of the peculiarities of the individuals.Sidney is described as forward in his applicationsfor Barillon's bounty, and ready to engage himselfentirely for a new gratification.Every one who is at all conversant with the principalevents of Sidney's life, or has read any part ofhis correspondence, must at once see that such conductas this is the most inconsistent with his generalcharacter of any that could be attributed to him.Hear his own sentiments, when his father gavehim hopes of return from exile. " I confess," hesays, *' we are naturally inclined to delight in ourown country, and I have a particular love for mine.I hope I have given some testimony of it. I thinkthat being exiled from it is a great evil, and wouldredeem myself from it with the loss of a great deal ofmy blood. But when that country of mine, whichused to be esteemed a paradise, is now like to bemade a stage of injury ; the liberty which we hopedto establish oppressed ; luxury and lewdness set upin its height ; the best of our nation made a prey tothe worst ; the parliament, court, and army corrupted;the people enslaved; all things vendible ; noTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 1^7man safe but by such evil and infamous means as chap.. IV.flattery and bribery ; what joy can I have in myA.D. 1679own country in this condition ? Is it a pleasure to & I68O.see that all I love in the world is sold and destroyed?Shall I renounce all my old principles, learn the vilecourt arts, and make my peace by bribing some ofthem. Shall their corruption and vice be my safety?Ah, no ! better is a life among strangers, than inmy own country upon such conditions. Whilst Ilive I will endeavour to preserve my liberty, or atleast not consent to the destroying of it. I hope Ishall die in the same principles in which I havelived, and will live no longer than they can preserveme. I have in my life been guilty of many follies,but, as I think, of no meanness. I will not blot anddefile that which is past, by endeavouring to providefor the fixture. I have ever had in my mind, thatwhen God should cast me into such a condition, asthat I cannot save my life but by doing an indecentthing, he shows me the time is come when I shouldresign it." And again — "It is usual to destroy thosethat will not be corrupted : I could expect not less.Whatsoever my fortune is, I hope I shall show untoyour lordship that I am not capable of base compliancewith fortune, in relation to any person whatever,nor an indecent action, and before I swervefrom this rule I hope God will put an end unto mylife"*Glencoe's Sidney Papers, p. 223.1^8 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. These are specimens of that great man's sentiments.Can it be supposed that such a person could& 1680. become an agent to bribe others, and spread himselfthe leprosy which he thus deplores ? Such a suppositionis sufficiently incredible. But when we arecalled upon to believe that Sidney, who alwaysbreathed such sentiments as these, and whose lifeaccorded with them ; who passed many years of exilerather than bribe or flatter the minions of a court —who shot his favourite horse only because a despotwished for it, and expected to obtain it ; when we arecalled upon to believe that Sidney would sell hiacountry to a man to whom he would not resign hishorse, and become " entirely his," for a paltry gratificationwhich he did not want ;* we think of hislife, his character, his death — we weigh it againstthe, at least doubtful, character of his accuser. —We have already seen that work is so recently published, wasthe Earl of Leicester had in 1677 written and printed some time ago,died, leaving him ,£5100. Sidney and upon a more hasty considerablenot a man of expensive habits, tion of this subject than I haveHe invested part of this sum in since given it,foreign securities, and embarked Long before the work was pub-anotherportion in trading speculated a correction was forwardednations, by which he does not ap to the publisher — on his carelessnessto have suffered. — Letters to ness the discrepancy must rest.Farley, passim. It will probably Several rather ridiculous errors inbe noticed, that my manner of the preface to that book are occa-treating this subject here is at va signed by that sheet having gonefiance with a short editor's note through the press without myin Martyn's Life of Shaftesbury, corrections.That note, however, although theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 129Every Englishman will pronounce the accusation chap.false.At 1 • • o- 1 ^ 1 .1 A.D. 1679Yet the accusation against Sidney must be the & less.test of Barillon's credibility. That minister admitsthat his intrigue with Hampden was carried onthrough Mrs. Hervey, the sister of Montagu, who,if she at all resembled her brother, was quite capableof deceiving him. Others are said to have beengained by Sir John Baber, who, while feigning anadherence to the popular party, was secretly a pensionerof the court,* and an adviser of the Dukeof York ; but Sidney is included among the numberwhom Barillon describes as his intimates andagents ;t and if we disbelieve that he eagerly caughtat the thousand guineas which he is said to havereceived ; if we disbelieve that he was anxious formore, and ready to sell himself entirely for anothersuch bribe, we must believe that Barillon stated ofthis man what he knew to be untrue — how thencan we hear him against any other ?His remarks upon Lord Shaftesbury are not lessimprobable. That nobleman was violent and ambitious,but he was not corrupt. No statesman hasbeen more unfairly treated by the writers of bothparties ; his want of political consistency lost himthe favour of each ; but none of his accusers have everdenied to Shaftesbury the character of being an incor-jNorth's Examen.' f Dalrymple's Appendix, p. iSO.VOL. I. K130 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Iruptible judge, and a man of honour. The followingIVanecdote, which has only recently been made public,& 1680. will show the improbability of Barillon's statement, thatthis nobleman might be gained by a sum of money.Monsieur Ruvigni, the minister from France,waited on Lord Shaftesbury. He first made himmany compliments in the name of the French king,as well as King Charles, on his abilities as a statesman,his address in the most difficult affairs, hisreputation with the people, and his fidelity in allpublic trusts ; after which, to convince him of thehigh esteem which the king of France in particularhad for him, he desired his acceptance of ten thousandguineas, a present fi^om that monarch, and importunedhim to send for them in the afternoon ; hetold him further, that King Charles not only approvedof his offer, but was desirous he should accede to it,and had besides authorized him to say that if hewould return again to court, he might choose whatpreferment he pleased ; and that if he did not approveof the seals, he should have the white staff,and be raised to the dignity of a duke. LordShaftesbury answered that he did not doubt, fromthese extraordinary offers, but it was expected heshould adhere to the French interest, which he couldnever do, whilst it was so incompatible with theinterest of his country ; that he was obliged to theFrench king for his favourable opinion, but couldTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 13not by any means accept of the present designed for CHAP.him, and, even in case he should do it, he could iZperform no service in return, since no Englishmanwould follow him into an interest so evidently destructiveto Great Britain, especially as the Frenchking had lately given such umbrage by the increaseof his shipping, and by his endeavours to obtain thesovereignty of the sea ; that if he had acquired anyreputation with the people, it was because they believedhe adhered to their rights and religion, andfell a sacrifice upon that account, and that as soon asthey should find he had quitted them, they wouldleave him as speedily. He desired Monsieur Ru-vinito represent him as full of duty to KingCharles, and to assure him that he had the sameheart and disposition to serve him, if he could doitconsistently with the interest of the Protestantreligion and the liberties of the people." *M. Stringer in his MS. says, tion with more to the same pur-thathe wast Lord Shaftesbury's pose from Lord Shaftesbury, andwhen Monsieur Ruvigni came from the gentleman who was in-thither, and when he went out ; interpreter. Some time after, Mon-thatRuvigni was in private near sieur Ruvigni related to Lordtwo hours with only one gentle Russell, who was his relation, hisman, who was interpreter ; for discourse with Lord Shaftesbury."though Lord Shaftesbury under — Martyrs Life of Shaftesbury,stood French, he was not ready in vol. ii., p. 87. This M. Stringerspeaking it; that immediately after was a very intimate friend andMonsieur Ruvigni was gone, he protege of Shaftesbury ; he residedhad an account oiF this conversation him for many years, and afterL32 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Having thus collected the evidence upon this importantcharge, which has been so often pressedA.D. 1679 ^ . ^ . /& 1680. against the founders of the Whig party, I shall quitthe subject, each will probably form his judgment accordingto the original bias of his mind, and accordingto the amount of confidence he is accustomedto place in the integrity of public men. It hasbeen made a party question upon which few pronouncean impartial judgment ; some, therefore, maystill be ready to prefer the testimony of the Frenchambassador to the character of the British statesman./ On the 31st of January, in this year. The/ Lords Russell and Cavendish, Sir Henry Capell, andI Mr. Powle, waited on the king, and desired to beI excused from any further attendance at the council.I " To which," says the Gazette, " his majesty wasI graciously pleased to answer, ' With all my heart.' "These parliamentary leaders had long been seekingan opportunity of withdrawing from a post wherethey incurred responsibility without enjoying influence,but they waited until some occurrence shouldtake place which would completely justify their secessionto the nation. They foulid it in the furtherprorogation which was now resolved upon. In thiswards, through his patron's influx left a MS. Life of Shaftesbury, fromence, became chairman of the which Martyn's was in a greatSalisbury Quarter Sessions. He measure written.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 133.■ ^ . . . /instance, they coincided in and were perhaps in- chap.influenced by, the opinion of Shaftesbury. The fol jlowing were the reasons delivered to them by that I ' & igqo.nobleman recommending this course :January 30, 1679-80.I have altered my opinion since last night, onsecond thoughts, and now think nothing clearer thanthat you ought to quit, and that presently and in abody together, both for your own sakes, the nation's,and the king's service ; you may not have so fair anopportunity again offered which so distinctly justifiesyou to the world, every day may engage you in newand illegal proceedings like that of the proclamationagainst petitions. ^ If the D. of Y. shall be admittedto the council as in Scotland, you must either quitupon that which is a less score, or continue his fellowcounsellors. If the papists, of whom the D. of Y.is the manifest head, shall attempt within a fewweeks to alter the religion and government, by theassistance of the French, whose forces and provisionsare ready upon the coast next us, your lordshipshave continued as blind watchmen for us, and willnever be received into the number of good Englishmen.As our affairs stand, we have no hope of a goodcomposure but by the weight of the nation in a mannercompelling us to take right counsels. To thisend, your lordships going out together at this time134 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, extremely serves, and the sense of the body of theProtestants and sober men made known to his^y their addresses and petitions through thewhole nation will not a little contribute. Thosethat are not for this cure must either rely on violentcourses or resolve to give up all ; it can have noeffect upon the Dutch treaty, the reputation of ouralliance is necessary to them, and more they hopenot from us ; the prorogation to the 15th of Aprilmakes all things else impossible. Besides the Dutchalliance is a thing in itself good and desirable ; but,as wholesome and nourishing meat, though good initself, yet to a disordered stomach serves only to addto the disease ; so with us, if this alliance serves toraise money, men, and ships, for our mutual defenceunder the conduct of his Rl. Hs., it had been muchbetter never made. Nothing is good but tends to setthings right at home : in the first place, your lordship,in particular, will never have such an opportunityto restore yourself to the nation ; again, thecounsel of good husbandry, to live without parliaments,both lie heavily upon your lordship, and mustleave you and others, in the opinion of the best menasthe worst ministers that have come yet : but youmay by this convince all good men that what is pastwas mistake, not malice, and they will be ready toembrace with open arms men of your consideration,both for quality, ability, and fortune. Your lord-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 135ship sees with what candour and clearness I deal chap.IV.with you ; I expect the same again from you, and '.when you have read this paper twice, and taken out ' & less.what notes you please with your own hand, that youbum it before the bearer. As you are, you serveonly to delude the world with vain expectations ofwhat they shall never find, and give the papists anopportunity to stalk with you, and destroy us underyour bellies"*Such was the issue of Sir William Temple's plausibleexpedient to delude the nation and increase thepower of the kingsAt Midsummer it was the custom of the citizensof London to choose their sheriffs, and their choicethis year had considerable effect upon the relativestrength of the two parties. When party feelingran so high, it was a matter of no small momentwhich faction had the choice of the London andMiddlesex juries : hitherto this had been usually leftto the under sheriffs, who, being generally in the payof the court, had of course returned such as wouldanswer its purposes. But Shaftesbury now instructedMartyn's Life of Shaftesbury, abhorrence of popery as an esta-vol.ii., p. 232. blushed religion than Temple, butf I, of course, do not mean to in advocating the cause of prero-accuse Temple of favouring the gative, he was unconsciously faciedesigns of the court ; hitting the event he would haveRussell himself had not a greater deplored.136 !>«« HISTORY OF PARTY.kCHAP, the people that this was a privilege, which should becarefully preserved as a defence against the tyranny& 1680. of the crown and the corruption of the bench. Thecustomary compliment of allowing the lord mayorto name one of the sheriffs was therefore refused, andthe citizens chose Bethel and Cornish for the ensuingyear.Bethel was sullen in his disposition and republicanin his principles ; he affected a primitive frugalityduring his year of office, by no means agreeable tothose who had elected him. The citizens thoughtthat the knowledge he had displayed, and the judiciouswork he had written, were but poor compensationsfor the feasts which he denied them. Cornish,on the other hand, was moderate in his politicalviews, and rich and liberal as well as patriotic. Hepretended to no republican simplicity, and his civichospitality made amends for the sordidness of hiscolleague.But different as these men were in their dispositionsand political views, they were united in theiropposition to the court : their power formed a counterpoiseto that of the judges, and the popular leadersnow felt themselves safe from those ordinary acts oftyranny, which were so commonly practised with thesanction of the courts and under the name of justice.Another event which, in a history of parties, requiresparticular notice, occurred during this long pro-theHISTORY OF PARTY.•^ 137rogation. It was during this time when, as Algernon CHAP.Sidney says, "Things were so entangled that libertyof language was almost lost, and no man knew how to ' & less.speak of any thing lest he that was spoken unto mightbe of a party contrary to him, and that endeavouredto overthrow what he would set up." * It was duringthis political chaos that the party words, Whigand Tory, were struck out, and that definitive titleswere thus imposed upon principles and parties whichhad some time' existed.According to Roger North, t the country partywere the first to brand their opponents with thename by which they were afterwards to be designated.The Duke of York naturally affected the society ofthose whose religion was the same as his own, andthe Catholic Irish were therefore in great favourwith him. This circumstance occasioned the popularparty to call all the opponents of the Exclusion bill,Irishmen. The hatred the majority of the Englishbore to popery, rendered this an opprobrious term ;but it required to be strengthened before it couldexpress the animosity of a hostile party. Theepithet became successively "Wild Irish," and "Bog-trotter;" but it was yet imperfect until some zealousmember of the opposition found invective and euphonyunited in the word Tory : a name applied to aLetter to Farley. f Examen, p. 321,138 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, set of ruffians in the disturbed districts of Ireland —according to North, to the most despicable savages& 1680, ^^mong the wild Irish.The word Whig is of Scotch origin. It was, saysoffi^wrifeTs, "used in that country for the curd intowhich milk was reduced previous to being convertedinto cheese ; it was thence deemed applicable to thesour and curdled tempers of the persecuted covenanters.The rebellion of the ill-used sect, of course,rendered them an object of the greatest abhorrence tothe high church and high monarchical Tories, and theybestowed this name upon their opponents in Englandas the most reproachful they could discover.Burnet, however, gives another derivation of thisword. He dates it from the year 1648, when theScotch people excited by their ministers, rose andmarched to Edinburgh to oppose the prosecution ofDuke Hamilton's attempt in favour of the captiveking. The south-west counties of Scotland producinglittle corn, were obliged to send to Leith forthe stores of that article, which were supplied by thesuperior fertility of the northern counties. Thecarriers who repaired to Leith for this purpose, werethen called Whiggamors, from the unusual word Whig-gam,which they used in driving their cattle. Theinhabitants of Leith and Edinburgh very naturallyextended this epithet to the whole of the inhabitantsof the countries whence these men came ; and as theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 139insurgents who occupied Edinburgh sprang chiefly chap.from the west, that circumstance was called theWhiggamors inroad. The name was afterwards ap ' & jgso.plied to the whole body of covenanters, graduallyshortened into Whigs, and thence, as already mentioned,the word was introduced into England.These names were no sooner applied, than theywere eagerly repeated : they became immediately \standard titles ; and although either party, when \under a cloud of unpopularity, has often had recourseto the temporary assumption of some less odious appellation,they have always returned with fondness totheir original word of union when the hour of adversityhad passed away.Having thus discussed those events during thisextended prorogation, which are connected with therise and progress of the two parties, we must nowexamine their conduct in the parliament which metfor the despatch of business on the 21st of October,1680,* and which after electing their speaker, andPreviously to the meeting of spect for his brother, and whoseparliament, the Duke of York opposition to the Exclusion billwas sent to Scotland. Several of seems to have proceeded from histhe council interceded for him, hereditary ideas of divine indefea-and he himself exerted all his in- bible right, was provoked by thefluence to prevent his banish annoyances he suffered upon hisment. But the Duchess of Ports account, and by his uncompromisingwas now against him, ing constancy in matters of reliantCharles, who had' little re- lion. Godolphin said at theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.IV.hearing Dangerfield's confession with regard to themeal-tub plot, immediately commenced their great& 1680. design of excluding the Duke of York from thethrone.council board upon this occasion, and the king along with him." —'' If the duke do not leave the Dal. App. 276. So strong werekingdom at present, he will be the apprehensions entertained ofobliged to leave it in a fortnight, the coming session.THE HISTORY OF PARTY, 141CHAPTER V.A.D. 1680.The Tory party — Seen in the debates on the Exclusion bill — In thecommons — In the lords — Trial of Stafford — Prorogation and dissolutionof parliament — Burnet's scheme of limitations — Fitzharris'slibel.We have seen the Whig party called into being to CHAP,resist the attempt of the king and his Cabal againstthe religion and liberty of the country. I havechosen to view the Tory party first in the debatesupon the Exclusion bill. Individuals professing thecreed which was now first called Toryism, were,doubtless, mingled in the pensioned parliament, butit would be then difficult to separate the conscientioussupporters of the court from its unprincipledhirelings, and it would be unjust to attribute to thisparty the conspiracy of the Cabal, or the alliance withFrance. I have chosen, therefore, a period whenthe line of distinction is broad and well defined, whenthe repugnant principles of the two parties werebrought into direct and active opposition.V. ^A.D. 1G80.142 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. '* The power and majesty of the people, an originalcontract, the authority and independency of parliaments,liberty, resistance, exclusion, abdication,deposition ; these were ideas associated at that timeto the idea of a Whig, and supposed by every Whigto be incommunicable and inconsistent with the ideaof a Tory.Divine hereditary and indefeasible right, linealsuccession, passive obedience, prerogative, non-resistance,slavery, nay, and sometimes popery too,were associated in many minds to the idea of a Tory,and deemed incommunicable and inconsistent in thesame manner with the idea of a Whig"*Such is the definition of these two parties at theirorigin, given by one of our most eloquent politicalwriters. It is evident, therefore, that nothing couldmark their existence more strongly than a measure,which, involving the highest interests both of thepeople and the throne, was put forward to establishone series of principles and to discountenance theother.In the house of commons, the subject was openedby Lord Russell, who declared that, either parliamentmust destroy the power and growth of popery,or that popery would soon destroy not only partialDissertation on creed will be found in North'sParties. An elaborate exposition Examen, pp. 325 to 341.and defence of the original ToryTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 143liaraents, but all that was near and dear to the CHAP.V.English nation. He moved a resolution against anypopish successor. Sir Henry Capell, brother to theEarl of Essex, followed in a speech of great length ;and, after hearing Sir Francis Winnington, who hadbeen solicitor-general, but was dismissed on accountof his uncourtierlike scruples, and Montagu, who isalready known — both in favour of the motion — thehouse resolved unanimously that it was their dutyeffectually to suppress popery and prevent a popishsuccessor.On the 4th of November, the Exclusion bill wasread a first time in this house of commons. Thedebates drew forth the strength of the two parties,and discovered the Tories as weak in numbers as inargument. Sir Leoline Jenkins conducted the oppositionto the bill. He was a high churchman, " set,"says Burnet, " on every punctilio of the church ofEngland, even to superstition"* Jenkins had beena stanch loyalist during the ci\41 wars, and had, incommon with many of his brother students, t joinedthe king's party, when his standard was displayed atAn instance of his superstition f Those of Jesus College, tois given in Wynne's Life of Jenkins, which Sir Leoline belonged, hadp. Xi. During a lent he fell sick, little choice, as the college wasand his physician advised him to dismantled and turned into a bar-eatflesh. Jenkins scrupled for a rack. It long continued to be thelong time, and was at last only quarters of Lord Herbert andpersuaded upon receiving a dissenters who joined the king fromnation from Archbishop Sheldon. Wales.A.D. 1680,144 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Oxford. His affections were divided between hisroyalist politics, and his love of academical learning ;and when the former became hopeless, he appliedhimself to the acquirement and communication of thelatter. For several years during the continuance ofthe Commonwealth, he had employed himself ineducating the sons of eminent royalists, many ofwhom attended him all over Europe. Upon therestoration he returned to his university, and becamefellow, and afterwards principal of Jesus College.While holding this situation, his advocacy of prerogativerecommended him to the notice of the court,who at this time much needed defenders of thefavourite doctrines of monarchy. He was associatedwith Temple in the embassy to Nimeguen ; andwhen that able minister was found too honest andpenetrating to be continued at the Hague, Sir Leo-linewas chosen to succeed him. He had practisedas an advocate in the Ecclesiastical courts ; and thejudgeship of the Admiralty, and of the Prerogativecourt of the Archbishop of Canterbury, which hadrewarded his compliant principles, had only stimulatedhis ambition. Upon his return from theHague, his university marked their approbation ofhis principles and conduct, by sending him to thehouse of commons as one of their representatives.This situation gave him more abundant opportunitiesof showing his devotion to the dispensers of patronage.1680.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 145age, and the king was not slow to reward so assiduous chap.a servant. Upon the dismissal of Coventry, a dis .missal which the commons thought sufficiently accountedfor by the letter of Danby, which Montaguhad betrayed to them, Jenkins was appointed secretaryof state in his place.*The new secretary's political sentiments will sufficientlyappear from the following extract from hisspeech upon the first reading of the Exclusion bill :"I am of opinion," he said, '* that the kings ofEngland have their right from God alone ; and thatno power on earth can deprive them of it. And Ihope this house will not attempt to do any thingwhich is so precisely contrary not only to the law ofGod, but to the law of the land too. For if this billshould pass, it would change the essence of the monarchy,and make the crown elective. For, by thesame reason that this parliament may disinherit thisprince for his religion, other parliaments may disinheritanother upon some other pretence which theymay suggest, and so, consequently, by such exclusions,elect whom they please. It is against the oath ofallegiance, taken in its own sense, without Jesuiticalevasion. For by binding all persons to the king, hisheirs and successors, the duke, as presumptive heir,must be understood. And I am of opinion it cannotWynne's Life of Jenkins, an elaborate work in two folio vols.VOL. I. ' LV,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, be dispensed withal. Sir, I will be very cautioushow I dispute the power of parliaments, I know thelegislative power is very great, and it ought to be so.But yet I am of opinion, that parliaments cannot disinheritthe heir of the crown ; and that if such anact should pass, it would be invalid in itself; and,therefore, I hope it will not seem strange that Ishould offer my judgment against this bill, while it isin debate ; in which I think I do that which is myduty, as a member of this house."And again, in the debate upon the third reading :** For my part I have taken the oath of allegiance,and think myself therein bound to him as heir, untilit please God that his majesty have children. Iknow of no power on earth, that can dispense withmy oath ; and, therefore, I cannot (as much as bybeing silent) give my consent to this bill, lest Itherein wrong my conscience, seeing I have thehonour to be a member of this house"*Sir Leonine found few supporters in the commons,and none who supported the bill upon his broadBurnet says, " Jenkins neil private reflections, which he leftther spoke nor writ well ; but," he among his papers. Reflecting uponadds, " being so eminent for the extending to them indulgences,most courtly qualifications, other he says, " Liberty and indulgencematters were the more easily dis doth not oblige ungovernable andpenned with." — p. 482. ambitious men, but render themf His sentiments respecting the more haughty and licentious."dissenters appear from one of hisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 147ground of the impotence of parliament to change the chap.succession (an argument which, followed to its legitimemate conclusion, would have abolished the right of ^the Stuartssss, and rendered Charles a usurper). SirR. Temple objected only to the details of the bill,and even then could only inveigh against their injustice.Mr. Laurence Hyde, the first commissioner ofthe treasury, the son of the Earl of Clarendon, andafterwards Earl of Rochester, was more decided, hedeclared that if the bill passed, he was confident therewas a loyal party which would never obey it ; they,he said, would still think themselves bound by theiroaths of allegiance and duty, to pay obedience tothe duke if ever he should come to be king.Sir Edward Seymour contented himself with eulogisingthe duke, and threatening the kingdom with \a civil war ; upon which Sir Richard Graham under \took to show the house what fruitful sources ofmisery such wars had always been to a nation.Garraway, with his usual trimming policy, spokeagainst the bill;* but, with the exception of these,Lord Carleton and Colonel Legge, afterwards LordDartmouth, and at this time master of the horse,and gentleman of the bedchamber to the Duke ofYork, were its only opponents in the commons.Sir Leoline's arguments were heard with theIt was previous to the debates house were first ordered to beon this bill that the votes of the printed.L 2bS THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, greatest indignation by the great majority of thehouse. They called forth the eloquence of Hampden,and the vigorous declamation of Birch. " Iadmire," said the latter, more argumentatively thanwas customary with him, " to hear that honourablemember make a doubt as to the legality of this bill ;certainly, sir, our legislative power is unbounded,and we may offer to the lords, and so to his majesty,what bills we think good ; and it can as Httle bedoubted, that the legislative power of the nation —king, lords, and commons — should want a law tomake laws ; or that any laws should be against whatlaws they make. Otherwise they cannot be legallyopposed." Hampden vindicated the house fromthe charge of disinheriting a man simply on accountof his religion, and declared that but for the dangerwhich threatened the liberty of the nation, he didnot think that the duke's being a papist would be asufficient cause for the house to spend time aboutthat bill. Sir William Pulteney held the same sentiment."This bill, sir," he said, "is not to disinherita man for his religion, but because he hasrendered himself incapable to govern us accordingto our laws : his being incapable is the ground ofour proceedings, having no other way to preserveourselves."The speech of Mr. Launcelot Hyde called forth anew and powerful advocate for the Exclusion bill.A.D. 1680.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 149Sir William Jones was one of those rare exceptions chap.of a lawyer rising to eminence during the reign of.the Stuart dynasty, assisted only by his own abilityand professional learning, and without submitting tobe made the mere instrument of the court. Morosein temper, honest in his intentions, wise and cautious,but hating arbitrary power, and jealous of the Catholics,Jones appeared to be a man against whom,notwithstanding the preference of his profession, thegates of preferment were for ever closed. It wasprobably to obtain credit for a popular appointment,and to restrain the activity of an opponent, thatCharles created him attorney-general.Beneath a rough address Jones concealed a humanedisposition, but he was not free from the credulityof his age. In the performance of his dutyas attorney-general, he conducted the prosecution ofthose who suffered for the popish plot, and he wouldhear no argument against the credibility of the witnesses.*In 1679, when the popular leaders wereCorsairs, a man who had ren know what profligate wretchestered himself notorious in Scot these witnesses were. " Jones,land by the most infamous practice attorney-general," says Burnet,times against the covenanters there " took it ill of me that I should(burnet, vol. i., p. 400), was the disparage the king's evidence ; thechief witness against Staley, the thing grew public, and raised greatcatholic banker, Burnet, who clamour against me, for it was saidknew his character and that of his I was taking this method to getassociates, sent both to the lord into favour at court." — Vol. i., p.chancellor and to Jones, to let them 434,1680.>U THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, admitted into the council, Jones obtained a proposeinnate increase of influence, and he was even allowedto effect some reformation in the bench ; but thecourt soon grew tired of so unaccommodating anofficer, and were rapidly raising Sir John King to behis rival and successor. This person however diedbefore his promotion could be completed, but notbefore Jones had been disgusted. He now determinedto retire from oflSce. Having refused thechancellorship, which was offered him if he wouldpromise an unconditional support of the king's measures,he openly joined the opposition, and obtaineda seat in parliament during the progress of the debateupon the Exclusion bill.In answer to the objections urged by Hyde andothers to the principle of this bill, he defended it asjust and constitutional."This bill," he said, "is not intended as a condemnationto the duke, but a security to ourselves ;and is so far from being against natural justice, thatthe passing of it is agreeable to the very foundation,not only of natural justice, but natural religion too ;the safety of the king and kingdom depending thereon,which, according to the rules of justice and religion,we are bound to use our endeavours to preservebefore any one man's interest. The objectionabout the oath of allegiance, I do a little admire at ;for it is the first time I ever heard that oath pleadedA.D. 1680.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 151in favour of popery. I have oftentimes had occasion CHAP,to scan the meaning of that oath, but never found itextended to the successor during the king's life,and therefore no need of any dispensation in thatpoint ; and I cannot understand how it can be anyscandal as to our church or religion, if by church bemeant our Protestant church. Can our church orchurchmen be scandalized because we endeavour tosecure ourselves against popery by all lawful means ?I rather think the very supposition a high reflectionon our churchmen, as rendering them willing to letin popery, which I am confident they are not. Asto what is said, that the law will be void in itselfand that there will be a loyal party that will neverobey it, and that it will occasion a civil war ; I mustconfess these are strange arguments to me ; for todoubt that the legislative power of the nation — king,lords, and commons — cannot make laws that shallbind any, or all the subjects of this nation, is to supposethere is such a weakness in the government asmust infallibly occasion its ruin ; and therefore I amof opinion, that what laws you make in this case, willcarry as much right and strength with them, not onlynow, but after the king's death, as any law whatsoeverand how then can there be a loyal party thatwill not acquiesce therein, unless the word loyal havesome other signification than I know of; I take itto be a distinction that can only be given to such as1680.THE HISTORY OF PARTY,obey laws ; and I think we need not doubt, but ifonce this law were passed, there would be Protestantsenough, whose interest it will be to defend it, thatwould compel an obedience to it ; and we have muchmore reason to fear a civil war without it than withit ; for if we can get this bill, we may be thereby sounited, and enabled to defend ourselves, as that thepopish party may never have the confidence to attemptus ; but without it we shall not be in anycapacity to defend ourselves, which, above all things,may encourage a civil war."Henceforward Sir William Jones is to be numberedamong the foremost of the leaders of the Whigparty, and as one of the most unflinching advocatesfor the Exclusion bill, as he supported this bill uponthe principle that a Catholic king (certainly such aCatholic king as the Duke of York had shown himselflikely to be) would attempt the introduction ofpopery as an established religion, and that this attemptwould bring about civil war, a despotism or arepublic, so he refused any offer of limitations uponthe principle that the constitutional prerogative ofthe throne was inseparable from the person of themonarch, aud that those who would vest the functionsof the sovereign in a committee of regency, proposedan infraction of the constitution, which would probablynever be repaired. The kings of Englandwould then bo as powerless as the caliphs of Bagdad,A.D, 1680.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 153and the monarchy would gradually merge into an chap.oligarchy.The AVTiigs having borne the Exclusion bill thusrapidly through the commons, it was sent up to thelords, and Lord Russell was intrusted with the message.Here, however, it met with a very differentreception.On the 15th of November, it was brought intothe house of lords, and after a debate so interesting,that the commons adjourned their house to be presentat it, and so important, that the king remainedthe whole day in the house to discountenance its advocates,and give confidence to its opponents,*it was rejected by a majority of sixty-three to thirty.Twenty-five of these thirty peers, entered theirprotests upon the journals of the houseThis great debate drew forth all the talent of thelords, and exhibited the eloquence of Shaftesbury,eclipsed by that of Hallifax. The rapidity withwhich the bill was passing the commons, had inducedthe king to send them a message, assuring them thatall remedies they could tender him against poperyThe names of these peers Cornwallis, Lovelace, Herbert,were Anglesey, Kent, Hunting Paget, Delamere, Howard, Northdon, Bedford, Monmouth, Clare, and Grey, Grey, Suffolk andSalisbury, Rivers, Manchester, Crewe.Stamford, Essex, Eure, Shafts Ralph,bury, Sunderland, Macclesfield,A.D. 1680,154 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, would be acceptable to him, provided they were such- as might consist with preserving the succession ofthe crown in all its legal course of descent.It is probable that in this assurance, the king wassincere, and that he would at this time have submittedto any limitations or restrictions — to any thingbut absolute exclusion.Hallifax preferred securing what was offered tocontending for an improbable object, and a courtier*says, that his clear head, fine wit, and fair eloquence,produced so powerful an effect upon the house, thatall confessed it was Hallifax alone who persuaded thepeers to throw out the bill. Burnet, who was nopanegyrist of Hallifax, also celebrates his triumphupon this occasion, and declares that in the debate,he had a visible superiority over Lord Shaftesbury,which, to a man such as we have seen Hallifax describedto be, was triumph enough to repay him forany deviation from his ordinary policy, and inducementenough to tempt him to continue in the newcourse he had chosen.The debates of the lords upon this importantquestion are lost ; but we may be sure that Hallifaxdid not employ in the house and before the king thearguments which he used in private conversation.There he was accustomed to laugh at the fears ex-sirJohn Krresby's Memoirs.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 155pressed by some of his supporters, lest the success CHAP,of such a bill should render the crown elective.** Who takes a coachman to drive him because hisfather was a good coachman ?" was the common observationof this public advocate for the integrity ofthe succession : and in pressing his limitations uponthe Whig leaders, be privately declared that he opposedthe delusion because it passed over one man,but left th^prerogative of the crown entire in thenext heirs whereas his expedient brought the nationreally into a commonwealth, and the limitations heproposed were so strict, that even the old republicanswould hail the accession of a popish prince as anational blessing.Shaftesbury laughed at these cobweb fetters, whichit would be the first exertion of kingly power tobreak asunder. Essex, who had temporarily sidedwith Hallifax, now rejoined the Whigs, and his nameappears to the protest against the vote, by which thelords threw out the bill.This contemptuous rejection of their favourite billwas not calculated to soothe the Whig majority inthe house of commons ; the violence to which itexcited them urged them on to acts which dangerand provocation may, perhaps, palliate, but which nodefence can justify. When they voted an address tothe king to remove Hallifax from his presence andTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D. 1680.CHAP, councils for ever, although they clothed their requestwith the decent excuse, that he had advised the dissolutionof the last and the prorogations of the presentparliament, it was notorious that their real complaintwas the opposition he had made in parliamentto the Exclusion bill. They were therefore, in fact,refusing to the peers that freedom of speech whichthey claimed for themselves, and selecting an individualto expiate a contempt which had been offeredthem by a body. Their conduct with regard to theabhorrers, many of whom they committed, and oneof whom, a member of their house, they expelled,was perhaps but a retaliation for the persecutionwhich Dare and others had suffered from the court :but although the expulsion of Sir Robert Peyton wasstrictly constitutional, it was as flagrant an abuse ofthe privilege of the house as the lords had committedin the former parliament, when they imprisoned inthe Tower the four lords who argued against thelegality of the session. It was inflicting the verytyranny of which they complained, and fettering theexpression of that public feeling which they declaredthemselves so anxious should have vent. When theyimprisoned persons who were not members of theirhouse, they were legally as well as morally wrong,and were obliged to admit their injustice : it wassoon exercised upon a man who had the courage toTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 157apply for a habeas corpus, and a judge was found chap.sufficiently courageous to award it.*But the most lamentable effect of the indignationof the commons was the prosecution to death of theEarl of Stafford. This last victim of the popish plotwas possessed of few virtues, and was entitled tolittle respect ; the extravagances of his youth hadimpaired his constitution, and he was looked upon asaman of weak intellect and timid disposition. Thecourtiers t said that it was this consideration whichled the commons to choose him out of the five lordswho had so long laid in the Tower under theirimpeachment, and that they brought him forth toexpiate the sins of all, because they expected to findin him a passive victim. If such a consideration hadany effect at all, the probability is rather that theychose Stafford because they thought that the terrorsof an impending death would startle such a mind intodisclosures of plots and designs, and that they shouldthus arrive at a full knowledge of the conspiracy,which they were confident had existed, but whichthey had not been yet able to unravel. The greatnessof the occasion however restrung the slackeningThere was one Thereon, a Baron Weston had the courage tonative of Ireland, whom the com- grant it." — Burnet, vol. i. p. 485.mons committed, and he moved For this, but on another pretence,for his habeas corpus. Some of the house afterwards resolved tothe judges were afraid of the house impeach this judge,and kept out of the way ; but f Reresby's Memoirs.V.A.D. 1680.A.D. 1680.1-58 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, powers of his mind, and his consciousness of innocenceenabled him to make a judicious defence, evenagainst the practised eloquence and legal skill ofsuch men as Jones, Maynard, and Treby, who wereamong the managers for the commons. Oates, Dug-dale,and Tuberville, all three, bloodhounds of thenicest scent, were the witnesses against him. Theyswore that he had received from a Jesuit named Fenwick,already executed, a commission of paymaster-generalof the forces to be levied for the purposesof the plot. Tuberville swore that the accused hadattempted to bribe him to kill the king ; and Dundalkdeposed that he had seen him at an assembly, whereevery person in succession gave his fill assent to aresolution to take away the life of the king. Thisdecisive testimony was received by the audiencewith a murmur which may have been either thedeep breathing of intense interest, or the involuntaryexpression of savage exultation.*Who can read," says Mr. voices of men, to whose memoryFox, " without horror, the account every lover of the English constthat savage murmur of applause tuition is bound to pay the tributewhich broke out upon one of the gratitude and respect!" — Historyvillains at the bar, swearing posi- of the reign of James II., p. 41.lively to Stafford's having pro It is however only said, " Hereposed the murder of the king? there was a great hum." — Stateand how is that horror deepened. Trials, vol. vii. Such a noise pro-whenwe reflect that in the odious needs from a thrill of intense in-cry were probably mingled the terest, as well as from a feeling ofA.D. 1680.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 159Against such accusers, and before judges who CHAP,evidently sympathized with them, there was little -chance of escape. Upon the division the house contained87 peers ; and of these the accused noblemanwas condemned by the voices of 55. It hasalready been noticed, that there is no distinctionof party to be drawn in this judgment of the peers.In the house of lords, which had shown itself soexclusively a Tory assembly, by the uncourteousrejection of the Whig Exclusion bill, now only 31voices could be gathered for the acquittal of a harmlessold nobleman, who had not rendered himselfobnoxious by any prominent political conduct, for hehad generally given a silent vote with the countryparty, but who was prosecuted by the Whigs becausehe was accused by men whom they believed, andcondemned by the Tories, because they also yieldedcredit to the same depositions.In the State Trials there is a list of the peers inthe house when judgment was given, and of theirseveral judgments. It has been already mentionedthat Holies and Hallifax declared the accused notguilty ; his two kinsmen, Carlisle and Howard ofEscrie, were present and voted him guilty — an inde-exultationand when it may be nation of the circumstances of thisso naturally accounted for, we need trial,not, I think, seek in it an aggra-A.D, 1680.160 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, cency more glaring, since there was some family■ quarrel between them and the earl. Charles's fellowconspirator, the infamous Lauderdale, stained withcrimes thrice blacker than even those of which Staffordwas accused, also sat upon the trial, and addedhis voice for the victim's death. But perhaps themost disgusting anecdote connected with this occurrenceis related of the Duchess of Portsmouth, who,it is said, was present during the trial, and dispensedsweetmeats, after the fashion of the time, amongthose who were known to be most hostile to theprisoner.If the bitter and bloodthirsty spirit which pervadedthis age inspires horror when we see it actuatingmen, with what inexpressible disgust must weview it in a woman. The duchess could have hadno excuse ; a papist herself, and sharing the incredulityof the king upon the subject of the plot, shemust have been convinced of the innocence of thenobleman whose murder she was abetting with herinfluence. But the duchess had lately acquired somepopularity ; her recent conduct with respect toforeign policy and the Exclusion bill had so far propitiatedthe commons, that when her impeachmentwas moved in that house, no one was found to secondit, and it was not the custom of the court to whichshe belonged to check a transient current of popu-A.D.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 10laity because it was tinged with the blood of inno- chap.cent men.*After his condemnation Stafford's courage wavered,and he entered, by means of Burnet, into a treatywith the Whig leaders, that he should receive apardon upon revealing all he knew. He was accordinglybrought into the house ; but when, aftermentioning a few immaterial circumstances, he proceededto accuse Lord Shaftesbury,! the lords wouldhear him no more, but abruptly dismissed him to hisdoom.Amid these scenes of violence we are scarcelysurprised to find the commons questioning the rightof the king to commute the ordinary punishment fortreason into that of beheading. The reason of agitatingthis point was not a desire to aggravate thefate of the condemned man, but a fear lest, if it wereVery different was her chas Stafford only accused Shaftesburyracer among the people some of advising him to use his infantinebefore, when she could not ence to get the long parliamentappear in the street without being dissolved ; that he persuaded himmobbed. Nell Gwinn's carriage that such a measure would be forbeing once mistaken for hers, the the interest of popery. We knowcrowd would have broken it to that the duke's party and Masterpiecesbut she saved herself, and bury's sought this object at thechanged their groans into accla- same time, although as a means tonations, by putting her head out very different ends ; and it is notthe window and crying out, " You improbable that the intriguingare mistaken good folks ; I am the spirit of Shaftesbury led him toprotestant w ." act as Stafford said.■f- Reresby, however, says thatVOL. I. Mt>2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, established that the king had a right to remit anypart of the sentence, it might be argued that he hadequal authority to remit the whole ; and that, in therecent case of Lord Danby, they had denied him.Lord Russell and those who acted with him probablythought that it was of much less consequencethat a traitor, whom they were convinced had beenrighteously convicted of the most heinous treasons,should suffer the penalty prescribed by the law, thanthat a precedent should be established which mightbe afterwards used to nullify that great safeguard ofthe constitution — the common's right of impeachment.But it appears that the point was only mentionedto afford an opportunity of protesting againstany such use being made of the precedent, since it wasupon the motion of Sir William Jones that the houseresolved that they were satisfied that the sheriffs ofLondon and Middlesex should execute the late Earlof Stafford, by severing his head from his body only.*Stafford met his fate with a courage and constancywhich surprised those most who supposed they hadknown him best, and died denying all that had beensworn against him.This was a question as to the credibility due toparticular men, and the delusion was shared by bothparties ; but the Whigs stood alone as violators ofPari. Hist.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. letheconstitution, when they induced the house to t chap.assume the dispensing power which they had so ;successfully struggled against when claimed by the; ^'^' ^^^^'crown, and to declare that the laws against dissenttears ought not to be executed. It is true that thiswas provoked by a shameful artifice of the king. Abill had passed both houses, repealing an act of the35th Elizabeth, which imposed a penalty of £20.a month upon all persons who did not resort to theirparish church. This act had been originally designedagainst the papists, but had lately, with Charles'scustomary policy, been enforced against the protestantdissenters. The bill of repeal was awaitingthe royal assent, when Charles, unwilling to pass,and afraid to reject it, procured it to be stolen fromthe table of the house of lords.* It can, however,The particulars of this impu- accepted as a sufficient answer.dent affair are thus given by Locke, Then the clerk of the parliamentin a letter to Mr. Stringer, inserted was examined, who gave this acidMartyn's Life of Shaftesbury, count, that, notwithstanding thevol. ii., p. 272. king came in his robes, he broughtOn Wednesday the 23d, the the bills; as he was bringing themlords, in a grand committee, ex he met my Lord Falconbrid^e,mined the clerk of the crown who asked him how many bills hewhy he did not present the first had ? He told him four. He saidbill of repeal to the king ? His he heard the king would pass butanswer was, that the clerk of the three of them ; whereupon he wentparliament had always the custody up to my lord chancellor, and toldof the bills, and that he presented him what my Lord Falconbridgeall that the clerk of the parliament said. My lord answered him, hedelivered to him, which was ac did not know what the king wouldM 2164 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, be no excuse for any party of upright men that theyimitated the conduct of Charles ; and iniquitous asthe laws against the nonconformists undoubtedlywere, both judges and juries were unquestionably tobe commended for disregarding the resolution of thecommons.Several other acts of the commons during the remainderof the session were equally vigorous andless blameable. In June, during the long prorogation,when all hope of a meeting of parliament wasgiven up, and the duke had returned in triumphfrom Scotland, Shaftesbury, to reanimate his dejectedparty, had suggested the bold steps of presentingthe Duke of York to the grand jury of Middlesex.1 as a popish recusant. Accompanied by Lords Russelland Cavendish, and others of the Whig party,I he proceeded to Westminster, and made the presentmentin form. The judges of the court of king'sbench were, however, alarmed at this decided proceeding,and immediately discharged Jhe grand jury,do, but he would ask him. The asked the king if he should writeking bid him hiring in the bills to upon the bill of repeal the wordsthe prince's lodgings to him. Then the king uses, and which it seemsthe king took a certain lord aside, are writ upon it when the kingand talked with him in a corner refuses a bill ? The king said no ;of the room ; after which he came but that he should leave it theretothe clerk of the parliament, and and not bring it into the house totold him he would not pass the be offered."bill of repeal. Then the clerkA.D. 1680.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. l65although there were many indictments yet remaining CHAP,before them. 'Upon this conduct the house of commons resolvedthat the discharging of the grand jury by any judgebefore the end of the term, assizes, or sessions, whilematters were under their consideration, and not presented,was arbitrary, illegal, destructive to publicjustice, a manifest violation of his oath, and a meansto subvert the fundamental laws of the kingdom.*They afterwards resolved to impeach the judgeswho had interfered upon this occasion ; as indeedthey did to impeach almost all the rest of Charles'sjudges, who had, in many instances, given themsufficient cause. North was called in question forhis proclamation against petitions, but their generaloffence, however the charge might be disguised, was,that they had received their cue fi*om the court todiscountenance the plot.But the opposition which most affected the kingwas, the refusal of a supply. Tangier was besiegedby the Moors, and Charles was of course in want ofmoney to relieve the place. The Whigs, however,openly declared that they had not forgotten howthose two millions had been disposed of which theyhad voted for the triple alliance ; and they now intheir answer declared, that unless the king promisedPail. Hist.16G THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, his assent to the Exclusion bill, and to a bill whichVthey were now preparing to associate the Protestants'in defence of its provisions, and unless he consentedthat the judges should thenceforward hold theiroffices " quamdiu se bene gesserint," and placed allthe offices of the state in the hands of persons ofknown affection to the Protestant religion, the peoplewould not be encouraged to contribute to his majesty'sservice. The king, on the 7th of January,answered their address by persisting in his refusal oftheir bill, and in his demand of a supply.* Thecommons replied by resolutions against the Duke ofYork, Hallifax, Worcester, Clarendon, Hyde, Fever-cham,and Seymour. They resolved also that anyonewho lent the king money by anticipation uponhis revenue, should be held responsible in parliamentas a conspirator against their being ; and that whoevershould advise their prorogation, would be a bedsto remodelled the army parliament offered so fair if hewhich the commons wanted, would but give up his brother,"Charles told Sir John Reresby, that the courtiers doubted his re-who was terribly alarmed at the solution, and none of them felttemper and power of the house, themselves quite safe. — Reresbi/sLet them do what they will, I Meriioirs, pp. 102 and 106. Thewill never part with any officer at same person attributes the king'sthe request of either house. My answer to this address to Lordfather lost his head by such com- Hallifax, who said it was likepliancy ; but as for me, I intend offering a man money to cut offto die another May." But "money his nose,was so exceedingly wanting, andA.D. 1680,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. iGjprayer of the king, the Protestant religion, and the CHAP,kingdom of England ; a promoter of the Frenchinterest, and a pensioner of France. They proceededin the same strain to vote thanks to the cityof London, to threaten the commissioners of thecustoms, and to declare that the Duke of Monmouthhad been removed from his offices and commands bythe influence of the Duke of York, and outfit to bereinstated, when the usher of the black-rod knockedat their door, and summoned them to the house oflords to hear their sentence of prorogation.This series of extraordinary resolutions was thework of a quarter an hour, for such was the noticethey obtained of the king's intention. The parliamentwas prorogued until the 20th of the samemonth, and the general expectation was, that beforethat time it would be dissolved.The city of London was the first to take thealarm. On the 13th, the lord mayor presented apetition setting forth, that whereas the parliamenthad convicted one of the five popish lords in thetower, and were about to convict the other four ofhigh treason; that they had impeached the chief-justiceScrooge, and were about to impeach other judges ;and all this in order to the preservation of his majesty'slife, the Protestant religion, and the governmentof England ; that they were extremely surprisedto see the parliament prorogued in the heightTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.V.1680.CHAP, of their business ; that their only hopes were, thatthis was done only in order to bring such affairsabout again, as were necessary to the settling thenation. They therefore prayed that his majestywould be pleased to let the parliament sit at the dayappointed, and to continue till they had effected allthe great affairs before them.* To this petition, theking gave the foolish answer, that " It was none oftheir business ;" and on the 18th he issued a proclamationdissolving parliament, t The Prince of Orangewas scarcely less disappointed than the citizens ofLondon at this prorogation and dissolution ; he wroteto Sir Leoline Jenkins upon the subject, in terms ofstrong disapprobation. " If people," he said, " persuadethemselves that when a new parliament iscalled, it will not have the same sentiments, that isa thing which cannot enter into my mind. The experienceof the past has shown clearly enough, thatinstead of being more moderate, they have alwayspushed things to a greater length"!Events soon proved the justice of the prince'sopinion. The same proclamation which had dissolvedthe former parliament, had summoned a newone to meet at Oxford on the 21st of March ; andthe nation, almost without exception, returned thosePari. Hist. f Reresby.J Dalrymple, App., p. 309./THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 1()9members who had rendered themselves conspicuous chap.ajg^ Whigs in the former parliament. ~a~d^680^The city of London, stung by the insult theyhad received, and by the further contempt which theking endeavoured to show them by the removal ofthe parliament from their neighbourhood, were thefirst to give an example. Their old members, Clayton,Player, Wilmington, and Love, were immediatelychosen ; they were thanked for their former conduct,and the freemen of that city, assembled incommon-hall, promised, that being confident thattheir members would never consent to grant anysupply until their citizens were effectually securedagainst popery and absolute power, they wouldstand by them with their lives and fortunes. Similardeclarations were made throughout the country, andso great was the enthusiasm, that few members wereallowed to pay the expenses of their return.Lord Hallifax, who had been readmitted into theprivy council immediately after his successful oppositionto the Exclusion bill, was now the chieffavourite at court ; and although still opposed to theFrench interest, and therefore at variance with theDuchess of Portsmouth, he exercised as much influencein the government as any minister could undersuch a sovereign as Charles. Hallifax was thoroughlyalarmed at the vote which declared him aa promoter of popery and a betrayer of the people.A.D. 1680.17<J THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Looked upon as a traitor by his former friends ;uncertain of the support of a master, whose ficklenessand reserve made him hearken to every counsel,and act suddenly and silently upon that which wasperhaps the most opposed to the advice of those whowere responsible for his deeds ; jealous of the Earlof Danby, who, it was supposed, would be now takenfrom confinement and reinstated in his former power,the situation of Hallifax was far from enviable, and,while he pretended to disapprove of the dissolutionof the late parliament,* he dreaded the hostility ofthe new one.The place chosen for the meeting of parliamentgave great dissatisfaction to the Whigs. It has beenalready mentioned that the politics of the metropolitansheriffs protected their party in Middlesex fromthe wrath of the crown. They thought that byconvening the new parliament at Oxford, Charlesintended to withdraw them from that protection, andto separate them fi:"om their most fearless supporters.Sixteen peers petitioned against a parliament beingheld at a place, where, as they plainly intimated tothe king, they must be in hourly danger of theswords of his papist guards ; but Charles onlyfrowned t upon the petitioners, and persisted in hisresolution.During the short interval that occurred betweenReresby. f Rapin..D. 1680.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. I7Ithe two parliaments, a new scheme was set on foot \ chap.by a section of the Whig party, to protect the nationagainst a Catholic king, without changing the succession.Burnet claims the merit of having originatedthis project ; which was, that the duke shouldenjoy the title of king, but that all the prerogativesof the crown should be vested in his daughter andher husband, the Prince of Orange. The king approvedof this futile expedient, and Lyttelton wasbrought into the government as a commissioner ofthe admiralty to support it. Hallifax, Nottingham,and Seymour agreed to it ; and Burnet was deputedto propose it to the Whigs. They, however, probablylooked upon it only as a stratagem to dividetheir party. Jones rightly perceived that its onlyeffect, if adopted, would be to excite a civil warbetween the king and the regent — a war which theweight of a regal title and the well-known loyalty ofthe English nation would probably decide in favourof the former. Shaftesbury and Russell coincidedin this opinion, and the party generally resolved toabide by their original determination, and to insistupon the exclusion.*Whether they were justified in refusing so large aconcession has often been questioned ; but thosewho have considered the character of the Duke ofBurnet ; Dalrymple.172 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. York, and his conduct when invested with all thepowers of the monarchy, will find ample reason toapprove their resolution and admire their foresight.James was certainly not a man to enact the merepageantry of royalty, while another exercised all itsimportant functions. Burnet's measure would havehad the effect of tranquillizing the nation for aseason, but its more remote consequence woulddoubtless have been what Jones pointed out — eitheran anarchy or a despotism.A few days before the parliament met, anotherevent occurred which had considerable effect uponthe conduct of the Whig house of commons. OneFitzharris, an Irishman and a papist, had written atreasonable libel, which he showed to a man namedEverard, who had been recently pretending to makediscoveries concerning a popish plot. Fitzharris hadbeen acquainted with this man in France, and nowpretended a wish to make use of his assistance, inorder to get his libel corrected and published.Everard, however, suspected that this was only adesign to entrap him ; and when Fitzharris came tohis lodgings to concert with him upon the subject,he took care to have a witness concealed, who mighttestify to all that passed. The libel was then producedby Everard, and read. Fitzharris being asked, accordingto previous agreement, whether it was drawn upaccording to his instructions, and from whom he wasA.D. 1680.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. I'sto expect a recompence for the great hazard he ran CHAP,in putting his hand to so dangerous a paper,answered that it was exactly drawn accordingto his instructions, and named the French ambassadoras the person who would reward him. Thispaper was called ** The True Englishman speakingplain English, in a Letter from a Friend to a Friend."It is a violent exaggeration of the crimes of theStuartssss, and particularly of Charles and his brother.It hints at their assassination, by approving the fateof Charles I. and Laud, and rejoicing that " the falseheart of their emissary, Buckingham, was found outbyan assassin's knife." It openly calls to rebellion"up all as one man," — and shows that formerkings of England had been deposed for far morevenial crimes than those which attached to Charles.It appears that Everard was right in his suspicionsof Fitzharris's designs. That person was patronisedby the Duchess of Portsmouth, and by her agencyhad been more than once admitted to the presenceof the king ; he had at these conferences receivedsmall sums of money from Charles, and, in return hepretended to reveal to him the intentions of his enemies,and amused him with accounts of presbyterianplots. As there is no proof that Charles was himselfprivy to the project, we must suppose that Fitz-harris,in despair of discovering such a plot as he hadspoken of, resolved to invent one. The treasonableTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, paper which Everard and he composed, was to have- been conveyed through the post to each of the lordswho had protested against the parliament meeting atOxford ; when the pamphlet was thus in their possession,they were to have been arrested, and thetreason thus found among their papers would havebeen adduced in evidence against them.*When Fitzharris, upon the information of Everard,was arrested, he pretended to make great disclosuresconcerning the popish plot ; of a design to murder theking, in which the Duke of York was implicated, andof many other things equally extraordinary and moreabsurd. He intended by these means to make hispeace with the Whigs, and to throw himself undertheir protection, and he hoped that the parliamentabout to assemble would put forth their power toshelter him from the vengeance of the king. Thisoccurred as he had anticipated ; but, although theattempt to protect this worthless man brought on theprincipal contest in the succeeding session, the successof the court prevented his escape.State Trials.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 175CHAPTER VI.Meeting of the Oxford parliament — Exclusion bill — Fitzharris's impeachmentLoss of popularity sustained by the Whigs — Secrettreaty with France — Dissolution of the Oxford parliament — Grey'shistory of the Rye-house plot — Designs attributed to the Whigs —Prospects of Charles and the Tories — Declaration of reasons fordissolving the two last parliaments — Reply of the Whigs — Theirjust and modest vindication."The assembling of the Oxford parliament pre chap,seated the spectacle rather of a military occupationof that city, than of the tranquil congregation of anational senate. The king entered, surrounded byhis guards, and followed by a numerous train ; anostentatious display of force which was intended,said the Whigs, to overawe opposition and stifle theessential privilege of parliament — liberty of speech.To counteract such a purpose, they had recourse tosimilar measures. Each of the Whig members wasaccompanied by a deputation of his constituents, instructedto defend his person against the king'sA.D. 1681.A.D. 1681.17^ THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, popish guards. The citizens of London had again• set the example to the rest of the nation, they surroundedtheir representatives with a numerous bodyof well-armed horse bearing ribbons and other emblemswith mottoes expressive of their determination to resistpopery and slavery. Thus prepared, the twoparties took possession of the city of Oxford, eachdreading or affecting to dread some violent attempton the part of the other.The king, in his opening speech, complained ofwhat he called the unwarrantable proceedings of thelast parliament, and declared his resolution to beunchanged with respect to the succession, but hehinted at the expedient which had been suggestedby Burnet, and declared his readiness to hearken toany method that could be devised to place the administrationof the government in Protestant hands.The unchanged temper of the commons immediatelyburst forth. Williams, their speaker, omittedthe usual profession of insufficiency upon his election,and he was thanked by the house. On their second dayof meeting, they entered upon the subject of the disappearanceof the bill of repeal, and commenced a debateupon the Exclusion bill. On the 26th, notwithstandingthe offers of the king, the original bill wasordered to be introduced. Sir Thomas Lytteltonpleaded for the expedient proposed by the king, andSir Thomas Meres spoke on the same side ; but SirTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 177Leoline Jenkins, who probably disapproved of the CHAP,expedient of a regency almost as much as he did of.A. D. 1681.the Exclusion bill itself, was silent. On the otherhand, Russell, Hampden, Winnington, Capell, Birch,and Jones, with a host of names which are less known,appear in the debate. Of these, however, Jonestook the place of honour ; he answered the speech ofLyttelton in a manner which convinced the house,and the motion was carried apparently without adivision.* On the 28th, after a speech against itby Sir Leoline Jenkins, which no one thought worthyof an answer, and after a motion from him that it bethrown out, which no one could be found to second,the bill was read a first time.The proceedings upon this bill were, however,concurrent with others of equal importance in theirevent. On the third day of the session, Fitzharris'scase was brought before the house, and Sir WilliamWaller, the concealed witness, gave his account of"Someseven or eight disgusted It is difficult to discover what theselawyers and able speakers," says others should have to fear if theReresby, glancing at Jones and king was sincere in the expedientWinnington, " joined by some he offered ; for one of the godmotherswho had been so active in tions of the duke's retaining thethis matter, that they thought, title of king was, that he shouldshould the duke ever come to the never come within 300 miles ofcrown, he could never forgive Great Britain, but both they andthem, wrought so prevalently upon Reresby evidently knew that thesethe members in general that it was limitations were merely intendedvoted a bill should be brought in." to serve a temporary purpose.VOL. I. N78 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the discovery. Sir Robert Clayton, who was one ofthe magistrates who took the prisoner's depositions inNewgate, intimated that Fitzharris had been removedto the tower, out of the jurisdiction of the city authorities,to prevent them drawing from him the disclosureswhich he seemed inclined to make. Winningtonsuggested that he should be impeached, as he wouldthen probably disclose all he knew, and, upon hismotion, a resolution to that effect was carried. Anindirect insult was offered to the king, by namingMr. Secretary Jenkins as the person who shouldcarry up the impeachment, and Jenkins refused togo ; upon a threat of commitment, however, hethought fit to apologize and comply.When this impeachment was carried up to thelords the attorney-general acquainted their house,that he had received a command from the king toprosecute Fitzharris by indictment. This communicationoccasioned some discussion ; the peers, themajority of whom were in the interest of the court,were anxious to reject the impeachment. LordNottingham, the leader of the Tory party in the houseof lords, at last furnished them with an excuse. Thisnobleman had discovered a precedent which was consideredto bear upon the point in question. In thefourth year of Edward III. that monarch had requiredthe earls, barons, and peers, to give judgmentagainst Simon de Bereford, as being an accompliceTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 179in the treason of Roger, Earl of Mortimer. But CHAP.they came before the king in parliament, and ob -jested that the accused person was not their peer, andthat they were therefore not bound to judge him.Afterwards, however, with the irregularity that sogenerally prevailed during these turbulent times,they received the charge and gave judgment againsthim,* inserting, however, at the same time, the followingcurious protest and proviso upon the parliamentroll : " And it is asserted and recorded by ourlord the king, and all the great men in ftiU parliamentthat, albeit, the peers, as judges of the parliament,have taken upon them, in the presence ofour lord the king, to make and render the said judgmentyet the peers, who now are, or shall be intimeto come, be not bound or charged to renderjudgment upon others than peers, nor that the peersThe barons of this parliament transaction of this period as a pre-werenot so scrupulous upon other cedent for more peaceable times.points. Although they refused to It is well known that Mortimertry De Bereford for some time, was the contriver of the depositionbecause he was a commoner, they and subsequent murder of the weakdid not hesitate to condemn his and unfortunate King Edward II.more powerful principal without The enigmatical line in which thesuffering him to enter upon his order for his assassination wasdefence. The rapacious tyranny conveyed, is a curious specimen ofof this paramour of the queen-mog the Jesuitical subtlety of the age :ther, had incensed them so far « Edvardum occidere polite therebeyond the bounds of moderation, bonum est "that we can hardly look upon anyN 2VI.A.D. 1681.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of the land have power to do this, but thereof oughtever to be discharged and acquitted ; and that theaforesaid judgment now rendered be not drawn toexample or consequence in time to come, wherebythe said peers may be charged hereafter to judgeothers than their peers, contrary to the laws of theland, if the like case happen, which God forbid."From this precedent Lord Nottingham arguedthat the lords had no jurisdiction to try a commoner;and the house concurring with him in this opinion,rejected the impeachment, and voted that Fitzharrisshould be proceeded against at common law.This principle is so dangerous, that, as Burnetrightly remarks, if it was good law it afforded a certainmethod to the court to be troubled no morewith impeachment, by employing only commoners ;yet if it be warranted by the case of Simon de Herefordit is undoubtedly good, since the judges, whenthe point was afterwards referred to them, decidedthat this entry upon the parliamentary roll is astatute.*The evident distinction, however, between thecase of Simon de Bereford and that of Fitzharris, isthat the former was a prosecution at the suit of theking, the latter was an impeachment by the com-There could be very little presence and assent of the king,doubt upon this subject, since the the lords, and all the great men indocument expressly mentions the parliament.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.mons. Where a peer is prosecuted by the crown forafelony, the house, of which he is a member, is theonly tribunal by which he can be judged. Where acommoner is so prosecuted, he must be broughtbefore the ordinary tribunals of the country. Thecommons, however, can only appear as prosecutorsat the bar of the house of lords ; * and since thepower of the commons to impeach is coextensivewith that of the crown to prosecute, the opinionwhich exempted commoners from an impeachmentevidently proceeds from a confusion of the two separateproceedings of impeachment and prosecution.CHAP.VI.A.D. 1681.Blackstone thus states and defendsthis rule of law : " The articlesof impeachment are a kind ofbill of indictment found by thehouse of commons, and afterwardstried by the lords, who are, incases of misdemeanors, considerednot only as their own peers, butas the peers of the whole nation ;for though in general the union ofthe legislative and judicial powersought to be more carefully avoided,yet it may happen that a subjectintrusted with the administrationof public affairs may infringe therights of the people, and be guiltyof such crimes as the ordinary magistrateeither dares not, or cannotpunish. Of these the representativeof the people, or house ofcommons, cannot properly judge,because their constituents are theparties injured, and can thereforeonly impeach ; but before whatcourt shall this impeachment betried ? Not before the ordinary tribunals,which would naturally beswayed by the authority of so powerfulan accuser ; reason thereforewill suggest that this branch of thelegislature, which represents thepeople, must bring its charge beforethe other branch, which consistsof the nobility, who have neitherthe same interests, nor thesame passions as popular assemblies."Vol. iv., p. 260.A.D. 1681\% THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, which in the case of a peer become very similar.- This is rendered more plain by the considerationthat it had been an ordinary practice for the commonsto impeach commoners for misdemeanors, andsuch impeachments had never been refused. Yetthe statute of Edward III., if applicable at all toimpeachments, would be equally so to all, whetherfor misdemeanors or capital crimes.Sir William Blackstone seems to have been struckby the frequency of these precedents, and althoughhe was inclined to give authority to this case ofFitzharris, be contracted the rule by saying, " Acommoner cannot be impeached before the lords forany capital offence, but only for high misdemeanors"*a contraction utterly at variance with the statute,upon which alone any such rule can rest. But thataccomplished but inaccurate lawyer has endeavouredto give effect to a decision which was an isolatedexception to former and posterior cases, and whichwas dictated by the party feeling of the time. Inthe then recent impeachment of Chief Justice Scroogethe distinction was so unknown that it was nevermentioned, although nothing could have been moreconvenient, both to the delinquent and his master,than such a plea to the jurisdiction of the lords ; andit had doubtless escaped the learned commentator'sCommentaries, vol. iv., p. 259.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D. 1681.recollection, that the point had been since formally CHAP,decided in the case of Sir Adam Blair and others,who were in the year 1689 impeached by the commonsof high treason for having published a proclamationof James II. On this occasion the objectionwas taken, and a committee appointed to search forprecedents upon the subject. After full deliberationthe lords resolved to proceed upon the impeachments,notwithstanding the parties were commoners,and charged with high treason.*The conduct of the lords in refusing to receivethe impeachment of Fitzharris was therefore clearlyunconstitutional. The commons protested againsttheir injustice by several violent resolutions. Theyvoted that that house had denied them justice, in violationof the constitution of parliaments, in obstructionto the further discovery of the popish plot, and to thegreat danger of his majesty's person |nd the Protestantreligion ; and they declared, that for anyinferior court to proceed against Edward Fitzharris,or any other person lying under an impeachment inparliament, for the same crimes for which he or theystand impeached, is a high breach of the privilege ofparliament.These opinions were not without supporters in theother house. Similar declarations were made uponLords' Journals for 1689. — State Trials, viii. — Hatsell's Precedents,iv.i4 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the lords' journals by twenty-one peers, who signeda protest, which clearly enounced and powerfullysupported them.These three subjects — the disappearance of theRepeal bill, the progress of the Exclusion bill, andthe impeachment of Fitzharris, were all that engagedthe attention of this parliament, and none of thedebates were calculated to conciliate the king. Butalthough the line of conduct pursued by the commonsduring this short session was apparently sohostile to his government, it had in fact materiallyfacilitated his concealed design. By the large concessionswhich he had offered upon the subject ofthe Duke of York's concession, he had, in the opinionof many moderate men, placed the Whigs in awrong position. The same class of persons, unusedto enter with excitement into abstract questions ofconstitutional law, would condemn the violence withwhich they insisted upon their impeachment againstFitzharris, and their avowed intention of screeninghim from the ordinary courts of justice ; and theywould justly censure the factious spirit which couldcredit a witness who made his accusations under theterrors of a threatened death. The vehemence ofthe Whigs thus wrought a reaction throughout thekingdom, which, proceeding beyond the point ofmoderation, procured for Charles a temporary popularity.But he derived from these proceedings whatTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 185he considered a yet more important advantage. It CHAP,was now long since he had tasted the golden fruitwhich France was always holding forth, as the produceof her friendship. Charles, who had so longdieted upon corruption, could restrain his appetiteno longer. Before the parliament met he hadcommenced a negotiation with Barillon for a renewal .of his forfeited pension. A very few days after their u"assembly-the conditions were agreed upon. So iniquitouswere these provisions that even Charles didnot dare to put his hand to them, nor did he communicatethem to any other person than Hyde.* Bythis verbal compact Charles was to disengage himselfby degrees from the Spanish alliance, to takemeasures to prevent parliaments from counteractinghis engagements, or, in other words, to engagehimself not to assemble one (this is Barillon's expression).In return he was to receive from Louisapension of 2,000,000 livres for one year, and of500,000 crowns for two others These conditionswere doubtless obtained from the fears of Louis.That monarch dreaded that Charles would be compelledto submit in all points to his parliament, whoNow Lord Hyde. Even the treaty should ever transpire, andDuchess of Portsmouth was kept she be blamed for it, she mightin ignorance of the conditions, al have it in her power to assert herthough she was aware of the exist innocence with a safe conscience,ence of a treaty. The king desired f Hume, vol. viii., p. 207 ; Dal-this,giving as a reason, that if the rymple.180 THE HISTORY OF rARTY.CHAP, would then vote him a supply sufficient to raise the'. king of England from a contemptible petitioner to a■ ■ * powerful enemy. No sooner were the details of thearrangement agreed upon, than Charles abruptly dissolvedhis parliament, and three days afterwardsBarillon wrote to his court that the verbal compacthad been completed.This parliament was dissolved on the 28th ofMarch, after a session of eight days ; and Sir WilliamJones was addressing the house upon the subject ofFitzharris's impeachment, when the usher knockedat their door. The last parliament had had a quarterof an hour's notice of their intended dissolution ; thiswas to the last moment unconscious of its fate ;* foralthough it was known in London the day before,and publicly declared at St. James's by the Duchessof Mazarine, so profound had been the dissimulationof the king, that no one of the Whigs suspected itwhen it happened, although, perhaps, many supposedthat it was Tar offset The following amusing accountof the king's conduct upon this occasion, is given byRoger North : *' The commons complained that the*" Just and modest Vindication him the next day, he told him,of the two last Parliaments." " Sire, by God's sacrament, you'llf Having dissolved his partial never have done following yourment the king set off for Windsor father's courses until you come toin such haste, that his departure the same misfortune." — Burnet'slooked like a flight. It is said Memorial lo the Princess Sophia,that when Prince Rupert joined p. 52.A.D. 1681.THE History OF Party. 187convocation house was too straight for them to sit chap.and transact in, and at their desire orders were givenfor the immediate fitting up of the theatre for theiruse. The king concerned himself much about thedisposition of it, viewed the design, gave his judgment,and came in person among the workmen, andparticularly on Saturday, 26th March. I had thehonour of seeing him there, and observed his takingnotice of every thing. Upon Sunday next his majestywas pleased, especially towards the evening, toentertain himself and his court with discourse of thewonderful accommodation the house of commonswould find in that place, and by his observations anddescriptions showed how it was to be. All this whilethe spies and eavesdroppers could find no symptomof a dissolution, but rather of the contrary, that theparliament was like to make a long session of it.The next morning, which was Monday, the kingcame to the house of lords, as he was wont, in achair, and another chair followed with the curtainsdrawn ; but instead of a lord, as was thought to bein it, there was only the king's robes. Thus theywent and sat down in a withdrawing-room. Whenthe robe chair was opened a gross mistake appeared ;for the garter robes were put up instead of the robesof state, so the chair must go back with an officer tobring the right. A lord happening to be in theroom, who was stepping out upon this discovery asA.D. 1681.188 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, they thought to give the alarm ; upon which thoseVI.with the king prevailed to continue his lordship inthe room till the chair returned, and matters werefixed, and then he had his liberty. The black rodat the house of commons door was the first cause ofsuspicion in the house of commons. The reason ofthis privacy was to prevent bad language, or worse,in parting votes, as had happened upon the dissolutionof the former parliament ; and the precautionwas more reasonable, because, if any evil was ripe, itmight prevent the execution of it, or perhaps hismajesty had no mind to be troubled with too manyinterposes, with their dark objections, as, Sire, whatdo you mean ? Does your majesty consider ? Firstthink what will be the consequence, and the like ;and I guess, besides weightier considerations, thekinof desired to free himself from such kinds ofimportunities"*North's intimation that the dissolution was effectedthus suddenly in order to prevent the execution ofsome design which the AVhigs were supposed toentertain, indicates a suspicion, which, if any creditat all is to be accorded to Lord Ford Grey, was notdestitute of foundation.That nobleman afterwards declared that thereexisted at this time a conspiracy, headed by ShaftsTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 189bury, and supported by other of the more violent ^y^^*men of his immediate party. Shaftesbury was sufficed.1681,gently sagacious to perceive that the course of conductpursued by the commons must very quicklyincline the king to dissolve them ; and he saw thatthe collision of the two houses, which the affair ofFitzharris's impeachment had occasioned, would furnishhim with a plausible excuse for doing so. Expectingtherefore a dissolution at no very distant day,he and his friends had, it is said, fixed upon thisevent as the moment when they were to proceed tomeasures of open resistance. It was arranged that,upon the declaration of the dissolution, the commonswere to continue their sitting, and that those whowere of their party in the lords should also remain.After this decisive step had been taken, they wereto call together their armed attendants for their protection,and, if necessary, attack the king's guards —a proceeding which the universal odium cast uponthis body would have rendered by no means unpopular,and which was the more feasible, since allthe students of the university, who would otherwisehave joined the king, had been sent away tomake room for the members and followers of thecourt and parliament. Thus secure against a forcibledispersion, they might have assumed the powers ofgovernment, and re-enacted the scenes of 1641.But the suddenness of the dissolution destroyedA.D. 1681.190 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, these projects. The commons separated in astonishmentand although Shaftesbury kept his adherentstogether in the house of lords, under the pretence ofsigning that protest against the vote upon Fitzharris'simpeachment, which has been already noticed, yetwhen they found that the commons had dispersed,they also made haste to depart, afraid, says the penitentconspirator, lest the king should come and pullthem out by the ears.This was one of the designs said to be entertainedby the Whigs ; another that was imputed to themwas an intent to seize the person of the king, whosaid the inventors or promulgators of the report wasso convinced of his danger, that he left Oxford immediatelyhe had dissolved the parliament ; sleptthat night at Windsor, nor considered himself insafety until he arrived the next morning at Whitehall.The latter of these stories rests only on thevague assertion, perhaps only on the credulous fearsof the Tories, the former upon the circumstantialdetail of Lord Grey, contained in the history of theRye-house plot.*This pretended history of that plot is, however,entitled to as little credit as the vague rumours whichwere prevalent of the other design. Ford LordGrey, of Were, its author, was a man of the mostSprat omits all mention of any such design.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 191abandoned private character, who had already been chap.convicted of seducing his sister-in-law, Lady Hen-ad.1681.rietta Berkeley, under circumstances of great aggravation.*His authority would, under no circumstances,be of much value ; but when we rememberthat this history was written by the command ofJames II., to whom his Hfe was then legally forfeited,and that Lord Great had at that time become asnotorious for his cowardice, as he was before infamousfor his licentiousness and falsehood ; we shall,without hesitation, reject an account in which truthand falsehood are so interwoven, that it is impossibleto separate the threads ; and which was, of course,dictated by the tyrant who was to reward him for hisservice. The story of this conspiracy was probablyframed, in order to excuse the severities which intervenedbetween the dissolution of this parliamentand the invention of the Rye-house plot.See this case in the State taking to flight with his troopsTrials, vol. ix., p. 127. Lord Grey upon the first shock, lost thathad employed the darkest teakettle and occasioned the holo-cherry and the most dishonourable causes of victims, which James andfalsehood. The lady Henrietta Jefferies immediately deliveredwas not 18 years old ; but her over to the axe and the gibbet,conduct throughout certainly dis Hume relies implicitly upon theplays an utter ignorance of shame authority of this " most full andand recklessness of character. authentic account" as he is pleasedf He commanded the horse at to call it.the battle of Sedgemoor ; and byA.D. 1681,192 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Charles having now dissolved his parliament, andguarded himself against the necessity of callinganother, for the first time since his accession, sawbefore him the prospect of a bright and unopposedcareer. ** Now," said the Tories, " we beginto have a prospect of halcyon days"* To keepalive the spark of loyalty which existed in his favour,he published a declaration to his subjects of hisreasons for dissolving his two last parliaments. Thetopics of such a document it is unnecessary to mention,since they have been already abundantly descantedupon as the circumstances occurred. Afterreckoning up all the points of opposition in whichhe had been foiled by the vigilance of the commons,he, however, concludes by assuring his people withdeliberate falsehood, " that nothing should ever alterhis affection to the Protestant religion as establishedby law, nor his love to parliaments, for he wouldstill have frequent parliaments."Charles was now possessed of nearly absolutepower ; but he ventured upon a dangerous taskwhen he attempted to defend his usurpations withthe pen. His declaration did not go unanswered.The joint labours of Algernon Sidney, Sir WilliamJones, and Mr. (afterwards Lord) Somers, producedan answer which Ralph rightly characterizes as cere1-2-2.A.D. 1681.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 193vainly the most judicious and important pamphlet CHAP,that the Whig party had ever put forth, and withoutreading which, the state of the controversy betweenthe two factions cannot be understood.*In this answer, it is argued from internal evidence,that the declaration was the production not of theking or of his ministers, but of the French ambassadorand it is stated that three days before it wasknown to the privy council, Barillon read it to agentleman, and demanded his opinion about it,"which his excellency," says the pamphlet, "willthe better remember, because of the great libertywhich the person took in ridiculing it to his face."The heats which the declaration complains of arerightly attributed to the conduct of the king, and theviolence of the Oxford parliament is naturally accountedfor by the abrupt dissolution of the formerone. *' The court," said this Whig manifesto, *' neverdid yet dissolve a parliament in a heat ; but they foundthe next parliament more averse, and to insist uponthe same things with greater eagerness than theformer. English spirits resent no affronts so highlyas those which are done to their representatives ;and the court will be sure to find the effects of thatThis tract is called " A Just printed in the appendix to theand Modest Vindication of the 4th volume of the Parliamentarytwo last Parliaments," it is re- History.VOL. I. O^4 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, resentment in the next election. A parliament doesever participate in the present temper of the people."The pamphlet declares that this declaration wouldmake but few converts, not only because the kingdenounced as high crimes what the whole kingdomhad been celebrating as meritorious actions, but becausethe people had learned by experience the faithwhich was to be placed in such documents. Theyare reminded of the manner in which the declarationof Breda had been fulfilled ; and a more recent exampleis adduced in the declaration which was madeupon the formation of the new council. The kinghad thus recently owned that he was sensible ofthe ill posture of his affairs, and the great jealousiesand dissatisfaction of his subjects, whereby thecrown and government was become too weak topreserve itself — dissatisfaction which proceeded fromhis use of a single ministry and of private advices ;and therefore he professed his resolution to laythem wholly aside for the future, and to be advisedby those able and worthy persons whom hehad then chosen for his council in all his weightyand important affairs. *' Every man must acknowledge,"remark the Whig leaders upon this declaration,that either his majesty has utterly forgottenthis public and solemn promise, or else that nothingweighty and important has happened from that timeto this very day."A.D. 1681.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 195The declaration had insisted much upon the offers CHAP.VI.made to the last parliament ; it dwelt much upon his .speech, the expressions of readiness to satisfy hissubjects, to secure them against all their just fears,and to comply with every thing proposed to him toaccomplish those ends, as far as would have beenconsistent with the very being of government. Theanswer is, that whatever the house of commons addressedfor, was certainly denied, though it was onlyfor that reason, and there was no surer way of entitlingoneself to the favour of the court, than toreceive a censure from the representative body ofthe people. " The government might have subsisted,"answers the Vindication, " though the gentlemenput out of the commission of the peace fortheir zealous acting against the papists hadbeen restored ; nor would a final dissolution of allthings have ensued, though Sir George Jefferies hadbeen removed out of his public office, or my LordHallifax himself from his majesty's presence andcouncils ; and had the statute of the 35th of QueenElizabeth, which had justly slept for 80 years, and oflate been unseasonably revived, been repealed, surelythe government might still have been safe. Thencethe writers pass to a detailed defence of all the actsof these parliaments. The numerous committals ofpersons, not members of the house, are sought tobe justified as steps preliminary to impeachments,o 2JO THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, necessary to the prosecution of the plot, and authorizedby numerous precedents.The vote which forbade any person to lend moneyto the king, secured by an anticipation of his revenues,is more capable of defence. No country (it is remarked)ever believed that the prince, how absolutesoever in other things, had power to sell or give awaythe revenue of the kingdom, and leave his successora beggar. The writers draw many instances fromhistory in which such grants have been resumed.France, England, Rome, and even Turkey, are calledforth for examples ; and they sarcastically add, whenspeaking of the Roman emperors, "Tacitus remarksthat the first of them who looked upon the publictreasure as his own, was Claudius, the weakest andmost sottish of them all." The Exclusion bill isdefended as necessary, and the limitations offeredcontemned as mere specious delusions. The generalcharges are indignantly repelled, and Charles and hisadvisers are told that he is the first king and theythe first ministers who have ever dared to characterizethe commons as a faction, and to denounce themas such in all the churches of the kingdom. *' This wemay affirm," says the Vindication, " that if the successof this parliament did not answer expectation, whoeverwas guilty of it, the house of commons did not fail ofdoing their part. Never did men husband theirtime to more advantage : they opened the eyes ofA.D. 1681.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 197the nation; they showed them their danger with a CHAP.VIfreedom becoming Englishmen. They asserted thepeople's right of petitioning ; they proceeded vigorouslyagainst the conspirators ; discovered, and heartilyendeavoured to take away the very root of theconspiracy. They had before them as many greatand useful bills as had been seen in any parliament,and it is not to be laid to their doors that theyproved abortive. This age will never fail to givethem their grateful acknowledgments, and posteritywill remember them with honour."198 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER VII.Effects of the declaration and the reply — Strength of the Tories — Toryaddresses — Trial of Plunket — Of Fitzharris — Persecution of theWhigs — Trial of College — Committal of Shaftesbury — Practices ofthe court to procure evidence — The association paper — The grandjury throwput the bill — The Shaftesbury medal — Dryden's Polishmedal — Abhorrers — Affair of the corporations — Contest in the electionof sheriffs.CHAP. / The publication of this pamphlet, admirable andunanswerable as it was, and as all moderate writersA.D. 1681 1to i684i have admitted it to be, produced little effect in thenation.* The king's declaration was published fromevery pulpit in England, and the clergy were notwanting in zeal to enforce its statements in declamatoryharangues against the parliaments it complainedof. The power of the Whigs was broken, theirleaders were dispersed, and the parliament, their onlyBurnet.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.QMlegitimate arena, was no more. Under these circum chap.stances, even a small number of Tories, supported by Lthe power of the court, could make a very imposing to\^6^84demonstration of loyalty. But this party, althoughoutnumbered by the Whigs, was still numerous andpowerful throughout England. They counted intheir ranks the great majority of landed proprietors,and all the holders of offices at the disposal of thecrown ; and, as the parliament was accustomed toreturn an address in answer to the speech from thethrone, so also they agreed that it was proper, sincethe king had appealed to the people, that they shouldreturn an answer to his declaration. The scene ofthe year before was re-enacted. Those who had thencome forward as abhorrers, now appeared as ad /dressers. Every society, city, and town, containeda Tory party, and from each of these came an address,which was more or less acceptable, in proportion asit simply approved the dissolutions, or entered moreviolently into the points of discussion ; condemningthe Exclusion bill, arraigning the commons as guiltyof treason and sedition, inveighing against the nonconformists,and thanking the king for not passingthe Repeal bill.* All were received with kindwords, but the presenters of addresses of the latterclass were commonly knighted, encouragements whichSe Gazettes for this j'ear, passim.200 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, were found so efficacious, that in a short time thereVII.was scarcely a town in England which had not sentA.D. 1681 • n 11 1 11-to 1684. up its address ; and, at last, so greedy was the kingof these unmeaning protestations, that the lawstudents, the undergraduates, and even the apprentices,were received as addressers at court. LordHallifax estimated these empty sounds at their propervalue, and spoke of them in a contemptuous phrasewhich became current in the nation. Others ofCharles's advisers, who possessed any penetration,held a similar opinion, but the addresses at leastconstituted an appearance of popularity, and that wasall that Charles or his ministers at present required.During all this excitement, Plunket, the Catholicprimate of Armagh, was tried for a pretended popishplot in Ireland. Plunket was a loyal and peaceableman, who enjoined obedience to the existing government,and applied himself diligently to the duties ofhis station ; his accusers were abandoned and disgracedIrish priests, who had been censured for theirdebaucheries by the man they now accused, andwhose contradictory testimony had already been rejectedby a grand jury of zealous Protestants.* Hisinnocence, however, was no protection. Plunketwas convicted; and Charles, although fully convincedthat he had been unjustly condemned, con-burnet.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 201seated to his death. The royal politician was chap.afraid of checking the loyalty of his high church '-supporters ; the true explanation of his brother's ' to 1684.remark upon a similar occasion, that he went intothese measures to prevent worse.*After the execution of the innocent titular archbishop,came the well-earned punishment of Fitz-harris.This man pleaded his parliamentary impeachmentbut his objection being overruled, he hadlittle further chance of escape. He produced theDuchess of Portsmouth and Lord Howard as witnessesupon his trial ; but their evidence only showedthat he had been employed and rewarded by theking, and threw an early suspicion upon the sincerityof Howard's co-operation with the Whilst Fitz-harriswas justly convicted. After he had receivedhis sentence, this man, who was originally a courtspy, then a traitor to his employers, a witness forthe popish plot, and an accuser of Lord Danby, nowmade another attempt to save his life by offering toturn his ready testimony against the Whigs. Theking received the offer with his usual policy. Hedrew from him a written denial of all he had saidimplicating the court, and a charge of subornationagainst the sheriffs, and then left him to his fate.Some letters which he had written to his wife tookMacpherson. f State Trial?.20^ THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, however all credit from this document; and whenthese became known their purport was so evident,to 1684. that Charles, having obtained them from her by thepromise of a pension, and having rewarded Dr. Hawkins,his agent in this matter, with the deanery ofChichester, was content to let the matter drop.*The loss of all political influence was not the onlymisfortune which the Whigs now endured. Charles,while the prospect of absolute power was yet distant,could disclaim all wish to tyrannize over his subjects,or (to use his own words), to sit like a grand seigniorand sentence men to the bowstring ; but no soonerdid he obtain the opportunity, than he evinced acruelty and heartlessness which proved him capable,under favouring circumstances, of rivalling any ofthese despots. This man now, in the words ofRapin, *' became as sanguinary as he had hithertoappeared merciful, and as soon as he had power inhis hands made his enemies feel the most terribleeffects of his vengeance."This vengeance was the more dreadful, since itwas executed with the forms of justice, and underthe sanction of the law. Its ministers were hiredperjurers, packed juries, and prostituted judges —instruments of wholesale murder — ever ready to seizethe victim whom the nod of their master should pointBurnet.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 203out for destruction. While Charles was discoursing CHAP,familiarly with his courtiers upon the impossibility ofA.D. 1681the existence of the popish plot,* and of the infamy to 1684.of the witnesses by whom it had been proved, hewas taking measures to withdraw these very witnessesfrom the side on which they had hithertosworn, and to array them against those who hadsupported their testimony. It was not enough tohumble the Whigs, their leaders must perish upon ythe scaffold, their party must be annihilated. Charleshad learned that a false plot was the most popularexcuse for judicial murder, and one was soon framedupon the model of that of Oates, but with this materialdistinction, that although many good men hadjoined in the prosecution of that plot, yielding undoubtingcredit to the witnesses, it was impossiblethat the present employer of those witnesses shouldbelieve one of the falsehoods which they came forwardto swear. The king followed his model, andcommenced with a humble victim.This was Stephen College, a joiner by trade, butaman of an active and violent spirit, who, elated bysome notice which had been taken of him by Monmouthand other of the popular leaders, had madehimself so conspicuous in the opposition to the court,that he had obtained the name of the ProtestantReresby.04 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, joiner. Dugdale, Tuberville, Smith, and the alreadyinfamous pack of Irish witnesses which supportedI /?Q 1to 1684. them, accused this man of participating in a plot toseize the king, and change the form of government.The very fact of these witnesses turning so suddenlyround, and swearing in concert to transactions soforeign to their usual province, would have been ofitself sufficient to open the eyes of those who hadbefore believed them ; but, besides this suspicion,their testimony was so incoherent, and the factssworn so notoriously false, that the Middlesex grandjury at once threw out the bill.*Charles, however, was not to be thus foiled. Collegewas one of those who had accompanied the citymembers to Oxford, and while at that city he haddoubtless indulged in many indecent expressionsconcerning the king. It was not difficult to suggestto the witnesses that any treason which he may havecommitted in Oxfordshire would remove him fromthe protection of the Middlesex juries, and bringFor this Gilmore the foreman mates that this was a court accusesarbitrarily apprehended, com- nation, when he says, " Whereofmitted to the tower, and after the consequence is, that Mr. Wil-wardsobliged to leave the king more, and every one else of hisdom. — Kennett, vol. iii., p. 499. bold usurpation, must look toNorth declares that this person their hits ; for if they may, theywas convicted of kidnapping men, will be caught napping." — Expandsending them to the planta men, 380. See also Cokes Detectionsbut he pretty clearly inti- Hon, vol. ii., p. 300.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^05him before a more convenient tribunal. It was im CHAP,mediately discovered that his journey to Oxford was 1—A. D- 1 fist ]made in furtherance of the plot, and thither the trial ' to 1684.was removed. North, the compliant and thereforesuccessful rival of Sir William Jones, was sent downto Oxford ; and the trial which ensued exhibited ascene of gross and shameless injustice, which theannals of this reign, fruitful as they are in suchexamples, cannot parallel.Previous to his trial, the papers which had beenprepared for his defence were taken away fi*om himby order of the king's counsel ; his prosecutors thusnot only put themselves in possession of the groundsof his defence, but also prevented him from takingthose objections to the form of his indictment, whichhe had been advised were tenable When Collegecomplained of this to North, and demanded theirrestitution before he would plead, that judge insistedupon his first pleading either guilty or not guilty,declaring first, that he had not taken his papers, andthen that he had no right to have them. *' Howcomes any body to give you papers?" he asked.Nobody can solicit for one that is under an accusationof high treason, unless he be assigned so todoby the court ; " and this reply was made, althoughNorth well knew that West had been assigned to theprisoner as counsel, and Aaron Smith as attorney,by the king and council, probably for the veryTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, pose which had just been attained. Well mightCollege reply, " God have mercy upon any manto 1684. that is so accused then; for it is not possible for himto make his defence, if he cannot be at liberty tolook after it himself, nor any of his friends permittedto do it for him."The evidence exhibited Dugdale, Tuberville,Smith, and Haynes, swearing for the first timeagainst a Protestant. Oates, more consistent in hisvillany, appeared for the defence ; and, could welisten for a moment to any thing which such a manmight swear, we should say that, by his testimonyalone, the perjury of the prosecuting witnesses wasabundantly proved, and that that testimony was confirmedby the most pregnant probabilities. Oatestaunted Tuberville with having changed sides. Theanswer of the attorney-general is worthy of the restof the proceedings of this day. " Mr. Oates'* wasthe reply, *' Mr. Tuberville has not changed sides,but you have ; he is still an evidence for the king,you are against him"* This was eminently a partyprosecution. So violent was the rage of the Toriesagainst the accused, that it was proved upon thetrial, and admitted by the high sheriff, that amongthose who had pressed forward to be placed in theOates's reply was worthy of a oration." — State Trials, vol. viii.better man. " I am a witness for p. 639.truth, against falsehood and sub-theHISTORY OF PARTY. '20']iurv box, one had been so indiscreet as to declare CHAP.VII.that he had sworn to convict him, right or wrong.College defended himself with more skill and intre- ' io 1684.rapidity than his prosecutors had expected ; standingalone, a humble and illiterate man, with all theauthority of the bench, all the eloquence and learningof the crown lawyers, and all the prejudices of apartial jury arrayed against him, he yet made astruggle for his life, which would have done honourto men much more highly esteemed. He cross-examinedthe prosecutor's witnesses with considerableacuteness ; and Dugdale, the principal evidenceagainst him, was so thoroughly destroyed, that henever again was produced in a court of justice. Heexamined his own witnesses with great tact, andelicited from them such strong circumstances in hisfavour, that Sir George Jeiferies found it necessaryvery often to remind the jury of the rule of law,which did not allow an oath to be administered towitnesses for the defence. " Gentlemen, it is Mr.Oates's saying ; it is Mr. Tuberville's oath."When the jury returned their predetermined verdictof guilty. College received his sentence withunshaken constancy. He merely inquired the dayof his execution, and was answered that he shouldhave notice to prepare himself. He had from the18th to the 31st of August. *' The true reason,"says Sir John Hales, solicitor-general to Will. III.,A.D. 1681to208 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, "of SO long a reprieve, was to see how the nationwould digest the matter, and whether the man, by1684. terror of death, could be prevailed upon to become atool to destroy other innocents ; but when it wasfound that the people were quiet, and that the prisonercould not be prevailed upon to do an ill thingto save his life, his execution was ordered ; yet, as ashow of mercy, his quarters were permitted to beburied — a favour he slighted by saying that he carednot whether he was eaten up by flies or worms.The constancy of College at his execution was such,that it made the most violent against him relent"*The execution of College was followed by theprosecution of the Earl of Shaftesbury — a step whichat once discovered with what rigour the king wasdetermined to use his newly-acquired power. Onthe 2d of July this nobleman was taken from hisresidence, Thanet-house, in Aldersgate-street, andcarried before the king, who had arrived from Windsorthat morning, purposely to preside at his examination.Shaftesbury found that the witnesses who hadprocured the condemnation of College, had now deposedto a series of improbabilities against him. Itwas in vain for him to demand to be confronted withthese accusers ; but he pointed out the utter impossibilityof his having ever spoken treason, or concoctedrebellion, with men so vile and worthless asState Trials, vol. viii., p. 746.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. '^v.these notoriously were. He appealed to the lords CHAP,of the council individually, whether they believedone of the depositions that had been sworn againsthim, and justly observed, that if they did they mustthink him worthy to become an inmate rather ofBedlam than the Tower. This, however, was notthe place for a successful defence. Shaftesbury wascommitted to the tower, and Hallifax, his determinedenemy, declared that there was fully sufficient evidenceagainst him to bring him to the block. *Macpherson, in his Life of James II.,t states, uponthe authority of that prince, that Shaftesbury was hootedby the populace as he was led to the tower ; but thisimprobable statement is contradicted by Mr. Martyn,who says, probably upon the authority of Stringer'sMS., that crowds of people followed him, salutinghim with good wishes and prayers for his prosperity.One of them (he adds) cr^^ng out, " God blessyour lordship ! and deliver you fi'om your enemies."Shaftesbury replied with a smile, *' I, my friend, havenothing to fear ; rather pray to God to denver themfrom me."tShaftesbury indeed was tolerably confident as toReresby. ment," p. 26). He calls it "anf Macpherson, vol. i., p. 124. imposture as impudent as OssianThe authenticity of this life of itself."James has been well canvassed by { Life of Shaftesbury, vol. ii.,Mr. Fox (see his " Historical Frag p. 288.VOL. I. P110 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the result of this prosecution ; he was secure of aVII.'- — favourable jury ; he was safe in the infamy of histo 1684. accusers ; and his habitual caution made him laughat the eagerness of the court to seize his papers.His usual cheerfulness did not forsake him in hisconfinement. A few days after he was committed,he was accosted by one of the popish lords who stillremained in the tower. This nobleman affected surpriseat meeting the chief of his persecutors in sucha situation. " I have lately, *' replied Shaftesburyto the taunting question of what had brought himthither? "been indisposed with an ague, and I amcome here to take a little Jesuit's powder"*But although Charles had placed this his mostviolent and restless enemy in confinement, he wasnot prepared with evidence which would convict himbefore a Middlesex jury, and he had recourse toevery contrivance to delay the trial, until he coulddiscover or suborn evidence against him. Shaftesburywas no less active. He made incessant endeavoursto obtain his liberty under the habeas corpusact, but every judge to whom he applied discoveredMemoirs of the Life and colony of South Carolina, andDeath of the Earl of Shafts never again return to England ;bury, in the Harleigh Miscellany, but that his petition met with noJames II., however, asserts that notice. Sir Richard BulstrodeShaftesbury was upon this occa- mentions the same circumstance,sion so terrified, that he offered, if probably upon the authority ofset at liberty, to remove to his James. — Memoirs, p. 332.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 211some excuse for refusing him the writ. He indicted chap.VII.the witnesses who had made the depositions against1 1 • • 111-11 P A.D. 1681him, and the justice who had received them, tor per- to 1684.jury, and subornation of perjury. But Pembertonat the Old Bailey refused to hear the indictmentsread ; and Sir William Smith at the Middlesex sessionshaving heard them, adjourned the court, inorder that the clerk of the peace might have timeto mislay them. They could never afterwards befound.*The court hoped that they had discovered thewitness, of whom they were in quest, in the personof Captain Wilkinson — a brave and faithful cavalierduring the civil wars. Shaftesbury was one of theproprietors of the newly-founded colony of NorthCarolina ; and he had appointed this gentlemangovernor of that place. Wilkinson, however, whohad experienced little gratitude at the hands of thecourt, became involved, by the detention of the vesselin which he was to sail, in expenses which he couldnot pay, and, probably by the contrivance of thegovernment, he was thrown into prison. When thusapparently at their mercy, the agents of the kingplied him alternately with threats and promises, toinduce him to accuse his benefactor. They offeredhim an estate of £500 a year if he consented ; andI * Martyn, vol. ii., p. 297.p 2212 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, they threatened to include him in the indictment ifVII.he refused. But Captain Wilkinson was a man ofto 168 i. honour ; he indignantly repelled their offers, and hedefied their threats. The authority and ingenuityof the lords of the council were alike useless ; andhe replied to their angry sarcasms by publishing tothe world an account of the practices to which hehad been subjected.*The reason given by Booth, the agent in thisattempt at subornation, for the anxiety of the prosecutorsto procure evidence fi:"om Wilkinson was, thatas yet they had but the Irish witnesses, who wouldnot be believed, and that they wanted a man whosecredit was unimpeached to support their testimony.With this battered crew, however, the crown lawyerswere now obliged to proceed to trial, and they presentedto the grand jury an indictment chargingShaftesbury with a participation in the same imaginaryconspiracy for which College had already suffered.On the 24th of November, the grand jury returnedby the Whig sheriffs, but consisting of some of themost eminent merchants and citizens of London,took this bill into consideration. The preparationsThe information of Captain vail with him to swear high treasonHenry Wilkinson of what passed against the Earl of Shaftesbury."between him and some other per- — London, 1681.sons, who have attempted to pre-theHISTORY OF PARTY. '^Jmade, and the concourse of people assembled, suffi chap.VII.gently marked this trial to be an important partystruggle. Contrary to all ordinary precedent, the jurymenwere assembled in open court, and the two chiefjustices presided. The proceedings commenced witha contest between the judges and the jury. Thelatter demanded a copy of their oath, and findingthat it obliged them to secrecy, objected that a publicexamination of the witnesses would not only be contraryto right and custom, but would also involve abreach of that oath. The judges overruled thescruple, and they proceeded ; but not before they hadrecorded a protest against the line of conduct pursued.*The names of the witnesses were already familiarto the public as prosecutors of the popish plot andaccusers of College, but the words they swore towere generally vague and indefinite as to any purposedtreason. Haynes, whom College had alreadyproved to be a mere hack perjurer, swore thatShaftesbury had told him, that unless the king wouldgrant Haynes and others a pardon, he would raise allEngland against him ; and, among other things equallypreposterous, that he had said the Duke of Buckinghamhad as good a right to the crown as any Stuart inEngland. Smith and Tuberville, men not less intestateTrials, vol. viii.14 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, piously notorious, deposed to similar expressions.The two Macnamaras had heard Shaftesbury threatento 1^684. *o bring Charles to the block ; and Booth camesomewhat nearer to the plot, by trying to connectShaftesbury with a treaty which he pretended to haveentered into with Wilkinson, whereby he was tobecome one of a body-guard of fifty men which wasto accompany the earl to Oxford, and to assist toseize the king's person and overpower his guards.The infamy of these men was notorious, and thesupposition that Shaftesbury should converse upontreasonable topics with instruments so vile, was animprobability too glaring. The crown lawyers reliedwith more confidence upon a paper which had beenfound among those which were seized when Shaftesburywas first arrested. It will be remembered, thatduring the sitting of the last Westminster parliament,various collateral securities had been proposed forthe protection and execution of the Exclusion bill.Among these was a bill for associating all the Protestantsin the empire in a league or association,which should have for its object the execution of theprovisions of that bill, and by which all the membersof the projected body were to engage to resist theaccession of a popish king. During the agitation ofthis bill, many projectors were, doubtless, besiegingthe leading Whig members with drafts of schemesand models upon which the intended association shouldTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 'Zlbe formed. It was apparently a neglected document chap.VII.of this description which had fallen into the hands ofSir Leoline Jenkins, and which was now produced.That it was drawn up during the sitting of parliamentis evident, since by it the members of the associationwere to bind themselves, that, lest their just andpious work should be anywise obstructed or hinderedfor want of discipline and conduct, or any evil-mindedperson under pretence of raising forces forthe service of the association, should attempt or commitdisorders, they would follow such orders as theyshould fi'om time to time receive from that parliamentwhilst it should be sitting, or the major part of themembers of both houses subscribing the associationwhen it should be prorogued or dissolved, and obeysuch officers as should by them be set over them inthe several counties, cities, and boroughs, until thenext meeting of that or another parliament, and wouldthen show the same obedience and submission untoit and those who should be of it.According to the axiom of our law, which declaresthat the king never dies, this is doubtless a treasonablepaper, since it declares a conspiracy to levy warunder particular circumstances against a king ofGreat Britain. But the prosecutors failed to fix thistreason upon Shaftesbury. It was found, indeed,among his papers; but this was the only connexionthey could show between it and the earl. None of\6THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the witnesses knew in whose handwriting the paperwas, but it certainly bore no mark of Shaftesbury'sA.D. 1681 ^ . 1 1 . ■, nto 1684. pen. JNo correction pl-owed that it had ever beenperused by him, and no signature that it had beenintended as an original document. It had, in fact,all the appearance of what it doubtless was, a projectsubmitted by some zealous partisan to his chief, whichhad been received, carelessly thrown by, and forgotten.The grand jury having severely examined the Irishwitnesses, and having heard the evidence by whichthis paper was sought to be fixed upon Shaftesbury,retired from the court, and soon after returned andpresented the indictment with their endorsement —*' Ignoramus."This result was communicated by a burst of applauseto the crowds which thronged all the avenuesto the court. The acclamations were caught up outside,and for an hour* the air rang with the plauditsof the assembled multitude. The citizens indulgedin excess of joy, and as it grew dark, bonfires throughoutand around the city notified the escape of thedestined victim, and celebrated the triumph of thepeople.fin the present depressed state of the Whig party,this was no trifling success ; it was commemoratedLetter in the State Paper office quoted by Sir Join Dalrymple.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 217by a medal, bearing the bust and title of Shaftesbury, / chap.and on the reverse, a sun obscured by a cloud risingover the tower and city of London, the date of they ' [^ interjectionof the bill, and a motto, *' L^tamur.*' \This medal which was struck by Bowen, becamerapidly disseminated throughout the kingdom ; theWhigs wore them as the distinguishing badge of theirparty ; and the Tories could read, in the frequency oftheir appearance, the force and confidence of their,opponents. The acquittal of Shaftesbury seems to \have changed for a moment the relative situations ofthe parties, to have introduced dejection among theytriumphant Tories, and to have inspired confidence \into the humbled Whigs. The press now teemedwith the most rabid denunciations against what theycalled the reign of Ignoramus. The tracts of thistime exhibit all the noisy violence of a furious anddefeated party. They had the field nearly to themselves,for the court had early taken the precautionto send a messenger, accompanied by the wardens ofthe stationers' company, to the several printing-houses,commanding them to publish nothing in defenceof the Earl of Shaftesbury, or in justificationof the " Ignoramus," which set him at liberty. BenjaminHarris, the Whig publisher of the day, didindeed put forth occasional pamphlets on the otherside, which have descended to us in Lord Somers'collection ; but they are probably more accessible218 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, now than they were at the time of their publication,^^^' when they required to be circulated with secrecy,to 1684. ^^^ received and read with caution.*fBut none of the Tory party felt the humiliationso acutely as their head and leader, Charles.Cheated of his victim, he exclaimed with the bitternessof disappointed vengeance, "It is a hard casethat I am the last man to have law and justice in thewhole nation! "t The triumph of the Whigs andthe fearless manner in which it was celebrated, wereparticularly galling ; the open exhibition of themedal was a continued insult. Foiled in his expectationof terminating his differences with Shaftesburyby the axe, he now condescended to use thepen. Dryden had once been considered a supporterof the Whigs, so much so, that in a satirical pamphletwritten in ridicule of Shaftesbury, whom theTories accused of having hoped to be elected Kingof Poland, when John Sobieski was chosen, Drydenis placed among the state officers of the newly-electedkings I need not say that Charles's laureatFrancis Smith had already ing inconvenient statements. Itbeen heavily fined for printing one was burnt by the hands of theof Lord Shaftesbury's speeches, hangman,under the title of " The Speech f Reresby.of a noble Peer," see it in Somers's J From this conceit, and anTracts. Shaftesbury disavowed it, abscess which arose from an ac-andit was subjected to the then cedent, and rendered it necessaryfashionable method of controvert for him to be tapped, came theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. '^19was no longer a Whig, his Absalom and Achitophel CHAP,had already proved the extent of his powers ofA T\ 1 Ci 1satire ; and it was Shaftesbury who had already been to 1684.the subject of his lash. " If I was a poet," said theking to Dry den one day as they were walking inthe Mall, " and I think I am almost poor enoughto be one, I would write a poem upon the subjectof this medal." Dryden took the hint ; his satireof "The Medal" soon after appeared, and the kingwas so delighted with its severity, that he rewardedhim with a present of a hundred broad pieces.*The Whigs had no champion whom they couldplace in the lists against Dryden ; they followed, indeed,the advice which he gave them in his dedicatoryletter, and railed at him abundantly ; but thepoet added, " Not to break a custom, do it withoutwit ;" and the "Whigs obeyed the whole of the injunction.This defeat sustained by the court, called forthanother of those demonstrations, then so fashionablewith the Tories. Addresses, by which obscure individualsobtained a momentary notoriety, and the authoritiesof country towns were received with smilesat court, could not but be popular among the classwhence they proceeded. Those who had commencedmost usual of Shaftesbury's nick pamphlet in Lord Somers's Tracts,names, Count Tapski. See this * Spence.220 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, as abhorrers and persevered as addressers, now be-viicame abhorrers again. Immediately after the vero1684. diet of the grand jury in Shaftesbury's case, thegazettes are crowded with expressions of pious abhorrenceof " that most execrable and traitorous designedassociation," which was discovered in thatnobleman's closet. Among these abhorrers, theuniversity of Cambridge as usual, bore away thepalm of courtly subserviency. Confessing their inabilityto judge upon political matters, this body,nevertheless, without hesitation, pronounced Shaftesburyand his associates traitors. But they claimeda greater authority upon theological points, andexerted it by declaring that they were atheists aswell as traitors. For themselves, they confessed thattheir lives and fortunes both depended upon theking's royal protection ; and they concluded, in thattrue style of eastern hyperbole which seems sonatural to slavery, with a prayer, that there mightnever want one of Charles's royal line in the unalterableright of succession to sway the sceptre so longas a sun and moon should endure.*This disgraceful document did not, however, speakthe sentiments of the majority of the Tory party: withalltheir hatred of the Whigs, the papists, and the\ nonconformists, the Tories still retained the spirit ofGazette, No. 1709.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 221Englishmen. Amid the expressions of that loyalty CHAP,which formed so conspicuous a feature of their creedthere occurred occasional hints of suspicion and dis ' [^ 16^4.trust, which could not be unnoticed by an acute andobservant monarch. Nearly all the addresses assumedthat a new parliament was about to be assembled,and promised to return loyal members forthe place whence the address came. The declarationof the grand jury of Exeter, is careful to recite ,that " His majesty has been graciously pleased, sooften to repeat his will and pleasure to support andmaintain the true reformed religion as now establishedby law, his resolution (as he shall see occasion)to call frequent parliaments, and to governaccording to the known laws of the land"* andrelies upon these assurances as proper grounds ofconfidence. The great majority of these documents,however, apparently servile, contain similar intimationsand Charles might have read in them an indirectrepetition of those very addresses for a parliamentwhich the Tories had before disclaimed withabhorrence.There are some of these addresses, however, inwhich I can discover no such reservation. Thosefrom the Temples show how judiciously Charles hadbestowed the law patronage he possessed, and howGazette, No. 1693.222 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, entirely the creatures of the court monopolized thegovernment of these societies. The view taken byA D 1681to 1684. the Middle Temple of the functions of a jury, doesas little credit to their judgments as lawyers, as therest of their address does to their sentiments asEnglishmen. " Whosoever promoted that rebelliousassociation, designed by the paper produced, by refusingupon full evidence to find bills of indictmentagainst the authors and promoters thereof, andthereby, as much as in them lay, preventing theirbeing brought to a fair trial, have, in a high measure,perverted the laws, and could have no otherdesign thereby than to usurp to themselves an arbitraryand tyrannical dominion, not only over yoursubjects, but over your majesty also." *Such was their declaration in defiance of thenotorious fact, that there was no evidence whateverto convict Shaftesbury of being the author of thistreasonable paper, or a promoter of any associationsuch as it projected.The address of the Inner Temple is penned withadmirable coolness. It urged Charles '' to proceedto remove all those obstructions which have or mayprevent the bringing of disaffected and evil men tosuffer that exemplary justice they have most notoriouslydeserved."Gazette, No. 1696.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 223With regard to the majority of these addresses, cHAP.Mr. Sidney* was right when he wrote of them tothe Prince of Orange, as mere noise, signifyingnothing, t But this suggestion of the Inner Templewas pregnant with meaning. The city of Londonhad hitherto stood firm and unassailable, high abovethe reach of the flood of royal wrath which sweptaround it and overbore every meaner barrier ; butnow this last stronghold of liberty was to be destroyed.With no parliament to withstand its encroachments,and with a bench of corrupt judges ready toregister all its edicts, the crown was now becomeirresistible. Charles usually had recourse to hislawyers for some plausible disguise for a projectedinjustice. Upon this occasion they were not wantingeither in zeal or ingenuity. Saunders, the mostprofound lawyer and the most profligate man at thebar, was the author of a new doctrine of law, thatthe slightest irregularity in the proceedings of a corporationworked a forfeiture of their charter. Thisdogma was certainly at variance with many decidedAfterwards Lord Rodney — with shouts and huzzahs, to whichDalr. App., pp. 1 to 11. another health 'To the confusionburnet says that " they were of all his enemies,' was commonlygenerally believed to be penned added"— Vol. i,, p. 509 (excerptedby the clergy, among whom the passage),duke's health was always drunkVII.A.D. 1681to 1684.224 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, precedents, and was supported by none. TheVIIexact question now propounded had never beforeto 1684. been agitated. It was now heard for the firsttime. But this was something in its favour, since,as no private person had ever been insane enough tocontest such a point, it had never received a directcontradiction. It could be supported by some fewarguments from analogy ; what proposition can not ?But above all, it was willed to be law at court : anymeans were justifiable, any rule of law was good, inthe eyes of the king, which would reduce this strongholdof rebellion, and destroy the last refuge of thosewho still defied his power. London at his feet, theMiddlesex juries packed at his pleasure, the corporationsthroughout the empire, then the citadels ofthe Whigs, garrisoned by Tories, who should thendare to resist him ?The authorities of the city were accordingly servedwith a writ of quo warranto — a process which requiredthem to appear before the court of King'sBench, and show by what authority they exercisedthe functions of the offices they claimed to hold.During the contests between the petitioners andabhorrers, the city had presented a strong petition*for the meeting of parliament, and they had imposeda trifling tax upon sellers resorting to the publicmarkets, in order to dei-ay the debt they had in-This petition is printed in the Coiners Tracts, vol. viii., p. U4.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 225cursed in rebuilding them after the fire. These CHAP,were the two delinquencies charged upon the city.Whether the acts were in themselves illegal is of ^" io^^684.little importance ; if the proposition now contendedfor was law, and every irregularity worked a forfeitureof a corporation's charter, there could be nodoubt that abundance of informalities might be discoveredamong affairs so extensive and involved asthose of the corporation of London.More than a year was consumed by the preliminaryproceedings. Ashen the case grew ripe for argument,the king found it necessary to make somealterations in the bench of judges by whom it wasto be tried. North, who had been chief justice ofthe Common Pleas, had, upon the death of the Earlof Nottingham, obtained the seals. Pemberton, thechief justice of the King's Bench, was slow to beconvinced of the validity of the new principle of lawpropounded by Saunders : he was therefore removedto the seat which North had vacated : Saunderssucceeded him, charged with the task of protectingand giving strength to his own offspring.Dolben, one of the puisne judges, was found to havesome doubts upon the point : he was dismissed, andWithers, a ready convert, who had the further meritof having been persecuted by a house of commons,was appointed in his stead.The preliminaries being thus adjusted, and theVOL. I. Q2^6 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, bench judiciously packed, early in 1683 the case cameVII.on for argument. The point has since then been soto 1684. authoritatively decided, that it is unnecessary to noticethe arguments by which the charter was attackedand defended. Finch and Sawyer on behalf of thecrown, conducted the contest with an ingenuitywhich all lawyers admire ; but Treby and Pollexfenin reply, adduced argument and authority by whichnone but a corrupted tribunal could fail to be convinced.On the 12th of June the court were assembled togive judgment ; the chief justice was however absent.JHe had been struck with apoplexy a few days before ;he sent in his judgment in writing, and died eitherthat day or the day after.* Jones, therefore, pronouncedthe judgment. It was that a corporationaggregate might be seized ; that the tax levied byvirtue of the by-law was extortion, and a forfeiture ofthe franchise of being a corporation ; that the petitionwas scandalous and libellous, and the making itand publishing it a forfeiture ; that the act of thecommon council was the act of the corporation ; thatno cause had been shown to excuse or avoid theseforfeitures ; that therefore the information had beenwell founded ; and therefore that the franchise shouldbe seized into the king's hands. The entry of theState Trials, vol. viii., p. 1264. were made," remarks Burnet, inUpon which great reflections an excerpted passage, p. 535.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 227judgment was, upon the motion of the attorney chap.general, respited until the king's pleasure should be '.A.D. 1681known. to 1684.Thus fell the privileges of the city of London.The issue of this contest was sufficiently demonstrativeof the absolute power which th king now held ;for if a body so powerful and wealthy as the unitedcitizens of the metropolis of his dominions could notwithstand his violence, who could hope to do so?If those prostituted engines of tyranny — his courtsof justice — were powerful enough to crush theyagainst whom could they be expected to fail ?The judgment was not entered upon record, lest,upon the dissolution of the corporation, certain tollsmight be construed to cease which were now theirprescriptive property, but could not be granted bythe crown.* Charles was contented to await thesubmission, which he doubted not this exhibition ofhis power would produce.The citizens were not ignorant that their onlyhope was now in unconditional obedience. A contritepetition was immediately penned, and presentedby the mayor, aldermen, and common councilmen,to the king in council. It expressed sorrow for theirpast transgressions, and was promise in promises ofloyalty and obedience for the fixture. The answerNorth.Q 2228 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, was delivered by Lord Keeper North. It was notthe policy of the king to destroy the corporation —to 1684. remodelled it would be as useful an instrument inhis hands, as it had proved formidable when itspower was exercised against him. The conditionsnow offered were such as exactly attained this purpose,without any unnecessary interference withtheir powers or privileges.They were told that if they accepted the conditionsproposed to them, their charter would be re-granted and confirmed ; if they refused them, judgmentwould be immediately entered up upon thequo warranto. These conditions were —That no lord mayor, sheriff, recorder, commonsergeant, town clerk, or coroner of the city of London,or steward of the borough of Southwark, should beadmitted to the exercise of their respective officesbefore his majesty should have approved them underhis sign manual.That if his majesty should disapprove the choiceof any person to be lord mayor, the city should,within a week, proceed to a new choice ; and if heshould disapprove the second choice, that he mighthimself nominate a person to be lord mayor for theensuing year.That the king should have a similar power overthe choice of sheriffs, and right to appoint after twodisapproval.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 229That the mayor and aldermen might, with the CHAP.VII.leave of the king, displace any alderman, recorder.common sergeant, town clerk, coroner, or steward. " to 1684.That the court of aldermen should have a negativeupon all elections into their body, and might themselveselect after two negatives. AndThat the justices should be appointed by theking's commission.*When the deputation returned with these conditions,a common council was immediately held, anda violent debate ensued, whether the city shouldenter into this compromise, or rather suffer all itsprivileges to be torn away by violence. Even in thepresent hopeless state of the Whig party, the resolutionto consent to the conditions passed only by amajority of 18. The division being 104 to 86.tThis principle of law having been thus established,and the metropolis having succumbed before it, itstriumph over the rest of the kingdom was scarcelyopposed. The corporations, from the antiquity oftheir charters, which rendered the qualifications fortheir offices moderate in the specie of those days,were chiefly in the hands of the middle classes, andNorth's Examen. than the fact of Jenkins, the most■f Burnet — State Trials — Ralph active agent in causing them, being717. The effect of these changes made soon after master of theare easily conceived. There can Salters' Company. — Wynne's Lifescarcely be a better instance of it of Jenkins, vol. i,, p. xlvii.230 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, these in cities and trading towns, have almost invariablyadopted the Whig code of politics. These wereA.D. 1681to 1684. 1^0 w threatened or persuaded into surrendering theircharters, and as there were few who could hope thatthey had been guilty of no irregularity, Charles soonplaced the government of these important places invery different hands, and reserved to himself thepower of interference whenever he might deem itsexercise necessary. The judges were as conspicuousin obtaining these illegal surrenders as theywere in every other deed of tyranny which marksthis reign.Sir George Jefferies is, as usual, eminent, evenamong such zealous competitors as these. During hisprogress upon the northern circuit he performed theinstructions of his master so well, that North* boaststhat he made all the charters, like the walls of Jericho,fall down before him, and he returned from his missionladen with surrenders, the spoils of towns.In tracing this celebrated cause to its conclusion,I have omitted a circumstance which occurred whileit was yet pending, and which gave the citizensample notice that they were to expect even absoluteforce and violence, if no other method could be devisedfor their subjection. At Midsummer, 1682,upon the day of election of new sheriffs, it had beenExamen, 626,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 231for some months resolved by the court, that a deci- chap,VII.sive effort should be made to put an end to what the '.Tories called the reign of Ignoramus. It has been ' ^ 1684.already mentioned, that it was an ancient custom ofthe citizens of London to allow the lord mayor tochoose one of the sheriffs by publicly drinking to him.This custom, which had been recently broken. SirLeoline Jenkins determined to re-establish. Thelord mayor, who would preside at the election, wasSir John Moor, a weak and flexible man,* once asectarian, afterwards, when he aspired to be a civicdignitary, a conformer, and now a worshipper of thecourt and a tool of Jenkins The king himselfstooped to flatter this man, and by intoxicating hisvanity excited in him sufficient courage to serve hispurpose. Moor, at the close of the interview, pro-northwhimsically likens this In Wynne's Life there is a lettermanto the primitive Christians, from him to the Duke of York,who were no less meek and hum in which he distinctly disapprovesable in behaviour and conversation, the proceedings, although he at-thanvaliant and resolved in their tempts at some length to proveprofession." — Examine, 620. their legality. This seems, in facts-f- Burnet, 529. Jenkins had the principal end of the memorial,the chief management of this cru His dissuasion is very tame, andsade against the corporations. His and he concludes by professingconduct with regard to the city was that he shall, nevertheless, submitthe less excusable, since he did not to his majesty's and his royal high-himselfapprove even the expense wisdom. He faithfullyof the violent measures to filled this profession. — Wynnewhich he himself had recourse. Life of Jenkins, vol. ii., p, 683."232 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, mixed to drink to any person whom the king should'. name, and to insist upon his right of election. Itto 1684. was still difficult to find a citizen, with any pretensionsto respectability, who would suffer himself tobe thus set up. Those to whom the ministers applieddeclared their intention to pay the usual fine ratherthan be made the instrument of oppressing their city,and risk the ruin which must fall upon them shouldtheir title be held bad, since they would then beliable to actions for every process they executed.*The family of the Norths, however, so fruitful inadmirers of prerogative and place, supplied the kingin this time of need. Mr. Dudley North, a Turkeymerchant, brother to the lord keeper, offered himselffor the occasion, and his services were readily accepted.Sir John Moor, when the day came, fulfilled hispledge ; he drank to North, and sending the gobletround to him with the usual formality, that personsignified his acceptance of the appointment, and waspresented to the common hail for confirmation.This the liverymen thus assembled refused; upon theside of the court it was contended, that the ceremonyof drinking to the person proposed was not a merenomination agreed to from courtesy, but a validelection authorized by prescriptive right. It wassaid that the choice of the sheriffs belonging to theExamen.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 233citizens, subject to their confirmation by the mayor, chap.it had been always understood that the mayor shouldelect one in return for confirming the citizens' choice " to iggi.of the other.*The citizens, however, appealed to their charter,whence alone they had the right of election at all ;by this it clearly appeared that the election of thesheriffs was granted to the citizens of London ; andthey contended that whatever customs had crept inamong them, the right still lay where the charterhad lodged itt The confirmation by the mayorwas, it was said, a mere ceremony ; that functionarywas bound to receive and confirm their choice as theking received and confirmed him when presented bythe citizens. On Midsummer-day the point wascontested with great violence. The sheriffs wereconsidered to be the officers who presided over thecommon hall, as the mayor did over the court ofaldermen. They now put the election to the pole,and the mayor's candidate was quickly found to bedestitute of supporters among the liverymen. Uponthis, the mayor who was present, assumed the presidingofficer's power, and adjoin-ned the court, tNorth. mourn, Pollexfen for the citizens,f Burnet. and Sawyer in opposition to them,J The mayor retired, and heard The timorous nature of Moorcounsel first as to his right to ad kept him a long time irresolute.234 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The sheriffs contended he had no power to adjourn,VIIand they continued the poll. Every thing remainedto 1684. quiet, the poll was carried on with the usual forms ;and Papilio and Dunois, the popular candidates,were chosen by immense majorities. The mayor, however,now rendered desperate by the extent to whichhe had already committed himself in the service ofthe court, declared the election illegal. He himselfopened a poll, to which none were admitted unlessthey first agreed to vote only for one candidate, andto admit his nomination for the other. By thismeans the court of course obtained the nominationof both sheriffs, since no elector would vote for onewho was not equally ready to vote for any other thatmight be pointed out to him. The mayor's pollconsisted of a very contemptible minority ; but thatdid not prevent him from swearing his candidates in,and leaving the others to their legal remedy. Theviolence, however, did not end here j Sir Ralph Box,who had been chosen by the court as a colleague toNorth, was not inclined to risk his fortune upon sodoubtful a title, he paid the usual fine. A new com-he was afraid of personal violence ; up, saying, ", If I die, I die," andat last, urged on by the aldermen, ordering the officer to bear theand reassured by the promises of sword before him, went down andprotection which he received from pronounced the adjournment.Whitehall, he suddenly startedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. • 235mon-hall was therefore to be held, and Sir Peter chap.VII.Rich was to be the new court candidate. '. —When the hverymen were thus assembled, and the ' to 1684.multitude was anxiously expecting the commencementof the proceedings, they were confounded bythe declaration that Rich had been elected withoutopposition. He had been proposed in a whisper bysome one near the mayor ; the persons who purposelysurrounded them, had carefully concealed theproceedings until they were concluded. The electionwas now complete ; all appeal was, of course,useless. To complain against Charles's agents inthe city, to his agents at Westminster,* was worsethan useless. Rich and North remained sheriffs ;and from Midsummer-day 1682 Charles could packthe London and Middlesex juries with the same facilityas he could those of the other parts of his kingdom.This, if any proof was want was required to swear in Papilioing, was made sufficiently clear by and Dunois, and refused, he wasthe fact that a prosecution was arrested in an action upon theimmediately commenced against case for such refusal ; but thethe two sheriffs, Wilmington and time for such demonstrations wasShute, who continued the poll, for gone by, he brought an action forariot. They, and all who were the false imprisonment, and reactiveupon the occasion, were covered £10,000 damages. Theconvicted and fined. — State Tnals, citizens were not ignorant that theirvol. ix. When Sir William lives as well as their privileges de-pritchard,the next lord mayor, pended upon these elections.2S6 * THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER VIII.A.D. 1682.Intrigues in the cabinet — Supremacy of the Tories — Designs of theWhigs — Resistance contemplated — The Rye-house plot — Accountsof it — Grey's — Sprat's — Shaftesbury's activity — Disappointmentand flight — Anecdote concerning Lord Howard — Its authenticityand importance.CHAP. While the metropolis trembled before them,the cabinet, conceiving themselves secure fromall attack from without, began to quarrel amongthemselves. Hallifax, the only man of great talentamong them, who had sacrificed his principles andhis popularity in the king's service, conceived himselfentitled to some higher reward than he had yet received.The creatures of the court were the firstto feel the poverty of the king, and the inconvenienceof the stoppage of parliamentary supplies.Hallifax discovered that his rival, Hyde, now Earl ofRochester, had taken advantage of his station toembezzle about £40,000 in farming a branch in theA.D. 1682.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 237revenue ; and he brought forward the charge in chap.council, as one which must find favour with an indigentking and a hungry court. Halifax had, however,miscalculated his strength. Hyde was theconfident of the last money treaty with France ; hewas the inseparable ally of the Duke of York, andthe client of the Duchess of Portsmouth. Thesepowerful personages, immediately this charge wasmade, forgot all the accuser's services ; the eloquentdestroyer of the Exclusion bill became immediatelyas odious to the court as he was hated by thepeople ; and although the practised hypocrisy ofCharles enabled him to conceal any change of sentimentas long as he designed to make use of theindividual, Hallifax knew and said that his influencewas gone.The hatred between Hallifax and Rochester hadcommenced a short time before upon the following occasionthe Earl of Sunderland, whose attempts to ingratiatehimself with the parliament, by favouring theExclusion bill and discountenancing France, hadbeen successful, had, of course, incurred a proportionateloss of reputation at court. After the dissolution,he had been dismissed ; but the Duchess ofPortsmouth, who had been his coadjutor in thesemeasures, remained faithful to him in disgrace ;and by her influence, assisted by that of LordA.D. 1G8-2..338 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Rochester, he was now reinstated in his office ofVIII.secretary.Rochester's interference was hotly resented byHallifax, who, although brother-in-law to Sunderland,hated that nobleman with an acerbity which was notuncommon to the supercilious peer. This was thecause of the rupture which ended in his discomfiture.Rochester, Sunderland, Jenkins, and North, soonafterwards made Lord Guilford, now formed a cabinet,in which we may contemplate unalloyed and primitiveToryism.The prospect of the nation under the rule of thesemen was hopeless beyond precedent ; it appearedthat nothing less than a revolution could restore theconstitution, or even save the lives of thos who hadcombated against its destruction. Now, therefore,when all the bounds of the limited monarchy werestruck down — when all those restrictions which theconstitution had placed around a king of Englandwere burst asunder — when the royal arm was baredto strike, and none knew where its desolating violencewould be stayed — now, for the first time, thenation began to entertain designs of an armed resistance.This was not a single project, formed by aparticular body of conspirators, having a specificobject to be attained by already concerted means :it was a general conviction which pervaded the wholebody of the Whigs — a conviction which was sharedrA.D. 1682.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 239alike by the moderate and the violent of the party, CHAP.and which unconnected individuals drew from the '- —circumstances around them — that the time had nowarrived when obedience was a crime, when life,liberty, and property, were no longer safe, and thecalls of patriotism, and the duty of self-preservation,alike urged to resistance.The consultations which ensued were, in theirorigin, their scope, and their designs, dissimilaras the tempers of the men by whom they wereheld. Violent and unscrupulous individuals entertainedideas which every Whig who possessed eitherinfluence or character would have repelled withhorror. The obscure remnant of the roundheadparty, chiefly composed of the lowest and most recklessof the people, saw no remedy for any grievanceso effectual as the death of a king : their conversation,therefore, was of assassination and a republic.The more scrupulous Whigs who had no wish againstthe monarchy, were fettered by their constitutionalprinciples, and were therefore irresolute what exactobject to propose, although they agreed with theothers in contemplating violence ; and some of then,perhaps, meditated an attack upon the king's guards.These independent conceptions of insurrection, allexisting among men united in opposition to theTory government, as they widened in their circles,touched, and in some degree coalesced. It after-ad.1G8-2.240 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, wards became the policy of the government to treatthem all as one connected plot, and to attribute toall the Whigs, intentions which were entertainedonly by a few desperadoes, who found access to theleaders of that party, only because these were ignorantof their wild designs.No reader is ignorant that we are now arrived atthe period of the Rye-house plot, but there are fewpoints of our history which are more difficult exactlyto unravel. We have here, as in the depositions ofOates, positive testimony to the most absurd improbabilities,and we have also undoubted facts whichprove, beyond all question, that a plot existed.It is a singular fact that the two contemporaneoushistories of this plot are written by two of the mostworthless men of the two opposite parties. OfGrey's history I have already spoken ; it may herebe dismissed with the remark of Mr. Fox, that " tocall that narrative an authentic account, "is aninsult to common sense."There is another history published under the titleof ** A true Account and Declaration of the horridConspiracy against the late King, his present Majesty,and the Government, as it was ordered to be publishedby his late Majesty." This was written byDr. Sprat, afterwards made Bishop of Rochester forhis pains. The authority of this account might veryfairly be questioned from the extravagant praisesA.D. 1682.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 241lavished upon it by North. He labours to convince CHAP.VIIIus that this production is the perfection of all historicalwriting, and that Sprat had written his bookwith consummate skill, both to attract contemporaryreaders and to convince posterity. " As to the presenttime he has drawn forth the relation of the factswith a purity of style and exactness of oratory, inorder to meet with the prejudices of the age, andpersuade the people that the government had thereason and justice of their side, and the faction thecontrary ; and this was more like to be done, if byneat writing the people were invited to read hisagreeable relation. Then on the other side as toposterity, that his beautiful style might not makethe truth of the history suspected, there are annexedat the end all those original examinations, remainingthere as records, which none had ever the face togainsay, to vouch the truth of it ; and for this reason,that relation, nth its appendix, will be accounted asariches in the English history for ever."The history of the author of this most perfectwork affords a specimen of political profligacy difficultto be equalled. Living in a most eventful agehe attached himself so consistently to the power ofpatronage, that we never, upon a single occasion,find him opposed to those who held it. He commencedas a suitor to the protector, and one of hisfirst literary efforts was a copy of eulogistic verses,VOL. I. E242 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, lamenting the death and celebrating the virtues ofVIII'. — that extraordinary man. After the restoration hetook orders, and became chaplain to the Duke ofBuckingham — a piece of preferment which we may-presumewas merely nominal. His courtly dispositionfound, however, opportunities to display itself,for he was soon after chosen chaplain in ordinary tothe king ; and as his merit became more known, hewas rewarded with a prebendal stall at Westminster,and afterwards a canonry of Windsor. Now he composedhis history of the Rye-house plot. Charles,daily more sensible of his worth, raised his faithfulservant to be Bishop of Rochester and Dean of Westminster.The latter station gave the eulogist ofCromwell an opportunity of showing the sincerity ofhis repentance, by refusing admission into the abbeyof a tablet to the memory of John Milton.* Spratwas clerk of the closet to King James, and one of hisecclesiastical commissioners. He was employed indrawing up that monarch's thanksgiving, when thequeen was supposed to be pregnant, and was probablyassociated with Sancroft, in inditing the formof prayer used by James against the Prince ofOrange. A few weeks later he signed the declarationin favour of that prince ; and in January 1689,he was twice employed by the lords to draw a formSymons's Life of Milton.A.D. 1682.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 243of thanksgiving for the great deliverance of the king chap.VIIIdom from popery and arbitrary power, and a particularprayer for the Prince of Orange.* The restof his life was spent in writing letters in exculpationof his former conduct, and claiming credit for oppositionto measures which every one knew him tohave promoted with ready zeal. At his death it wasfound that he had, with posthumous hypocrisy, declaredin his will, that his poor store had beengathered always by ways honest, fair, and honourablenot by any mean or undue methods of heapingriches, which, in the several advantages of his conditionin this world, his soul had always abhorred ;and he praises the Lord, that, in an age of so greatcorruptions, temptations, and prevarications, he hadstill kept his integrity, and God had made him firmand steady to the faith, doctrine, discipline, and trueinterest of the church of England"!Such was the author of the other history of thisplot — a history avowedly written under the superintendenceof Charles, and published with the imprimaturof James. Of the narrative itself there canbe but one opinion ; that it is destitute of authority,and unworthy of notice. After the revolution, whenBennet, p. 496. Sprat was one " Two Toms and Nat,of the Toms mentioned in the Together sat,ballad upon that occasion. To hammer a thanksgiving."f Bennet, 541, note.R 2I4f THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, it became Sprat's interest to extenuate this performance,he declared that James had, previously to thepublication, called for his papers, and having alteredthem in divers places, they were then printed by hisorder. Whether in making this assertion Spratdeviated into truth it is unnecessary to inquire. IfJames did revise and alter this history, it is of courseunworthy of any credit ; if he did not, its credibilityis not increased, since it then relies upon the wordof a man convicted of having falsely asserted that hedid.The papers which form the appendix give it howeveran appearance of authenticity. These are forgeries.Oldmixon, speaking of the performance, aftercalling it a romance, and stating that the office wasfirst offered to South, remarks, " South's consciencecould not go Sprat's lengths ; for when KingCharles II. desired him to write the fable of theRye-house plot, which his majesty called a history,South, after he had read all the papers the king hadto show him, refused the work, saying, * Thesepapers were all copies, and no legal proof, and unlesshis majesty had better evidence he would not meddlewith it ; ' as Dr. Prideaux, late Dean of Norwich, told agentleman (Map.) of that city, from whom I had it."The original documents connected with this plothaving been thus interpolated and corrupted by theking, for such is the inevitable conclusion from thisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.passage of Oldmixon, and the published accounts of CHAP,the trials having been no less impudently altered by —^ n 1 . . A.D. 1682.the judges, we have no indubitable authorities uponthe subject, but must be contented to receive ourimpressions from those historians, who are the leastliable to the imputation of having been unduly influenced.The restless spirit of Shaftesbury, inured to theatmosphere of revolution, had been foremost to conceiveand to enter upon a scheme of insurrection.This nobleman had from his influence, his activity, fand his persecutions, become not only identified inactionwith the Whigs, but also the chosen chief ofall the most violent members of their party. Alwaysresiding in the city, and always carefully courtingpopularity, he had now obtained the implicit confidenceof the citizens. He had agents in all partswho zealously sustained the dissatisfaction whichraged among them, and who brought him frequentreports of the strength of the malcontents, and ofthe numbers which were ready to rise at his signal.The names of these men became soon afterwardswell known. Rumsey, an officer during the Commonwealth,and still a republican ; West, a lawyer,witty and bold in conversation, but without principles,either in politics or religion ; Ferguson, whoprinted and circulated Shaftesbury's pamphlets ;\Holloway, a merchant of Bristol j and Goodenough,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, a man who had some influence in the city, fromhaving held the office of undersherifF, while theVIII.sheriffs were yet chosen by the citizens. TheseI were the chief of Shaftesbury's tools ; the last wasthe most trusted, and perhaps the least discreet,since he appears not only to have freely divulged toihis intimates what he had been told by his principal,but to have scattered also among them any falsehoodswhich he thought calculated to infuse confidenceinto the rabble with whom he was in connexion.During the contests about the sheriffs, Shaftesburyhad been eager to strike the blow ; he applied tomany of the Whig noblemen for assistance, andspoke of seizing the tower as an easy exploit. They,however, better acquainted with the difficulty of theundertaking, or less confident of the support of thepeople, refused to sanction the project, and he wasmost reluctantly compelled to restrain his owt andhis adherents' ardour. When North and Rich becamesheriffs the situation of Shaftesbury was desperate.Afflicted and debilitated as he was by a complicationof diseases, he was compelled to leave hishouse, and to seek security in disguise and seclusion.No care could, however, protect him long against theindustry of Charles's agents ; and, knowing that, hebecame furious in his eagerness to precipitate hisparty into a war : his notions were wild and impeach1682.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 247table, and his friend, Lord Essex, said of him, that chap.VIII.fear, anger, and disappointment (and perhaps disease) .had wrought so on him that he was much broken inhis thoughts.*The agitation of Shaftesbury was by no meanswithout reason. He alone was connected with theoperative part of any formed conspiracy. His secrethad been intrusted to so many, that every hour'sdelay increased the probability of discovery, and hewas living in momentary danger of being seized bythe emissaries of the court. Monmouth, who hadhitherto been ruled by him in all things, and whohad looked up to him as the man who was to seat himupon the throne, now placed himself under theguidance of the Earl of Essex. That noblemanrefused to act until some certain prospect of successoffered, and Russell expressed a similar determination.Shaftesbury, unable to attend the consultations ofhis party, made one more appeal to them through anagent ; he proposed numerous risings in distantparts of the city ; he offered to lead the first partyhimself; and, jesting upon his infirmities, said theyknew he could not run away, but he preferred ratherto die at the head of a people fighting for their libertiesthan to perish on a scaffold. When they repliedBurnet, vol. i., p. .587.*0 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, to this appeal, by enumerating the improbabilities ofsuccess, he broke out into invectives against them. Hesaid that Essex had made his peace, and was to return toIreland as lieutenant ; that Monmouth had been sentamong the party by the king, whose only object wasto keep the nation quiet until the court had gainedits point, and between them Lord Russell was deceived.For himself, he said, the papists shouldnever triumph over him, whatever they might overthem ; and that he was afraid he should leave themto be ultimately haled away in triumph to gaols andgibbets, and to die by the axe and the halter.*Having taken the resolution to quit a country inwhich death alone awaited him, he, at the latter endof November, 1682, after a farewell interview withEssex and Salisbury, who approved his intentionsquitted London disguised as a presbyterian minister.Contrary winds detained him for eight or ten daysof harassing suspense at Harwich, where he metwith several adventures. He was singularly fortunatein making his escape, for he was pursued soclosely, that having dressed two of his servants inhabitssimilar to that which he himself wore, and sentthem off by different boats, one of them was arrestedbefore he could reach the ship. This stratagem alonebaffled pursuit.Burnet, vol. i., p, 537. Martyn's Life of Shaftesbury, vol. ii., p. 320,f Burnet.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 249So stormy was his passage, that several vessels chap.which sailed in company were lost, and the fatigue ofthe voyage so far increased the violence of his habitualdisorder, that he died about two months afterhis arrival.*Thus died Shaftesbury, a man of ambition soinsatiable that he could belong to neither party, ofgenius so powerful that he must be an object of deepinterest to both. Alternately an ally of each, hewould act entirely in concert with neither ; andwhen, at last, he quitted England, it is difficult todetermine whether his friends or his enemies felt themore rejoiced at his departure.!An anecdote is related in Martyn's life of Shaftesbury,concerning the flight of Lord Shaftesbury,which may contribute in some degree towards theelucidation of the prosecutions which afterwards tookplace. It is related thus : " Lord Shaftesbury's resolutionof going abroad, which was quickly formed,and as quickly executed, was owing to the followingcircumstance : Lord Mordaunt, afterwards Earl ofPeterborough, had, at his first appearance in theworld, conceived a great respect for Lord Shaftesbury,who, being much delighted with the uncommonMartyn's Life of Shaftesbury, land, but added that he had donevol. ii., p. 330. them already a great deal of missLord Essex said he was glad chief. — Burnet, vol. i., p. 537.Shaftesbury was gone out of Eng-ViiA.D. 1682.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D. 1682.^n^' spirit and vivacity which he perceived in him, tookpleasure in conversing with him, and giving himadvice ; this the Earl of Shaftesbury did in such afriendly manner, that Lord Mordaunt was affectedwith it, became frequent in his visits to him, andalways communicated what intelligence he could discover.Lord Mordaunt, to push his interest atcourt, had entered into an intimacy with the Duchessof Portsmouth. One afternoon as he was drinkingtea with her, word was brought that the king wascoming in, and that he was already upon the head ofthe stairs. The duchess, to hide his lordship from hismajesty, locked him up in a closet. While he wasthere, his curiosity induced him to kneel down andlook through the keyhole, so that he saw every thingthat passed between the king and the duchess. Butinstead of the familiarity which he expected. LordHoward of Escrie entered the room about fiveminutes after the king : a conversation of two hoursensued, but so low, that Lord Mordaunt could nothear one word of it. As soon as the king and LordHoward were gone, the duchess released him, andafter staying a short time, he begged to be excuseda longer visit, having earnest business that wouldpermit of no delay. As soon as he went down, hegot into a hackney-coach, drove directly to LordShaftesbury, and told him what he had seen. LordShaftesbury looked earnestly at him, and desired himTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.to repeat it ; after Lord Mordaunt had done so, theearl rose from his seat, and embracing him, said,My lord, you are a young man of honour, andwould not deceive me ; if this has happened, I mustbe gone to-night.' Accordingly he left the househe was concealed in without delay, and in a fewhours it was searched by the king's messengers"*This anecdote is taken from Mr. Stringer's manuscript,t which, as was before observed, formed theCHAP.VIII.A.D. 1682.♦ Martyn's Life of Shaftesbury,vol. ii., p. 327.■f- When the life of Shaftesburypassed through my hands to thepress, I was not aware of the authorityupon which this anecdoterested, and therefore regarded itwith distrust. Since that time, Ihave been favoured by the presentearl with a copy of the passage inthe MS. at St. Giles's, upon whichit rests. Although it varies veryslightly from Martyn's version.I subjoin it here :Lord Shaftesbury's very suddendeparture from England wasoccasioned by certain informationwhich he received of Lord Howard,having had a long interviewwith King Charles at the Duchessof Portsmouth's house. LordMordaunt, afterwards Earl ofPeterborough, was an intimateand attached friend of LordShaftesbury ; he was drinking teawith the Duchess of Portsmouthwhen word was brought that theking was at the bottom of thestairs ; the duchess concealedLord Mordaunt in a closet, fromwhence he could see every' thingthat passed through the keyhole.Instead of the familiarity whichhe expected, Lord Howard arrivedabout five minutes after theking, and a conversation followed,which lasted two hours, but in solow a tone, that Lord Mordauntcould hear none of it. Assoon as the king and Lord Howardwere gone, the duchess releasedLord Mordaunt from thecloset, who, pretending urgentbusiness as a cause for leaving her,went immediately to Lord Shaftesbury,and told him what had2.52 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, basis of Mr. Martyn's work. The objections whichVIII.occur to its authenticity are, that it would appearprobable, that had Shaftesbury made so important adiscovery, he would immediately have communicatedit to the other lords, who would have broken off allconnexion with a suspected traitor. We have, however,seen that Shaftesbury when disappointed in hisexpectations of their concurrence in his projectedinsurrection, became indignant at their timidity, andeven doubted their sincerity. He died soon afterhis arrival at Amsterdam, so that he might possiblyhave had no opportunity of communicating his suspicions,and he might have deemed the informationof less importance to them, since he doubtless knewthat Howard had not yet been received into theirconfidence. Mr. Stringer's anecdote is certainlysomewhat at variance with Howard's testimony uponthe trials of the Rye-house conspirators ; but thiswill be deemed a very trivial objection, and that lordeven admitted upon those occasions, that Shaftesburyhad, after an interview with him, changed his placepassed. Lord Shaftesbury thanked Shaftesbury, after taking an affectin the warmest manner for innate leave of his countess andhis intelligence, and told him friends, left London the followingthat he must leave the house in night in disguise, accompanied bywhich he was concealed without his confidential gentleman, Mr.delay ; he accordingly did so, and Whulocke, who was also in divina few hours it was searched guise, and passed for his nephew."by the king's messengers. LordA.D. 1682.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. <25Sof concealment previous to leaving England, and CHAP.VIIIthat he was not intrusted with the secret whither '-he had removed.In other respects it bears every mark of probability.Even so early as the trial of Fitzharris,* itappeared, from unquestionable evidence, that theking had employed that person to gain over LordHoward ; and that, in consequence of the overturesmade to him through Fitzharris, he had had twointerviews with the king. Howard insinuated thatthese interviews terminated fruitlessly. Whether aman, whom Sidney (upon his trial) describes to havebeen without five shillings in the world, and whoseafter conduct proved him to be utterly destitute ofmanly or honourable feeling, would be likely torefuse the royal offers, it is not difficult to determine.When we consider these circumstances of probability,and add the excellent sources of informationto which Mr. Stringer had access, and the high estimationin which he was held, there appears no longerany reason to doubt the truth of the anecdote.If true, it establishes the important facts thatHoward was now the spy of the king ; that all the subsequentcouncils of the Whigs were known to Charlesas soon as they were formed j and that he was thereState Trials, vol. viii.254 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, fore acquainted with the exact circumstances out ofVIII.which the Rye-house plot was afterwards fabricated,and was aware of the falsehood of the charges uponwhich so many men afterwards suffered. It behovesus now to inquire what those councils were.A.D, 1682.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 255CHAPTER IX.Councils of the Whigs — Members of the council of six-west andhis associates — Connexion of the two cabals — Meeting at Sheppard'sDiscovery of the meetings — Depositions of Keeling — West andRumse/s discoveries and inventions — Trial and execution of thosewho were denounced — Discovery of the council of six — Arrest ofLord Russell — Of Algernon Sidney — Conduct of Lord Howard.Although the chiefs of the Whigs had refused chap.IXto risk the Ives of their followers in the rash designs . 'of Shaftesbury, they had not renounced all intentions ' ^ 1533of resistance. Algernon Sidney was now an activeparticipator in their councils ; by his persuasiveaddress he had obtained great influence over theEarl of Essex, he implicitly guided the Duke ofBuckingham, and even Monmouth submitted to histutelage.It was the misfortune of the Whigs of this agethat they were obliged to act in concert with menwhose violence, both in principles and in action,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, imitated them often into imprudent, and sometimesIXinto unjustifiable measures. Sidney was one of these& 1683 — honoured as his name is among patriots, and excellentas he was as a man, his presence was a misfortuneto the Whigs. His avowed maxim was, thathe who draws his sword against a prince, shouldthrow away the scabbard ; and his connexion withMonmouth did not prevent his ridiculing the pretensionsof that aspirant, and declaring, that if thenation was to be governed by a king, it was thesame to him whether that king was James Duke ofYork, or James Duke of Monmouth. Sidney'sacquaintance with Monmouth, and consequently hisfull admission into those councils in which that noblemantook so prominent a part, he owed to LordHoward of Escrie. His republican spirit had revoltedfrom the idea of seeking the acquaintanceof the duke, and he could feel little cordiality forone who was trying to attain an end the very oppositeto that which he himself had in view. LordHoward, however, brought them together by a stratagem,and the enthusiastic republican* seems toThe testimony of all his con sufficient to throw any doubt upontemporaries pronounce Sidney to the subject. He says indeed inhave been a firm republican ; and one place, " If I should undertakealthough a contrary opinion has to say there never was a goodbeen sometimes advanced from government in the world that didsome passages in his " Discourses not consist of three simple specieson Government," these are not of monarchy, aristocracy, and de-theHISTORY OF PARTY.have entertained some hopes of converting the duke.Sidney had probably been attracted to Howard bythe sentiments he expressed in conversation. Howardwas a bitter and sarcastic railer against all establishedinstitutions. The king and the clergy of courseformed frequent topics of abuse ; and Sidney, delightedwith, so unfrequent a congeniality of langIX.A.D. 1682& 1683.moray, I think I might make itgood," p. 130. And the followinganecdote, from the pen of LordDartmouth, is given in the octavoedition of Burnet : " When Sidney'slarge book came out in thereign of King William, Sir WilliamTemple asked me if I had seen it?I told him I had read it all over.He could not help admiring mypatience, but desired to know whatI thought of it ? I said it seemedto me wrote with a design to destroyall government. Sir Williamanswered that was for want ofknowing the author ; for therewas one passage in it that explainedthe whole, which was this :If there be any such thing asdivine right, it must be where oneman is better qualified to governanother than he is to govern himself;such a person seems by Godand nature destined to govern anotherfor his benefit and happiness.'Now I that knew him very'VOL. Lwell can assure you that he lookedupon himself to be that very manso qualified to govern the rest ofall mankind."It must however be rememberedthat neither of these passages,when considered in conjunctionwith the context, are at all at variancewith Sidney's character as arepublican, since he considered therepublican constitution of Romeas a mixture of these three forms,and finds sufficient representativesof monarchy in the consuls ofRome and the archons of Athens.The passage quoted by Temple isexplained by another, in which hesays, " Such magistrates as wei'eorderly chosen by a willing peoplewere the true shepherds, who camein by the gate of the sheepfold,and might justly be called the ministersof God, so long as theyperformed their duty, in providingfor the good of the nations committedto their charge." p. 133,258 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, gage, mistook the unmeaning jests of a mere libertine,for avowals of republican and anti-episcopal& 1683. principles. Under this impression Sidney had attachedhimself to Howard ; and, with a warmth of friendshipwhich seemed natural to his enthusiastic temper,he would hear no word to his disparagement, althoughall mouths were open to declare him infamous.Fitzharris, among other attempts to screenhimself, had named Howard as the author of hislibel. Upon this, that nobleman was apprehended,and lay some time in prison. During his imprisonment,so little was he loved, that he was in a greatdegree deserted ; Sidney alone discovered a friendshipwhich increased with the occasion for its exercise.He took his affairs, his family, and his defence,entirely under his care ; he was indefatigable in hisexertions in his behalf; nor did his zeal or carediminish until the attorney-general withdrew his prosecution,and Howard obtained his liberation. Thetie of gratitude by which he was thus bound to him,may be some excuse for Sidney, having so pertinaciouslyintroduced him into the secret councils ofhis friends, notwithstanding the repugnance they allshowed to his company ; but his most probable inducementwas, that those violent sentiments wereechoed by Howard, which were checked or disavowedby Essex, Monmouth, and Russell.These noblemen had hitherto looked forward tothe meeting of a parliament as the harbinger of aTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.national redemption. It was not until the crusade chap.1 Aagainst the corporations which has already been re-° . . . * A.D. 1682lated as taking place early in this year, that even & 1683.this hope faded from them. It is now for the firsttime that we have any proof that serious thoughtswere entertained of an insurrection.*Monmouth had large estates in Scotland, he hadresided some time in that country, and his popularaddress, combined with his moderate and mercifulconduct after the affair of Bothwell Bridge, hadrendered him much beloved by the people. Thither,therefore, he looked as to the most proper scene ofaction. The affair was opened to Argyll, who wasthen in Holland, and that nobleman engaged, uponbeing assisted with £8000 and a troop of 100horse, to commence hostilities. The Whiff noblemenwere now engaged in continuing Shaftesbury's projectof the colony of Carolinas The business connectedwith this, served as a cloak for their more importantnegotiations. Aaron Smith, who had been attorneyIt is amusing to read the Scotland, had induced many whosetruly courtier-like interpretation, consciences would not allow themwhich Reresby puts upon their to take the test, to project anconduct. According to him, the emigration to a part of the worldconspiracy was formed " by such where they would at least be alashad been disappointed of prefer lowed to worship in peace. Ca-mentat court, and by Protestant carolina being under the manage-dissenters."p. 163. ment of the Whig lords, appearedf The dreadful cruelties exerted most eligible part of the newcited by the Duke of York in world to which they could remove.S 2THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, to College upon his trial, was sent into Scotland to^ ' desire that men in whom implicit confidence might"^'^&\*?83. ^6 placed, should be sent to London. In April,several of these arrived ; but they were, it appears,ignorant of the mission upon which they came, andthought they were only to treat concerning thetrade to Carolina. After frequent interviews withRussell and Essex, they better understood what wasexpected of them. A negotiation ensued, the particularsof which since Burnet neglected the opportunitieshe possessed of learning them, and since itwould have been madness for either of the parties tokeep any papers, which, if seized, would afford any clueto a discovery, will probably never be filly known.A council of six persons managed these negotiations.It consisted of the Duke of Monmouth,Lords Russell, Essex, and Howard, Algernon Sidneyand young Hampden, another scion of thatillustrious house, which seemed destined to supplyan hereditary succession of patriotic-men.*At the meetings which were held between themembers of this council and the persons fi-om Scotland,the probabilities of a successful insurrection,both in that country and in England, were doubtlessbalanced, and many expedients having force as theirmeans of execution canvassed. It is not probable,Sir William Jones was no father of Hampden here men-longeralive to take part with his toned, and one of the championsformer coadjutors. He died while of the Exclusion bill,upon a visit to Hampden, theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 26lhowever, that any project was ever decided upon, or chap.IXthat any of their consultations amounted to more 'than Russell described them to have been, talk : talk * ^ improbablyof the proper measures to be taken uponthe occurrence of contingencies, which were thenanticipated, for the majority of these men seem tohave been agreed that the nation was not yet ripefor any immediate enterprise, and that the royalbrothers must be allowed to go through a few morescenes of despotism before the popular indignationwould be thoroughly aroused.Howard, although nominally one of this council,knew little of their designs. Their meetings werenecessarily unfrequent ; and Essex and Russell heldthe character of this coadjutor in such contempt, thatthey were careful not to commit themselves in his presence.*' If you were to betray me," said Essex uponone occasion to Russell, " all the world would blameyou, not me ; but if Howard should betray us, weshould be the parties chiefly censured for trusting sucha man." * Although Howard, therefore, was admittedunder the patronage of Sidney, to be a member ofthe council of six, he was only present at the earlier,and, as we may suppose, the less material conferences.While the affair was in progress, he left town forashort time, and during his absence, Essex andRussell resolved to proceed no further with him.He was told, therefore, upon his return, that it wasBurnet.262 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, necessary at present to give over all consultationsand to be quiet. After having thus removed him& 1683. from among them, they were careful to avoid him.It is probable that this withdrawal of their confidence,by destroying the source of the government'sinformation, urged an immediate discovery, whichwould otherwise have been delayed until somethingdefinite had been matured.While the leading Whigs were proceeding thuscautiously, there was another conclave of conspirators,where far different designs were spoken of Thetools whom Shaftesbury employed were, in theirindividual characters, either desperadoes or fanatics ;they formed, however, invaluable instruments in thehands of a master, and were doubtless well chosenfor the parts which their employer intended them toenact. When Shaftesbury was obliged to leaveEngland, the spell by which these spirits had beenbound, was broken. They had been told by him ofthe co-operation which they were to expect from LordRussell and his friends ; but when their leader beganto declaim against the dilatory conduct of that nobleman,they of course shared his dissatisfaction. Now,scorning the cautious policy of those whose rank andcharacter could alone give any chance of success toan insurrection, they formed plans which were to beexecuted by their own party, unsupported by thecouncil of six, of which they had only heard. Assembledat West's chambers in the Temple, theseTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.^26^emancipated instruments enacted in a coarser man chap.ner, and upon a more violent scale, the scenes whichA.D. 1682took place at Lord Russell's. & i683.They also began by canvassing projects of insurrection,and devised many absurd methods of raisingthe city and overpowering the guards ; but, afterthese schemes had been debated for some time, theybegan with the ordinary impatience of unprincipledmen, to entertain a more expeditious and certainmethod of obtaining their object. An attack uponthe guards was dangerous in execution, and uncertainof success ; but a plot to assassinate the kingand his brother, if carefully planned, and boldlyattempted, could scarcely miscarry. Walcot andRumbold, who had both served in Cromwell's army,were added to this band of conspirators, who appearnow to have been divided into two parties. Walcot,Galloway, Rumbold, and perhaps some others, approvedthe project of a rising, but rejected the ideaof assassination. West, Ferguson, and Goodenough,now spoke only of the danger of their former project,and of the facility which attended the executionof their shorter and surer scheme. By constantlydwelling upon this idea, it had become familiar tothem, and they were accustomed to express it by theterm lopping. Many plans were spoken of ; one wasto take one of the cellars under the Duke's Theatre,and blow theatre and audience into the air. Thechief objection urged against this, appears to haveTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, been that it was too popish ; for the immense slaughterof innocent persons which this would occasion, wasA.D. 1682& 1683. looked upon as of Httle moment. " What businesshave the days among the rooks ?" was the reply saidto have been made by one of the confederates toanother who mentioned this as an obstacle.Another project was suggested by a remark ofRumbold. This man had a farm near Hoddesden,admirably situated for an attempt at assassination.The house was strongly built, surrounded by a moat,and having, in some places, the additional protectionof high walls ; it was situated upon a cross road, sonarrow that two carriages could scarcely pass abreast.By this cross road, which was somewhat nearer thanthe high road, the king generally travelled to Newmarket,whither he constantly went in April andOctober.*Sprat's description of the Rye were loopholes in that second linehouse and the environs is very war of defence, the strong garden-walls,like. His design is to prove the The sally ports were excellent, andplausibility of the statement of the the outer courtyard admirablywitnesses, that the party who were adapted to the drawing up and contocommit the assassination in- ceiling squadrons of horse andtended to defend themselves in the foot. It is strange that Charleshouse until night. "Twenty men," should have left a place of suchsays this aspirant to a mitre, " might prodigious strength destitute of aeasily defend the Rye-house for garrison and a governor. Burnet,some time against five hundred." however, speaks of the Rye-houseHe has bestowed upon the place as a place which afforded no othera watchtower, whence there was means of defence than mud walka view of the road on either and a moat,side for a mile's distance. ThereTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.^^5Rumbold is said to have remarked how easy it CHAP.IXwould be to lay something across the road whichshould overturn, or at least detain the carriage, and ' & legs.while the impediment was being removed, the brotherscould be shot. Once he remembered, he said,that the carriage passed his moat unattended by anyguards, and had he delayed it but a minute, he couldhave shot them both, and have rode away throughgrounds that he knew so well, that it should not havebeen possible to have followed him.This remark, like many others, was the subject ofmuch conversation, but nothing was ever attempted,for Rumbold, although he might mention the facilitytfGu an assassination, was by no means the man tocountenance such a design. The meetings in West'schambers terminated, like those at Lord Russell's,in talk ; with this difference, however, that the talkthat was carried on at West's amounted to the worstspecies of treason, and was recklessly repeated by theCabal to their acquaintances throughout the city.I have said that these two very different classes ofconspirators had been in some slight degree connected.Ferguson and his colleagues were disadvantageouslyknown to Russell as tools of Shaftesbury.They had been employed by the latternobleman to conduct the mysterious communicationswhich he held with his party, while he was secretinghimself from the emissaries of Charles's justice.^66 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Howard had an interview with Shaftesbury at hishiding-place, and prevailed upon him to appoint aIA J") 1682& 1683. meeting with the Duke of Monmouth, and others ofhis party, which however he did not keep. Insteadof doing so, Shaftesbury changed his lodging, andwould never afterwards allow Howard to know hisretreat. Another appointment was afterwards made• by the Whig leaders to meet Shaftesbury at Sheppard's,a wine merchant in the city and an adherentof the Duke of Monmouth. In this man's house theduke sometimes passed the night, and there, it issaid, he always had arms ready for his personal use.Monmouth, Russell, Grey, and Sir Thomas Armstrong,attended the appointment, but Shaftesbury,instead of coming himself, had sent only Rumsey andFerguson. Lord Russell the more readily consentedto attend this appointment, as he wished to tastesome wines which he purposed buying of Sheppard,but when he saw who were present, both he andMonmouth were about to withdraw. During thefew minutes they waited for the wine samples, Ferguson,Rumsey, and Armstrong, fell into conversationupon the project of a rising at Taunton, andafterwards upon the possibility of surprising theking's guards. Sir Thomas Armstrong, who hadcommanded them, pointed out the difficulty of theattack, and the others of his party having selectedsome wine, he left the house with them. TheyTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 26?were not above a quarter of an hour in Sheppard's CHAP,house.* '-It is said, also, that Howard was present at some " & i683.of the meetings held by West and his accomplices,and that he freely conversed with them upon theplans they were considering connected with theirproject of assassination. This, he, of course, alwaysdenied ; but several observations attributed to himare certainly much in unison with his general sarcasticstyle of speaking. tThese appear to have been the chief occasionsupon which the members of West's Cabals held anyintercourse with the Whig leaders, and when Shaftesbury,who was the connecting link, was gone, withthe exception of Howard, no member of the one wasever in communication with any one in the secrets ofthe other.The consultations of West and his associateddesperadoes, had been too long protracted, and tooindiscriminately communicated to proceed with impunity.They were at last betrayed by one ofGoodenough's agents, Keeling, a bankrupt vintner,who, with the bright example of Dr. Oates beforehim, thought that the trade of a plot witness wasThis was October, 1682. If given up the Duke of Monmouth,any credit is due to the statement and aimed at the establishment ofof Rumsey, even upon points un a republic. — See his Evidence uponconnected with his undoubted lie Russell Trial,tions, Shaftesbury had at this time f Burnet,268 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, much better than that in which he had failed.Goodenough had employed this man to ascertain the& 1683. strength of their party among the citizens, and hadeven mentioned to him the talk about killing theking and the duke. Keeling now went to LordDartmouth and discovered all he knew. The agewas, however, so rife with false accounts of this description,that Dartmouth placed little reliance uponthe tale of a man of broken fortunes ; he referredhim to Jenkins, who received his depositions withequal apathy. Jenkins told him that he could takeno step until a second witness could be brought tocorroborate the statement, and Keeling returned insearch of one. It is a singular circumstance, thatamong all the desperate characters who must haveparticipated in Goodenough's confidence, so greatwas the unpopularity of the government, that Keelingknew none to whom he could dare to make theproposition of a voluntary discovery ; he took, therefore,his brother, a man who was yet ignorant of thewhole affair, and introduced him to Goodenough.Goodenough, as usual, spoke freely of their prospects,and of the certain success which would follow an assassinationand Keeling took care to prolong the conversationuntil his brother was able to corroborate thestatement which Jenkins had already received. Nosooner had they left Goodenough, than Keeling ledhis brother, who as yet knew not the purpose forTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^69which he had been brought to hear this dangerous ^^y ^*talk, to Whitehall, and drew him, under a pretence ofA.D. 1682business into Jenkins's office. The brother was & 1683.confounded at hearing Keeling tell the secretarythat he had brought the testimony required, and thatthe witness now before him had just heard the substanceof the plot from Goodenough's own lips.Thus taken by surprise, he took the proffered oath,and added his depositions to those of his brother ;but Jenkins still suspected that they were speculatingupon his credulity, for he sent out no warrant,but contented himself with dismissing them, andlaying their statements before the rest of the ministry.The younger Keeling, meanwhile, who had an honestabhorrence of the office of informer, having thus beenunwillingly drawn into it, sent intelligence to Good-enoughand the others who had been named, of whathad occurred. Upon this the Cabal met in greatconsternation, they agreed that all was now lost, andthat their only hope lay in separation and flight.Two of them, however, having little confidence inthe chances of escape, and satisfied that Keeling haddiscovered only sufficient to arouse the suspicion ofthe court, determined at any rate to secure themselves.They rightly conjectured that it wouldnever be believed that the conspirators had proceededno further than mere verbal plotting ; recent exampleswere then numerous of men, who, afterTHE HISTORY OF PARTI.CHAP, mises of pardon, had been executed as insincere intheir confessions, because they had proceeded noit 1683. further than the truth. West and Rurasey were resolvednot to die on this account. They had frameda story, and concerted the details so well together,that they were not likely to disagree when separatelyexamined. This story was the more acutely preparedsince it was founded upon facts, and dependedas little as possible upon fiction. West and Rumseyinvented no treason, they were satisfied with declaringthat some of the plans which had been proposedfor adoption, had been actually tried, and had onlyaccidentally failed in execution. The chief and mostplausible feature in their narrative was, the use theymade of Rumbold's remark upon the facility withwhich the king might have been killed on his wayto Newmarket. This was now drawn forth as aregularly concerted plot, the authors of which hadagreed upon the parts they were severally to take,and had provided themselves with the things necessaryfor its accomplishment ; even the day hadbeen fixed for the attempt. The conspirators hadlearned when the king intended to return to London ;it was nothing but a fire that burnt down half thetown of Newmarket, and occasioned him to return aweek before the appointed day, that saved his life.According to the statement of these two persons,the safety of the king and the duke was the especialTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 271care of providence. Ten years ago, Rumbold and chap.a party of his friends had determined to shoot the '-king on his way to Newmarket, and actually lay in ' & 1633,ambush to intercept him ; but upon that occasionCharles and his brother took an unusual route throughthe forest, a circumstance which had never happenedbefore or since, and which was therefore as evidentlyprovidential as the fire at Newmarket.Upon this evidence, Walcot, Hone, and Rouse,were immediately tried, found guilty, and executed ;others of the conspirators escaped or found some temporaryconcealment. Those who were now condemned,were the least guilty of the set to which they belonged;they were certainly far less guilty than those who accusedthem. Captain Walcot has been already mentionedas dissenting from all propositions for " loppingthe sparks," as his confederates expressed their ideaof assassination ; he was guilty only of concealingthe conversation to that effect, which he had witnessed.Hone was a joiner, who had been unwillinglydrawn into conversation upon the same subjectby Goodenough and Keeling ; but he admittedthat he had promised to assist when necessary.*Rouse had held many employments both on sea andland, and he had enjoyed an office in Flanders, connectedwith the payment of the army ; he had as-stateTrials, vol. ix.272 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, sister at debates where the possibility of surprisingthe town was the subject of discussion ; but he& 1683. declared upon the scaffold that he had no treasonabledesigns, and that the greater part of what hadbeen sworn against him, were the observations madeat the time by the witnesses, and now falsely attributedto him by the authors.*Pemberton tried this man with great severity,treating him from the first as though he had beenalready convicted. In his address to the jury, henever suggested the possibility of the witnesses beingperjured, although they confessed themselves guiltyof intentional murder, and having allowed theprisoner no time to obtain evidence of their falsehood,he dwelt upon the absence of such evidenceas conclusive proof of his guilt.These new witnesses, Rumsey and West, hadheard of the council of six, and Rumsey had beenpresent at the meeting at Sheppard's. Their disclosurestherefore implicated Russell and Monmouth.When these noblemen were named, the king, whowas then at Windsor, came to town : the plot he hadNorth speaks of Rouse in in order to have good magazineshis usual style. " He was," he of arms and ammunition, he wassays, " a thorough paced traitor, in the front of a design to sur-andlooked upon to be paymaster prise the Tower and Whitehall."of the mob ; a wappinger and Examen, p. 585.good at mustering seamen ; and.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 27^been fostering approached its denouement. By CHAP.placing an inefficient guard upon Russell's house, —the council had, indirectly, given him notice of his * & i683.danger, and warning to fly. Russell, however, whoknew that he had never trusted any of the party towhich Rumsey belonged, and who had forgotten theconversation at Sheppard's ; if, indeed, he ever heardit ; resolved to remain, rather than tacitly acknowledgea guilt of which he was unconscious. Uponthe arrival of the king he was taken into custodyand carried before the council. Charles at once toldhim, that no one suspected him of any design againsthis person, but that he had good evidence of hisbeing in designs against his government. Russellanswered the questions put to him upon this occasionhe admitted having been, more than once,at Sheppard's, but he denied having heard any conversationrelating to the rising at Taunton, or thathe knew or had ever seen Trenchant, the agent whowas said to have failed in his engagements on thisoccasion. At the close of the examination Russellwas committed to the tower.Algernon Sidney was the next person seized andbrought before the council. This stubborn republicanrefused to reply to any of their questions. Ifthey had any proof against him, he said, he mustmake the best defence to it he could ; but theyshould not fortify that proof by any word he shouldVOL. I. ' TTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.IX.say.* This answer was not only consonant withthe unbending character of the man, it was also theA.D. 1682 , , - , , . -& 1683. most prudent he could have made : as yet the courthad no evidence whatever against him, and his committalto the tower was, like the majority of the actsof this government, illegal.When Russell and Sidney were known to be incustody, Monmouth made his escape. t Grey havingA committee of the councilvisited them both while in thetower. Russell answered themcivilly that he was now preparingfor his trial, when he did not doubtbut that he should answer everythingthat could be objected tohim. Sidney treated them withless ceremony, he told them thatit seemed they wanted evidence,and were come to draw it fromhis own mouth ; but they shouldhave nothing from him.f Burnet tells the followinganecdote concerning Monmouth'sescape : " As soon as the councilrose, the king went to the Duchessof Monmouth's, and seemed somuch concerned for the Duke ofMonmouth, that he wept as hespoke to her. That duke told astrange passage relating to thatvisit to the Lord Cutts, from whomI had it. The king told his ladythat some were to come and searchher lodgings : but he had givenorder that no search should bemade in her apartments, so shemight conceal him safely in them.But the Duke of Monmouthadded, that he knew him too wellto trust him, so he went out of hislodgings, and it seems he judgedright : for the place that was firstsearched for him was her rooms ;but he was gone, and he gave thatfor the reason why he could nevertrust the king after that. It isnot likely the king meant to proceedto extremities with him, butthat lie intended to have him inhis own hands, and in his power."Upon this passage Lord Dartmouthremarks, " Mr. FrancisGwin (secretary at war in QueenAnne's time) told me, that as soonas this book was published, heasked the Duchess of MonmouthTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^5first surrendered and undergone his examination, CHAP.IX.bethought himself of the danger he ran, and followed1 • 1 TT 1 111 A.D. 1682his example.* Howard was not named, and the «& 1683.king remarked, that he and Oates were probablyfound absent from the list of conspirators for thesame reason, that their characters were so wellknown, that no one would trust them. This noblemanwas going about among those Whigs who werenot in the secret, declaring that there was no plot,that this was another of those pretended discoveriesby which the king had so often attempted to takeoff the chiefs of his opponents ; and speaking in termsof the utmost contempt both of the witnesses andtheir depositions. To Russell, however, he spokedifferently ; to him he admitted, that he had beenas free with West as with any man, and thisshe remembered any thing of that he was dead drunk. Nextthis story ; she answered, it was morning he went to the towerimpossible she should, for there gate, the messenger being againwas not one word of it true." fast asleep, he himself called atBurnet relates it thus : " An the tower gate to bring the lieu-orderwas sent to bring up Lord tenant of the tower to receive aGrey, which met him coming up ; prisoner, but he began to think hehe was brought before council, might be in danger; he foundwhere he behaved himself with Rumsey was one witness, and ifgreat presence of mind ; he was another should come in he wassent to the tower, but the gates gone ; so lie called for a pair ofwere shut, so he staid in the mes oars and went away, leaving theSanger's hands all night, whom he drunken messenger fast asleep."furnished so liberally with wine, p. 549.T 2276 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, sion, made to one who knew the violent language inIXwhich Howard habitually indulged, was sufficient& 1683. confession that his life was in West's hands. ToHampden he made a similar statement, and he wasadvised by him, if he had not strength of mind tosuffer, to save himself by flight.It must be remarked, as a very singular circumstance,that Rumsey, who could recollect so circumstantiallyevery thing that passed during the quarter ofan hour he had been in Russell's company at Sheppard's,should have made no mention of Howard, whowas unquestionably present at some of the meetingsof the Cabal at West's, and was more immediatelythan any other member of the council of six, incommunicationwith Shaftesbury before that councilwas formed, and with Shaftesbury's tools afterwards.It is no less singular that West, who sacrificedwithout scruple his most intimate friends and associates,should, in his first depositions, have sparedthis man. Howard* was the only person, conspiresays, " At one time ed, but it is there attributed to oneLord Howard was among them : of the minor conspirators. If theand they talked over their several observation was thought too goodschemes of lopping. One of to be lost, and if it were deemedthem was to be executed in the imprudent to discredit Howard,playhouse. Lord Howard said by making him a participator inhe liked that best, for then they this part of the transaction, thewould die in their calling." authorship would of course beIn the appendix to Sprat's His changed, for Charles garbled thesetory, this same remark is mention documents at his leisure.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^77cujus by his name or character, with whom he had CHAP.IX.held any converse upon the subject of the plot,(except Shaftesbury, who was beyond the reach of ' & ipsa.vengeance,) and his notoriously ill reputation wouldhave given as much credibility as his name wouldhave added importance to such a denouncement.It is probable that West and Rumsey did denounceHoward in their first statement, but that, at thecommand of the king, the accusation was suppressed;that Howard's stipulated service was not yet performedthat he was left at large a little longer todiminish the terror of the accused party ; to inspirethem with confidence ; to dissuade them from flight ;always ready, at the critical moment, to appear andwitness to their destruction.This idea seems to have suggested itself to Burnet,but he rejects it, because the king spoke ofHoward with such contempt. Most persons woulddraw an opposite conclusion to that which Burnetdrew from this circumstance. Black as the characterof Charles the second is, and infamous as every faithfulhistorian must describe him, even he must havelooked upon Howard with a contempt amounting toloathing. Men seldom respect vice in others, andCharles, who might call his own tyranny ambition,and his own cruelty necessity, would behold, in itstrue light, the cowardly perfidy of his instrument,and spurn while he used him.278 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Two authorities more I shall cite, which tend toIX.prove that this embryo plot was all along fostered byA.D. 1682 , 1 1 1 1 ., 1 1& 1683. the government, or at least by the king through theagency of Howard.Narcissus Luttrell in his diary* says, ** Eversince the first discovery of this plot there have beendiscourses of a peer's coming in to discover the same,which now proves to be the Lord Howard." Andagain a yet stronger passage from the same author:Howard, ever since he has been taken, has donenothing else but make discoveries, and is said to bethelord that lay behind the curtain all this while, inorder to discover."The other is contained in the following note, producedby Lord John Russell, from the Bedfordpapers, and endorsed by Lady Russell, " This wassaid by the Lady Chatsworth :"There having run a story of a letter, without aname, writ to the king, promising a discovery againstLord Russell, which some said was Lord Huntingsome Lord Essex's. Lord Howard and hiswife being here on Sunday last, a lady coming in,whispered me in the ear, that here was the lord thatnow they said had written the said letter to hismajesty. I whispered to her again, and asked herPrinted in the State Trials, from the MS. in All Soul's College,Oxford.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 279whether she would give me leave to tell him. She chap.IXsaid, ay, if you will, when I am gone, withoutnaming me. After which, she, and all the rest of ' ^ igga.the company, being gone, except Lord Howard andhis lady, who staid for their coach, I said to mylord and his wife, * My lord, they say now that youare the person that writ the nameless letter to theking.* To which he replied, ' My Lord of Essexas much as I ; and I as much as my Lord of Essex.May my Lord Russell and all innocent men, live tillI accuse them.' " *Life of Lord W. Russell, p. 180.280 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER X.Trial of Lord Russell — The evidence — The objections taken by theprisoner — Death of Lord Essex — The king's obduracy — Dyingdeclarations of Walcot and his companions — Lord Russell's paper —Trial of Algernon Sidney — The evidence — Defence — Monmouth'ssurrender and pardon — His confession, repentance, and banishmentHampden's trial — Prosecutions on account of the plot inScotland — Sir Thomas Armstrong's execution.CHAP. 'Pjjj, ^Yial of Lord Russell was fixed for the 13thA.D. 1683.of July. Four days before that appointed for thetrial, Lord Howard was taken, and immediately confessedevery thing, and, doubtless, more than everythinghe knew.The circumstances of this celebrated trial are toowell known to require any detailed notice. Sheppardproved the presence of the accused nobleman at theconference held at his house, and that a proposal wasmade to seize the guards at the Savoy and Mews,when the Duke of Monmouth, Lord Grey, andA.D. 1683.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 281Sir T. Armstrong undertook to reconnoitre them. CHAP.XRumsey* swore to the conversation concerning the .rising at Taunton, and corroborated Sheppard as tothe reconnaissance of the guards. Howard sworeto the existence of the council of six, and amid along story, chiefly composed of hearsay, spoke ofseveral consultations upon the best means of excitingan insurrection, and of a resolution they came to, tosend agents into Scotland to concert measures withthe disaffected in that country.West, Keeling, and Leigh were then called, andalthough it was not pretended that any thing theywere about to testify was more than hearsay. Westwas still allowed to prejudice the jury, by accountsof what others had told them of Lord Russell's goodwishes for the success of the insurrection project, andto declare, that they looked upon the members ofthe council of six as their leaders and paymasters.Lord Russell was indicted under the statute of 25Edw. III., c. % which declares treason to be, amongother irrelevant things, ** When a man doth compassor imagine the death of our lord the king, or of ourRumsey's infamy was after thought it prudent to affect greatwards so fully proved upon the indignation against him. He con-trialof Cornish, that although he fined him in one of those illegalswore in favour of the court, and foreign prisons, which were stillalthough Cornish was hanged on kept up in defiance of the Habeashis testimony, the popular demon Corpus Act.station was so strong, that James1683.i'x, THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, lady his queen, or of their eldest son and heir : orif a man do levy war against our lord the king in hishis realm'* &c. The accused objected that no proofof treason had been brought against him under thisact. The testimony of Rumsey and of Howard, ifbelieved in its fullest extent, would only amount toa compassing of levying war against the king ; foralthough, from the association of ideas connected withthe term guards, it would be natural to imagine thatan attack upon the king's guards involved an attackupon his person, yet the contrary was the fact : theguards were a body unknown to the law. *' Theguards ! " exclaims Sir Robert Atkins in a tractcalled A Defence of Lord Russell's Innocency, "whatguards ? What or whom does the law understand orallow to be the king's guards for the preservation ofhis person? Whom shall the court that tried thisnoble lord, whom shall the judges of the law thatwere then present, and upon their oaths, whom shallthey judge or legally understand by these guards ?They never read of them in all their law books ;there is not any statute-law that makes the leastmention of any guards," and even the long parliament,compliant as they were, could never bebrought to notice the existence of any such a bodyas the king's guards, or to treat it as an adjunct ofroyalty at all recognised by the English constitution."The fact is plain, that the king's guards are part ofTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.the kinff^s army, and that only to conspire to attack chap.• • Xthem was, therefore, to conspire to levy war against ithe king. This the prisoner objected was not within * 'the statute.*In thus stating the case I ammerely repeating the objectiontaken by Lord Russell. It is nothowever to be supposed that, hadhe consented to admit the facts asdeposed, any lawyers could haveconvinced Pemberton and his associatesof the validity of the objection.The crown lawyers had longsince invented a sophism to eludethe plain meaning of the statute,and by declaring that a conspiracyto levy war was, in fact, a conspiracyto kill the king, had establisheda species of constructivetreason, that deprived the subjectof much of the benefit of the statuteof Edward. Judge Fosterconsiders every consultation tolevy war against the king as a consultationto imprison or deposehim ; "and experience has shown,"he says, "that between the prisonsand the graves of princes the distanceis very small." (crown Laid,p. 194.) Hale, in his " Pleas of theCrown," approves this doctrinewhen he says, that "an assembly tolevy war against the king, eitherto depose, or restrain, or enforcehim to any act, or to come to hispresence to remove his counsellorsor ministers, or to fight against theking's lieutenant or military compassionateofficers, is an overt act,proving the compassing the deathof the king; for such a war isdirected against the very person ofthe king, and he that designs tofight against the king, cannot butknow, at least, it must hazard hislife." p. 123. With such authorityPemberton would have had littledifficulty in putting aside all argumentto the contrary. We cannot,however, read this passage and anotherin p. 131, where Sir MatthewHale seems to feel the impossibilityof reconciling this constructionwith the words of the act, withoutcontrasting them with his own observationsupon those doctrines ofconstructive treasons which occasionedthe statute of Edward.How dangerous is it," he says, "byconstruction and analogy to maketreasons where the letter of the lawhas not done it : for such a methodadmits of no limits or bounds, butruns as far as the wU and inventionA.D. 1683.284 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Another objection was, that in cases of treason,according to a statute of Mary, two witnesses arerequired to prove an overt act. Howard and Rumseyonly brought a single testimony to two distinctacts. It had, however, been before decided thatalthough two witnesses were required to prove thetreason, they might prove it by each deposing to adistinct overt act.*Lord Russell demanded counsel to argue thesepoints of law, but as he refused to admit the facts asthe witnesses swore to them, his request was refused.For the defence Lord Anglesea deposed to thediscredit of Lord Howard, that he had heard thatperson frequently declare that he knew nothingagainst Lord Russell, and that he had comforted theEarl of Bedford by assertions of his son's innocence.Upon Lord Anglesea proceeding to mentionaccusers, and the odiousness and months after the treason was com-detestation of persons accused, mitted. The meeting at Shep-willcarry men." pard's was eight months before.The construction thus put upon and Howard's was only a singlethis statute was the more obviously testimony.unjust, since several temporary * It is singular that this doc-actshad been passed (one in Eliza trine had been solemnly confirmed'sand another in this very ed, and, therefore, unquestionablyreign) to make a conspiracy to levy established in the recent case ofwar treason. This act could not. Lord Stafford, where the presenthowever, reach Russell, since there victim was a prosecutor,was a proviso, that the prisoner Dedimus, cinque vice prebendsshould be indicted within six crura sagittis.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 285thing which he had heard upon this subject from chap.Lady Chatsworth, Pemberton and Jefferies immediatelystopped him ; and although they had allowedHoward to dilate at length upon similar authority,merely interposing the useless remark that it wasnot evidence, on behalf of the prisoner they wouldnot hear an unnecessary word.Burnet proved that Lord Howard was with himthe night after the plot broke out, and that he then,as he had done before, with hands and eyes lifted uptoheaven, said he knew nothing of any plot, norbelieved any, and treated it with scorn and contempt.A host of the first men of England stood forward toproclaim their friendship and admiration of the destinedvictim ; but North * had taken care to return apanel, which, as his kinsman remarks upon anotheroccasion, would start no formalizing scruples. Al-thereis no doubt whatever overruled, because the custom wasthat this jury was packed by North against it ; and very properly, sinceunder the direction of Burton and the freeholds of the city wereGraham, solicitors for the crown, chiefly in the hands of very largeNorth afterwards admitted, that, landholders, and the substantialalthough in ordinary cases the merchants and tradesmen werepanels were left to the under supposed to be of at least equalsheriffs (themselves sufficiently intelligence with 405. freeholders,stanch Tories), upon this occa- At the present day it is usual tosion, on account of its importance, try an intricate or mercantile casehe himself struck the panel. — in the city, if possible, since aState Trial, vol. ix. Russell ob common jury there is thoughtjested to the jury as not being nearly equal to a special jury offreeholders. This objection was the county.X.A.D. 1G83.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, though Pemberton exhibited none of the gratuitousbrutality which JefFeries soon afterwards renderedcustomary from the bench, but even summed upthe evidence with some show of impartiality, thezealous Tories, who filled the jury-box, did not longhesitate before they pronounced the fiat which consignedRussell to the block.A circumstance occurred while Lord Russell'strial was yet proceeding, which was assiduouslybrought forward to create a sort of stage effect incourt. That it had any effect upon the minds of thejury is very unlikely, since they had doubtless resolvedupon their verdict before they heard a wordof the evidence ; but it afforded the attorney-generala new topic in favour of the reality of the plot, andproduced from Howard an exhibition of hypocrisy asshameless as it was disgusting. I allude to theunhappy death of the Earl of Essex. The earl wasin the country when the plot broke out ; he heard ofthe arrest of Lord Russell, and was not ignorant ofhis own danger ; but, with the true chivalric honourof a high-minded nobleman, he refused to avoid thatdanger, lest his flight might be adduced against hisfriend, and weigh with the jury as a proof of guilt.A party of horse was sent down to bring him up,and he was committed to the tower. On the morningof Russell's trial he was found dead in his closet,with his throat cut.A.D. 1683.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. f287When this catastrophe was reported in the court, chap.Howard pretended to shed tears — his voice faltered,and for a moment he discontinued his evidence. Itis difficult to write dispassionately of this man. Toview him — the author of the death of the two bestand most virtuous characters which England hasproduced — weeping over one of his victims, and sealingthe next moment the fate of the other, raisesfeelings of disgust and aversion too violent for historyto express.It would be inconsistent with the scope of thiswork to enter into any lengthened discussion uponthis nobleman's death ; but I am far from thinking,with Mr. Hume and Mr. Hallam, that it is indisputablethat he died by his own hand. The argumentson both sides will be found lucidly stated in theBiographia Britannica ; * but upon the whole it certainlyappears rather probable that Essex was a suicide.I have no excuse, either, for dwelling upon thedeath of Russell. The simple and circumstantialrelation given by Burnet, his intimate friend, andhis companion in his last hours, is one of the mostpathetic passages of history : there are few readersto whom it is not familiar.Art. " Capell" — Kippis's edit, vantage to those who defended theBrandon's pamphlet is printed in king and his brother from thisthe State Trials. The intemper- accusation,once of this person gave greatTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The execution of Russell was a triumph over theWhigs which no consideration would induce the kingto forego. The severity of the sentence was so evident,and the character of the condemned noblemanso universally known and admired, that some evenof the Tory ministry ventured to speak in his favour.The king, who disliked all importunities, and neverwillingly returned a direct denial to a request, forbadeany one to mention the subject ; but the Dukeof York, who was not accustomed to be turned fromhis purpose by any appeal to his mercy or compassion,who had looked on the agonies of the victimsof his tyranny in Scotland as calmly as though hehad been assisting at a mere philosophical investigation,and who remained, from choice, when everyother member of the council, who could do so, hadfled the chamber of torture — the Duke of York freelyallowed of intercession, and he would listen to entreatiesfor mercy so readily and so unmoved, thatthose may be acquitted of a want of charity whojudged that he felt pleasure in refusing them. It isdoubtless true that James fortified his brother in hisresolution to take the full advantage of the positionin which he found himself, and to crush at once theheads of the Whig faction ; but his aid was hardlyrequired in pursuing his object. Charles felt muchmore annoyed by the importunities by which he wasbesieged, than by any compunctions of pity for theA.D. 1683.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 289fate of his victims. He affected to think, perhaps chap.he had persuaded himself, that Russell and his partyhad designs which could only be accomplished byhis death., AVTien Lord Dartmouth dwelt upon theexalted character, the known virtues, and the extensivepopularity of Russell, he was answered, *' Allthat is very true, but it is equally true that if I donot take his life he will have mine"* His desire ofvengeance was even proof against the blandishmentsof his favourite mistress. The Duke of Bedford hadgained her to his interest, and made her the mediumof the offer of £100,000 for the life of his son. " Iwill not sell my own and my people's blood at such aprice," was Charles's reply. It has been said bysome historians that Russell would have been spared,could he have been brought to publicly acknowledgethe doctrine of non-resistance ; and great effortswere certainly made under that persuasion by Burnet,Tillotson, and Hallifax, to induce him so to do. TheWhig nobleman modestly but firmly refused to abjurehis principles ; but had he consented, it is moreprobable that Charles would only have exulted overhis fall, and sent him, notwithstanding, to the scaffold.The insolent sarcasm which attended the circumstanceof changing the legal punishment for treasoninto beheading, betrays the true nature of the man —Dalrymple.VOL. I. UA.D. 1683.290 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the heartless tyrant transgresses in his triumph evenXthe bounds of good taste and gentlemanly feeling,and vents his cowardly and pitiful jest upon the sufferingsof his victim. " Lord Russell shall find, byhis own experience, that I have the prerogative hedenied me in the case of Lord Stafford." *The execution of Lord Russell was preceded bythat of Walcot and his accomplices ; and the dyingconfessions of these men had already thrown greatdiscredit upon the story of the plot, and the evidenceof the principal witnesses. The declarations of dyingmen, who have nothing to hope from a concealmentof the truth, who are penitent in their death, andacknowledge the justice of their doom, must everhave great claims to our belief. These men admittedtheir participation in discourses about assassinatingthe king and his brother ; but they all denied thecircumstances of aggravation which the witnesseshad sworn against them. Walcot denied the wholebusiness of the Rye plot, or that he ever undertookto attack the guards while others killed the king :This anecdote seems to de remit Stanford's sentence had beenpend only upon the authority of canvassed, because that noblemanEchard. The cases were by no had been condemned at the suitmeans similar. None could deny of the commons : the former wasCharles's right to remit the whole a matter of course, the latter in-or any part of Russell's sentence, solved a great constitutional ques-forhe had been condemned at the tion.suit of the crown. His right toA.D. 1683.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 291his admissions, however, were quite enough to justify CHAP,his sentence, and both he and his companions weredoubtless executed justly. These confessions, carryingas they did such evident marks of truth, renderedthe character of West so black, that evenCharles's myrmidons were afraid to rely any moreupon him as a necessary witness.The manner of the death of Russell, which tookplace the next day, gave another blow to the characterof the witnesses upon whose testimony theplot rested. Russell left behind him a paper, ofwhich printed copies were selling about the streetswithin an hour after the execution. The public confidencein the veracity of this unfortunate noblemanwas so great, that any statement he might makewould always have been received as indubitable truthby the majority of the nation — his dying declarationnone would doubt. This paper was a short expositionof his principles, religious and political, and anexplanation of the most prominent acts of his publiclife. He professed upon this occasion, as I havealready remarked, his entire belief in the reality ofthe popish plot, and declared that that belief stillremained unchanged.* He acknowledged his zealHis language is very strong : under it when it should prevail, IWhatever apprehensions I had of never had a thought of doing anypopery, and of my own severe and thing against it basely or inhu-heavy share I was like to have manly, but what could well consistu 2A. D, 168a.~92 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, against popery, but indignantly denied any intentionagainst the life of the king, or any design to alterthe government of his country. He attributed hisfate to the earnestness with which he had promotedthe Exclusion bill, but he extended the forgivenessof a Christian to the authors of his death, and forbadehis friends to think of revenging him. He complainedof his sentence as severe, and gave the correctaccount of all that passed at the meeting atSheppard's. " There was no undertaking," he said,'* to secure or seize the guards, nor none appointedto view or examine them : some discourse there wasabout the feasibleness of it, and several times byaccident, in general discourse elsewhere, I haveheard it mentioned as a thing might easily be done,but never consented to as fit to be done ; and Iremember particularly at my Lord Shaftesbury's,there being some general discourse of this kind, Iimmediately flew out and exclaimed against it, andasked if the thing succeeded what must be done nextbut massacring the guards, and killing them in coldblood, which I looked upon as so detestable a thing,and so like a popish project, that I could not butwith the Christian religion, and can appeal to God Almighty, whothe laws and liberties of this king knows my heart, that I went ondom ; and I thank God I have sincerely, without being movedexamined all my actings in that either by passion, by ends, or illmatter with so great care, that I designs."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 293abhor it"* He denounced the reigning practice of CHAP.destroying opponents with the forms of law as theworst description of murder, and hoped that the practicemight end with his death, t His paper concludedwith sentiments of Christian confidence andmanly resignation — sentiments that well accordedwith the life, and well befitted the last hours of aman who had lived the life, and was about to die thedeath, of Lord William Russell. tTo render the triumph more imposing the executionwas ordered to take place in Lincoln's InnFields — a spot so distant from the tower, that thecarriage which conveyed him to the scaffold musttraverse the city before it reached its destination.The best and most beloved of their protectors wasthus ostentatiously exhibited to the citizens, led toState Trials, vol. ix., p. 691. face, and equivocation of somef Upon the scaffold he repeated crafty, hypocritical confessor, orhis ignorance of the plot for which presbyterian casuist, than the noblehe died : " In the words of a dying plainness and simplicity of a gen-manI profess I know of no plot leman, especially of one who, ineither against the king's life or the this very paper, so much boasts ofgovernment." — StateTrials,vol.'ix., the sincerity and candour of hisp. 683. whole life, and of his perpetualX Sprat thus misrepresents this hatred of tricks and evasions."paper : " As to the whole matter Time did indeed prove the bestof it, time, the best discoverer and discoverer and light of truth : evenlight of truth, has since shown it in the lifetime of this man theto be full of enormous falsehoods ; truth was so well proved that heand for the manner it was such as was glad to recant his slanders,rather became the subtilty, artic.A.D. 1683.A.D. 1683.294 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, death without the dread of opposition on the part ofXthe court, or without any one daring to murmur atthe spectacle. Even this did not satisfy the malignantheart of James. Scotland had already witnessedhis ingenuity in devising new tortures. Knowingthe love which Russell bore his wife, and the faithfulardour with which that affection was returned, herightly conjectured that the bitterest drop in his cupof sorrow must be the severance of his domestic ties.He moved the king, therefore, that Lord Russellmight be put to death in front of his own dwelling.*The conduct of all the Whig leaders at this conjuncturewas that of fearless and honourable men.Lord Cavendish, although so conspicuous amongthat party, and so intimate with Lord Russel, nowhereappears in the plot. This was perhaps occasionedby the tenderness of Russell, who would notrisk the life of so dear a friend, and therefore kepthim in ignorance of the consultations. Cavendish,however, openly and zealously attempted to succourhis friend ; and when his condemnation was pronounced,offered to exchange clothes with him inprison, and remain while he escaped. MonmouthOne of the notes in Mon Russell, but was forced to executemouth's memorandum-book, found him, otherwise he must have brokein his pocket when taken in the with his brother. He bid Mon-west,was, that Charles had told mouth think no more of it. — Iveshe inclined to have saved wood's Memoirs, Appendix, p. 374.A.D. 1683.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 295also offered to surrender himself, and abide his trial, chap.But Russell would not consent to compromise hisfriend ; and to Monmouth's offer he replied, " thatit would be of no advantage to him to have his friendsdie with him."This was the first and most decisive blow whichwas struck for the annihilation of the Whig party.It was to be pursued. Pemberton, although he hadproved himself an agent to be tolerably implicitlyrelied upon for a conviction, had shown some shadowof decorum in the trial of Lord Russell. He wastherefore dismissed, not only from his office but evenfrom the privy council, and sent back to his practiceat the bar. To make future prosecutions yet morecertain, Jefferies was made chief justice. When thisprecaution had been taken, Algernon Sidney wasbrought to his trial ; and a scene ensued which wasworthy of the judge who tried him, and the causewhich required his death.In the case of College, there was testimony to thetreason charged, however infamous the character ofthe witnesses. In the case of Lord Russell theforms of justice were at least observed, and the lawdelivered from the bench, however strained, was inaccordance with some recorded precedents ; but theexecution of Sidney was an undisguised murder.Sidney had not been present at the meeting atSheppard's. Howard, therefore, was the only witnessA. D. 1684.296 THE HISTORY OF PARTY".CHAP, against him. The law required two, and JefFerieswas charged to overcome this difficulty. The nextstep was to form a jury which would be imperviousto any proof of innocence, and which would abstainfrom confusing themselves with points of law. Parry,one of the most infamous of mankind, who had beenpardoned his crimes, and promoted to the office ofjustice of the peace for similar services, managed this,and sent in the names of a number of " sure rnen.''^The men who composed Russell's jury had beenat least respectable as to their station. The tribunalbefore which Sidney was cited, had not even thisrecommendation. Russell had objected to his jury,because they were not all freeholders : the objectionwas overruled, because they were citizens. ButSidney was tried in the county court, and by a Middlesexjury, where no such custom as that whichobtained in London was known ; -^ et, when he tookthe same objection JefFeries refused to hear it,declared it had been altogether overruled in LordRussell's case, and would not even suffer the accusedto read the statute which he cited upon the point.With this piece of violence the trial began, andboth judge and jury being now consentient in theirobject, the after proceedings were, as far as the eventof the trial was concerned, a mere idle form. Howardopened his evidence against his benefactor with arhetorical flourish upon the uniformity of truth, andTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. i^QJRumsey and West were allowed to repeat their hear chap.Xsay statements in support of his declining credit ;^and although JefFeries admitted that this was notevidence, he allowed them to proceed, and evenrepeated it, without any such remark, when summingup the evidence.To discredit Lord Howard, the same evidencewas produced, which appeared upon Lord Russell'strial ; and his solemn declarations, that he knew ofno plot were repeated. In addition to this, a witnessdeposed, that having asked Howard when he was tohave his pardon, he answered, *' Not till the drudgeryof swearing was over;" and Sidney's servants proved,that since the committal of their master, Howard haddeclared to them that there was nothing againsthim.Sidney denied altogether the facts stated byHoward, and argued how improbable it was, that aman who could not raise five men, and had not fiveshillings to pay them, should be admitted into conferences,which, according to his own statement,were held by the chiefs of the proposed insurrection,In doing so they contradicted one of the members. Rumseyeach other. West said, that he said that he had similar informa-hadheard of the council of six tion, but he had received it fromfrom Rumsey, and that that per- West,son had told him, that Sidney wasA.D. 1684.298 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and would, therefore, of course, be attended only by- those who could contribute largely to its success.Notwithstanding these imputations upon the credibilityof this witness, it was competent for the juryto receive his testimony as true : but this was onlythe evidence of one witness, and that, according tothe law, did not constitute a sufficient case to go toa jury at all. To escape this objection a manuscriptwas produced, which had been found among Sidney'spapers, and which has since been given to the world.From this now well-known work, the " Discoursesupon Government" certain passages were produced,which asserted that princes derived their power fromthe people, that this power was confided to them underconditions, and with restrictions and limitations, andthat if they abused it, they were liable to be punishedfor their misconduct by the people whose confidencethey had betrayed. This doctrine, the fundamentalprinciple of the Whig creed, and the keystone ofthe British constitution, was according to the nowdominant dogmas of Toryism, treason, and its advocacywas brought forward as an overt act of compassingthe king's death. Scribere est agere was thelaw pronounced from the bench, and this speculativepaper was held to supply the place of a second witnessa conclusion which could only be arrived at bya series of forced constructions, which none but aA.D. 1684.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 299crown lawyer could have seriously put together as CHAP,evidence of a fact, and which none but a judge, whopreferred his place to his conscience, could for amoment have entertained.It has been urged, as one of the chief iniquitiesthat marked this trial, that this paper was not legallyproved to be in the handwriting of the prisoner.Jefferies's conduct upon this occasion does not requirethis additional circumstance to blacken it ; nor, ifwe can place any reliance whatever upon the printedreport, was the evidence upon this point insufficient.It is an established rule of evidence, that handwritingcannot be proved by submitting to the jurythe paper intended to be proved, and another containingwriting admitted co be genuine, for the purposeof their comparing the two. It has been said thatthe reason of this rule is, that unless a jury can readthey would be unable to institute a comparison, orjudge of the supposed resemblance. A better reasonappears to be, that the writings intended as specimensto be compared with the disputed paper, wouldbe brought together by a party to the suit who isinterested to select such writings only as may bestserve his purpose, and they are not likely, therefore,to exhibit a fair specimen of the general characterof handwriting.*Phillips on Evidence, vol. i., p. 490.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.The objection taken to the proof of the handwritingof the "Discourses on Government" beingSidney's is of this description. It is said that thepassages brought against him were handed to thejury with other writings admitted to be his, thatupon such proof this vital part of the case for theprosecution was held established, and the act of parliament,which reversed the attainder, mentions thisamong the reasons for the reversal. This appears,however, to be incorrect ; of the three witnessescalled to prove the handwriting, Sheppard had seenhim write the endorsements on several bills of exchange,and was, therefore, a legal witness to provehis handwriting. Gary had seen endorsements onbills which had passed through his hands as Sidney'sendorsements, and Cooke had paid such bills, and hadnever been called upon to account for nonpayment.All these witnesses agreed in thinking the writingsubmitted to them was Sidney's, and this evidencewas perfectly legal. The true iniquity rests withthe jury, who were resolved to believe such a manas Howard, and in that part of the judges conduct,where he held the writing of a speculative workon government, to be an overt act of compassing theking's death. *' If you can believe," he said, *' thatit was Colonel Sidney's book and written by him, noman can doubt but that it is sufficient evidence thathe is guilty of compassing and imagining the deathA.D. 1684.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 301of the king. The case does not rest upon two chap.witnesses, but upon greater evidence than twenty-two,if you believe this book was written by him."The conduct of Chief Justice JefFeries in thiscase," says Mr. Philips, *' has been universally reprobated.His summing up exhibits a complicationof such gross perversions of law, as are not to beparalleled in any other state trial on record. Tomention only a few particulars : He declared to thejury that the hearsay evidence of persons who werestrangers to the prisoner, was admissible as legalproof of a general conspiracy, and as confirmation ofthe general narrative of the witnesses — thus attributingto it the utmost possible effect. He held itto be law, that if one witness prove an overt act oftreason, and another witness prove a circumstance infavour of the former (though not itself of a treasonablenature, but perfectly indifferent), these would betwo sufficient witnesses to prove the treason. Herelied on the conviction of Lord Russell as an argumentfor the conviction of Sidney. To conclude, helaid down, in the strongest terms, that the papersfound in Sidney's closet were competent and sufficientevidence of the treason charged in the indictment,although these papers were nothing more thanaspeculative and controversial disquisition on politicalsubjects, written apparently many years before,not relative to the treasonable practices charged inA.D. 1684.302 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. ^}jg indictment, and entirely unconnected with anypolitical design.*Sidney behaved at his death with the intrepiditywhich all expected from him. In the words ofBurnet, with an unconcernedness which became onewho had set up Marcus Brutus as his pattern. Hewas but a very few minutes upon the scaffold onTower-hill, he spoke little, and prayed very short,and his head was cut off at one blow, tSidney also left behind him a paper, but it consistedrather of animadversions upon the injusticeState Trials Reviewed, vol. ii., p. 109.f The editors of the octavo edition of Burnet have quoted the followingfine lines from Dr. Watson's Oxford prize poem, on " The Loveof our Country :"Lo ! Sidney bleeding on the block — his air, his mien,His voice, his hand unshaken, firm, serene ;Yet no diffuse harangue proclaimed around,To gain the plaudits of a wayward crowd ; —No specious feint death's terrors to defy,Still death delaying as afraid to die :But sternly silent down he bows to prove.How firm perishing his public love.Unconquered patriot ! formed by ancient lore.The love of ancient freedom to restore ;Who nobly acted what he nobly thought.And sealed by death the lesson that he taught."Sidney could hardly have anticipated that such an eulogy would,within a century, be received with cheers from the rostrum of theOxford theatre, or that the university would bestow her honours uponits author.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 303committed at his trial, than of any explanations as to CHAP,the share he had in the pretended plot.A.D. 1684.Hallifax, although holding the office of privy sealin a ministry essentially Tory, was, as was beforeremarked, in his convictions, a Whig, We have seenthat his influence was greatly lessened by the quarrelwhich occurred between him and the Earl of Rochester,and that he had thereby incurred the hatredof the Duke of York and the Duchess of Portsmouth.Hallifax found it necessary to raise for himselfsome protection against these powerful enemies,and he determined upon a scheme, in which he wouldbe supported by the paternal feelings of the king.Monmouth was still in concealment : it was Halifax'sobject to find him out, and restore him to hisformer consequence at court, thus securing to himselfa powerful ally, and opposing to the Duke ofYork a dangerous rival. Monmouth was soon discoveredby those who sought him in friendship ; andHallifax persuaded him to adopt and transmit to hisfather some submissive and penitent letters, whichhe had penned for his use.* Monmouth acquiesced,and was again received into favour, having first madea general confession of his offences to the king, anda complimentary request to the Duke of York tointercede in his favour. The next Gazette an-elwood'sMemoirs.304 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, bounced that the king had pardoned him, upon hisX.confessing the late plot, and Charles declared to hiscourtiers that James had confirmed all that Howardhad sworn.* The Duke of York has left a more circumstantialaccount of his confession. t According tothis authority, secretary Jenkins was sent from thecouncil chamber, and Monmouth being examined byhis father and the Duke of York, confessed the generaltruth of Howard's statements, and only contradictedhim in trivial and immaterial circumstances.Whatever credit is due to this imputation uponMonmouth, and it rests only upon the very equivocalveracity of the two brothers, — the duke himself vehementlydenied it. The entreaties of Hallifax restrainedhim for a day or two, until his pardon wasformally passed. He had before denied any suchconfession to his friends : he now disavowed it to theworld. He declared that Lord Howard was a liarand a rogue, and boldly denied the statements bothof his father and his uncle. Upon this the kinginsisted that he should give a written confession,under his own hand ; and Hallifax arguing upon theindefinite signification of the word plot, and urgingthat there had certainly been dangerous consultations,which might be called by that name, at lastobtained from him a letter acknowledging that heBurnet. f Macpherson's Extracts.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D. 1684.had confessed to the plot. The king received the CHAP,paper from Halifax, and was satisfied. Not so thewriter of it : he reflected that the admission he hadmade, although no evidence, would be made use ofto destroy the remainder of his party. Juries, alreadyso facile, would never be brought to doubt theplot when they heard of his confession, and underthis general conviction they would listen with readycredulity to every tale which the hirelings of thecourt might be brought forward to depose. Thesereflections tortured him beyond endurance : he wentto the king in a state of agony, and entreated thatthe paper might be rem-ned. It was in vain thathis father withstood his resolve. It is said thatCharles stooped upon this occasion to beg a confessionfrom the son he had so lately pardoned, anddeclared that he should be ruined if he did notyield to him this point. Monmouth was firm : herecovered the paper, and was banished the court.He immediately betook himself to Holland, and wasreceived with great kindness and distinction by thePrince of Orange.*Hampden was now the only member of the councilof six whose doom remained uncertain. The flagrantviolation of justice which had been committed in thecase of Sidney had startled even the easy consciencesBurnet. Welwood's Memoirs — and Appendix.VOL. I. XA.D. 1684.806 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of the Tories ; and although the Duke of York couldwrite to the Prince of Orange that all went on wellsince the jury had returned their verdict againstSidney,* his triumph met with but a faint responsefrom any moderate men even of his own party.Hampden had the benefit of the discontent whichhis friend's death had occasioned : since no secondwitness could be produced to convict him of treasonhe was indicted for a misdemeanor, a charge uponwhich the evidence of a single person is sufficient.Howard was, of course, again produced, and fortifiedby copies of his former narratives, repeated histhrice-told tale. In this case Howard was left alone,there were no circumstances to fortify his statement;and, according to the universal practice of our courts,which has been never to convict an accused personupon the evidence of an accomplice, unless there arestrong corroborating circumstances to fortify thatevidence, Hampden should have been acquitted.But Jefferies was the judge ; the brutal ferocitywhich had triumphed over the dignity, intrepidity,and eloquence of Sidney, would hardly fail on aninferior occasion. Jefferies told his jury, that unlessthey brought in a verdict of guilty, they would discreditthe plot ; a worthy argument from such a manto such men. They responded to it by their usual♦ Dalrymple.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 3Lverdict, and JefFeries, not to be outdone in zeal, set chap.Xa fine upon Hampden of £40,000, the most enormousfine which had ever been imposed by thatcourt, and which amounted, ii his case, to imprisonmentfor Use.The government refused every offer to compoundfor this fine, and when a statement was made of themiseries the prisoner suffered from the closeness ofhis confinement, and another offer was made for hisrelease, the answer received was, that they had ratherhe should rot in prison, than the whole sum shouldbe paid.*Such was the fate of the leaders of the people.Having struck down these, the court continued toseize subjects for punishment from the ranks ; nonewho had by any act made themselves obnoxious toFrom a tract called A Display then sent close prisoner to theof Tyranny. " After being ten tower by Lord Sunderland's war-months,"continues the author, rant ; and put into such a roomin the marshal's house in the where he had no conveniency, andKing's Bench, they put him in the with two of the rudest warders incommon prison, where he was the tower to lie in the room withkept ten or eleven months very him. After seven or eight weeksclose. They then contrived a writ, he was removed to Newgate, wherecalled a long writ, to reach his he was kept close eleven weeks,real and personal estate, whilst he His friends offered money for hiswas thus a prisoner. After this pardon to some in power, whohe heard a new witness appeared, were the Lord Jefferies and Mr.which was after the defeat of the Petre, the sum was ^£6000, andDuke of Monmouth. He was that was effectual."X 208 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the court were safe, either in their lives or properX.ties. In Scotland every desperate ruffian was encouragedto accuse those whom the government of thatoppressed country chose to suspect, and as the membersof the council there commonly participated inthe confiscated spoils of the victims, they were, ofcourse, eager to select objects for prosecution. Thetorture was in that country, now entirely governedby the Duke of York, in daily use. Spence, aservant of Argyle, underwent the dreadful inflictionof the boots with the unflinching fidelity of a clansman.Lord Perth was made chancellor ; he hadrecommended himself to the duke by a faithful imitationof his patron's conduct, he could look on unmovedwhile the instruments of torture were doing theirterrible work ; no agony could excite his commiserationno firmness could command in him respect.He sat the presiding demon of this terrestrial hell,and his was the voice which always called for newtortures, and prolonged the pangs of the wretches wholay in their blood before him. This man conductedthe examination of Spence. When the first tortureproved ineffectual, the prisoner was remanded toprison, and for nine days and nights he was keptwithout sleep. This tedious process proving equallyuseless, another was devised ; the inquisitors preparedlittle screws of steel, and with these theyscrewed his thumbs, producing a torment too exqui-THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 309site for human nature to endure. While in the chap.Xextremity of agony Lord Perth declared, that hewould screw every joint in his whole body thus untilhe took the oath. The poor man sank under this,but even in this extremity, he capitulated upon theterms that no other questions should be asked of him,than those already agreed upon, that he should ,receive a pardon for himself, and should not beobliged to appear as a witness. He then confessedthat he knew the cipher of some letters which hismaster had written to some persons, among whosepapers they had been found. He deciphered theletters, and from them the council learned whatArgyle had demanded to commence an insurrection,and what he had undertaken to effect, if thesums he asked were advancedCorsairs, a preacher, was subjected to the sametorture, and though he was likewise compelled to aconfession, he preserved, under all his sufferings,some important secrets which he possessed relativeto the Prince of Orange, and spoke only to somediscourses of taking off the duke.Upon the information thus barbarously obtained,the Earl of Tarras, and several others, were arrested ;but the chief object of their vengeance was Bailieof Jerviswood, one of the members of the mission toEngland. This learned and good man had beenlanguishing in prison since the discovery of the plot,A.D. 1684.310 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and his treatment had been so cruelly severe, thatX.he was now evidently dying.* A natural deathwould not satisfy the court ; Tarras and his fellowprisoners were terrified into giving evidence againsthim ; nothing that could be even thus collectedamounted to any plausible proof of treason, but juriescould be packed in Scotland as well as in England,he was found guilty and executed with eager hastethat same day, lest death should deprive them of theirvictim, tAs though the Rye-house plot was not a sufficientlycopious source of judicial murders, the affair ofwas revived. Circuits went round thecountry, the test which the duke had enforced atthe point of the bayonet, apparently from an abstractlove of persecution, since it was so essentially Protestantthat he himself could not take it, was stilloffered, and those who wished to escape both thatand the penalties of treason, were obliged to paylargely for their impunity. The protection of thechancellor was not to be cheaply purchased.!His wife was denied all ac one Bailie of Jerviswood, one ofcess to him, although she offered the conspirators that was takento be put in irons with him if it here and sent to Scotland, being awas feared she might assist him to Scotchman, was hanged, drawn,escape. and quartered there last week." —flames relates this murder Dalrymple.thus laconically in a letter to the J Burnet, vol. i., p. 585.Prince of Orange : " As for news.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.These horrors were however enacted at a distance; chap.scarce an echo of them could reach the throne, andlittle of them was known in England. To the Dukeof York, a congenial administrator of a country whoselaws required the use of the rack, every thing connectedwith that country was intrusted, and the kingsigned, without hesitation or inquiry, whatever hisbrother submitted to him relating to this part of hisdominions. Other scenes of the same great tragedywere however displayed before Englishmen.In cases of treason, a sentence of outlawry, afterthe expiration of a year, is equivalent to a convictionbut if the outlaw surrender himself within thattime, the law allows him a trial. Holloway was takenin the West Indies before the expiration of the year.The first intention with regard to him was to executehim without a trial ; but as he appeared penitent, andpromised to confess, a trial was offered him, in orderonly, as the Duke of York admits to the Prince ofOrange, that his confession might be more public andunexceptionable.* Holloway, however, declined theuseless form, and pleaded guilty. As he could remembernothing but treasonable conversations, andcould not be induced to say more than he knew, thecourt pretended to think him insincere, and hangedhim upon what he had already said. His statementDalrymple.X.L2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, upon the scaffold, however, went no further; andX • •even Tories, if unconnected with the court, nowbegan to lose their confidence in the evidence ofRumsey and West.It was probably a sense of the infamy which nowattached to these men that prompted the next act ofdespotism. Within the twelvemonth after his outlawry.Sir Thomas Armstrong was seized at Ley den,and sent over to England. This gentleman had ledadissolute life, and was, upon the breaking out ofthe plot, so alarmed by the prospect of death, thatHampden, who saw him at that time, said he wasconvinced, if taken, that he would do any thing thatwould save his life.The king, who knew him, had a similar opinion ofhim. The subject of the plot was almost worn out ;the excitement and credulity it had produced hadpassed their flood ; it was important to prevent areaction. If Armstrong were tried, and by anychance acquitted, the whole plot would be immediately,by that verdict, declared a fabrication ; * but ifcertainly in the power of the crown, there was noconfirmation of the plot which they might not hopeto terrify him into making. Jefferies therefore wasI mean the plot for which confessed themselves guilty of treatand Sidney were tried, son, although not of the treason-sinceto this party only did Arm able facts for which they died, norstrong belong. The others had indeed of any /j/o^ at all.A.D. 1684.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 313instructed to hand him over to the sheriffs for execu- CHAP.Xtion, without any trial whatever — a service whichthat judge readily undertook.Armstrong, however, surprised both his friendsand his enemies, and exhibited in his death, and thetrying circumstances that preceded it, a courage andconstancy which neither had supposed him to possess.When examined before the council, he said he knewof no plot but the popish plot.* He demanded a fairtrial for his life ; he said he asked no more.He was then carried before Jefferies, who thoroughlyperformed the work he had undertaken.When the attorney-general prayed execution, Armstronginsisted upon his right to a trial. Thestatute, he said, was express, that if an outlaw camein at any time within a year, he was to have a trial,notwithstanding his outlawry ;t that in his case therewere several months of the year yet to run, and thathe was legally entitled to this time to deliberateupon his coming in. Jefferies treated this appealwith his ordinary brutality. He pretended to drawBurnet, vol. i., p. 578. the person outlawed shall, within■f- A statute of 6 Edward VI., a year after the outlawry be pro-whichaltered, in cases of high bounced, come in and yield him-treason,the rule of law, by which, self to the chief justice of theif a person was beyond sea when King's Bench, and offer to traversean outlawry was pronounced, it his indictment, and on his trialwas an error in fact. There is a shall be acquitted, he shall be dis-provisoin that statute, that, if charged of the outlawry.A.D. 1684314 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. ^ distinction between a voluntary surrender and a- forcible arrest, and, conscious of the weakness of thisanswer, had recourse to violence, and refused to hearthe point argued by counsel — a decision no lessimpudent than the whole of his conduct was atrocious,since it was in direct contempt of what evenhe always acknowledged to be a prisoner's right.When Armstrong insisted that he asked nothing butthe law, Jefferies concluded the business with aninhuman sarcasm, which was almost worthy of hismaster. He should have it, he said, to the full, andimmediately ordered his execution within six days.Armstrong died with the greatest composure, andexhibited, at and before his execution, signs ofearnest penitence ; yet in his last paper he deniedthat he ever knew of any design against the king's orthe duke's life, or was in any plot to alter the government.The sentence of treason was executedupon him with all its barbarities, he was carried toTyburn in a sledge, and was quartered, and hisquarters hung up. A disgusting exhibition of thehatred and disappointment of his prosecutors.Armstrong's last paper contained a passage whichexcited much conversation, but drew forth no reply ; acircumstance which was attributed to the command ofthe personage whom it implicated. It is said that theking, wishing to palliate the palpable injustice whichwas inflicted upon Armstrong, had, immediatelyA.D. 1684.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 315after his condemnation, published a story through the chap.court, and told it to all the foreign ministers, thatArmstrong had been sent over by Cromwell to assassinatehim when in exile : and that he having beenwarned of the design, challenged him with it, whoconfessed it with such signs of contrition, thatCharles promised him never to speak of it any moreas long as he lived. He added, that now, since theman was dead in law, he was absolved from hispromise.The story reached the condemned man, and itaroused in him resentments and passions which heappeared to have forgotten ; his first indignant denialof this false and improbable fabrication was couchedin terms, which Dr. Burnet, who attended him,thought too strong for a dying penitent. It wasmuch softened in the paper he delivered to thesheriff; in that he contented himself with provingthe falsehood. He had never, he said, been beyondsea but once, and, upon that occasion, he had beensent by the Earl of Oxford, and other cavaliers, witha considerable sum of money, a present to the king.This commission he executed, and brought backletters of thanks to those who sent him. Cromwell,he went on to show, having a suspicion of the objectof his journey, seized him and put him in confinement,where he remained almost a year, and uponthe merit of this service and suffering he was made a316 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, captain of horse soon after the restoration. TheX.absurdity of a story which asserted that the king hadmade a man Lieutenant of the first troop of his bodyguardand gentleman of the horse, for these officesArmstrong had held, who had been detected in adesign to assassinate him was too evident to requireexposure, and would justly expose the whole story toconsiderable doubt, had we not the printed paper inwhich the charge is answered,* and no reply inwhich it is disavowed.The effect which this proceeding had was shownsoon after upon the trial of Hayes, a banker, who, itappeared, had corresponded with Armstrong whileabroad. Jefferies's violent harangue against the prisonerwas in vain, the evidence was defective, andalthough he outdid himself upon this occasion in hisattempts to drive the jury into a conviction, theybrought in a verdict of not guilty. This was thefirst proof the Tories gave of returning sanityCharles did not scruple to avow publicly the servicewhich Jefferies had performed in putting Armstrongto death without a trial. When he saw him at Windsorsoon after, he took a valuable ring fi-om his fingerThe printed paper, however, Burnet, who saw and prevailedonly complains of Charles having upon Armstrong to alter the firstcalled him a spy of Cromwell's, paper he had written on this sub-thestory of the assassination sect. — State Trials, vol. x., p. 123.depends upon the authority of f State Trials, vol. x., p. 307.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 317and gave it to him. This ring was called JefFeries's chap.Xblood stone. '.The king added a piece of advice, which showedthat he was well aware that he was committing thelives and fortunes of his subjects to the arbitramentof a drunken ruffian. "You are going the circuit,"he said, ** and it is a hot summer, pray do not drinktoo much." Advice not unnecessary to a man whosenatural ferocity drinking increased into a furiousmadness. What would the present age think of aparty of cabinet ministers — Jefferies was one — riotouslydrunk, stripped to their shirts, and unanimousin their resolve to climb up a signpost and drink theking's health upon the top of it ?The debauch to which I allude, took place inthe following year, at Alderman Buncombe's ; andthe Earl of Rochester, lord high treasurer ofEngland, was one of the most eager of this crewof bacchanals to exhibit his loyalty astride thesignpost.*Such were the men who sat in judgment uponRussell and Sidney. Such were the men whoseevery sentence a triumphant party was ready toratify. We may smile when we picture to ourselvesthe actors of this scene in the high celebration ofReresby's Memoirs, p. 231. vented the execution of thisHe says an accident only pre rational design.318 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, their drunken orgies ; but who can help checkingsuch a smile with the reflection, that the best bloodof England had flowed in vain to deliver the countryfrom these stripped and reeling statesmen, and thatthey still guided the destinies of a mighty nation !A.D. 1684.THE HISTORY OF PAIITV. 319CHAPTER XI.XI.A.D. 1684.Persecution of the Whigs and of the dissenters — Summary ofthe evidence as to the Rye-house plot — Changes in the ministry —Influence of the Duke of York — Intrigue against him — Death ofCharles — Review of the conduct of the two parties during his reignThe Oxford decree.After a relation of the tragic fate of the Rye chap.house conspirators it might seem trifling to notice •minor acts of tyranny ; but, perhaps, these show withequal force the prostrate condition of the Whigparty, and the insolence of the dominant Tories,since they were exercised upon men who, for themost part, could not be considered as objects ofalarm. Many of the prosecutions partake of a politicalintolerance which has been usually confined toreligious dissensions. In no part of England wasthe utterance of a Whig sentiment without itsattendant danger. A man named Gutch, at Wells,dared to express an opinion that the king wasTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, countable to his people : the observation was heardXI'. and repeated, and for it Gutch was tried, convicted,put in the pillory, bound over to his good behaviour,and fined two hundred pounds.* Sir Samuelhad, in some private letters, reflected uponthe conduct of the court, and expressed a hope thatSidney would not be put to death : these were intercepted,and Sir Samuel was fined £10,000 for theseconfidential communications. A man named EliasBest had drank to the pious memory of honestStephen College ; for this offence he was tried at thebar of the King's Bench, and sentenced to pay a fineof £1000; to stand in the pillory at Westminster, atthe Exchange, and at Guildhall, an hour each place,to be bound to his good behaviour for life, and to becommitted until all this was done.Harris, an attorney, for speaking disrespectfully ofthe king was sentenced to stand in the pillory at fourdifferent places throughout the country, and to pay afine. A man named Carson was similarly treatedfor a similar offence. The printers did not escape ;the instances of their fines, imprisonments, and pilloriesare too numerous to mention ; there werefew who had ever dared to publish a Whig pamphlet,that might not be seen occasionally subjected to thepelting of a Tory mob.Narcissus Luttrell's Brief Historical Relation.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.Private individuals now took up the war ; everyword of reproach that had been used during thefeverish excitement of the popish plot was calledto mind, and visited severely upon the indiscreetlibellers. None will feel sorry to find Oatesamong the number of the sufferers. The Duke ofYork brought an action against him for scandalummagnatum, in calling him a popish traitor. Thezealous jury gave the fill damages demanded,£100,000. This sentence of imprisonment for lifewas well deserved, but few will deem the verdictvery justly proportioned to the value of the characterof the duke. Oates's followers, who were yet living,were soon distributed throughout the town in thenumerous pillories — a single instance of Tory justiceduring this reign. The Duke of Beaufort, LordPeterborough, and many other Tory noblemen imitatedthe example of the Duke of York, and the juriesto whom they appealed readily gave such damagesas amounted to a perpetual imprisonment. TheEarl of Macclesfield proceeded against a grand jurywhich had presented him, for their libellous presentment,and others took a still bolder step ; they filed acriminal information against Williams the speaker ofthe late house of commons for injurious aspersionsupon them, which he had printed by order of thehouse. There is hardly any extravagant act which somemembers of a dominant party may not be found readyVOL. I. YA.D. 1684.•322 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, to perform to celebrate their triumph, but this wasthought to be done by the creatures of the duke,to destroy any idea of calling a parliament together.It was not to be supposed that any house of commonswould endure that their speaker should, aftertheir dissolution, be punished for their acts.This political persecution was not, however,unmixed with others of a religious nature. TheTories, in their day of humiliation, had been zealousagainst popery ; many of them were now so cordiallyand so eagerly supporting the Duke of York, thatwhen they raised their favourite cry of church andking, it might seem that they meant no king buthim who possessed the hereditary title, but anychurch which he might choose to establish. Theyexpended, however, all their tolerance upon popery,they had none to bestow upon their protestantbrethren. These severely felt the altered state ofparties, and suffered the greatest severities. InScotland the court managed, by a forced constructionof a penal act, to place half the estates of thenonconforming gentry at their mercy.* In Englandexcommunications were common, and ruinous penaltiesyet more so. They were proceeded against fornot going to church, and even for not receiving thesacrament. Attending a conventicle was a certainBurnet.A.D. 1684.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 3^3cause of prosecution, and Jefferies seemed inclined chap.to hold, that it was an overt act of high treason.*These minor persecutions, although suggested andcarried on by the malice of a party which was exasperatedby recent humiliation, were protected andcountenanced only by the Rye-house plot. Thereis a portion, perhaps a large portion, of the people ofEngland which is destitute of any consistency inparty feeling, alternately supporting and abandoningeither party, and obeying, unconsciously, everybreeze of popular feeling which skims the surface ofthe waters of politics. These men are by no meansthe least violent partisans while absolutely engaged,but since they are less bigoted than the regularmembers of either party, are accustomed to change,and calling themselves of no party judge the acts ofeach ; it is they who, in every violent impetus of nationalfeeling, are usually found the first to pause.Easily excited, they are, nevertheless, capable ofconviction ; they do not continue for the sake of consistencyin a course to which they were first urgedby passion.This important body had been caught by the fableof the Rye-house plot ; little reflective, in the firstmoment of excitement, the plot of assassination, andthe providential escape, were eagerly believed, andSee Roswell's case, State Trials, vol. x.Y -2324 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, inspired all the horror which such a deed ever mustXI.inspire in a generous nation. Upon this story, theplot, as they understood it, rested. The Rye-housewas, in their idea, the great feature of the conspiracy;the consultations of the Whig leaders were onlylooked upon as evidence of their participation in theRye-house assassination-plot ; the clergy declaredthis from the pulpit ; the government used every artto perfect the delusion, and a public thanksgiving,*throughout England, produced a thousand sophisticalharangues, in which the offences of the accusedpersons were ingeniously confounded. The peoplewere deceived ^dth a generous horror of the designsimputed, and they joined the Tories. Withouttheir support, without this popular delusion, Charleshad not dared to spill the blood of Russell or Sidney.Yet no Rye-house plot existed. The declarationsof dying men, some of whom might have lived ifthey would have stated that it did exist, prove thisfact. The Rye-house conspiracy was, in the languageof the time, a sham plot ; since the attemptat assassination, the grand circumstance which aloneUpon several of the churches in London was found pasted acopy of these rhymes, upon the thanksgiving day :Ye hypocrites forbear your pranks,To murder men, and then give thanks.Forbear your tricks, pursue no further.For God accepts no thanks for murther."THE HISTORY OF PARTY.3^25A.D, 1684.justified in the eyes of the nation the severities chap.which ensued, was an entire fabrication of subornedwitnesses. The fluctuating portion of the peoplerose in a body, when they heard that an attempt toassassinate the king had been foiled by the hand ofProvidence, and that the most influential noblemenwere implicated in the design. They would havelistened listlessly had they been only told, that aparty of desperate men, without character or station,had talked of killing the king, and were known tospeak treason in a chamber of the Temple. Had thetruth alone been told, the nation would have estimatedthem as mere braggarts, who were too openin the counsels to excite much apprehension as totheir deeds.*I may here give another instancewhich renders the fact thatthe assassination plot was a fabricationindisputable. To the declarationof all the other persons, whodied ripon this account, was afterwardsadded that of Rumbold, whoit will be remembered was proprietorof the Rye-house, having obtainedit by marrying the widow ofa maltster, to whom it had formerlybelonged. This man had been alieutenant in Cromwell's army ;he had followed his great captainin his campaign in Scotland, andhe had been on duty, as one of theguards, about the scaffold at theexecution of Charles the First.(Fountainhead's MS. Memoirs —and Decisions — Fox's Appendix,clvi.) At the breaking out of theplot he escaped, and he afterwardsjoined Argyle's unfortunate expeditionin 1685. He was now 68years old, and boasted that he hadbeen in arms against those twoidols, monarchy and tyranny, eversince he was nineteen. Rumboldwas, therefore, a stern and fearlessrepublican; Upon the dispersion3^6THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.XI.A.D. 1684.I have dwelt thus minutely upon the incidents ofthe Rye-house plot, because it was essentially a partyaffair. The popish plot had been the madness of anation, this was the headlong vengeance of a party ;of Argyle's army, lie was taken at Scotland, &c. Upon receiving hisLesmaliago, but not without a sentence, Rumbold only replied,desperate resistance, in which he that he wished he had a limb forkilled one and wounded two of every town in Christendom. Beinghis numerous assailants; he fell,at last, covered with wounds, andwas, when secured, so near death,that however desirable it might bedeemed that he should suffer inEngland, it was impossible to removehim there without dangerthat their vengeance would bedisappointed. Such a man couldhave no incentive to deny theproject of assassination had it everexisted, he had nothing either tohope or fear from an avowal of thetruth either way ; yet upon histrial "he absolutely denied anyknowledge of that designed mtirdei-"and it affords a curious proof ofthe discredit into which this plothad fallen, that upon this denialthe king's advocate passed fromthat part of the charge, and insistedsingly upon the point, thatthe prisoner had associated himselfwith the late Earl of Argyle,a forfeited traitor, and invadedasked if he owned the king'sauthority, " he craved leave to beexcused, seeing he needed neitheroffend them nor grate his ownconscience, for they had enoughwhereon to take his life besides."After condemnation he did notreject the consolations of religion,and, upon the scaffold, he prayedfor the party which he owned, anddeclared that if every hair of hishead were a man, he would venturethem all in their cause. Wasthis a man likely to deny, at hisdeath, any act of a political naturein which he had been engaged?Yet Rumbold's dying words were,an indignant denial of any knowledgeof intended assassinations.I was too well known," he added,for any one to have had the imprudenceto make any such propositionto me." — Ralph, vol. i., p.872 ; Founiainhairs MS., ubisupra, Fo.v, p. 216.A.D. 1684.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 327of a party, it is true, aided by the co-operation of chap.others who seldom acted with them, but still of aparty. The addresses which passed round the kingdomthe unanimity of juries in all parts of thecountry — above all, the unblushing avowals of thewriters who have related and defended it — all pronounceit to have been of Tory offspring. Of theselast the most resolute and unhesitating vituperationof the sufferers is Roger North. His examinationof Kennett's History is perhaps the choicest collectionof cool and audacious misrepresentation thatever issued from the press. Although written longafter the events it discusses had passed away, ityields in undisguised partiality and party violenceto none of those contemporaneous pamphlets whichdescribed the exuberant prosperity of Toryism. Thepeople, the parliament, and the court, joined inthe prosecution of the popish plot. The court,and a portion of the people only, were engagedin this. The Whigs were utterly incredulous ;and so notorious was this incredulity, and so greatthe talent and strength of that party, that the prosecutorsof the plot dreaded the meeting of a parliament,as the annihilation of their instrument of vengeance.According to the best historical evidencethe Rye-house plot was, although not in its origin,certainly in its prosecution and its after design, aTHE History OF PARTY.CHAP.XI.scheme of the Tories to destroy the Whig party — ascheme in which for some time they succeeded inobtaining the co-operation of all the neutral part ofthe nation.It is scarcely necessary to notice any new marksof degradation which England suffered from foreignpowers, while all the power and prudence of herrulers were exercised against herself. Luxemburgsold for a million livres, and even Englishmen assistingin the disgraceful exploit.* Genoa bombarded inBurnet, in his memorial to thePrincess Sophia, says, " Affairsabroad went all wrong ; for as theking was guarantee of the peace ofNimeguen, we suffered the Frenchto lop off Strasbourg from theempire, and to take Luxemburg,without so much as crying halt.But instead of it some noble Englishvolunteers went to signalizethemselves at the siege, and it wasobservable, the French king beingat Chantilly just before his armiesmarched for Flanders upon that expedition,he was made acquaintedthat several young English noblemenwaited, who desired the honourto kiss his majesty's hand.They were no sooner introduced,but the king told them, " Ho MessieursAnglais ! il y a de Honneura gagner devant Luxembourg."My Lord Cornburie, Lord Chol-monterey, and Mr. Howard, sonto the Earl of Carlisle, were thepersons, of whom the latter diedin the bed of honour at the siege ;the two others are yet living. TheFrench made themselves mastersof more places and countries duringthe peace, and under the umbrageof our guaranty, than if thewar had continued." — p. 53. Thegreat object of Louis's ambition atthis time, was to obtain the electionof the dauphin as King of theRomans. In this view the possessionof Luxemburg and Strasbourg,from the paramount influenceit gave him over the fourRhenish electors, was of the utmostimportance.A.D. 1684.THE HISTORY OF Party. 3^9defiance of the rights of nations, and England look chap,XIing on with apathy ; Louis encouraged in all hisacts of rapacious ambition ; Tangier abandoned.These had been the most recent features of England'sforeign policy.During this year some changes were made in theministry, but none which had any effect upon therelative situation of the two parties. Jenkins wasdismissed from his office of secretary ; as Burnet says,because he had now done all the drudgery that thecourt had occasion for him to do ; or, as his biographersays, he resigned it on account of ill health, andGodolphin, a man of rather versatile politics, of nogreat energy, and of no very extraordinary talent,succeeded him. Godolphin will be remembered asone of the chits ; he will hereafter appear more prominentlyupon the political stage. By his advancementa commissionership of the treasury becamevacant ; and as Peering, another commissioner, diedabout the same time, the Earl of Rochester, thusrid of his two colleagues, aspired to the office oflord treasurer. In this juncture, however, the influenceof Lord Hallifax revived. Rochester's extensivepeculations had been severely felt by the minionsof the court : these, in the present indigent state ofthe king, had contributed not a little to the stoppageof all payments to them ; his unpopularity increasedas the funds upon which they had subsisted diisHISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.XI.A.D. 1684,wished ; * and when Hallifax and North joined theirinterest against him, the king was easily persuadedto name two additional commissioners without consultingthe earl. Rochester, therefore, resigned theplace of first commissioner, and the king, to avoidan open rupture, dismissed the Earl of Radnor fromhis place of president of the council, and appointedRochester his successor. As this was a place superiorin rank, but far inferior both in influence andemolument to that he had resigned, his translationdrew from Hallifax a remark, that " he had heard ofmany being kicked down stairs, but never of any oneBurnet gives the following instanceof the manner in whichCharles supplied the wants of hiscourtiers, when his exchequer nolonger contained funds commensuratewith their demands :The title of baronet is nowgenerally bought by new-raisedpeople, who want to be made gentlemen.I know myself an oldcourtier to whom King Charles II.gave a good number of blank patentsof this sort, instead of presentmoney to reward his services, andhe was allowed to fill them up ashecould find chapman to buy them.I have heard, and do believe it,that some of these patents havebeen pawned to a tailor, and therelain to be disposed of, for want ofmoney to pay for new clothes. Iam myself now actually acquaintedwith a gentleman, whose fatherwas as miserable as poverty couldmake him, his mother selling saltin a poor country-market to gether bread by, yet an estate accidentallyraised by an uncle, whowas a common carrier, hath giventhis man and his wife the vanity tobecome a baronet. He gave a goodsum for it to the courtier beforementioned, who was Sir Heme, ofCressy Hall in Lincolnshire, fatherto my Lady Fraser, wife to SirPeter, now at the court of Hanover.The new made baronet is Sir PaulWilkinson, of Wanton, near Chesterfield,in the county of Derby." —Memorial, p. 76.A.D. 1684.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 331who had been kicked up stairs before." Upon this CHAP.XIarrangement Godolphin, who was impatient of the .labour which the secretaryship imposed, became firstcommissioner of the treasury, and was created a peer.The Earl of Middleton, a man who is described as'* a man of a generous temper, but without muchreligion, well learned, of a good judgment, and alively apprehension," succeeded to the vacant placeof secretary.*The Earl of Rochester soon grew disgusted withhis situation at court, and the duke's influence procuredhim the government of Ireland ; but the fickletemper of the king had become estranged from hisformer favourite, and he could not even confer thisfavour without coupling it with a mortification. TheEarl of Sunderland suggested that it was imprudentto allow the lieutenant of Ireland to be also generalof the forces there. The army, therefore, was putunder independent control.Burnet says, speaking of the remonstrances ofRochester against this division of his authority, thatthe king seemed to be the more pleased with it, sinceit affected Rochester so much. There is, however,some reason to suppose that the king's design wassomewhat deeper than either Rochester or his enemyHallifax could penetrate.Buniet.3f2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Charles's absolute crown was not without its thorns.XI.He had at this period of his reign lost that recklessgaiety, and that buoyancy of spirit, which had formerlyattended him in every reverse, and throughevery difficulty. During the last two years he hadbecome acquainted with the intrigues of Louis withthe Whigs, and he had reason to believe that thoseintrigues were still carried on. He now felt, in alltheir bitterness, the effects of his secret allianceswith France. Louis had secured his dependant,placed him in a position of hostility with his people,and rendered him powerless as an enemy ; he thereforetreated him with contempt, stopped or delayedthe payments of his pension, and had even the ineffablemeanness to threaten him if he complained ofthis treatment, that he would publish his infamy tothe world, by putting his subjects in possession ofthe secret treaties.Even his success at home had not brought him thehappiness he anticipated. The Duke of York, as hehad been the object of hostility to the Whigs, so hewas now of the adulation of the Tories. After hehad been placed again near the king, and had, indefiance of the Test act, been seated at the councilboard, his levies became far more crowded than thoseof his brother ; and it is said that his antechamberwas often thronged with obsequious petitioners, whileA.D. 1G85.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 333the kinar was left with scarcely sufficient attendants chap.to form the semblance of a court.*The king, who was far from destitute of penetration,and whose intellect was greatly superior to thatof his brother, could not but reflect deeply upon hispresent condition, and retrace in thought the steps ofguilt and bloodshed which had brought him to it.There is some reason to think that he now meditatedsome important movement, whether the calling of a parliament,or only a change in the spirit of his government,it is useless now to inquire ; but certainlysomething beneficial to the nation, since it was somethingin which the Duke of York was not expectedto concur.Such was the state of affairs at the close of theyear 1684. The disgrace of the Earl of Rochester,who was peculiarly a creature of the duke, was probablythe first step towards the accomplishment ofhis design. The following is the uncertain accountgiven by Burnet of this matter :There was at this time a new scheme formedthat very probably would have for ever broken theking and the duke, but how it was laid was so greata secret that I could never penetrate into it. It waslaid at Lady Portsmouth's. Barillon and Lord Sun-wallersaid that Charles, to his death, had resolved that hespite the exclusionists, who would should reign while he was yet alive,not allow the duke to reign afterA.D. 1685.334 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, demand were the chief managers of it. Lord Godol-XI.pain was also in it. The Duke of Monmouth cameover secretly ; and though he did not see the king,yet he went back very well pleased with his journey ;but he never told his reason to any one that I knewof. Mr. May, of the privy purse, told me that hewas told there was a design to break out, with whichhe himself would be well pleased ; and when it wasripe, he was to be called on to come and manage theking's temper, which no man understood better thanhe did ; for he had been bred about the king eversince he was a child, and by his post he was in thesecret of all his amours, but was contrary to hisnotions in every thing else both with relation topopery, to France, and to arbitrary government ; yethe was so true to the king in that lewd confidence inwhich he employed him, that the king had chargedhim never to press him in any thing so as to provokehim. By this means he kept all this while at a distance,for he would not enter into any discourse withthe king on matters of state till the king began withhim, and he told me he knew by the king's waythings were not yet ripe, nor he thoroughly fixed onthe design. That with which they were to begin wasthe sending the duke to Scotland ; and it was generallybelieved that if the two brothers should beonce parted they would never meet again. The king-spoketo the duke concerning his going to Scotland,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. Sandhe answered there was no occasion for it; upon chap.XIwhich the king replied, that either the duke mustgo, or that he himself would go thither. The kingwas observed to be more than ordinarily pensive, andhis fondness for Lady Portsmouth increased, andbroke out in very indecent instances. The grandprior of France, the Duke of Vendee's brother, hadmade some applications to that lady, with which theking was highly offended. It was said the king camein on a sudden, and saw that which provoked him,so he commanded him immediately to go out ofEngland ; yet after that the king caressed her inview of all people, which he had never done on anyoccasion, or to any other person formerly. Theking was observed to be colder and more reserved tothe duke than ordinary, but what was under all thiswas still a deep secret. Lord Hallifax was let intono part of it ; he still went on against Lord Rochester.He complained in council that there weremany erasures in the books of the treasury, and thatseveral leaves were cut out of those books ; and hemoved the king to go to the treasury chamber, thatthe books might be laid before him, and that hemight judge of the matter upon sight. So the kingnamed the next Monday, and it was then expectedthat the Earl of Rochester would have been turnedout of all, if not sent to the tower ; and a messagewas sent to Mr. May, then at Windsor, to desireA.D. 1683.336 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, him to come to court that day, which it was expectedXIwould prove a critical day ; and it proved to be soindeed, though in a different way."The same author, in his memorial to the PrincessSophia, states upon the same subject, that the Dukeof York, after his return from Scotland, ruled all, andcarried every thing at last to that height, that theking grew jealous and uneasy, and ordered his highnessag-ain for Scotland. One month's time wasallowed to prepare his equipage, and before thatexpired King Charles II. died, the Duke of Monmouthnot being in England.*This seems to be strengthened from the followingparagraphs from the memorandum-book afterwardsfound in the Duke of Monmouth's pocket ; extractsfrom which have been printed by Welwood, in theappendix to his memoirs.December 19. A letter from L (probably eitherHallifax or Sunderland), bidding me stay till I heardfurther from him (Monmouth was then in Holland."** January 5. I received a letter from L, markedby 29 (the king) in the margin, to trust entirely in10; and that in February I should certainly haveleave to return. That matters were concertingtowards it ; and that 39 (the Duke of York) had nosuspicion, notwithstanding my reception here."Pare 54.A.D. 1685.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. Ot** February 3. A letter from L, that my business CHAP,was almost as well as done, but must be so sudden asnot to leave room for 39's party to counterplot. Thatit is probable that he would choose Scotland ratherthan Flanders or this country, which was all oneto 29."*The Count D*Avaux,t Louis's ambassador to theStates, seems to have also entertained a suspicionthat some intrigue had been in existence contrary tothe interests of France, and he speaks of some papersto that effect found in the king's closet.That such an intrigue existed is therefore plain.Its object is less distinct. It is more probable thatBurnet should be mistaken when speaking of theparties to a plot which he confesses he never understood,than that Barillon should countenance a schemewhich must have certainly terminated to the disadvantageof France. D' Vaux, on the contrary, says,James himself admitted this ; says, that at this time he "receivedLady Portsmouth began to en a very kind letter from my Lordcertain some thoughts of sending Marquis (Hallifax), and othershis highness back to Scotland ; and from very great persons, which gaveif the king had lived longer, it is him to understand there wouldprobable she might have effected probably be some further change atit." — Life of King James II., vol. i., court ; that his lordship stood veryp. 736. firm with the king, and that it wasf February 27, 1685. believed the power of the French\ Burnet's assertion that Halls interest was somewhat abated." —fax was kept in ignorance, seems p. 186.to be contradicted by Reresby, whoVOL. I. ZA.D. 1685.338 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, going to an opposite extreme, but yet speaking moreprobably, that Charles had expressed the greatestindignation against France, and had forbidden Barillonto come to him again, except when an audience wasformally asked, and granted through the master ofthe ceremonies.It appears, however, from Barillon's despatch inMr. Fox's* history, that neither Burnet nor D' Vauxwas correct. Barillon was quite ignorant of theintrigue, but was at this time himself intriguing forthe removal of Hallifax, whose arguments for a sessionof parliament had given great offence to Louis,and whose recent bold defence of limitations to monarchy,expressed in open council, had given a speciouspretence for calumniating him to the king.The occasion of this manifestation of Hallifax's remainingpartiality for constitutional government wasthis : Among the general crash of corporations, andthe prevalence of quo warranty the company whichruled New England under a charter of James I. wasdeprived of its privileges. Charles had now bestowedthe government upon Colonel Kirk, who hadjust been deprived of office by the abandonment ofTangier, and who became so infamous for his atrocitiesin the reign of James II. The question wasdebated in council what authority he should have.Appendix, p. x.A.D. 1685.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 339Hallifax contended, with vehemence, that the laws CHAP.XIand constitution of England should be extended toher colonies. The arguments by which he supportedthis opinion were of a nature by no means adaptedto Charles's council-chamber : he dwelt upon theinconveniences of absolute power, and he eulogisedthat form of government where the power of theprince was tempered by the laws, and restricted by afree constitution ; he concluded by declaring plainly,that he could never bring himself to live under amonarch, who had the power of taking the money inhis pocket whenever he pleased. Hallifax was alonein his opinion, and it was resolved that the inhabitantsof the colony should have no voice either in theirgovernment or taxation.*Upon the whole it appears probable that thiswas a scheme devised by the more moderate ofthe Tory party, who were impatient of the absoluteinfluence which the duke now enjoyed. Thesemen were not inclined to turn Catholics, and hadnot lost all recollection that England had once aconstitution ; they were aware also that the dukelooked upon them with distrust, if not with absolutedislike ; and they were probably anxious to bringabout the meeting of a parliament, in order that somelimitations might be interposed between him and hisBarillon's Despatch, Fox, App. Corporation Case in the Statep. vii. See also a note to the Trials.Z 2A.D. 1685.340 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, brother's power. In this they were supported by- the Duchess of Portsmouth, whose motives it wouldbe very difficult to assign, and by Charles, throughlove for her, affection for his son, and jealousy of hisbrother. Had the affair proceeded it would probablyhave ended in the restoration of the Whig party topower, perhaps, in a violent revulsion of feelingthroughout the nation, and an act of exclusion ; consequenceswhich the parties who contrived the measurecertainly did not anticipate. But in the Whigparty, crushed as it was, there was a mightily elasticpower : it was dangerous to say how much pressurecould be removed, without risking the overthrow ofthe remainder.Such was the critical state of parties in February,1685, when Charles's sudden death, which, occurringat so important a moment, did not pass without suspicionof poison,* entirely changed the face of affairs.He died on the sixth of that month.Burnet and several other the duchess, that she herself wasWhig historians state this as a of this opinion, and Burnet has afact, and attribute it to the priests, similar statement. See also a noteto whom the Duchess of Ports to the octavo edition of that au-mouth'sconfessor communicated thor. The Duke of Monmouthdie project of sending away the afterwards accused his uncle ofDuke of York, information which murdering his father, but his mantlehad obtained from her under festa, which was drawn up by Fertileseal of confession. Mr. Fox guson, is full of falsehoods. Northhad heard from his father, who is of course on the other side,had, when a young man, knownTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 341Thus terminated the most disgraceful reign in the CHAP,English annals ; a reign whose only redeeming fearture is the noble struggle which the infant Whigparty made against the tyranny to which they wereat last forcibly subjected. Even this granulation,excited by the refreshing thought that even in thosedays of adversity there were men whose exertions inbehalf of their country ceased only with their lives,is repressed by the knowledge that although aminority of the nation approved their sentiments,and loved their cause, they suffered the sacrificewithout an effort, and that a very large majoritycheered on the tyrants in their acts of tyranny andtheir deeds of blood.We have beheld in this reign the rise of the twoparties whose history we are tracing ; we have seenthem, during a long and stormy period, each actingin conformity with its principles. The Whigs,although reviled by their opponents as republicans,have shown themselves firm supporters of monarchy,and so fixed was this principle of their creed, that itwas not shaken even by the manner in which Charleshad shown them it could be abused. During all theprosecutions of the Rye-house plot, there was nogenuine member of that party who suffered, withoutasserting, at his death, that he had never entertainedany intention of altering the form of government.XI.A.D. 1683.342 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. They however regarded the monarchy as a civilinstitution, established by the nation for the benefitof all its members, and they, consequently, regardedit both as lawful and proper to propose any modificationwhich the circumstances of the times, or theadvance of political knowledge should show to beconducive to the great end in view, the happiness ofthe people. Theirs was a creed which recognisedno intractable rule of conduct, and no perfect andunalterable state of government. Their object wasa free government, and they knew the justice of theremark of Machiavel, that " a fi-ee government,in order to maintain itself free, hath need, every day,of some new provision in favour of liberty." TheWhigs, therefore, were sincere friends to themonarchy upon the grounds of expediency ; but, inorder to be expedient, they held that it must bei strictly limited ; and, in order that these limitationsmight be effectual, they held that the people had anatural right to resist, by force, any sovereign whoshould attempt to break them. These principlesthey had during this reign strictly acted by.The Tories had shown themselves a party ratherof religionists than of politicians. Their politicalcreed was part of their religion, and consisted ofprinciples for which they claimed a divine origin ;they thought they could read in their bibles thatA.D. 1685.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 343monarchy was a government of divine appointment ; chap.that the monarch was the delegate of heaven, and !they, therefore, considered that to resist him wasto rebel against their God. Such principles as thesecould, of course, yield to no human modification,and could never be made to bend to any senseof human expediency. Even they, however, drew adistinction between an active and a passive resistancethe former they thought no circumstancescould justify ; but if the prince should command anyact inconsistent with the laws of God, which, accordingto their interpretation, would, of course, includeinconsistent with their scheme of politics, it wasthen incumbent upon the subject to refuse obedienceto the command ; but, at the same time, to submit,without a murder, to any punishment, even deathitself, which the monarch might think fit to imposefor such refusal.*The only sect in England which admitted thesedoctrines as essential articles of religion, and there-eventhis, however, was mo divine laws." — Patriarchs, p. 100,derate Toryism, such as was avoir Robert Filmer lived before thedated by Sherlock, Hicks, and revolution, and since his work wasBancroft. There were not a so well known to Sidney, it wasfew who followed Brady and probably printed in the author'sFilmer, the latter of whom plainly lifetime. It does not, however,declares, that " a man is bound to appear to have been much readobey the king's command against until the appearance of the editionlaw, nay, in some cases, against of 1685344 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, fore necessary to salvation* was that portion of theXIchurch of England which was called the high churchparty The members of this part of the nationalchurch looked upon episcopacy as an institution oforigin as unquestionably divine as monarchy; and whilethey inculcated such entire submission to the constitutedauthorities of the state, in temporal matters,they were equally strict in requiring a similarobedience to the authorities of the church in spiritualmatters. The Tories were therefore, uponprinciple, intolerant in matters of religion. To use thedistinction drawn by Secretary Walsingham, in thetime of Elizabeth, they persecuted the Catholics ascatholics m conscience: — the Whigs persecuted themas catholics in faction. The Whigs dreaded themas political enemies, and strove to keep them dora,because they were then allied with the foes to theirliberties ; the Tories classed them with all otherdissenters from their church, and joined in the persecutionbecause they were heretics. They continuedthis persecution until the crown interposed, inSeethe exhortations of the of orthodoxy, were called Grindsto Monmouth at his delivers and Trimmers, and theircaution. parish churches were declared tof It was also called the Laden be little better than conventicles,church. See Mr. Samuel John See a tract of the time, with theson's notes on the pastoral letter, title, " Parish Churches turnedThose church of England men who into Conventicles."did not come up to their standardTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 345accordance with their creed they then desisted : to chap.attack a client of the monarch would have beenan active resistance, which their religion disallowed,but they proceeded with redoubled vigour against theProtestant nonconformists, to whom no such protectionwas extended. During the whole of thisreign, therefore, the two factions acted consistentlywith the principles which they acknowledged as theirrule of conduct.On the day that Russell suffered death, as thoughfreedom had died with him, the University of Oxfordpublished a formal renunciation of the liberties ofEngland. On that day was passed, in convocation,a decree which is a negative assertion of the principlesof the party, who have always considered thatUniversity as their great stronghold. All notice ofthis document was omitted, when speaking of theperiod of its publication, since it more naturallycomes under consideration in a review of the principlesand constitution of the two parties.This enunciation of Toryism well deserves insertionat length, in a history of our national parties.It is called,346 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.XLA.D. 1685.The Judgment and Decree of the University ofOxford passed in their Convocation, July 21,1683, against certain pernicious hooks anddamnable doctrines destructive to the sacredpersons of princes, their state and governmentand of all human society.** Although the barbarous assassination, latelyenterprise against the person of his sacred majestyand his royal brother, engage all our thoughts toreflect with the utmost detestation and abhorrence onthat execrable villany, hateful to God and man ; andpay our due acknowledgments to the Divine Providence,which, by extraordinary methods, broughtit to pass that the breath of our nostrils, the anointedof the Lord, is not taken in the pit which was preparedfor him, and that under his shadow we continueto live, and enjoy the blessings of his government.;yet, notwithstanding, we find it to be anecessary duty at this time to search into, and layopen, those impious doctrines, which, having of latebeen studiously disseminated, gave rise and growthto these nefarious attempts ; and pass upon themour solemn public censure and decree of condemnation.*' Therefore, to the honour of the holy and undividedTrinity, the preservation of Catholic truth inthe church, and that the king's majesty may beA.D. 1685.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 347secured both from the attempts of open bloody chap.enemies and machinations of treacherous heretics '-and schismatics we, the vice-chancellor, doctors,proctors, and masters, regent and non-regent, metin convocation, in the accustomed manner, time, andplace, on Saturday, July 21, 1683, concerning certainpropositions contained in divers books andwritings, published in the English and also in theLatin tongue, repugnant to the Holy Scriptures,decrees in councils, writings of the fathers, the faithand profession of the primitive church ; and alsodestructive of the kingly government, the safety ofhis majesty's person, the public peace, the laws of■^flture and bonds of human society, by our unanimousassent and consent have decreed and determinedin manner and form following :The First Proposition. All civil authority isderived originally from the people.*' The Second. There is a mutual contract, tacitor express, between a prince and his subjects ; andthat if he perform not his duty they are dischargedfrom theirs.** The Third. That if lawful governors becometyrants, or govern otherwise than by the laws of Godand man they ought to do, they forfeit the right theyhad unto their government. (Lex Rex. Buchanan,de Jure Regni. Vindicate contra Tyrannous. Bella.A.D. 1685.348 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, de Concilium, de Pontificate. Milton. Goodwin. Bart.XTH. C.*)*' The Fourth. The sovereignty of England isin the three estates, viz. king, lords, and commons.The king has but a co-ordinate power, and may beoverruled by the other two. (Lex Rex. Hunton,of a limited and mixed monarchy. Baxter's H. C.Polit. Catechise.)*' The Fifth. Birthright and proximity of blood,give no title to rule or government ; and it is lawfulto preclude the next heir from his right and successionto the crown. (Lex Rex. Hunt's Postscript.Dolman's History of Succession. Julianthe Apostate. t Mene Tekel.)The Sixth. It is lawful for subjects, withoutthe consent and against the command of the suprememagistrate, to enter into leagues, covenants, andassociations, for defence of themselves and theirRichard Baxter's True His than resist by force not only thetory of Councils. king, but all who are put inf Julian the Apostate was a authority under him. This worktract, written by Mr. Samuel probably contains the sentimentsJohnson, chaplain to Lord Russell, of Lord William Russell upondefending resistance in extreme that important subject. See ancases, against the propositions ad account of it in the Appendix todanced by Dr. Hicks in some Lord John Russell's Life of Lordsermons, that the professors of William Russell.Christianity ought to die ratherA.D. 1G85.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 349religion. (Solemn League and Covenant. Late ^^f^'Association.)The Seventh. Self-preservation is the fundamentallaw of nature, and supersedes the obligationof all others, whensoever they stand in competitionwith it. (Hobbs, de Civ. Leviathan.)The Eighth. The doctrine of the gospel, concerningpatient suffering of injuries, is not inconsistentwith violent resisting of the higher powersin case of persecution for religion. (Lex Rex.Julian the Apostate. Apology. Relate.)The Ninth. There lies no obligation uponChristians to passive obedience, when the princecommands any thing against the laws of our country ;and the primitive Christians chose rather to die thanresist, because Christianity was not settled by thelaws of the empire. (Julian the Apostate.)** The Tenth. Possession and strength give aright to govern, and success in a cause or enterpriseproclaims it to be lawful and just : to pursue it is tocomply with the will of God, because it is to followthe conduct of his providence. (Hobbs. Owen'sSermon before the Regicides. Jan. 31, 1648. Baxter.Jenkins Petition. October 1651.)** The Eleventh. In the state of nature there isno difference between good and evil, right andwrong ; the state of nature is a state of war, inwhich every man hath a right to all things.A.D. 1685.350 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. i< The Twelfth. The foundation of civil authority,- is this natural right ; which is not given, but left tothe supreme magistrate, upon men's entering intosocieties, and not only a foreign invader, but adomestic rebel, puts himself again into a state ofnature, to be proceeded against not as a subject butan enemy ; and consequently acquires by his rebellionthe same right over the life of his prince, as theprince for the most heinous crimes has over the lifeof his own subjects.The Thirteenth. Every man after his enteringinto a society retains a right of defending himselfagainst force ; and cannot transfer that right to thecommonwealth, when he consents to that unionwhereby a commonwealth is made. And in case agreat many men together have already resisted thecommonwealth, for which every one of them expecteddeath, they have liberty then to join togetherto assist and defend one another : their bearing ofarms, subsequent to the first breach of their duty,though it be to maintain what they have done, is nonew unjust act ; and if it be only to defend theirpersons it is not unjust at all.*' The Fourteenth. An oath superadds no obligationto part, and a part obliges no further than itis credited : and consequently if a prince gives anyindication that he does not believe the promises offealty and allegiance made by any of his subjects,A.D. 1685.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 351they are thereby freed from their subjection, and chap.XInotwithstanding their parts and oaths, may lawfully .rebel against, and destroy their sovereign. (Hobbs,de Civ. Leviathan.)The Fifteenth. If a people that by oath andduty are obliged to a sovereign, shall sinftdly dispossesshim, and, contrary to the covenants, choose andcovenant with another, they may be obliged by theirlatter covenants, notwithstanding their former. (Baxter'sH. C.)The Sixteenth. All oaths are unlawful, and contraryto the word of God. (Quakers.)The Seventeenth. An oath oblige th not in thesense of the imposers, but the takers. (Sheriffscase.)*' The Eighteenth. Dominion is founded ingrace.*' The Nineteenth. The powers of this world areusurpations upon the prerogative of Jesus Christ ;and it is the duty of God's people to destroy them,in order to the setting Christ upon his throne. (FifthMonarchy-men.)The Twentieth. The presbyterian governmentis the sceptre of Christ's kingdom, to which kings aswell as others are bound to submit ; and the king'ssupremacy in ecclesiastical affairs, asserted by thechurch of England, is injurious to Christ, the soleA.D. 1685.352 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, kintr and head of his church. (Altare DamaskXI.centum. Apology. Relate. Hist. Indulge. CartwrightTravers.)*' The Twenty-first. It is not lawftd for superiorsto impose any thing in the worship of God that is notantecedently necessary-theTwenty-second. The duty of not offendinga weak brother, is inconsistent with all humane authorityof making laws concerning indifferent things.(Protestant Reconciler.)The Twenty third. Wicked kings and tyrantsought to be put to death ; and if the judges andinferior magistrates \^'ill not do their office, the powerof the sword devolves to the people. If the majorpart of the people refuse to exercise this power, thenthe ministers may excommunicate such a king; afterwhich, it is lawful for any of the subjects to killhim, as the people did Thalia, and Jehu Jezebel.(Buchanan, Knox, Goodman, Gibby ; Jesuits.)*' The Twenty-fourth. After the sealing of thescripture canon, the people of God, in all ages, areto expect new revelations for a rule of their actions;and it is lawful for a private man, having an inwardmotion fi-om God, to kill a tyrant. (Quakers, andother Enthusiasts. Goodman.)** The Twenty-fifth. The example of Phineas isto us instead of a command ; for what God hathA.D. 1683.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 35Scommanded or approved in one age, must needs chap.oblige in all. (Goodman, Know, Naphtali.)The Twenty-sixth. King Charles I. was lawfullyput to death, and his murderers were the blessedinstruments of God's fflorv in their generation.(Milton, Goodwin, Owen.)The Twenty-seventh. King Charles I. madewar upon his parliament, and in such a case the kingmay not only be resisted, but he cease to beking. (Baxter.)We decree, judge, and declare, all and every ofthese propositions to be false, seditious, and impious,and most of them to be also heretical and blasphemous,infamous to Christian religion, and destructiveof all government in church and state.We further decree, that the books which containthe aforesaid propositions and impious doctrines, arefitted to deprave good manners, corrupt the minds ofuneasy men, stir up seditious and tumults, overthrowstates and kingdoms, and lead to rebellion, murder ofprinces, and atheism itself; and therefore we interdictall members of the university from the readingof the said books, under the penalties in the statutesexpressed. We also order the before-recited booksto be publicly burnt by the hand of our marshal, inthe court of our schools.Likewise we order, that in perpetual memoryhereof, these our decrees shall be entered into theVOL. I. 2 aA.D. 1685.354 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, registry of our convocation, and that copies of them,being communicated to the several colleges and hallswithin this university, they be there publicly affixedin the libraries, refectories, or other fit places, wherethey may be seen and read of all.Lastly, we command and strictly enjoin all andsingular the readers, tutors, catechists, and others towhom the care and trust of initiating of youth is committed,that they diligently instruct and ground theirscholars in that most necessary doctrine, which, in amanner, is the badge and character of the church ofEngland, of submitting to every ordinance of manfor the Lord's sake, whether it be to the king assupreme, or unto governors, as unto them that aresent by him, for the punishment of evil-doers, andfor the praise of them that do well ; teaching, thatthis submission and obedience is to be clear, absolute,and without any exception of any state or orderof men. Also, that they, according to the apostle'sprecept, exhort that, first of all, supplications, prayers,intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made forall men, for the king and all that are in authority,that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in allgodliness and honesty, for this is good and acceptablein the sight of God our Saviour ; and in especialmanner, that they press and oblige them humbly tooffer their most ardent and daily prayers at the throneof grace, for the preservation of our sovereign lord.A.D. 1685.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 355King Charles, from the attempts of open violence, CHAP.and secret machinations of perfidious traitors, thatthe defender of the faith, being safe under the defenceof the Most High, may continue his reign on earth,till he exchange it for that of a late and happyimmortality."This manifesto was printed, presented to the king,and conspicuously posted upon the gates of all thecolleges and halls of the university. It will benoticed, that in it the Tories artfully mingled theessential articles of British freedom, with extravagancesfound only in the ravings of fifth monarchy-men,and the declamations of desperate republicans.In their eyes the whole appear to have been equallyatheistical, and equally objects of wrath.The Whig principle being one of continual progression,they have never been compelled to renounceit, that of the Tories being stationary, was thereforemore inconvenient ; but although the current ofevents soon tore away their grasp, and bore themfar fi-om their original support, they struggled longagainst its influence, yielded every foot with reluctance,and ever took advantage of any favourableconjuncture to win back a portion of the space betweenthem and their original starting-point.During the last four years of this reign the Torieshad been supported with the whole power of thecrown : the prerogative they vindicated had been2 A 2356 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, uniformly exerted in their own service, and the kinghimself had been but the head of their party.* WeA.D. 1685. ^^^^^ ^^^ ^^^ ^j^^.^ principles were preserved in thenext reign.Burnet's Memorial.THE HISTORY OF PARTY, 357CHAPTER XII.A.D. 1660to 1688.State of political literature during the reigns of Charles II. andJames II.Before quitting this division of our history it chap.will be useful to glance at the state of political Literatureduring the period of the reigns of Charlesand his successor, since this is a subject which hasexercised a powerful influence upon the acts and fortunesof the two parties.It is curious to observe the humble origin of thosemighty vehicles of disputation, through which thecontests of the different parties are now conducted.The parliamentary leader of the present day speaksto an auditory composed of the whole of the nation,the words yet ringing through the walls of St.Stephen's are caught up as they fall, and pass multipliedby a thousand echoes through every hamletA.D. 1660358 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of the kingdom. In the reign of Charles II.,XIIShaftesbury and Halifax, Hampden and Hyde wereto 1688. heard only by the audience which they immediatelyaddressed. Of the contest between the two noblemenupon the Exclusion bill, so celebrated by thosewho heard it, not a word remains ; and of theeloquence of the two commoners an imperfect sketchonly exists, traced by the hurried pencil of a memberof their house. Shaftesbury, indeed, occasionallyput forth pamphlets, containing, what he called, hisspeeches, but, with the exception of that againstCromwell's house of lords, they bear little impress ofthat eloquence which all his contemporaries haveattributed to that orator, and appear rather heads ofarguments, expressed in much bolder terms thanwould, at that time, have been tolerated by eitherhouse of the legislature.In the reigns of Charles and James newspapers hadnot greatly increased in their pretensions, since thetime that Elizabeth had first established the "EnglishMercuric"* to supply her subjects with certain intelli-There are three numbers of (the first in the Museum) wasthis curious paper preserved in the published on the 23d of July,British Museum, (Sloane, MS. 1588, and contains the despatch4106,) in print, and MS. copies which Sir Francis Walsinghamof several others. These numbers, had just received of the defeat ofprobably, made their appearance the Armada. No. 51 appeared onmore frequently as the danger the 26th of the same month. Thisbecame more urgent. No. 50 contains a continuation of theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.hence of the amount of danger to be dreaded fromthe Spanish Armada, then approaching their coasts.This paper died with the event which gave it birth, butthe advantages gained from its publication were notforgotten ; similar occasional publications had beenrenewed from time to time, and during the civil wars,each army commonly carried with it a printer topublish its successes. " The Weekly News Books"were then, of course, eagerly sought for, and the affairsCHAP.XII.admiral's despatches, and also someadvices from Madrid, written, probably,at Whitehall, to keep alivethe enthusiasm of the people.Those who are best acquaintedwith the politiques of this courte,"says the Madrid correspondent,talk of nothing lesse than the puttingthe Q — n's M — y to death ;the entire reduction of the Islandof Great Britain to the King ofPayne's obedience, and the extirpationof such hardened wretchesas shall refuse to return into thepale of the Cluirclie. It is certaine,(though not obliquely divulged,)that several instruments of tortureused in the inquisition areput on board, and that aboveone hundred Jesuits, Dominicans,Mendicant Fryers, with MartinAlaxo, vicar of the holy office, aredispersed about the Fleet, as bestunderstanding the application ofsuch wholesome severities." No.54 was not published until the24th of November". It contains alist of the losses of the Armada,is printed in smaller type, and theforeign correspondence is moreartificially arranged. This papercontains an account of the queen'sprocession to St. Paul's, and is,probably, the concluding number.It must be observed that theEnglish Mercuric" was, althoughmuch better written and printedthan many of its successors, merelya Kfifspaper, and though its fewadvertisements consist chiefly ofanswers to pamphlets, under thename of that well-known fictitioushero, Marprelate, there is no wordof controversy or politics in itsfour quarto pages. Politics andcontroversy were left entirely topamphleteers.3()0 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of every town, in which the war rased, were circum-xii.11 1 1essentially related.to 1688. In Charles II. 's time there were many of thesenews books, under every variety of title, andappearing for the most part either with weekly orirregular intervals. It is said that previous to thedeath of Charles I. there had been published morethan a hundred newspapers with different titles, andfrom that period to the restoration there wereupwards of eighty others.* The great majority,however, of these must be classed rather as pamphletsthan newspapers, since they seldom continuedbeyond a few numbers, and most of them rather ,commentedupon than communicated news.Upon the restoration the number of these periodicalssensibly declined; but, perhaps, those which remainedwere more stable in their duration, and morerespectable in their authorship. For a long time thetitle of " Intelligencer" had been a favourite namefor these sheets of news. In 1663 Roger Estrange,so well known as a party writer of the time, starteda paper, which he called "The Public Intelligencer,published for the satisfaction and informationof the people." The editor of this paper held a veryhigh reputation among the political writers of thetime ; he was, indisputably, at the head of thewriters for the Tory party. What the state of poli-chalmers'sLife of Ruddiman, p. 114. See also Appendix, p. 404,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 361tical literature was in those ranks, we may learn from CHAP.XIIthe character which Mr. Disraeli draws of this '.their champion. *' Sir Roger L'L'Estrange," he says, ' to jess.who appears to have greatly surpassed his rivals,and to have been esteemed as the most perfect modelof political writing merits little praise. The temperof the man was factious and brutal, and the compositionsof the author very indifferent. In his multifariousproductions and meagre translations we discovernothing that indicates one amiable sentiment, to compensatefor a barbarous diction, and a heavy load ofpolitical trash. His attempts at wit are clumsy exertionsthe awkward efforts of a German who labourson a delicate toy. A\Tien he assumes the gravityof the sage he seems more fortunate in extorting alaugh ; burlesquing the most solemn reflections byquaint and uncouth expression"*It was not, however, in the Intelligencer thatL'L'Estrange put forth the strength of his talent forpolitical controversy. So little was his newspaperconsidered as any thing more than a mere chronicle ofevents, that upon the first appearance of the Gazette,he declined at once any competition with a publication,which bore upon its intelligence the stamp ofauthenticity.The first number of the Gazette was, althoughCuriosities of Literature, vol. i., p. 271,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, without date, probably published November 13,XII.1665, while the court and parliament were at Oxford,to 1688. and the plague raged in London. It was a half-sheet,printed on Mondays and Thursdays, and isnot only the only newspaper of that time which hascontinued to the present, but is also the only publicationwhich resembles the newspapers of the timeof its establishment.The fallibility of the Gazette, however, being soondiscovered, several rivals were induced to start, commonlywith little success, until the period of thepopish plot. At that propitious moment, BenjaminHarris started " The Domestic Intelligence," whichhe afterwards called *' The Protestant DomesticIntelligence*' a paper published every Mondayand Thursday. This paper was probably calledinto being by the two or three numbers which hadjust appeared of a paper bearing the same title,but published on Tuesdays and Saturdays by NathanielThompson. Harris and Thompson werethe two great party publishers of that day, andalthough the government, of course, still confided intheir own Gazette, Harris's new paper was theorgan of the Whigs. The opposition between thispaper and the Gazette is chiefly discovered in theiry selection of information, each giving insertion tothe fact or the rumour which was most favourableto the views of the party of which it was the organ.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 36SThis was done without comment ; neither of these chap.XIInewspapers possessed that first object of interest in '- —a modern paper, the leading article. ' [o 1688.I have said these papers contained no controversialarticles upon political matters ; the same silencewas not preserved in matters of trade rivalry. Uponthe appearance of Harris's paper that of Thompsoncontained an advertisement against it, which, asit is a rare and early specimen of newspaper abuse,may be worth insertion.ADVERTISEMENT.There hath lately dropped into the world anabortive birth (some fifteen days before the legitimateissue), by a factious, infamous, perjured antichristian,a senseless lying pamphlet, by the name of the * Cityand Country News* (the second title of both papers).This is the first of his offspring that everbore name, the rest being spurious and illegitimate,like his natural issue, which he either durst not own,or would not bring to the font to receive the marksof Christianity no more than himself. This pamphlet-nipperand press-pirate hath cruised abroad since heput up for himself, to make a prize of other men'scopies, to stuff his own cargo with ill-gotten profit,making his business cheating and usurpation, todefraud all men, and by factious libels to sow seditionamongst the people, and frighten allegiance from theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, subjects' bosoms. Now I have yourselves and allhonest men to be judges, whether of the two be theto 1688. best intelligence ; he having not only stolen from allother intelligences, but likewise from mine, to makeuphis senseless scrawl, as particularly the relation ofMr. Carte the Jesuit, taken in St. James, which heinserted in his for want of matter, three days afterthe same was published by me, in a single half-sheet ;and this is the whole proceeding of this infalliblenewsmonger."To this tirade Harris vouchsafed no reply ; butit is nevertheless not improbable that his was theoriginal paper, since, although the first number ofThompson's paper extant in the noble collection ofearly papers in the British Museum is dated September12, 1679, and is numbered 15, it has all theappearance and ill arrangement of a first number,and was so stated to be by its rival.*Harris then took the title of the " ProtestantDomestic Intelligence," and Thompson that of theBy an advertisement in Harris's 16 or 17 printed upon it, he wouldpaper of September 3 : " This is buy and bring to Benjamin Harris,to give notice," he says, " that the 13 preceding printed by thethere is no other real ' Domestic same person, and he shall be wellIntelligence' published, but what rewarded for his pains." For ais printed by Benjamin Harris ; specimen of Thompson's politicsthe reader being desired that if he and moderation, see the prefacefind any other with the number to his " Loyal Poems."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. OOOTrue Domestic Intelligence." This opposition chap.explains one of the errors of the chronological list of '. —newspapers in the appendix to *' Chalmers's Life of ' to 1688.Ruddiman," where these two papers are mentionedas one, and that one is said to have been printed forBenjamin Harris, by Nathaniel Thompson.These three newspapers, the Gazette and the twoIntelligences, which were the best of their day, consistedof half a sheet of paper of the size of a smallfolio volmne The printers, as appears from Thompson'sadvertisement, were frequently at a loss to fillboth sides of even this modicum. Nearly the halfof the first page is occupied by the title and the date,and the half of the second is frequently taken up bythe advertisements and the printer's address.Periodical political controversy being in a thusinfant state, we must look for the literary contests ofthe two parties into the occasional pamphlets whichare ever issuing from the press. It would be vain toattempt any detailed notice of these ephemeral productions.The number of pamphlets published duringthis reign still extant in the British Museum, hasbeen estimated as 1000;* and even this collection,This number sounds small catalogue : " An exact collectionwhen compared with that of the of all the books and pamphletscelebrated collection, which that printed from the beginning of theinstitution contains, of tracts from year 1641, to the coronation ofthe year 1641 to the coronation King Charles II. ; and near 100of Charles II. It is thus described manuscripts, never yet in print;in the MS. title to the original the whole containing 30,000 booksy366 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, comprehensive as it is, can hardly be supposed to beperfect. Sir Roger L'L'Estrange has already beento 1688. noticed, and his pretensions as a pamphleteer, as wellas a journalist, already canvassed. The most regularseries of periodical pamphlets proceeded from hispen during the years 1684 and 1685. At the commencementof the former year he started a workcalled "The Observatory," published four times a week;but this was not a newspaper. It was a mere seriesof political dialogues between representatives of thetwo parties under the names of " Observatory andTrimmer : " it never contained any article of news,and was generally employed in defending the Toryscheme of government. The last number is takenup with arguments to prove that a " mixed monarchyis nonsense;" and that "a// imperial princes are soabsolute, with respect to their subjects, that theyare unaccountable."L'L'Estrange ingenuously acknowledges his partialityfor abuse, in concluding this series of dialogues.and tracts uniformly bound, con Mr. George Thompson was, assistingof 2000 volumes, dated in appears from a note to this MS.,the most exact manner, and so the collector. There is a verycarefully preserved as to have curious account of the manner inreceived no damage. The cata- which they were collected, andhogue of them makes 12 vols, in the dangers through which theyfolio ; they are so marked and were preserved. They were rememberedthat the least treatise seated to the museum by Georgemay be readily found, and even HI. Such was pamphleteersthe very day on which they became during the commonwealth,public wrote on most of them."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 367Trim. — Come, prithee, let's take up while we chap.XIIare well now ; unless you intend to run dialogue-on7 7 A.D. 1660m secular seculorum. ^^ ig88.Sobs. — Troth, I think *tis well advised, Trimmer,and we'll e'en close with this paper then.Trim. — And when that's done the wits will begirding at ye still ; and you can no more keep yourhand out of an ink-pot —Sobs. — Why faith. Trimmer, let 'em don't, andwelcome : for my fancy lyes more to character thento dialogue ; and whoever will be so kind as to furnishme with spiteful materials, shall have his omniagain with interest, in an essay upon human nature :where I am resolved not to leave so much as one ill-naturedfool without a capon's feather in's cap."L'L'Estrange was a pamphleteer by profession, buthis province was sometimes invaded by men whobrought a finer genius and a more temperate spiritto his cause. Among these we find the acute andversatile Hallifax scattering his light irony amongthe Whig party, and delicately insinuating improbablecharges, which L'L'Estrange would have loudlyproclaimed.*See his seasonable address to the head of 60,000 men ; thatboth houses of parliament in 1681. another Whig peer had solicited,(somers's Tracts, vol. viii., p. 222.) as his price of desertion, the placeHe insinuates that Shaftesbury of master of horse to the duke,had sent to an astrologer to know and that the Duke of Bedford,whether he would not soon be at " whose son in the lower house is368 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Dryden must not be forgotten. His letter to theXIIWhigs would alone place him in a high positionto 1688. ^^Daong the Tory pamphleteers ; but his chief servicesto that party were rendered from his great powers ofpoetical stir. His political dramas, his " Absalomand Achitophel," and his "Medal" — put forth when theWhigs were at the very zenith of their fortune, galledthe triumphant party more than a host of such assailantsas L'Estranffe.Dryden was, as it is well known, a deserter fromthe ranks of the republicans. He had commencedwith heroic stanzas on the late lord protector. Oneof the most witty and whimsical of the anonymousTory tracts is one written against Lord Shaftesbury,and grounded upon an idle story that was told ofhim, that he had expected to be chosen King ofPoland, when the throne of that kingdom was vacantby the death of John Sobieski. The writer pretendsto give an account of the election and coronation ofShaftesbury, and mentions all those who were sup-thegreat tribune of the people, shall grow calm and wise, permitwould have had a dukedom added the king to enjoy his own prestothe garter, to make both sing to natives, and content ourselves withanother tune." The following our just rights and privileges. Itpassage contains the true spirit of will be time enough when theseHallifax's trimming policy. "When are invaded (if religion even thenour passion is over, and we have will allow it J to oppose, or standfully considered the rise, progress, upon our defence."and event of the late rebellion, weTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.posed to be his adherents, as appointed to offices ofstate under the new monarch. Among these Dry .den's name appears, but evidently erroneously, sinceDryden was at that time poet laureat. The Whigswere not without writers fully competent to answerthe prosaic effusions of their opponents, and eventhe satires of Dryden did not pass without reply.Elkanah Settle's name is scarcely known to thepresent age, but his ** Medal Reversed " was receivedat its publication with loud applause, and waspreferred to the original poem, by all who wereenvious of the laureat or annoyed by his rhymes. tCHAP.XII.A.D. 1660to 1688.A modest vindication ofthe Earl of Shaftesbury in a letterto a friend, concerning his beingelected King of Fo\and."—Soniers'sTracts, vol. vii., p. 313. The poetis thus satirized : " Jean Drydenwitzitz. Our poet laureat forwriting panegyrics upon OliverCromwell, and libels against hispresent master, King Charles theSecond of England." Sir W. Scottremarks upon this passage, thatDryden was then supposed to beengaged against the court. Butas this pamphlet, although withoutdate, speaks of Shaftesbury asbeing then in the tower, and alsoof the popish plot, it must havebeen published during his secondVOL. I. 2incarceration in 1681. Drydenwas made laureat in 1668, and his"Absalom and Achitophel" waspublished before Shaftesbury wascommitted to the tower upon thecharge of treason. This accusationis, therefore, probably an ebullitionof private malice.f The later career and ultimatefate of their champion does littlehonour to the party in whose servicehe laboured. Johnson saysof him, in his life of Dryden,Elkanah Settle, who hadanswered 'Absalom,' appeared withequal courage in opposition toThe Medal,' and published ananswer called ' The Medal Reversed,'with so much success, inBTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.XII.The inopportune death of Andrew Marvell,deprived the Whigs of one who would have been the^^'°to\S.most valuable defender of their party, as he had longbeen of the principles which they espoused. HisGrowth of Popery" was long remembered by theopposite party, and the virulence with which it wasattacked discovers the avidity with which it wasread. When we see a pamphlet denounced by thegovernment, answered by a member of the cabinet,Lord Halifax, and exciting such rage at court thatit gave occasion for an absurd story that he hadbeen poisoned in revenge, we may judge of itsboth encounters, that he left thepalm doubtful, and divided thesuffrages of the nation. Such arethe revolutions of fame, or such isthe prevalence of fashion, that theman whose works have not yetbeen thought to deserve the careof collecting them, who died forgottenin an hospital, and whoselatter years were spent in contrivingshows for fairs, and carryingan elegy or epithalamium, ofwhich the beginning and end wereoccasionally varied, but the intermediateparts were always thesame, to every house where therewas a funeral or a wedding, might,with truth, have had inscribedupon his stone.Here lies the rival and antagonistof Dryden.'Settle was, for his rebellion,severely chastised by Dryden,under the name of Does, in thesecond part of Absalom and Achitophel,and was, perhaps for hisfactious audacity, made the citypoet, whose annual office was todescribe the glories of the mayor'sday. Of these bards he was thelast, and seems not much to havedeserved even this degree of regard,if it was paid to his politicalopinions, for he afterwards wrotea panegyric on the virtues of judgeJefFeries, and what more couldhave been done by the meanestzealot for prerogative."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 371efficiency to forward the cause for which it had chap.been written. In this pamphlet, and in his " Sea '■1 1 A ^ 1 T • », ivT n , A.D. 1660enable Argument toCarand Juries, Marvel proved to 1688.that however superior his talent for ridicule, he wasno unskilful master of that coarse abuse and vigorousargument which are found in the best pamphletsof the period.But the political writings of Marvel, popular asthey were, never occasioned the excitement whichthose of Shaftesbury called forth. Shaftesbury'spamphlets usually, but not always, put forth in theform of speeches, or under the title of debates,naturally carried with them an authority extrinsicof their real merit, since they communicated theadvice of the man whom the people for a long timerelied upon as their most trusty leader, and whomthey probably deemed the most honest, because hewas the most violent of their friends in the upperhouse.Shaftesbury had in his employ a little band ofskill pamphleteers, who, by means of Ferguson'ssecret press, and through his agency, kept up theliterary warfare, but the names of these persons arenot known, nor are they perhaps worthy of inquiry.In political controversy the two parties were thereforeduring this reign equally matched. Quaintdrolleries are the chief merit of one class of pamphlets,strong and nervous language the excellence2 B 2372 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of the other ; unsparing exaggerations and scoldingepithets are the common characteristics of both. IfA.D. 1660 1 . 1 1 n p ,to 1688. we admit that the pamphleteers oi the two partieswere equal in their merits, we must also notice thatnone of these were of a very high order : it was notuntil the next century that the dryness of politicalcontroversy was enlivened by the graces of styleand by elegance of diction.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 37^CHAPTER XIII.Accession of James — The Rochester administration — Degrading humiliationto the French ambassador — Arbitrary levies of customs —Approved by the Tories in their addresses — Immediate views of theTories with regard to religion — A Tory parliament — Its submissionIts management by prerogative — Cautious opposition of theWhigs — Argyle — Monmouth — Exemplification of the principles ofthe Tories, afforded by the conduct of the bishops at Monmouth'sexecution.The entire prostration of the Whig party is chap,strongly marked by the manner in which James succeededto the sceptre of his brother. Who that had " ^ jess.witnessed the debates upon the Exclusion bill, andmarked the spirit that pervaded the nation duringthe agitation of that question, could have suggestedthat James would mount the throne unopposed byhis subjects, and even unfettered by limitationsWhen his succession was spoken of as a possible event,it was spoken of as one, which, if it ever occurred,would be ushered in by storm and commotion ; areign to commence with a civil war, and to be continuedby the sword. Yet James ascended thethrone amid acclamations,* and not a whisper ofReresby, p. 188. Barillon, Fox's App. p. xvi. Evelyn. Burnetwas not in England.374 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, opposition was heard to mingle with that cry.Could the shades of Russell, Shaftesbury, or Jones,& 1685. have looked down upon the crowds which assembledthroughout England to applaud the proclamation ofthe new king, the sight might have suggested asigh of despondency for their country, and a bitterreflection that their energy, their patriotism, andtheir sufferings had been vainly expended upon aworthless people : they must have turned to thosewho were not there, and have looked but a spaninto futurity to see the glorious fruits of the seedsthey had themselves sown.James, on his accession to the royal title, made adeclaration to his privy council : he expressed adetermination to rule by the laws, which he said weresufficient to make him as great a monarch as hecould wish, and he promised to defend and maintainthe church, and preserve the established government.By the auditors of this speech it was, of course, rightloyally believed, and it was, at their request, publishedthroughout the nation. The Tories receivedit with unbounded confidence : " We have now theword of a king, and a word never yet broken," wasthe commentary which proceeded from every pulpit.Loyal addresses immediately surrounded the throne.Oxford, true to her declaration, promised obediencewithout limitations or restrictions. The clergy ofLondon, on the other hand, consistently with theprinciples still fostered in the metropolis, covertlyTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 37<5insinuated their distrust and determination, by speak CHAP.XIII.inff of " their religion established by law dearer to^ . . *^ A.D. 1684them than their lives." The Oxford model was that & 1685.which was the more generally followed ; the AVhigswisely refraining from the unnecessary avowal ofprinciples which could only draw upon them increaseddispleasure*James's next act was the choice of a ministry,since all appointments had determined upon thedeath of his predecessor. Halifax, the trimmer, ashewas now generally called, had been, a few daysbefore, the triumphant rival of James's faithful adherent,the Earl of Rochester. Godolphin had takenpart with him, Sunderland had promoted the Exclusion.These three ministers, therefore, thoughtthemselves destined to feel the first effects of thenew sovereign's power. Halifax, in expectation ofthe storm, sought a private interview, and attemptedto excuse his conduct. The king, however, who hadno design to create unnecessary opposition, stoppedhim, declaring that he would remember nothingbut his behaviour upon the Exclusion bill. Theoffences of Sunderland were more serious; but thatveteran of intrigue, who had so often saved himselfin the former reign by the influence of the Duchessof Portsmouth, had not neglected to secure himself apatroness in this.Upon the death of his former duchess the dukehad married, contrary to an address of the commons,376 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the Princess of Modena, a Catholic. In the yearXIII1674 she arrived in England, a girl of sixteen, andA.D. 1684 , . . 1 1 -1 T 1 • • 1 1& ] 685. ner innocent gaiety and childish vivacity had conciliatedeven the most suspecting of the anti-catholiccourtiers. For several years the duchess took nopart in political matters, and was apparently quiteindifferent to the course of public events ; but thewoman could not be expected to content herself withthe harmless pursuits of the girl, and it now appearedthat she possessed a passion for power, and an aptitudefor intrigue, which, whether discovered andcalled into action by her priests, or naturally appearingwith the opportunity for development, promisedthe most important results. Sunderland, therefore,whose profuse expenditure in private life rendered itnecessary for him to secure the emoluments of office,and whose theoretical preference of a free governmentnever precluded him from receiving the bribesof France, and courting the favour of an absoluteking — Sunderland, had contrived to shelter himselfunder the favour of the new queen, who took himunder her protection, because, depending upon heralone for support, he must necessarily devote himselfto her interests ; and she was anxious to promote hisadvancement because she wished to give a rival toRochester, who being the uncle of the king's daughterby his former marriage, would, upon every occasion,naturally espouse their interests.Godolphin had shared Sunderland's offence, butTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 377he was included in the general amnesty, probably chap.XIIIfrom the same influence.* !But although none of the former ministers were ' & less.expelled the cabinet, there were several changes madeas to their offices. When James's ministry wascompleted, it stood thus : The Earl of Rochesterwas lord high treasurer, Sunderland continued secretaryHalifax obtained the promotion which he hadlately ridiculed, when it was thrust upon Rochester ;he became president of the council, and the Earl ofClarendon, brother to the premier, succeeded to thevacant office of privy seal. Lord Godolphin wasmade grand chamberlain to the queen. Such was theRochester administration.During the few days which were necessary tocomplete these ministerial arrangements, the newking had found time to place himself under the protectionof Louis. Upon his accession he was igno-Sir James Macintosh appears men paroit fort content, et m'ato think that he was retained only dit qu'il lui trouve pais de fer-fromhis habits of business ; and I mete et de hardness qu'il e'enam inclined to his opinion, although attendant." This was in Marchit ill accords with the account 1685 ; but on the 30th of Aprilof Burnet, that he could not en the same minister had discovereddure the drudgery of the secretary's his mistake, and writes, " Milordoffice. For some time Godolphin Godolphin quoique soit du secret,gave satisfaction to the king. Ba n'a pas grand credit et songe seule-dillonsays of him, " II est admis ment a se conserver par une containsles deliberations les plus quite sage et moderne " — 16 Avrilsecretes. Le Roi angleterre 1685. Fox's App., p. Ix,378 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, rant of the position in which he stood ; and while heXIIIheld in public, and to his subjects, the haughty lane1685. gage of a Stuart, he was in momentary terror ofsome outburst of rebellion. The day after the deathof his brother, James sent for Barillon, and sued tohim in the most abject terms for new marks of hismaster's friendship, or in other words for an immediateadvance of money.* The application was not invain. The policy of Louis with respect to England,is throughout these two reigns admirable. Charleshad ceased to be an object of fear. When he had irretrievablylost the confidence of his people Louis hadtherefore ceased to waste his treasure upon him. Butexamples were not wanting of unpopular subjects,who had made popular and powerful monarchs. In thestate of national feeling which Louis was informedthen existed he thought it was not impossible thatJames might obtain a parliament who would makegreat advances to obtain the confidence of their newking, and he vainly feared that James, in his turn,might concede some points in order to secure theirsupport. He hastened, therefore, to assure him ofhis friendship, and to anticipate his wants. BeforeBarillon could communicate to his court the requestwhich James had made, a remittance of 500,000 livreshad arrived in London for his use. Barillon's accountof the manner in which this trifling sum was received,Barillon's Despatch, Fox's Appendix, p. xxi.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 379would be ludicrous, could we forget that we are read chap.• • X ITTmg of the abasement of a king of England, and the 1humiliation which was in his person suffered by our ' & lesscountry. James received the money with tears of joy.He said he was more affected by the kindness of thedonor than he could be by any event which mighthappen to him during his life. His brother had, hesaid, foreseen his wants and anticipated his requests ;he professed himself unable to render thanks adequateto the obligation, but declared that the whole courseof his fixture life should declare his gratitude.*The ministers could not but imitate the servilityof their master. Rochester, Sunderland, and Godolphin,came one after the other to the ambassador ofthe gold-dispensing king, and, bowing down in gratitude,declared, in the true eastern style of acknowledgment,that he had given life to the king theirmaster. Barillon might well remark to his court,that although he expected much fi-om the subsidy.James could speak on no en Angleterre et en Ecosse ; maisother theme ; he pursued the le roy votre maitre m'a secouruFrench ambassador with his im dans un tens qu'il ne pouvoirfortunate thanks, declaring that savoir s'il y adroit une sedition ahe had now nothing to fear, since Londres, et si je e'en serous pashe was assured of the friendship chasse." James forgot to reflectof his brother of France, " Je ne upon the possibility of so acute anregarde pas," he said at one time, agent as Barillon having, in suchD'etat ou je suis, mais D'etat ou je a case, stopped the supply,pouvoir etre. Tout est paisible380 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, he had never anticipated such marks of gratitude asthese.& 1685. There was a sequel to these tears of gratitude andunited protestations. Lord Rochester was sentto petition that the yearly pension granted to Charlesmight be continued to James, and Barillon, in histurn, suggested that the Spanish treaty, whichCharles had, in his lifetime, so properly disregarded,might be held abrogated by his death. The threeEnglish ministers agreed without an objection, anddeclared that their master considered himself freefrom any, even the lightest, engagement with Spain.*James was thus, by a dishonourable evasion whichno man of private honesty would have had recourseto, free to act in the fullest manner under the ordersof his employer at Versailles. Clifford is reportedto have said of Charles, that it was better to reignthe viceroy of a powerful and liberal monarch thanto be subject to the control of many masters athome. The present ministers of James evidentlyconcurred in this opinion.Lord Churchill t — Who does not start to see sucha name connected with such an employment ! — wasnow sent over to Versailles to acknowledge theBarillon, ubi supra. had chosen. " Comme un hommef Barillon now speaks of qui est deja dans le secret d'uneChurchill as a person wlioin James intime liaison avec votre majestie."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 381receipt of the subsidy, and to ask for more. He was chap.XIII.to make no terms, to specify no demands, all wasto be trusted to the bounty of the French king. ' ^ iqss.Speaking of the share which Godolphin had in thismission, Mr. Fox eloquently exclaims, " With whatself-humiliation must he not have reflected upon thesetransactions in subsequent periods of his life ! Howlittle could Barillon guess that he was negotiatingwith one who was destined to be at the head of anadministration, which, in a few years, would sendthe same Lord Churchill, not to Paris to imploreLouis for succours towards enslaving England, or tothank him for pensions to her monarch, but to combineall Europe against him in the cause of liberty ;to rout his armies, to take his towns, to humble hispride, and to shake to the foundation that fabricof power which it had been the business of a longlife to raise at the expense of every sentiment oftenderness to his subjects, and of justice and goodfaith to foreign nations ! It is with difficulty thereader can persuade himself that the 'Godolphin andChurchill here mentioned are the same persons whowere afterwards one in the cabinet, one in the field,the great conductors of the war of the succession.How little do they appear in one instance, how greatin the other! And the investigation of the cause towhich this excessive difference is principally owing382 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, will produce a most useful lesson. Is the differenceXIIIto be attributed to any superiority of genius in the& 1685. prince whom they served in the latter period of theirlives ? Queen Anne's capacity appears to have beeninferior even to her father's. Did they enjoy in agreater degree her favour and confidence ? Thevery reverse is the fact. But, in one case, they werethe tools of a king, plotting against his people ; inthe other, the ministers of a free government, actingupon enlarged principles, and with energies whichno state that is not, in some degree, republican cansupply. How forcibly must the contemplation ofthese men, in such opposite situations, teach personsengaged in political life, that a fi:-ee and populargovernment is desirable not only for the public good,but for their own greatness and consideration forevery object of generous ambition"*The first public act of this government was inaccordance with the policy they had pursued underCharles, but it was an extension of that policy farbeyond the bounds which that king had observed.If we notice attentively the occurrences of the latereign we shall find innumerable acts of glaringtyranny, but they were, with a few exceptions,isolated acts, felt only by individuals or particularbodies. Charles's injustice always wore the cloak ofHistorical Fragment, p. 88.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 383law, and he seldom risked and hastily receded from chap.XIIIthose open assertions of absolute prerogative which —^ —had proved so fatal to his father. With one of ' & loss.these, however, James commenced his reign, and hisTory ministry readily supported him.* The lateking's revenue ceased with his life. James orderedit to be collected by virtue of his proclamation.This assumption of tyrannical power was thinly disguisedby the contemptible pretence that a farm ofthese dues had been made during the late king'slifetime. A forged and antedated instrument to thiseffect was accordingly produced before the judges,and these puppets of the court of course pronouncedit legal. The taxes thus levied were to be paid bythe merchants, and some of these for a moment contemplatedresistance No court of star-chamber wasnow in existence, but Jefferies presided upon thebench ; every man knew that to oppose the illegalexaction before such a judge was to rush uponinevitable ruin, and no Hampden was found amongthis class of men to brave the power of a tyrant inhis country's cause. Many of them, on the contrary,were even so base as to send up addresses declaringI call this a Tory ministry, by his colleague or his master,for Halifax, the only one whose he was uniformly alone in hisideas were at all questionable, was opposition.quite powerless ; and, whenever f Burnet,he opposed the measures proposed384 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the willingness with which they continued the payments,and thanking the king for the steps he had& 1685. taken. They were little interested in withstandingthe payment of sums which were reimbursed to themwith interest by the people.*Halifax and Guildford had proposed a middleexpedient, t which the king rejected without hesitation.Rochester attempted to shift the responsibilityto the shoulders of his colleagues, and havingprocured the proclamation to be issued before heassumed the title of Lord Treasurer, he fixed themeasure upon Godolphin and his co-commissioners,remarking he had only persevered in the coursewhich he found commenced when he entered uponhis office, t The rest of the ministry appear to havequietly concurred, without seeking for evasions orattempting opposition.These were the events of the first week of James'sreign. They were immediately followed by an openand an ostentatious display of his profession of theRoman Catholic religion. Even the Tories were alittle shocked at seeing him proceed as it were intriumph to witness the celebration of mass, and theyThese addresses were not kept by those who had beenconfined to merchants. The Mid engaged in the rebellion againstdie Temple declared that the his royal father,king's right to levy these duties f Barillon. Fox's Applaudnever been questioned, ex X Burnet.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 385looked with an evil eye upon the crowd of priests CHAP.XIIIand Jesuits who were busy behind the throne ; buttheir displeasure was occasioned not by the contempt ' &. iqs5,of the laws, which the king's presence at an illegalmeeting evinced, but by the disrespect it offered totheir church, and the danger it threatened to theirascendancy : they recalled, however, his recent promise,and they confided, and they remembered theobligations of their own creed, and were silent.With all the rashness and obstinacy which hasbeen so justly attributed to James, it is not probablethat he at this time meditated any immediate crusadeagainst the church of England. Pope Innocent XI.,who then filled the papal chair, was a man of toomuch penetration not to see that such an attemptmust end in certain failure, and in a new proscriptionof the members of his church ; he thereforestrongly dissuaded James from any rash attempt, andthus probably imposed upon him the only restraintwhich the regal bigot would brook. Ronquillo, theSpanish ambassador, conveyed similar advice. Ignorantof the compact with Louis, this minister thoughtit the interest of Spain that England should be intranquillity at home. When he therefore urged theking not to assent with too great facility to thecounsels of his priests, James asked whether it wasnot the custom in Spain for the king to consult withhis confessor ? " Yes," replied the ambassador, " andVOL. I. 2c'THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, it is for that very reason our affairs succeed so ill"*XIIIIt was probably in accordance with advice to this& 1685. effect already received, that James, in his conferenceswith the French ambassador, speaking of his Catholicsubjects, expressed only his determination — "Lesetablir dans une entire liberty de conscience etexercise de la religion. "tSince the ministers probably knew of the advicewhich was thus given, and thought that their masterwould follow it, there is no reason to accuse them ofa concurrence in any design for the establishment ofpopery as the national religion. If we consider themas ready only to support the measure of a full andfair toleration of the rival religion, and to resist itsfurther progress, we may question their motives inundertaking such a work, and we may doubt theirprudence in supposing that, under the extraordinarycircumstances of that time, they could stop at anyparticular point, but we cannot disapprove theirobject. A popish king, supported by a numerousand powerful body of popish subjects, possessed of aprerogative almost unlimited, supplied with gold fromabroad, little dependant upon his parliament, andunencumbered by those enormous pecuniary wantswhich have since rendered the intermission of a sessionof parliament equivalent to a proclamation ofHume. f Barillor). Fox's App.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 387anarchy, possessed a power which, exerted to the chap.establishment of popery, might indeed give gravecause of apprehension ; but the result proved that, ' & i685.even under all these threatening circumstances, thedanger was rather imaginary than real — that the momentthe bounds of toleration were passed, and anascendancy was claimed, the nation would break inscorn the cobweb fetters which the sophistries of theTory doctors had woven around them — would rise inone body against the abusers of their generous confidenceand, asserting those rights which are notonly claimed by the principles of the Whigs, butare declared by the laws of nature, would reducethe conspirators, whether sovereign or subjects totheir former servitude.There appears, however, little reason to ascribe tothe Tories of Rochester's administration any viewsso enlarged and liberal as a free toleration in mattersof religion : their conduct rather proves that theywere inclined to follow their master as far as theycould, with any degree of safety to themselves ortheir party, and that they left the future to fortune.When James claimed a toleration for the RomanCatholics they were ready to agree ; for the Catholicswere at present their political allies, bidding high forthe favour of the prince, and professing to advocatethe cause of prerogative. Had the ministry and itsmaster generalized their measure, and extended it2 c 2388 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, really as they did verbally to all classes of noncon-XIII. J J Jforests, we might have admired them as statesmen& J 685, and philanthropists ; but when we find that the Protestantdissenters were sedulously excluded fi:'om allthe real benefits of the proposed toleration, the conclusionis inevitable, that the Tories were anxiousonly to secure an accession of power to their party,without regard to the danger which they might drawupon the nation (and according to their party's tenetsthat danger would be irresistible) ; and that James,by nature a persecutor and a bigot, for a time and apurpose, awkwardly assumed the garb of toleranceand moderation.It was now necessary that a parliament should becalled to settle the revenue ; for even James preferredthat, if possible, his revenue should be a legal one.The progress of the elections showed the importanceof the usurpations which had been made by Charles,and how near he had arrived to that worst species ofdespotism, which, disguised under the semblance ofpopular forms, inflicts upon the subject all the insecurityof a slave, without any security for the moderation,which, in a naked despotism, the monarchcommonly observes in his exactions. Charles had byhis attack upon the corporations changed his principleof government from corruption to prerogative ; andso successful had he been, that he had paved theway to becoming an absolute monarch with the revenueof a constitutional king.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.SS9A.D. 1685.It is probable that Charles was not aware of the CHAP,XIII.extent of the power he had obtained, nor of thefacilities which he had enjoyed for nominating a houseof commons.* James was now to prove it. Themanner in which these elections were conducted isthus described by Burnet :All arts were used to manage elections, so thatthe king should have a parliament to his mind.Complaints came up from all parts of England ofthe injustice and violence used in elections, beyondwhat had ever been practised in former times ; andthis was so universal over the whole nation, that nocorner of it was neglected. In the new chartersthat had been granted, the election of the memberswas taken out of the hands of the inhabitants, andrestrained to the corporation men, all those beingleft out who were not acceptable at court. In someboroughs they could not find a number of men tobe depended on, so the neighbouring gentlemen weremade the corporation men, and, in some of these,persons of other counties, not so much as known inthe borough, were named : this was practised in themost avowed manner in Cornwall by the Earl of Bath,who, to secure himself the groom of the stole's place,which he held all King Charles's time, put theHalifax, when pressing him time for such a parliament wasto call a parliament, did not venturing the excitement of the returnto promise him that it would house plot, and that was then goneprove very ductile. He said the by. — Reresby.A.D, 1685.390 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, officers of the guards' names in almost all the chartersXT IIof that county, which sending up forty-four members,they were, for the most part, so chosen, that theking was sure of their votes on all occasions. Thesenumbers were so successful over England, that whenthe elections were all returned, the king said therewere not above forty members but such as he himselfwished for : they were neither men of parts norestates, so there was no hope left, either of workingon their understandings, or of making them see theirinterests in not giving the king all at once ; mostof them were furious and violent, and seemed resolvedto recommend themselves to the king, byputting every thing in his power, and by ruining allthose who had been for the exclusion."The king opened this parliament (May 19) bya speech which might carry the recollections of someof his auditors back to the days of Charles I.Having repeated the declaration he had previouslymade to his privy council, he spoke of his revenue,and insisted that it should be settled upon him forlife. " There is one popular argument," he said,which I foresee may be used against what I askof you, from the inclination men have for frequentparliaments, which some may think would be thebest secured, by feeding me, from time to time, bysuch proportions as they shall think convenient ;and this argument, it being the first time I speak toyou from the throne, I will answer once for all.A.D. 1685.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 391that this would be a very improper method to take chap.XIIIwith me ; and that the best way to engage me tomeet you often is always to use me well.I expect, therefore, that you will comply withme in what I have desired, and that you will do itspeedily ; that it may be a short session, and thatwe may meet again to all our satisfactions."In any assembly, possessed of a spark of spirit,this plain intimation that he possessed a prerogativewhich would enable him to govern without theiraid, and that unless they were prepared to registerhis edicts he would exert it, would have producedloud opposition, and, perhaps, a vote of defiance.In this parliament of Tories, however, his demandwas unanimously complied with, the slender minorityof forty AVliigs, if, indeed, we may reckon asWhigs all those whom James disapproved, were sooverborne, that the only semblance of opposition wasa complaint of the practices during the elections,and that was made by a Tory. The house listenedto the speaker with so much apathy that the ministersdid not think him worthy of an answer.*This unanimity was produced by party spirit inthe great majority, by despondence and terror inthe minority ; there was no corruption used by thecourt previously to the meeting of parliament. Louishad placed in the hands of his ambassador 400,000Burnet, Baiilloii, Fox.A.D. 1685.392 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, livres, to be expended in gratuities to such membersXIIIof parliament as James and his ministers shouldconsider fit objects of his bounty. Barillon writes, inanswer to this communication, *' I did not explain,with sufficient clearness, the state of affairs in thiscountry, when I conveyed to your majesty theimpression that the sums I required would be employedin gratifications to members of parliament.The present king will compass his designs, whetherwith regard to his revenue, or the free exercise ofthe Catholic religion, by no such means ; and nothingis more opposed to the plan of operations he proposes.He is determined to be firm and resolute ; he remembersthe event of the Earl of Danby's plan ofbuying the votes of members, and thinks, with reason,that those who pursue the same scheme willmeet with the same inconveniencies. The King ofEngland wishes rather to take advantage of thenecessity which his parliament will be under togrant that which, whether they grant or not, he isdetermined to take, that is to say, the revenuesenjoyed by the deceased king ; and these, accordingto all appearances, the parliament will give him." *In his opening speech James had also mentioned,with a bitterness unbecoming a powerful monarch,the insurrection of Argyle in Scotland, which hadbeen commenced so rashly, was prosecuted so ill-advisedly,and ended so fatally. The commonsBarillon's Despatch. Fox's App., p. Lxviii.A.D. 1685.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 393resolved unanimously, in the usual form, that chap.XIIIthey would stand by him with their lives andfortunes.They were equally unanimous in their declaration,that they rested wholly satisfied with the king'spromise to support and defend the church of Englandas by law established, but they showed thatthey were only Tories by adding that that churchwas dearer to them than their lives.A resolution had been moved that the addressshould contain a prayer that the penal laws might beput in force against all nonconformists whatever.The king and queen were, however, both indignant,and ordered their party in the commons to reject it.Soon afterwards (June 13) the king communicatedto them the landing of the Duke of Monmouth, andthey, having returned the usual answer, voted asupply of £400,000, passed a bill of attainder againstMonmouth,* and another for preservation of hismajesty's person and government, and on the 2dof July were adjourned by command of the king.The court party seem to have expected someslight opposition in the lords, and Barillon thoughtThis bill rendered the written the proposing in parliament anyor verbal declaration of a treason alteration in the succession of theable intention an overt act of crown. This parliament of Jamestreason, and created two new and II. appeared anxious to rival thatvery remarkable treasons ; the one of Henry VIII. The bill, how-wasthe assertion of the legitimacy ever, did not pass, it was stoppedof Monmouth's birth, the other in the lords by the adjournment.394- THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, he could discover that cabals were early forming inXIII.that assembly : but their fears were vain, the only"^ ' point in which the views of the court were crossedin either house, was that of the reversal of the Earlof Stafford's attainder, and even this bill passed thelords. This reversal could only have been effectedby discrediting the testimony of witnesses for thepopish plot, which the Tories had themselves afterwardsused against College and Shaftesbury. AsTories, therefore, the majority would be unwillingto admit that the London grand jury had been rightin acquitting Shaftesbury, and that the long sustainedoutcry against the reign of " Ignoramus" wasonly clamour at the disappointment of a scheme ofmurder by subornation. But it does not appear thatthey had yet altered their opinions upon the subjectof the popish plot, or that those who had voted LordStafford guilty now believed him innocent. It hasbeen remarked by Mr. Fox as a singular circumstance,that among all the adulatory addresses whichwelcomed James to the throne, there is not to befound, in any one of them, any declaration of disbeliefin the popish plot, or any charge upon the lateparliament for having prosecuted it, though it couldnot but be well known that such topics would of allothers be most agreeable to the court.It was nothing therefore but the influence of thecrown which bore this bill through the lords againstgreat opposition. The Tories, in the commons,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 395threw it out : for, as they hated the rehffion of the CHAP.XIIICatholics and the politics of the Whigs, the majority ^of them believed both in the popish plot and in ' 'Shaftesbury's guilt. They, therefore, had no causeof accusation against Tuberville and his accomplices,although they rejoiced in the recent sufferings ofOates because be had refused to ive evidenceagainst College, and because he had even appearedto discredit his former companions who were thenbecome the allies of the Tories.During the whole of this short session the Whig-sdid not venture one act of open opposition, nor dowe find any division upon which their numberswould appear ; but they had recourse to the ordinarytactics of a defeated party, and attempted to effect bypolicy what they could not hope to do by force.It is probable that the resolution which was unanimouslytaken in committee to address for the persecutionof all nonconformists,* and which was asLa malice de cette resolve admissible. II leur declare quetion fut aussitot reconnu du roy si Ton persistent a lui faire unangleterre et de ses ministres : pareille adresse il repondroit a lales principaux de la chambre chambre basse en termes si dccisifsbasse furent manes et ceux que et si fermes qu'on ne retourneroitsa Majeste Britannique croit etre pas a lui faire un pareille adresse.dans ses interests . il fit une repri- Lamaniere contra Majeste Britonssevere de s'etre lasses nique s'expliqua produisit sonsecure et entrainer a une reso- effet hier matin, et la chambrelution si dangereuse et si peu basse rosetta tout d'une voix ceTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.chap. unanimously retracted upon the bringing up of thereport, was the offspring of \Vliig stratagem. Barillon,from whom we have the most detailed account of theprincipal proceedings of this parliament, seems tohave been of this opinion, and it was evident to thecourt that it was an attempt to show the Tories howirreconcilable their views and interests were withthose of the king. The Whigs secretly expressedtheir exultation that they had drawn the commonsinto a declaration of their sentiments upon the subjectof religion,! exultation which was not dampedby the haughty manner in which they had beencompelled to retract their vote, for an act of tyrannyso undisguised must, they thought, in the event,become favourable to their views.Another act of the Whigs was yet more insidious.With a view to embarrass the ministry they hadconceived the design of introducing in the commonsa bill for disabling all who had voted in favour of theExclusion bill from holding office under the presentqui avoit ete resolve en comte n'empeche pas que le sentimentlejourauparavant. Onfaitgrande anime n'ait ete de donner unreflexion ici sur cette marque coup aux catholiques et de fairede deference et de soumission meme componere au roy danglela chambre basse a donne ; terre combien il trouveroit demais ceux qui savent les motifs difficulty a rien obtenir du partedla premiere deliberation voient ment en leur faveur. Fox's Ap-bienque la seconde est force et pencil, p. xcvi.que ce qui se fait par authority f Fox's App., uii supra.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 397king. This was directed against Sunderland and chap.XIIIGodolphin, whom the Whigs regarded with particularanimosity, as betrayers of the principlesthey had once held. Barillon had obtained earlyintelligence of this attempt, and had communicatedit to the king, who gave the necessary orders for itsfrustration. It accordingly, when made, met withno support.The insurrections of Argyle and Monmouth, whichnow occurred, are events only collaterally connectedwith the history of the two parties. Argyle sentimentshad been those of an English Tory, until,like many others, he had been converted by thetyranny of which he was himself the subject. Monmouthinvaded England in order to usurp a throneto which he had no legal title, and he was supportedby large bodies of the people. But neither of thesedesigns were countenanced by the Whigs. Duringthe time that Monmouth had acted with the leadersof the Whig party, there is no reason to supposethat, with the exception of Shaftesbury, any one ofhis coadjutors had held out to him any prospect ofthe succession. Russell or Essex certainly neverdid. Sidney was sanguine in his expectations ofconverting the duke to republicanism, and Hampdenafterwards declared that the consultations of thosedays were the commencement of the revolution of1688.A.D. 1685.398 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Had Shaftesbury survived until this time he would■ .doubtless have joined in this invasion, and his talentsand experience might possibly have given it success.As it was, the only nobleman who appeared by theside of the duke was Lord Grey, whose condition,as an outlaw, had rendered him desperate, andwhose character and cowardice rendered his presencea disgrace to any cause.The Duke of Monmouth's execution was accompaniedby a remarkable display of Tory feeling inthe bishops who attended him. Their conduct, uponthis occasion, has been censured as indelicate andunfeeling. The propriety of this charge must dependupon a suspicion of insincerity in the bishops ; for,if they believed, as they professed to believe, thatsalvation was only to be obtained through the creedof their church, it was their duty to dwell, at thelast moment, upon every essential article of thatcreed.Bishops Keen and Turner, Dr. Venison and Dr.Hooper were the four clergymen appointed to attendMonmouth at his death. The duke had acknowledgedhis illegitimacy, and had expressed his penitencefor the crime he had committed, but he hadnot acknowledged the doctrine of non-resistance. Itwas upon this subject that the clergymen now particularlypressed him. In answer to their solicitationsupon the scaffold, he answered, " I shall sayA.D. 1G85.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 399but very little; I come to die; I die a Protestant chap.of the church of England." — *' My lord," rejoinedhis clerical attendants, " if you be of the churchof England, you must acknowledge the doctrine ofnon-resistance to be true." It was in vain that theduke asserted that he acknowledged the doctrinesof the church of England in general, it was pertinaciouslydemanded that he should acknowledgethat doctrine particularly with respect to his owncase, and to this point they endeavoured to fixhim during all the time he was upon the scaffold.Monmouth, unhappy in his marriage, had beenliving, for some time, with Lady Henrietta Wentworth,whom he tenderly loved ; he could not bebrought to believe this intercourse sinful : but thiswas considered a secondary point ; the assistants,as the clergymen are termed in the printed accountof the execution, drew him from this point, toreiterate that there was nothing about resistancein his last paper. And again, they declared thatthey desired only a few words, " we desire only ananswer to this point" In spite of the entreaties ofthe dying man this was insisted upon; without it,they declared, they could not pray with that cheerfulnessand encouragement that they should. Thedreadful preparations for death were now commenced,yet, even then, while the victim bared his neck forthe axe, the anxious ecclesiastics returned to theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.XIII.A.D. 1685.charge. " My lord, ten words will be enough," wasthe last eager exhortation. Monmouth did notanswer, but turned to the executioner, and havingspoken a few words to him, laid his head upon theblock. The work of prolonged butchery then commenced;*and while the groans of the multitudesThe most circumstantial accountof this horrible execution iscontained in the Appendix (No.8) to Mr. Rose's observations onMr. Fox's historical work, printedfrom a MS. in the possession ofthe Buccleugh family. After relatingthe exhortation the dukegave the executioner, this accountproceeds, " All this he said, withas much indifference and unconcernedlyas if he were givingodours for a sute of cloathes.Noe change or alteration of countenancefrom the first unto the last;but stript himself of his coat ;and having prayed, layed himselfdone and fitted his neck to theblock, with all the calmness oftemper and composure of mindthat ever hath been observed inany that mounted that fatalscaffold before. He would haveno cap to his head, nor be bound,nor have anie thing on his face ;and yet for all this the brotherlydog, the executioner, did so barbarouslyact his part that he couldnot at five stroaks of the ax, severthe head from the body. At thefirst which only made a slendergash in the neck, his body heavedup and his head turned about ;the second stroke he made only adeeper gash, after which the bodymoved ; the third not being thework, he threw away the ax andsaid, God damn me I can do namore, my heart fails me. The bystandershad much adore to forbearthrowing him over the scaffoldbut made him take the axagaine, threatening to kill him ifhe did not do his duty better,which two stroaks more not beingable to finish the work, he wasfain at last to draw forth his longknife and with it to cut of theremaining part of his neck. Ifthere had not been a guard beforethe shoulders to conduct the executioneraway the people wouldhave torne him to pieces, soe greatwas their indignation at the barbaroususage of the late Due ofMonmouth, received at his hand."A.D, 1685.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 401echoed the repeated falls of the axe, the clergymen CHAP,addressed earnest ejaculatory prayers to God, thathe would be pleased to accept the dying man'simperfect and general repentance.I know of no passage in our history which sostrongly exemplifies the rigid and unbending spiritof genuine Toryism. Both the bishops who officiatedupon this occasion had an opportunity afterwardsof proving that they themselves conscientiouslybelieved and practised the doctrine they nowinsisted upon as necessary to salvation. After therevolution they each suffered deprivation of theirsees, rather than take the oath of allegiance toWilliam.VOL. I.2 D40*^2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XIV.Estrangement of the king from the high church Tories — Decline of theinfluence of Rochester — Increase of that of Sunderland — Massacresin the west — Conduct of James — Dismissal of Halifax — Suspicionof the Tories — Conduct of the Tories and Whigs in the commons —Creation of peers — State of parties in the lords — Prorogation ofparliament — Hostility of the clergy to James — Ecclesiastical commission.CHAP. The scene at the death of Monmouth as it wasXIVthe most forcible, so it was the last exhibition of theto 1687. Tory party's devotedness to James. It wouldappear as if these doctrines had been allowed to bethus publicly and solemnly declared, in order onlythat they might be the more completely exploded bythe subsequent conduct of the party which professedthem. Upon the day of Monmouth's executionJames renounced his alliance with the Tories :henceforward, until his expulsion, we are to regardhim, not as the head of one of the political parties,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 403but as the enemy to both. His most dangerous CHAP.•^ ^ XIV.enemy destroyed, and all who had favoured, or whocould be suspected of having favoured his attempt, ' to i687.butchered in cold blood, the spirit of oppositionappeared to be exterminated throughout the country.The power of James was now consolidated. "Withthe lives of Monmouth and Argyle," remarks Mr.Fox, " ended, or at least seemed to end, all prospectsof resistance to James's absolute power ; andthat class of patriots, who feel the pride of submissionand the dignity of obedience, might be completelysatisfied that the crown was in its full lustre"*The use which James intended to make of thisincrease of power was soon apparent. The Earlof Rochester told Burnet that although the king hadbefore spoken to him of all his affairs with great freedom,and commonly every morning of the businessthat was to be done during the day, yet the very dayafter Monmouth's execution the king changed hismethod, and never talked more to him of any businessbut what concerned the treasury, tThe Earl of Rochester was then the acknowledgedhead of the Tory party in England — no man hadbeen more zealous against the Exclusion bill — nonehad been bolder or more unscrupulous in the serviceof Charles. He had been throughout his life a creamFragments. f Burnet, vol. i., p. 684.2 D 2404 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ture of the duke, and he had faithfully adhered toXIV.him through every difficulty. If designs were into1687. agitation which required his removal, they could haveonly one tendency. Rochester being a Tory was ofcourse a hiffh churchman : a little circumstance whichhappened soon after James's accession, discovered tothat monarch how untractable his minister was likelyto prove upon the subject of religion.The king had determined to go to mass with thesame state that his brother had always assumed whenhe went to chapel — with his guards and principalofficers of state. Upon communicating his intentionto his ministers, Sunderland and Godolphin made nodifficulty ; but Rochester opposed it with all hisconstitutional vehemence, and plainly declared, thatunless his majesty expressly commanded him to attendhim to the door of the chapel, he would not do so.The king justly retorted, that if the act was wrongin itself, his express command could be no excuse forits performance ; and if it was not so, his scruplewas absurd. Neither the arguments of the king, northe courtly suggestions of Sunderland and Godolphin,could shake the lord treasurer's resolution : the onlycompromise he could be brought to make was to passthat day at his seat in the country, that his absencemight not be altogether without a pretence.Although the Earl of Rochester nominally retainedthe office, Sunderland was henceforward in effectTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 405James's prime minister. This man's career is an CHAP.XIV.extraordinary example of versatility of principle andexquisite courtly talent. Having passed through all ' to 1687.those vicissitudes of political life which we havealready witnessed, and having, as there is strongreason to suspect, given some encouragement toMonmouth during the late rebellion, he had nowcompletely secured the confidence of the king, andnominally at least, a Protestant, he was zealouslyemployed in preparing all things for the projectedattempt to establish the Catholic religion as thenational church.It has been stated as doubtful whether James hadat first designed the bold step of establishing his religionin England : that from the death of Monmouthhe entertained this design, can admit of no doubt.On the day after that event James declared to theFrench ambassador his intention of establishing theCatholic religion, and boasted that his troops werenow commanded by Catholics as well as Protestants.*** Lord Sunderland," writes the same minister, " appearsto be in the secret of every thing that haspassed between me and the King of England, uponthe subject of the Catholic religion : that ministersaid to me, ' I do not know whether our affairs areseen in France in the same light as they are here ;but I defy those who observe them closely not to seeBarillon. Fox's Appendix, p. civ.406 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, that the king my master has nothing so much atXT VL heart as the establishment of the Catholic religion,"^ t 1687. «^^^ ^^^^ i^ reason and common sense he can haveno other object, since, without that he will never besafe, but must always be exposed to the indiscreetzeal of those who will never cease to excite his subjectsagainst the Catholic religion, so long as it isnot more fully established.' "Fortunately it does not form part of my task to enterinto any account of the atrocities which followed therebellion that was now suppressed, since, to the honourof England, these can be charged upon neither of ournational parties. All the authorities of the time,corroborated by the correspondence between theking and the judge, indisputably prove that Jameswas the sole author, and Jefferies and his associatesthe instruments, of these horrible butcheries. Thedying declaration of this wretch was, *' Whatever Idid then I did by express orders ; and I have thisfarther to say for myself, that I was not half bloodyenough for him who sent me thither ; " * and he isbelieved upon this occasion to have spoken thetruth.The Tory ministers had no hand in pressing forwardthe executions ; the only manner in which theyinterfered was to obtain wholesale grants of pardons,which they were careful to sell at the highest possibleOnslow's Note to the octavo edition of Burnet.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 407price. A thousand convicts given as slaves to perchaXIV.tain courtiers, upon condition of their transportingthem to a part of the world where they must meet ' i^ i687.with a lingering death — a hundred bestowed upon afavourite of the queen — girls sentenced to death, inorder that they might be bestowed upon the maidsof honour* — and a wealthy merchant, intrusted tothe tender mercies of the same ladies, led to the footof the gallows, in order to extort the uttermost farthingbefore the pardon was produced — these are afew of the instances of James's clemency. If theobject that prompted the intercession was merelyhumanity, neither courtier nor minister could hopeto be heard. Even Sunderland, when he beggedthe life of a youth who had joined the standard ofMonmouth to revenge the murder of his father,pleaded in vain. In the well-known case of Mrs.Alicia Lisle, whom Jefferies obliged the jury, afterthrice returning with a verdict of not guilty, to bringThe young women of Taunt with regret, that William Penn,ton, who had presented colours sacrificing other objects to the hopeand a bible to Monmouth, were of obtaining the toleration of hisexcepted by name from the gene religion from the king's favour,oral pardon, in order that they was appointed an agent for themight purchase separate pardons, maids of honour, and submitted toTo aggravate this indecency, the receive instructions to make themoney to be thus extorted from most advantageous compositionsthem was granted to persons of he could in their behalf." — Mac-theirown sex — the queen's maids kentish.of honour ; and it must be added408 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, in guilty, and whose only offence was that she hadgiven a night's shelter to two men, who it afterwardsto 1687. appeared had been in Monmouth's army, intercessionwas made by the Ladies St. John and Aberga-penny, through Lord Clarendon. These two ladieshad both received assistance from Mrs. Lisle duringthe civil wars, and testified, that during all thosetimes she had exerted herself to the utmost in relievingthe royalists when in the greatest extremities.Her son had served in the king's army against Monmouthbut all was in vain. James said he hadpromised Jefferies that she should not be spared, andshe died accordingly. A few days afterwards hewent, in order to amuse himself with horse-racing, tothe very city* in which she had been executed.The most careful and authentic history of thismassacre, which James delighted to call Jefferies'scampaign, is to be found in Sir James Mackintosh'sHistory of the Revolution of 1688. That historianhas diligently collated all the authorities, and hasverified them by official documents, and by the correspondencebetween Jefferies and his employer in thestate-paper office. Sunderland, the medium of thiscorrespondence, was doubtless without the power tostay the murders. How far this can excuse hisholding an office which obliged him to consent toWinchester.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4-09them, is a question not difficult to answer. Pollexfen, CHAP,an eminent WTiiar lawyer, who had been considered ■ —A.D. 1685as the successor to Sir William Jones in all causes to 1687.which involved a constitutional principle, happenedto be the senior king's counsel upon this circuit. Tohim therefore the odious office of prosecutor was, accordingto custom, committed, nor could he refuse it.James has meanly, and as we now know falsely, endeavouredto throw the odious infamy of Jefferies's campaignupon Jefferies himself; and he has not scrupledto include Pollexfen in the charge. That Pollexfenby becoming in any manner an agent in this horriblebusiness, sullied the reputation which he had beforeobtained, must doubtless be admitted ; but there isno evidence whatever to prove that he acted at allin the spirit of his employers, or overstepped thestrictest bounds of his duty. It will be remembered,that Jefferies so terrified the prisoners by his denunciations,that very few had the courage to stand atrial. In the county of Somerset, out of upwards ofa thousand who were condemned, only six had pleadednot guilty. Where the forms of law were so littleobserved, the office of prosecuting counsel was nearlya sinecure. Pollexfen certainly appeared againstMrs. Lisle,* but he confined himself to a very shortstatement of the case, without using any of the topicsState Trials, vol. xi.410 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of declamation then so fashionable ; and the work ofXIV.terrifying the witnesses was taken up by Jefferies,to 1687. who evidently thought Pollexfen unfit to be trustedwith the office. If it was a crime to sit silent duringthe violence which ensued, it was a crime which wasproductive of no ill, for any interference upon hispart could only have diverted for a moment the furyof Jefferies from the prisoner to himself; it mightperhaps have placed him by her side.But although neither of the national parties wereidentified with the deeds of Jefferies and his master,they were in the event very materially affected bythem, since the deathlike stillness which reigned inthe counties that had been thus visited, persuadedthe king that his power was now at length sufficientfor the success of his most cherished design.Sunderland being thenceforward the only ministerin whom the king confided, and Father Peters, aJesuit, being the only man whose advice he habituallyfollowed, the consequences were those which mightbe anticipated. The army was in a great measureofficered by Catholics, and James, considering thathe was now in possession of the sword, began toagitate the repeal of the Test act. But this was notsufficient. The Habeas Corpus act he had alwayslooked upon as a mischievous invention of Shaftesburyto embarrass the government, and abridge theprerogative of the crown ; while it existed he feared,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 411notwithstanding the pliancy of his judges, that he CHAP,could never act with the energy requisite for theA.D. 1685suggest of his plans. Having coupled these two to 1687.subjects, he now made it his chief endeavour to makeconverts to his views. Those whom he looked uponas the most dangerous of his opponents, he called toa private interview ; and if neither his arguments orhis promises could convince them, he seldom failedin devising means to render them an example todeter others from manifesting a similar insensibilityto royal persuasion.Halifax was one of the first Who were thuscloseted ; but this nobleman, wayward and eccentricas he Was in his public conduct, and anxious, as heappeared, rather to be admired for his skill in delicatemanagement of the two parties, than for hisconsistent adherence to any of the public principlesof either, could not resolve to go so far as this. Hefrankly answered, that he would never consent tothe repeal of these acts; that these were the onlysecurities to which the nation trusted, and that itwas necessary, even to the security of the crown,that these should not be broken through. Upon thisanswer Halifax was immediately dismissed from hispost, the king declaring that he would have noneother than a unanimous ministry ; qualifying, however,this act of rigour by a promise, which the discardedminister knew was little to be relied on, that412 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, he would never for-et the services which he hadXIV. °already performed. This measure was intendedto 1687. partly as a gratification to the French king, butchiefly as an example to others ; for having thuspublished his intention, he did not think fit immediatelyto extend his inquiries to Rochester and therest of his colleagues.At the meeting of parliament (Nov. 9) theking's speech consisted of a declaration that hewould maintain a standing army, and that he wouldemploy in it Catholic officers, notwithstanding theTest act. For this speech, the house of lordsreturned thanks ; Halifax assenting, with the sarcasticremark, that " they had now more reasonthan ever to give thanks to his majesty, since he haddealt so plainly with them and discovered what hewould be at."The Tories, in the commons, were just one degreelesssubservient than they had been before theadjournment; like the long parliament in the formerreign, at their first embrace with royalty the connexionappeared indissoluble ; it was not until they hadleisure to observe more steadfastly, that they couldslowly discover dangers which produced a gradualretrogression. Charges and Seymour, two zealousTories, spoke against both the points of the king'sspeech, but were satisfied with having declared theirindividual sentiments, and the house voted the sup-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 413ply without a division. Every day, however, as it chap.XIV.made more apparent the designs of the king increasedthe distrust of the Tories. In a division upon the ' to Representationof an address for the removal of Catholicofficers, upon giving them indemnity for the loss,it was carried against the court by three, and it wasa pregnant sign that among the majority were manyof the officers of the court.* This address wasmoved by a Tory, Sir Edmund Jennings, t a retainerof the Earl of Danby ; t but the house were so littleprepared for any stormy opposition to the king, thatwhen they received a sharp reproof for their address,it was received with all due reverence and respect,and a profound silence reigned in the house for sometimeafter it. This was broken by Mr. Wharton,who moved for a day to consider this answer. Mr.Coke, the new member for Derby, an approvedThe earl of Middleton, then year,* This incident upon onea secretary of state, seeing many vote very likely saved the nation."go out upon a division against the — Onslow's Note on Burnet, 8vocourt who were in the service of ed., vol. iii., p. 86.government, went down to the \ Thus described in Andrewbar, and, as they were told in, re- Marvell's seasonable argument forpreached them to their faces for a new parliament ; " Sir Edwardvoting as they did. He said to a Jennings, made high sheriff ofCaptain Kendal, ' Sir, have you Yorkshire (against a vote ofof horse inhis majesty's liament), which is worth ^61000,service?' — ' Yes, my lord,' replied promised a pension and place atthe other, ' but my brother died court."last night, and has left me £700 a J Barillon. Fox's App.414« THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, royalist, rose, and, in seconding this motion, said,■ "I hope we are all Englishmen, and not to be^'^to^Ts^?. frighted out of our duty by a few high words." Thisexpression was deemed so offensive, that, notwithstandingthe interposition of many who vouched forhis loyalty, he was committed to the tower. " Notourown honour, but the king is concerned in this,"was the argument which in that assembly was deemedunanswerable against any extension of lenity. Thetrue explanation of this disproportionate severity appearsto be, that both the mover and seconder of thismotion were Whigs, who, mistaking the temper ofthe majority, thought they might now also ventureto express their sentiments. This well-knownjealousy of the Tory party, who had always when inpower manifested a determination to allow no one tooppose the court but themselves, probably restrainedthe Whigs from taking any part in the discussionsduring this session. The small minority of thatparty in the house therefore preferred to limit theiropposition to silent votes rather than engage in acontest which could give advantage to none but theking. They abandoned the task of shaping the oppositionentirely to their rivals, satisfied with thehumble but patriotic part of sustaining them withtheir votes, and thereby giving them the majority.In the lords the relative situation of parties wasnearly but not quite similar. Twenty noblemenTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. "^^^had been introduced into that assembly at the ^^f^^-•' XIV.meeting of this parliament, no inconsiderable number -— — — —when it is remembered that, upon a call of the house, to 1687.the number of temporal peers present was butseventy-five, and that upon this occasion there werevery few absent who were not disqualified either bynonage or religion. Upon the 19th of November,the day when the commons received the reply totheir address, Lord Devonshire moved that a dayshould be appointed for consideration of the king'sspeech. Jefferies, one of the twenty introduced atthe commencement of the session, had been madelord chancellor on his return from his campaign inthe west. He undertook to answer the oppositionlords, as he had been accustomed to answer witnessesand juries, but his arrogance, his noise, andhis menaces, fell idly upon the ears of the members ofthat assembly ; violence that terrified all who heardit when proceeding from the bench, excited onlyderision among his auditory in the lords. Halifax,Mordaunt, Nottingham, and Anglesea, are mentionedas speakers upon this occasion. The indignantscorn with which these noblemen treated this attemptof Jefferies to introduce his style of oratory into theirhouse quickly reduced him to his level : even in thepresence of his master, who witnessed the debate,he fell to be as mean and cringing as he had attemptedto be violent and overbearing.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. But the most important feature of this debate wasXIV.'. — the desertion of the bishops. Compton, Bishop of Ponto1687. don, stood forward, and, in the name of his brethren,protested against the infringement of the Test acts,now the only defence they had for their religion ;the rest of the bench testified their acquiescenceby their silence, and the court party, surprisedat this decisive event, gave way without a division.*The commons had not yet completed the businessof the supply, although they had promised £700,000,but James chose rather to sacrifice this sum thansubmit to the lords. On the 20th the parliamentwas prorogued, and with it vanished all the popularitythat James had ever possessed.James was now fairly started upon the path whichcould only lead him to ruin ; every act he performedonly served more completely to alienate the partywhich had placed him upon the throne. No soonerwas the parliament prorogued, than those of thecourtiers who had ventured to oppose him weremade to feel the consequences of their conduct.Fox, who held the post of paymaster of the army,an office which an acute courtiers values at £10,000a year, was deprived. Colonel Darcy and MajorWebb lost their commissions ; and it was formallyRalph. Mackintosh, p. 44. Fox MS., but does not quote it.)(Sir James relies, for some facts, Reresby, p. 220.upon Barillon's account in the f Reresby, p. 222.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 417resolved, at the council board, that all the depend CHAP,ants of the government, who had joined the oppon 1 • Till . „ , A.D, 1685siphon, in any or their measures, should be similarly to 1687.treated. A yet more flagrant insult to the churchparty was the expulsion of the Bishop of Londonfrom the privy council, for expressing the sentimentsof the great majority of his brethren. This wasfollowed by an act which showed that the greatmajority of the Tories had broken terms with thecourt, and were, at least, exercising the right whichthey had always reserved, of passive resistance.Instructions were sent to the Archbishop of Canterbury,to command the clergy that they shouldexhort their flocks only to the observance of therules of morality, but that they should not presume tomeddle with any topics of government ; a sure evidencethat that powerful engine which, a few monthsbefore, had thundered forth anathemas against allwho opposed the government, had now turned itsbatteries upon its former masters. Still the workwent on but slowly ; the people rallied the moreenthusiastically round their church in proportion asthey considered its danger more imminent ; theclergy no longer attempted to explain away thedifferences between the Romish and the Englishcommunions. The recent conduct of Louis, whohad repealed the edict of Nantes ; the dreadful persecutionsof the Protestants, and the piteous tales ofVOL. I. '2 E418 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the sufferers who had fled to England to avoid them,XIV.produced a great impression on the nation. The cons1686. proverbial writings and private efforts at proselytismmade by the priests, were met by corresponding effortson the part of the Anglican clergy. Tillotson, Stilling-fleet,Venison, Patrick, Sherlock, Williams, Claret,Gee, Aldrich Canterbury, Whitby, Wake, Hooper ;names which are yet familiar to all who reverencepiety, or admire learning ; bestirred themselvesvigorously in the contest. Whatever might havebeen their former tenets, whatever might have beentheir after conduct, and many of these are sinceknown as eminent Jacobites, upon this occasion theywere unanimous in their opposition to the advancingflood of popery.The king, of course, placed himself at the headof the priests. One more attempt he made to obtainthe repeal of the Test act, in a constitutional manner.The parliament was kept on foot by short prorogations.He ordered his judges to feel the pulses ofall the members upon their circuits, and to reportto him their dispositions. When he found that eventhe most trusted of his dependants faltered in theirproffers of adherence,* he abandoned for ever theThe following account of of the courtiers at this conjunctionattempt, which is given by ture. Every one must, at least,Reresby, affords a very faithful admire the candour of this author,view of the motives and feelings His unsuspecting ignorance of theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.XIV.idea of assembling his parliament, and resolved tofall back upon his prerogative. A vain attemptwas made to restrain republication of the works " & lose.existence in the world, of anythinglike principle, would appearto be the cause of the candour,since it is used without an effort,and, apparently, without a knowledgeof its merit.1686, March 7. The time forthe meeting of parliament nowdrawing near, and several of themembers neglecting to repair toLondon ; the king oi-tered thejudges, in their several circuits, tofeel the pulses of the men : in consequenceof which I was, to mygreat surprise, accosted at Yorkby the judge (Reresby wasGovernor of York), who told me,he had orders to talk with me onthe subject. I asked him if hismajesty had made particular mentionof my name ; to which, hereplying that he had only receiveda general order from the king tosound the inclinations of theseveral gentlemen who sat in parliament,and that he had had a particularinstruction from the chancelloronly as to myself by name ;I desired time to consider of it,and the next morning returnedfor answer, that I perceived a2 Edenial would be construed intodisloyalty ; that I had so latelywaited on the king, and givensuch assurance of my integrity,that I could not apprehend hismajesty could harbour any doubtas to me, and the rather as he hadnot been pleased to make use ofmy name. That I could not conceivemyself obliged to declaremyself to any body else ; but thatif his majesty should think fit tosay any thing to me further thanhe had already, when I had thehonour of waiting on him next,which I intended should bespeedily, I would so consult myloyalty and my conscience, as togive him all the satisfaction in mypower. The judge told me hewould make a report of what Ihad said, and did not seem to bevery forward in pressing a compliancehe had his orders, and heobeyed them. I deemed this tobe the most prudent reply I couldat this time make, for had Ianswered in the affirmative, Imight have incurred the displeasureand censure of the greatestpart of the nation : if in the nega-A. D. 1686.420 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, which were so incessantly appearing against popery,and which were read with so much avidity by thepeople.The validity of the king's dispensing power wassolemnly recognised by eleven out of the twelvejudges of England : a judgment so monstrous, thatin order to obtain it James was even obliged todischarge Sir J. Jones, who had hesitated at nodeed of blood, and had presided at the judicial murderof the poor old woman Gaunt, burned to death forharbouring a rebel, and convicted upon the testimony,and by the treachery of, the man shehad thus preserved. Montague, who accompaniedJefferies upon his circuit, was also among thosewhom it was requisite to remove. Thus did thepower of education and habit manifest itself superiorto that of humanity or justice. The men who woulddistort facts and prevent probabilities, in order tosend their fellow-creatures away to a violent death,started when it was proposed to them to outragethose rules of law which their youth had been passedin learning, and which it was their pride that theytime, I should have utterly dis all cases of this nature, it is betterobliged the king ; a caution the to unbosom one's self to themore necessary to be taken, as prince in person, and, as muchthere was no likelihood there as possible, avoid the danger thatwould be any meeting of partial may arise from the treachery, thement to control him in his con prejudice, or the ignorance of aduct. However I believe that in reporter." — p. 240.A.D. 1686.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 421thoroughly understood. To James's remark, that CHAP,he would find twelve judges of his opinion, Jonesreplied, with all the pride of art — he could haveknown no higher feeling — "Twelve judges, Sire,you may find, but hardly twelve lawyers."The king made his attacks upon his new antagonistswith great rapidity ; he next assumed the exerciseof his fill prerogative as supreme head of thechurch of England, and under this pretence he establishedhis ecclesiastical commission, so well knownfor its illegality and tyranny. Sancroft, Archbishopof Canterbury, Crew, Bishop of Durham, Sprat,Bishop of Rochester, the Earl of Rochester, the lordchief justice, were members of this court, and Jeffreywas made the president, without whose presenceno business could be performed. The business tobe performed by this conclave could be safely trustedto no management but his.Such was the ecclesiastical commission — a courtestablished in defiance of the act for its abolition,passed upon the restoration. Sancroft certainly didnot attend ; but instead of protesting against thelegality of a tribunal created to destroy the chi-ch*God," said the king to Ba case more extensive power thandillon, " has permitted that all the other Catholic princes possess inlaws made to establish Protestant the ecclesiastical affairs of theirism, now serve as a foundation for dominions." — Mackintosh, p. 66,my measures to establish true relic from Fox's MSS. ; also quoted bylion, and give me a right to exert Mature, vol. ii., p. 130.A.D. 1686.4i22 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of which he was the guardian and the head, he wasXIV. . .contented to send a petition to the king, allegingfeebleness and ill health, as an excuse for his non-attendance.The first business of this court was tosilence the church of England preachers, and Compton,Bishop of London, was selected as the firstexample. The king, in the plenitude of his ecclesiasticalsupremacy, had ordered the bishop to suspendDr. Sharpe, Dean of Norwich, for preachinga controversial sermon. The bishop protested thathe had no power to do so in a summary manner, andwas thereupon summoned before the new court ofcommission, and suspended from his bishopric. Thissentence was contrary to the avowed opinions ofthree-fourths of the commission, but the king andSunderland would have it so ; and Lord Rochesterdeclaring that he acted against his own conviction,yielded nevertheless to whatever his majesty mightdetermine.*Catholics were now admitted to the council board,and were declared admissible to the great offices ofstate. The vacant bishoprics were filled by menwho evidently waited only for the proper moment tobe converted. An Irish Catholic, with the foreigntitle of the Marquis d'Albyville, was sent to theHague, for the important reason, as assigned byFox's MSS., Mackintosh, p. 70.XIV.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.Barillon, that it was almost impossible to find an chap.English Protestant who had not too great a considerationfor the Prince of Orange ; * and the pope'sagent in London, whose avowed character had beenalready changed from that of a private gentleman tothat of ambassador from the Roman pontiff, was nowentreated to take upon himself the formal and solemntitle of nuncio.A yet more unequivocal mark of the degree oftoleration which the church of England might expectwhen the designs of the king were accomplished,was the conduct he pursued with regard to the armyin Ireland, There the Earl of Tyrconnell, afterhaving gradually introduced a number of Catholicsamong the officers, continued to fill up every vacancywith persons of that persuasion. This being tooslow a method of remodelling, he proceeded to makevacancies by breaking the Protestant officers uponthe slightest pretences ; and at last, all decency beinglaid aside, they were, without any reason assigned,deprived of their commissions, tRapidly upon these demonstrations followed othersequally threatening towards the church. Cambridge,which had so often declared the absolute power of themonarch, and had so often acknowledged that all themembers of her body held their lives and fortunes atFox's MSS., Mackintosh, p. 70. f Burnet.A.D. 168G.424 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, his disposal, Cambridge being ordered to confer theXIVdegree of master of arts upon a Benedictine monk,unanimously refused. Thus the top stone was removedfrom the pyramid of Toryism, since even oneof the most uncompromising bodies of Tories hadadmitted and acted upon the legality of passiveresistance.Not convinced by his defeat in this attempt, theking next made an experiment upon Oxford. Hecould not believe that those who had declared thatassertions of the sovereignty of England being inthe three estates, and that it was lawful for subjectsto enter into associations for defence of themselvesor their religion, were false and impious propositionswhich led to atheism, would refuse to receive anofficer of his appointment, or defer to a recommendationwhich had been constantly made and very seldomdisobeyed; yet the fellows of Magdalen Collegerefused to choose Farmer,* a profligate Catholic convert,to be their president, and in defiance of the king'scommand elected Dr, Hough to the vacant office.It might have been a question for the casuists whodrew up the celebrated decree, which still hung uponHe had been expelled both said Mr. Farmer had the unhap-Oxford and Cambridge ; and the pines to be under an ill fame asdelegates from the college ended to his life and conversation." —their allegations against him by Distorts of the Ecclesiastical Com-saying, " And that in general the mission, p. 30.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4>25the gate of their college, whether this contumacious chap.election was not a proceeding a step beyond even passiveresistance ; it certainly was not a passive ' ^^^^'obedience. For this the college was placed undersuspension by the ecclesiastical commission court ;and it is well known that the affair ended by Parker,Bishop of Oxford, being substituted for Farmer,whose infamy was too notorious, and Cartwright, thenew Bishop of Chester, going down with a subalternecclesiastical commissioner, breaking open the gates ofthe college, putting Parker in possession, and turningout the fellows.* " It was much observed," remarksBishop Burnet, " that this university that had assertedthe king's prerogative in the highest strainsof the most abject flattery possible, should be thefirst body of the nation that should feel the effects ofit most sensibly ; and it was an afflicting thing, whichseemed to have a peculiar character of indignity init, that this first act of violence committed againstthe legal possessions of the church, was executed byone bishop, and done in favour of another." tThe conduct of the high church Tories, upon thisoccasion, was an admission of the absurdity of theirpolitical creed, and an eminent example of the emptinessof professions by which men pretend to renounceSee the whole proceedings History of the Ecclesiastical Coin-detailedin the State Trials, vol. mission.xii., p. I ; and in a tract called the f Vol. i., p. (i99, 700.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D. 1686.CHAP, their natural and indefeasible rig-its. It was nowXIV. .plain that the clergy, who had drawn these tenetsfrom their misconstrued bibles, had intended themonly for the practice of laymen. They had lookedon without a murmur while the corporations weredestroyed, and while the elective franchise, theircountrymen's best birthright, was wrested from them.They had supported Charles through all the infamyof the Rye-house plot, and they had followed hisvictims to the scaffold with denunciations of rebellionand atheism. They had not rejected an alliancewith popery, so long as that religion was to befavoured only at the expense of the law ; and aboveall, they had given a solemn sanction to the wholecode of despotism, and encouraged their kings toclaim and exercise a tyranny which could only besupported by bloodshed, and which it required amighty convulsion to destroy. Now, however, whena single act of that tyranny was leveled againstthemselves, and a demonstration was made againsta portion of that property which they had beenaccustomed to look upon as their own, they raisedcries which, at the time of a similar attack upon thecivil institutions of the country, Russell wouldhave censured as too vehement, and proposedmeasures which Shaftesbury would then have disapprovedas too precipitate. No sooner had thisviolence been offered to the foundation of MagdalenA.D. 1686.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 427College, than they despatched pressing letters, and CHAP,confidential emissaries to the Prince of Orange, -entreating him to appear in arms against their king.They urged the prince to force his father-in-law, notto restore the constitution, abandon his claims toan absolute prerogative, and give back to his peoplethe rights he had wrested fie-om them, but to recedefrom his nomination of Parker to the pro'vostship ofMagdalen, and to renounce all claim over the temporalitiesof the church. These letters were so pregnantwith treason, that the prince dared not showthem to his most confidential friends ; and themeasures they recommended were so violent, thateven Burnet, the fi-end of Russell and Hampden,who could deplore the attacks upon liberty and Protestantism,as well as those upon the temporalitiesof the church, thought them not justified by theoccasion, and that the Prince of Orange himself,with the prospect of a crown, considered them tooquestionable in propriety to be undertaken.*Thus early did the Tories confess the fallacy oftheir own creed, and do homage to that of theAVhigs.Burnet, vol. i., p. 701.428 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XV.Parties in the cabinet — Declaration of indulgence — James makesadvances to the Whigs — Repulsed by that party — Junction of theWhigs and Tories — Embarrassment of the king — Trial of the sevenbishops — Birth of the Prince of Wales — Invitation to the Prince ofOrange — Conduct of the party leaders — Flight of James.CHAP. In the former year there had been three partiesin the cabinet and the court. The first consisted ofto 1689. the king and his confidential adviser, Father Petre.This man was an Englishman of noble family, uncleto the then Lord Petre ; he was famed neither for hisvirtue nor his learning, but neither of these qualificationswere requisite for the service of James.He was a man of a daring spirit, and zealous inthe cause of his religion : a Jesuit, and possessingthe entire confidence of his order, who admired inhim the boldness and decision which few of themhad the courage to imitate. Petre had introducedhimself to the king during the excitement of thepopish plot, and he had suggested measures ofdefence, which discovered him to be a man of noTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 429ordinary resolution, and recommended him to James CHAP.XV.as a valuable instrument, to be employed at somehappier opportunity. Upon James's accession he " to 1689.was received into his confidence. He now suggestedall the most violent measures, and it was he whohad started his royal pupil in the headlong coursehe was running. Already the sanguine priest spokeof the Protestant church with insolence and contempt,and he deemed the day drawing near whenthat mischievous and intolerant heresy would beextirpated. The most sanguine visions of personalambition already visited his day-dreams : althoughthe pope had rejected the earnest request of James tobestow on him a titular bishopric, and had refusedto listen to his application for a cardinal's hat, hethought the day might come, when the pontiff mightbe glad to offer what he now refused. Meanwhilehe fixed his eyes upon Wolsey, and, taking him asan example, aspired to the archbishopric of Yorkand the chancellorship of England.*This religious zealot and ambitious priest formed,together with his master and some humbler Jesuits,the first, most violent, and of course most influentialparty at court.It is not, however, to be supposed that the majo-mature,vol. ii., p. 390. See vol. i. of Mr. Trevor's Life ofalso a letter from Petre to the William III.Pere la Chaise in the Appendix to430 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, city of the Roman Catholics approved the violentmeasures which originated with this party. Theto 1689. queen, Sunderland, Godolphin, Lord Churchill, andsome others formed a second party. These wereunited in their disapproval of the precipitancy ofPetre, but their ultimate views were probably by nomeans the same. The queen, although she warnedher husband that his violence would cost him hiscrown, yet cannot be supposed to have wished thathe should stop short of the establishment of her ownreligion. Sunderland had promised the king to assisthim throughout the whole work ; he must earn theFrench pension he enjoyed, and to do so the moreeasily he had resolved to change his religion : duringthe present year he privately conformed to theRoman church. Godolphin and Churchill had nosuch intention : their views were probably very indefiniteperhaps their most distinct intention wasto retain office as long as they could do so withoutchanging their religion. In this conduct they weredoubtless followed by many others who retained theirreligion as a point of honour, and dreading the prevalenceof popery, as endangering their emoluments,became daily less loyal as these were more openlythreatened.The measures of the queen's party were thosewhich were supported by the pope. Innocent, whileacting as head of the church, did not forget that heTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 431was also a temporal sovereign. He disapproved the chap.whole conduct of Father Petre, because he thought itmust produce a contest which would not only in its ' [^ ^gsQ.event prove prejudicial to the church, but whichwould also, by leaving Louis uncontrolled in hisprojects of ambition, endanger the independence ofthe papal dominions. The queen, who was probablymore under the control of the priests who took theirinstructions from Rome than the king, complainedthat Petre's introduction into the privy council hadbeen without her consent. She declared, using anItalian idiom, that he had been brought in by Sunderlandover her belly.* The measures which werepursued were so contrary to the instructions of thepope's nuncio in England, that he, finding he couldnot moderate them, often desired his recal, lestthey should be attributed to his agencyThe third party had been headed by the Earl ofRochester, and numbered in its ranks many of themore conscientious or more timorous of the courtiers,and the less compliant of the bishops. This was thereal Tory party ; although some of the queen's adherentsheld nearly the same sentiments, and ratherattached themselves to different interests, than contemplateddifferent ends. Of this number wereChurchill and Godolphin, preferring the protectionNote to Oxford edition of f Welwood's Memoirs.Burnet, vol. iii., p. 96.432 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of Sunderland* to that of Rochester, but ignorant^ — '. both of the engagements and of the secret conversionto 1689. of that nobleman. This party was, however, nowno more. Rochester, familiar with the intrigues ofthe former reign, had cultivated the friendship ofCatherine Sedley, whom the king had, by his secretadvice, lately created Countess of Dorchester Thislady's influence was always opposed to that of thepriests, and her wit and railleries were freely lavishedupon them and their religion. Rochester now havingre-established this intercourse, which had been forsome months intermitted, attempted to set her up atcourt as an acknowledged mistress, and through herinfluence to disgrace Sunderland and his whole party.The queen, however, still young, beautiful, and affectionate,gave way to the most vehement expressionsof grief and resentment ; and having secured the aidof the priests, was continually complaining to theking of the injustice this intercourse was to her, andthe scandal it brought upon their religion.It was upon one of these occasions that she saidThis is by no means surprising, toned to reply, " He deserves it."when we consider the immense — Ralph. Life of James, vol. ii.influence which Sunderland now Sunderland preserved this influenced.It is said that the king ence not by proposing or advo-would grant no favour until he had eating Petre's extravagances, butasked the question, " Have they by refraining from opposition tospoke to Sunderland?" and when them.told that this nobleman got all the f This is the last creation of amoney of the court, he was accus peerage for life.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4tto the king, "Is it possible that you are ready to CHAP,sacrifice a crown for your faith, and cannot discard amistress for it ? Will you, for such a passion, losethe merit of your sacrifices"* — expressions whichshow that she at least estimated the dangers he wascourting.The struggle was protracted and violent, but thequeen at length prevailed. The countess was sentfrom England : she went, warning the king of themisfortunes he was bringing upon himself, and declaringthat she was a martyr to the Protestant faith.Rochester's fall was not long delayed. Sunderlandwickedly suggested that the earl had shown somesymptoms of a desire to be converted. The king,eager to secure so important a proselyte, seized uponthe intimation, and invited the lord treasurer to witnessa conference between some of the priests of thetwo communions. The earl reluctantly consented ;but before any point had been canvassed, started upand declared that he was more thoroughly convincedthan ever. This decisive conduct answered Sunderland'sexpectation ; by destroying all hope of his conversionit determined the king to dismiss him.This was done ; he retired with all the booty he hadobtained during his term of oflSce — no inconsiderablesum, since it included a life interest in Lord Grey'sMemoires History. de la Reine Mackintosh from the MS, in thed' Angleterre, quoted by Sir James archives of France.VOL. I. 2 F434 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, estates, and with a pension of £4000 a year, for hisXV.own and his son's Ives.to 1G89. With Rochester's fall was associated that of hisparty at court ; those who had before adhered to himas their leader, then either followed him into retirement,or made their submission to Sunderland.At the commencement of the year 1687, therefore,the court was supported by neither the Whignor the Tory parties. The king was served onlyby avowed Catholics, or by a few of the latter faction,who had forsaken their friends for the power andemolument of office. Even these were graduallydismissed when all hope of their conversion had disappeared,and as men of any private honour wouldnaturally scorn to change their faith at the commandof another, even although they had otherwise littleaffection for it, the nation was constantly amused byreports of repartee which had been returned to suchrequisitions. Norfolk, Margrave, Middleton, Godolphin,and Churchill, were all men who paid littleregard to the dictates of any religion, and had,probably, imbibed the loose opinions so commonin the court of Charles, yet these men wereattacked in vain, and all the arguments of the priestswere commonly demolished by a jest. Perhaps thebest answer recorded is that of the duke of Norfolk,who, as grand chamberlain, carried the sword of statebefore the king to chapel. The duke, however,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.stayed without while the king entered. Upon one CHAP,occasion James said, as he passed him, " My lord,%, A.D. 1687your father would have gone further." — ** lour to 1689.majesty's father," was the reply, " was the betterman, and he would not have gone so far." EvenJefferies remained a Protestant, or rather refused tobecome a Catholic, and Kirk, who had servedagainst the Moors, as governor of Tangier, pleadeda pre-engagement, since he had promised the kingof Morocco, he said, that if he ever changed hisreligion he would turn Mahometan.Having thus lost the Tories, James entertainedthe ridiculous notion of gaining over the Whigs. Itwas amusing to hear this man who was so systematicallya bigot and a persecutor, that, restrainedfrom persecuting in behalf of his own religion, hesatisfied his predilections for the torture in behalf ofanother, now suddenly grown eloquent in favour ofChristian charity, and insisting upon the duty ofuniversal toleration. In accordance with this newdesign, he, in April, published his celebrated declarationof indulgence, repealing all sanguinary andpenal laws in matters of religion ; he declared all hissubjects equally capable of employments, and suppressedall oaths and tests to the contrary.This declaration was intended far more to conciliatethe dissenters than to benefit the Catholics.A dean of Christchurch, several rectors and curates,2f2THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, a master of University College, and two fellowsof Brasennose, all openly professing the CatholicA.D. 1687 ,. . , . . , . ^ , . pto 1689. religion, and retaining their omnes by virtue oithe king's dispensation,* sufficiently testified thatthe Catholics required no such general edict fortheir protection. Herbert, the chief justice, wassent upon the western circuit to attempt to banishthe terror which Jefferies had so lately spreadthere. Conventicles were no longer treasonableassemblies. The nonconformists were astonishedby invitations to partake of the favour of the court,and their allies, the Whigs, were bid to hope forcountenance and power if they would only retortupon the Tories the denunciations which they hadso recently been subjected to from them.Hitherto the Whigs had kept aloof from the contest,not that they were uninterested in the event,or that the majority of them were less zealous membersof the church of England than the Tories, butbecause they saw that their brethren of the highchurch were still willing to return to their politicalslavery, and that, if they interfered, the king wouldprobably be driven to a new alliance with the Tories,of which they would be the ready sacrifice. Now,however, they refused the insidious overtures whichSee these dispensations in vol. i., and in the ClarendonGutch's " Collectanea Curiosa," papers, vol. ii.XV.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.were made them, and although some of the non chap.conformists of their party, smarting under the rigoursof the terrible persecution they had lately sufferedfrom the Tory churchmen, could not be restrainedfrom taking advantage of their season of triumph,the example was by no means generally followed.When the king, deceived by the few exceptions,remodelled the corporations, and substituted Whigsand nonconformists for the delinquent Tories, hequickly discovered that they had not forgotten theiraffection for liberty, and that, in the words they hadused in the former reign, *' although they wanted atoleration they would not accept it at the expense ofthe laws"*The leaders of the two national parties sedulouslyexerted themselves to discountenance any mutualrecriminations now that the safety of both requiredtheir union. The clergy agreed among themselvesto put forth no answer to the reproaches of those ofthe nonconformists who could not be restrained fromusing their new liberty, and Halifax, t and otherThe new Whig magistrates of set up his religion in the Guild-thecity of London carefully took hall chapel, but, on the contrary,the tests, and ordered the obser- frequently attended the Esta-vanceof the gunpowder-treason blushed church. — Burnet.day. When the nuncio came to \ See his " Letter to a Dissentertheir city banquet, they made an upon occasion of his Majesty'sentry in their books that he came gracious Declaration of Indulgetheir knowledge ; and the hence."mayor, a presbyterian, refused to " If it should be said,' he saysTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, leaders of the new united opposition, put forth many'. powerful tracts to warn the dissenters of the dangersto 1689. of the proffered alliance, and to deprecate any divisionamong the opponents of popery. By thesejudicious measures the contest, which the king andhis ministers had hoped to excite, quickly expired,and the Tories and Whigs were, for the first time,united in opposition to the crown ; the Tories solelywith the object of preserving the established church,the Whigs including that as one of the parts of theirfar more extensive design, the re-establishment oftheir constitution, and the recovery of their nationalliberties.in this tract, " that the church ofEngland is never humble but whenshe is out of power, and thereforeloseth the right of being believedwhen she pretended to it, theanswer is, first, it would be anuncharitable objection, and verymuch mistimed, an unseasonabletriumph, not only ungenerous butunsafe ; so that in these respects itcannot be urged, without scandal,even though it could be said withtruth. Secondly, this is not so infact, and the argument must fallbeing built upon a false foundationfor, whatever may be toldyou at this very hour, and in theheat and glare of your presentsunshine, the church of Englandcan, in a moment, bring cloudsagain, and turn the royal thunderupon your heads, blow you oiFthestage with a breath, if she wouldgive but a smile or a kind word ;the least glimpses of her compliancewould throw you backinto the state of suffering, anddraw upon you all the arrears ofseverity which have accrued duringthe time of this kindness to you ;and yet the church of England,with all her faults, will not allowherself to be rescued by such unjustifiablemeans, but chuse tobear the weight of power ratherthan lie under the burthen of beingcriminal." — Somerset Tracts, vol. ix,p. 36.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 43In July the parliament was dissolved by proclus CHAP.XVnation, and the day after the dissolution the pope'snuncio made his public entry into Windsor, and theDuke of Somerset, one of the lords of the bedchamber,was discharged from his office for refusing to assist atthe procession — an admirable commentary upon thesentiments of toleration contained in the declarationof indulgence. * All who were concerned in this reception,or in the embassy which occasioned it, were,by the then laws of England, guilty of high treason.It was intended to call a new parliament to ratifythe declaration of indulgence, and legally to repealthe laws which James had thus tyrannically suspended.Hence the remodelling of the corporations,and the removal of the lord lieutenants of the counties.Fourteen of these latter were now changed, and theircounties transferred either to Catholics, or to thosewho had promised an early conversion. It was theHis excellency had three were eighteen coaches morecoaches, with six horses apiece in besides these, with six hoi-seseach coach. Immediately after apiece, in which number the Lordhis excellency, in two of his Bishop of Durham's (Crewe) wascoaches, were ten priests, his coach one, and the Bishop of Chester'sof state going empty. After them (Cartwright) another," — Full andwent the lord chancellor's, two of true relation of his Excellencythe lord president's (Sunderland), the Pope's Nuncio making histhe lord privy seal's (Clarendon), public entry at Windsor, on Sun-andthe lord chamberlain's (Duke day the 3d of this instant, Julyof Norfolk) carriage. There 1687. Shines' Tracts, vo\.\x.,p.267.140 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, business of these new officers to inquire among the• justices of the peace, and the resident gentry, who ofto 1689. them were willing, if returned to parliament, to givevalidity to the king's declaration. So unsuccessfulwere they in their canvass, that the king found itnecessary to insert in the Gazette* a notice thathis majesty being resolved to maintain the libertyof conscience, and to use the utmost endeavours thatit may pass into a law, and become an establishedsecurity for after ages, has thought fit to review thelists of deputy-lieutenants and justices of the peace,that those may continue who are willing to contributeto so good and necessary a work, and such othersadded from whom he may expect the like concurrence."The difficulty was now not so much to pack ahouse of commons, for that could be done by an openand unscrupulous exercise of this power over the corporations,as to find members willing to be returnedunder such conditions, and of sufficient respectabilityto influence the hostile majority of the house oflords.Many expedients were proposed and abandonedfor overcoming this important difficulty of a legislativerecognition of the declaration ; the opinions ofthe lords were carefully collected, and lists wereDecember 1 1, 1687,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 44]made out of the votes which would probably be given CHAP,in favour or in opposition to the court, the leastT . 1 1 ^ A.D. 1687majority anticipated against the repeal was 85 to to 1689.33, besides 10 doubtful, and 21 Catholic peers ;*but Sunderland, could he obtain the support of ahouse of commons, would have unceremoniouslyannihilated this majority by the creation of a sufficientnumber of new peers. *' Why, Churchill, yourtroop of guards shall be called to the house oflords," t he cried out in a numerous company, andwe have the authority of Lord Halifax that he saidupon another occasion that he would make all LordPetersham's troop peers, tBut had Sunderland accomplished his threat, andturned a troop of dragoons into the house of lords, itwould still have been very doubtful whether he couldhave accomplished his object ; he would, more probably,have found his newly-created peers, nearlyto a man, voting with the former majority. § TheMackintosh (p. 197) quotes in the next year, when everyfrom two lists, one sent to Holland, exertion had been made to secureand in the possession of the Duke the army, James tried the expelPortland, and another sent by raiment of proposing this veryBarillon to his court, in the depot question to Lord Lichfield's residesaffaires Strangers. ment — a regiment he had selected•f Burnet. as supposing them the most delDalrymple's App., vol. ii,, p. voted to him, and willing to show288. Mackintosh, p. 200. the rest of the troops an example.§ It will be remembered that When he desired all those who442 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, kinar, at this time, did not want power — he wantedXV. . . .only instruments ; but when the two national partiesA.D. 1687 . , , „ , . . , J .to 1689. were withdrawn iron his service, and ranged m anopposition, although merely passive, there were nomenleft to fulfil his commands. The Catholics werenot the hundredth part of the nation, and althoughthe dissenters might amount to a sixteenth, it wasbut a very small portion of these who numberedthemselves among his supporters.* James, therefore,had no instruments to place in the corporations,which were the slaves of his will ; and he had nopersons to recommend to them for election uponwhom, if elected, he could depend to do his bidding.The people were occasionally disgusted to hear ofdissented from him to lay down Halifax, in his " Address to a Dis-theirarms, with the exception of enter," speaks of him as qualified,a few Catholics, the whole regiment notwithstanding his hat, to becomepiled their arms before him. — master of the ceremonies. HisJohnston. projected equivalents drew fromWilliam Penn, the quaker, Halifax a tract, with the title ofwas at the head of these. He was " An Analysis of an Equivalent."fond of inventing equivalents for In conversation, when these me-theTest acts : one was a statutable thos were proposed, that noble-declarationof the liberty of con ran answered, " You see my nose,science to be like Magna Charta, it is not a very handsome one, butinviolable by all future partial would not change it for any onements. Penn was then supposed five hundred times handsomer ;to be a concealed papist. James simply because this is my own,declared, privately, that he was no and is fast to my face." — John-morea quaker than he was : and stone's Lettas.he was so zealous a courtier, thatTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 443the desertion of a profligate lawyer or greedy chap.XVchurchman ; of the conversion of a cringing courtier '- 1-1 -1 A.D, 1687or a needy poet ; they might express astonishment to 1689.when Wigwams, the speaker of one of the exclusionparliaments, became solicitor-general ; when Sunderlanddeserted his principles and his faith ; or whentheir favourite dramatist became a renegade to hisreligion ; but their astonishment was unmingledwith apprehension, since the contempt and ridiculewith which these deserters were assailed was sogreat, that none could be induced, by their success,to imitate their conduct.This unanimity throughout the nation may accountfor the tranquillity which reigned at the commencementof the year 1G88. James, althoughnominally successful in all his enterprises, had madeno material progress towards the establishment ofthe Catholic religion ; and the Whigs were obligedto remain quiet under the flagrant violations of thelaws which were hourly taking place, until somenew attack upon their church should excite theTories to another fit of resistance. This opportunitywas soon afforded.Early in this year when the king republished hisdeclaration of indulgence, urged on by Petre, whonow began to feel some jealousy of Sunderland,he added to it an order, which was intended as aninsult to the church. They shall eat their own444 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, dung, was the insolent expression of this priest,adopting a phrase to be found in the Old Testament.to 1689. When he added the clause requiring the clergy,throughout the kingdom, to read the declaration intheir churches immediately after divine service, theyalmost unanimously refused. A meeting of thebishops was held at Lambeth Palace, and it wasresolved to petition the king to recal his order.*The language of this petition affords a striking proofof the amelioration which the events of a few monthshad caused in the Tory creed. The most reveredmembers of a party, whose organ had, upon James'saccession, promised an unconditional and unlimitedobedience, now dared to call in question the exerciseof a prerogative which the courts of law had solemnlydecided to be inherent in the crown; and, restrainedby the rules of courtesy from avowing the realmotives of their refusal,. they even condescended tofound it upon an affection for the laws, and anunwillingness to acknowledge an illegal prerogative.The words of this petition were, "that the greataverseness found in themselves to their distributingand publishing, in all their churches, your majesty'slate declaration for liberty of conscience, proceedsneither from any want of duty or obedience toyour majesty ; our holy mother, the church ofEngland, being, both in her principles and herBurnet.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 445constant practice, unquestionably loyal, and having, chap.to her credit honour, been more than once publicly ^- , , , . . A.D. 1687acknowledged to be so by your gracious majesty ; to 16H9.nor yet from any want of tenderness to dissenters,in relation to whom we are willing to come to sucha temper as shall be thought fit, when the mattershall be considered and settled in parliament andconvocation: but among many other considerations,from this especially, because that declaration isfounded upon such a dispensing power, as hath beenoften declared illegal in parliament, and particularlyin the years 1662 and I672, and in the beginningof your majesty's reign ; and is a matter of so greatmoment and consequence to the whole nation, bothin church and state, that your petitioners cannot,in common prudence, honour, or conscience so farmake themselves parties to it, as a distribution of itall over the nation, and the solemn publication ofit once and again, even in God's house, and in thetime of divine service, must amount to in commonand reasonable construction."The Oxford decree, three years before, markedthe extreme flood of Toryism. This petition isthe first evidence of its ebb. Its language, restingthe refusal, not upon the danger such a tolerationwould cause to their religion — the most natural topicfor a body of ecclesiastics — but upon the constitutionalpoint of the illegality of the dispensing power,446 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, was bolder than any which James had heard sinceXV. .he had become king. His parliament had presumedto 1689. only to make oblique complaints, and when theyaddressed James to dismiss those whom he then protected,by the exercise of his dispensing power, theyalmost recognised that power, by offering to compensatethem for the loss of their appointments. Thebishops now afforded a proof of a remarkable revulsionof feeling within those few months ; shaming ahouse of commons by the firmness of their opposition,speaking not only as churchmen, but ascitizens, and struggling for the preservation of thestate, as well as the integrity of the church, theyeither proved that the Tories were become consciousof the fallacy of their political dogmas, and wereapproximating to those of the Whigs, or if the alliancewere temporary and insincere, they, at least,acknowledged the superiority of the party theyaffected to join ; and, in adopting their language,rendered that homage which hypocrisy always yieldsto that she imitates. There is no reason, however,to doubt the sincerity of the Tories. At this timea sufficient reason for their sudden change, both ofsentiments and action, may be found in the verydifferent position in which they were now placed,to that which they had before occupied. It is easyfor the dominant party to hold, that those whomthey oppress should submit without a murmur, butTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4^he must be either more or less than man who feels CHAP.11- ^V-the scourge and becomes a convert to the doctrine. -The trial of the bishops for the presentation of thispetition might suggest to some the idea that Jameswas struck with a judicial infatuation : their acquittalby a jury packed by the court, carefully soundedbeforehand,* and containing among them not onlydissenters and persons employed in the public offices,but some even of the king's household, t shows howthoroughly all parties detested their persecution.The manner in which the verdict was received is aproof still less equivocal. Reresby calls the tumultuousshout which passed over the kingdom " a veryrebellion in noise." The huzza from the audience incourt " was echoed from without," says Sir JamesMackintosh, "by a shout of joy which sounded likea crack of the ancient and massy roof of WestminsterHall ; " but the most terrible echo of that shout,which resounded in the ears of the baffled tyrant, wasthat which was caught up by the troops that surroundedhim at Hounslow, and filled the camp with cheerswhich no military discipline could restrain — this outbursttold him that his soldiers sympathized with thecitizens. Henceforward he must have felt that theJohnston's Letters. — Gutch Collectanea Curiosa,vo\. \.,-j- Arnold, the brewer of the p. 374 ; Ellis, 2d series, vol. iv.,royal household, for a long time p. 103 ; Mackintosh, p. 274.opposed the verdict of acquittal.448 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, army, upon which he had bestowed such pains, wasXVformidable only to himself. The dissenters vied withto 1689. the churchmen in their expressions of joy; and eventhe acidity of sectarian animosity was lost in theeffervescence of the national exultation.* The Romannuncio writes in religious horror, that " the fires overthe whole city, the drinking in every street, accompaniedby cries to the health of the bishops and confusionto the Catholics, with the play of fireworks, thedischarge of fire-arms, and the other demonstrations offurious gladness, mixed with impious outrage againstreligion, which were continued during the night,formed a scene of unspeakable horror, displaying inall its rancour the malignity of this heretical peopleagainst the church." tThe reverence in which the church and itsministers were held by the public in the seventeenthcentury, and the influence which the latter exercisedover their flocks, were far greater than the experienceof later ages accustoms us to contemplate. Manycircumstances concurred to create and maintain thisinfluence ; education as it now exists was withheldfrom the lower ranks ; very few among them couldSome of the gown were also was like to catch another, butobserved to be as loud as any ; for that he narrowly escaped with thewhich the attorney-general caused crowd." — Ellis's Letters, 2d ser.one of Gray's Inn to be seized, vol. iv., p. 1 10.and bound him to answer to an in- f Mackintosh, p. 276.formation. The solicitor-generalTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 449read, and those few had access to no political works chap.XV.of a popular character. Public meetings were un , '. —known ; and as religious controversy is not found to ' to i689.flourish long among illiterate men, the body of dissenterswas comparatively small.* The yeomen ofthe counties resorted to their parish church, andwere content to take their politics, as they took theirreligion, from their minister. Oral communicationsspread but slowly, and with great inaccuracy. Thereading-desk was the only vehicle for the extensivepublication of any document among this importantclass. Hence the numerous orders for reading actsof government, and the numerous enactments requiringlegal notices in the parish churches. Unaccustomedto the consideration of political subjects,flattered by having any such affair submitted to theirjudgment, and hearing only an ex parte statementof the merits of the question, a speciously writtendeclaration from the government seldom failed toAccording to a computation holders throughout iilngland weremade in the next reign, the free estimated, upon an average, asConformists to nonconformists 22 A to 1.Conformists to papists 178 into I.Conformists and nontumbrmists to papists 186"- to 1.At this time the numbers of but a small portion of the residenonconformists were probably dents in towns, and it was amongsomewhat increased, and those of these that the spirit of dissentthe papists diminished. This chiefly prevailed,computation, however, includedVOL. I. 2 G50 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, produce some effect. But if, as was usually theXV.case, the reading of the document was followed byto 1689. an harangue from the pulpit, convincing and excitingeither by its eloquence or its violence, theimpulse thus given was irresistible, and prejudiceswere implanted in the auditors according to thepleasure of the preacher. In the towns the influenceof the established clergy was somewhat less ; theconflict of opinions was, of course, more frequent,and its effects were seen in the increase of conventiclesbut still the absence of education precludedthe rapid circulation of political knowledge, and thedissenter, like the churchman, was commonly contentedto receive his politics from the pulpit.That such a body of men as the country clergy,frequently cut off" from all extensive intercourse withthe world, looking upon the church as the greatobject of veneration, and the court as the greatsource of preferment, should wield so vast a politicalpower, was a circumstance often perilous to the libertiesof England. This is a consideration which mustnever be neglected when we are seeking the cause ofsome sudden change in the sentiments of the nation,and, consequently, in the position of parties.Upon the occasion of the outrage upon the church,in the persons of the bishops, this power was calledinto exercise under circumstances peculiarly favourable.The elders of the church, which they hadTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 451from their childhood been taught to revere, persecuted CHAP.XV.by those papists whom they had as early learned tohate, was a theme upon which no minister could ' Iq i689.fail to be eloquent, by which no congregation couldfail to be excited : but there was a difference in theseharangues which few of the hearers could fail toremark. In the reign of Charles II., they hadbeen excited against popery only, now they learnedthat tyranny, as well as popery, was a legitimatecause of resistance. The prelates, whom they werecalled upon to succour, were not only the guardiansof their religion, they were also the champions oftheir liberties : these liberties were doubtless, inmany instances, explained, their value described,and the duty of defending them inculcated, — theknowledge was never forgotten.Neither the united voice of the nation, nor theopen manifestation of insubordination in the army,could open the eyes of the infatuated monarch. Renderedonly more desperate by the opposition heencountered, he again remodelled the corporations ;he removed the two judges, Power and Holloway,who had summed up in favour of an acquittal,* dis-hereby.Ellis's Original Life of James, but not, it mustLetters, Second Series, vol. iv. be admitted, upon the authorityGazette. This well-authenticated of those original journals, fromfact, which is mentioned by almost which his work is chiefly com-every contemporary authority, has piled,been denied by the editor of the2g2^-5(2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, charged many of the Middlesex magistrates, andreplaced them by papists ; he ordered the trial beforeto 1689. them of those who were engaged in the tumultuousrejoicing, and he commanded the introduction ofIrish Catholics into the army. * He was baffled againin all these attempts. No management of the corporationscould obtain him any favourable report ofthe probable result of an election ; the grand juriesthrew out all his indictments against the rioters ;and those officers who had received the command toadmit Catholics into their companies chose rather tosubmit to the sentence of a court-martial than obeyit. James dismissed them in a manner which securedfor him the full odium of the punishment, withoutthe usual credit for energy in its infliction ; and theofficers were fully recompensed by the plaudits oftheir countrymen, tSunderland appeared as blind as his master to thesigns of the times ; to atone for his recent advocacyof more moderate measures and to keep pace withPetre, who was rapidly rising above him, he openlyprofessed his conversion, and was publicly admittedinto the church of Rome, tReresby. description of the insurmountablef Reresby. See also the letter nature of the difficulties whichfrom Father Petre to La Chaise, James was now attempting toprinted in the appendix to vol. i. overcome.of Mr. Trevor's Life of William % Ibid. Burnet.in. This letter conveys a vividTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 453The ecclesiastical commissioners were more pru- chap.XV.dent, they issued but never enforced an order for a — '-return of those clergymen who had not read the ' to 1689.declaration, and soon after Sprat, whose habitualwatchfulness had discovered the probability of achange, sent in his resignation. Jefferies swore theman was mad, but his fellow commissioners thoughtdifferently. The commission was thenceforwardvirtually dissolved.Hitherto the opposition of the nation had onlybeen passive. Those who had proposed violentmeasures had not met with the unanimity whichcould alone procure their success. The prospect ofa Protestant successor tended to reconcile them tothe endurance of hardships which promised to be buttemporary.Two days after the committal of the bishops(June 10), the queen was delivered of a son, andthis hope also disappeared. The legitimacy of thisprince is one of the best authenticated facts in ourhistory. There were present no less than twenty ofthe privy council at his birth, the room containedalso a great number of ladies, the curtains of the bedwere open, and a concourse of persons at the side, alldeeply interested in the event, and many of themanxiously upon the watch to detect an expectedfraud. Dr. Hugh Chamberlain, a known Whig,who had suffered for his political principles, was the454 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, surgeon, and although, by the accident of being fromhome when sent for, he did not arrive until an hour^'^to\S. after the birth, that could not be attributed to anycontrivance of the king, and is satisfactorily accountedfor by the event occurring a month beforethe queen had anticipated it. * This gentleman longafterwards declared his conviction that the child thenbrought forward, as the Prince of Wales, was reallythe son of the queen ; t and no person can now readthe answers returned by the Princess Anne, to thetwenty-three questions which her sister, the Princessof Orange, proposed upon this subject, without beingentirely convinced of the perfect fairness of the wholetransaction, although it is evident that the princess,who wrote them, herself inclined to a differentopinion, t The answer to the thirteenth questionappears conclusive upon the subject, and gives anaccount of the accouchement, which leaves no roomfor doubt in the minds of any who were not predeterminedin their judgments.Notwithstanding this abundant proof it long continuedpart of the creed of both parties that this childwas supposititious. At the time of its birth thewhole nation was obstinately incredulous. LordLetter from the queen to the Sophia. — Dalrymple Appendix,Princess of Orange. — Ellis's On vol. ii., p. 311.final Letters. % Dalrymple's Appendix.f Letter to the ElectressTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 455Clarendon remarked, with despair, that only two or cHAP.XV.three persons in a large conversation provided them '-AT) lf«ft7selves with the form of prayer issued for the occasion. ' to 1689.The Bishop of London did not believe in the child'sidentity himself, and doubted whether there was oneperson in a thousand who did. * The Bishop of St.Asaph, equally sceptical, continued to avow hisopinion long afterwards, and the Bishop of Bristolshared the conviction of his brethren. Mordaunt,Danby, and Devonshire, insinuated their suspicionsto the Prince of Orange, t and so strongly were theserumours supported and authenticated at that court,that the prayer, which upon the arrival of the newshad been read in the chapel of the princess, was discontinuedupon receipt of the fuller intelligence.Motives of prudence t caused it to be resumed uponthe remonstrance of James, but both that monarchand his queen complained, the latter to the princessherself, that no notice of the child had ever beentaken either by her or by the prince her husband intheir letters, notwithstanding the frequent mentionwhich had been made of him in the letters whichboth she and James had written to themes Thisdirect complaint only drew from the princess anNote to the Oxford edition § Ellis's Original Letters, vol.of Burnet. iii., p. 348. See also Second Series,dalrymple Appendix. vol. iv., p. 117.X Burnet, vol. i., p. 754.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, equivocal expression of affection for any son of theking her father.to 1689. Every incident during the confusion of a crowdedlying-in room was tortured into a proof of deception,for the nation had arrived at a conclusion that suchit would be, long before the event occurred. Thestories were various and contradictory ; some affirmedthat the supposititious child had been brought in in awarrington, and that the queen was not pregnantat all ; others that the labour was real, but the chidwas still-born. The account given by Burnet requiresno less than three supposititious children, sincehe has proofs of the death of two, both equallyplausible.* The real grounds of the incredulity soprevalent upon this subject, were the knowledgewhich all men had of the bigotry of the king, andtheir conviction that as there was no baseness whichhis priests would not advocate, in order to secure soimportant an object as a popish successor, so therewas nothing which they could not influence him toundertake. Upon the first announcement of thequeen's pregnancy, the Catholics had been lavish oftheir vows, and bold in their prophecies : the Protestantsno sooner heard these confident predictions,than they were convinced that they were notBurnet, vol. i., p. 753. See the notes upon this part of Burnetin the Oxford edition.A.D. 1687to 1689:THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4^7hazarded without some information, less fallible than chap.the aspect of the stars, or the miraculous powers of.the Roman church : when they were fulfilled nonedoubted that the prophets had themselves taken carethat the event should confirm their skill.The legitimacy of this prince is by no means anunimportant consideration with respect to our subject,since these fables were long used by the Toriesas a cloak, under which they attempted to disguisethe inconsistency of their after conduct.This event more firmly united all the Protestants ofthe empire against James. Both Whigs and Toriessaw in it the extinction of all hope of resurrection,either for their religion or their liberties. The Toriessaw in the fi^aud, for such they doubtless conscientiouslybelieved it to be, a violation of all those doctrinesof hereditary and divine right which they had soopenly professed in more prosperous days, and which,even in their present state of humiliation, wererather avoided than renounced. The birth of thischild, which the king hailed as the event thatwas to consolidate his power, was the immediatecause of the loss of his throne. The discontentswhich the violent measures of James caused, hadnot evaporated in popular clamours and judicialstruggles. Article the people complained theirleaders had coalesced, they naturally looked to theheir presumptive to the throne, a zealous ProtestsTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ant, professing the principles of constitutional libertyand religious toleration, as their retire from theA. U. 1687to iti89. tyranny of the present occupier ; and applying tothe inheritance of a kingdom the rules whichgovern a private property, they conceived thatshe who had a right to the throne, after thedetermination of the life interest of the presentholder, had also a present power of interferencefor the preservation of that right, and that herhusband was bound to protect her from the consequencesof those measures which could only find anatural conclusion in the destruction of the monarchy.At the commencement of I687 the prince hadsent Dykvelt to England as his ambassador, a manwell informed as to his intentions, and faithful tohis interests. It was the business of this agent,besides the ostensible negotiation with which he wasintrusted, to mark the course of popular feeling inthe country ; to hold frequent communication withthe Protestant party ; to encourage them in theiropposition to popery ; and to nourish their animosityagainst France. To this man first the Whigthen the Tory leaders resorted : they continuedto communicate with him, and afterwards with hissuccessor Count Zuylesteyne, as one national party.*Mr. Fitzpatrick writes to the great prudence, and the zeal he isPrince concerning Dykvelt, " His believed to have for your highnessTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4.59The result of this connexion is soon to be traced in CHAP.XV.the letters received by the prince. * During the '.same year, and the commencement of the next, the ' to 1689.Bishops of London, Bath, Bristol, and St. Asaph ;and among the temporal peers, Shrewsbury, Devonshire,Bath, Halifax, Bedford, Nottingham, Lumley,Mordaunt, Danby, Rochester, Churchill, and evenSunderland t — men of every shade of politics — arefound in active correspondence with the prince,always declaring their attachment to his personasJames became more open in his attacks, increasingin their expressions of devotion ; and upon thebirth of the Prince of Wales, we find some intimatingthat this devotion is still unshaken ;t and nearly allreferring to conversations with Dykvelt, upon subjectswhich were probably too perilous to becommitted to such a channel of communication.and the princess, has got him the 187, it is dated as early as March,universal good opinion of all parties 1687. The princess Annediffering never so much scribed this lady as a "flattering,in their religions, which your high dissembling, false woman ;" and ofness will easily find by the free the husband and wife, she says,dom with which they have commun As she is, throughout, the reanimatedtheir innermost thoughts, est jade that ever was, so is he thehopes, and fears to him." — Dal subtlest, workings villain thatrymjiles Jpp. vol. ii., p. 194. is on the face of the earth." —Dalrymple's App., vol. ii., Dalrymple Ajyp. vol. ii., p. 299. —p. 180. Evelyn speaks differently of her.t Both personally (letter of J " I am as much this eighteenthMay 28, 1687) and through his of June as I was the ninth yourwife See this mysterious epistle highnesses devoted, &c.,Dalrymple's App., vol. ii., p. awry "dalrymple, vol. ii., p. 288.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Before the birth of the Prince of Wales it was inXV. . . . .agitation to mite the Prince of Orange over to pro-ad.1687 ,., r.-ii- n , ,to 1689. sect, by a forcible interference, the institutions of thecountry. The originators of this revolution were,perhaps, the two best representatives of the twonational parties which could have been chosen. TheEarl of Devonshire, who has before, as Lord WilliamCavendish, the friend of Russell, and only the secondamong the founders of the Whig party, claimed ouradmiration. Lord Danby, the constant and violentopponent of Lord Cavendish and all his party; theirstrenuous and at last their humbled enemy ; a Toryin politics, an admirer of prerogative, a hater ofpopery, and one who submitted to the alliance ofFrance only to resist the claims of the people *' AtWhittington," says a writer who probably relied uponthe tradition of the country, '* a village on the edgeof Scarsdale in Derbyshire, the Earls of Devonshireand Danby, with the Lord Delamere, privately concertedthe plan of the revolution. The house inwhich they met is at present a farm-house, and thecountry people distinguish the room where they satby the name of the plotting-parlour." *Dr. Akenside's Ode, addressed to the Earl of Huntingdon :Where Scarsdale's cliffs the swelling pastures boundThere oft let the farmer hailThe sacred orchard which bowers his gate,And show to strangers passing down the valeWhere Cavendish, Booth, and Osborne sat.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4,61Lord Danby himself confirms this anecdote. When CHAP., XV.speaking of his impeachment by the Whigs, he says, '- —A D 1687** The Duke of Devonshire, also, and I were partners ' to i689.in the secret trust about the revolution ; and he didmeet me and Mr. John Darcy for that purpose, ata town called Whittington in Derbyshire"*Upon the birth of the Prince of Wales the invitationwas no longer delayed, but when the decisivemoment drew near the hearts of many who wishedwell to the expedition failed. Halifax had been sofruitful in excuses for delay, that the prince judgedit imprudent to intrust him with the secret ; Mor-daunt,once so impetuous, was now all despondence;Nottingham altogether drew back — he could notsummon sufficient firmness to risk the penalties oftreason. This latter nobleman was now consideredat the head of the Tory party ; for Rochester hadlost that position by his mean compliance with theking, and by sitting and voting upon the ecclesiasticalcommission, and Danby's name was still associatedwith the recollections of the French alliance,and the iniquitous intrigues revealed by Montague.When bursting from their country's chain,E'en in the midst of deadly harms,Of papal snares, and lawless arms,They planned for freedom this her noblest reign."[The passage quoted in the text is a note to these lines.]The Earl of Danb/s (then the Duke of Leeds) Letters. Introduction,p. vi.462 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The invitation which was at last transmitted toXVthe prince, was signed only by seven persons ; butA.D. 1687to1689. these were persons of the highest station and thegreatest influence. It is said that the meeting atwhich it was agreed upon and signed, was held atthe house of the Earl of Shrewsbury.* This noblemanwas the first who subscribed the invitation : hewas followed by the Earl of Devonshire, whose nameis succeeded by that of the Earl of Danby. LordLumley signed next, and his name is followed bythat of the Bishop of London. The two concludingsignatures startle us with the names of Russell andSidney, once more in conjunction. The first wasAdmiral Russell, so well remembered as the victorat La Hogue, and yet more interestingly connectedwith the present scene as the cousin of Lord WilliamRussell. Henry Sidney was the brother of thepatriot, whose name he bore ; he had exerted himselfwith great address and indefatigable industry to bringabout the expedition, and he now stepped forward toclaim a place among that little company of seven,who, by a deliberate act of high treason, staked theirlives upon the success of their attempt to regeneratetheir country.Upon analyzing this council of seven, we discoverin it none of those elements of republicanism whichBurnet.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 468lurked in the council of six, of the pretended Rye CHAP.house conspirators ; an important circumstance inthe history of the parties, since it discovers the Whig ' to 1689.party for the first time as a purely constitutionalfaction, purified from the antimonarchical alloy withwhich it had before been combined. Not one of thesubscribers to the invitation to the Prince of Orangehad the most distant idea of effecting any change inthe form of government. With Shaftesbury andSidney departed all mention or thought of a commonwealthin the consultations of party leaders ; theonly subject now canvassed was not the overthrow ofthe monarchy, but the recovery of the constitution.Devonshire, Sidney, and perhaps Russell, belongedto the old Whig party ; Danby to that section ofthe Tories who looked upon their power and place asinvolved in the safety of the Protestant church, andhad moreover recently discovered the inconveniencesof living under a tyranny. The Bishop of London,who had once worn a sword,* was an example of thebest but smallest section of the Tory party ; hecombined with a devotion to his church a love forhis country's liberties ; he could contend for therights of his order without placing among those rightsthe destruction of those of others ; and while heHe had held a commission in her flight, and took the commandthe guards. When the Princess of the troop of volunteer horsemenAnne fled he accompanied her in which escorted her to Nottingham.464 THE HISTORY OF Part.CHAP, claimed protection for the church of England, he^ offered no disgraceful barter of the civil Liberties ofto 1689. ^^os® whom she influenced. The Earl of Shrewsburywas a young nobleman of high character andgreat popularity, influential with both parties, althoughhimself a moderate Whist : he exhibited all the zealof a recent convert against popery, and it was perhapsthe fear of that faith which he had once professed,which rendered him so active upon this occasion.The very circumstance of having left theCatholic for the Protestant communion, at such atime, evidences a sincerity and devotion in his religioussentiments which were probably found in fewof the others.Such was the complete amalgamation of partieswhich was caused by the tyranny and bigotry ofJames, and which produced the revolution of 1688.It would be foreign to the purpose of this work torelate the particular accidents which facilitated thesuccess of the great design they had undertaken.*The treachery of Sunderland, the profligate, butThat Sunderland acted treaters he calls Jefferies " un treacherouslythere is abundant proof; vacant qui fait tout ce qu'on veut etto determine how far that treble seul peut-care qui ne prends pascherry extended, and how far he des mesures secretes." Sunderlandwas credited by the prince, would is supposed to have communicatedrequire some discussion of the with the prince through Sidney,authorities. Bonrepaux was pro notoriously the favoured lover ofbably right when writing to his his countess.court concerning James's minis-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 465masterly, dexterity with which he contrived to CHAP.xy.deceive both his master and Barillon, and to keep '.both in ignorance of the events which were passing * [q iggg.in Holland, the drowsy inactivity of James, hisinfatuated indifference to the approaching tempest,his ill-timed pride inducing him to refuse the protectionof Louis, and to destroy the effect of the onlythreat at which the States could feel alarm, — theseare subjects for the general historian ; the streams ofparty having now formed a temporary junction, itdoes not become necessary to mention every circumstancewhich occurred to accelerate or impede theircommon course.To canvass the conduct which every public manpursued after the prince had landed, would lead usinto a tedious and desultory history of the period.*That of the bishops, however, is too prominent, andbears too much reference to the tenets of a party tobe wholly unnoticed. James, who had been so longaccustomed to hear fi-om these fathers of Toryismthe courtly doctrines that he loved, might well beJames's letters at this time, speculating on the stars, unionsof the anxious in- scions that he is treading upon aterest he took in the war against precipice. See the correspondencethe infidels, and of his joy at the of this period in Dalrymple's App,circumstance of the pope's accept a mine of authorities so copiousing his mediation in the affair of that it would be tedious to give athe franchises, realize the idea of reference to each passage glancedthe fabulist, showing us a man at in the text.VOL. I. 2 H46liTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, surprised when he found it asserted in the declarationXV. ^ .of the invader, that several of them had invited himA.D. 1687to 1689. to lead an army into their sovereign's kingdom, andto appear in arms against the monarch who, theywere used to teach, was the delegate of their God.He must, however, have been yet more surprisedwhen, upon showing the declaration, he could drawfrom them only a faint and verbal denial, and whenthey formally refused to put that denial into writing,or to solemnly express an abhorrence of the prince'senterprise.Compton, who was more suspected than hisbrethren, was interrogated at a previous audience,and his reply had been a skilful equivocation, thathe was confident that the rest of the bishops wouldas readily answer in the negative as himself. Atthe subsequent interview he refused to answer anyfurther, referring to what he had already said. Forthat equivocation the bishop has been severely, butrather absurdly, censured by one who appears to haveno kindly feelings towards the authors of this revolution.The bishop by signing the invitation to theprince, had committed an act which the law calledhigh treason. He was now in the power of the kingagainst whom that treason had been done. Surelyif that act was in itself laudable or necessary, there isno rule either of morality or honour which couldenjoin an avowal which would have cost him his life.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4^7When we find the bishops of the church of CHAP.XV.England, the very head of that portion of their '.party whose politics were part of their religion, re- ' io 1689.fusing to express their abhorrence of an open rebellionthen raging in the kingdom, we see the mighty-changewhich Toryism had already undergone. Thedoctrines of the church had given way before theterror of the dangers which threatened her temporalities.The desertions which immediately ensued havebeen recorded as examples of the blackest ingratitude,and in too many instances the imputationcannot be denied. Men who had owed theirwhole advancement to James, now promised fidelity,were trusted, and betrayed him. No considerationcan make us regard with pleasure the dissimulationof Ormond or Drumlawrig, or readwithout strong reprobation the refined treacheryof Churchill. It must, however, be remembered,that those who are most prominent in the catalogueof traitors could have procured, upon the conditionof their conversion, far higher honours under Jamesthan any they could hope to receive from theprince. Whether the crusade which James hadcommenced against all who continued steadfast tothe English church had absolved him from all tiesof gratitude, was a question which the casuistry of2 H 2468 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, a courtier would probably solve in the affirmative ;XVand since he was persecuted for his religion he mightto 1689. easily persuade himself that he was justified injoining a prince who treated the report that hehad a design upon the crown as a calumny, andstated his object to be, not the dethronement of themonarch, but, the protection of the religion andliberty of the subject.That many of those who now forsook the kinghad no further intention than the redress of grievancesis proved by their after conduct. Among thepresent partisans of the Prince of Orange appear themost illustrious of those names which were afterwardsreckoned among the party of the Jacobites, and inthe muster-rolls of the pretenders.These observations apply only to individuals ofthe Tory party. The Whigs* had no favours torequite : in too many instances they had wrongs torevenge.Upon the landing of the prince it became immediatelyevident how impotent the priests behind theJames has attempted, in his of having remitted this fine : theMemoirs, to fix a charge of ingram fact appears to be that the dukelatitude upon the Earl of Devon had the greatest difficulty in pro-shire.I have ahead mentioned curing that certain bonds given bythe circumstance of this nobleman the two Charles's, for money ad-leadingan insolent courtier from danced to them in their extremepresence-chamber by the nose cities, should be admitted as aand being fined £30,000 for the set-off to this enormous mulct,assault. James claims the meritTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.throne were to avert the ruin they had called down. chap.XV.Petre had obtained the disgrace of Sunderland, who,dismissed from all his offices, and perhaps trembling ' to 1689.for his head,* declared, to his former dependants, thathe merely retired because it was, at present, inexpedientto employ Catholics. For a moment Petreand his fellow labourer, the Earl of Belford, heldthe ascendancy : but James, alarmed by the suddennessand magnitude of his danger, was now reallyaware of their incapacity, and turned for advice tothose of the Protestants who were still with him.These, however, could already read the signsof the times. They had nothing to expect fromhis success, every thing from his failure. Halifaxand Rochester now intrigued, not for the honourof serving, but for the opportunity of betrayinghim. Halifax was the successful competitor ; joinedwith Nottingham, who had refused to sit at thecouncil-board, and Godolphin — who had alreadychanged his allegiance, in a commission to treatwith the king, he, at his first meeting with theconfidential agent of the prince, expressed his determinationto use his powers as he might direct.After an interview with the princes he wrote to theking, declaring that he thought there was a designAs he himself afterwards Country," but this is a tissue ofdeclared in his pamphlet, called the most notorious falsehoods."A Letter to a Person in the f Reresby.470 THE HISTORY OF PARTY,CHAP, against his person, and Godolphin seconded theXV. . .intrigue by a letter of advice to withdraw, and withinto 1689. ^ y^^'^ ^i^ people would invite him back upontheir knees.*It was, doubtless, this letter from Halifax whichcaused James's suddenly conceived and rapidlyexecuted project of flight. The services of thatnobleman in bringing about the revolution were sogreat, that we could wish to remove from him thatstigma of treachery which renders deeds, that werethe salvation of his country, the dishonour of theman.The sufferings of James were now, doubtless,great : deserted by all those who had been accustomedto deem themselves honoured by his slightestcommand, a terrified fugitive, stealing under thecover of darkness and disguise, from his capital andhis kingdom, then a captive in the hands of therabble of a small fishing-town, cringing, entreating,and imploring his life from these ignoble masters ofhis fate, while the nobles of his council sought, inaffected ignorance of his situation, an excuse forconniving at his destruction : then again, when, foramoment, installed in his former dignity, and whenbeginning to remember the language of command,!Lord Dartmouth's note f Sheffield, Duke of Bucking-uponBurnet, Oxford edition, ham's Account of the Revoiriii., p. 345. tion. — Works, vol. ii., p. 93.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4.7Ibanished at midnight from his palace by the voice CHAP.XVof the man he had confided in as his ambassador,reduced to the necessity of borrowing so small a sum as " ^ 1689.a hundred guineas from a subject, and, lastly, obtainingby favour of his enemy, an ignominious safetyin a second secret flight ; these were sufferingswhich, having none of the dignity that commonlyennobles the reverses of royalty, must have bornewith tenfold weight upon the haughty spirit of thelast of the Stuart kings. Yet, amid all this misfortune,he must be possessed of a very morbid sensibilitywho can pity James. When we picture himkneeling and crying before the hooting rabble, wesee also Monmouth kneeling at his feet ; the rudejests which assailed James from the fishermen ofPetersham, were not nearly so savage as the cooldenial of mercy with which the duke was dismissedfrom the presence-chamber to the scaffold. Whatsuffering, which James underwent, can we comparewith the horrors which he jested of, as Jefferies'scampaign in the west? No one ever thought ofpitying the fate which now overtook that instrumentof human butchery, why, then, should we wastecommiseration upon him who was the real author ofall the other's crimes, and who superadded to themthe diabolical deeds which he personally perpetratedin the torture-chamber in Scotland ?In the midst of all his distress one act in the dark472 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, catalogue of his crimes was brought before him withits full force. Previous to his flight he called1689. ^^^^ those nobles who were within reach of his summons,to advise with them upon his affairs. The Earlof Bedford, whom age and despondency had longsecluded from public business, came among the rest.** You, my lord," said James to this popular noblemanas he sat at the council-board, " could do muchfor me in this extremity." The earl replied that hewas now old and incapable of exertion ; " but," headded with a sigh, " I once had a son who mighthave been of infinite service to your majesty at thismoment." It is said that James was pale and confoundedat the reply. It was the rebuke of a fatherto the murderer of his son.*Even the treachery of which James was the victimwas in many instances of a character to excite onlydisapprobation of the traitors, not commiseration forthe betrayed. Their master had rivalled them all iningratitude. Hyde, Earl of Rochester, at one timehis chief, at all times his devoted supporter, who hadserved him faithfully through his difficult and apparentlyhopeless struggle for the crown, was cast asidelike a worn garment, when success .had rendered himunnecessary. The eloquence of Halifax, to which hewas not less indebted for his throne, could not pro-bennett.The HISTORY OF PARTY.sect him from similar treatment ; and not the most CHAP.XVunconditional compliance, even to the abandonment !of his religion, could preserve Sunderland, when ^ ' J^ ^Q^g^he halted for a moment in the course he was givento run.The king arrived in France on the last day of theyear 1688.474 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XVI.Views of the two parties — Meeting of the convention parliament —Debates upon the settlement of the government — Somers — Separationof the parties upon the question of a regency — Election ofWilliam and Mary to fill the vacant throne.XVI The tyranny of James was the force which had^ jj jggg compressed the two national factions together : nosooner was this removed than they sprang back fromeach other with a powerful elasticity, and resumedtheir antagonist positions. Before the meeting ofthe convention parliament the opposition was renewedwhile the lords were yet sitting summonedat Guildhall and at Westminster, under the presidencyof Halifax. At the meeting of lords and commons,which the prince called to deliberate upon thestate of the nation, Nottingham, the head and organof the Tories, opposed the proposition of assemblinga parliament by letters from the Prince of Orange,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4<7'5insisted upon the illegality of such an assembly, and CHAP,suggested the strange expedient of addressing theking, whom they had driven from the country, tosummon a parliament, that they might legally dethronehim.* The slender support which this amendmentreceived, discovered how little attention the olddoctrines of Toryism were now likely to command.This was still more unequivocally shown in theelections which took place in obedience to the addressof the convention and the letters of the prince.The Tories, frightened at the success they had them ^selves assisted to achieve, were now anxious to -^neutralize its effects, and applied themselves to the ^difficult task of reconciling their acts with their prin -cipher. Nottingham proposed the establishment ofa regency, which should govern in the name of theking. This was considered by his party as the leasttheoretical irregularity : if they failed to obtain this,the next best expedient for them was to presume ademise of the crown, and, passing over the Prince ofWales by means of the convenient fable that he was asupposititious child, to declare the Princess of OrangequeeneThese schemes, which were already agitated, naturallycompromised their projectors with the Prince ofBurnet. she enclosed the letter to her hussDanby wrote to the princess band,offering to accomplish this, andA.D, 1689.476 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Orange, who, from a very comprehensible dislike to- become the subject of his wife, was equally hostile tothem both. The Whigs, on the contrary, wishedto secure the permanent triumph of their principles,and they were the rather inclined to raise the princeto the throne, since, having no semblance of anyhereditary title to it, his reign and those of his successorswould form an ever present and ready vindicationof their constitutional creed. The prince wasnow universally popular, and the electors, partlybecause they agreed with the Whigs, and partly alsobecause they were grateful for their deliverance, andthought that their deliverer deserved to be theiroking, returned a great majority of Whigs to theconvention parliament.On the 2'2d of January, 1689, this memorableparliament met at Westminster, and the complexionof the two houses was immediately shown by thelords choosing Halifax as their chairman in oppositionto Danby, and the commons unanimouslyelecting Mr. Powle to be their speaker. The appearanceof the new house of commons immediatelydeclared the complete re-establishment of the oldWhig party. Looking around the benches a spectatormight have dreamed that nearly ten years hadbeen annihilated, and that he was looking upon thelast parliament which Charles had assembled withinthese walls. Birch, Powle, Lee, Lyttelton, Capell,A.D. 1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^77Maynard, Harbordd, Treby, were all there — names CHAP.XVI.and voices which were well remembered by those ofthe assembly who could call back the days of Whigascendancy ; and if some vacant seat suggested amelancholy recollection of him who had filled it,these miffht now remember that Russell had notdied, and Jones had not laboured, in vain ; thatHampden, their friend and colleague in the labour ofthe Exclusion bill, the son of a yet more illustriousfather, was yet present to lead their debates, and addthe weight of his matured experience to their decisionsand that he had, moreover, given them a sonwho inherited the hereditary patriotism of his house,and had already suffered with constancy for thecause for which his father was still striving and hisgrandfather had died.The progress of the momentous debates whichensued quickly showed how different were now theviews and prospects of the nation to those whichappeared at the time to which we have referred.The voices of these men had then proclaimed,perhaps accelerated, the approaching extinction ofliberty ; they sounded as the flapping of the wingswhich ignite the pyre of the dying phoenix, nowthey arose as the joyous cry with which the samebird of fable springs from her ashes, and wings herway with renovated strength towards the skies.But among these Whig leaders of a former genesisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ration, there appeared others whose powers ofXVI.oratory and strength of opinion manifested in thedebates which ensued, marked them as aspirants toan equality. Mr. Dolben, son of the late Archbishopof York, was one of these. Mr. Wharton,the eldest son of Lord Wharton, who had been oneof the earliest of the men of rank who had joined theprince, now commenced his parliamentary career, andhis first effort was in accordance with the reputationwhich he retained through life, that of a consistent,an able, and an ardent Whig. By far the mostillustrious, however, of those who now for the firsttime took part in debate, was John Somers, a manto whom immediate precedence was willingly yielded.\ But Mr. Somers, who had now arrived at the age ofthirty-seven, had long been known as an activeWhig. At the latter end of Charles's reign, havingrapidly passed through a public school and theUniversity of Oxford, he arrived in London for thepurpose of commencing a course of study for thebar. Possessed of indefatigable industry, directedby a polished and classical taste, Somers had alreadyqualified himself to seize the first opportunity ofdistinction : placed as a pupil with Sir Francis Winnington,who was at that time of some importanceamong the Whigs, he had early access to the chiefmen of the party whose principles he had alreadyespoused. These quickly discovered the value ofA.D, 1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 479their new associate ; he was courted and esteemed CHAP.XVI.by Lord Essex, and he returned the friendship with .which that nobleman honoured him : his able penwas always ready for the service of his party, andalthough it is impossible to agree with the gratefulpanegyric pronounced by Mr. Addison, that LordSomers was the best writer of the age in which helived, yet we may agree with Burnet, who, speakingof a tract written by Mr. Somers, in vindication ofthe grand jury that acquitted Shaftesbury, adds,that he wrote the best papers that came out at thattime. While these and lighter works* occupiedhis leisure, he was increasing in reputation as alawyer ; during the last reign he had been engagedas junior counsel in nearly all those trials whichinvolved constitutional questions : and, at the mostimportant of all of them, that of the bishops, his wasthe address which is said to have had the greatesteffect upon the jury. We have seen that whenJames assumed the mask of universal toleration, andsought to release the Catholics in order that he mighthave their assistance to bind the Protestants,He contributed largely to the land was altogether a politicaltranslations of Plutarch's Lives work, written in favour of theand Ovid's Epistles, which were Exclusion bill, and his share inthen printed by Jonson. Lem- preparing the answer to Charles'spriere. Somers's History of the declaration has been already ad-successionof the crown of Inverted to.480 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Somers was upon the list of those whom he proposedXvi——to have elected. James had, doubtless, been deceivedby the known liberality of Somers's politics,but he quickly substituted for his name that of amore compliant individual, when he found thatSomers judged from the fact of the Protestantsbeing expelled from the great offices of state againstthe laws, what toleration might be expected bythem when that check was withdrawn. Somers isimmediately afterwards found among those who wereconcerting measures for advancing the enterprise ofthe Prince of Orange. Those efforts being crownedwith success, his native city, Worcester, now returnedhim to parliament.*The commons of the convention parliament thusassembled, having agreed, almost without debate, toan address, which the lords had drawn up, to theprince, thanking him for his interposition, and desiringhim, provisionally, to take upon himself theadministration of public affairs, entered immediatelyupon a consideration of the state of the nation. Thatthe debate might be the more unrestricted theyresolved themselves into a committee of the wholehouse, and of this committee Hampden was chairman.Mr. Dolben opened the debate, and arguing thatWalpole's Royal and Noble No. 39. Life of Lord Somers.Authors. Addison's Freeholder, Biog. Brit. Burnet. Tindal.A. D. 1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 481James had voluntarily forsaken the government, CHAP,urged that he had ceased to be king and moved aresolution to that effect. Sir Richard Templeagreed that the king had deserted the government,but could go no further than to say that itwas now their duty to take care of it. Sir ChristopherMargrave, a high Tory and a leader amonghis party, but one of those whose loyalty could notprevent their dismissal from office during the latereign, naturally felt some resentment against the king;he was divided between his fear of James's return andhis horror of Whig doctrines, and he wished to avoidthe responsibility of giving a judgment by referringthe question as one of law to be decided by lawyers.Mr. Wharton repudiated such technicalities, andcared nothing for the words, if it was decidedin effect that the fugitive was not still their king.Maynard, from whom the house expected a solidargument upon the most momentous subject ofconstitutional law, indulged only in inconclusivegeneralities. Sir George Treby was more argumentativeand Sir William Williams, having beforeabandoned the popular party and become the instrumentof their persecution, now, by a second treachery,sought impunity by inveighing against hislate master. Somers followed, and drew a parallelbetween the present case and that of SigismundKing of Sweden, who, when he had tried in vainVOL. I. 2 I482 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, to force his way to the throne, broke the agreementXVI, .which he had entered into with his subjects andretired into Poland ; the Swedes declared thethrone vacant and elected Charles VIII. to fillit, a precedent which, as Somers argued, must gofar to convince foreigners at least of the legality ofthe proceedings which the English nation was aboutto take. Finch, the second son of the Earl ofNottingham and a lawyer of considerable reputation,who, having held the office of solicitor-general,had been dismissed because not quite sufficientlycompliant, had since then joined the Whigs ; he nowfollowed in the debate, and argued in favour of theproposition that the throne was vacant. Sir RobertHoward was the first who argued the question uponthe true and constitutional basis of the responsibilityof the sovereign in extreme cases. The constitutionof the government, said that member, isactually grounded upon pact and covenant nth thepeople* — an essential truth which even the Whigs,in their anxiety to secure unanimity, had hithertorefrained from insisting upon, but one, nevertheless,upon which the question must ultimately be decided.Pollexfen, so long known as the leading Whig advocateat the bar, added his opinion to those of thelawyers who had preceded him, that the crown wasvacant, and Wharton, treating the affair as nowPari. Hist. Hardwicke Papers.A. D. 1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 483decided, called upon the house to fill the vacancy. CHAP.The adherents of the king were few throughout thenation, they were scarcely perceptible in parliament.Some few of the Tories, writes the Duke of Buckingham,*were inclined to the unfortunate king,some out of conscience, but more out of despair offavour from the prince." Of these Lord Bashawonly, one of the few courtiers who had obtained anelection, stood up to defend his late master. Butthe house appeared unanimous ; it was in vain thathe denied that the departure of the king was voluntary,in vain that he dwelt upon the importance ofthe subject, and pleaded for an adjournment ; thecommons were already resolved ; they passed theirgreat resolution, that ** King James II. having endeavouredto subvert the constitution of this kingdomby breaking the original contract between king andpeople, and by the advice of Jesuits and otherwicked persons, having violated the fundamental laws,and withdrawn himself out of this kingdom, hasabdicated the government, and that the throne isthereby vacant, "tHampden carried up this resolution to the house oflords, and the next day the commons resolved, withouta dissentient voice, that "it hath been found byexperience inconsistent with the safety and welfareAccount of the Revolution. t Commons' Journals. Pari. Hist.2 I 2i84THE HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D, 1689.CHAP, of this Protestant king-dom to be governed by aXVI. . . ° b J- Popish prince." An important triumph to the Whigs.One of the chief principles which their party hadbeen formed to establish, for which they had sufferedthe taunts and vituperations of the Tory press, theloud abuse of a Tory clergy, the disfavour of aTory king, and the more serious inflictions ofTory judges, was now proposed in an assemblycomprising a considerable, although not an equalproportion of Tories, and not one voice was heardagainst its adoption.When these resolutions were communicated to thelords their house resolved itself into a committee, ofwhich the Earl of Danby was elected chairman. Thequestion of the vacancy of the house being of considerabledifficulty, and opposed by two parties fordifferent reasons, was postponed until the other pointshad been discussed. In the debate which ensuedthe Earl of Nottingham, the mouthpiece of the mostviolent and most numerous section of the Tories,took the lead : he proposed that a regency should beestablished during the lifetime of the king, and hefortified his proposition with examples so skilfullychosen, and arguments so judiciously selected, thathe was evidently followed by the majority of thehouse. Those who wished to see the legitimate kingrestored upon guarantees of safety to the church,adopted this measure, because it left room for hope ;A.D. 1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 485those who had no such wish, but who saw in an chap.elected monarch the destroyer of Toryism, acceptedit as an easy compromise between their principlesand necessities. The Marquis of Halifax, however,checked the precipitancy of the house, and repliedto Nottingham in a speech which was no less effectivethan his had been. Of this speech no reportremains ; but it is not difficult to conjecture thetopics upon which the orator in all probability dwelt.He would doubtless remind the house that the fateof Sir Harry Vane, a precedent within their ownrecollections, warned them that they could be shieldedfrom the penalties of treason only by the existenceof a de facto king ; he would also exhibit the inextricabledifficulties by which such a scheme wasencompassed, and show the danger as well as theabsurdity of creating a succession of regents at homewhile they acknowledged the title of a dynasty ofexile kings, and publicly admitted that they wereonly forcibly excluded from their rightful inheritance.Lord Danby joined in exposing so fruitful a sourceof civil war, and his party inclined the balance. Uponthe question being put, the motion for a regent wasnegatived by a majority of two — 49 being in favour,and 51 against it ; all the bishops, except those ofLondon and Bristol, voting in the minority. Thisminority, the real Tory party, were now reverting totheir original tenets, and evincing their total dis-ad.1689,486 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, regard to every other object than the preservation ofXVIthe church, and of the despotic doctrines which theyignorantly attributed to her. The majority consistedof the Whigs and a small section of the Tory party,who had read more shrewdly the signs of the times,and followed Lord Danby as their leader.On the following day the lords resumed theirdebate : the question was an abstract proposition,but one of momentous practical importance, both tothemselves and their posterity, 'whether there wasan original contract between king and people." Thedoctrine of divine right was now openly declared andstrongly insisted upon from the Tory benches ; theWhigs replied with equal vigour and more sanguinehopes, since the Dukes of Ormond, Southampton,Grafton, and Northumberland, had left the opposition.The numbers now were 53 to 46 ; and thejournals of that house contain this proposition, solemnlyenunciated by the peers, for merely hintingwhich, some few years ago, so many persons hadbeen scourged, maimed, disfigured, pilloried, andimprisoned.* Such was the advance of Whiggish.The committee proceeded to discuss the commons'resolution by paragraphs, and agreed without difficultyuntil they arrived at that by which James wasdeclared to have abdicated the government — theysubstituted the milder word "deserted."See pp. 319,3-20.A.D. 1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 487On the next day the last question, of the vacancy CHAP,of the throne, was considered ; an amendment wasmoved that the words " that the Prince and Princessof Orange be declared king" and queen," be substitutedj but this was probably thought premature byall parties, and was met by the previous question.The committee then divided upon the originalmotion, and in this division the Whigs were desertedby Lord Danby and his party. These men held thatthe king by his flight had renounced his crown, whichtherefore immediately descended to the next heir ;and, according to their theory, which quietly assumedthe illegitimacy of the Prince of Wales, so far fromthe throne being vacant, Mary, Princess of Orange,was then the legitimate Queen of England. TheWhigs, who cared nothing for these subtilties, andwho were unwilling to risk the success of their greatwork upon the issue of an inquiry into the legitimacyof this child, now found themselves in a minority.The paragraph was lost by a majority of eleven, andthirty-five peers entered their protest.*The lords unanimously concurred with the vote ofthe commons, that it was inconsistent with the safetyof the nation to be governed by a popish prince.Here Whigs and Tories were at last agreed ; theLords' Journals, vol. xiv., p. and places Lord Danby at their112. Echard is very erroneous ; head,he numbers the dissentients at 40,488 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, church of England, no less then the civil liberties ofthe nation, absolutely required the declaration : theTory lords who threw out the Exclusion bill hadawakened from the delusion, that the property of aProtestant church would be safe from attack under aCatholic king.The free conference which ensued between thehouses was managed, on the part of the commons, entirelyby Whigs. The lords had, with singular inconsistency,appointed the Earl of Devonshire and severalothers, who had protested against their resolution,to draw up reasons in favour of it : they now, however,committed the conduct of the free conferenceto Tories. The dispute between the words abdicatedand deserted was a subtilty unworthy of the housesof legislature. The word " deserted" was doubtlessinsisted upon by the Tory peers who conducted theconference, from a persuasion that it did not implyan absolute loss or forfeiture of the crown ; but asthe lords collectively had evidently used it in a differentsense, they were unable to allege the realgrounds of their opposition, and rested chiefly uponthe objection, that the term used by the commonswas not found in any of the old records of the commonlaw. The commons jealously defended theirexpression, only because they thought it of importancewith respect to the real point of contention,the vacancy of the throne. When they came toA.D. 1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 489debate this the consistency of the Whig course of CHAP,conduct, and the inconsistency of that adopted by -the Tories became manifest. The lords had declaredthe existence of an original contract between thesovereign and the people — they had declared thatJames had broken the contract, and had desertedthe government — they had declared also, in effect,that they would elect a king, and yet they refusedto admit that the throne was vacant. Pollexfen,in the debate, remarked strongly upon this inconsistency,and Lord Clarendon made but a weak defenceto the accusation. Maynard and Pembroke appearedincidentally in the contest ; but Nottingham deliveredupon this, as he had upon the former point,an harangue which comprehended all the groundsupon which his party relied. The post of honourwas again yielded to Somers, whose legal learningenabled him to meet the antiquarian research ofthe earl, and to oppose precedent to precedent, aswell as eloquence to eloquence. The brothersRochester and Clarendon then spoke at length.Howard answered them ; and the addresses ofTemple, Lee, and Treby closed the debate. Thenames which have been enumerated clearly show thenature of the contest, as far as regards the twoparties. There was not one among the lords' committeewho was not well known as a Tory, nor one490 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, among that of the commons who was not eminentXVI. ^jj,.as a Whig.. 1689. UpQjj ^jjg return of the deputation the peersagreed to the commons' amendments ; but that thisagreement was not occasioned by the report of thosewho had conducted the conference is evident, sincewe find nearly all their names attached to the protestagainst the vote.These important preliminaries having been established,the vote which established William andMary upon the throne appears to have passedunopposed, since although leave was given to protestno protest is recorded.*The superiority of the Whigs in the lords throughoutthis affair, was rather in argument and principlethan in numbers. That superiority requires nocomment. It cannot be better testified than by theexpression of Lord Nottingham, who declared, thatwhile he felt himself bound in conscience to opposethe settlement by every means in his power, hehoped, for the sake of his country, that his effortswould not prevail.Perhaps it is not too much to affirm, that theAfter their victory Danby and the protests. They were, proba-iii adherents seem to have mode ably, afraid of the ultimate intendedtheir opposition, since his tions of those to whom they hadname is to be found in none of given a momentary ascendancy.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.church of England was saved by Tories.* Thecivil liberties of Englishmen, and the present dynastyof British kings, were certainly established and preservedby AVhigs.CHAP.XVI.A.D. 1689.It must not, however, beforgotten, that it was their oppositionto the exclusion which firstbrought it into peril ; nor, on theother hand, that it was the effortsof the Tories on behalf of thechurch, which placed the Whigsin a situation to contend for theconstitution.492 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XVII.Formation of the Shrewsbury administration — Intrigues of the ToriesLiberal policy of the Whigs, towards the Catholics, in favourof the dissenters — War with France — Corporation bill — Williamchanges his policy and the Tories obtain a majority in the commonsAn election — The Carmarthen administration.CHAP, i The new kind's first act after he had been electedXVII. ^A.D. 1689.to the throne, was necessarily the choice of a privycouncil and a ministry. This was a step of noordinary difficulty ; William himself entertained thesentiments of a Whig, but he was not prepared toimitate the conduct of Charles II., to protect only onehalf of his subjects, and make the occupant of the-thronethe head of a party. Great as the excessesof the Tories had been during the reigns of his twoimmediate predecessors, he had no intention of excludingthem entirely from all share in the government,or of giving so important a class of his peopleTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.real cause for hostility. When, therefore, that | CHAP.•' XVII.active and meritorious young nobleman, the Earlof Shrewsbury, was named one of the secretaries ofstate, the Earl of Nottingham was chosen to be theother : a choice which, considering the prominentpart he had taken in opposing the election of thepresent king, was certainly rather magnanimousthan prudent. The Earl of Danby, who had moreclaim to William's gratitude, but scarcely lesshostility to the politics of his friends, was madepresident of the council, nth the title of Marquis ofCarmarthen. Halifax resumed his old post of privyseal. The treasury was put in commission : — LordMordaunt, created Earl of Monmouth, was the firstcommissioner. Lord Delamere, created Earl of Warrington,Lord Godolphin, Richard Hampden, andSir Henry Capell were the others. The Earl ofWarrington was also chancellor of the exchequer.The great offices of government were thus nearlyequally divided between the two parties, but theking, nevertheless, gave his chief confidence to thoseministers who were of the party which had placedhim upon the throne. In the council, Shrewsburyexercised and deserved the greatest interest ; Halifax,who, now that his ambition after titles and place didnot interfere, was again a Whig, was more attentivelyheard than Carmarthen ; and if Godolphin waslistened to with preference upon affairs of the tread.1689.A.D. 1689.494 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, sure, it was not on account of his temporary lapse-into Toryism, after voting for the Exclusion bill,but rather from his superiority in knowledge andexperience over those with whom he was joined.William's impartiality in distributing the patronageof government was not extended to the offices of hisI household ; he wished to assure the Tories of protection,not of preference ; — this part of his patronagehe reserved for his friends. The Earl of Devonshirewas made lord steward, and the Earl of Dorset, lordchamberlain. Mr. Bentinck was groom of the stole,and privy purse ; and Sidney, who soon after receiveda peerage, was one of the gentlemen of thebedchamber. Marshal Schomburg was provided forbythe place of master of the ordnance, the title ofDuke of Schomburg, and an estate of £5000 a year,*and Herbert, who, dismissed by James for refusingto vote for the repeal of the test, had gone over toHolland, and became lieutenant-general admiral ofWilliam's fleet, was now made first commissioner ofthe admiralty, t and was afterwards created Earl ofWarrington.Pari. Hist., vol. v., p. 383. Sacheverell. Thus it is seen that-|- The names of the six other the distribution of the inferiorcommissioners, were the Earl of patronage is decidedly in favour ofCarbury, Sir Michael Wharton, the Whigs. Sacheverell, who hadSir Thomas Lee, Sir John distinguished himself among thatCicely, Sir John Other, of party, wished to decline the ap-whitehall,and Mr. William ointment, because he was littleTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D. 1689.In the privy council the Whigs had the majority ; I CHAP,in addition to those who held offices of government,it contained the names of the Earls of Bedford andBath, Lords Lumley, Wharton, Montague, amongthe Whig peers ; and those of Bentinck, Sidney,Howard, Powle, Russell, and Boscawen, among thecommoners. Among the Tories whom it containedLord Churchill's merit was not forgotten, and thePrince of Denmark and the Archbishop of Canterburywere included on account of their rank.The bench of judges, which was chosen by theprivy council, gave universal satisfaction. Sir JohnHolt was chief justice of the king's bench ; SirHenry Pollexfen was chief justice of the commonpleas ; Sir Robert Atkins, chief baron ; Powle,master of the rolls, and the chancery was put intocommission, under Maynard, Koch, and Rawlinson ;Sir George Treby was attorney-general, and Somerswas rewarded nth the office of solicitor-general.Among these rewards the clergy, who had beenactive in the revolution and subsequent settlement,were not forgotten ; but these instances were so rarethat when Compton had been placed upon the privyacquainted with maritime matters, and that he could depend on hisand when the king replied that integrity, he accepted the ap-therewere enough who did under ointment, but refused to receivestand the business, which a man the salary. — Oldmixon.of sense would soon be master of.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, council, and Burnet had been made Bishop of Salisbury,William's debt of gratitude to them was, withA.D. 1689. . .a few exceptions, discharged.The public offices of government being thus distributed,and the sentiments of the king being knownto be those of the majority of his privy council, theascendancy of the Whigs was quickly marked by themeasures which were proposed. Notwithstandingthe opposition of the Tories, who hoped in a newelection to increase their numbers, the conventionwas voted a legal parliament. The bill for annullingLord Russell's attainder was carried unanimouslythrough the houses, and the disgust of the commonsbroke forth so apparently that Finch was unable toobtain a hearing when he attempted to defend hisconduct upon occasion of this ** murder."The presence of the Tories in the cabinet was,however, not without its effects. Nottingham'soffice of secretary of state justified the employmentof spies at home as well as abroad, and informationthus gained was readily available to the purposes ofhis party. Nottingham threw a veil over the fermentationwhich was taking place among the Tories ;he communicated little of the schemes for recallingJames, but he was eager to collect the unguardedexpressions of violent and nameless persons amongthe Whigs, and he assiduously repeated them tohis master as positive proofs that that party was inTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.reality and in principle republican, and therefore thecommon enemy of kings. Their conduct upon thesettlement of the revenue gave Nottingham someassistance in his work of supplanting his colleagues,and excited in William some disgust. William,seated upon a throne which appeared to be placedamid a chaos of conflicting elements, uncertain uponwhat support he rested, and only conscious of theintegrity of his own intentions, was naturally jealousof opposition from those to whom he chiefly lookedfor support. He had given greater proof that hewas worthy the confidence of the nation than hadbeen afforded by any of his recent predecessors; heexpected to receive at least an equal confidence.The Whigs, however, recalled the miseries of theformer reigns, and they deduced them all fie-om thefetal power with which they had armed their kings,by giving them a revenue for life. They now proposedto continue it from year to year. Williamwas indignant, the Tories joined him, but the Whigsprevailed, and for two years the revenue was onlygranted annually. They went further, and performeda far more signal service to their country,by separating the civil list, or the revenue set apartfor the support of the monarch, fi-om the grantswhich were made for the service of the public ; theformer was, of course, intrusted to the direction ofthe sovereign, the latter were strictly appropriatedVOL. I. 2 kCHAP.XVII.A.D. 1689.A. D. 1689.498 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, to the purposes for which they were granted. Animportant decision, which may rank among the firstclass of salutary reforms, produced by the revolution.This also was resented by the king, and resisted bythe Tories. We owe it entirely to the Whigs.These manifestations of an adherence to the principleof a strictly limited monarchy favoured theinsinuations of Nottingham and his party, whichhad doubtless, at this time, made some impressionupon the king. The accusation was indignantlydenied by the leaders of the Whigs. Sir HenryCapell laughed at the idea, and Treby declared,with unnecessary warmth, that "rather than have ahand in any thing of a republic he would lose hishand ;" adding, that " Where there is a great territory,and a warlike people, as the English are, monarchyis a government fit for that part of the world.The experiment of a commonwealth will be impracticable**But notwithstanding these disavowal Williamstill entertained some lurking distrust of his allies,and a decided feeling of offence at what he consideredtheir unreasonable jealousy. These considerationsdid not however prevent his pursuing the courseof conduct which his policy and principles enjoined.It was the province of an elected monarch toreform the corrupt, while he preserved the soundParliamentary History, vol. v., p. 248.A.D. 1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 499institutions of the country he had been called to chap,govern, and William was not unmindful of his duty.It would be superfluous to dwell upon the details ofthe Bill of Rights : no reader is ignorant of them.None can deny that (following the language of thespeaker of the house of commons when he presentedit for the royal assent) it does remain, not only asecurity to us from those notorious violations of rightand liberty which took place in the reign of James,but also a lasting monument to all posterity of whatwe owe to William for our ancestors' deliverance.The ascendancy of the Whigs is also seen, at thisearly period of William's reign, in the moderationwhich was observed towards the Catholics, andthe equality which was sought to be extended tothe dissenters. When we consider the danger fromwhich the nation had just escaped, and that thatdanger had accrued entirely from the Catholicreligion, when we remember the multitudes throughoutthe nation who had been expelled from theiremployments upon a refusal to embrace that faith,and the numbers of surviving relatives of thosewhom James had slaughtered, who attributed theirbereavement to the professors of that religion, weareinclined to wonder that now that the pent-upwrath had burst, it did not spread in blood andmassacre over the land, and roll a terrible retribution2 K 2500 , THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Q-ver those in whose favour these acts of tyranny hadXVIIbeen perpetrated. So far, however, from this beingthe case, even the penal laws, then in being againstthem, were not enforced, and no constraints werelaid upon them, but such as were absolutely necessaryfor the tranquillity of the nation. Amen oneportion of the kingdom was in the hands of aninvader, to whom they openly owned allegiance, andwhose triumphant return they were preparing tocelebrate ; to confide to them the defence of thekingdom, or admit them to offices of trust, wouldhave been not liberality but madness : that governmentcannot be censured as severe which,knowing their universal hostility, left them, nevertheless,unscathed in their property and persons,and even in possession of arms.It was the desire of the king, and his ^\Tiigministers, to remove from the Protestant dissentersall incapacities for office, but the clause in the billfor altering" the oaths of allegiance which wasframed for that purpose, was rejected by a greatmajority by the Tories in the house of lords, anda second attempt met with a similar fate. Each ofthese refusals to do justice to the dissenters, wasfollowed by a strong protest from the MTiig peers ;and the latter of these is very remarkable, as showingthe steadiness with which that party opposedA.D. 1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 501persecution for mere matters of faith. They pro CHAP.XVII.tested against the decision of their house, " Because,"said the dissentients, " it gives great partof the Protestant freemen of England reason tocomplain of inequality and hard usage when theyare excluded from public employments by a law, andthat for a mere scruple of conscience :" and again,they declared that to set marks of distinction andhumiliation on any sect of men who have not renderedthemselves justly suspected to the government,is at all times to be avoided by the makers ofjust and equitable laws.*The Tories when imploring the dissenters to aidthem in their defence of the Protestant church, hadbeen profuse in their professions of repentance fortheir former persecution ; they had now, they thensaid, seen their error, and if the present dangershould be repelled they would never again turntheir power against their Protestant brethren Thedissenters had readily answered their call, it was noweasy to foretel how their confidence would be repaid. tLords' Journals. Pari. Hist, obscurity and enforced against the-|- Burnet. See also the pam dissenters. They also introducedpiles of the time, passim, a bill of comprehension, but by% The Tories, nevertheless, to the time this had passed the lordsestablish some claim to moderate found themselves too portion,repealed many of those erful to require the assistance ofpenal laws which had in the late conciliatory measures, they tliere-reigns been dragged from their fore stifled it in the commons.502 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The occasion of this attempt was the introductionXVII.into the house of lords of a bill for prescribing,when the new oath should be peremptorily taken, toWilliam and Mary. This act was in itself, viewedapart from the struggle which incidentally aroseupon it, one of no small importance to the parties.The new oath of allegiance was, of course, a necessarypreliminary to the acceptance or continuance ofany official duties either in church or state. Williamwas well aware that there were many of the clergywho were glad that the late king had been expelled,and would live quietly under the present government,but who would recoil from a solemn renunciationof their Tory doctrines ; he had offered,therefore, that deprivation should not take placeuntil the oath had been tendered and refused.This clause was offered as an equivalent for thatwhich removed the disabilities of dissenters, butwhen the lords rejected the one the commons decidedagainst admitting the other. When the dayarrived upon which the oath was required to betakenby the clergy, a large party of that body,headed by five of the seven bishops* whose prosecutionunder James had rendered them so popular,refused it. These bishops probably thought that theirOf the other two St. Asaph had been accustomed to call themyielded, and Bristol was dead, the seven golden candlesticks ofAfter their acquittal the people the church. Hampton, Bishop ofTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 503past conduct would support them in their present chap.opposition. In the eyes of the people, however,1 1 Tm ^ 1 • , , A.D. 1689.they appeared very differently, and it was urged thattheir past when compared with their present deeds,manifested only a devotion to the church to whichthey belonged, but an uncompromising hostility toall free institutions in which the laity might participate.After long indulgence these bishops were atlast deprived.Many of the clergy, who did take the oath,explained it away with the most Jesuitical casuistry,and the great majority declared, that they took itto William only as king de Facto, just as the membersof their party had before taken it in thecommons.This was the origin of the party of Nonjurors,the most open and sincere, but not therefore themost dangerous of William's enemies. The majorityof the Juring clergy were inferior to them inhonesty, not in hostility to William,The clergy of the church of England, therefore, jwere generally favourable to the return of theStuart dynasty, not, probably, because they hatedlimitations upon monarchy more than they lovedGloucester, joined these five non session of the doctrine of non-jurors.Lake of Chichester soon distance and passive obedience,after died, leaving behind him a See it in Ralph, vol. ii., p. 166.paper containing his dying con-theHISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.XVII.A. D. 1689.their church, but rather that they sacrificed theirinclination and safety to the maintenance of a badand impracticable principle.These were the effects of the bill which gaverise to the Tory demonstration in the house oflords against admitting dissenters to equal politicalrights.Such being the general temper of the house, inwhich the Tory party predominated, it is not surprisingthat the commons proceeded but unwillinglyin the bill of indemnity which was laid before them.While many of the Tory leaders were open to prosecutionsand impeachments for the crimes they hadcommitted or connived at during the first part of thepreceding reign, the tone of the party would bemoderated, and their opposition would be temperedby their apprehension ; but if this check were withdrawn,it was feared that those, who were alreadydaily gaining courage, would resume their formerposition. It was not doubted that they would exercisetheir power to the destruction of those measureswhich were in progress, to repair the dilapidatedconstitution, if not for the recal of that dynastywhich had rendered those measures necessary.Another act of the convention parliament mustnot be passed over in silence. No sooner hadEngland recovered her liberties, than she appearedin a new character among the nations of Europe.A. D. 1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 505So long the vassal and dependant of France, she / chap.now entered the arena as her mighty and her deadlyenemy. William's whole life had been an almosthopeless struggle against the ambition and thepower of Louis ; perhaps the happiest hour he hadyet known was that in which his commons addressedhim to make war upon that monarch, enabled himto realize his favourite object of ambition, andplaced at his disposal the resources of a kingdomalone well able to sustain the conflict.The events of this war and of that which was goingon in Ireland must be read in the general histories ofEngland, but the disappointment of the nation at thesuccesses which James at first obtained, furnished'the extreme party of the Whigs with an excuse bywhich they attempted to drive the Tories fromthe cabinet. This onset was led by the younger |Hampden, who, repeating the usual charge that theTories were still in the interest of the late king,imputed the recent reverses to secret informationfurnished by Nottingham and those of his party whostill remained in the government ; he moved an addressto the king, representing the imminent dangerof the kingdom from the want of ability or integrityin those who had the direction of affairs. Upon thisoccasion Hampden carried the house with him ; butupon presenting the report upon the address a fewdays after, the face of affairs seemed entirely changed.506 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Those Whigs who held offices of government resentedthe address, as reflecting no less upon themselvesA. D. 1689,than their Tory colleagues. The elder Hampdenled the opposition against his son's motion ; andafter a stormy debate, in which the novel spectaclewas displayed of the old leaders of the Whigs speakingand voting with the Tories, the address was decentlystifled by a committal.The king's disgust at the conduct of the Whigs inI keeping him so entirely dependent upon them wasevidently very great, and they feared lest it should1 lead him to dissolve this parliament. The corporationswere as James had left them, entirely in thehands of Tories ; the exuberant joy of the peoplehad overcome this obstacle in the former election,and perhaps the holders of those corporate officeswere too much alarmed for themselves to attempt toinfluence others : now, however, they had regainedtheir courage, and it was known that if the presentcorporators retained their places, the next would bein all probability a Tory house of commons. Toprevent this, when a bill was introduced into thehouse condemning all that had been done in the caseof the corporations in the reign of Charles, and restoringthem to the state in which they stood in theyear 1675, Sacheverell and Howard, representingthe Whigs, proposed the insertion of two clauses,the first declaring all who had consented to the sur-ad,1689.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 507render of a charter incapable of being members of / chap.that corporation for seven years, and the second xvii.imposing a penalty of £500 and perpetual disabilityupon breach of this provision. These clauses wereproceeding quietly through the house, to the annihilationof the Tories, when the king threw his influenceinto the opposite scale ; a violent oppositionensued, and the Whigs, to their astonishment andmortification, found themselves in a minority of 18.*William had thus taken a decisive step ; withdrawnhimself from the Whigs, who had placed him uponthe throne and intended to keep him there, andthrown himself into the hands of the Tories, thegreat majority of whom had opposed his accession,and were now wishing if not working his deposition.Shrewsbury had long seen with regret this alienationof the king from his friends, and he earnestly wishedto withdraw from his post. He besought the king,in the most urgent terms, to accept his resignation :this, however, William pertinaciously refused, butcontinued nevertheless in the path into which he haddeviated. His minister now saw that he was resolvedto prorogue and dissolve his parliament — a measurewhich he strongly deprecated. When ordered toRalph ; Pari. Hist. ; Burnet ; the Disabling Clauses." Burnetand the pamphlets of the time, is very erroneous,particularly " A Letter concerningA.D. 1689.508 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, prepare the speech, he addressed the king a TetterXVII.containing the following remonstrance : *' I thinkmyself obliged in duty to lay before you my sense ofthe matter ; and though I am very incapable to putany thing in writing fit for your majesty to speak toyour parliament, yet that is not the only reason makesme now decline it, but a thorough conviction thatan adjournment for so long a time can be of noadvantage, but will certainly prejudice your business.For the nation will reasonably conclude either thatyou part with your parliament in anger, which is abad preparation against the meeting it again so soon,or else that you have not that pressing occasion formoney which you and your friends have often representedto them, since you defer the consideration ofit for three weeks, without any apparent good reason.Besides, it will more and more exasperate the houseof commons against those persons who have had theill-fortune to be named in this last address, sincethey will be pointed out as the authors of this advice.By what I find from my Lord Nottingham, theargument used for this delay is to expect the churchof England men to return who are gone into thecountry, and he says, so depend upon this recess,that they will think themselves unfairly dealt with ifthey are foiled in this expectation. What encouragementthey had to rely upon it I do not know ; butTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.supposing they had good grounds, I will say the CHAP.same thing to your majesty I did to him, that yourresolution in this must be suitable to what you determine,either to join or not join with the church ofEngland.** I think your majesty does not suspect me to beso violently biassed to either of these parties as notto see the faults of both, and the dangers that maylikely ensue in joining with each of them. I wishyou could have established your party upon the moderateand honest-principled men of both factions ;but as there be a necessity of declaring, I shall makeno difficulty to own my sense that your majestyand the government are much more safe dependingupon the Whigs, whose designs, if any, are improbableand remoter than with the Tories, who, manyof them, questionless, would bring in King James, andthe very best of them I doubt have a regency still intheir heads ; for although I agree them to be theproperest instruments to carry the prerogative high,yet I fear they have so unreasonable a veneration formonarchy, as not altogether to approve the foundationyours is built upon"*This letter was written on the 22d of December,1689, when the disabling clauses of the Corporationbill were passing the commons : the adjournment wasShrewsbury Correspondence.A.D. 1689.510 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, not proceeded in, because the Whigs gave way, andpostponed the consideration of the measure until theattendance should be fuller. But for this interferenceof the king these clauses would certainly have passedthe commons, and with his concurrence probably thelords.The letter of Shrewsbury had little effect ; on the27th of January the parliament was prorogued to the2d of April, and its meeting was prevented by adissolution.This sudden dissolution* scattered throughout thekingdom those brands of political contention whichhad before been confined within the walls of St.Stephen's. The press teemed with pamphlets bothlaudatory and condemnatory of the recent measure.The names of Hampden and Wiseman appear asdefenders of the convention parliament ; a crowd ofanonymous writers followed in their track, and anequal number advanced from the hostile ranks.The Whigs published the names of the 150 Torymembers who had voted against the use of the wordabdication, when the vote was returned from thelords ; and the Tories published the names of thosewho had voted for the disabling clauses in the Corporationbill. The Whigs called those who wereincluded in the former list Jacobites j the ToriesMr. Wharton addressed a this change of policy and councils,powerful letter to the king upon — Dalrymple Appendix, p. 80.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 511stigmatized those who appeared in the latter as chap.republicans, fanatics, latitudinarians, or atheists ;increasing, according to the custom of angry persons,the violence of their epithets in proportion tothe remoteness of their applicability.The elections for the new parliament were so jdecidedly in favour of the Tories, that even the city Iof London, under the influence of their illegally |nominated corporation, rejected their old Whigmembers, and returned the nominees of Nottinghamand Carmarthen. William's great design was to 1 '\unite the two factions, and form a stable ministryfrom the moderate men of each ; * a design excellent Iin theory, but difficult, perhaps impossible, in prac- <time. Prior, therefore, to the meeting of parliament,which was fixed for the 20th of March, the ministrywas remodelled. Halifax, distrusted and disliked byboth parties, was dismissed, and the privy seal putin commission ; Godolphin shared his disgrace, buthis fall was probably attributable to his adherence tothe extreme high Tory party, who rallied round thePrincess Anne, as the champion of the church, sidedwith her in the contest with William upon the subjectof her revenue, and affected to view in theirpresbyterian king an enemy to the establishment.Three of Godolphin's Whig co-commissioners of theRapin's Dissertation on the Whigs and Tories.512 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, treasury, Monmouth, Surrender, and Capell, werealso discharged ; but the fourth, Hampden, who wasmore moderate in his views, and who was now lookedupon as one of that division of his party which hadlately been designated State Whigs, was retained,and advanced to the additional offices of treasurerand under-secretary of the exchequer. The vacantplaces in the treasury-board were filled with Sir JohnOther, a member of Carmarthen's party, who waschief commissioner. Sir Stephen Fox, and Mr.Thomas Pelham ; so that that department of thegovernment now consisted of two moderate Toriesand two state Whigs.Lord Warrington was removed from the head ofthe admiralty, and the Earl of Pembroke, who hadrecently returned from an embassy to the States,was his successor. Upon this change the Whigmembers, Wharton and Sacheverell, immediatelytendered their resignations. The inferior appointmentswere of a similar character. Such was theCarmarthen administration.With this ministry William hoped to obtain what theI younger Hampden, and his party among the Whigs,(had refused, but the Tories had promised; — a settlesment of the revenue for life. The influence of thesemen was not, however, so great as to render allother measures unnecessary. The revolution haddestroyed for ever the power of curbing a waywardA.D. 1690.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 513house of commons, by the force of the prerogative; CHAP,it had not, however, taken away that gentler butmore certain source of influence, corruption. Thisdangerous expedient, had been occasionally tried bythe Stuartssss, but was found too expensive for theirunaided revenues, and too delicate for their rigidhands ; it was now the only remaining equivalent forpopularity, and a party which affected disdain forthe voice of the people, would naturally applythemselves to the dexterous management of theironly availing resource.The speakership of the commons was, therefore,intrusted to a man who was deemed skilful in thisrespect. Sir John Trevor, who supplanted Powle,was one of those Tories who had deserved the gratitudeof James : he had held under him, the officeof master of the rolls, and he now undertook, ifsufficient funds were placed at his disposal, to procurea majority for the new ministry, by buying overthe members of the opposite party. Under this conditionTrevor received his patent as first commissionerof the great seal. William is represented* to haveyielded reluctantly to this method of government,upon the representation of Nottingham and hiscolleagues, that the age was too corrupt to allow himto dispense with this assistance. When such induce-ralph.VOL. I. 2 LA.D. 1690.514 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ments were offered to profligate men to engage inopposition, we shall not be surprised if we sometimesfind, in the ranks of the Whigs, political adventurerswho, contemning all principle, endeavoured torender their hostility conspicuous, only that theymight enhance the price of their desertion.By the assistance of a Tory house of commons,and a Tory ministry, for such it was in reality,since the Whigs, in office, neither enjoyed the confidenceof the king, nor retained the support of theirparty, the hereditary excise was settled for life,and a bill of indemnity was passed ; the first theservice, the latter the reward of the compliantparty. These were two of the topics of the speechfrom the throne.The party complexion of the house was alsomanifested, by returning the king thanks for havingplaced the lieutenancy of London in Tory hands,a measure which, had James ever arrived in London,might have proved fatal to him who effected it.I The Whigs attempted to remove the film fromthe eyes of their king, and expose their rivals intheir real character, by bringing in a bill requiringall subjects, in office, to abjure King James. Aprotracted struggle ensued in the commons — theministry were divided — each faction exerted itsutmost strength — and the support of the king raisedthe Whigs to an equality with their opponents.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 515Every step was contested : the bill was often lost chap.and won, until the king, at last, wearied with thedelay which kept him from Ireland, and with theimportunities of his Tory ministers, sent a messageto the commons, desiring them to suspendthe discussion, and pass to matters more immediatelyimportant. This conduct completed the disgust ofthe Whigs. Shrewsbury now insisted upon surrenderingthe seals, and refused even to remainnominally secretary until the king's return fromIreland. In the lords Shrewsbury promoted, andNottingham and Danby led the opposition, to thebill. It was, at length, rejected by the commons,upon a division of 192 to 165.*After this defeat so feeble were the Whigs, thatthe act of grace sent down by the king to the lords,passed that house without a division, and the houseof commons without a show of opposition. TheTories, freed from all terror of punishment for theirpast misdeeds, were unshackled in their supremacy,and ready to commence a fresh account.The king now set out for Ireland, and by thebattle of the Boyne crushed the hopes of his falsefriends, and consolidated his own power and hispeople's liberties.In the next session the preponderance of theBurnet. Ralph, vol. ii., p. 198.2 L 2516 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, j Tories was no less remarkable. The chief business,however, was the grant of sufficient supplies, toienable the king to prosecute with vigour the warwith France, and in this the Whigs cordially concurred.In the arrangement of the details Godolphinfinancial experience became necessary, andhe was placed at the head of the treasury. LordSidney, who had rendered such essential servicesto William, in preparing the revolution, receivedthe seals which Shrewsbury had resigned.An abortive attempt to revive the impeachmentagainst the lord president Carmarthen, was the onlymotion of importance made by the Whigs. On the5th of January the king put an end to the session, andset out for the Hague, which place he soon afterwardsleft, to take upon him the command of thearmy in Flanders.In the course of the year the Tories receivedincreasing marks of the royal favour ; Rochester,Ranelagh, Cornwallis, and Sir E. Seymour wereadmitted to the council-board, and the Earl ofPembroke received the privy seal.The perseverance thus shown by the king, inpatronising, and placing in situations of trust andpower, men who were only known as enemies tothose liberties of which he had approved himselfthe champion, and been elected the guardian, losthim much of his popularity. The Whigs reviled himTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 517as ungrateful — commented upon his tenderness for CHAP.XVIIthe prerogative — and pretended to doubt the sincerityof his Liberal professions. The people sym * to 1693.pathized with those whom they thought ill-used, theysuperadded an openly-expressed hatred for theforeign favourites of the king, and a disgust at hisphlegmatic temperament and Dutch partialities.The Tories, nevertheless, maintained their postsin the government, and their place in the king's confidencesecure of a majority in the commons theycared little for the murmurs of the nation, and asthe house grew more confiding in its grants, theministry appeared to grow more confident in theirdemands. The real fi:-iends of the reigning monarchlooked upon him as infatuated, and prophesied therestoration of James as an event neither dubious nordistant. There were, at this time, strong reasonsfor such a judgment : but William was neither soignorant nor so unprovided as he was supposed tobe. In a speech to the commons, in I69O, he haddistinctly declared his knowledge of those darkintrigues which were ramifying throughout the nationin favour of the Stuartssss. If he was acquaintedwith them all, his situation, he must have known,was one of no ordinary embarrassment and of imminentdanger.518 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XVIII.State of the Jacobite interest — Correspondence of the Tory ministrywith James — Compounders and non com pounders — Views of thosewho corresponded with James — Intrigues in the cabinet — Fall of theTory ministry — Shrewsbury and the Whigs recover their interestin the cabinet — Montague — Triennial bill passed — Dissolution ofparliament — Administration of the Whigs — Supplanted by theTories — Shrewsbury' and Montague displaced — New arrangements —Impeachment of the Whig ministers — Act of succession — Intriguesof the Tories — Robert Harley — The Tories lose their popularity —Are distrusted by the king — Return of the Whigs to power —Death of William,CHAP. The publication of state documents and privateXVIII. .correspondence of that period enables us now toto1693. judge, with some correctness, of the dangers withwhich William was beset. Among the favourers ofthe late revolution were not only the Whigs, who hadcarried the settlement, and the Tories who drew backfrom that measure, but also many courtiers, whoTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 519were actuated by a vehement resentment for the loss CHAP.o 1 IP 1 • • , XVIII.01 the royal favour, and its entire monopoly by theCatholics ; and many others who never forsook the to 1693.party in power. All these classes, when the mightychange was accomplished, looked back with astonishmentand dread. That a legitimate and powerfulmonarch should descend from his throne without ablow, and fly before the first outcry of popular indignation,was an event too sudden to appear lasting ;and the preparations of Louis, and the temporarysuccess which attended James in Ireland, rendereda restoration an event which was contemplated ashighly probable by all. The parties were agreed inadmitting the probability, but acted very differentlyunder their belief. The Whigs strenuously exertedthemselves for the maintenance of the war ; theTories and courtiers affecting an equal zeal in public,privately made overtures of their services toJames. Buckley, the Jacobite agent in London,received the repentance of many of these. Godolphinoffered to quit his office, that he might engage,with a clearer conscience, in the counsels for therestoration ; but he was enjoined to remain, as hewould be more useful to the cause of the rightfulmonarch, while conversant with the secret designsof the usurper. At the command of James thewhisperings of conscience were hushed, and Godolphinremained in the council-chamber, prepared to520 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, i^ betray the confidence he had sworn to deserve.marlborough, who was now become Godolphin'sto 16931 inseparable friend and political ally, was yet moreI eager to reconcile himself. Colonel Sackville calledupon him, by his desire, and was surprised to findhim " the greatest penitent imaginable." Throughthis agent, the repentant earl conveyed the strongestassurances of contrition, and the most abject prayersfor mercy. His crimes, he said, appeared so horridto him, that he was ready to redeem his apostacywith the hazard of his utter ruin : the thoughts ofthem kept him in continual anguish, and he couldneither eat nor sleep from the torment caused byhis reflections. The Jacobites received the overturesof this important but uncertain ally, withconsiderable caution : they trusted him little, and1 proved him much. Marlborough communicated,without hesitation, whatever he knew : he gave accountsof all the forces, preparations, and designs, bothin England, Scotland, and Ireland, and he informedthem of William's design to conduct the war in the lastkingdom in person. Marlborough's information uponthese points being confirmed by the accounts receivedby less suspected channels, seemed to vouch his presentsincerity, and his credit was increased by thedaily intelligence which he procured of incidentsin the secretary's office, in relation to the Jacobites,by which they avoided many inconveniences, andTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 521perhaps escaped some dangers. He confirmed by CHAP.letter what he had communicated by verbal message, '- —and assured James, that upon the least command he to 1693.would abandon wife, children, and country to regainand deserve his esteem. But with all these professionshe declined to bring over the troops hecommanded in Flanders, and gave the somewhatsuspicious advice, that the invasion should be madewith a small force.The restless and impatient Halifax was not behindthese. Having been among the last who came overto the Prince of Orange, he had found himself underthe necessity of compensating for his tardiness byardent zeal and unabashed treachery, he was determinednot to repeat his error ; he received Buckleywith open arms, and promised to do every thing inhis power to overthrow the king he had been soinstrumental in creating.The fickle and eccentric Earl of Monmouth appearsto have sought a share in these designs, fromhis natural inclination for intrigue of all descriptions ;and Dartmouth, who had preserved a rare consistency,proposed to go over to James, if he could bepromised the command of a squadron of Frenchmen-of-war.*The king of course answered all these promises ofMacpherson, vol. i., p. 238.5^2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, adherence with kindness. He wrote in terms of particulargood humour to Marlborough, and made theto 1693. queen add a few words to his letter of acknowledgmentbut it is said that he privately declared thatChurchill's crimes were so black they could never beforgiven.*Of these Jacobites there were two classes, whichobtained the designations of compounders and non-compoundedthe former required James to compoundfor his restoration to a throne, which, byallowing that he had any title to it at all, theyadmitted was absolutely and inalienably his. Allthat man could do to deprive James of the crownhad been done, and justice and patriotism sanctionedthe act. If he had yet a right, it was one whichcould be made the subject of no human restrictions,which could be lawfully opposed under no pretenceof human expediency, which was capable of no reformationfrom human hands ; — it emanated from theDeity — the province of man was solely submission.When, therefore, the compounders stipulatedterms upon which they would restore James to thethrone, they made a proposition inconsistent withtheir own principles — they cut away the foundationto obtain materials to enlarge the fabric.Macpherson, vol. i., p. 281. an absurd story of Lord Churchill,This however seems to depend having undertaken "to pistol oronly upon the same authority as stab'" James.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 523The non com pounders were those who even in ex chap.XVIIItrinity still held fast the true doctrines of Toryism ; '. —they held it as an essential point of their religion, to ' to 1693.obey the hereditary owner of the crown, and theyfollowed the principle careless of its consequences.The former of these classes were statesmen ormen of the world, the latter divines, or laymen of thestrict high church party : these were the more conscientious,those the more numerous ; the first lookedupon James as the herald of halcyon days for theTories, the last expected it as a triumph for the doctrinesof the church.The compounding party contained among itsmembers all the Tory leaders in parliament exceptthe Earl of Nottingham ; and it was headed by thePrincess Anne and her husband. Prince George ofDenmark. These two weak-minded persons wereentirely under the control of the Earl and Countessof Marlborough ; and although less courted by theTories now they were in power, than they had beenwhen that party was in opposition, their near relationto the throne rendered them nevertheless possessorsof very considerable influence. Under the guidanceof Marlborough the princess wrote a penitential letterto her father, acknowledging the guilt of her pastconduct, and expressing an earnest desire to deserveand receive his pardon.James remarks in his diary at the time of thereceipt of this letter, *the number of the king's•524 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, friends increased daily ; they proposed schemes forhis restoration ; the correspondence with ChurchillA.D. 1691 , 111- . 1' iito 1693, was kept up, though his pretensions were liable tosuspicion from his former conduct, his professionshad the appearance of sincerity ; there was somecause to believe him, as both he and his mistress, thePrincess Denmark, were out of favour with the Princeof Orange. Neither of them reaped any advantagefrom their past infidelity, but the infamy of havingcommitted such great crimes. The most interestedmay be credited, when they can reasonably hope tomend their fortune and better their condition byreturning to their duty."The compounders were not all Tories : some fewof the Whigs, seeing the Tories in power, and knowingtheir designs, were anxious to accommodatethemselves to an event which they were hopelessof averting. Among these Shrewsbury* isnot entirely free from suspicion, Monmouth t wasdoubted, and Russell was certainly guilty. Speakingof the Princess Anne's letter, James remarks, t'* Lloyd brought the above letter. AdmiralMacpherson, vol. i., p. 243 — reasons which exist for doubting245. But a passage which will be the authenticity of these extractsafterwards cited, from the Making given by Macpherson, I cite themtosh Collections, and his general as being what the collector pre-conduct,seems sufficient to acquit tends they are. — They are, doubt-shrewsburyof this charge. less, entitled to considerablef Dalr. App., part li., p. 125. credit, although probably to less% Having already mentioned the than is claimed for them.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 525Russell, who had the command of the English chap.XVIII.fleet, still pretended to be in the kind's interest.TT V ■ n ^ • ^ i , • , i , • ^•^- ^691He was dissatisfied with the kmg s declaration. to 1693.There was a necessity of doing all that waspossible to content a person who had the crownof England so far in his hands. Lloyd was Russell'sparticular friend. Russell had several conferences,before he came away, with the Princess ofDenmark. He expressed his earnest desire toserve the king. He said, the people were inclinedenough to his side again, if the king would take aright line to continue them so : he advised him ifhe wished to reign as a Catholic king over a Protestantpeople, he must forget the past and grant ageneral pardon ; and that as for him, he made nostipulations for himself, saying it was the public goodand no private advantages made him enter into thisaffair. He told him, therefore, that if he met theFrench fleet he would fight it were even the king himselfon board, but that the method he proposed toserve the king was by going out of the way with theEnglish fleet. This was an odd way to restore theking, by fighting him ! He, however, meant nothingbut advantage to himself, as the preparations of theFrench made a restoration probable. He wasdetermined to raise his fortunes whichever way thebalance inclined. Had the French passed by accidentor prevailed by force, he would have made aTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, merit of serving the king : and should the contraryhappen he could easily keep his credit with theA.D. 1691to 1693. present government.The battle of La Hogue, which annihilated the navyof France and overthrew for ever that sovereigntyof the ocean which she had recently arrogated,showed that James's view of the intentions of Russellwere perfectly just. This was a stunning blow tothe Jacobites at home and abroad, and for some timethe busy faction appeared lifeless.Few of these negotiations with the mimic courtat St. Germain's were unknown to William. Marlborough'sdismissal from his offices, although attributedby his duchess to his zeal for the service ofthe Princess Anne, was spoken of as the result ofsome intercepted letter. Mr. Hallam, the mostacute and accurate, as he is certainly the most elegantof living historians, thinks the discovery ofthis nobleman's treachery extended to the letterwritten by the Princess Anne to her father, andsuggests that many of those ministers mentioned byMacpherson and Dalrymple as favourable to theJacobite cause, only amused the agents of Jameswith general expressions, while they learned andprovided against particular designs.During the session of 1692 the parliament seemsj to have lost much of its loyalty. The Whigs evenprocured the adoption of an act dissolving that par-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 5^7liament and rendering all future ones triennial. But j chap.this bill which ministers had not been able to stopin its progress through the houses, was destroyed by 1 * *the prerogative of the crown.*At the close of the session the king made somealteration in his policy. The conduct of Russell andNottingham, with relation to naval affairs, had beenmuch canvassed. The lords censured the admiral,but the commons protected their member, and retortedupon the secretary. The king dischargedRussell, adopting the expression that it was notenough that his officers were faithful, they must befree from suspicion. tThe unpopularity of this government was so greatthat, previous to William's departure for the seat ofwar, it was remodelled. The appointment of SirJohn Trenchant, already mentioned in connexion withthe Rye-house plot, to the post of secretary of statelong since vacant by the promotion of Lord Sidneyto the lieutenancy of Ireland, and the nominationof Somers as lord keeper, manifested an inclinationto return to the Whigs. The circumstances whichoccurred during the progress of the campaign of1693 rendered this inclination much stronger ; thePari. Hist., vol. v. when they state that Nottinghamf Ralph. Life of King Wil was dismissed at the same timelias. The compilers of the Par and for the same reason. — Vol. v.,alimentary History are in error p. 771.A. D. 1693.528 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.^^fK' government was disunited in itself, without influencein the houses of parliament, uncertain in its conduct,and distrusted throughout the nation.* Every departmentof the public affairs suffered either through theinefficiency or treachery of the officer who presidedover it, or the opposition which his managementreceived from his colleagues. Each was intriguingagainst the others, and Rochester was pressing hisinterest with the queen, and plotting the introductionof his own peculiar party.Such a ministry might have been a convenientinstrument in the hands of a master who could usetheir mutual animosities to compel an universalobedience ; it was far too formidable for the controlof the gentle and domestic Mary. William, toodistant to watch the secret springs, found ampleopportunities of marking its general inefficiency.Upon his return in November, he resolved to destroythe ascendancy of the Tory party. He replacedRussell at the head of the fleet, and immediatelyafterwards manifested his further intentions by thedecisive step of taking the seals from the Earl ofNottingham. Shrewsbury was immediately summoned,and required to take upon him the vacantoffice. By the assistance of this popular nobleman,William hoped to recover the alienated affections ofSee Mary's letters to William ; in Dalrymple's App., part ii.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 529that majority of the Whig party which was called by / chap.the courtiers the malecontent Whigs. Shrewsbury, » 'however, suspected the sincerity of this suddenchange of policy, and he was hopeless of any ministrywherein Carmarthen held the office of president, withthe power and influence of premier. The conferencebetween the king and the earl ended in a warmaltercation ; Shrewsbury retired in disgust, and the'king was reduced to the necessity of repeating hisoffers through the medium of his own mistress, Mrs.Villiers, and of soliciting the good offices of Mrs.Dundee, the mistress of the earl.*Shrewsbury steadily refused the solicitations ofboth these ladies. The urgency of their letters, thefreedom with which they state that they write by theauthority and under the instructions of the king,and the forcible manner in which they depict hisanxiety for their success, sufficiently show thatWilliam was now fully aware of the error he hadcommitted.The applications to Shrewsbury were continued \during the whole of the session of 1693-4. At theprorogation, when William was again about to leaveEngland, he found himself compelled to submit tothe terms of the Whigs, and to abandon his favouritepolicy. Russell was placed at the head of theShrewsbury Correspondence.VOL. I. a M530 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, admiralty ; Montague was made chancellor andunder treasurer of the exchequer. The Tories whowere left were of the more moderate character, andCarmarthen and Godolphin, no longer the chiefs ofthe cabinet, undertook for their good behaviour, andpledged themselves to the earnest prosecution of thewar. Shrewsbury then accepted the seals, the Carmarthenadministration was no more, and the newsecretary, being in reality the prime-minister, gavehis name to a government of WhigsCharles Montague, the chancellor of the exchequerin the new ministry, was a man whose after-eminencedeserves that we should mark his first accession to aprominent political station. Montague was of ayounger branch of the family of the Earl of Manchestereager in the pursuit of distinction, andfortunate in the selection of his associates, his collegecareer was marked by the friendship of Newton, andhis first appearance in the world by the patronage ofthe Earl of Dorset, and the intimacy of Prior.Montague's first attempt was to distinguish himselfas a poet ; the " City Mouse and Country Mouse,"a parody on Dryden's " Hind and Panther," was thejoint production of Prior and his pupil. This production,added to his " Epistle on his Majesty'sVictory in Ireland," appears to have recommendedhim to the king ; for, when the Earl of Dorset,in allusion to his poem, introduced him as theXVIII.A.D. 1694.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 531Mouse, William is said to have thanked the patron chapfor the opportunity of making a man of him. Thegrant of a pension of £500 a year, certainly atteststhe intention, even if we doubt, with Dr. Johnson,the occurrence of the promise. Montague nowobtained a seat in the house of commons, and soondiscovered a talent in debate which was sought invain in his poetry. His first effort was made uponthe bill for regulating trials in cases of high treason.When Montague rose to advocate that clause in thebill which allowed the assistance of counsel to personsaccused of this crime, he was overpowered withthe novelty of his situation, his utterance failed him,and he resumed his seat in great embarrassment ;the feeling which this failure had excited in thehouse was, however, entirely changed when he immediatelyafterwards rose, and, availing himself withexquisite skill of his own confusion, drew from it anargument for allowing counsel to men who stoodaccused before their judges, since he himself, innocentand unaccused, stood silent and confounded,even in an assembly of which he was himself amember.*Montague's eloquence and talent immediatelycommanded the consideration of the commons, heIn the parliamentary history, bute to the third Earl of Shaftsanecdote is erroneously attribute2 M 2A. D. 1694.o32 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, was a prominent member of the committees which^^ • conducted the conferences with the lords upon theTrials for Treason bill, and the posts of privy counsellorand commissioner of the treasury had preparedhim for the important office which he held in thenew Whig ministry.*The conduct of public affairs during the session of1694, evinces that Carmarthen and Nottingham wereno longer the prompters of the royal acts. TheTriennial bill, which William had before negatived,again passed both houses, with no other oppositionthan a protest by Devonshire and others, because itallowed the continuance of the present parliament.This time it received the royal assent, for those whopromoted it in the houses of legislature advocated itin the cabinet. The death of the queen immediatelysucceeding destroyed every shadow of hereditaryright, and threw the king yet more upon the supportof the Whigs. The new ministers applied themselveswith vigour to the reformation of abuses, andsoon opened to the commons a scene of corruptionthat surpassed the boldest conjecture. The investigationimplicated not only members, but even thespeaker of their house, who was expelled upon themost conclusive proof of flagrant corruption. Car-lifeof Halifax. Biog. Brit., art. " Montague." Johnson's Livesof the Poets.A. D. 1694.THE HISTORY OF PARTI'. 533earthen, now Duke of Leeds,* was so notoriously CHAP.XVIII.guilty that the commons voted his impeachment, andit was found that that exclusive body of Tories andJacobites, the East India Company, had defied allcompetition in the boldness of their corruption byoffering a bribe of 50,000/. to the king.In 1695 William's second parliament was dissolved.The sentiments of the new one may begathered from the association which was proposedand signed upon the discovery of the assassinationplot in the next year. This document, acknowledgingWilliam to be the rightjiil and lawful king of theserealms, and pledging the association to revenge himif he died by a violent death, was refused only byninety-two members of the commons and fifteen ofthe peers. Among the dissenting peers we are notsurprised to find Nottingham and Normandybut with every allowance for the chameleon characterof Halifax, we could scarcely be prepared for suchshameless inconsistency as the rejection of therecognition of his own conduct.The three years' duration of this parliament offers 'few subjects for observation. The Whigs retainedThe Duke, by sending away crime by the ingenuity with whichhis servant, escaped this his third he had suppressed the evidenceimpeachment ; but the high tone which all knew to exist.he assumed very ill accorded with f Afterwards Duke of Buck-hisconduct ; he was only preserved ingram.from conviction of a disgraceful534f THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. 1 their supremacy throughout. The reforms introducehad been great, but they had been effectedto 1698. without contest. In the words of William, when heprorogued them, great things had been done, thewhole money of England had been recoined, theking secured in his government, an honourablepeace made, public credit restored, and the paymentof public debts put on sure grounds.*The ill health of the Duke of Shrewsbury hadcompelled him to cede the direction of affairs toSomers, now Lord Chancellor Somers, whose influencein the house of lords was as great as it was inthe cabinet. Montague enjoyed the implicit confidenceof the commons. The administration ofaffairs is described to have been without exception,and the silence of the opposition justifies the description.In the new parliament, which met in December,Ice Whigs retained their majority as long as theyretained the favour of the king, but when they refusedI to defend him against the general demand that heshould dismiss his Dutch guards, William withdrewhis confidence, made a step towards the Tories anddisplaced Shrewsbury and Montague t to make wayfor three of the opposite party.Pari. Hist., vol. v., p. 1 183. he thought himself maltreated,■j- Sir Wm. Trumbull resigned The Whigs named Wharton ashis place of secretary, because his successor, the king appointedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 535This concession served to increase the boldness chap.1 • • 1 1 M- r. 1 . XVIII.but not to mitigate the hostility of the party it was^ -^ '■ -^ A. D. 1698intended to conciliate. In the next session the to 1702.Tories were confident and active, the Whigs weredesponding and inert. William now abandonedhimself to the former party, and the ministry wasagain a Tory one. The most violent measures ofopposition were proposed and adopted by a confluenceof broken parties, and William only escaped anaddress to remove his countrymen from his councilsby interposing an abrupt prorogation and a subsequentdissolution.The Earl of Rochester was now lord lieutenantof Ireland, and Godolphin at the head of the treasury,the Earl of Jersey was secretary of state in theplace of Shrewsbury, the Earl of Pembroke presidentof the council, and Lord Lonsdale privy seal, Mr.Smith was chancellor of the exchequer.This change was not a little facilitated by theintrigues of the Earl of Sunderland, who, althoughburdened with all the iniquities of the reign ofJames, and excepted by name from the act ofoblivion, had made his peace at court, and hadobtained the office of lord chamberlain. Although hedared not openly appear in the government, his secretVernon, and Shrewsbury, who now withdrew. — Shrewsbury Cor-hadlong meditated a retreat, resjwndencc.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, cabals often influenced its fate:* he still assistedXVIII. )each party in its turn, as the success of Whig; orA.D. 1698 . . . ^to 1702. Tory politics favoured his own designs.The fruits of this administration were various.The new ministry commenced with the dismissal ofthe great and good Lord Somers ; and having a smallbut certain majority in their new house of commons,they proceeded to impeach their predecessors. TheEarls of Portland and Oxford and Lords Somersand Halifax t underwent their accusations. TheTory majority attempted to prejudice the impeachments,by addressing the king to remove the accusednoblemen from his presence and councils for ever ;but the lords, who were less intoxicated with revenge,presented a counter address. The flagrantviolation of the liberties of their fellow-citizens,perpetrated by this house, in committing to prisonpersons who presented to them a temperate, althoughan unwelcome petition, the violence with whichthey urged on their groundless impeachments, therecklessness with which they provoked an unnecessarycollision with the lords, their evident unwillingnessto grant supplies for the war, and their notoriousShrewsbury Correspondence. tinct in that family by the death-|- Montague was created Lord of his son in August, 1700. ItHalifax soon after he left the was revived, as a barony, in thechancellorship of the exchequer, person of Montague, in DecemberSeville, Marquis of Halifax, died of the same year. — Heylyn.in 169j, and the title became ex-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 537corruption by France excited universal disgust, chap.The whole nation rejoiced at their dissolution inTVT 1-irrrx-i A. D. 1698November I7OI. to 1702.This house of commons nevertheless passed a lawwhich is well remembered, now that their misdeedsare nearly forgotten. This was the act of succession.William had been always anxious to render Ithe succession of the crown in a Protestant lineclear and indisputable, and, aware that there was nochance of his being able to direct the limitation tohis own immediate family, the house of Brandenburg,*he designed to fix it upon the next heir afterthe exclusion of the Catholic claimants, the PrincessSophia. This had been already, by his order,proposed by Burnet in the lords, and carried with 'out opposition, but rejected by the Tories and Jacobitesin the commons. The king, sure of theWhigs, had proposed this measure to the Torieswhen in opposition, as the condition upon whichthey should be admitted to oiRce.t The compactwas made and the ministers slowly and unwillinglyset about their ungrateful task. We owe no gratitudeto the authors of this measure. An ignoblemotive induced them to undertake it, and a dishonourableattempt to escape from their promise,marked every stage of the bill. The speech recoilNote on Buniet. f Onslow's Note upon Burnet,vol. ii., p. 270.THE HISTORY OF PARTY,CHAP.XVIII.mending the measure was made on the 11th ofFebruary, I7OI. It was not until after a long delay,to 1702. ^^^ ^ threat from the Whigs, that they would proposea similar measure, that this part of the speechwas taken into consideration by the house. Theministers then moved certain conditions of government,many of them invaluable in themselves, butof so extreme a character, and so evidently reflectingupon the king, that it was plainly the intention ofthe promoters to disgust William with his ownmeasure — draw on a conflict upon the subject betweenthe two houses — and drown their unwelcomeoffspring in the storm thus raised. This designfailed ; the Whigs supported both the bill and theconditions, and the king resolved to secure the successionat every sacrifice. The next scheme was totreat the bill with contempt and ridicule. Sir JohnBowles, a man who was then disordered in his senses,and soon after totally lost them, was the memberappointed by the ministerial party to name thePrincess Sophia, and he was placed in the chair ofthe committee to which the bill was committed ;through this ordeal it very slowly progressed, themembers, when it was brought forward, indecentlyleft the house ; and we may judge from the fact, thatfifty or sixty members generally formed the committeethat the Whigs were left alone with theunii^isters, and that the Tories, without disguisingTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 539their hostility to the measure, thought they suffi! CHAP.. XVIII.gently earned their advancement by refraining from —Opposing it. to 1702.In the lords it passed with little opposition : theMarquis of Normanby spoke against it, and fourpeers protested ; but the greater number of thosewho were hostile to the bill purposely absented themselves.It was then sent back to the commons, whopassed it with little discussion in a very thin house,and not without some contemptuous comments uponthe bill and its supporters.*The manager of this bill in the commons, andthe contriver of all the abortive attempts for itsdefeat, was Robert Harley, a man of no littleimportance in party history. Descended from a presbyterianfamily, and possessed of talents of noordinary character, he had, upon his entry intopublic life, taken his natural station in the ranksof the Whigs. Without very rare advantages, it requiresmany years of assiduity to rise into importancewith a prosperous party. Harley's success was unequalto the expectations of his impatient ambition ;amid the multitude of claimants he was overlookedor underrated, and he resolved thenceforward todepend upon himself alone for advancement. Withoutopenly deserting the Whigs, he applied himselfBurnet ; Oldmixon ; Ralph ; Parliamentary History ; Cox's Lifeof Walpole.540 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, to conciliate the Tories ; an adept in petty intrigue,affectedly mysterious, silent even to his friends, andto 1702. concealing his purpose even from those upon whomhe depended for its fulfilment, Harley had the ambitionof the Marquis of Halifax, to hold the balancebetween the parties, and to be necessary to each.He soon obtained the reputation he desired, and hewas courted by both parties, because each supposedthat he was favourable to them, and in the confidenceof their opponents. This reputation recommendedhim to the speakership under the Tory ministry :such an ambitious politician was the best conceivableinstrument to manage for them the bill ofSuccession.The Tories were now unpopular with the nationand distrusted by the king. Upon his return toEngland William dissolved the parliament, and madeadvances to the Whigs. Somers received the overturewith suspicion, and asked what security hisfriends had that he would not return to the same illadvisers. Never, never, replied the king,* with anemphasis which denoted his thorough conviction ofhis error. The death of James had intervened, andLouis, by acknowledging his son King of England,offered an insult which William resolved to avengeby a declaration of war. The Whigs returned toOldmixon.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. .541power: their deeds declared that they were deter / chap.XVIII.mined to carry out the act of succession ; the act of Iabjuration was passed, and the confederacy against ' io 1702.France had been consolidated, when the sudden 'death of the king put an end to the session, andchanged the prospects of the country.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XIX.Prospects of the parties upon the accession of Anne — Formation of theGodolphin administration — Its Tor' character — Character of thenew house of commons — Measures of the Tory majority — Oppositionof the lords — Contest upon the occasional Conformity bill.CHAP. The death of William and the accession of AnneXIXwere events which caused no little consternationA.D. 1702.among the Whigs. The princess had been educatedamong the high church Tories, and she had imbibeda sincere, almost a superstitious, veneration for thechurch. She had been taught that the WTiio^s wererepublicans and dissenters — enemies to the establishment,and subverters of the monarchy : * her ownConduct of the Duchess of mouths of those who made theMarlborough, p. 122. The Duchess most noise with it, for I could notwas a Whig. " For my own part," perceive that they gave any othershe says, "the word ' church,' had distinguished proof of their regardnever any charm for me in the for the thing than a frequent useA.D. 1702.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 543experience had confirmed her in this belief. In her ^^ix^contest with William for an independent revenue,these had been her enemies ; the Tories had thenproved themselves her friends. We seldom judgevery strictly the motives of those efforts which aremade in our own favour; it doubtless never suggesteditself to the princess that the object of her championswas embarrassment to the king, and that theirconduct in this instance was in direct contradictionto the doctrines they taught.An erroneous conviction may be shaken by argument,but the eradication of a long-cherished prejudiceis a hopeless endeavour. Anne was scarcelysuperior to her husband in intellect : her opinionswere prejudices ; they had been received withoutexamination, and were retained without suspicion".The influence exercised over her by Marlboroughand his countess was so great, that the Whigs lookedupon her accession as that of the earl ; and had atonetime proposed to exclude her fi-om the throne,by appointing the succession to the house of Hanoverof the word, like a spell to enchant of these churchmen appeared toweak minds, and a persecuting me to have no fixed principles atzeal against dissenters, and against all, having endeavoured, duringthose real friends of the church the last reign, to undermine thatwho would not admit that perse very government which they hadcaution was agreeable to its doc contributed to establish."trine ; and as to state affairs, manyA.D. 1702.544 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, immediately upon the death of William ; * a designnot altogether indefensible, since all suspected, andsome knew the intrigues of Marlborough with theexiled family, but far too violent for the temper ofthe nation.Anne took no pains to conceal the partiality shefelt. Very soon after her accession she determinedto surround herself with ministers more congenial toher taste than those which were bequeathed her byher predecessor, and Marlborough received full powerto form a ministry. The earl's conduct upon thisoccasion manifests a sudden change in his sentiments.When the prospect of immediate success vanished,Marlborough's ardour in the cause of the Stuartssssceased : he had retired from all correspondence with St.Germain's, and, confident in the duration of the presentsettlement, he addressed himself to the pursuitof a brighter fortune. The humiliation of France,the glory of England, an immortality of fame tohimself — these formed the newly-discovered objectsof a mind now for the first time awakened to a consciousnessof its own might, and exulting in theopportunity for its display. Marlborough's motiveLord Dartmouth's note on him yes, but I did not think itBurnet. His lordship adds, " Lord very Hkely. He said it was veryMarlborough asked me afterwards true ; but by God, if ever theyin the house of lords if I had ever attempt it, we would walk overheardof such a design ? — I told their bellies." — Vol. ii., p. 300.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 545was no longer the hope of the courtier — it was now chap.XIXthe ambition of the hero. LAs this change came over the sentiments of thisextraordinary man, he found himself more and moreestranged from the party to which he had hithertoadhered. Now, when they thought their day oftriumph had arrived, and rushed forward with impatientviolence to chase away their rivals and dividetheir spoils, the hand of Marlborough put themback, repressed their vehemence, and moderatedtheir transports.The ministry, formed by Marlborough, was originallyTory in its character, for the queen wouldhave it so, and the temper of the nation required it ;but it was by no means so deep and unmixedin its party complexion as that faction had expectedand required. Godolphin, who unwillinglyassumed the premiership, with the usual title of lordhigh treasurer, was but a moderate Tory ; he hadbeen present, indeed, in several violent Tory administrations,but he appears to have been passivein the most important measures, and to have actedmore as a financier than a politician. His vote onthe Exclusion bill shows that whatever motive,whether expediency, avarice, or ambition, inducedhim to act with the Tories upon constitutional subjects,he, at least, thought as a Whig, and his conductat the head of this administration showed thatVOL. I. 2 N546 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, he had not forgotten his ancient predilections.XIX.Marlborough placed Godolphin in this office as ato 1704. man upon whom he could depend for seconding himin his military operations. They had long beenfriends and political allies, and they were connectedby marriage, Godolphin's eldest son having marriedthe eldest daughter of the earl. Marlborough reservedto himself the personal conduct of thewar, with the title of captain-general of the forces.Rochester retained his office of lord lieutenant ofIreland, from which he had not been formally dismissed.Nottingham returned to his office of secretaryof state, the Tories would trust no less prominentand decided member of their party, and asthe earl was able to dictate his own terms, he insistedupon having Sir Charles Hedges as his colleague.Mr. Vernon, however, one of the secretaries,thus displaced, was, upon the application of the Dukeof Shrewsbury (now in retirement at Rome) madeone of the tellers of the exchequer. Prince Georgeof Denmark was created lord high admiral in theplace of the Earl of Pembroke, who was offered alarge pension upon his removal, an offer which theearl, although by no means wealthy, generouslydeclined. Simon Harcourt, a Tory lawyer, who haddistinguished himself in the house of commons, andwas considered an adherent of Robert Harley, wasappointed solicitor-general. The dominant party re-THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 547civet yet greater encouragement when the Marquis chap.X TXof Normanby, an avowed Jacobite, was made lord L1 T^T, T^ • • 1 ^ • A.D. 1702privy seal. Fine lories, so immaculate m oppo- to 1704.siphon, who had clamoured for a bill to exclude fromthe commons' house all who held places of profitunder government, now eagerly scrambled for theminor offices. Many of them had declared, whenthere was little hope of temptation, that they, fortheir parts, would never be drawn from their countryparty by the offer of a place. The Whigs did notfail to remind these patriotic men of their self-denyingresolve, and all were not so happy in theircases, or so acute in their casuistry, as Mr. How,who could answer to such an unpleasant allusion thathe had kept his word, he had not a place," — a pleawhich was, doubtless, literally true, since the officeof paymaster-general was divided between him andMr. Fox.*No sooner had the death of William been announcedthan the press teemed with libels upon hismemory. No charge was too improbable, no calumnytoo gross for the mendacity of the Tory pamphleteers,and the credulity of their Tory readers ;so long as the Whig house of commons, which sat atOldmixon. This Mr. John next parliament, by a most shame-howwas one of the most violent less and unconstitutional decisionmembers of his party; he was of the Tory majority of an electionseated for Gloucestershire, in the committee.2n2548 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the time of his death, was in existence, these libellersXIXwere kept in some awe. They would allow none toA.D. 1702 , . - , , Jto 1704. calumniate a memory they revered, but repressedhis assailants with an active and even an indiscreetzeal. The fame of such a monarch as Williamcould suffer nothing from the drowsy lucubrationsof a few Tory divines ; and even '* Tom Doublereturned out of the Country" might have been sufferedto dialogue unpunished. The attempts of thecommons to suppress these scurrilous publicationswere injudicious and even unjustifiable, but theyabundantly show that assiduously as the Tories hadflattered William, and hardly as he had sometimestreated the Whigs, the Tories hated the man towhom they bowed, and William had been only themonarch of the Whigs. It was they alone whoplaced the crown upon his head, and they alone whokept it there.The house of commons which the new ministerscalled together, contained a large majority of Tories,who manifested their sympathy with the authors ofthe condemned sermons and pamphlets, by imitatingtheir conduct. They seized every opportunity ofinsulting his memory, and, Marlborough having justconcluded a successful campaign, they voted, in theiraddress to the queen, that he had retrieved thehonour of England. '* I will never swear to becomea persecutor," said William, when the coronationTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 549oath was tendered to him. The Tories were re- chap.X TXsolved to manifest their dislike to his principles as 'well as his acts. No sooner had they gained an ' to 1704ascendancy than they commenced a furious persecutionof the dissenters. By the Test act of I672,all who held offices of trust, or were magistratesin corporations, were compelled to take the sacrament,according to the rite of the church of England,before they entered upon their office ; but this done,they were not disqualified from retaining it by anysubsequent dissent. Under the protection of thisact many dissenters now held government and corporateoffices ; these were called occasional conformers.The queen's husband. Prince George ofDenmark, was one. The present bill expelled everyperson in the service of the crown, or in a corporateoffice, from the situation held, upon proof that hehad been present at any conventicle, and inflictedpenalties more ruinous even than those which wereimposed upon the Catholics. This bill was a favouritemeasure with the Tories ; it gratified twoof their most cherished wishes ; it threatened prostrationto all who differed from the church in formulasof faith, and promised, through the instrumentalityof Tory corporations, a long career of Tory supremacy.It passed the commons by a large majority,and was carried up to the lords backed by all theinfluence of the court. So. ardent was the queen'szeal, that the Tory-party w<ere^-able= to convince her550 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, that this cunningly-contrived and politic measure■VT Vwas hei' bill. " I can't bear saying," she writes toA. D. 1 702to 1704. the Duchess of Marlborough, " that I see nothingHke persecution in this bill. You may think it is anotion Lord Nottingham put into my head, but uponmy word it is my own thought." Although, withsingular inconsistency, she declares in the sameletter, that although she " wished it then to passshe would have been very glad if it had not beenbrought into the house of commons."A British house of commons represented, at thistime, the most transient sentiments of the nation ;it was the creation of the people. The house ofpeers, small in the number of its members, representedthe sentiments of the monarch, who had heldfor any considerable time the power of creation — theinfluence which actuated the former, was as the gustwhich sweeps athwart the Alpine lake ; the courseof the latter, was more analagous to the trade windof the ocean, steady, durable, but certainly finite.Many circumstances had concurred to renderWilliam's power of creation more than usually important.The flight and proscription of the rigidadherents of legitimacy had decreased the number ofthe peerage ; in rewarding the active agents of therevolution, William had, at once, filled these vacancies,and effected an entire change in the politicalaspect of the house. Although the creations, uponthe accession of Anne, had been four to one inTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 551favour of the Tories, the Whigs still had a majority chap.in the lords. 11The occasional Conformity bill was, therefore, ' to 1704.very differently received in that house to what ithad been in the commons. The lords supplied thosewords of form, by the omission of which the Torieshad attempted to stigmatize the memory of William ;they rejected the clause which affected corporateofficers, they inserted several provisions favourableto the dissenters ; and reduced the penalties toa more moderate scale.*The commons objected to nearly all the amendments,but they declared that the mitigation offines was no part of the jurisdiction of the otherhouse ; conferences were held in vain, the influenceof the ministry and the court was strained tothe utmost extent : the parties became nearly equal,and the contest became one of absorbing interest —three times the lords divided, and three times amajority of one decided the question in favour ofthe Whigs ; a circumstance unprecedented in parliamentaryhistory, since upon no two of thesedivisions were the members the same, and thehouse was the largest that had ever met.tThis bill is printed, with the f Burnet. Parliamentary His-amendmentsmarked, in the Par tory. Tindal.alimentary History, vol. vi., p. 65.55^ THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XX.Secession of the high church Tories from the Godolphin administrationModification in tluit ministry — St. John — Violence of the Toriesagainst the house of lords — They propose to tack the occasionalConformity bill to a bill of Supply — 'Examination of the divisionupon this proposition — Collision between the houses — Dissolution —Elections favourable to the Whigs — Marlborough and Godolphinfavour that party— r-Tlie Godolphin administration become a Whiggovernment — Measures of this government — Intrigues of Harleyand Mre. Masham — Their success — Estrangement of the queen fromher ministers — Retirement of Harley and his party — Walpole —Political errors of the Whigs — Their rejection of peace — Theirimpeachment of Sacheverell — Consequences of their errors seenin the loss of their popularity and the overthrow of their administration.CHAP. The popularity of the Tories was now diminished,but their pretensions appeared to have proportion1710. S'bly increased. The Earl of Nottingham couldnot endure that the privy-council chamber shouldbe profaned by the presence of a Whig, and hadTHE Hl^^TOKV OF PAK'IV. 553often in.si.stf'd that the J)uke.s of Devonshire and chap.Somerset .should he dismissed. Upon the prorogationthese importunities were reiterated, but the " ^,j iVioqueen, influenced by the Duchess Marlborough,and aware of the temper of the nation, instead ofsubmitting to this dictation, dismissed the Earl ofJersey, a weak but crafty man, half a papist andwholly a Jacobite, from the office of lord chamberlain,and that veteran Tory, Sir Edward Saviour,from his office of comptroller. The Earl of Nottinghamthen resigned the seals, and Mr. Blithehis colleague, also retired. The Earl ofRochester had already resigned his post of lordlieutenant of Ireland in great wrath ; upon thequeen pressing him to gu thither to discharge thefunctions of government, he replied, that he wouldnot go into Ireland if she would "sive the country tohim and his son. The earl behaved with rrreat rudenessupon this occasion, and afterwards absentedhimself from the council : upon which the queen onlyremarked, " it was not reasonable my Lord Rochestershould come to council only when he pleased," andordered that he-hould no more be summoned.'In filling up these vacancies, Marlborough andGodolphin made a step towards conciliating theConduct of the Duchess of Marlborough, p. 142.554>THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Whigs. The Earl of Kent, a very moderate man,succeeded the Earl of Jersey ; * Mr. Manse, noto 1710. violent Tory, succeeded Sir Edward Seymour ; theEarl of Nottingham's post of secretary was givento Harley ; an important intimation of a gradualchange ; Harley insisted upon naming his colleague,and his choice introduces to our notice one of themost important characters in the earlier history ofthe two parties.The successor to Mr. Blaithwaite was Henry St.John, afterwards Lord Bolingbroke. This youthfulaspirant now stepped forward as a competitor forpolitical power, gifted with all the qualifications forsuccess which nature could bestow or art improve.Descended from one of the noblest and most ancientfamilies in England, St. John's education had beenthat which is usually bestowed upon the sons of thearistocracy. If the rigid fanaticism of his first tutor,Dr. Wanton, was calculated to blight the buddingof his genius, and chill his mind into barrenness, thenoisy rivalry of a public school, the comparativeindependence of a college life, and the unrestrainedlicentiousness of the usual years of travel, were moreThe Earl of Kent owed his old Duchess of Marlborough." —white staff to lord treasurer Godol- Lord Hardwicke's Note upon Bur-pain.The scandalous Chronicle net, vol. ii., p. 381.said lie lost money at play to theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 055than sufficient to restore its freedom. St. John, soon CHAP.XXafter his appearance in the world, was famed inn• ^ ^ ^ i A. D. 1704society, as the most noised gentleman, the most to i7io.courtly suitor, the most elegant conversationalist,and the most abandoned libertine of the day. Hispopular manners and numerous accomplishmentshad, notwithstanding his excesses, obtained himgreat admiration and applause in private, before hestepped upon the stage of public life. Upon hisappearance in the house of commons, the noblerfaculties of a great mind found their development.A strong memory, a clear judgment, a vast rangeof wit and fancy, a thorough comprehension, aninvincible eloquence with a most agreeable elocution,are the qualities attributed to him by afriend.*Even Burnet, opposed to him as he was, declareshis eloquence to have been superhuman ; its traditionalfame in the next generation may be judgedfrom the testimony of Mr. Pitt. That statesmanwas conversing with some friends upon the mostvaluable pieces of literature and art which had beendestroyed by time, and they were forming wishes forthe recovery of some one of them — the lost books ofLivy, and a specimen of an ancient comedy, wereseverally named, but when it became Mr. Pits s turnSwift's Inquiry into the Behaviour of the Queen's last Ministry.556 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, to express a wish, he decided that upon the wholehe should prefer to see a speech of Boiling, ^to 1710. broke*The character of St. John's eloquence, as it can becollected from the testimony of contemporaries, maybegiven in the words I have already used upon thesame subject. "It is said that in the delivery of hisspeeches there were occasional pauses of reflection ;but when he had recovered and arranged his ideas,as he clothed them in words, his language flowed onwithout either hurry or hesitation, in a copious streamof eloquence, which equally delighted the ear andconvinced the judgment. In all the arts of oratoryhe seemed to have been endued With a natural proficiencyand even the tactics of debate were not inhim the acquirements of experience. Where theweakness of a cause was to be disguised, or theattention of the audience withdrawn from its examination,the wit of the orator shot like a star-shootathwart the debate ; but when the arguments of anadversary were to be sifted, and his fallacies exposed,he discovered a wonderful power of analyzing hissubject at a single glance, and of almost instinctivelydiscovering its capabilities of attack and defence.He united in his reply a subtilty of reasoning, aI find this anecdote in a re- Magazine for August 1835. Thisview of the "Memoirs of Lord very able article has suppliedBolingbroke," in the Gentleman's several defects in my " Memoir."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 557profundity of thinking, and a solidity of judgment, ^ xx'which fixed attention and commanded admiration.* . „ ,„^,A.D. 1704Such were the powers of the man who, forsaking to i7io,the party of his family, attached himself to Harley,and commenced his career as a moderate Tory.These two men, however, by no means identifiedthemselves with the administration which they nowjoined. It was the design of Harley to bring abouta coalition of the parties, and to form from them astrong administration, of which he alone, he thought,could be the bond of union and the head, St. John,conscious of his own superiority, and panting forpolitical distinction, saw in this alliance the earliestprospect of promotion, and he embraced it.These were the alterations made during the recessof 1704. The news of the dismay and slaughterwhich Marlborough was scattering among the armiesof France, the storm of Schellenburg, and the victoryat Blenheim, had made the war popular with thenation, and had greatly increased the odium castupon the Tories.The next session was not less turbulent than thelast. Two assemblies, differing so completely intheir political views as the lords and commons now did,could not long exist without a hostile collision. TheTories discovered great reluctance to grant suppliesMemoirs of Lord Bolingbroke, vol. i., p. 20.558 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, for the war. Notwithstanding the vast power ofXXLouis, his ambitious designs, the enmity he had everto 1710. shown to English Liberty, and his avowed intentionsof setting the Stuartssss upon the throne whenevercircumstances might facilitate the attempt, the Torieswere originally averse to the league against him ;the influence of Marlborough with that party aloneaccomplished it.In this session the Tories attempted to achieve adouble success, by reviving the occasional Conformitybill, and tacking it to the bill of Supply.This proposition was entertained only by the mostunflinching of the high church party ; its successwould have broken the confederacy against France,and put an end to the war. Notwithstanding all theinfluence of the court and ministry was added tothat of the Whigs, the majority against this factiousand unprincipled proposition was only 251 to 134.The list of the division upon this bill has beenpreserved and points out the strongholds of the twoparties throughout the country. Bedfordshire maintainedits character, and supplied no vote in favourof the tack. Gloucestershire, Huntingdonshire, andWestmorland, not yet under the influence of theOthers, equally preserved the integrity of theirrepresentation. Yorkshire, Sussex, Salop, and thecinque ports, presented but occasional exceptions.On the other hand Oxfordshire stood forward as anTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 559example of uncompromising Toryism ; all her mem CHAP,hers were tackers, prepared to destroy even the house '. —A D 1704of lords, if that assembly should be found to be * to untaintedwith any liberality of sentiment. This honourisonly shared by Warwickshire and Cheshire; butit was emulated by Suffolk, Hertfordshire, and evenMiddlesex, which sent majorities in favour of thetack. The numerous boroughs of Cornwall werealready infamous for their corruption, but the influenceof the court and ministry had drawn many ofthese members from the church party, and therewere some among them who voted consistently uponthe side of toleration and liberty.This bill, when sent up to the lords, was, after alengthened debate in the presence of the queen,rejected by a majority of 7I to 50.The houses soon after engaged in a dispute uponthe subject of the illegal commitments made by thecommons, in the case of the Aylesbury election.The conduct of this house of commons had beenthroughout so violent, and in this particular instanceso despotic and illegal, amounting in fact to a virtualsuspension of the habeas corpus act, that the queenfound herself compelled to prorogue it. The proclamationwhich followed, only anticipated, by a shorttime, its natural dissolution.The Tories, during this session, had been deprivedof the counsel of Sir Christopher Margrave, whoTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, had long been their leader in the commons, and wasXXesteemed the wisest man of their party. Sir Christ1710. tother was not, however, incorruptible ; presentsfrom William amounting to £12,000 had inducedhim to surrender several important and long-contestedpoints ; and the unsuspected wealth which heleft at his death, gave much plausibility to the accusationthat his objection to the war against Louiswas founded upon an experience of that monarch'sgenerosity.*A violent party is never popular in England,unless the points they contend for are, unquestionablyjust and necessary. The nation judged theWhigs unreasonable when they refused all conditions,and insisted upon the Exclusion bill ; wehave seen the consequences of that judgment, in thesufferings of their party, and the temporary extinctionof public liberty : the Tory ministry of I7OIcommitted a similar error, and received a similarchastisement. The Tory house of commons which wasnow dissolved in 1705, had, for the same reason,been long looked upon by the nation with disgust.The elections for the new parliament were carriedon with the greatest excitement ; the cry of " Thechurch is in danger" was raised by the Tories, andthe question, " Is the church in danger ?" becameTindal. Burnet.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 56lthe touchstone of the parties. While the contest CHAP.was in progress the court maintained a neutrality ; 'but when it was decided in favour of the Whigs, the ' Iq i^iq^influence of the Duchess of Marlborough swayed thescale ; Marlborough and Godolphin declared for thatparty, and the queen reluctantly acquiesced. NathanWright, a Tory lord keeper, a man despised by bothparties, and useful to his own only to keep out anopponent, was dismissed, and the seals were transferredto William Cowper. Cowper is described asagentleman of good family, of excellent parts, of anengaging deportment, very eminent in his profession,and for many years considered as the man who spokethe best in the house of commons.* The Duchessof Marlborough says he was not only of the Whigparty, but of such abilities and integrity as broughta new credit to it in the nationsThis decided step had been preceded by the dismissalof that popular Jacobite leader who acceptedthe office of privy seal as the Marquis of Normanby,but who had since been created Duke of Buckinghamshire.The Duke of Newcastle, an influentialBurnet, vol. ii., p. 426. great seal. These gifts amountedf When Cowper received the to ^6 1500 a year. Cowper, think-sealsit was customary for all who ing this looked too like bribery,practised in Chancery to bring, on refused the offers, and abolishedthe first day of the year, a new the custom.year's gift to the holder of theVOL. I. 2 O.562THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Whig, succeeded him, and some Whig noblemenwere admitted to the privy council.to 1710. Godolphin's administration had now changed itscharacter : the Whigs were now in power, the Toriesin opposition.The new parliament discovered their political biasby taking up the great party question which haddivided the electors ; they debated '* Is the churchin danger?" and voted, by very large majorities inboth houses, that it was not.The nation," said Lord Somers in this debate,*• is now happy under a most wise and just administration,the public money is justly applied, the publiccredit in the highest esteem, the armies and fleetsare supplied, the success of her majesty's arms givesthe nation greater honour and reputation than hasbefore been known, and we have a fair prospect ofbringing the war to a happy conclusion. Those menwho raise groundless jealousies in this position ofaffairs, can mean no less than to embroil us at home,and defeat all our glorious designs abroad"*The ministry proceeded for some time prosperously.The rejection of a bill for persecuting theCatholics by a majority of 1 19 against 43, showed howsmall was the numerical force of the Tories. TheParliamentary History.THE History OF PARTY. 563ill-judged attempt of that party to embarrass their chap.opponents by a motion to invite the PrincessSophia to England, alienated their only hope, the ' to 171Q,queen. Anne would endure any extremity ratherthan submit to the presence of a successor ; she wassurprised that a party, so loyal in their principles,and so dutiful in their professions, should contrivea petty annoyance against her personally, and shebegan to express a hope, in her letters to theDuchess of Marlborough, that they should no longerdisagree upon the subject of politics. *The act of Union with Scotland, and the measuresof sound legislation with respect to thatcountry which were then passed, would be alonesufficient to immortalize this administration. TheTories found little ground for opposition ; theirefforts in parliament were feeble, and in no instancesuccessful ; their opposition to the Union was unsupportedand abortive, and the shadow which theyattempted to cast over the glory of the nation, bymagnifying trifling naval reverses, was dissipatedin a moment by the splendour of Marlborough'svictories.Upon an after occasion, when that the queen would risk herthe Whigs, in terror of the pre crown rather than allow the restraineddesigns of the then Tory hence, at her court, of any mem-ministry,proposed a similar mea ber of the house of Hanover. —sure, Bolingbroke told Gautier Mackintosh, MSS., March 8, 1714.^ o 2564 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. This Whiff ministry, one of the most gloriousXX .in our annals, was destroyed by the secret plottingA.D. 1707 no. 1to 1710. 01 one 01 its own members.Harley was far from satisfied with the subordinatestation which he held in the present ministry.Its almost exclusively Whig character was calculatedto compromise him with the Tories, and its existencewas an obstacle in his path to the summit ofministerial power. Harley was not an able statesman,he had neither application nor greatness ofmind to qualify him for that character, but he wasan unrivalled adept in the arts of courtly addressand petty intrigue. Knowing the political prepossessionsof the queen, and aware that her preferenceof the Tories was only repressed by the influenceof the Duchess of Marlborough, and by the recollectionof their own recent conduct, he imaginedthat if he could gain access to her he might supplantthe present monopolist of court favour, and behimself the guide of the queen's political conduct.An opportunity presented itself, which, by skilland perseverance, he improved to the accomplishmentof his designs. This transaction may berelated in the language of the injured party theDuchess of Marlborough.** Mrs. Masham was the daughter of one Hill, amerchant in the city, by a sister of my father. Ourgrandfather, Sir John Jenyns, had two-and-twentyTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^65children, by which means the estate of the family, chap.XX.which was reputed to be about £4000 a year, cameAD 1707to be divided into small parcels. Mrs. Hill had ' to i7io.only £500 to her portion. Her husband lived verywell, as I have been told, for many years ; till turningprojector, he brought ruin upon himself and hisfamily. But as this was long before I was born, Inever knew there were such people in the world,till after the Princess Anne was married, and whenshe lived at the cockpit ; at which time an acquaintanceof mine came to me and said, she believed Idid not know I had relations who were in want ;and she gave me an account of them. When shehad finished her story, I answered, that indeed Ihad never heard before of any such relations, andimmediately gave her ten guineas out of my pursefor their relief, saying I would do what I could for .them. Afterwards I sent Mrs. Hill more moneyand saw her ; she told me that her husband wasin the same relation to Mr. Harley as she was tome,but that he had never done any thing for her.I think Mrs Masham's father and mother didnot live long after this. They left four children,two sons and two daughters. The elder daughter,afterwards Mrs. Masham, was a grown woman. Itook her to St. Allan's, where she lived with meand my children ; and I treated her with as greatkindness as if she had been my sister. Aftersome time a bedchamber-woman of the Princess566 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of Denmark died, and as in that reign (after theXXprincesses were grown up) rockers, though notto 1710. gentlewomen, had been advanced to be bedchamber-women,I thought I might ask the princess to givethe vacant place to Mrs. Hill. At first, indeed, Ihad some scruples about it ; but this being removedby persons I thought wiser, with whom I consulted,I made the request to the princess, and it wasgranted."Mrs. Masham, thus introduced to the queen, wasemployed by the duchess to relieve her of thatassiduous attendance which the office of favourite requires.Secure in her own supremacy, and confidingin the gratitude of the creature of her bounty, shebecame less frequent in her visits to the palace, andwas sometimes absent for consecutive weeks. Avery slight knowledge of the customs of a courtmight enable us to anticipate the event. Anne fellinto the hands of her who was always present toflatter ; the creature supplanted her benefactress :the duchess was disgraced, and Mrs. Hill succeededto the office of the queen's favourite.This woman Harley entirely secured to his owninterests, by the dexterous use of a secret he contrivedto draw from her. Morose in disposition,although capable of a fawning flattery to superiors,with no advantages of birth, with the queen's favouras her only fortune, and without personal recommendationsto counterpoise the coarseness of herTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 56^mind, Mrs. Hill had, nevertheless, ventured to fall CHAP.in love with a gallant of the court. The gratification 'of her passion was the bribe Harley proposed. The ' [q 1710.task was somewhat difficult, but he boldly undertookit, and succeeded. The young courtier yielded, atlast, to the visions of titles and offices which Harleyplaced before him, and Mrs. Hill became Mrs.Masham, the queen being present at the ceremony,and the Duchess of Marlborough being kept inignorance of the marriage.Harley was now admitted to daily conferenceswith the queen, and his opportunities were not neglected.In a short time she became so fascinatedwith his conversation that his society was as necessaryto her as that of the Duchess of Marlboroughhad once been : he entertained her with conversationmost adapted to please a woman's ear ; now detailingthe trifling topics of interest, and the secret gallantriesof her court, now descanting in strains ofpolished adulation upon the happiness and devotedloyalty of her people,* carefully concealing that theTories were Jacobites, and cautiously insinuatingthat the Whigs were republicans.While he was thus prosecuting his designs atcourt, Harley was also striving to increase his influenceamong the parties ; he carried on a secretMemoirs of Lord Bolingbroke, vol. i., p. 82, 2d edition.5G8THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, correspondence with the Tories, and assured them ofthe queen's affection for their party, while he spreadto 1710. among the Whigs reports which might create adivision between them and the leaders of the administration.All this time he was profuse in his professionsof attachment to the men he was plotting against.Some part of his conduct had excited suspicion :hear how he replied to a letter from Marlborough,which disavowed belief of the reports circulatedagainst him. " I return your grace most heartyand humble thanks for the favourable expressionsin your letter. I beg leave to assure you that/ serve you by inclination and principle, and avery little time will make that manifest, as wellas that I have no views or aims of my own"* Uponanother occasion he writes to the duchess, *' I cannotthink of a servant and a spy without the utmostabhorrence, and particularly when I find it levelledat your grace's family, to whom we all owe so much.I have been often provoked to see so much publicand private ingratitude exercised towards the duke."tThese intrigues, however, soon became too manifestto admit of further doubt. Even the pretender'sattempt upon Scotland, although it gave a transientcheck, caused no real interruption to the secretConduct of the Duchess of Marlborough, p. 199. f Ibid., p. 198.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.council of courtiers. The ministers found that they CHAP.XXhad lost the confidence of their mistress, and thatthe divisions of the council-chamber were re- to 1710.examined and reversed in the closet. Marlboroughand Godolphin at last tendered their resignationsand left the council. Harley attempted to graspthe vacant staff, but when he found that, with theexception of his own immediate party St. John,Harcourt, and Manse, the council-board was deserted,his resolution failed him, and he reluctantlyretired. St. John and Harcourt imitated his conduct,and the seals of the two secretaries, and the officeof attorney-general, were vacant. The ministry wasnow remodelled ; Sunderland, who appears at last,after a long probation, to have succeeded in hisendeavours to regain the confidence of the Whigs,and Boyle, afterwards Lord Carleton, were secretariesof state. The Earl of Pembroke was madehigh admiral, a post which was now vacant by thedeath of Prince George. The Earl of Whartonobtained the lieutenancy of Ireland, and Lord Somerswas made president of the council.This revolution of parties introduced the mosteminent man of the second generation of Whigs.St. John had already appeared in splendour uponthe scene ; his great rival and ultimate victor,Walpole, now stepped forward in a more staidand unpretending costume. St. John was dashing.A.D. 1708to 1710.570 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, eloquent, and dazzling; Walpole was shrewd, sensible,and persevering. To Bolingbroke none couldrefuse admiration, but to Walpole men were moreinclined to trust their judgment. The third son ofa country gentleman, apparently possessed of littletalent, and evidently indolent in his disposition,Walpole had been by his father at once destinedto the church. At Eton, whither in pursuance ofthis design he was sent, some evidence of his hiddenpowers was afforded by a collision with St. John,who was two years his junior. It is said that theseeminent statesmen were thus early rivals. Thisemulation, probably, aroused Walpole from his mentalstupor ; since, before he left Eton, he obtained oneof the scholarships of King's College, Cambridge,which are in the gift of that school. After two years*residence at the university, the death of his elderbrothers removed the necessity of further application.The heir to an estate of £2000 a year, Walpole nolonger looked towards the church ; he resigned hisscholarship, left the university, and soon lost thehabit of study in the morning field-sports andevening conviviality of a country life. In 1705,Walpole being then twenty-four years old, succeededto the family estate, and in the same year he married,and obtained a seat in parliament. The marriageand election of St. John, in this same year, rendersthe coincidence in the commencement of the careerTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 571of the two rivals complete. Upon entering the chap.XXhouse of commons, Walpole immediately took his 'station among the Whigs: ambition soon eradicated to n'lo.his habits of indolence, and after some unsuccessfulefforts, practice and perseverance procured himfluency, if not eloquence. Nearly the first rewardof his exertions was a triumph over the rival ofhis schoolboy days, for Walpole now succeededSt. John in his office of secretary at war.*It has been said that the Earl of Wharton enforcedthese appointments, by the use he made ofa letter from Godolphin to St. Germain's, whichhe had obtained and threatened to produce ThatGodolphin was engaged in such a correspondence iswell known. It is said that the staid and sombre-lookingminister carried on an epistolary flirtationwith Mary, the exiled queen, and that the letters,verses, and trinkets, which passed, were seen andsanctioned by William. If this be true, it is anadditional reason for supposing that Godolphin wasthe spy who betrayed the secrets of St. Germain's ;yet, as the king, who alone could have proved this,was dead, such a letter was a dangerous weapon, andwas doubtless preserved by Wharton and his friends,who rather suspected their new ally, as a check uponCox's Memoirs of Walpole. ing the reign of Queen Anne.Memoirs of Lord Bolingbroke. Macpherson, vol. ii. Note uponf Hamilton's Transactions dur Burnet, vol. vi.57.2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, his inconstancy. That it had any effect upon theXX.new appointments is improbable, since the interestto 17 10. of Marlborough and Godolphin now lay entirelyamong the Whigs.This ministry continued their career of glory ;they extended the renown and the power of England,they destroyed the fabric of empire, which Louishad spent a long life in constructing, they drainedhis resources, annihilated his armies, and depopulatedhis country ; they undid all that Charles and Jameshad done, and rendered England the umpire ofEurope, and the hope and terror of the continentalpowers. Such were the effects of their governmentabroad ; at home they increased the happiness, andextended the liberties of their fellow subjects ; theyvindicated the principles of the revolution, and demonstrated,by their acts, that they were ready toapprove by practice what they inculcated in theory.But their zeal in these two noble pursuits betrayedthem into two capital errors, both of which werechiefly unfortunate to their country, because theywere fatal to their power.The first of these, aided by the machinations ofthe Tories, rendered the war, hitherto so gloriousand so popular, odious to the people ; the secondgave a great and fatal increase to the political influenceof the clergy.England had entered into the war with France toTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 573avenge a public insult, and to curb the extending ^^y^^'power of a formidable rival. Louis, by declaring theA.D. 1708son of James King of Great Britain, had insulted the to 1710independence of this country ; by seating his grandsonupon the throne of Spain he had become dangerousto all the states of Europe. These were the groundsupon which England joined the confederacy againsthim. Her fleets tore from him the empire of the sea,annihilated his navy, destroyed his trade, and conqueredhis colonies ; her armies, guided by the geniusof Marlborough, overthrew his generals, scatteredslaughter and dismay among his hosts, laid bare hisfrontier, sacked his towns, ruined his allies, andunpeopled his country. At the close of the campaignof I7O8 France lay feeble and prostrate, like thebloodless corpse of a mighty giant ; her youth andmanhood had been destroyed in the war, and hertreasure had been lavished as wastefully as her blood ;the plough had been abandoned for the sword, andfamine followed to complete the measure of hermisery. In the years I709 and I7IO the returnsfor the metropolis had a decrease of births and marriagesto the amount of one-fourth the ordinaryaverage, an increase of deaths to very nearly double*If such was the state of the metropolis, what musthave been that of the provinces ! If the misery theseBufFon's Supplement, tome iv., p. 278.574 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPXX. returns evidence appears dreadful, when viewed inA. D. 1 708 t^6 mass, how terrible to humanity must have beento 1710. j|.g infjiyiduai instances, its horrible details !Louis now sued for peace ; but the allies, upon asuspicion of his insincerity — a suspicion which wasshared by many of his own subjects — broke off thenegotiations. Another campaign intervened ; butearly in I7IO conferences were opened at GertrudeHere Louis offered to submit to everyoneof the preliminary demands made by the allies.Both the objects England proposed were thus obtained.Louis even consented to supply a subsidyof £40,000 a month towards expelling his grandsonfrom Spain. The Dutch plenipotentiaries, however,required, as an indispensable preliminary, that heshould perform this alone, and Louis in vain declaredthe impossibility of his doing so. Upon his refusalthey put an end to the negotiation.Marlborough, now the soul of the confederacy,was the author of this injudicious step : it was hewho influenced Heinous, Eugene, the Emperor, andthe Duke of Savoy, throughout the negotiations ;and whether his motive was ambition, pique, avarice,or patriotism, he was supported by his colleagues athome. This error of the Whigs was fatal ratherfrom its effects than its intrinsic importance, for hadMarlborough continued to guide the cabinet, as wellTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 575as command the camp, the same terms might have chap.XXbeen obtained whenever they might be demanded ; ^ —but it unfortunately drew from the people a demand, ' to 1 710.and from the Tories a promise, of peace — a compactwhich the foreign enemy well knew was chiefly beneficialto him.The other great error of this ministry was theimpeachment of Sacheverell. This tool of a partywas far from being worthy of the ostentatious persecutionof an impeachment : he appears to have beena mere bigoted coxcomb, handsome in his person,vain and forward in his address, insanely violent inhis Toryism, and furious in his harangues.* Butthe Whigs through him attacked the declamations ofthe Tory divines against the principles of the revolutionin his person, therefore, the clergy defendedtheir political power. Again the churches echoedthe cry "The church is in danger ;" the voices of theclergy awakened their slumbering flocks with thecall to the rescue, and an ignorant multitude answeredwith their wonted promptitude. They rallied roundtheir clerical leaders, repeated their charges, andthought they were defending their church when theywere protecting their ministers in the abuse of itsdoctrines.His learning may be estimated parallel lines," he says, "meetingby that well-known illustration in one common centre."which occurs in his writings, " likeA.D. 1710.576 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. All the ministers in the house of commons wereXXnamed as managers of this impeachment. Annereluctantly, but at their request, was present at thetrial. When she heard the eloquent harangues of herministers, asserting the great principles of the revolution,and insisting upon the right of resistance, shecontrasted these bold annunciations with the compliantdoctrines which she heard in her closet, andthought the Whigs must be enemies to the monarchy;she listened to the eloquent vindication of the rightof individual judgment in matters of religion, andconcluded that the Whigs were plotting the destructionof the church.Anne was not alone in the latter conclusion.Shrewsbury, timorous in his policy, feeble in health,but ardently attached to his adopted church, left hisold associates, combined with Harley, and by votingand protesting against the condemnation of Sacheverell,repudiated the principles of his former life.Three weeks after this act he received the chamberlain'sstaff, and the ministers, without whose knowledgethe appointment had been made, were appeasedby promises of sincerity and undiminished confidence.Two months elapsed and the Earl of Sunderlandwas discarded, and the Tory Lord Dartmouth placedin his office. The intention was now plain : theallies, the commons, the moneyed interest, all whohad any deep concern for the welfare of England,A.D. 1710.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 577took the alarm, and Anne for a moment faltered. CHAP.XXHarley made overtures to the leading Whigs, thequeen declared she would make no further alterations,and her counsellor assured the remaining ministersthat a '* Whig game was intended at bottom"* Hewas repulsed with contempt.The mob still echoed the cry of their clerical ringleaders,and Anne, reassured by the acclamations** God bless your majesty ; we hope you are for Dr.Sacheverell and the church," which followed herthrough the streets, resolved to proceed. EvenSwift was shocked at the bold and unceremoniousmanner in which the whole ministry was now dismissed.!The staff was demanded from Godolphin,although not with the studied insult which has beenby some authors related ; t and in one day (September20) the lord president Somers, the secretaryof state, Mr. Boyle, and the Duke of Devonshire,the lord steward, were removed from theiroffices.Such was the catastrophe of the Godolphin administration,brought about indeed by internal treacheryand court intrigue, but facilitated by conduct whichbore too much the appearance of party violence tobe proceeded in with safety. The fall of this ministryaffords another lesson to the statesman : the♦ Cox's Life of Walpole. f Journal to Stella.J Note to Burnet.VOL. I. 2 P578 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, impeachment of Sacheverell was justifiable in itself,XXand laudable in its object, yet it was a political error,since its violence was not thought by the nation tobe countenanced by necessity. We have alreadyseen how common and how fatal this error has been,both to Whigs and Tories.A.D. 1710.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 579CHAPTER XXI.Formation and character of the Harley administration — State of politicalliterature — An election — Tory majority in the commons —Charges against the late ministry — Guiscard's attempt to assassinateHarley — Opposition of the lords — Creation of a majority in thehouse of lords — Prosecution of Marlborough, and expulsion ofWalpole — The treaty of Utrecht — Jealousy of Oxford and Boling-brokeIntrigues against each other — Decrease of the influence ofOxford — Difficulties of the ministry — Their cause — Conviction thatministers were plotting the introduction of the pretender — Examinationof the charge — Sir James Mackintosh's MS. historicalcollections — Account of the Jacobite intrigues — Interrupted bythe rivalry of Bolingbroke and Oxford — Views of Bolingbroke—Dismissal of Oxford — Sudden illness of the queen — Conduct ofShrewsbury and the Whigs — Dismay of the Tories — Death ofQueen Anne.The Harley administration which now commenced CHAP.XXIits career was not formed from the ultra section of — ^^ — —the Tory party. When the members of the October2 p 2A.D. 1710.A.D. 1710.580 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Club* spoke of the men they wished appointed, themeasures they wished taken, and the impeachmentsthey intended to prefer, Harley resisted their dictation,and threatened to resign. The countenanceof the queen's favourite could not be spared, and hewas allowed to proceed.St. John and Lord Dartmouth were the new secretariesof state. Rochester was president of thecouncil ; Harcourt, when Cowper refused to deserthis friends, was made lord chancellor; and Harleycontented himself with the chancellorship of theexchequer, and the second commissionership of thetreasury. The appointments of St. John and Harcourtwere not made until Harley had discovered hisjealousy of these dangerous allies, by a futile attemptto retain them in a subordinate station.!The stanchest members of the Whig party, suchas the Earls of Wharton and Oxford, threw up theircommissions ; but Marlborough, who was promisedthat he should be supported even better than he hadever been if he consented, and probably threatenedwith a discovery of his corrupt administration of theOf this celebrated society house, to drive things on to ex-swiftsays, " There are about an trees against the Whigs, to callhundred parliament men of the the old ministry to account, andcountry who drink October beer get off five or six heads."at home, and meet every evening f Memoirs of Lord Boilinga tavern near the parliament broke, vol. i., p. 119.A.D. 1710.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 581army funds if he retired, was induced to retain his chap.J * XXI.command.*The ablest of the new ministers was seven yearsafterwards writing in exile. Reviewing then thetransactions of this time, he was compelled toadmit, that the public good of the nation formedbut a secondary object in the eyes of his party.** The principal spring of our actions was to have thegovernment of the state in our hands ; our principalviews were the conservation of this power, greatemployments to ourselves, and great opportunitiesof rewarding those who had helped to raise us, andof hurting those who stood in opposition to us.* * To improve the queen's favour, tobreak the body of the Whigs, to render their supportsuseless to them, and to fill the employmentsof the kingdom, down to the meanest, withTories'* tThese, if they were not the sentiments of Harley,were certainly those of his supporters ; and theminister, repulsed by the Whigs, and urged by theTories, was soon compelled to abandon all hope ofreflecting a coalition of the factions, and to share theviews of that which sustained him in his office.Bol. Cor. The new secretary such scenes will open as no vic-writes,You must know that the tories will varnish over." Thismoment he leaves the service, and threat was faithfully fulfilled,loses the protection of the court, f Letter to Sir Wm. Bingham.582 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. This ministry met with great difficulties at itscommencement ; the hostility of the moneyed merestA.D. 1710. ^i^pgatened it with immediate dissolution, and whenthis was, with difficulty, overcome, adverse majoritiesin both the houses of the legislature appearedto present an insuperable bar to its progress.Diminishing popularity, and the unswerving supportof the queen, were its only resources.These two auxiliaries were, however, powerful inthemselves, and their efficiency was carefully improved.The assiduity of Mrs. Masham, theflattery of Harley, and the exhortations of herclergy, were sufficient to fix the favour of thequeen. Other measures were taken to prolong thatof the people. From the appointment of this administrationwe may date the regular establishmentof those periodical engines of political controversy'which have ever since exercised such influence asthe organs and supporters of the several parties.The new ministry were strong in literary talent.In the reign of Anne, the Augustan age of Englishliterature, what party could be without it? St.John was one of their number, and he was in himselfa host. Among their legitimate supportersthey could count Canterbury, Friend, and King ; andPrior, expelled by the Kit-Cat Club,* joined themfrom the opposite ranks.Prior speaks of this circumstance in one of his papers in the Examiner.A.D. 1710.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 583The powers of these able men were concerns chap.XXItreated in the production of a political daily paper,put forth as the organ of the new government, andemployed to announce their intentions, to defendtheir policy, and to vilify their predecessors. Thefirst thirteen numbers were the production of themen by whom it had been established ; but Swift,whose services had been contemptuously rejected byLord Godolphin, now made himself known to Harley :and this minister discovered greater discernment bysecuring so important an ally. The conduct of " TheExaminer" was immediately resigned to him.The appearance of this paper, rendered so importantby the eminence of the men to whom its articleswere ascribed, produced a great effect upon thepublic mind, and called forth a multitude of opponents.The champions who stepped forward fromthe Whig party were not inferior to those who hadgiven the challenge. Prior's paper in the Examinerwas answered by Addison, in the first number of arival paper, which he put forward under the titleof " The Whig Examiner." This paper lived onlythrough five numbers ; it was discontinued in favourof " Managing's Medley," which immediatelyfollowed, and became the organ of the oppositionparty.The excitement, which the contests of thesepapers occasioned, drew within its vortex thoseA.D. 1710,584 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, more delicate offspring of the periodical press, whoseXXIlight essays were hitherto confined to the reformationof social manners, and the promotion of refinementand taste. The elegance of thought and dictionwhich had been cultivated as an attractive garb tothe moral lesson, was now rendered subservient tomore exciting objects ; it gave dignity and polish tothe eulogy of a party, and added pungency to thepolitical satire. ** The Tatler" quickly swerved fi'omits appointed course. Steele, its editor, who despisedthe prudence of a placeman, and Addison, who hadno such tie to restrain him, ventured to match theirlittle painted bark against opponents which had beenpurposely constructed for conflict. *' The Tatler"had devoted itself to the service of the ladies ; itdoes not appear that by deviating into politics itsconductors considered they were violating their professionsbut a short time later we find an essayistdeprecating the prevalence of party spirit among hisfair readers, and marking its power by the whimsicalinstance, that it had caused the Whig and Toryladies to show their hostility, and avow their party,by wearing their patches upon different cheeks.This trivial instance may illustrate the strengthand universality of party hostility during the reignof Anne.It must not however be forgotten, that the influenceof the Examiner, the Medley, or the Tatler,A.D. 1710.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 585bore no analogy to that of a modern newspaper, chap.Even the assiduous cultivation of style which theseorgans discover, denotes their readers to have consistedof the aristocracy, the wealthy, and theeducated ; their influence did not penetrate to thelower classes of the community. The people werestill without education.From the more intimate alliance which they thusinstituted between politics and literature, the newministry derived considerable assistance : but thisaid they were little careful to deserve. No soonerdid they find themselves annoyed by the arguments,or the abuse of their opponents, than they suppliedall deficiency in their reply by an appeal to force.No one was a more vigilant prosecutor of Whigpamphleteers than St. John, yet it is curious toobserve Swift, the greatest libeller of his age, complainingof his inactivity in that respect. To thisministry we owe the invention of the newspaperstamp, and from the tendency of some othersof their purposed measures, they appear to havemeditated a war of extermination against the periodicalpress : but these called forth the loudly-expressedindignation of their own allies, and werereluctantly abandoned.A yet more important support to the popularityof the Tory ministry, was their known anxiety forpeace ; a powerful recommendation to a nation,A.D. 1710.586 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, wearied by a long and burdensome war. While yetXXIin opposition the Tories had held secret communicationwith France, in order to throw obstacles inthe way of any negotiation with the Whigs, and tosecure the popularity of terminating the war tothemselves. Gaultier who had been confessor tothe Earl of Jersey's countess, and was now chaplainto the embassy from the Archduke Charles, and asecret agent of France, was the instrument. Louiswas too intent upon the internal affairs of Englandto be ignorant of the change which had now takenplace in his favour ; he knew that peace was notmore necessary to France, humbled and exhaustedas she was, than to the Tory government of hertriumphant enemy. In the words of De Torcy, theproposal of peace was to Louis as the offer of healthto a dying man, yet it was received with affectedindifference. The consolidation of Philip's power inSpain, and some recent reverses which the Britisharms had sustained in that country, formed anexcuse for departing from the terms offered atGertrudenburg. The preliminaries proposed weresuch as the British ministers well knew the allieswould never willingly accede to ; they thereforethrew themselves into the arms of the enemy,trusted to his favour and his policy for favourableterms ; intrigued with him against their own allies ;deceived those allies with solemn protestations ofA.D. 1710.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 587fidelity, while they were contemplating their aban- chap.XXIconsent, and finally, by neglecting their interests, .exposing their troops to destruction, and compellingthem to submit to terms of their dictation, brokethe fundamental article of a solemn treaty, and compromisedthe honour of England.This was done, not for any countervailing advantageto England, for the terms offered containednone : it was done to sustain the popularity whichheld the Tory party in power.The first produce of the popularity thus excitedby the favour of the court, the harangues of theclergy, and the professions of the party, was anoverwhelming majority of Tories in a new house ofcommons : a majority which was greatly augmentedby the usual policy of giving factious decisionsupon election petitions.*This parliament met in November I7IO, and thehouse of commons manifested itself more entirelyTory than the ministers had expected or evenwished. They refused a vote of thanks to the Dukeof Marlborough ; they examined diligently into allthe accounts of the late ministry, and althoughGodolphin's integrity, in the office of treasurer, hadleft no real cause of accusation, they discovered atechnical informality which enabled them to startleBurnet says there were a hundred of these petitions.A.D. 1710.588 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the nation with the astounding assertion that thereXXI.was an expenditure of thirty-five millions of thepublic money entirely unaccounted for. St. Johnappeared ashamed of this charge, and even spokeagainst his party,* probably for the only time duringhis long life, but the house did not fail to approvethe accusation by a vote. The supremacy of theTories in the commons enabled them to reward theclergy, who had so materially assisted in raisingthem to power, by providing funds for the building offifty new churches in London and Westminster, andthey discovered that their respect for vested rightswas by no means so blind and unyielding as hadbeen supposed, since they passed a bill by whichthey intended to resume all the grants that Williamhad at any time made to the Whigs. This bill thelords would not allow to be read in their house.The present house of commons was too unmixed inits complexion, and too violent in its character to besatisfied with the timorous policy of the new minister ;it is probable that the majority would have insistedupon changing him for some more energetic leader,had not the opportune attempt made upon Harley,in the session of 1711» by Guiscard, a French papist,invested him with a sudden popularity which nothingcould resist. Favourable as this accident was at theSwift's Journal to Stella.A.D. 1710.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 589moment, its ultimate consequences were far other chap.XXIwise. Harley, who had felt the stab of the assassin,naturally claimed to monopolize the honour of hishatred, but circumstances suggested the suppositionthat Guiscard's first design had been against St.John, and that it was only when he could find noopportunity of attacking the secretary that he struckat the treasurer. St. John favoured, and Harleyresented, this account. The jealousy was so great,and so well known, that Swift, who had undertakento write a history of the transaction, found he couldnot perform his task without offending at least one ofhis patrons ; he therefore abandoned it to Mrs.Manley, who could avoid the difficulty only bydrawing upon her imagination for all that part of thescene which she describes. Henceforward the Harleyadministration was disunited in itself. Whatever itsorigin, it is here we have the first evidence of thatjealousy which gradually increased to secret rivalry,to open hostility, and ultimately to rancorous andunappeasable hatred.But the full support of the house of commons thusaccidentally ensured was insufficient. It was in vainthat they assumed the courage to attack the Dukeof Marlborough ; the besetting vice of that great manhad given them grounds for a valid accusation. Thecharge was made by a party, and was advanced fromA.D. 1710.590 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, party motives, but the crime was that of a man ; itXXI.was opprobrious to the individual, not to his party.Nothing could be done to destroy the power of theWhigs, so long as they commanded a majority in thelords. This house was at that time by no means sonumerous as it is now become. In the then recentcase of Sacheverell, a case which called forth theentire strength of the two parties, the number ofpeers who voted, including proxies, amounted onlyto 121, and upon ordinary cases the attendance wasof course considerably less. In an assembly so numericallysmall, and so susceptible of court influence,if the crown was favourable to either of the originalparties, a small creation must give that party thepreponderance. The Tories had already, by privateintrigue and gradual creation, succeeded in reducingthe opposition nearly to an equality ; in 1712 theyboldly seized upon the battery, which was playingagainst them, created in one day twelve peers fromamong their stanchest adherents, and having thususurped the legislative power of the lords, conceivedthat they had firmly established their own dominion.The peers were at this time opposed to the wishes ofthe crown, the government, the house of commons,and the people ; and whether we may now considerthem to be right or wrong in their political views,few will deny that they were very properly coercedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 591to submission.* The addition of a number, not quite chap.equal to one-tenth of their whole body, was foundsufficient for the purpose ; but had the necessitybeen greater, a resolution had been taken to meet it.St. John declared in the lobby, that if this was notenough they should have another dozen, t and thequeen was understood to have given a previousassent. The new peers took their seats withoutany further observation in the house than a sarcasticquestion from the Earl of Wharton, whodemanded whether it was the intention of theministers that the twelve should vote by theirchairman.Having thus surmounted all their difficulties, thesuccessful party thought they might venture uponthe indulgence of their resentments. Walpole wasexpelled the house of commons for a transactionwhich certainly afforded much ground for censure ;Swift defends this creation, ministry, the dean has a moreby saying, " In such a government elaborate defence of this measure,as this, where the prince holds the resting upon the grounds that forbalance between two great powers, twenty years previously the favourit is the very' nature of his office to of the court was perpetuallyremove from one scale into the turned towards the Whigs, andother, or sometimes put his own that " the government of Englandweight in the lightest, so as to cannot go on while the twobring both to an equilibrium." — houses of parliament are in op-historyof the Four Last Years of position to each other."Queen Anne. In his inquiry into f Boyer.the behaviour of the queen's lastXXI.A.D. 1710.A. D. 1710.592 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and Marlborough, dismissed from all his employments,- and disgraced as far as a house of commons coulddisgrace such a man, was terrified into inactivity byan impending action for immense sums, which he wasaccused of having improperly appropriated. Causeof accusation was sought in vain against Godolphin ;the Tories were compelled to be satisfied with theirtriumph over the most conspicuous of their opponentsin each house.The conferences at Utrecht had been opened inJanuary 1712, and as the negotiations proceeded,the confidence of the people in the ministry rose andfell in proportion to the success of their great work.The nation was at first indignant at the conduct ofthe Whigs, who joined the allies, and by throwingevery obstacle in the way of the negotiations, doubtlessplaced the Tory negotiators more at the mercyof Louis ; but when the progress of the conferencesdiscovered the ambition, the treachery, and eventhe resuscitated arrogance of that monarch, thepopular tide in some degree subsided. It was rememberedthat the object of the Whigs was not tostrengthen the hands^of Louis, or to favour France,but to destroy negotiations which, in their estimation,were proceeding upon unequal terms, and could yieldno honourable result.In April 1713 the war was terminated by thetreaties of Utrecht. The consequences of this eventA.D. 1713.tTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 593to the party which brought it about, are thus stated chap.XXIby the great manager of the negotiations. " Insteadof gathering strength either, as a ministry or as aparty, we grew weaker every day. The peace hadbeen judged with reason to be the only solid foundationwhereupon we could erect a Tory system, andyet when it was made we found ourselves at a fullstand ; nay, the very work which ought to have beenthe basis of our strength was in part demolishedbefore our eyes, and we were stoned with the ruinsof it"*The treaty of commerce was so manifestly unfavourableto British interests that the whole mercantilebody exclaimed in one voice against it, and even theTory house of commons refused to ratify those provisionswhich had been admitted subject to theirapprobation. This, however, was the only successfulopposition offered ; in every other respect the treatieswere approved by addresses from all parts of thekingdom ; and although the \\Tiigs in both housesdenounced the peace as shameful, and its contriversas traitors, large majorities voted their addresses ofthanks to the queen' for the great care she had manifestedfor the honour and safety of her kingdom inrespect to the peace, and the excellent footing uponwhich she had placed her subjects with regard totrade.Letter to Sir William Bingham,VOL. I. S QA.D. 1713.594 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. But notwithstanding these appearances of strength,A.A.1.the Harley administration was already tottering.During the progress of the negotiations, the enmitybetween St. John and the Earl of Oxford had beenimbittered by what the fiery secretary considered apublic insult. When the minister created a majorityin the lords, St. John, as secretary of state, andleader of the house of commons, was naturallyentitled to the first place in the list of new peers ;the interest of his party, however, required his presencein the lower house, and he consented to remainthere for the present, upon the understanding, thatwhen he received his peerage, the rank of his titleshould give him precedence of those who were thencreated. Previous to his embassy to the Frenchcourt, in 1712, he received the promised honour, andbecame Viscount Bolingbroke ; a strict fulfilment ofthe compact which had been made with him. Butthe earldom of Bolingbroke, his own family's title,had recently become extinct, and the secretarythought that this should have been revived in him.His application was refused ; the jealousy of Oxfordwould not allow him to decorate a rival with an equalrank, and this mortification was soon after increasedby a refusal of one of several vacant ribands of thegarter, a distinction which the Earl of Oxford hadlikewise obtained for himselfThese slights, the proud spirit of Bolingbroke,A.D. 1713.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 595conscious of the superiority of its powers, could not CHAP,brook : he expressed all the indignation he felt.All former feelings with regard to Oxford were nowabsorbed in one of unmitigated hatred.* Whatevermay have been the bond of unity betweenHarley and St. John, and it is difficult to saywhether they were friends or merely allies, Oxfordand Bolingbroke were always enemies, enemieswhich no community of interest, or even communityof danger, could ever reconcile. Bolingbroke wasnot without power to give effect to his hostility.At the time of the expedition to Quebec, Mrs.Masham, having placed her brother at the head ofthe expedition, proposed to realize a large sum forherself, by the exercise of her influence upon thecontracts for equipping the fleet. Oxford, consciousof his power, or timorous of its abuse, refused togive effect to this scandalous design ; but Boling-broke,less scrupulous, and more politic, immediatelycame to her aid and effected the object, notwithstandingthe treasurer's opposition. Thenceforwardthe protection of the lady-patroness of this ministrywas withdrawn from the treasurer, and extended withready gratitude over the secretary.From this time the influence of Oxford gradually,Letter to Windham. Letter Queen, printed in the Report ofto the Earl of Strafford. Bol. the Secret Committee.Corr. Oxford's Letter to the2 Q €A.D. 1713.59O THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, although almost imperceptibly decreased, until, it isXXI. ,said, upon the refusal of an extraordinary demand ofa dukedom for his son,* he affected to retire fromthe active direction of affairs, and monopolizinghimself the emolument, the power, and the patronageof the premiership, resigned to Bolingbroke itsduties and its toil.Soon after the conclusion of the peace, the Harleyadministration lost two important sections of itssupporters. Those Whigs whom the impulse ofpopular feeling had driven into the ministerial ranks,returned to their party, and that division of theTory party, which Bolingbroke styles the Whimsical,or Hanover Tories (the latter an ominousdistinction), went over to the Whigs. The causeof this desertion was seen in the proceedings of thenew body of opposition ; violent votes were proposedand carried against the pretender, and a vindictiveperseverance was displayed in the persecutionof that individual, which could only be the productof extreme alarm.While the conferences at Utrecht were pending,both the Whigs and the Dutch were convincedthat peace with France was, in the minds of theTories, only a preliminary measure to the introductionof the pretender. This was the secretcause of the great opposition offered by the Dutch ;Letter to Windham. f Ibid.A.D. 1713.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 597it was one of the avowed charges of the Whigs. CHAP.That conviction gradually spread itself throughoutthe nation. About the end of the year 1713 auniversal persuasion prevailed, that the ministrywere actively engaged in paving the way for a restoration.This suspicion it was that caused thesudden revulsion of feeling throughout England ;that left an administration, which had struggled upthe steep against difficulties which appeared insurmountablefrom below, tottering and insecure uponthe pinnacle they had reached. Their great support,the confidence of their fellow-citizens, hadbeen withdrawn.Successive writers have applied themselves toinvestigate the truth of this charge, then so confidentlymade, so implicitly believed, and so unequivocallydenied. From the evidence which wasopen to them, it rather appeared that no design hadbeen formed by the ministers as a body, nor anymeasures taken by them in their ministerial capacity,to alter that line of succession which parliament hadmarked out.That individuals, members of this ministry, werein frequent correspondence with the pretender'sagents has been long since abundantly proved by thepublished collections of Macpherson. The head ofthat government, the Earl of Oxford, himself wasone of the most frequent of these correspondents,A. D. 1713.598 THE HISTORY OF PARTYCHAP, and he was imitated by many of his subordinates.XXIBut the men who thus acted, as far as these documentsshow, treated only as individuals, and by their irresoluteand procrastinating conduct incurred the suspicionof the Jacobites themselves. That trustyJacobite the Duke of Berwick thought that theywere only providing for their own safety in the eventof a revolution which they had much reason toexpect, although no wish to aid.*The inference drawn from the testimony of theseletters was strengthened by the memoirs of thoseJacobites, who have transmitted to posterity accountsof their shares in the intrigues of the period ; bythe tracts of the time, the public conduct of theministers, and the universal expectation of the people,the apparent, although publicly-repudiated, hope ofthe Tories, and the vehement and loudly-proclaimedalarm of the AVhigs.These arguments for imputing such a design tothe Harley administration, were met by considerationswhich more then counterbalanced them.Although some ministers were implicated in thiscorrespondence, all were not. Although we haveabundant proof against Oxford, we look in vain forany intimation of the guilt of Bolingbroke. Of thepublished evidence upon the subject the greater partisutterly destitute of credibility, being anonymousMemoirs of Berwick, vol. ii., p. 184.A.D. 1713.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 599pamphlets, written under the direction of Oxford or CHAP.Bolingbroke, with the evident object of fixing thecharge of Jacobites upon each other.* Thememoirs, which were chiefly relied upon, have beenclearly sho^Ti to be an impudent forgery put forthby Daniel De Foe.t The severe scrutiny afterwardsinstituted failed to discover any distinctsentence of such a design. The distracted state ofthe ministres their mutual rivalries, the vigilancewith which they were watched by the AMiigs, thegreat danger of the attempt, the suspicious hostilityof the people, all these circumstances seemed torender it almost beyond the bounds of possibilitythat such a design was in contemplation by theministry of Queen Anne.Inferences, however strong, must yield in allSee the pamphlets : " The f " Minutes of the negotiationsSecret History of the White of Monsieur Message at theStaff," a defence of Oxford, and court of England towards thean attack upon Bolingbroke ; close of the last reign ; whereinthe " Considerations" upon it, some of the most secret transactthe accusation ; " A tions of that time relating to theDetection of the Sophistries and interest of the pretender, and aFalsities of the pamphlet entitled, clandestine separate peace are• The Secret History,' " &c. ; The detected and laid open, writtenHistory of the Mitre and the by himself, done out of French."Purse ;" and many others which For proof that these pretendedthis controversy gave birth to. minutes are a forgeries MemoirsThey are nearly all of them to be of Lord Bolingbroke, vol. i.,found in the British Museum. p. 347.600 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, cases to direct evidence, and such has now beenXXIopened to us by the exertions and good fortune ofthe late Sir James Mackintosh. When the allieswere in possession of Paris, Sir James obtainedaccess to the French archives, and seized the opportunityof drawing thence copious materials for hiscontemplated history of England. The fragment ofthat work, which has been so often quoted in thisvolume, affords us proof of the magnitude of theloss which our literature has sustained in him whoalone could complete it. Among the extensive collections,which had been made for this purpose, areseveral volumes relating to the four last years of thereign of Queen Anne. These consist of the diplomaticcorrespondence which passed between theKing of France and his minister De Torcy, andtheir agents at the English court. These agentswere Gaultier, already mentioned as the instrumentthrough whom the Tories commenced their negotiations.The Due Beaumont and Somerville,who were not in England at the time of the peace,but who as the successive accredited agents of theFrench court managed the intrigues which followedit.We learn from Macpherson* that the ministrywere assisted by the whole influence of the JacobiteVol. ii., p. 417, et passim.A.D. 1713.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 601party during the negotiations; general expressions CHAP,of their expectations, affecting the whole ministrymade at this time, may therefore have been but presumptions,founded upon the obligations the courtwere under to them, but particular facts are lessliable to suspicion. Oxford, while the negotiationswere yet pending, had mentioned the conclusion ofthe peace as the epoch whence he was to devotehimself to the effecting a restoration ; he promisedto gain over his mistress to the cause, and instructedthe pretender in the conduct he should pursue, inorder to facilitate their design. * But (although heis said to have been initiated in 1712, while Harleylay ill of the wound he received fi-om Guiscardit is not until late in the year 1713 that we findBolingbroke active in the conspiracy. In a conversation,at which D'Iberville was present, and whichthat minister related to his king in a letter of Feb. 5,1714, Bolingbroke, pressed by the agents of the pretenderto immediate exertion, answered that he did notblame their impatience, but he excused the inactivityof himself and colleagues by the magnitude of the task.We know better than you can," he said, *' thedifficulty of ruling the heterogeneous spirits whichcompose a parliament ; such an object requires timeGaultier to Torcy, March 20, James Mackintosh's note-books,171'3. — Mackintosh MSS. quoted in the Edinburgh Reviewt Memorandum in one of" Sir for October 1835.A.D. 1713.602 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and skill, which a foreigner cannot imagine necessary."He cited the recent case, in which the queen,who in 1707 had resolved to place Harley at thehead of her councils, had been unable to proceed inher purpose until 1710> or to perfect it until 1712;and he expressed it as his decided opinion, that ifthey attempted to proceed more rapidly, *' all wouldbe spoiled."These proofs are decisive against the two leadersof the ministry. Bromley, the other secretary ofstate, is described as a man who scarcely disguisedhis affection for the cause of the king.* The Jacobiteprinciples of Buckingham, Hamilton, Ormond, andJersey, require no proof. Harcourt, the lord chancellor,and Benson, the chancellor of the exchequer,as the immediate followers of Bolingbroke, were notlikely to have been kept in ignorance of what wascontemplated. Harcourt's guilt appears to havebeen notorious, since it was said that, upon the queenwriting to the elector and speaking contemptuouslyof the rumours which were then prevalent, she receivedfor answer, that if she wished to remove thesuspicions which the elector entertained, she mustdiscard Bolingbroke and Harcourt, who were knownto give her Jacobite counsels.!The conduct of Shrewsbury is more equivocal.The weak and sanguine Lord Jersey speaks of himSeptember 26, 1713. f D'Iberville au Roi, 11 Juin 1714.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 603as a Jacobite, probably only because he had held CHAP.XXIoffice under a government exclusively Jacobite. Itmust, however, be remembered that the nature of ' 'these offices seems to betray some impatience of hispresence : his place of chamberlain had given himno voice in the cabinet. While ambassador to Franceit is evident that he was not in possession of theministerial secret ; and when at last he became amember of the government, it was as lord lieutenantof Ireland, a post which entirely relieved his colleaguesof his presence. Gaultier differed in opinionfrom Jersey. On the 12th of December, 1712»he wrote that Shrewsbury would not assist ; and onthe 1 eth of August, 1714, D' Iberville declared thatShrewsbury had always been opposed to the chevalier.It is probable that this nobleman had beendrawn, by the enthusiasm of a convert to the churchof England, to countenance a ministry which professeditself her champion, but that he never adoptedthe political creed of the party, or coveted any veryintimate connexion with his new friends.Generally, D' Iberville could in 1714 write homethat the whole ministry was engaged, that the affairwas proceeding silently (doucement) and that leisureonly was wanted to its success.These disclosures prove beyond a doubt that, withthe exception of Shrewsbury, all the members of theHarley administration were Jacobites, ready to throwTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.A. D. 1710.CHAP, their country affair into the hands of the Stuartssss.XXIOf these conspirators many of the subordinates weredoubtless influenced by their Tory principles ofgovernment ; but the two leaders, Oxford and ,*both Whigs by education, and Toriesfrom circumstances, were swayed only by partymotives. The life of the queen was very precarious,and the only hope of the Tories was in her favour.Under the Hanover dynasty they could only hope atmost to participate in the power and emoluments ofgovernment, under a king brought back by themselvesthey might rely upon a monopoly ; theydelayed, therefore, any application at the court of theelector, and the Whigs, who had not omitted theopportunity, were soon looked upon by the legal heirto the crown, as the party upon which he mustdepend for his inheritance. This preference was nosecret to the Tories, and their leaders soon foundthat the design which they had entertained to prolongtheir supremacy, must now be prosecuted to ensuretheir safety. Of the precise means by which thiscontemplated revolution was proposed to be effected,we have no certain knowledge ; probably the rupturebetween Oxford and Bolingbroke prevented theOne of the most eloquent and divine right. It occurs in theargumentative passages in Boiling 8th letter of his Dissertation onbroke's works, is his exposure of Parties,the absurdity of the doctrine ofA.D. 1714.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 60.5arrangement of any definite plan. It does not, how CHAP,XXIever, appear to have occurred to Bohngbroke thatthere was any thing very dangerous in the attempt :he reckoned that there were throughout the kingdomeight Tories to one Whig,* and these were doubtlessthought prepared to say with Oxford, that theywould never see a German on the throne of England.One thing, however, was necessary, without whichboth Oxford and Bolingbroke would have made theattempt in vain ; the Tories would ask no securitiesfor good government, — for that their king was notaccountable ; but he must change his religion.This was a necessary preliminary, without it thehigh church Tories would not stir ; but this concededhe had his succession guaranteed, and the exampleof his uncle proposed for his imitation. '* LordOxford," says Gaultier, " qui craint toujours de tropexpliquer sur le chapitre du chevalier a cause desgens qui sont autres de sa personne m'a neanmoinsdit qu'il ne consentiroit jamais, tant qu'il vivoit, queAngleterre fut governed par un Allemand ; queje pourrois vous (De Torcy) assurer que le prochainparlement disposer tellement les choses, qu'il faudranecessairement que le chevalier revienne acres laD'Iberville au Roi, G March D'lbenille, in a letter to Torcy,1714. If this computation was reckons 100 Tories to 48 Whigs.correct a strange revulsion of The first, however, is distinctlyfeeling must have taken place, mentioned as a Tory account,for on the 11th of February, 1715,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, mort de la reine ; pourvu qu'Q se comporte desormaisXXI. sill' < • Acomme il le doit par rapport a ses propres meritsA.D. 1714. , vi • • 1 1 • 1 /^i 1 TTet quit imite la conduite de Charles 11. sononcle.'**This, happily for the liberties of England, heobstinately refused. Upon this point he would submitto no compromise, he would not even interposethe transparent veil of a temporary conformity ; hisanswer was, " Qu*on ne devout jamais s'attendrequail le fait jamais, et que rien au monde ne pourroitTy obligor." t Upon a similar declaration Oxfordhad before complained, t that the Chevalier put itout of his power to serve him. If it were onlynecessary to persuade a certain number of persons,he said, the thing might be effected, but to convertan entire nation, the attempt was impracticable.Bohngbroke was no less convinced of the impossibilityof restoring the Catholic religion with theStuart dynasty. *' The grand Turk," he told Gaul-tier,"is as likely to become king of England asthe Chevalier, as long as he remains a Catholic."This, the French minister adds, was ^e sentimentof more than thirty others to whom he had spoken,and these said further, that if the Chevalier returned,as a convert, and then relapsed, they also would14th December, 1713. This f D'lbervilleto De Torcy, 14thpassage has already been quoted August, 1714.by the Edinburgh Reviewer. | Gaultier, 19th March, 1714.A.D. 1714.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. QOJchange, and treat him as their fathers had treated CHAP,his father.* LAfter events seem to prove that this importantobstacle to the restoration might have been removed,but the design thus checked was kept in abeyance,by the violence with which the rivalry betweenOxford and BoHngbroke broke forth, by the evidentlyapproaching fall of the former, and the hopesentertained by the Jacobites from the latter, tThe di-agon, as Oxford was nicknamed by thecourtiers, t was now entirely deserted; it was generallyunderstood by all parties, that his dismissalwas only delayed until Bolingbroke's party couldagree among themselves as to the distribution of thespoil. Oxford, aware of his situation, exhibited aninconsistency of conduct, and a weakness of mindwhich surprised even his enemies : now sufferingwith humility the reproaches of Lady Masham ;now exclaiming against her in the lowest terms ofimpotent abuse : at one time pouring forth threatsagainst BoHngbroke and his adherents, at anotherwalking and conversing with apparent cordialitywith the object of his recent vituperation. Boling-brokewas elated and confident ; the prize for whichhe had so long toiled now hung within his grasp, andGaultier to De Torcy, 27th f Gaultier to De Torcy, 6thMarch, 1714. August, 1714.I Swift's Correspondence.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. SO eager was he to seize it that he could scarcelyXXI.submit to the prudence of placing the treasury incommission until the new ministry should be established.Shrewsbury was distant and reserved,conduct which was observed by Bolingbrokewith a prophetic anxiety. The Whigs, who sawthese intrigues but darkly, rejoiced at the evidentdisunion of their enemies, and waited theevent.This state of things continued sufficiently longto allow Bolingbroke time to resolve upon the coursehe should pursue as lord treasurer. The considerationwhich engrossed his attention must have beenthe succession. The queen's existence was imminentlyprecarious. If she died while the Torieswere yet unreconciled with the elector, their onlyhope would be to bring in the pretender withoutconditions, an event which that personage confidentlyanticipated, but for which the nation was by nomeans prepared. Bolingbroke's intention probablywas to retain power to himself and his immediatefollowers, at every risk, under the legal successor ifpossible; if not, under the Stuartssss.*Bolingbroke had already made overtures to Marlborough,who was now in consequence on his way toBolingbroke's after conduct, to his letter to Sir W. Windham,in conspiring to raise to the he then knew the pretender to be,throne such a man as, according justifies this assumption.XXI.A.D. 1714.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 609England, whence he had some time before been chap.driven by the intrigues of the Tories. The politicalfaith of Marlborough was certainly not very firm,and the event of the new alliance might have beeneither a coalition between Bolingbroke's section ofthe Tories, and the Whigs, or a restoration. Somepublic civilities, which Bolingbroke at this time paidto certain members of the Whig party, seem tofavour the former supposition : if, however, thisfailed, there can be no doubt that he considered thelatter as the next object to be pursued.This line of action would appear consistent withBolingbroke's political sentiments and general conduct.The supposition that such were his intentionsis also corroborated by an extract from Carte'smemorandum-book, quoted by Macpherson ; * itThe design of L. B, [Lord ment), and will never be broughtBolingbroke] at the time [May in.' And L. L. going on the ],was to bring about the saturday evening (before the queenHanover succession, and two or died) to Kensington, met Arthurthree days before the queen's Moore and John Drummond wait-death,L. L. and Sir W. Wynd ing for L. B. (who dined with Sirham, going in a coach together, W, W., and a great deal of com-the first said, ' Now they have got any that day at Blockhead),the power entirely into their who did not come, though Johnhands, they might easily bring was appointed to attend there forabout a restoration ;' to which Sir L. B., to receive his last instruct.said, ' Put that out of your tions, in order to set out the nexthead ; that will never be : is day for Hanover, to make up satanimpracticable man (i. e. would tears with that court. This Johnnot change his religion at that mo Drummond himself told L. L. ;VOL. r. 1 RA.D. 1714.610 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, may also supply an explanation to his somewhatXXI . . K .mysterious declaration, that m six weeks he wouldhave taken such measures as would leave him nothingto fear from the death of the queen.*On the 27th of July a cabinet council was held, atwhich the treasurer's staff was to be demanded fromOxford. The scene which then took place wascreditable to none of the actors. The hatred betweenOxford and Bolingbroke now broke forth in words ;charges, threats, and recriminations, passed betweenthe rivals; and the falling minister in his recklessrage forgot his duty as a subject, and poured forthhis abuse even upon his queen. When this indecorousscene had ended by Oxford breaking his staffand leaving the council-chamber, another not muchless tumultuous arose upon the subject of his successors.This discussion was ended at half-past two inthe morning by the illness of the queen, who retiredfrom the debate declaring she should not outlive it,and was carried to bed in a state of insensibility.but the queen's death did not particulier et de la consummation.allow them time to execute their de toutes les affaires qui ont etescheme, and they could never make faites depuis quatre ans. II m'athe court believe they had such assure que les mesures soient sischemes." — Macpherson, vol. ii., bien prises qu'en six semaines dep. 530. temps on adroit mis les choses enD'Iberville au Roi, 13 August tel eat qu'il n'y adroit rien a1714. "Milord Bolingbroke est craindre de ce qui vient carrier."centre de douleur de la perte de — Mackintosh MSS.la reine au point de sa fortuneTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. ellWhen the council aerain met the queen was sunk chap.XXIinto a lethargic state ; they adjourned therefore untilthe next day, when the physicians reported that shewas sensible. The debate was now renewed, whenthe conclave was disturbed by the abrupt entrance ofthe Dukes of Somerset and Argyle. The former ofthese noblemen had been the most dreaded opponentof the Tory ministry at the commencement of itscareer, it was not until after his dismissal that theythought themselves safe ; the latter had been peculiarlyan object of Tory persecution. Bolingbrokeand his friends regarded these intruders with dissembledalarm ; but Shrewsbury thanked them fortheir zeal, and invited them to take their seats at thetable. They did so, and while the ministers wereyet silent in astonishment, assumed the lead in thedeliberations. Having examined the physicians asto the sanity of the queen, Argyle moved that thecouncil should address her to place the treasurer'sstaff in the hands of Shrewsbury. So evident was theconfusion and dismay, that, it is said, Bolingbroke,unwilling to appear defeated, seconded this proposal,which was immediately carried. The queen declaredthey could not have named a better man, and, deliveringhim the staff, told him to keep it and use itfor the good of her people.The energy which had thus wrested the governmentof this momentous crisis from the hands of theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D, 1714.CHAP. Tories was not suffered to relax. Shrewsbury, sud-xxideny surrounded by his old friends, adopted themost vigilant measures. Intelligence of the hopelessstate of the queen was sent to Hanover, and a fleetdespatched to the Dutch coast ; an embargo was laidupon the ports, Portsmouth was garrisoned, troopswere despatched into Scotland, and the heralds andand life guards were kept in momentary readiness toproclaim George King of Great Britain.The excitement lasted but two days ; the deathof the queen then took place, in a political crisis soimportant, that Bolingbroke, a week before thetriumphant leader of an all-powerful faction, nowexclaimed in despondence, *' The grief of my soul isthis : I see plainly that the Tory party is gone." *♦ Bolingbroke Correspondence. Memoirs of Bolingbroke, vol. i.,p. 291.END OF VOL. I.WHITING, Beaufort HOUSE, Stand.