THEHISTORY OF PARTY;FROM THE RISE OFTHE WHIG AND TORY FACTIONS,IN THE REIGN OF CHARLES II.,TOTHE PASSING OF THE REFORM BILLBYGEORGE Mangrove COOKE, Esq.,Barrister AT LAW,AUTIIOU or " MEMOIRS OF LORD B0LIN0I5110K E," &C.VOL. III.A. D. I7r»2— 1832.LONDON:.iOlIN .\L\CRONE, ST. JAMES'S SQUARE.\l DCCCXXXVII.9CS I 4 01QT9• • • •.• . •••WHITING, Beaufort HOUSE, STRAND.CONTENTS.CHAPTER I.PAGEThe Bute administration — Political writings — Biographical anecdotes ofJohn Wilkes — The North Briton — Negotiations for peace — Debateupon the preliminaries — Mr. Pitt's speech — Formation of the opposition— Its members — Topics of opposition — The cider tax — Unpopularityand resignation of Lord Bute — Review of his administration . 1CHAPTER II.The Granville administration — The North Briton, No. 45 — Arrest ofWilkes — General warrants — Death of Lord Egremont — Attempt of theking and the Tories to detach Mr. I^itt from the Whigs — Its failure —Death of Earl Grenville — Meeting of parliament — Proceedings againstWilkes — Review of the conduct of ministers in the proceedings againstWilkes . . . . . . .25CHAPTER III.The Grenville project for taxing America — The Stamp act — Biographicalanecdotes of Charles Townshend — Debate on the Stamp act — Dissolutionof the Grenville and formation of the Rockingham administrationBiographical anecdotes of Edmund i^urke — Repeal of the Stamp actDissolution of the Rockingham administration . . .48CIIAPTKR IV.State of the Whig and Tory parties — The Chatham administration — Unpopularityand imbecility of Lord Chatham — Charles Townshend'sproject to tax America — Death of Townshend — End of the Chathamadministration . . . . , , . 8iCHAPTER V.Supremacy of the Tory party — The Grafton administration — Biographicalanecdotes of Lord North — Of Charles .lenkinson — A new parliamentState of the elections — Imprisonment of Wilkes — Riots — Divisionsof the Whigs — The Middlesex election, and proceedings upon it — of the people at the decision of the commons . . 96IV CONTENTS.CIIAPTEU VI.PAGEJA'ttprs of Junius — Their character and influence — Summary of'tlie claimsof the dill'erunt writers named as the author of these letters . • 118CHAPTER VII.Lord Mansfield's doctrine of libels — Resignation of Lord Camden — Ofthe Duke of Grafton — The North administration — Biographical anecdotesof John Dunning — Of Thurlow — Middlesex election — Privateinterference of George III. in the decision of a cause before the courtsSubordinate changes in office — Attempt of the lords and commonsto preserve privacy in their debates — Arrest of the printers — Releasedby the city magistrates — Proceedings of the commons . . 154CHAPTER VIII.State of the popular mind— Rise of the democratic party— Biographicalanecdotes of John Horn Tooke — The Whigs abandon the cause ofcorruption — Dissolution of parliament 185CHAPTER IX.Elections to the new parliament — Disputes with America — A contestbetween Whiggism and Toryism — Opinion of the Earl of Chatham —Biographical anecdotes of Charles Fox— American declaration of independence— Contests between the parties upon the American war —Lord North's propositions 201CHAPTER X.France concludes an alliance with America — Schism in the Whig partyupon the subject of American independence — Death of Lord ChathamYorkshire petition — Burke's jean of economical reform — Motion forthe repeal of the Septennial act — George Byng — Dissolution of parliament— Elections— The new parliament — Motion against the Americanwar — Carried motion of censure upon the North administration — Dissolutionof the North administration 237CHAPTER XI.Formation of the second Rockingham administration — Biographical anecdotesof Richard Brinsley Sheridan — Of Lloyd Kenyon — Policy of theRockingham administration — Pacification of Ireland — Economicalreform — Extinction of the votes upon the Middlesex election — Parliamentaryreform — Opinions of the Whig leaders upon this subject —Contractors' bill — Revenue officers' Disfranchisement bill . . "477CONTENTS.CHAPTER XII.PartPut's motion in favour of a parliamentary reform — Biographical anecdotesof William Pitt — Debate upon his motion — Death of the Marquis ofRockingham — The Shelburue administration . . .301CHAPTER XIII.State of parties in the commons — Debate on the preliminaries of peace —Coalition of Lord North and Mr. Fox — Fox's defence of his conduct —Defeat of the minister — Premiership offered to William Pitt — Hedeclines — Formation of the coalition cabinet — Relative strength ofWhigs and Tories — Mr. Fox's India bill, nature and policy of thisscheme — Opposed by Pitt — Passes the commons — Is rejected by thelords — Dissolution of the coalition ministry . . . oldCHAPTER XIV.Formation of the Pitt administration — Strength of the opposition — Theminister left in a minority — Mediation of the country gentlemen — Unsuccessful— Perseverance of Pith — Diminution of the opposition majority— Dissolution of parliament — General election — Adverse to thecoalition — The Westminster election — Westminster scrutiny — Pitt'smotion for parliamentary reform — Debate upon Mr. Beaufoy's motionfor the repeal of the Corporation and Test acts — Illness of the king —Contest upon the subject of the regency — Conduct of Thurlow — Recoveryof the king . . . 330CHAPTER XV.The French revolution — Effect upon the state of parties — Conduct ofBurke — Speech in the house of commons and breach with Sheridan —Expiration of the parliament . 3()6CHAPTER XVI.Review of the last parliament — Biographical anecdotes of .Colin Scott —Of Henry Addington— Of Charles Grey— Of William Wyn>lham— OfSamuel Whilbread— Of Erskine — Leaders of the democratic party —Reflections on tl)e French revolution — Meeting of the new parliamentRupture between Burke and Fox — The Whigs decide against Burke 382CHAPTER XVII.Mr. Fox's Libel bill — Dismissal of Thurlow — Political clubs — Their in-significance — (Commencement of the Tory war for the re-establishmentof the bourbons — Opposition of the Whigs — Mr. (irey'a motion infavour of parliamentary reform — Prosecutions for high treason againstparliamentary reformers— Hardy — HoruoTooke — Th. Wall — Secessionvi CONTENTS.I-ACEof the Duke of Portland and his lutherans — Zeal of the apostate Whigsin the cause of Toryism — I'rovalenco of high Tory continents amongPitt's followers — Death of ]burke — Mr. Grey renews his motion forparliamentary reform — Biographical anecdotes of George Canning — OfTierney — Of Sir Francis Burdett — Corruption of Pitt's government —Mr, Grey's motion of 1798— Catholic Emancipation question arisingout of the union with Ireland — Advocated by Pitt — Refused by theIjing — Resignation of Pitt 409CHAPTER XVIII.The Addington administration — Peace of Amiens — Resignation of Mr.Addington — Pitt returns to office — Secession of tbeGrenvilles — Deathof Pitt — Lord Grenville's administration, comprising " All the Talents"The Catholic question — Death of Fox — Consequent ministerialarrangements — Dissolution of parliament — Refusal of the king to grantindulgence to the Catholics — Dismissal of ministers — Formation of aTory cabinet under the Duke of Portland — Biographical anecdotes ofSpencer Perceval — Of Lord Castlereagh — Irish policy of this ministryResuscitation of the question of reform — Curwen'sbill — Boldness ofCanning and the Tories in resisting every inquiry that might lead toreform — Motion of Sir Francis Burdett — Duel between Canning andCastlereagh — The Perceval administration — Committal of Sir FrancisBurdett to the Tower — Incapacity of the king — The Regency bill . 453CHAPTER XIX.Views of the two parties — The Prince Regent abandons the Whig partyJ^ord Morpeth's motion for Catholic emancipation — Robert Peel —Refusal of the Wliigs to coalesce with the Tory ministry — Assassinationof Perceval — Ministerial negotiations — The Liverpool administration— Canning's motion for Catholic emancipation — Conclusion of thewar — Revival of popular interest in domestic questions — Scarcity andriots of 1716 — Suspension of the Habeas Corpus act — Coercion bills —Massacre at Manchester — Indignation of the people — Shared by theWhigs — Castlereagh's Six Acts — Lord John Russell's motion on thesubject of parliamentary reform — Death of George III. . . 482CHAPTER XX.Thisllewood'fl conspiracy — The queen's trial — Unpopularity of the ToriesEfforts of the Whigs to undermine their power — Education —Hume's motions — Progress of the Catholic question — Mr. Plunder'sbill passes the commons — Canning's bill — State of Ireland — Death ofI,ord Londonderry — Accession of Canning to the ministry — Its effectsupon the Catholic question— Cabinet changes of 1823 — Irish CatholicAssociation — Burden's Catholic bill of 1825 — Rejected by the lords —CONTENTS. VllsageQuestion of parliamentary reform — mr. Larabton's motion of 1821 —Lord John Russell's — Lord John Russell's motion of 18'22 — Petitionsin its favour — Canning's speech against it — State of the question in1826 — General election of 1826 — Illness and retirement of Lord Liverpool— The new house of commons decide against the Catholics — Formationof the Canning administration — Secession of the high Tories —Canning is supported by the Whigs — Death of Canning — Appointmentof Lord Goderich as his successor — Resignation of Lord Goderich . 311CHAPTER XXI.Formation of the Wellington administration — Beaten by the Whigs uponthe question of the Test Acts repeal — Debates upon the repeal — Catholicquestion — State of Ireland — Emancipation bill brought forward by theDuke of Wellington — Rage of the Tories when they find themselvesbetrayed — Debates upon the bill — In the commons — In the lords —Catholic bill passed — Resentment and opposition of the Tories — Generosityof the Whigs, who support the Duke of Wellington against hisown party .545CHAPTER XXII.Prospects of the Whigs at the accession of William IV. — French revolutionof 1830 — Duke of Wellington's declaration against reform — Defeatof his administration — Formation of the Grey administration — Introductionof the first Reform bill — Debates — Rejected on the secondreading — Dissolution of parliament — Elections — Meeting of the newhouse — Reform bill re-introduced — Debated — Passed — In the house oflords — Debated — Rejected — A short prorogation — State of the countryPower of the press — Parliament re assembles — Second Reform billbrought forward — Passes the house of commons— The Whigs defeatedin the house of lords — Resign— State of the country — The Duke ofWellington fails to form an administration — Earl Grey returns to officewith power to create peers — The Reform bill passes the lords . 577CHAPTER Xxiii.Conclusion C20ADVERTISEMENTTO THE THIRD VOLUME.The first volume of this work exhibited a detailof the rise of the Whig party, and of the efforts bywhich they at length succeeded in stripping thecrown of every prerogative which could oppress thesubject.The second comprised a long period during*which the Whigs administered, in the constitutionthey had built; — a period less eventful, because lesscheckered with misfortune.In this volume the history is concluded. It narratesthe succeeding interval of Tory government,and ends with the return of the Whigs to power andthe passing of the llcform bill.This arrangement has unavoidably occasionedsome difference in the size of the volumes. A moreserious objection will be brought against the presentvolume, la it, 1 have overstepped the thresholdADVERTISEMENT.of the present gcnemtion, and the events whichcontemporaries judge so all-important, have beenpassed over as lightly as those of other times. Imuch regret that the nature of the work so imperativelyrequired that it should be brought downto so recent a period. Contemporary history canseldom be correct, and can never be satisfactory.Each person sees only one phase of the events of histime, and the great majority of readers will thinkthat the events they remember are slighted if theyare diminished until they harmonize with the generalscale of the historical picture.The reasons which forbade me to continue thebiographical sketches into the present generationare sufficiently obvious.To an objection already urged, that this work isdeficient in minute details and statistical calculations,I must remark that " The History ofParty " is not intended as a work of reference tosupersede the thousand volumes from which it isculled — it is not a collection of all that an historicalstudent can discover, but a compendium of knowledgeof which no British elector should be ignorant.THEHISTORY OF PARTY.I.A. D. 1762.CHAPTER I.The Bute administration — Political writings — Biographical anecdotes ofJolin Wilkes — The North Briton — Negotiations for peace — Debateupon the preliminaries — Mr. Pitt's speech — Formation of the opposition— Its members — Topics of opposition — The cider tax —Unpopularity and resignation of Lord Bute — Review of his administration.The Earl of Bute became prime minister on the CHAP.29th of May, 1762. George Grenville, who had now .forsaken his early companion, and the principles towhich his friend still adhered, was made secretary ofstate. Sir Francis Dashwood was chancellor of theexchequer — ** a man to whom," says one of the periodicalsof the day,* " a sum of five figures was animpenetrable secret." Charles Townshend was secretaryat war. The Duke of Bedford, the Earl of• Quoted in the History of the Minority.VOL. HI. UA. D. 17(i-J.<2 The IlISTOKY OF PARTY.CHAP. Effremoiit, who inlun-itod \hc Toryism of his father,and Mr. CliarU>s Vorki^ rotaiiuHl their places.The impetus which it lead received from the handof Pitt continued for some time to propel the statemachine. Tidings of successes continued to arrive, theloss of the Savannah checked the insolence of Spain,and the processions of cart-loads of bullion plunderedfrom the captured galleons delighted the Englishpeople. But no success, however brilliant, could givepopularity to the premier, or reconcile the nation to therule of a favourite. The king's friends — such was thetitle under which the Tory party had now seized thegovernment — were still execrated, and all the honourof success was ascribed to Pitt. The Tory ministerswere even looked upon with suspicion, as men whoscarcely participated in the joy of the nation, and whowere eager to follow in the steps of the last primeminister of their party, and conclude a glorious warby a dishonourable peace. It was said that the Earlof Bute felt his own insufficiency to conduct the greatschemes which had been devised by his predecessor,and would reject no terms that might be offered.He had already refused to renew the annual treatyby which Great Britain assisted the King of Prussiawith a subsidy and engaged to make no peace withouthis concurrence ; and although this step wasreadily defensible on the ground that Russia, Frederic'sgigantic enemy, had then become his ally,A. D. 17G2.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.and Sweden was about to withdraw from the confer CHAP,tracy against him ; still it was loudly censured athome as a breach of national honour, and remarkedupon as a proof that the favourite entertained all theancient partiality of a Scotchman towards France.Immediately after the earl was formally invested withthe office of premier parliament was prorogued, and hewas thus left to pursue his policy, whether for peace orwar, without direct interruption. It was now, however,that the effects of the long administration of theWhigs became manifest in the conduct of the nation.The Whig party was scattered and irresolute, Pitt andhis city friends looked with distrust upon Newcastleand his aristocratic followers, and Newcastle enviedand dreaded his too powerful ally. No party-plan ofopposition cous be formed; but while the chiefs weredeliberating the people where in action. Upon theresignation of Pitt such a storm had arisen from allparts of the kingdom, that the first act of the newminister was an attempt to turn the current of publicopinion. On the 29th of May, the day he enteredupon his office, was published the first number of aperiodical called The Briton,* which had as its objectthe support of the new minister. The highly wroughtpanegyric upon the Karl of Pute which this numbercontains, and the marked abuse of Pitt with which itconcludes, called forth several opponents. The Mo-writtenby Dr. Smollett.R QAD. 17()2.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, nitor and the Observatory had boon already in exist-onceand opposition, hut on the ensuing Saturday arival, destined to obtain more enduring notoriety,made its appearance. This was the first number ofthe Noi-tli linton which came forth to defend WilliamPitt from the calumnies of the ministerial writer, andto ridicule the perfections of his master. The principalcontributor to this periodical, John Wilkes, is acharacter which circumstances rendered too importantto be introduced without especial notice.John Wilkes was the second son of a wealthy distillerliving in St. John's-square, Clerkenwell, butdescended of a family of that name long settled inBuckinghamshire. John was born in October, 1730.His father, supposing he had discovered in his son asuperior ability, bestowed considerable care upon hiseducation. At an early age he was placed under thetuition of Mr. Lesson, a dissenting clergyman, fromwhom he obtained a considerable knowledge of theclassics. While yet young he went, accompanied byhis tutor, to the University of Leyden, where he prosecutedhis studies with diligence and success ; andwhence he returned, after the completion of the usualacademical course, with the reputation of being ayoung man of very extensive acquirements and considerabletalent. To an accurate and extensiveknowledge of the ancient and modern languages headded a graceful and gentlemanly deportment, greatA. D. 1762.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.conversational powers, ready wit, and an undaunted CHAP,assurance. His education was considered completedby the usual tour of the continent, during which hecontracted friendships with many men eminent fortheir genius and learning, and among others withDr. Andrew Baxter,* the most profound theologianand metaphysician of his time, with whom he carriedon a frequent correspondence, and who did not thinkhis young friend unworthy of honourable mention inone of his works. In 1 749 Wilkes returned to London,and in October of the same year married MissMead. This lady was possessed of a large fortune,she was the only daughter of the most intimate friendof his mother, and she had refused the addresses ofLord Bellenden in his favour. These were incentiveswhich dutiful obedience, cupidity, or gratified vanitywould alike approve. On the other hand. Miss Meadwas upwards of thirty-two, Wilkes was not yet twenty-two,and their dispositions and habits were as littlein accordance as their ages.t It was this ill-assorted♦ Baxter's Appendix to the by death : Mr. Baxter continuingInquiry into the Nature of the his letters even after he was unableHuman Soul" is dedicated to John to write with his own hand. —Wilkes, and is said by the author Hog. Dirt., art. Baxter.to have been suggested by a con f In one of Wilkes's letters tosensation he held with \Niikes in Mre. Stafford, in 1778, speaking ofthe Capuchins' garden at Spa. The this marriage, he says, " Now, onecorrespondence between Wilkes word on my own situation. In myanal Baxter was only interrupted nonage, to please an indulgentA. D. 176'J.THE IIISTOUY OF I'AIlTY.CHAP. Amid such scenes it is no wonder that honour andprobity quickly died, that virtue soon appeared to^^' ilk.es but a stale jest, and patriotism the mask ofclever knaves. M'hen such men were admitted to hiswife's society, and Potter's obscene jests fell upon herear, it is no wonder that Mrs. Wilkes fled from herhusband's house, and sought the protection of hermother.The ruinous expenditure which this mode of lifeentailed was the subject of frequent remonstrancefrom Mrs. Wilkes, who appears to have been as parsimoniousas her youthful husband was licentious.He was now ambitious of a seat in parliament : hespent 3000/. in an imprudent and unsuccessful attemptupon Berwick ; and upon his return from hiscanvass, smarting under his defeat, he was assailedwith reproaches at home. A quarrel and a separationensued : by the deed Wilkes retained a portion ofthe property, and granted an annuity of 200/.In 1757, Wilkes, at an expense of 7OOO/., becamemember for Aylesbury, where some of his propertylay, and he himself occasionally resided. His electionfor this borough was not the reward of any politicalexertions ; it was effected by a chain of delicatemanoeuvres by which his friend Potter, his predecessorat Aylesbury, succeeded Mr. Pitt in the representationof Southampton, thus making a vacancy forA. D. 1762.THE History OF Party. 9Wilkes. Mr. Pitt was returned for Bath, and Wilkes CHAP,paid the whole expense of the arrangement.This heavy expenditure exhausted his finances,and with the true heartlessness of a practised libertine,he proposed to escape from his embarrassmentsby forcing from his wife her separate property.He pursued his design without shame or decency ;brought Mrs. Wilkes into court by a writ of habeascorpus and only desisted from his attempt whenLord Mansfield declared that any further annoyancewould subject him to a commitment.Now it was that Wilkes began to look to the emolumentsof office as a means to retrieve his fortune.He at first proceeded with moderation ; he gainedthe friendship of Lord Temple, who was his neighbourin Buckinghamshire,* and so far retained that ofSir Francis Dashwood that, when Sir Francis resignedWhat little interest Wilkes to throw a stone at Johnson, anpossessed he freely employed in impertinence which the doctorbehalf of his literary' contemporaries forgave. In his Englishries. Two of his most vehement Grammar prefixed to his Diction-abuseswere Dr. Smollett and mary, the lexicographer had written,Dr. Johnson. About this time "'H,' seldom, perhaps never, beginshe conferred a signal obligation any but the first syllable." Wilkesupon the latter, by obtaining published some remarks upon thisthe release of his black servant dictum; commencing, "The authorwho had been seized by a press of this observation must be a mangang. Dr. Smollett was the mo ofrpiick apprehension, and of ndrum through which .Johnson made most comprehensive genius."his application. Wilkes had dan HAD. 17ti2.U) THE IIISTOUY OF PARTY.CHAP, his commission as colonel of the Buckinghamshiremilitia, he recommended Mr. Wilkes as his successor.In 17()0, Sir James Porter, the British minister atConstantinople, desired to be recalled, and Wilkesfixed his desires upon the office, as one which wouldat once gratify his love of distinction and removehim from his creditors. His application was madethrough Mr. Legge to the Duke of Newcastle ; butMr. Legge was at this time an unfortunate patron.The Earl of Bute interfered, and Wilkes was disappointed.Such was the origin of the hatred whichWilkes always manifested towards the king's favouriteminister. In I76I, during Mr. Pitt's negotiationwith France, when it was known that Canada was tobe retained by England, the government of that provincecaught Mr. Wilkes's attention. He mentionedit to Lord Temple, and had the negotiation succeeded,he would have had the appointment. The failure ofMr. Pitt's negotiation, and the ejection of the Whigparty from office, destroyed all his hopes. His embarrassmentshad increased beyond endurance ; hisdisappointment infused into him a hatred of the partywhich had succeeded to power, and the desperatestate of his fortunes made him reckless as to themeans he adopted to overthrow them.Under these circumstances, he, in conjunctionwith the poet Churchill, started the North Briton.The early numbers of this periodical attracted at-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 11mention because they appealed to the passions and the CHAP,prejudices of the multitude. The abuse of Scotland — — — ^- — —^ J A.D. 1762.and of Scotchmen was the North Briton's constanttheme. At first, in accordance with the title assumed,the abuse was conveyed in irony ; but as the attackgrew hotter this veil was thrown away, and the NorthBriton continued to inveigh against the cloud ofadventurers, which, at the beck of the minister,crossed the Tweed and spread like locusts over theland, and to vent the most bitter personalities againstthe favourite and his colleagues.Upon a perusal of these letters, without referenceto the extraordinary excitement they occasioned, weshould judge them to be characterized by a very moderateability. In boldness of invention they had, attheir time, no rival, but in composition they fall veryfar short of the Examiner or the Craftsman : they certainlydo not sustain the reputation which, as a scholarand a philosopher, Wilkes had acquired in his youngerand his better days.Notwithstanding the abuse and opposition whichhe knew it would call forth, the minister determinedupon putting an end to the war, and his papers wereinstructed to prepare the public mind for this courseof policy. This was rather boldly than successfullyexecuted. The Triton dec-dared that the war hadbeen carried on in an injudicious manner, and thatour extraordinary successes wore to ho rcrkonrdA.D. 17C2.1'2 Tali History OF PARTY.CHAP, among its evil consequences.* The hint was immediatelytaken, the land rung with laughter at thenovel discovery, and the popular papers which echoedthe voice of the multitude, immediately prophesieda disgraceful Tory treaty. Soon after a notice to thelord mayor gave information that the negotiationhad commenced.Upon the meeting of parliament (Nov. S5), theking could inform the houses that preliminaries hadbeen signed ; and on the 29th, they were laid uponthe table of the house of commons. A day was immediatelyappointed for taking them into consideration,and the public expectation was greatly excited. Inthe lords it was expected that the opposition wouldbe very strong.! Lord Combe moved the address,and Lord Hardwicke opposed it in a prepared andlengthy speech ; several other peers followed, andmany severe and personal reflections were thrown outagainst the Earl of Bute. He defended himselfwith an energy he had not been supposed to possess,and concluded by a wish, that his only epitaph mightbe that he was the author of this peace. At theconclusion of the debate the house was clearly in hisfavour, and the address was carried without protest,and apparently without divisions Even in the commonsthe struggle was not so severe as had been• Briton, No. 6. f Chesterfield to his Son.X Lorclj-' Journals.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. tSanticipated. The minister had prudently provided for CHAP,this contingency ; he had emissaries among allparties, and so well did he strengthen their exertionsthat it is said he in one day issued 25,000/. to theirorder.*Many of the old retainers of successive administrationswere so disgusted with their exclusion fromoffice, that they were disposed to neglect no opportunityof returning. Upon the day of the debate manyof these slunk away, some feigned sickness, others ranout of town, and many more were absent withouttroubling themselves to assign any excuse. t WhenMr. Fox opened the debate the state of the houseseemed scarcely to promise a division. He set forthand justified the preliminaries in a speech of considerablelength, and appeared to have thoroughlysatisfied his auditory ; when Pitt, whom the occasionhad drawn from a sick-bed, raised himself upon hiscrutches to reply.Although at that instant suffering under the mostexcruciating torture, he had, he said, determined atthe hazard of his life, to attend that day to raise hisvoice and hand against the preliminary articles of atreaty that obscured all the glories of the war, surrenderedthe dearest interests of the nation, andsacrificed the public faith by an abandonment of our• History of the Minority, p. M. f Ibid.•A.D. 17G2.14 11 li: HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, allies. Ho, he said, had indeed consented to conselude a peace, and his terms had not satisfied allpersons, for it was found impossible to reconcile everyinterest ; but he had not, for the mere attainment ofpeace, made a sacrifice of any conquest ; he hadneither broken the national faith nor betrayed theallies of the crown. He called for a discussion of themerits of the peace he had offered comparatively withthe present preliminaries, and challenged the mostable casuist among the minister's friends, who ingallant appearance were all mustered and marshalledfor duty, to refute him. His motive was to stop thattorrent of misrepresentation which was poisoningthe virtue of the country.Thus far he had proceeded, supported by two ofhis friends, but his bodily weakness here overpoweredhim. He sank, and the house, moved byhis fortitude and his sufferings, granted him the unprecedentedindulgence of delivering the remainderof his speech sitting.The india-nant statesman continued for nearly fourhours to pour forth his objections to the terms whichhad been accepted. He contrasted the surrender ofthe fisheries which had been made by the Earl ofBute, with the conditional surrender which theFrench had consented to receive from him ; norwould it have been necessary, he said, for him tohave conceded even thus much, had he not beenA. D. 1762.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 14overruled, not by a foreign but by another enemy, chap.Of the retention of North America he approved, butit was not the present negotiators who had obtainedit. It had been the uti possidetis of his own negotiation; it was a concession which he had gained.Savannah, he said, was also his own, he had designedthe conquest, and it would have been madesome months earlier had he been permitted to executehis own plans. Why was this key to all theSpanish treasures in America exchanged for Florida ?The terms were inadequate : they were inadequatein every point where the principle of reciprocity wasaffected to be introduced.The conquered islands were to be restored. Therestoration of Guadaloupe, it was said he had himselfproposed. But he had been overruled in that pointalso ; he could not help it ; he had been overruledmany times — on many occasions ; he had acquiescedhe had submitted. But, at length, he saw that allhis measures, all his sentiments were inimical to thenew system ; to those persons to whom his majestyhad given his confidence. But, to this island thesepersons had added Martinique and St. Lucia. Theyseemed to have lost sight of the great fundamentalprinciple that France is chiefly, if not solely to bedreaded by us in the light of a maritime and commercialpower. By restoring to her all the valuableA.D. 17'.J*2.IC) Vue IIISTOKY OF PARTY.CHAP. West Iiulia islands and conceding the Newfoundlandfishery, they have given her the meansof recovering her prodigious losses, and of becomingonce more formidable to us at sea. The fisherytrains u\) an innumerable multitude of young seamen ;the West India trade employs them when they aretrained.As to the equivalents for these concessions, heargued that the trade of the conquests in NorthAmerica was extremely low ; the speculations oftheir future precarious, and the prospect, at thebest, remote ; but the exhaustion occasioned by thewar called for supplies, certain, speedy, and considerable: the retention of the French islands, or atleast one of them, would alone answer this triplepurpose.In Africa, he said, Gore had been surrenderedwithout the least apparent necessity, after he hadobtained that it should remain with the Britishcrown as an essential security to Senegal.In the East Indies, conquests were to be mutuallyrestored. What, he asked, had France to restore ?All the conquests she had made had been retaken.All her own factories and settlements were in ourhands. We had conquered every thing, we retainednothing.Minorca was indeed restored j the East Indies,A. D. 1762.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 17the West Indies, and Africa were its price — a price CHAP,fifty times its worth. This was the only conquestFrance had to restore.Pitt now passed on to a defence of his own policy,vindicated the propriety of the German war, anddeclared with all his own startling emphasis, thatAmerica had been conquered in Germany ; he refutedin detail, many of the objections which hadbeen urged against him, and returned again to thetreaty, inveighing against the desertion of the Kingof Prussia as insidious, tricking, base, and treacherous.He would have spoken of Spain, but hisvoice was now scarcely audible, and he concluded bydeclaring, that upon the whole, the preliminariesmet with his most hearty disapprobation. He sawin them, he said, the seeds of a future war. Thepeace was insecure because it restored the enemyto her former greatness : its terms were inadequate,because the places gained were no equivalent for theplaces surrendered.*Such were Mr. Pitt's objections to the terms uponwhich his war had been concluded. His speech uponthis occasion was considered a failure, and such itno doubt was. *' It is impossible," says Lord Chesterfield,upon this occasion, "for a human creatureto speak well for three hours and a half;" and Lord• Pail. Hist., vol. \v., col. 1-J70.VOL. III. CTHF HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D. 1762.CHAP. Barring-ton, who was present, remarks that he neverbefore made so long or so bad a speech.* Thegreat force of Pitt's oratory lay not in the words heuttered, but in the manner in which he utteredthem : there is eloquence in his reported speeches,but not eloquence in any degree equal to the effectthey produced. We cannot read in them thescathing power which made the boldest membertremble when he arose, nor see in them the cause ofthe paralysis which bound the most voluble speakerwhen his eye was upon theist Upon this occasion• Lord Bennington to Andrew opened to let him into the lobby.Mitchell. Ellis's Letters, second A member then started up, saying,series, vol. iv., p. 455. " Mr. Speaker, — I rise to reply totOn one occasion, Pitt, im the honourable member." Pittmediately after he had finished turned round and fixed his eye ona speech in the house of com- the orator, who instantly sat downmons, walked out of it, and, as dumb : he then returned to hisusual, with a very slow step. A seat, repeating as he hobbledsilence ensued until the door was along, the verses of Virgil :Last Danaum progeny, Agamemnoniaeque phalangesUt videre virum, fulgentiaque arma per umbras,Ingenii trepidare met, — pars venture retro,Seu quondam peter rates — pars toller voceEpigram — inceptus clamor frustrate hates."Then placing himself in his gentleman from whom he heard it,seat, he exclaimed, " Now let me if the house did not laugh at thehear what the honourable mem ridiculous figure of the poor memberhas to say to me." Mr. But ber. " No, sir," he was answered,her, who relates this anecdote (in " we were all too much awed tohis '* Reminiscences") asked the laugh."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 19his sitting posture precluded all vehemence of gest CHAP,circulation, and his feebleness extended to his voice, » r. i-^^A. D. 1 /62.and, doubtless, subtracted largely from his confidenceof power. But this speech, however listlesslyheard, is read with interest. It was not an essay atopposition, for no opposition was yet formed.During the course of his harangue, the orator distinctlydenied that he was then connected with anywho were thought to meditate a systematic opposition,and he intimated that he should appear butseldom in the house.* We read herein, therefore,Pitt's deliberate opinion of the terms upon whichthe war he had carried on was concluded. We findthat terms which had been conceded to him, whileSpain was still powerful and ready to declare herself,had been refused to his successor when that powerwas crippled, and additional conquests justified additionaldemands.Thus early was the determination of George theThird to support an unpopular party, under the titleof the king's friends, followed by national loss.They were compelled to make peace because theycould not raise funds to continue the war ; for themerchants who had so readily opened their purses toPitt, closed them against a minister whom theydoubted whether they could trust. This peace was• Kllib's Letters, second series, vol. iv., p. 445.(• -2*0 The IIISTOUY OF I'AlltV.CHAP, doubtless advantageous to England, and humiliating'to France : after such uniform triumph it could notA.D. 1762. , /have been otherwise. But how different had beenits conditions had Pitt been allowed to conclude thework he had so well carried on. How great thecontrast between a negotiator who dictates conditionsof peace with the same pen with which hehad drawn schemes of gigantic conquests nowachieved, who knew his own power and his enemy'sweakness ; and a negotiator who trembled at theshadow of his predecessor's greatness, doubted whetherEngland or France was more his enemy, andfound his greatest embarrassments in the successesof his country.Fox, in reply to Pitt, repeated the advantagesthat had been gained, extolled their value, andargued that the objects for which the war had beenoriginally undertaken were fully secured. Uponthe division the victory was as complete as he himselfcould wish : the preliminaries were approved bytwo hundred and twenty-seven against sixty-three.In the two divisions which took place upon thisquestion, ninety-seven* members only avowed their** Pari. Hist , vol. XV. col. 127'2. speaking, left the house. It isThe greatness of tuis majority said that the Duke of Newcastlewas doubtless occasioned in some had desired his party in the housedegree by the disunited state of not to divide, but Mr. Dempster,the Whig party. Pitt, after a young Scotch member, who hadTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. SIdisapprobation. Thus easily was a house of com- chap.A. D. 1762.mons, which had during the former session beennearly unanimous in their support of Mr. Pitt, persuadedto show themselves nearly equally unanimousin rejecting his counsel when he was no longera minister.This vote of the house of commons 'was but littlein accordance with the opinion of the nation, and theoutcry was so great, that the minister thought itnecessary to devise some expedient to prevent itsreaching the royal closet. Ministerial envoys werenow despatched over the country, and every art wasused to procure addresses approving the peace. Thecause must be bad indeed which cannot find someindividuals in each county to support it ; but theexposure of some of the intrigues by which theseaddresses were obtained, and the protests they drewforth, went far toward destroying their utility.The multitudes who exclaimed against the late 1763.treaty all looked up to Pitt as their chief, and theDuke of Newcastle and his party of aristocraticWhigs, finding they were powerless without thesupport of the people, overcame their jealousy andmade overtures for a coalition with the late minister.taken it into his head to bo in the posed the nakedness of his party,minority upon this occasion, took —E//U's Lcltcrt, second series, vol.it likewise into his head to bring iv., p. 4^3.the hoiisr to a division, which ex-ad.1760.?'2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Pitt readily consented: early in March the oppositionwas formed. The leaders met at a dinner atthe house of the Duke of Newcastle. There werepresent, the Dukes of Devonshire, Bolton, andPortland ; the Marquis of Rockingham ; EarlsTemple, Cornwallis, Albemarle, Ashburnham,Ilanhvicke, and Besborough ; I^ords Spencer,Sondes, Graham, and Villiers ; Sir George Sa-ville,Mr. J. Grenville, and Mr. Pitt. These werenow the conspicuous members of the Whig party.The newly-formed opposition were not withoutsubjects of complaint. Among the financial arrangementsof the ensuing year, the minister hadproposed a loan of 3,500^000/., which he raised byprivate subscription upon terms so exorbitant, thatthey drew down the strong disapprobation of Mr.Legge in the house of commons. The urgentapplications for portions of this subscription, yetextant amono^ the MS. letters to Lord Bute in theBritish Museum, show that the whole affair was amere contrivance to reward the ministerial phalanx.In a few days the truth became evident to all. Thestock immediately rose ten per cent, above the subscribingprice, discovering that the minister hadthus distributed 350,000/. among his friends. Thiswas a flight which left the genius of Walpole farbehind.The Earl of Bute was now about to imitate Wall.D. 1763.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 23pole in another part of his administration in which CHAP,that minister had been less successful. Not dauntedby the storm, which he might have remembered asoccasioned by the last proposition of the kind, henow proposed an excise upon cider. This measureproduced the same degree of virulent oppositionwhich had been arrayed against that of 1733 ; Pittput forth all his strength against it in the commons,and it was not without six divisions that it wasforced through the house. Petitions against it toboth houses of parliament, and even to the throne,poured in from every county affected by the measure,mobs were again assembled in all parts of thecountry, and cockades were worn, inscribed "Liberty,Whigs, and no Excise." To such a demonstrationWalpole succumbed, but the Earl of Bute professedall his party's contempt for popular clamour. Aftera struggle in the lords — a very unusual occurrenceupon a bill of supply, the measure became law.*The odium which this perseverance occasioned,drove the minister from the helm. So thoroughlywas he now detested, that it was unsafe for him toappear in the public streets. Twice had he beenattacked by the populace : on one occasion his carriagehad been demolished, although surrounded bya guard of prize-fighters ; on another, his life wassaved by the interference of the civil powers 'JeersAnnual Register. Tail. Hist. f History of the Minority.AD. 17(i3.21- TMK History OF Tasty.CHAP, riticd by the expressions of national abhorrenceI. • *which he every whiche encountered, and probablyactuated also by the motive which he himself assigned,an unwillingness to render his master unpopular,the Earl of Bute resigned office, and declaredthat he would never again interfere in political questions.This short administration, although the cabinetconsisted of Tories, was not founded upon Tory^rm-cipher ; neither the king nor the minister advocated,or perhaps understood the peculiar principles ofeither party. The only principle of this governmentwas favouritism : the minister was the favourite ofthe king, the subordinate officials were favourites ofthe minister : these were all Tories, because the principles,the pride, and the recent supremacy of theWhigs forbade them to hold office under such humiliatingterres. The kings of a constitutional monarchyare usually obliged to be content with beingabsolute in their own court ; George III. wished togo further, and to make his courtiers his ministers.The experiment failed ; the courtier was compelledto retire from the public stage, and to besatisfied with prompting others, himself unseen.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 25CHAPTER II.The Grenville administration — The North Briton, No. 45 — Arrestof Wilkes — General warrants — Death of Lord Ej;remont —Attempt of the king and the Tories to detach Mr. Pitt from theWhigs — Its failure — Death of Earl Grenville — Meeting of parliament— Proceedings against Wilkes — Review of the conduct ofministers in the proceedings against Wilkes.The resignation of Lord Bute made little altera CHAP.&tion in the measures of government. Like Walpolehe had taken care to leave his own friends in officeto protect him from prosecution or censure. GeorgeGrenville was his successor. This gentleman, whosebrothers, Earl Temple and James Grenville, were sostrenuous and conspicuous as members of the opposition,had now altogether deserted the party withwhich ho had set out in life, and had become identifiedwith the Tories. Lords Egremont and Halifaxcontinued secretaries of state : Fox retained hislucrative but siibordiiiato station as paymaster of the11.A. D. 1763.The HISTORY OF PAllTY.CHAP, forces, receiving, however, a peerage as a reward for■ . jj ~^Z7^ his compliance. He was raised to the upper house,by the title of IJaron Holland, and Sir Francis Dash-woodresigning the chancellorship of the exchequerto the minister, received a similar equivalent ; he wascreated Baron le Dispenser. The Earl of Sandwich,who possessed neither popularity, ability, or virtue,was made first lord of the admiralty.*Contemporary writers attributed the overthrow ofLord Bute to the talent and influence of the NorthBriton, which had certainly directed and expressedthe popular indignation when the Whigs in parliamentwere silent. When the minister's resignationwas made known, the publication of this paperceased ; but ho sooner were the new appointmentsgazetted, than it was resumed. Forty-four numbershad already been published. On the 23d ofApril, No. 4o appeared, ushered by an advertnote to one of the num of Churchill, against Lord le Dis-hersof the North Briton contains pence and others, we must beamost odious character of this lieve that most of the public mennobleman, whom we have lately of this time were, in private life,seen as the writer's most intimate monsters. The profligacy of thefriend ; but I cannot rely upon Earl of Sandwich and Lord leany of Mr. \^'ilkes's writings for Dispenser is proved by a concur-thecharacters of his contempt hence of contemporary testimony,varies. If we were to believe the f See the History of the Mino-titheof what is alleged in some city and other pamphlets of theof this writer's notes to the poems day.A. D. 1763.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 27tenement, in which the writer asserted that the CHAP.Scottish minister had not retired, but that he stillgoverned by three wretched tools of his power ; hedeclared that he was ready to combat this triple-headedCerberean administration, and pledged himselfthe firm and intrepid assertor of the rights of hisfellow subjects, and of the liberties of ^\Tiigs andEnglishmen.This sounding introduction was the prelude to astrain of very ordinary abuse.* Wilkes consideredthe king's speech to parliament as the speech of theminister and criticised it as such ; an assumption hehad a perfect right to make. He spoke of thesovereign as imposed upon by his minister, andlamented that a prince of so many great and amiable• It is said that No. 45 of speech which was to be spokenthe North Briton, was suggested on the morrow. Mr. Pitt was atby a conversation held between Lord Temple's house, in PallEarl Temple, Pitt, and Wilkes. Mall, when the letter arrived.On Mr. Grenville receiving his and, owing to his intercession,appointment as first lord of the the consent was given. Wilkes,treasury, it was of course necesse who was just returned from Paris,say that he should be re-elected ; called in at the same moment,and as he sat for his brother's and a conversation ensued uponborough of Buckingham, he was the speech. From his recollectionobliged, although then at variance of this conversation, and somewith him, to ask his permission to additions of his own, Wilkesbe chosen In the letter contain wrote this celebrated paper. —ing the request was enclosed, as a Almond Talc and Correspondencecompliment, a copy of the king's nf Wilkes, vol i., p. 9.5.A. 1). 1763.28 THE HISTORY OF rAIlTY.CHAP, qualities, could bo brought to ^\\c the sanction ofhis sacred name to the most odious measures, andthe most unjustifiable ]public declarations, from athrone ever renowned for truth, honour, and unsulliedvirtue.However libellous this sentence might be as regardedthe Earl of Bute, it was no libel upon the sovereign.The house of commons had in effectexpressed the same sentiment long before, when theymade it one of the articles of the impeachmentagainst Robert Earl of Oxford, that he had corruptedthe sacred fountain of truth, and put falsehoodsin the mouth of her majesty in several speechesmade to parliament. To hold that the sovereign isanswerable in any manner for his public speeches, orcan be libelled by a denial of the accuracy of theirstatements, is clearly an unconstitutional and Toryheresy.This was one of the passages selected as libellous :another was the following piece of commonplacedeclamation. "The King of England is only thefirst magistrate of this country, but is invested bythe law with the whole executive power. He is,however, responsible to his people for the due executionof the royal functions, in the choice of ministers,&c., equal with the meanest of his subjectsin his particular duty." The correctness of thisposition evidently depend? upon the sense in whichTHE HISTORY OF PARTV. 'r^Othe word responsible is used, and we are not to CHAP,expect in the hurried productions of the periodical Y^n^GsTwriter, aiming as he does at bold and startling positionswhich shall excite for a moment and perish asthat excitement droops, the guarded restrictions andcarefully poised definitions of finished composition.The whole of this celebrated paper may be judgedfrom these extracts : to those who are in the habit ofseeing the diurnal philippics of the present time,which appear, are read, and are forgotten, this numberof the North Briton will not be thought to exhibitany extraordinary violence ; nor, judging it fromthe same comparison, will it be remarked for itsability. It was not the power of the writer, it wasthe error of a weak ministry which made Wilkes andforty-five the gathering cry of the populace, and renderedthe insulter of the sovereign the most popularman in the kingdom.At the council which was held to decide how thislibel should be treated, Lord Mansfield advised thatit should be let alone, and exposed, in a forcible manner,the danger of giving the writer importance by apublic prosecution. The ministers, however, thoughtdifferently ; they each had private wrongs to revenge ;their master insisted upon vengeance, and an opportunityso favourable as an attack upon the king wasnot likely to recur.On the 30th of April Wilkes was arrested byA.D. 17G3.30 THE HISTOKY OF PARTY.CHAP, three messengers, under a general warrant from thesecretary of state, directing the officers to apprehendand seize, together with their papers, the authors,printers, and publishers, of a seditious and treasonablepaper, entitled the North Briton, Number XLV.These general warrants were clearly illegal, but theyhad been so long in use, and so uniformly obeyed,that this proceeding of the ministry was rather to becensured as weak than condemned as tyrannical.Having resolved to embark in a prosecution in whichthey were sure to find the sympathies of the populaceagainst them, they should have been careful that nosuspicion of irregularity should appear upon their proceedings.Wilkes saw his advantage ; he filled thenation with complaints of the violence he had suffered,and immediately applied for his habeas corpus. Thiswrit was evaded by transferring the prisoner from thecustody of the messengers ; but a second brought himfrom the tower to the court of common pleas on the3d of May. The case was now argued both by himself,in a speech which was intended to keep up theexcitement without, and by Sergeant Glynn, whoaddressed himself to the bench. The court employedthree days in consideration ; and then, without givingjudgment upon the validity of the warrant, orderedhis discharge, on the ground that he was protectedby his privilege of parliament. This decision wasreceived with peals of applause, and Wilkes returnedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 31home attended by a prodigious multitude of people, CHAP,who followed him with continual acclamation. AtA. D. 1763.night frequent illuminations and bonfires celebratedthe triumph of the popular idol.While Wilkes was only known to the public as thewriter of the North Briton, the Whigs took littlenotice of a man whose chief aim appeared to be toattract that attention by his violence which he couldnot command by his talent. Now, however, thefolly of the ministry rendered him of importance. Inhim they had wounded the constitution, and the principlesno less than the inclination of the Whigs urgedthem to afford him protection. Lord Temple immediatelyundertook his defence, and attempted torender his conduct consistent with the dignity of thepart he now had to perform as the vindicator of publicliberty. But Wilkes had none of the disinterestedpatriotism of Hampden or Russell ; public confusionwas the object he sought, and that he only desired,as it would contribute to his private gain : he continuedto adopt every contrivance to fix public attentionupon himself; wrote to the secretaries of stateaccusing them of having broken into his house androbbed him of his property, and brought actionsagainst all who had been employed in his illegalarrest. Never forgetting the great end of all hispatriotism, he set up a printing press in his own house,and reprinted his North Briton ; he also put forthA. D. 1763.S'2 The History OF Parity.CHAP, proposals for publishing the proceedings against him,at one guinea a copy, and so numerous was his that he found himself relieved from hispressing difficulties, and suddenly raised to a comparativeaffluence. Several of these acts, and especiallythe last, were highly disagreeable to the Whigswho had espoused his cause ; their pride revolted fromthe idea of so open a trade in patriotism ; and theyoffered, if he would abandon his design, to raise amongthemselves a sum equal to that he expected from hispublication. But Wilkes was not a man to be turnedfrom his purpose ; if the Whigs had his assistancethey must be content to receive it as he chose to affordit ; he refused their offer, and continued, unmindfulof their counsel, his own schemes for increasing hispopularity and its gains.Meanwhile the cabinet was thrown into some confusionby the sudden death of the Earl of Egreraont,which occurred on the 21st of August.* This nobleman,although not possessed of the abilities of hisfather, was of considerable importance in an administrationmade up of men who were all, except Fox,insignificant in their public characters. The governmentwas now become so weak that it was thoughtabsolutely necessary to look out for some addition toits strength. Lord Bute saw the tottering state ofEllis's Letters, second series, vol. iv.A. D. 17G3.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 33the ministry ; he knew that his own unpopularity CHAP,was unabated, and feared that those whom he hadplaced in office would be unable to protect him. Hesought a more powerful protector — to whom could heturn but to Pitt? A negotiation was immediatelycommenced, with the utmost secrecy, under the mediationof Lord Saville ; and, so rarely is perfect uprightnesspersonated in a statesman, even Pitt, thefairest of our public characters, did not at once refuseto coalesce with the negotiator of the peace of Paris.The arrangement, if it was not originated, was accelerated,by the death of the Earl of Egremont. TheEarl of Bute introduced Mr. Pitt to the king atBuckingham House, and a long conference ensued.The king listened attentively, and apparently withconviction ; and Pitt, while he was firm in hisdemands for the restoration of the Whigs, was courtlyin his bearing, and unassuming in his demeanour.He found, however, that the secret influence whichhad already proved so powerful was still to prevail jfor when he made an offer to unite with LordBute, the king replied, "How! Mr. Pitt, do youmean to laugh at me ? You must know, as well asme, that that nobleman is determined never moreto take any share in the administration." Pittknew that the favourite's power would remain ; hesaw only that he was determined to refuse all responsibility.VOL. III. D51. THE HISTORY or PARTY.CHAP. The kinc^ also expressed a wish to see a reconcile11.A.D. 17li3.tion take place between George Grenville and hisbrother, Earl Temple, to which Pitt made no reply,but probably drew his inference, that the king's onlyobject was to gain a section of the Whig party to reinforcehis present inefficient body-guard of Tories.From Buckingham House Mr. Pitt proceeded toClaremont, and acquainted the Duke of Newcastlewith what had passed, fully persuaded from the king'smanner and behaviour that he was in earnest, and allpoints of difference would be overcome. The twoWhig leaders consulted with their friends, and severalinfluential members of their party were sent for totown. The first audience had taken place on the27th of August, the next was appointed for the 29th.The Whig chief was received as graciously as before,and the king began the conversation. He talkedstrongly of his honour being concerned in the protectionof his present ministers, and mentioned LordHalifax for the treasury. At this proposal Pitt wasnaturally startled, and replied that he should neverhave thought of him for the treasury ; but recommendedthat he should receive the paymaster's place."But, Mr. Pitt," replied the king, " I had designedthat for poor George Grenville. He is your near relation,and you once loved him." To this the only answermade was a low bow. " Why," continued the king,should not Lord Temple have the treasury ? YouTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 3,5could go on then very well." The object was now chap.developed ; Pitt and Earl Temple were the onlyWhigs the king cared to gain. Pitt replied, " Sire,the person whom you shall think fit to honour withthe chief conduct of your affairs cannot possibly goonwithout a treasury connected with him. But thatalone will do nothing. It cannot be carried on withoutthe great families who have supported the revolutiongovernment, and other great persons of whoseabilities and integrity the public has had experience,and who have weight and credit with the nation. Ishould only deceive your majesty if I should leaveyou in an opinion that I could go on, and your majestymake a solid administration, on any other foot."Some conversation ensued : Mr. Pitt named a greatnumber of his supporters, but refused to draw out,upon the moment, a scheme of a new cabinet. Allwho voted for the peace, with the exception of theDuke of Marlborough and Lord Halifax, he objectedto, and declared that he would have nothing to dowith the Duke of Bedford or any Tory whatever.He had now discovered that a change had takenplace in the king's intentions since the last interview,and that it was doubly necessary to be firm in hisdemands, and guarded in his concessions. At last,when it became plain that the only terms upon whichPitt would accept office were, the dismission of hisopponents and the ;appointment of his friends, the3()TIIK IIISTOHV or Beauty.A.D. 1763.CHAP, kinir rei)lio(l, "Well, Uv. Pitt, I see this won't do ;II. ^^ .my honour is concerned and I must support it ;" andagain, more passionately, he declared, "Were I tosubmit to such dictation, I had nothing more to dothan to take the crown from my head, place it uponyours, and then submit my neck to the block"*Upon the failure of this negotiation the Duke ofBedford was applied to for assistance : he accepted theoffice of president of the council, and his powerful influencebrought a seasonable reinforcement to thewavering ranks of the government. Lord Sandwichsucceeded Lord Egremont as secretary of state, andLord Egmont was made first lord of the admiralty.The vacancy in the post to which the Duke ofBedford now succeeded was occasioned by the deathof Earl Granville, who had passed a long life in thecabinet, who, as Lord Carteret, had exercised suchweighty influence in the government, and who, inthe words of Lord Chesterfield, possessed, " take itfor all in all, the ablest head in England."Notwithstanding his great and versatile powers,Granville had failed as a statesman, and with talent• Letter from Lord Hardwicke is the most authentic narrative ;on the subject of a ministerial ne but it only professes to be a sketch,rotation in 1 763. Ellis's Letters, I have therefore thought myself atsecond series, vol. iv., p. 470. See liberty to fill it up from the otheralso the account of the contempt accounts, one of which, that of Mr.rare press in the Gentleman's Ma Erskine in Ellis's Letters, is buti{a7.ine for 1763. Lord Hardwicke's little less trustworthy.A. D. 1763.THE History OF PAllTV. 3?which might have commanded the support of a pow chap.erful party, he was compelled to owe his transient -moments of power to the personal favour of the king."smile he pretended to a leading station in the cabinet,the unpopularity of the government was alwaysgreat in proportion to the extent of his influence ;when he cast away from him ambition all partieswere well content that he should hold the office hethen chose ; the emoluments of which his great extravagancehad rendered necessary to him. He wasalmost as popular as a man as he was hated as aminister.The cause of Granville's failure may be found inhis utter destitution of political principle. It has alreadybeen remarked that a high and chivalrous senseof honour, which will never yield to circumstances, ordeviate one line from its forward track at the dictationof expediency, is an impediment to success in a statesmanof a free country. But Carteret erred still moregrievously on the other side. He entered, indeed,into ]public life under the auspices of Sunderlandand Stanhope, and during the short time that thoseleaders and their section of a party existed, he continuedto support them. But when he ceased to be asubordinate he renounced all allegiance either toparty or patriotism. He cared nothing for principle,whether Whig or Tory ; thought that system of governmentthe best which preserved him in his office,nA.D. 17G3.38 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and openly laughed at the idea of men acting fromany other motive. Many who acted as Carteret spokeyet joined in the'gcneral condemnation of the avowedpolitical infidel. Such doctrines not only annihilatedpatriotism and public spirit, but destroyedwhat have so often been their efficient substitutes,party principle and party honour. No political leaderwould venture to ally himself to a man who disclaimedalike the profession and the practice of fidelity ; andCarteret, who thought he held in the royal preferencethe surest tenure of office, was outlawed by bothparties ; he was represented to the nation as a profligatefavourite, by men who, in private life, admiredhis varied talent, and eagerly courted his society.Recently Earl Granville had become ratherpopular. The multitude, always prone to think theirpresent evils their heaviest, looked back upon thereign of George II. as a golden era, and thought allwho had been his ministers worthy of their worship.As the earl professedly took no part in public affairs,he was not involved in the unpopularity of LordBute ; he had outlived his political importance, andhis death attracted little attention except among thosewho hoped to succeed him.Parliament met on the 15th of November, andWilkes and the North Briton, words which still rangthrough the nation, were, of course, the first topicsof discussion. So anxious was the Grenville ministryA.D. 1763.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 39upon this subject, and so careful to anticipate the ac chap.causation of Wilkes, that the house of commons wasnot allowed to enter upon the consideration of thespeech ; but a message was first delivered, informingthe house of the steps that had been taken againstMr. Wilkes. This message was immediately takeninto consideration, and after a long debate, of whichno record remains, number forty-five, was, without adivision,* voted a libel, and ordered to be burnt bythe common hangman. Wilkes, who had in vain attemptedto address the house before, was now heard,and the consideration of his complaint, as well as thefurther consideration of the king's message, was adjourned.But in the house of lords an attack was on the sameevening made, which affected Wilkes far more fatally.When, elated by the popular applause, he had set upa press in his own house, and reprinted the libels forwhich he had been marked out for prosecution, heforfeited the esteem of all moderate men, althoughthe folly of his enemies might perhaps compel them tocontinue to him their support. Among other uses towhich he put this press, he had determined to print,• There was a division upon the government ;" lout no Whig ap-terms.Some members thoiiglit it pears to have defended the paper.inexpedient to describe the paper Even this objection was overruledas " tending to excite traitorous in- by a majority of 273 to 1 1 1 . — Purl.suggestions against his majesty's //w/,, vol. xv., col. l;)6f).^0 THE Ml STORY OF PARTY.CHAT, for some of his intimates, thirteen copies of a poem,called " An Essay on Woman." There is no reasonA.D. 1763.to suppose that this obscene and blasphemous productionwas composed by Wilkes ; in sentiment itprecisely agrees with the practices of the MockPlanks Club ; and it was probably concocted in thatsociety, and well known by its members. Wilkes hadit printed with the greatest privacy, and from the fewcopies he struck ois it is evident that the poeta wasonly to be confidentially intrusted to some of his intimateswho were ready to receive and admire it.While it was proceeding through the press, from conversationbetween the printers it became known toMr. Kidgell a clergyman, who, having bribed thecompositor to procure him a copy of the poem,proceeded with it to Lord Saville, exhibiting it asan invaluable weapon of offence against the troublesomepatriot. Lord Saville, as a member of theMock Monks Club, was doubtless already well acquaintedwith the poem ; but he saw the value of thiscopy, and having arranged the necessary evidence, roseand denounced it in the house of lords. Bishop Warburton,*whose name had been used in one of the notes,complained of this breach of his privilege; the lords addressedthe king to prosecute the printer, and Mr. Kid-gellfavoured the public with such an account of theThese notes wore written by Potter. — Almon,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 41book,* that every one was in an agony of curiosity to chap.see the poem itself; a curiosity which was not long un , ^^ ' • <= A. D. 1763.satisfied, since the book lay open upon the table of thehouse of lords. Mr. Kidgell's pamphlet contains aconsiderable quantity of such nonsense as the following: " Deliberately, and in a few words, I ask, forwhat one valuable consideration upon earth would aserious or a good man permit an hour's perusal of thisexecrable essay to his children ? I reason but fromwhat I feel within my own breast ; for could I bepersuaded that such a misfortune would probablyhappen to a child of mine, I should be the most afflictedparent in the worlds Thus, he reasons asthough this essay had been intended for publication ; •and when met by the fact of the number of copiesprinted, he has recourse to the pitiful evasion that, inthe eye of the law, printing is a publication. Therecan be little difference of opinion as to the fact thatMr. Kidgell and his ministerial coadjutors were thereal disseminators of this obscenity. Had theymerely brought forward the " Essay on Woman," andappealed to the morality of the country, to place nopublic confidence in a man who avowed such gentisCliiircliill, in his poem of Aiidwhilst he rails at blasphemyThe Author," alluding to this blasphemies."pamphlet, says of Kidgell, he f '• narrative of a scandalous,obscene, and exceedingly profane'• Most lusciously declaims 'gainst libel, entitled ' An Essay on \No-luscious themes, man,'"p. U.THE IIISTOIIY OF rAUTY.A. D. 1763.CHAP, ments, their conduct, whatever success it might haveobtained, would have been at least straightforward.But when the notorious profligate Lord Saville cameforward as the conservator of public morals, and whenit was pretended that religion and morality were aboutto still before thirteen copies of an indecent poem,every one saw the hypocrisy ; none doubted that it wasthe politician and not the poet that was aimed at ; andalthough all men detested Wilkes in his private character,many, even of the most virtuous, thought thathe was still to be defended. The Whigs saw that,under the cover of the odium of Wilkes's private vices,the Tories were advancing to attack the liberty of thesubject and the privileges of the commons.Although it had been solemnly decided by thecourt of common pleas that the parliamentary privilegefrom arrest extended to cases of libel, thecommons were called upon by the ministry to pass adeclaratory resolution against any such privilege, andafter a debate of two days such a resolution wascarried. Of the speeches delivered upon this occasion,Mr. Pitt's is the only one which has comedownto us. Pitt founded his opposition upon theground that such a surrender of the privilege of parliamentwould be highly dangerous to the freedomof parliament, and an infringement of the rights ofthe people. Whenever, he said, complaint was madeagainst a member, the house could give him up : theA.D. 1763.THE HISTORY OF PARTY'. 43privilege, although reposed in parliament for ages, had CHAP,never been abused. ^Miy then was it to be votedaway ? Why was every member who did not votewith the minister to be put under a perpetual terrorof imprisonment ? For Wilkes and his writings, heattempted no defence. He condemned the wholeseries of " North Britons," and called them illiberal,unmanly, and detestable. He repudiated all connexionwith their author, whom he called the blasphemerof his God and the libeller of his king : buthe declared that having condemned the libel, it wasneither consistent with the honour and safety of parliament,nor with the rights and interests of thepeople, to go one step further ; the rest belongedto the courts below. The 'house, however, readilyagreed to cover the ministerial error by a renunciationof their privileges. The resolution passed by amajority of two hundred and fifty-eight to one hundredand thirty three, and the lords concurred.*The Whigs appear, upon this occasion, to haveacted upon constitutional grounds. The objectof the privilege of parliament was to protect its• But not until after a long de The Duke of Newcastle refusedbate and a protest from the mino to sign the protest on account ofcity. Earl Temple led the opposites friend, Lord Warwick, whotion, but the only speech which had declared his opinion againstremains, is that of Lord Lyttclton, privilege. — Hilary of the M'mo-which was afterwards published city, p. 240.with his lordship's corrections.A.D. 1763.41- IHK msTOUV OV PAKTV.CHAP, members from the power of the crown, not toII.give impunity either to libellers or debtors ; thepower was given to meet extraordinary occasions,and should be dormant except when such occasionspresent themselves. The privileges of parliament discreetlyexercised, are invaluable safeguards of theconstitution, and should never be resigned. It isonly in their abuse that they can be found injuriousto the subject, and the abuse can readily be remediedwithout renouncing the right.During the debates upon the North Briton, manymembers who had been attacked in that journal,took the opportunity of retaliating upon the author.Among others, Mr. Samuel Martin, who had been secretaryto the treasury under the Duke of Newcastleand Lord Bute, speaking of the writer of the NorthBriton, said that whoever he was that, without a nameand in the dark, was mean enough to stab anotherman's reputation, was a coward and a malignant scoundrel.Wilkes, who did not want personal courage,despatched a note to Martin, avowing the authorship,and in the duel which ensued was severely wounded.This event caused some delay in the proceedings ofthe house, and, at the adjournment for the Christmasrecess, Wilkes was still unable to appear in his place.*« Adolphus's Rcigii of George the Third. History ol the Minority,5' cA. D. 1763.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 45Meanwhile his actions against those who had ar chap.rested him were in progress. The proceedingsagainst Lord Egrremont had abated by his death:those against Lord Halifax were delayed by variousexertions of privilege, and even by standing out incontempt of court. The action against Wood wastried, and Chief Justice Pratt now solemnly decidedthat the general warrant upon which he was arrestedwas invalid. A verdict was returned for 1000/. da-masses,and verdicts for various amounts were alsoreturned against the messengers who had executedthe warrant.But although AMlkes was thus successful, andalthough his popularity was so great, that the cityauthorities, assisted by two hundred constables, hadfound it impossible to execute the order for burningthe North Briton,* yet he had before him a prospectthat might daunt the boldest spirit. There was aprosecution against him in the King's Bench for theNorth Briton, and another for the Essay on Woman,and there sat Lord Mansfield from whom he couldexpect neither sympathy or mercy. He had arrayedagainst him, also, the personal resentment ofthe king, and the indignant votes of the lords. Thecommons were only waiting until he could obey their• See the testimony given be agree that the paper was not en-foretho louise. The witnesses timely burnt — /'^/r/. //;>/. , vol. xv.A. D. 1763.i-6 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, siiminons, to pronounce their fiat of expulsion. Had^V likes been animated by a genuine enthusiasm forthe cause he had espoused, he would have bravedthe storm, and perhaps found an equipoise to hissufferings in the popular sympathy. But as he wasmerely acting a part, he saw all the real terrors ofthe approaching prosecutions, and resolved to withdraw.A few days after the adjournment for therecess, being sufficiently recovered to travel, he setout for Paris.Upon the reassembling of the house in January,all further adjournment was refused, and some evidenceof the authorship of the libel having beengiven at the bar, Wilkes was unanimously expelledthe house. A subsequent motion to declare theillegality of general warrants occasioned great discussion; the resolution was narrowed by manyamendments, and at length met by an adjournment ;which was carried by a slender majority of twohundred and thirty-two against two hundred andeighteen.*• Many desertions were of mission, and other appointmentscourse necessary thus to swell the The opposition exclaimed veryminority, and, among others of vehemently against this abuse oftheir supporters, General Conway patronage, and Horace Walpolevoted against ministers upon this wrote his " Address to the Publicoccasion. For this he was shortly on the Dismissal of a Generalafterwards deprived of his com- Officer ;" but the practice hadA.D. 1764.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. '1'7The conduct of ministers throughout this business CHAP.II.was violent and hasty. It was neither dignified norconstitutional to prejudge by the votes of the twohouses of parliament a question which was in thecourse of judicature by one of the ordinary courts.Nor was it in accordance with an Englishman's ideasof justice, to condemn and punish a man upon unsworntestimony, without allowing time for obtainingthe opinion of a grand jury, or waiting until a processof outlawry had issued. The whole proceedings bearthe stamp of vindictiveness ; and the worthlessnessof the person injured is no palliation to the injustice.*been too constant with both fac tourney-general, coarsely told thetions to render this a legitimate house, that upon such a subjecttopic of party indignation. he should value their resolution• In the debate on the subject no more than that of a parcel ofof the legality of general war drunken porters.— See the parents,the ministerial orators were piles of the time, particularly theprompt to discover the incog letter upon libels and general war-sentenceof the house of com- rants, attributed to the Earl ofmons debating a point of law. Temple.Sir Fletcher Norton, the Tnt; history of beauty.A.D. 17G4.CHAPTER III.The Grenville project for taxing America — The Stamp act — Biographicalanecdotes of Charles Townshend — Debate on the Stampact — Dissolution of the Grenville and formation of the Rockinghamadministration — Biographical anecdotes of Edmund Burke — Repealof the Stamp act — Dissolution of the Rockingham administration.CHAP ^^ come now to the contemplation of a project^^" of the Grenville administration far more eventful inits consequences than the expulsion of Mr. Wilkes.Mr. Grenville's experience of the unpopularity ofthe cider excise had taught him the impossibility oflaying on new taxes in a time of peace, and he lookedaround for some device by which the public expendituremight be met. With the common error of aweak politician, he immediately turned his attentionto the distant Americans, as a people whosetaxation would be highly productive, and whose com-A.D. 17G4.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 49plaints would hardly be heard in St. Stephen's. In chap.III.the committee of ways and means, therefore, aseries of resolutions was proposed, imposing variousduties upon imports, and making otherarrangements which had always hitherto beensubmitted to by the colonists under the title ofregulations of trade.But among these resolutions lurked one of farmore comprehensive import. By the 14th, it wasresolved, *' That towards further defraying the saidexpenses, it may be proper to charge certain stampduties in the said colonies and plantations." A boldassumption of the British parliament to levy a taxupon British subjects who were not representedwithin its walls.As ordinary measures of finance, these resolutionsattracted little notice, and no opposition ; the resolutionto impose a stamp duty is said to have passedlate at night, at the rising of the house,* when probablyfew members heard, and still fewer understood,the question put. Having carried his resolutions,the minister deferred until next session the measurehe intended to found upon them ; and the king, inproroguing th(; parliament, congratulated the nationupon the wise regulations which had been establishedto augment the public revenues, to unite theLetter on I.ibols and W arr.infs.vol rn. !•:A. D. 17(34.60 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, interests of the most distant possessions of thecrown, and to secure their commerce with GreatBritain.* The parliament remained prorogued untilJanuary of the following year.Meanwhile the arrival of the parliamentary resolutionsin America, diffused consternation throughoutthe colonies. The restrictions which England hadbeen accustomed to impose for the aggrandizementof her own commerce were already found sufficientlyburdensome ; but this novel attempt was looked uponas the commencement of a system of taxation whichwas to be gradually extended to every article ofcommerce. t The American colonists were notsprung from a race accustomed to suffer in silence.The gloomy puritans who had sought in the depthof the everlasting forest, a refuge from the regal andepiscopal tyranny of Charles I., had bequeathed totheir descendants their fanaticism and their independence.The doctrines of freedom which hadbeen advancing slowly and silently in Europe, hadbeen the creed of generations in the new world.Upon receiving notice of England's intention to levyPari. Hist., vol. XV., col. 1434. taint a seat in parliament. —f It is said that the scheme of Gordon's American Revolution, vol.taxing the Americans was first i., p. 157. Hushee may have madesuggested by an American named such a suggestion, but the ideaHushee, who, having acquired a was much older ; the proposalfortune in his native colony, had was made to Sir Robert Walpole,come to England, and had ob who peremptorily rejected it.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 51a tax, they boldly inquired her right, and argued chap.it in a manner which showed they would submit onlyA.D. 1764.to conviction that such a right existed. The coloniesseverally met in their councils of domestic legislation,and forwarded protests and remonstrances tothe British parliament, and commissioned agents torepresent their sentiments. The populace was inthe highest state of excitement, and every hamlet inthe wilderness sent forth its indignant cry againstthe purposed tyranny. Those who appealed to thejustice of the mother country, urged that the claimwas as unfounded, as the manner in which it wasattempted to be enforced was tyrannical. Thecolonies, they said, taxed themselves : during thelate war they had made great exertions in a quarrel,which was national between England and France ;and had contracted debts which they were still boundto pay. As the monopolist of her commerce,England was already vastly benefited by her connexionwith America, and protection in time of warwas the least recompence which could be given forsuch advantage. No benefit could accrue to themfrom prolonged tranquillity, or successful war, butwhat would be a source of ultimate profit to England.America, therefore, weil to England nothing,but the obligation of having sent forth herfirst colonists — an obligation of much too equivocala nature to bear a close inspection. Such wcw theA. D. 17G4.50 THE insTOUY or tart v.CHAT, interests of the most distant possessions of thecrown, and to secure their commerce with GreatBritain.* The parliament remained prorogued untilJanuary of the following year.Meanwhile the arrival of the parliamentary resolutionsin America, diffused consternation throughoutthe colonies. The restrictions which England hadbeen accustomed to impose for the aggrandizementof her own commerce were already found sufficientlyburdensome ; but this novel attempt was looked uponas the commencement of a system of taxation whichwas to be gradually extended to every article ofcommerce The American colonists were notsprung from a race accustomed to suffer in silence.The gloomy puritans who had sought in the depthof the everlasting forest, a refuge from the regal andepiscopal tyranny of Charles I., had bequeathed totheir descendants their fanaticism and their independence.The doctrines of freedom which hadbeen advancing slowly and silently in Europe, hadbeen the creed of generations in the new world.Upon receiving notice of England's intention to levyPari. Hist,, vol. XV., col. 1434, gained a seat in parliament. —f It is said that the scheme of Gordon's American Revolution, vol.taxing the Americans was first i,, p. 157. Ilushe may have madesuggested by an American named such a suggestion, but the ideaHushee, who, having acquired a was much older ; the proposalfortune in his native colony, had was made to Sir Robert Walpole,come to England, and had ob who peremptorily rejected it.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 51a tax, they boldly inquired her right, and argued chap.it in a manner which showed they would submit only '-r . A.D. 17G4.to conviction that such a right existed. The coloniesseverally met in their councils of domestic legislation,and forwarded protests and remonstrances tothe British parliament, and commissioned agents torepresent their sentiments. The populace was inthe highest state of excitement, and every hamlet inthe wilderness sent forth its indignant cry againstthe purposed tyranny. Those who appealed to thejustice of the mother country, urged that the claimwas as unfounded, as the manner in which it wasattempted to be enforced was tyrannical. Thecolonies, they said, taxed themselves : during thelate war they had made great exertions in a quarrel,which was national between England and France ;and had contracted debts which they were still boundto pay. As the monopolist of her commerce,England was already vastly benefited by her connexionwith America, and protection in time of waitthe least recompence which could be given forsuch advantage. No benefit could accrue to themfrom prolonged tranquillity, or successful war, butwhat would be a source of ultimate profit to England.America, therefore, owed to England nothing,but the obligation of having sent forth herfirst colonists — an obligation of much too equivocala nature to bear a close inspection. Such were theE 'Z5^2THE III STORY OT PAllTV.A.D. 17ti3.CHAP, arguments used by tho Americans, and enforced byin- 1 . /then assents in England.Early in the session of 17^>''5, the threatened billwas introduced. But although the agents for thecolonies had appealed to the nation against the imposition,no firm array of Whigs appeared to resistthe contemplated tyranny. The great commonerwas confined to his chamber, and the Whigs in thishouse of commons were by no means numerous.But the subserviency of the house of commons isnot to be thus accounted for. A better solution ofthe silence of the Whigs is, that the contemplatedsystem of American taxation was highly popular inEngland. Englishmen, galled by the burdensomeimposts which they bore at home, looked upon theminister as the discoverer of an unknown mine ofwealth. *' In England," testifies an eyewitness,* " wecried out for new taxes on America ; whilst theycried out that they were nearly crushed with thosewhich the wear and their own grants had broughtupon them " From the same authority we receivea general account of the debates upon this bill.Recurring to the subject, some years afterwards,Mr. Burke said in the house of commons, "As tothe fact of a strenuous opposition to the Stamp act,I sat as a stranger in your gallery when the act was♦ Burke's Speech on American Taxation.A.D. 1765.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 53under consideration. Far from any thing inflame CHAP.. . ni.amatory, I never heard a more languid debate in this -house. No more than two or three gentlemen, as Iremember, spoke against the act, and that with greatreserve and remarkable temper. There was but onedivision in the whole progress of the bill, and theminority did not reach to more than thirty-nine orforty. In the house of lords I do not recollect thatthere was any debate or division at all : I am surethere was no protest. In fact, the affair passed withso ver', very little noise, that in town they scarcelyknew the nature of what you were doing"*The most eloquent among the supporters of thepresent ministry and their new measure was CharlesTownshend. He was the second son of the thirdViscount Townshend, and had entered parliament,in 171<7, as a Whig. He had already servedunder Pitt in the great struggle for a nationalmilitia, and, afterwards, when his brother waschosen by his leader to accomplish the work,Charles cordially assisted. He had, under thePitt administration, held several subordinate appointments; but, upon the dissolution of the Whigcabinet, the offer of the post of secretary at wargained him to the Earl of Bute. Under theGrenville administration he held the office of firstr^urke's Speech on Amfricari Taxation.541 THE niSTOIlY Olm PARTY.CHAi'. lord ot'trado and the plantations, a situation whichIII.identified him with the question before the house.*A. D. 1765.The versatility of Townshend's political conducthad deservedly obtained for him the appellation ofthe weathercock. The extent of his powers mustbe judged from a quotation from that specimen of eloquencein which Burke has embalmed his memory,and from which every other sketch has been borrowed.In his recapitulation of the policy of England towardsAmerica, and of the characters of the statesmen bywhom that policy had been directed, the orator, closinghis eulogium upon Lord Chatham, says, *' Then, sir,even before this splendid orb was entirely set, andwhile the western horizon was in a blaze with hisdescending glory, on the opposite quarter of theheavens arose another luminary, and for his hour becamelord of the ascendant.*' This light too is passed and set for ever ; youunderstand, to be sure, that I am speaking of CharlesTownshend, whom I cannot even now remember withoutsome degree of sensibility. In truth, sir, he wasthe delight and ornament of this house, and the charmof every private society which he honoured with hispresence. Perhaps there never arose in this country,nor in any country, a man of more pointed and finishedwit ; and, where his passions were not concerned, of a• (collins's Peerage, by Sir E. Bridges.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 55more refined, exquisite, and penetrating judgment. If chap.he had not so Peat a stock as some have had who —° A. D. 1765.flourished formerly, of knowledge long treasured up,he knew better, by far, than any man I ever was acquaintedwith, how to bring together, within a shorttime, all that was necessary to establish, illustrate,and to decorate that side of the question he supported.He stated his matter skilfully and powerfully ; heparticularly excelled in a most luminous explanationand display of his subject ; his style of argument wasneither trite and vulgar nor subtle and abstruse ; hehit the house just between wind and water ; and, notbeing troubled with too anxious a zeal for any matterin question, he was never more tedious or moreearnest than the preconceived opinions and presenttemper of his hearers required, to whom he wasalways in perfect unison. He conformed exactly tothe temper of the house ; and he seemed to guidebecause he was always sure to follow it." CharlesTownshend was apparently what Lord Carteret hadbeen, a man of great genius without political principle,a beautiful vessel without ballast, driven asidefrom her appointed course by every breath that shookher sails. The motives which influenced Carteretand Townshend were different ; the former soughtpower and emolument, the latter was ruled by a passionfor preserving, under all changes, and in everyconjuncture, the admiration and support oftheuia-6(]Tllli IIISTOKV or i'.VKTVCHAP, majority in the house of commons. They differed intheir ruling desires ; but the cause that renderedA.D. I7'j3. ' . ,^ .their desires their rule of conduct was in eachthe same.Upon the present occasion Townshend supportedMr. Grenville ; conceding a piece of declamationwhich he probably did not expect to hear answered,with the question, '* And these Americans, childrenplanted by our care, nourished by our indulgence,protected by our arms until they are grown to a gooddegree of strength and opulence, will they grudge tocontribute their mite to relieve us from the heavyload of national expense which we He under ?"The sole opposition to the bill at this stage was areply of Colonel Barre, which would seem to have producedrather more effect both within and without thehouse, than the description of the debate given by Mr.Burke would appear to imply. It probably, however,was read with more attention than it was heard.Those who are in the habit of listening to the debatesin the house of commons know that the mosteloquent harangue would sound tame and languidamid the marked inattention and continual conversationof an unwilling audience.Colonel Barre, after arguing the question, appliedhimself particularly to the concluding words of CharlesTown send's speech . * ' Thet/, planted hy your care f "he said. '* No, your oppressions planted them inTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 57America. They fled from your tyranny to a then CHAP,uncultivated and inhospitable country, where they •— -—^ -^ •' A. D. 1763.exposed themselves to almost all the hardships towhich human nature is liable ; and, among others, tothe cruelties of a savage foe, the most subtle, and Iwill take upon me to say, the most formidable of anypeople upon God's earth ; and yet, actuated by principlesof true English liberty, they met all hardshipswith pleasure, compared with those they suffered intheir own country from the hands of those that shouldhave been their friends. They, nourished by yourindulgence ? They grew by your neglect of them.As soon as you began to care about them, that care wasexercised in sending persons to rule them, who were,perhaps, the deputies of deputies to some members ofthis house — sent to spy out their liberties, to misrepresenttheir actions, to prey upon them — men, whosebehaviour, on many occasions, has caused the bloodof these sons of Liberty to recoil within them — menpromoted to the highest seats of justice ; some ofwhom, to my knowledge, were glad, by going to aforeign country, to escape being brought to the bar ofa court of justice in their own. They protected hjfyour finns ? They have nobly taken up amis inyour defence, have exerted a valour amidst theirconstant and laborious industry, for the defence of acountry whose frontier was drenched in 1)1()0(1, whileits interior parts yiel(l«'(l all it.-, little savings to yourTHE lIlSTOIiy OF Party.CHAP, cnioliiiiient ; and, believe me — remember I this day111.- told you so — that same spirit of freedom whichA. D. 1705.actuated that people at first, will accompany them stillprudence forbids me to say more. God knows Ido not at this time speak from motives of party heat ;what I deliver are the genuine sentiments of my heart.However superior to me in general knowledge andexperience the respectable body of this house maybe,yet I claim to know more of America than mostof you, having seen and been conversant with thatcountry. The people, I believe, are as truly loyalas any subjects the king has ; but a people jealous oftheir liberties, and who will vindicate them if everthey should be violated"*Such is the most perfect version of a speech whichis known only from the reports transmitted by theAmerican agents to their constituents. Upon thesecond reading of the bill petitions were offered againstit from the London merchants, as well as fi-om thecolonies. The minister, however, urged the standingorder of the house, that no petition should beGordon's History of the Ames curtailed. The circumstance ofrican Revolution, vol. i., p. 160. our deriving our knowledge of thisThe account given of this debate debate from the Americans, isin the Parliamentary History is strongly illustrative of the factmeager and incorrect. The speech that the decision was an object ofof Charles Townshend is there intense interest in America, butattributed to Mr. Grenville, and of little or none in London,that of Colonel Barre considerablyA. D. 1765.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 59received against a money bill, and they were not CHAP,received. General Conway and Alderman Beckford,two men who, in the present disorganized state of theWhig party, were conspicuous as occasional leaders,*now, for the first time, denied the power of parliamentto tax the colonies. The minister broadly and boldlyasserted the right, and a large majority of the housesupported him. The bill then passed. Thus wasAmerica lost to England.Mr. Grenville and his colleagues held their officesby the tenure of an entire obedience to the courtiers.Hitherto the two sections of the party, the king'sfriends at court and the king's friends in the cabinethad agreed ; but disputes now occurred upon the distributionof the patronage, of which the courtiers wereinclined to claim an unreasonable share, and somedifferences of opinion arose as to the terms of theRegency bill, which the king's recent illness had renderednecessary. Stormy discussions had also takenPlace in the cabinet ; the ministers had sometimesbeen intemperate in their remonstrances, and the• General Conway had sup adverse vote he declared to a importedministers upon every canister that he was not, nor in-sion previously to the vote upon tended to he engaged in opposition,general warrants. He had voted — Ilhtoryoftltc Mimritij. — Seethefor the cider excise, and had j)rocccdiiigs in the commons uponsrvcnil times stood up to speak this officer's dismission. — Pari..-igaitisl Wilkes, and even after \\\s Hist., vol. xvi., col. 66.A.D. 1765.()0 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Duke of Bedford had, upon one occasion, offered a111.a gross personal insult to his sovereign.It was resolved, therefore, that Mr. Grenvilleshould be dismissed ; and the Earl of Bute applied tothe Duke of Cumberland for assistance to form agovernment which might enjoy some public confidence.The duke, who had been throughout hislife connected with the Whig party, applied to LordTemple, but without success ; and afterwards to Mr.Pitt, The great commoner answered that he had noobjection to go to St. James's if he could carry the constitutionwith him ; but, upon descending to details,it was found impossible to accommodate his demandswith the continuance of the court influence. Theexisting ministry was then applied to, but Grenvilleand his coadjutors now required complete emancipationfrom the sway of the Earl of Bute, and power toconduct the government. These demands weredeemed inadmissible : recourse was again had to theDuke of Cumberland, who now opened a negotiationwith the Duke of Newcastle. This ancient His:leader, although his shadow now fell upon his grave,was still greedy of power : he readily entertained theproposition, and exerted his utmost influence to obviatedifficulties, and to reconcile differences. Hewas at long-th successful : the event was the formationof the Rockingham administration ; constructed,not from that portion of the now disunited WhigA. D. 1763.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 6lparty which stood highest in principle and popularity, chap.but containing, nevertheless, elements of better go -government, and giving promise of the prevention ofthe civil war which was now upon the point of burstingforth.In this cabinet the Marquis of Rockingham wasfirst lord of the treasury. General Conway was secretaryof state and leader of the house of commons,*having the Duke of Grafton as his colleague in thesecretaryship. The Duke of Newcastle was lordprivy seal.Neither Pitt nor the Earl of Temple approved ofthe new cabinet ; they thought that the PelhamWhigs had seized upon the first occasion to recoveroffice, without stipulating for a change of measuresor destroying the power of the favourite ; they knewthem to be the Pelham Whigs of George Ii'sreign ; and, although their recent opposition hadaroused among them the fire of their party principle,Pitt doubted whether it would not be extinguished atthe door of the cabinet.Upon reviewing their strength the Newcastlephalanx found that, during the few years they hadbeen in opposition, great ravages lind boon made intheir ranks. In subordinates they were especiallydeficient ; of these, some had risen to the rank of• History of the Minority. Life ofthr Karl of ( hathin.111.A.D. 17G5.6'2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, loaders ; but the far greater number were to be seenin the camp of the enemy. Searching for adherentswho should compensate these losses, the heads of thisadministration introduced upon the stage of publiclife one of the most extraordinary of those men who were now about to rise, and extinguish,by their brilliancy, the waning luminariesof this generation. The recommendation of severalfriends had made known to the Marquis of Rockinghamthe name of Edmund Burke ; he was appointedprivate secretary to that nobleman.Edmund Burke, born on the 1st of January, 1730,was a younger son of an eminent Dublin attorney.A delicate and apparently consumptive constitutiondebarred him, when in childhood, from the robustsports of his brothers, and condemned him to solitudeand thought.* In his twelfth year he was sent to aschool at Baltimore, which was established by thequakers, and became famous for the number of illustriousmen whom it sent forth. Here he evincedgreat readiness and perseverance ; he mastered therudiments of the classics with a facility which lefthim leisure for other and, to his boyish taste, moreThis was not forgotten in plaise which followed his brother'safter years. " I cannot think," eloquence, " how lie has contrivedsoliloquized Richard Burke, as he to monopolize all the talent ofsat in the house of commons and the family ; — but he was always atlistened to the enthusiastic ap work when we were at play."III.A. D. 1765.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. (jScongenial studies. History and poetry were not chap.avoided, but the old romances, Palmer of England, -Don Belgians of Greece, and others, such as these,were temptations which could at any time draw himfrom his study or his sport.* From Baltimore he, in1744, was removed to Trinity College, Dublin,where he was looked upon as a young man of superior,but unpretending talents, more anxious toacquire than to display knowledge. His assiduityand regularity were rewarded with a scholarship.While at the university, Burke declared his politicalsentiments by some letters in which he ridiculedDr. Lucas, in his day so eminent as an Irish patriot,and Brooke, the author of Gustavus Vasa, who wasas an author equally in favour with the patriot party,and whom Burke, in allusion to the reported rapidityof his composition, satirized as Diabetes. Thusit appears, that from his youth, Burke attached himselfto Newcastle's section of moderate or aristocraticWhigs. These performances attracted no attention,and are only known from the reports of his friends.Edmund was intended by his father for the bar,and having graduated at Trinity, he left Dublin forLondon, where he became a member of the MiddleTemple.• Here is the germ of that siicli gdigcDusiicss to the ilo-imaginative faculty which gave (|ucncc of the man.A. D. 17G5.64 THE History OF PARTY.CHAP. Hitherto Edmund Burke had obtained only theIII. . , . .reputation of a respectable mediocrity, and had beenoutstripped, both at school and college, by manyremembered examples of precocious talent. Hiscomparative obscurity at college may be readilyaccounted for. Burke, although far from being blindto the beauties of the classic writers of Greece andRome, and although well appreciating the pleasureand the profit to be derived from their learning, theirsentiment, and their language, was rather careful toenjoy their beauties and imbibe their spirit, than tospend his energies in settling a disputed passage, orencumber his memory with their various readings.He extended his studies beyond the classics, descendedinto modern history, expatiated in the fieldsof science, wandered in the regions of romance,delivered criticisms upon Milton, and even himselfperpetrated some poetry. No mortal genius could,in the short time of a college course of education,become proficient in all these studies, and the universitiesoffer no rewards for multifarious mediocrity.In London, Burke continued his reading, andfound congenial minds. His mornings were devotedto arduous study, his evenings were spent in conversation.Several years were thus passed, duringwhich the student laid up stores of general, but verylittle legal knowledge. Why he neglected his appointedprofession we are not told : it was from noTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.disgust for its studies, for he afterwards spoke CHAP,of it as one of the first and noblest of humanA.D. 17G5.sciences ; *' a science which does more to quickenand invigorate the understanding, than all the otherkinds of learning put together"* May he not havedoubted his success, or felt impatient of the intervalwhich must elapse before he could expect remunerationfor his labour? Qualified as Burke undoubtedlywas to become the first lawyer of the age,such doubts, nevertheless, where not unreasonable. Hesaw around him many whom he had seen successfuland honoured at the university, unkno\^Tl and unemployedin the courts of law ; he saw many of these,disgusted at their ill success, turn again to literature.Their success excited his emulation, and literature,at first divided, then absorbed his attention.During this period, he formed several designs forhis future course ; at one time, he sought the professorshipof logic, at Glasgow ; at another, he contemplatedproceeding to America. In his first pursuit,he was unsuccessful ; the second, was forbiddenby his father. His preparation, however, for a contestfor the logic chair, at Glasgow, gave at thetime a direction to his studies, and probably ]producedhis " hupiiry into the Origin of our Ideas ofthe Sublime and Beautiful j" the magnificent result• S|)C( rl) (HI Aini'iic'iii 'l":i\;itioii.vol,. IN. F06 THE HISTORY of party.CHAP of the continued and laborious revisions of a juvenileHI.- essay.A.D. ITU.'i. * • 1 1 1 p 1 • " ITBurke now tried the strength oi his wing. Hebecame a contributor to many of the periodicals ofthe day ; the superiority of his mind was admittedwithin his own society of templar, and his reputationbecame extended beyond that circle. Of the drama,he was a devoted admirer, and he soon becameconspicuous at the Grecian coffee-house, the commonresort of lawyers, authors, and actors. Herehe made the acquaintance of Mr. Murphy, who had,at this time, attempted the stage as a profession, andwas immediately known to all the dramatic authors,actors, and critics. At Garrick's table he met thefirst men of the age : at Macklin's debating societyhe made the first essay of his powers of oratory. Inthe acquaintance of Miss Washington he had a stillmore potential introduction. This lady, whose beautyand vivacity rendered her the Aspasia of the day,was honoured with the applause of poets and thehomage of nobility. Her house was the resort of allto whom rank or talent gave the privilege of access ;and as a climax to her honours she had been electedthe only female member of the Beef-steak Club. HereBurke was always welcome; and it has been hintedthat his intimacy with his fair hostess was morestrict than Plato would have advised. At her househe greatly extended his acquaintance, and is said toA. D. 1765.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 67have been introduced and recommended by her to chap.the Duke of Newcastle, who was then prime mi ,sister. The duke, no doubt in accordance with hischaracter, promised much, and had the next minuteforgotten that he existed.In 1756, Burke published his "Vindication of NaturalSociety ;" an ironical imitation of Bolingbroke'sstyle and argument, which appearing while the worldwas yet troubled by the appearance of the viscount'sphilosophical works occasioned some sensation. Thistract was published anonymously, as the nature ofthe composition required, and could give no immediatereputation to its author.In a few months the philosophical " Inquiry intoour Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful" followed, andat once established Edmund Burke's fame. He wasnow admitted as an equal in the circle where themost celebrated authors of the day shone. But hedid not long enjoy his celebrity. A fit of illness,induced by study, or by his constitutional delicacy,compelled him to resort to Bath, from the waters ofwhich city he had before found benefit. Here hemet with his countryman and acquaintance. Dr.Nugent, who enjoyed considerable reputation andpractice as a physician, and who invited Burke totake up his residence at his house. Dr. Nugent hada daughter ; and the result of the daily intercoursebetween the young people was a mutual attachmentA. D. 17Gj-08 TIIK IIISTOHY OF rAUTY.CHAP, and a speedy marriat'i'e. This connexion was highlyfortunate. Amid the turmoil of political contention,disgusted by neglect, fretful from defeat, or jaded bystudy, how often does the man of genius require somepillow upon which his ambition and his hopes maysleep ; some oasis in the waste, girded by a circlewhich they cannot pass ! Burke had this refuge inhis home. There he ever found one who wouldcheer him in his despondency, and exult with him inhis fortune ; one whose mind was capable of communionwith his own, whose love was idolatry, andwhose welcome was always unclouded. Burke wasaccustomed to say, that ** every care vanished themoment he entered under his own roof"*Dr. Nugent accompanied his daughter to London,and they resided together in Simple-street ; anarrangement very advantageous to Burke, whoseresources were but a slender allowance from hisfather, in addition to the emolument he derived fromA character of Mrs. Burke it is a beauty not arising fromwritten by her husband is preserved features, from complexion, orinPrior's Life of Burke, vol. i., p. from shape. She has all three in62,with the title or"'rheldeaof a a higher degree ; but it is not byPerfect Wife." It vias presented these she touches an heart; it isby the husband on an anniversary that sweetness of temper,say of his marriage ; and is, of benevolence, innocence, and sen-course,a specimen of brilliant siblity, which a face can express,eulogy. Take the first descriptive that forms her beauty."]passage : — "She is handsome l)iitA. D. 17G5.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 69his connexion with the periodicals, and his editor CHAP.III.ship of Dudley's Annual Register.Burke's powers of abstract philosophical speculationwere made known by his first avowed production; his conversational ability was tested by thatgreat dictator over tea-tables, Johnson. They metat Garrick's, and those who sat around were astonished; first, at the boldness of the man who dared todispute with Johnson, but still more to see the greatlexicographer submit to contradiction. But a greaterthan Johnson was there. The doctor felt the presenceof a superior genius, and found himself excelledin his own peculiar excellence. Johnson wastoo proud and too able, to feel jealous : he every wherecelebrated the powers of the young Irishman, andcontinued ever after to regard him with the highestadmiration. " Don't let Burke up," was Johnson'sinjunction when he was ill. *' That fellow calls forth allmy powers; if I were to see him now it would kill me."Johnson's remark is well known, that if you metBurke for the first time in the street where you werestopped by a drove of oxen, and you and he steppedaside for shelter, he'd talk to you in such a mannerthat when you parted, you would say, ** This is anextraordinary man :" it was once remarkably verified.After ]turk(! Iliad attained the zenith of his fame, hewas traveling through Lichfield ac('omj)aiiied by afriend ; the place; was then interesting to Burke asA. D. 1705.'0 THE HISTORY OF Party .CHAP, the birthplace of Johnson, and the two travellersIII.strolled towards the cathedral. One of the canonsseeing that they were strangers, politely offered topoint out the objects most worthy of curiosity. Aconversation ensued, but in a few moments the clergyman'spride of superior local information was completelysubdued by the copious and minute knowledgedisplayed by one of the strangers. Whatevertopic the object before them suggested, whether thetheme was architecture or antiquities, some obscurepassage in ecclesiastical history, or some question inthe life of an early saint, the stranger touched it aswith a sunbeam ; his information appeared universal; his mind clear intellect without one particleof ignorance. A few minutes after their separation,the canon was met hurrying through thestreet. "^ I have had," he said, "quite an adventure ;I have been conversing, for this half-hour past, witha man of the most extraordinary powers of mind andextent of information which it has ever been my fortuneto meet with, and I am now going to the inn,to ascertain, if possible, who this stranger is."In I7GI, Burke, through the interest of LordCharlemont, obtained the office of private secretaryto Mr. William Gerard Hamilton, better known bythe name of Single-speech Hamilton, who was thenabout to set out for Ireland in the capacity of publicsecretary. This gentleman, who early in life, dea.D. 17G5.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 71served Lincoln's-inn for the house of commons, had chap.distinguished himself by one brilliant speech, whichobtained for him a reputation that led to his appointmentin 1756, as a lord of trade under LordHalifax. Henceforward he was dumb in the houseof commons, and the genuineness of his singularcoruscation began to be doubted. Some of thosewho ridiculed his silence affirmed that Burke hadwritten his celebrated harangue : but Hamilton'slaurel-leaf had been plucked before his connexionwith Burke had commenced, and notwithstandingthe sneers of his contemporaries, it was probablyhis own. Hamilton was a fop in literature; — one whowould not write a note to his most intimate friendwithout considerable study and careful revision.The speech that had gained him such great applausehad doubtless cost him infinite labour towrite, to learn, and to practise. Such efforts cannotbe frequently made ; and, if made, cannot always besuccessful. Hamilton had obtained what he soughta place. Such a fastidious writer could not hopeto be a good extemporaneous speaker ; and as hisincapacity to reply must soon become known, heacted wisely in eschewing oratory altogether.Under this gentleman Burke returned to Ireland,and obtained, through his influence, a pension of 300/.a year. This connexion was not of long continuance ;a rupture took place, which Burke, writing to Mr.Au. 17G5.72 Till: IIISTOUY OF Parity.CHAP. Flood, thus describes : ** It is very true that there is111. •'an eternal rupture between me and Hamilton. Theoccasion of our difference was not any act whatsoeveron my part ; it was entirely on his ; by a voluntary,but most insolent and intolerable demand, amountingto no less than a claim of servitude during the wholecourse of my life, without leaving me at any time apower, either of getting forward with honour or retiringwith tranquillity. This was really and truly thesubstance of his demand upon me ; to which I neednot tell you I refused, with some degree of indignation,to submit. On this we ceased to see each otheror to correspond, a good while before you left London.He then commenced, through the interventionof others, a negotiation with me, in which heshowed as much of meanness in his proposals as hehad done of arrogance in his demands ; but as allthese proposals were vitiated by the taint of that servitudewith which they were all mixed, his negotiationcame to nothing"*Burke now offered to resign the pension he enjoyed,since he had obtained it through Hamilton'sinfluence, and that gentleman thought proper toaccept his offer : it was assigned to Mr. Hamilton'sattorney.This paltry conduct of the Irish secretary was pro-prior'sLife ot" Burke, vol. i., p. 1 1.3.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 73bably prompted less by avarice than by revenge. He CHAP,felt the stronger genius of his subordinate, and111- • -1 1 . ^■^- ^765.adopted this petty persecution as a tribute to hiswounded vanity.Burke was now known among the political leaders,and his services in Ireland were appreciated. Whilepursuing a course of diligent preparation — of dailystudy of the constitution of the government and theresources of the kingdom, and nightly attendance inthe gallery of the house of commons — he was summonedto undertake the post of private secretary tothe new premier. A seat in parliament was nowprovided for him. By an agreement with LordVarney, he was returned for Andover, in Buckinghamshire,his lordship being, as an equivalent, gazetteda privy councillor.In ordinary cases, to a political aspirant, a seat inthe house of commons is but the starting-point of hiscareer : to Burke it was a high and long-ambitionvantage-ground, the acquisition of continued andlaborious toil. He had gained the top of the Alp,and although many obstacles still intervened, hecould look down upon the prospect before him asthe Italy of his hopes.The new senator did not nnnain silent in thehouse ; the familiar acquaintance(; with forms so in-(lispcnsal)h' in a dcbatcn- lead been acquired by himwliilc sifting a stranger in the gallery. Henceforwardhi deed belong to history.A. D. ITtJa.71. THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The policy pursued by the Rockingham ministrywas of a temporizing character, calculated to awakenno enthusiasm either in their friends or their enemies,but rather to lessen the activity of both. As honourableand independent men they scorned the trammelsof the courtiers ; they would not hear of the partywhich called its members the king's friends ; butmade the attempt to break their corps, to discountenancetheir doctrines, and to revive connexions of adifferent kind ; to restore the principles and policy ofthe Whigs, and to reanimate the cause of liberty byministerial countenance.* But there was no energyin the body to effect the intention ; the cabinet wasformed from the rear-guard of the Whigs ; men whowere timorous and suspicious of their own principles,held them bound in the chains of aristocratic expediencyand personal interest, and dared not to loosethem because they knew not their power or theirultimate tendency.This indecision was strikingly manifest upon theAmerican question. They brought forward a billdeclaratory of the right of Great Britain to makelaws bindings the British colonies in North Americain all cases whatsoever, yet, at the same time, proposedto repeal the Stamp act. Thus abandoningthe solid advantage, but clinging to the obnoxiousprinciple — shrinking, themselves, from the com-• Burke's Thoughts on the present Discontents.A.D. 1763.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 75mission of injustice, but providing a ready excuse for chap.any less scrupulous successors.In the debates upon this subject, which commencedon the first day of the session, and formedthe prominent feature throughout, Pitt reappeared.When the Stamp act passed he had been ill in bed ;he now stood forward to vindicate the natural rightsof his fellow men, declaring that when the resolutionto tax America was taken, so great was the agitationof his mind, that if he could have endured to be carriedin his bed he would have solicited some kindhand to have laid him down on the floor of the house,to have borne his testimony against it.* Thiskingdom, he said, has no right to lay a tax upon thecolonies : the commons of America have ever beenin possession of this their constitutional right of givingand granting their own money. They wouldhave been slaves if they had not enjoyed it. Hedrew a distinction between the riffht of legislationand the right of taxation, and instanced the Britishhouse of peers as an estate possessed of the one withoutthe othcr.t " I rejoice," he said, "that Americahas resisted — three millions of people so dead to allPari. History, vol. xvi., col. have rights of taxation as well as98. yourselves : rights which they willf "If taxation be a part of claim, which they will exercise,simple legislation, the crown, the whenever the principle can bepeers, arc equally legislative supported by power." — I'arl.Hut.,power with flic commons, and vol. xvi., col. 100.A. D. 1765.Ji) THE IIISTOKY Ol' rally.CHAP, the feelings of liberty as voluntarily to submit to beslaves would have been fit instruments to make slavesof the rest. Upon the whole," he concluded, *willbeg leave to tell the house what is really my opinion.It is, that the Stamp act be repealed, absolutely,totally, and immediately. That the reason for therepeal be assigned, because it was founded on anerroneous principle. At the same time let the sovereignauthority of this country over the colonies beasserted in as strong terms as can be devised, and bemade to extend to every point of legislation whatsoever.That we may bind their trade, confine theirmanufactures, and exercise every power whatsoever,except that of taking their money out of theirpockets without their consent.Thus, broadly and unhesitatingly, was Mr. Pitt'sopinion upon this grand constitutional question delivered.In supporting the Repeal bill he was assistedby the maiden eloquence of Burke, who thus madehis first essay in the cause of liberty, in defence ofmen with arms in their hands, whom Whigs calledsons of liberty, whom Tories execrated as rebels.Whether the eloquence of the new member burstforth in all the gorgeousness of its meridian display,or whether its perfection was the result of time, wecannot now determine.* Its appearance was, at least,He was, certainly, for some house of commons, by no meanstime after his appearance in the so highly estimated as CharlesA. D. 1763.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 77sufficient to fix the attention of the house, and called CHAP,forth a smile of encouragement from William Pitt.In the words of Johnson, his two speeches on therepeal of the Stamp act filled the town with wonder.The Tories, led on by George Grenville, vehementlyopposed the Repeal bill, asserting the absolute vassalageof the colonies, and asking contemptuously whenthey had been emancipated ? They were answeredby the question, Alien had they been enslaved?and the question thus debated, was a real strugglebetween Whig and Tory principles. " It was atime," said Burke, afterwards recurring to thisstruggle, " for a man to act in. We had powerfulenemies, but we had faithful and determined friends,and a glorious cause. We had a great battle to fight,but we had the means of fighting. Wc did fightthat day, and conquer"* The Repeal bill passed,but so also did the Declaratory act. Of the debatesin the commons upon the latter we have no record ;it was carried because Pitt and his friends had nowthe ministerial Whigs as well as the Tories againstthem. Burke's voice had been first heard in thehouse calling for the repeal of an unjust impost ; maywe not fear that, with the usual indecision of the sectTownshend. Lord Charleston, " Townshend was the orator, thewriting to a friend, and dcs(Til)inj; rest were speakers." — Thackeray sa debate ti wliicli Towiiblieiid and lac of Chatham.Biirkc had taken part, says, * Speech on American Taxation.A. D.17G5.78 THL History OF PARTY.CHAP, to which he had alHod himself, it was now heardurtriiisi" the enunciation of a false and tyrannicaldomina ?In the lords this Declaratory bill received its condemnationfrom the lips of that great Whig lawyerwho, as Chief Justice Pratt, had habituated the lawcourts to the voice of constitutional liberty, and whonow, raised to the house of lords by the title of LordCamden, carried the same principles and the samelanguage into that assembly. " My position," hesaid, *' is this — I repeat it — I will maintain it to mylast hour — taxation and representation are inseparable; — this position is founded on the laws of nature ;it is more, it is in itself an eternal law of nature ; forwhatever is a man's own is absolutely his own ; noman hath a right to take it from him without his consenteither expressed by himself or his representative ;whoever attempts to do this attempts an injury ;whoever does it commits a robbery ; he throws downand destroys the distinction between liberty andslavery."These debates were also remarkable for the proofthey afforded of disunion between Mr. Pitt andEarl Temple. Earl Temple opposed the Repeal billin the lords, and his name is attached to all the Toryprotests entered upon this subject.The bills became law, and the colonists, caringPurl. History, vol. xvi., col. 180.III.A. D. 1765.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 79little for the parliamentary declaration, and feeling CHAPonly the cessation of the evil, were pacified.This mighty question being thus settled, the ministersproposed to give some further proofs of theirparty faith. Resolutions, condemnatory of generalwarrants and the seizure of private papers, were proposedand adopted ; and a bill founded upon thempassed the commons, but failed in the lords. Theyrepealed the cider tax, an impost which was almostas odious in the cider counties as the Stamp act inthe colonies ; and they were certainly the first administrationwhich encouraged public meetings, anddiscountenanced the practice of removing raihtaryofficers for their votes in parliament.*The first of these measures entailed upon thema visit fi'om Mr. Wilkes, who had been employinghimself, during his outlawry, in making a tour ofItaly, preparing an edition of Churchill's poems, anddesigning a history of England ; but had never beenwithout good intelligence of what was going on athome. Upon the formation of the Rockingham ministryhe made another application for the embassyto Constantinople, which was again vacant. In aletter to his friend, Mr. Cotes, he expresses his expectationthat the king might be forced into a consSee Biirke's short tract, calkd " A short Account of u late shortAdministration."A. D. 17(53.80 TIIK HISTORY OF Party.CHAP. sent. In 17()1- ho wrote to the same person, "Ifgovernment means peace or friendship with me, Ithen breathe no longer hostility ; and, between ourselves,if they would send me to Constantinople asambassador, that is all I should wish"* His applicationwas either refused or evaded, and the patriotquickly altered his style. He now began to threaten,"I believe the Scot is the breath of this ministry'snostrils. It depends, however, on them whetherMr. Wilkes is their friend or their enemy. If hestarts as the latter he will lash them with scorpionrods, and they are already prepared : I wish, however,we may be friendship Wilkes's threats were aslittle regarded as his solicitations ; and, pressed byhis poverty and his resentment, he boldly returnedto London. The ministry were, as he anticipated,alarmed at his presence, and the patriot proportionedhis demands to their fears. These demands wererejected ; for no ministry could dare to mention thename of Wilkes to George III., except as an objectfor prosecution ; but Burke was despatched to negotiatewith him, and to offer an eleemosynary pensionfrom the ministers, to be paid from their privatepurses, in proportions regulated according to theemoluments of their offices, and to cease upon their• Almon's Life and Correspondence of Wilkes, vol. i., p. G2, andvol. ii.,p. 53.t Ibid., vol. ii.,j). 214.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 81resignation. The offer was accepted, and Wilkes CHAP,returned to Paris.A. D. 1765.On the 6th of June parliament was prorogued.On the 2d of Aug-must the Gazette informed thenation that the Rocking-ham administration was dissolved.VOL. III. r.8^2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER IV.State of the Whig and Tory parties — The Chatham administration —Unpopularity and imbecility of Lord Chatham — Charles Townshend'sproject to tax America — Death of Townshend. — End of theChatham administration.CHAP. The cause of the early overthrow to the Rocksking-ham administration was a want of energy andto 1767. decision : they were too much Whigs to be welcometo the court, too little, to be objects of interest tothe people. The king who had received them unwillingly,parted with them with pleasure : the newswas heard with indifference.To Mr. Pitt was intrusted the formation of thenew cabinet, a task which the state of parties renderedone of no ordinary difficulty. The Torieswere now clustered thickly around the throne, theyoccupied all the offices of the household, and pos-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 83sessed every avenue of the court, and their mem chap.hers were daily augmented by the accession of all 'those who thought the favour of the sovereign more to 1767.valuable than the patronage of the minister. A fewyears had created a great change in the appearanceof this party. Six years ago it consisted chiefly ofcountry gentlemen who advocated in parliament theprinciples upon which they governed their tenantryin the country, denounced the corruption of theWhigs, and thought slightingly of the title of the houseof Hanover. Since then a Tory king of that househad ascended the throne : the strength of the partyhad become courtiers, favourites, king's friends.These were, however, consentient ; but the Whigswere, as they generally have been, split into divisions.Of these, Pitt, supported by Lord Camdenand a few others, led that which was favoured with thepopular suffrages. These men were the pioneers ofWhiggism ; they strode boldly forward, guided onlyby the compass of political principle, satisfied thatwhile they pursued this monitor they could not errandcareless of the impediments which sometimesarose in their path. Behind these, but at a considerabledistance, came the Rockingham phalanx ;strong in family connexions, aristocratic influence,and wealth. This body was formed of men who,from accident or education, had assumed the sameguide as their ouwanl Iricuds, but wIkj had never af-G 284 The HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, gained a ]philosophical conviction of its uncrrinf^ truth,IVThey followed it so long as the course it pointed outA. D. 17Goto 1707. appeared otherwise expedient, but always slowly andtimorously : always cautiously exploring, lest itstrack should lead them across some favourite prejudice,or bring them to tread upon some personalinterest. Should such impediments cross their path,a long and dubious halt invariably succeeded: thedeserters immediately became numerous, and nosooner had the most resolute passed the disputedspot, than they saw those whom they had left behindgo over to the enemy. These deserters were alwaysthe most active in subsequent attacks. Not unfrequentlythey made to themselves a new and very differentcompass ; and while remaining stationary withthe Tories, declared that they were the true andorig-final Whigs.Such was the state of the party which Pitt againundertook to unite in the service of their country.Notwithstanding their late estrangement, his firstoverture was made to Lord Temple, whom he proposedto place at the head of the treasury. An interviewtook place, and Pitt submitted his list ofappointments : but Earl Temple had now becomeinvolved in Tory alliances, and refused to take officeunless Earl Gower and Lord Lyttelton were admittedto the cabinet. These conditions were peremptorilyrejected ; and Temple saying that Mr.THE History OF PARTY. 85Pitt was evidently determined to be sole and absolute CHAP.T IVdictator, put an end to the conference. '■A. D. 1765Failing m his attempt to unite the Whigs, Mr. to 17G7.Pitt now endeavoured, by assembling around him hisown friends, and filling up their numbers from theTories, to obtain a coalition ministry, which he couldmanage at his will. In this design he was doubtlessconfirmed by the artifices of the courtiers, and thehomage proffered to him by Lord Bute. At the headof the treasury he placed the Duke of Grafton,a nobleman who professed himself a Whig, whohad always hitherto acted with that party, but whoseonly claim to that title appeared to be the devotedattachment he professed for Mr. Pitt. He had, forashort time, held the seals under the Rocking-hamadministration. When he resigned them, he declaredin the house of lords that he retired, because thegovernment wanted strength and efficiency, andthat he knew but one man who could give them.Under him, he said, he would serve, not only as ageneral-officer but as a private soldier ; he wouldeven take up a spade and a mattock at his command.*This nobleman Mr. Pitt named as one whowould be an obedient vicegerent. Lord Camdenwas made lord chancellor. The Earl of Hepburn, ayoung nobleman, who had warmly attached himself• ClioU-ilicld's Letters to his Son.80 Tin: iijsioKY of i'aktv.CHAP, to Pitt, who was animated by an affection for theIV. .principles of his party, and whose talents, althoughA. 1). 17(ijto 171)7. not calculated to shine in posts of the highest order,were sound and valuable in a secondary station, wascreated secretary of state. Thus far Pitt had securedthe support of professed friends : for their coadjutors,he chose Lord Northington, whom he had dismissedfrom the chancellorship, and made president of thecouncil ; Charles Townshend, the promoter of theStamp act, as chancellor of the exchequer andmanager of the house of commons ; while GeneralConway, its great opponent, was continued as secretaryof state.The arrangements of the inferior offices wereequally incongruous. At the different boards politiciansof every shade were seen sitting together. Itwas altogether a disconnected mass, which, Mr. Pittthought, being divided in itself, would only agree tobe ruled by him. Burke afterwards described thiscabinet as "a piece of joinery, so crossly indented andwhimsically dovetailed ; a cabinet so variously inlaid ;such a piece of diversified mosaic ; such a tessellatedpavement without cement ; here a bit of black stone,there a bit of white ; patriots and courtiers ; kings,friends, and republicans ; Whigs and Tories ; treacherousfriends and open enemies. It was, indeed,a very curious show, but utterly unsafe to touch, andunsure to stand on. The colleagues whom he had as-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 87sorted at the same board stared at each other, and were CHAP,obliged to ask, * Sir, your name ? Sir, you have the '■J • „ Tir o 1 T 1 , A. D. 1765advantage oi me. — Mr. Such-a-one. — 1 beg a thou to 17G7.sand pardons.' I venture to say it did so happen,that persons had a single office divided betweenthem who had never spoke to each other in theirlives, until they found themselves, they knew nothow, pigging together heads and points in the sametruckle-bede"*But the most singular feature in this arrangementwas the part Mr. Pitt took himself. He namedhimself lord privy seal and Earl of Chatham.Verging now upon sixty, and broken by a life ofalmost incessant torture, it is probable that Pitt felthimself unequal to the stormy discussions of thecommons, and coveted peace. If this was hismotive, he chose an unfortunate moment : he wasthought by the nation to be then seizing the helm,prepared to act and to command : those who saw himshrinking from his own demonstration, and abandoninghis post, could not constrain their disappointmentor forbear their censure. ** To withdraw,"says Lord Chesterfield, "in the fulness ofhis power, and in the utmost gratification of his• Speech on American Tax North and George Cooke as jointaction. The last sentence alludes paymasters of the forces,lo thir appointment of Lord88 THE IIISTOKY OP FAIITY.CHAP, ambition, from the house of commons, and to ffo intoIV. . . .that hospital of incurables, the house of lords, is aA. D. 17G5to 1767. measure so unaccountable, that nothing but proofpositive could have made me believe it : but true itis — he is now only Earl of Chatham, and no longerMr. Pitt in any respect whatever. Such an event, Ibelieve, was never read or heard of"* These werethe sentiments of the public. The city of London,where he had so long been worshipped, refused anaddress upon his appointment, the press teemed withinvectives, and the people, who thought themselvesdeserted, followed him with maledictions.All this a man of Pitt's high resolution and undauntedcharacter could have borne with contempt,but it was not long before he felt that the publicvoice was right ;t that he had been deceived by thecourtiers, had lent his influence, and sacrificed hispopularity in forming a government in which he wasto be a cipher. When he had executed his plan,he had not an inch of ground to stand upon. Whenhe had accomplished his scheme of administrationhe was no longer ministers« Chesterfield's Letters to his his after language, in alluding toSon. this time. — Pari. Hist., vol. xvi.,\ " 1 own 1 was credulous, 1 col. 842.was duped, I was deceived," was J Burke.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 89The commencement of the career of this admit CHAP.IV.distraction was by no means auspicious. The failure —of the harvest had occasioned a scarcity of corn which to 1767.amounted to famine : riots, pillage, and bloodshedwere the natural consequences ; and the sufferersclamoured for protection and relief. Urged by theextreme necessity, the ministry laid an embargoupon the exportation of grain, and sent messengersto the different ports to enforce obedience to theproclamation. This measure was highly popular,not a voice was raised against it : but upon themeeting of parliament the opposition urged, thatalthough excused by the imminent necessity, theact was unconstitutional and illegal, and required anact of indemnity, to shield the authors from its consequences.Ministers, on the contrary, urged thatin such cases of absolute necessity the constitutionrecognised a right in the sovereign to suspend theoperation of an act of parliament ; and although theyintroduced an act for the protection of the inferioragents, they refused to include themselves. Itmust have sounded strange to hear Whigs who hadproved throughout their lives their affection forliberty, and their hatred of oppression, arguing in aBritish house of commons in favour of a dispensingpower, ^^et, it is said, that Lord Camden was oneof these. As we derive our knowledge of the deyTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, bate from the writings of the opposition,* we are-p-— — 7^ unable to tell the precise line of argument adopted,to 17G7. or the exact extent of the proposition contended for.The bare canvassing of such a proposition, in suchan age, should be a moral lesson to their posterity.The example of wise and good men betrayed intoegregious error by party pride which disdains toown itself wrong, or by the popular voice which criesthat that cannot be illegal which is in itself so excellent,must teach us habitual caution in the formationof our opinions, and moderation in pressingthem upon others.Lord Chatham's health was now so entirely brokenthat he was unable to take any part whatever in ministerialaffairs, and remained at Bath, at Hampstead,or at Hayes, apparently unconscious of his importancein the state. When his power was no longer felt, hisinfluence ceased ; and it was remarked that, althoughPari. Hist., vol. xvi. — A " Life of Lord Chatham," it is saidtract, called a speech, on behalf that Lord Chatham kept clear ofof the constitution against the this doctrine, calling it an act ofsuspending and dispensing overpower justified by necessity; andgative, written by Mr. Macintosh, on hearing the debate, desired theassisted by Lord Temple and Lord spill to be made as strong as ,is the usual authority bible, to be extended to the ad-forthis debate. But in a letter misers, and to be made declaratoryfrom Mr. Henry Flood to Lord as well as indemnifying.Charlemont, cited in Thackeray'sTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 91Constantly attacked in the course of debate, by the op chap.position, he was never defended by his colleagues.* . ^The ministry soon became divided into as many partiesas there were men in it, each complaining of theothers. Charles Townshend was at open war withall; Conway was angry ; Lord Shelburne out ofhumour, and the Duke of Grafton by no meanspleased. MTiile the bond of unity was thus relaxed,each member of the cabinet thought himself at libertyto pursue his own policy. Charles Townshendavailed himself of this independence, and by a singleact, the effect of his sensibility and versatile character,entailed disasters upon his country, which eventhe continual exercise of his own brilliant genius couldnot have compensated.George Grenville could not forgive the Americansfor thwarting his favourite scheme of revenue, anddisplacing his ministry. He lost no opportunity ofdeclaiming against their ingratitude, and stigmatizingthe ministers who had conceded their demands.Upon one occasion, in the middle of his harangue, heturned to the ministers : " You are cowards," he said.** You are afraid of the Americans ; you dare nottax America." He repeated the taunt, and it hadits intended effect. The fiery temper of Townshend• Letter IVom Lord Cliarlenioiil. Lite ol the Earl of Lliatliaiii,vol. ii., p. 109.A.D. 17(37.9!2 THE IlISTORV OF PARTY.CHAP, was kindled. "Fear!" he said, "Fear! Cowards IIV.Dare not tax America ! I dare tax America."Grenville stood silent for a moment, and then said,** Dare you tax America? I wish to God I could seeit." Townshend replied, '* I will, I wills**This declaration, once made, was not allowed to beevaded or withdrawn. Grenville was incessantly remindinghim of his pledge ; the whole body of courtiersdrove him forward. They always talked as if the kingstood in a sort of humiliated state, until somethingof the kind should be honest Burke, in sketchingthe character of Townshend, has truly said, that, toplease universally was the object of his life. Thehouse of commons had approved the project of theStamp act. Townshend ardently supported it. Thehouse of commons had changed their opinion of thatmeasure ; and Townshend voted, and had not illnessprevented him, would have spoken for its repeal.The opinion that America should be taxed beganagain to prevail, and Townshend again conformed.He boasted that he knew how to raise a revenue fromthe Americans without giving them offence ; and assumingthat, in Lord Chatham's distinction betweenlegislation and taxation, the former included comersHistory of the United Dr. Wm. S. Johnson, then in Eng-Stales, from the MS. papers of huit, as agent for Connecticut.t Burke.JTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.clay restrictions and import dues, he introduced a CHAP,series of resolutions, imposing duties upon several ^ j^ ,^g,articles of import to the British colonies in America.The bill which was framed upon these resolutionspassed both houses of the legislature in silence.* TheEarl of Chatham was ill in bed.The spirit which produced this bill was occasionedby the recent conduct of the assemblies of Massachusettsand New York, in refusing obedience to therequisitions of the Mutiny act. The Americans hadnow obtained some knowledge of their strength, andwere rather disposed to abuse it. Their captiousopposition had alienated the sympathies of many oftheir friends, and enabled their enemies to recommencetheir system of unjust taxation. Two otherbills accompanied that imposing the duties. Onecreated a board of customs in the colonies; thesecond restricted the legislature of New York frompassing any bill until the provisions of the Mutinyact had been complied with.There can be no doubt that these measures werehighly esteemed by the king. Townshend was nowin favour at court ; his lady was created a peeress,and he himself was about to seize upon the treasury.• There was, however, great only opposed, but was, by a majo-contentionupon other parts of the city against ministers, reduced tobudget ; the proposed land tax of three shillings.four shillings in the pound, was notA. D. 1767,1)4 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The result of the intrigues now in properest wouldprobably have been a cabinet, in which the king'sfriends would have been again supreme; but the immediatedesign was frustrated by the death of Townshend,who was carried off by a putrid fever, in the primeof his manhood, when the object of his ambition wasjust within his grasp. The difference between thereputation and the fame of this highly-gifted man issingular. His contemporaries ranked him as anorator with Pitt : in the house of commons he wasfar more popular than the great commoner ; yet posterityscarcely recognises his name ; and hundredswho revere the Earl of Chatham as one of the demigodsof history, are ignorant that Charles Townshendexisted.When Pitt and Townshend were withdrawn, theministry, which had been from its formation feeble,became contemptible. Before the death of Townshendthe necessity for some change had been apparent,and the king had sent for Lord Chatham toadvise with him upon the subject. That nobleman,however, returned a verbal answer, excusing himselfon account of his illness. Arrangements were nowmade without consulting him ; and the administrationwhich has been so improperly called the Chatham administration— improperly, since the Earl of Chathamwas neither ostensibly nor really at its head — was nomore.A. D. 1767.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 95The only important measure proposed by this mi chap.ministry, was the revival of the scheme of taxing America; a scheme which Pitt had denounced in the houseof commons, with all his characteristic vehemence ;but which the Tories of this administration, takingadvantage of a season of bodily and apparentlymental incapacity,* found means to send forth to theworld, stamped with the authority of his name.Lord Chesterfield attributes This experiment caused a severethe Earl of Chatham's inactivity fit of illness, which chiefly affectedto the effects of the injudicious the nerves. The inaction or errortreatment of his physician, who of a man thus afflicted cannothad prevented a threatened at fairly be made the subject of criticof gout by dispersing the cis.humour throughout his body.qC the history or faulty.CHAPTER V.Supremacy of the Tory party — The Grafton administration — Biographicalanecdotes of Lord North — Of Charles Jenkinsonon — A newparliament — Stiite of the elections — Imprisonment of Wilkes —Riots — Divisions of the Whigs — The Middlesex election, and proceedingsupon it — Excitement of the people at the decision of thecommons.CHAP. The Duke of Grafton retained his office as firstV.lord of the treasury ; and the new administration wasA. D. 1767 . ^to 1769. known by his name. General Conway and LordNorthington had long been anxious to rejoin theirold allies, the Rockingham Whigs. Lord Gower, aspresident of the council, and Lord Weymouth, assecretary of state, supplied their places. Lord Northbecame chancellor of the exchequer ; Mr. ThomasTownshend succeeded him as paymaster ; and Mr.Jenkinsonon was made a lord of the treasury. EarlA. D. 1767.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 97Camden was not immediately removed from the chang CHAP.fellowship, and Chatham nominally retained the privyseal ; the latter was probably unconscious of being aminister, since, so great was his mental imbecility,that the trifling duties of his office were transactedby a temporary commission. Mr. De Grey, afterwardsLord Walsingham, was attorney-general, andMr. Dunning solicitor-general.Thus easily did the heterogeneous production ofLord Chatham resolve itself into a regular Tory administration; and thus did the Tories become again,ostensibly — as they had, since the dismissal of LordRockingham, been effectively — the governing faction.Among the members of the new cabinet appeartwo names, those of Lord North and Mr. Jenkinsonon,which will occur too frequently in after scenes to beintroduced without some particular notice.Frederick Lord North, eldest son of the Earl ofGuildford, was born of a stock fruitful in the productionof men of second-rate talent. He received theordinary education of the aristocracy, at Eton, andTrinity College, Oxford ; and, it is said, made morethan the ordinary use of the advantages he enjoyed.*♦ His classical knowledge, upon proverb "iii;i<j;iniin vcjctigal est par-oneoccasion, procured iii a rare ionia ;" providing iiig, however,triumph, even over Burke, 'lln' the second word as vecttjjal. Lordlatter, in introducing his scheme of North, in a low tone, rciuarki deconomical reform, used ir Latin iliac nor ; hut Hinc, \\ ili ailniii-VOI III. HA.D. 17G7.yS THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. From Oxford he, of course, set forth to visit the con.tinental courts, and to acquire that knowledge ofGermany which, in the reign of George II., everycourtier deemed indispensable. At Leipsic he studiedthe Germanic constitution, under Moscow, a professorfamous in his own generation, and forgotten inours. The young nobleman also applied himselfdiligently to the study of diplomacy, and having thuspossessed himself of the usual qualifications of a candidatefor office, returned to England in 1754, andwas elected by his father to represent the familyborough of Banbury. At the latter end of the Pittadministration he received, as the reward of his abilityor his obedience, a seat at the treasury board, and retainedthis appointment during the Bute administration.George Grenville found and retained him inoffice, putting him forward in the motions againstWilkes, and valuing him as an unhesitating supporterof the right to tax America. Upon the influx of theRockingham party, North was ejected with his colleagues; but not before he had acquired the reputationof being a very useful member of the party towhich he had attached himself. When Lord Chathamable presence of mind, turning to It gives me an opportunity of re-the interrupter, said, " The noble eating the inestimable adage,Lord hints that I have erred in 'magnum vect-I-gal est parsimonyquantity of a principal word nia'" — Prior's Life of Burke.in my quotation. I rejoice at it.A. D. 1767.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 99composed his medley ministry he was yoked with a CHAP,colleague with whom he had neither personal or politicalcommunion, as joint paymaster of the forces ;in the Tory ministry which now succeeded hewas chancellor of the exchequer, and a lord of thetreasury.In private life Lord North was universally esteemed.Always amiable and urbane, with a perpetualgood humour which it appeared impossible toruffle ; witty without acrimony, abounding in scholasticand general knowledge ; he was inestimable as acompanion, and valuable as a subordinate minister :but destitute of vigilance, easily moved from his owncourse by the suggestions of others ; and, incapableof severity, he was not calculated to rule in momentsof danger. His speeches were in accordance withhis character ; light, sparkling, witty, always clever,sometimes well arranged and perspicuous, but nevereloquent. The candour and known disinterestednessof the man was of great service to the orator ; hisown conviction was so evident that it spread amonghis hearers, and his audience listened with interestto his professions because they knew them to betruths. The character of his intellect affords nosubject for philosophical speculation ; it was open toall, seen in every act — a shining superficies,Charles Jcnkinson, afterwards Earl of Liverpool,was, throiin-hoiit life, the objcn-t of the tost arrinio-11 '3A.D. 17G7.100 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, nioiis hostility from the Whigs. If we copy the portraitsof the party writers of his day, we must drawhim as a mere court minion, who had ability only toflatter and to fawn ; whose honours were the rewardof disgraceful services, and whose ignoble descentdisgraced the peerage to which he was raised. Such,however, is not the language of truth. CharlesJenkinsonon was born in 17^7) the eldest son of ColonelJenkinsonon, who was a younger son of Sir RobertJenkinsonon, the first baronet of a family long and honourablyknown in Oxfordshire. Charles receivedthe rudiments of education at the Grammar-schoolof Bedford, and removed thence to the Charterhouse,where he was placed on the foundation. From thatexcellent school he proceeded to Oxford, and graduatedat University College.Thus qualified, he sought the metropolis with theintention of devoting himself to literature. Jenkinsononwas at this time a Whig ; he aided in the establishmentof the Monthly Review, wrote largely in itspages, joined in the cry for the establishment of anational and constitutional force independent of astanding army, and published a dissertation upon thesubject, abounding with the sentiments of Whiggish.When this pamphlet was afterwards quoted againsthim, in the house of peers, he acknowledged it asthe offspring of his extreme youth, and the repositoryof its errors.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 101This production evinced considerable talent, and CHAP.met with some success ; but probably not sufficient -to induce the author to continue in the service of theparty he had first espoused. He now produced hisDiscourse on the Conduct of the Government ofGreat Britain, with respect to neutral Nations, duringthe present War ;" a performance which was only discoveredto be able when its author was known to bepowerful : then it was translated into all the languagesof Europe.We soon afterwards find Jenkinsonon had made thediscovery that, of the two parties, the Tories are byfar the more grateful to their supporters. An obstinateelection contest was raging in Oxfordshire,where Sir Edward Turner, favoured by the universityand the court, was combating the Whigs. Jenkinsjoined the Tory candidate, and was found souseful in writing satirical songs and electioneeringpasquinades against the Whigs, and perhaps also fromhis connexions in the county, that he secured SirEdward's future favour and patronage.The Earl of Bute was now in the plenitude of his]power, and to him, as to the high priest of fortune,Jenkinsonon was presented by his patron. The ministerlistened to the recommendation, and appointedhim to a subordinate office. His own diligence andthe interest of the member for Oxfordshire, ratherthan the I'.arl of lite's favour, obtained his gradual102 THE History OF PARTY.CHAP, promotion, and he was at length appointed theearl's private secretary. Being thus admitted behindthe scenes, and initiated into all the mysteriesof court government, his rise could no longer beimpeded. In I76I he was appointed under secretaryof state, and was returned for Sir JamesLowther's borough of Cockermouth. When LordBute retired into the country, a medium of communicationbetween him and the king becamenecessary. Jenkinsonon was now frequently at St.James's, and so well did he ingratiate himself therethat he was immediately ranked in a high stationamong the king's friends. The lucrative situation oftreasurer of the ordnance, and afterwards the moreimportant office of joint secretary of the treasury, rewardedhis assiduity, during the supremacy of LordBute and the administration of George Grenville.The Rockingham government, which declared waragainst favourites, dismissed Jenkinsonon from all hisplaces ; but he was recompensed by the princessdowager, who appointed him to a post in her household.Jenkinsonon was now looked upon as the pivot ofevery court intrigue, the confidential agent of theking, the princess dowager, and the Earl of Bute ;the depositary of all their secrets, and the worker ofall their schemes. A\Tien Toryism began to predominatein the Chatham administration, which wasTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. lOC)within a very few weeks after its settlement, Jenkins chap.son was restored to office. In I766 he was made a . ^^ ,^^q 'A. U. 170c.lord of the admiralty, and now, under the Grafton administration,he became a lord of the treasury.Mr. Jenkinsonon, although he possessed no shiningtalent, had much solid ability, and official information.He was not an orator, but he was a shrewd and sensiblespeaker ; he was eminently conversant with internationallaw, and was profoundly versed in theprinciples and details of trade ; he was a most efficientminister in a subordinate office j he was not qualifiedto lead and command a party.Upon the settlement of the Grafton administration,the parties appeared exhausted by incessantcontest, and by the continual changes which theirstruggles had produced. The remainder of the sessionof 1767-8 passed with no other incident of interestthan a debate, in which the Whigs accused the ministersof taking advantage of the technicalities ofthe law for electioneering purposes, and enforcingthe odious law maxim, "Nullum tempus occurrit regi,"to take from the Whig Duke of Portland, certainpossessions which he held under a grant from WilliamIII., and to bestow them upon the Tory, Sir JamesLowther. This was an attempt so dangerous to thesecurity of private property, and so far beyond theordinary bounds of party warfare, that it met withvery general execration. In the hou^c of coinmnnsA. D. 17(i8.101 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the niinistor dared not meet the Whiff motion by aV. . . ,- negative, and only succeeded in obtaining an adjournmentby a majority of twenty.At the end of the session this parliament had satits septennial period, and the nation was awakenedto the excitement of a general election. The stateof the representation was at this time such, that noTory minister could want a majority in parliament,unless sufficient excitement prevailed to overcomethe ordinary influence of the landholders. Verymany of the boroughs, once the property of theAA'higs, had now been bought up by the treasury, andwere at the disposal of every successive minister.Many others had been bought up by jobbers uponspeculation, * and were let to the highest bidders jgenerally those who could reckon upon recoveringtheir purchase-money from the national coffers. Thecorruption of the Whigs, although sufficiently reprehensible,was carried on for a party, and, as at leastthe corrupters considered, for a patriotic object : theborough representation was now a mere money speculation,undisguised traffic, by which men were returnedto parliament to increase the gains of a capitalist; and the majority in favour of Whig or Toryprinciples might depend upon whether Whigs orTories were the more ready to satisfy the demands ofAniiu;il Kr;;i-tf,T for l?'**^, !>• 7S.A. D. 1768.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 105a Jew jobber. The terms for seats in the new par chap.Vlament were very high. Chesterfield offered 2500/.for one for his son, but he was informed that all thatwere in the market had been secured by the richEast and West Indians, who had obtained them atthe rates of three, four, and five thousand pounds.*Men who have passed their lives in an atmosphere ofdespotism, and have been themselves the despots,seldom retain much affection for civil equality orpopular rights. From the composition of this parliamentwe do not expect to find the majority veryzealous to push the principles of AVhiggism.The great event of the day was, however, thesudden return of Wilkes and his election for Middlesex.The Duke of Grafton, the present premier,although still a young man, had passed through severalshades of politics. During the struggle uponthe subject of general warrants he had strenuouslysupported Wilkes, and he had, since that time, repeatedhis assurances of protection and friendship.When placed by Lord Chatham at the head of thetreasury he had, through his own brother, conveyeda similar message to the impatient democrat, who,inflated with hope, returned to England to receivehis pardon. He found, however, upon his arrival,that nothing was int(nidc(l in his favour. He re-• C'ht'stcrlicld's Letters.lOG THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, vcnged hiinsolf by writing and publishing a severe■-letter to the Duke of Grafton, taxing him with faithlessnessand prevarication ; and he returned in bitterdisappointment to his exile and his poverty.Upon the dissolution, which took place on the12th of March, I768, he returned to England, andimmediately offered himself a candidate for the cityof London. Notwithstanding the philippic he hadpublished against the minister, the duke retorted noacrimony, no writ was issued against the outlaw candidate,and he was allowed to appear upon the hustings,and conduct his canvass with impunity. Hewas defeated : but with undiminished confidence hedeclared that the suddenness of his arrival had aloneprevented his success, and that he would appear as acandidate for the county. His opponents wereGeorge Cooke and Sir William Proctor, but at theend of the first day's poll, Wilkes was so immenselyabove him, that Sir William resigned the contest.Wilkes now surrendered himself to receive judgment,and obtained the reversal of his outlawry, which waspronounced informal. Twenty-two month's imprisonment,fines to the amount of 1000/., and securitiesfor his future behaviour were the terms of thejudgment for publishing the North Briton and theEssay on Woman ;" and Wilkes was immediatelyconveyed to the King's Bench.The imprisonment of their idol inflamed the .U. 1768.THE HISTORY OF TAllTY. 107place to frenzy ; he was rescued from the custody CHAP,of the marshal as he proceeded to Jbhe prison.After he had surrendered himself, crowds of peopledaily surrounded the prison demanding his release,and a still greater number assembled on the day forwhich the new parliament was formally summoned,supposing that the object of their anxiety wouldthen go to take his seat. Against the multitudethus assembled, the military were sent ; a conflictensued, and many of the people were killed andwounded. Among the slain, was an innocent ladnamed Allen, who was shot in his father's house.The soldiery mistook him for a rioter whom theywere pursuing, and who had taken refuge there. Thecoroner's jury pronounced the soldiers guilty ofmurder : the king and his ministers thanked themfor their conduct.* This unhappy affair did notconduce to remove the prejudices of the peopleagainst a Tory cabinet.In October, Lord Chatham was sufficiently recoveredto external affairs to observe the policypursued by his colleagues, and to send in his resignation.On the 8th of November, parliament met for the• When .Mr. Biirkc afterwards thirty-nine votes against two liuii-attempted to bring this affair be dred and forty-five. — I'url. liisl.,fore parliament, lie obtained only vol. xvi., col. G03.A. D. 17G8.jS the history of party.CHAP, despair of business.* In the discussions which tookplace upon the ad(h-ess, there appeared to be twodistinct bodies of opposition ; the Rockingham partyof AVhigs, headed by Edmund Burke, who since theloss of Pitt and Townshend was without a rival asthe orator of the house ; and the Grenville party.George Grenville retaining many of the ideas hehad acquired in his contact with Toryism, had neverthelessreceded from that party. His reconcilementwith Earl Temple had caused a great change in thepolitical conduct of each of the brothers, and theGrenville party was now composed of individuals ofvaried creeds, ranging from discontented Tories torepublican Whigs. All who were eager to oppose,but unwilling to submit to the strict discipline of theRockingham party, joined the standard of the Grenville.These two bodies only agreed in hostilityto the ministry ; on all other points, as the pamphletwar between their leaders denoted, they were hostileThe state of America was necessarily the firstobject of importance which engaged the attention of• It had sat a few days in May, f See Grenville's pamphletbut merely for the purpose of con " On the State of the Nation," andtinuingthe temporary act for pro Burke's " Observations " on thatlimiting the exportation of corn, pamphlet.Pari Ilinl , vol. xvi., col. 4(io.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.the houses. The ministry proposed a series of reso- CHAP.lotions, declaring the risrht of taxation, noticing the -^ * A. D. 1769.violent resistance which had been offered to the law,and resolving that military force was necessary to itsprotection. In the lords, these resolutions wereenforced by Lord Hillsborough and the Duke ofGrafton, and feebly opposed by Lords Temple andShelburne.* In the commons, a debate of considerableimportance ensued. Burke and Grenvilleproved that one of the resolutions was contrary tothe evidence before the house. The fact could notbe denied, and the ministerial speakers were dumb.But their followers now came to their aid — drownedthe laughter of the opposition in cries of question,and, upon a division, carried the resolutions, hastilyamended, by a large majority.A topic of much less importance, but of far greaterpopular interest was now furnished by Wilkes. TheDuke of Grafton had promised that person, that ifhe would refrain from agitation until the period ofhis imprisonment had expired, he should then beallowed to take his seat without oppositions Thiswas not what the patriot desired ; he was well awareof the importance of keeping himself in the publicview, and ]persisted in forwarding a petition to the• Hardwirkc papers. I';iil. -| y\linoii's Life .iii Corro-List., vol. xvi., rnl. 47(i. s|iiiii(li'ti((' of Wilkes.A.D. 17G9.110 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, house, recapitulating his persecutions, charging thechief justice with partiality, and the under secretarywith suborning evidence against him, and demandingthe interference of the commons. After the presentationof this petition, the duke kept no furtherterms with his former friend. He was called uponto prove some of the allegations of his petition,and the house voted all his charges either false orfrivolous. He was then expelled.*The resolutions upon Wilkes's petition passed withlittle opposition from the Whigs, who only proposedand obtained the omission of some opprobrious epithets,which they originally contained; but the motionfor his expulsion called forth a strong resistance.Burke, Beckford, and even Grenville, names whichrepresented every modification of Whiggism, resistedthe measure. The speech of Mr. Grenville wasafterwards published, and is one of the most moderateand argumentative orations of the time : it had littleeffect upon the ministerial majority, who carriedtheir motion by two hundred and nineteen to onehundred and thirty-seven.The imprudence of this violent and unwarrantablemeasure was immediately evident, the people's excitementin his favour became enthusiasm ; it pervadedall ranks, and without the parliamentary circle• Pari. Hist., vol. xvi.,col. 544.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. Illof ministerial influence, there was scarcely an indica.V.vidual who did not think that a blow had been aimedA. D. 1769.at the constitution. Men asked each other whether,since ministers had undertaken to say whom theyshould not choose, the next step might not be to saywhom they should elect as their representatives.The ignorant and the thoughtless regarded theejected member as a patriot, whose presence wasdreaded by a tyrannical ministry, and a venal parliament; the Whigs saw in the persecution of a meredemagogue adventurer, a precedent which mightprove fatal to better men. The electors of Middleseximmediately re-elected him ; and the day afterthe election, the house of commons resolved that hewas incapable of being elected a member to sit inthat parliament. In the debate upon this motion,Mr. James Townshend intimated that the proposedresolution would call forth petitions to the throne foradissolution of parliament, an intimation which producedLord North, fulminating with wrath, and denouncingterrible threats against any one who shouldsion such a petition. The house, however, was notfallen so low as to be threatened into silence, andhis lordship found it prudent to explain his observations.*• His explanation was that resent surly nii ;i(lroiit on thosemost probably parliament would who should sii;n such ,i petit ion."ll'-i THE mSTOHY OF PARTY.CHAP. The necessity of a (demonstration in tlioir favourV. -^out of doors was now seen by the ministers. TheA. D. J7G9Tories in London called a meeting, to vote a loyaladdress to the king, but the adherents of Wilkesassembled in such numbers at the place appointed,that they drove their opponents from the room, andreversed the character of the proceedings. A Toryaddress was, however, at length prepared, but thosewho undertook to convey it to St. James's, bore alsointo the palace the popular protest marked upontheir persons. A hearse, bearing an effigy of themurdered Allen preceded them, and drew up beforethe courtyard of the palace : those few of the ad-addresserswho reached the palace, were beaten,wounded, and covered with the pelting of the populace.Such was the spectacle of Tory popularitypresented to the king.Mr. Dingle, the principal promoter of the address,undertook to contest the county, but theHis lordship appears to have hold thought the king the proper partyat a low estimate the liberty of an to punish a presumptuous petitif he thought it could tioncr ; Toryism under the housebe taken away by a house of com- of Hanover, was jealous of nomons, for petitioning the king to power which declared against theexercise a branch of his prero- people. Privilege, in the hands ofgative. — Pari. IIi.it., vol. xvi., col. a Tory house of commons, was57S. Here is an example of as useful as prerogative, and theToryism in its second generation, principle, which preferred prero-Clarendon or Clifford would have gative was gone. Seea7i(e,vo].u.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. H^violence of the mob was so great, that he was afraid CHAP,to appear upon the hustings at the nomination, and ^ ^ ^^^.^Wilkes was re-elected without opposition. Thiselection was also declared void and another writissued.Such a contest as this, it was highly important tothe minister to terminate. He looked around uponhis supporters for one who, possessing the requisitequalities of personal courage, and contempt of publicopinion, would exert both to the utmost in his service.Such a person was found in Colonel HenryLawes Luttrell, a young gentleman of good familybut of no fortune or immediate interest in thecounty ; so great was the risk he was thought todare, that as soon as he had vacated his seat, anddeclared himself a candidate, policies were openedupon his life at several of the insurance offices in thecity.These expectations were disappointed : the apprehensionof affording a triumph to the Tories madethe friends of Mr. Wilkes preserve strict order in alltheir proceedings. At the close of the poll i(.appeared that the whole court and Tory interestin the county could muster no more than two hundredand ninety-six votes : Wilkes numbered elevenhundred and forty-three.When the n'tuni was laid before the house,Wilkes's election was immediately declared void ;vol III. 1A.D. 171)9.114 THE History OF Tasty.CHAP, and upon the following day the house resolved thatColonel Luttrell ought to have been returned.Fourteen days were allowed for petitions against thisdecision, and one was accordingly presented andheard. The resolution was, of course, confirmed,and the clerk of the crown was ordered to amendthe return by rasing out the name of Mr. Wilkes,and inserting that of Colonel Luttrell.No public measure, since the accession of thehouse of Hanover, had excited so general an alarmas these resolutions. They were opposed in thehouse of commons as loudly as they were denouncedby the people. When the attorney-general spun hisforensic sophistries, cited precedents of expulsion,and argued that because aliens, minors, and clergymenwere excluded from that house, the samepower which could exclude a rank could exclude anindividual, he was answered by Mr. Grenville, who,with an equal knowledge of election law, canvassedhis precedents, showed that they were either irrelevantor opposed to the ministerial doctrine, andridiculed the assertion, that the same power whichcould legally exclude a class could exclude an individual,as a position worthy only of a man who couldnot distinguish between a legislator and a tyrant.When Lord North appealed to the passions of hisaudience, railed against Wilkes, enumerated thevariety of troubles he had given the ministry, andTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 115dwelt upon the expediency of the measure proposed, chap.he was met by Burke, who drew, on the other side, a .moving picture of the state of the nation, and of theterrible consequences to be dreaded from the conductof the ministry. He denied that this was a contestbetween the house of commons and the freeholders ofMiddlesex — it was a contest between that house andthe voters of England, whose franchises the house ofcommons had invaded. He accused the ministers aslibellers of the people, with charging them in theiraddresses with crimes they had themselves forcedthem into, and as the sowers of discord between theking and his subjects.*On the <Jth of May the king, with many encomiumsupon the conduct of his parliament, put anend to the session.The decision of the house of commons was heardwith rage and indignation. A Tory ministry and aTory house of commons, it was said, had at last met ;they were worthily pursuing their old party predilections;they had already evinced their contempt for theconstitution by destroying the right of representation,and their hatnnl of the people by a military massacre.• Pari. Hist. vdl. xvi., col. 590. It must not be forgotten that thisTlic best account of the urgu- work was written !>> or under thement on each side of this question initiate superintendence of Editthe summary contained in the nnind Burke.Annual R.-j;ist(T for I 7r,f», p tiH* .I 'JA. D. 1769.116 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The indignation of the people and their leaders wasnot greater than their boldness. Wilkes and hisparty promoted the circulation and signature of themost outrageous attacks upon the ministry, theparliament, and the sovereign ; which, under thename of petitions, carried the most poignant invectiveeven to the throne. The Middlesex petitionersreviewed the whole series of political transactions ofthe reign, and concluded that they were a tissue ofunjust, tyrannical, and cruel acts, flowing from thelegislative, executive, and judicative estates. Theyprayed, therefore, that he would banish for ever fromhis favour, trust, and confidence, his evil and perniciouscounsellors. The tenour of the London petitionwas the same.Westminster prayed more wisely for a dissolutionof parliament ; and fifteen counties and a great numberof populous cities and towns immediately followedthe example. An effort was made to obtain addressesof an opposite character. Scotland sent themreadily ; the universities maintained their Tory character,and complied ; but, of all the counties ofEngland, in Essex, Kent, Surrey, and Salop onlycould such a demonstration be risked ; the cities ofBristol and Coventry, and the single town of Liverpool,completed the list of admirers of the ministry.Another class of petitions, expressed in languagefirm but temperate, and forcible but decorous, pro-theHISTORY OF Py\RTY. 117needed from the AVliigs ; men who were not hurried CHAP.away by their passions to exclaim against the persecutorsof "Wilkes, but who saw and deplored theravages which this ministry had already made in theconstitution. Of these, one from Buckinghamshire,written by Mr. Burke, and another from Yorkshire,by Sir George Saville, excited general attention andapprobation.lis Tin: msTouv of rAUTY.CHAPTER VI.Letters of Junius — Their character and influence — Summary of theclaims of the different writers named as the author of these letters.CHAP. This was a time, when all constitutional remedy^^' was suspended, and the house of commons had bet1773- come an instrument of tyranny, to tax to the utmostthe power of the press — an engine whose power arisesfrom its necessity, and increases with its pressure ;which can, at such a crisis as this, alone supply thewant of a representative body, and by imbuing multitudeswith the same definite purpose, enable themto use the power they had been accustomed to delegate.The age was by no means destitute of men(qualified for the occasion. Judge Blackstone, in hispamphlet, called "The Answer to the Questionstated ;'* and Dr. Johnson, in another, called *' FalseTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 119Alarm," exerted their great talents upon the Tory chap.VIside ; Wilkes and Sir MlUiam Meredith were only : — '■individuals of a multitude which gave utterance to to 1773.the sentiments of the nation. But these writers,able as they were, shrunk into insignificance besidea rival who, upon his appearance, at once claimedand monopolized the public attention.Junius commenced that series of letters which hasinflicted a damning immortality upon every memberof this government, in January, I769. He was a practisedpolitical writer, well known to the public undervarious signatures, and never unsuccessful in hisappeals. He was a Whig in party and in principle,a defender not a servile encomiast of the Rockinghamparty, differing from them upon many occasions,sometimes preceding, at others falling short of themin liberality of sentiment, but always halting far shortof those who urged forward their principle withoutregard to aristocratic interests or personal expediency.*The powers of this writer as they are displayed inthese letters, stand unrivalled in any age or language.• Junius, in parliament, would the other hand he denounced thehave voted for Lord Rockitigliam'b game laws as incompatible withDeclaratory act (Letter 63) ; and legal liberty (Letter 63); andhe would have opposed the dis recorded his dissent from Lordfranchisement of nomination bo Camden's doctrine of a suspend-roughs(Letter to the supporters ing prerogative (Letter 69).of the Bill of Rights). But on'JO Tin; HISTORY OF PARTY-chap,liolingbroke could declaim in majestic and harmoniouslanguage, allure his readers by a display of rising17()J)to 1773. treated and patriotic sentiment, and animate themagainst his enemies by the eloquence of his accusation; the elegant Addison could please, couldridicule, could convince ; Swift, was an inimitablelampooner, unhesitating in his assertions, and strongin abuse ; but Junius surpassed all these. He addressedhimself to the powerful passions of ournature, captivated attention by rancorous abuse, sarcasticinvective, and ferocious personalities ; yet disguisedthese so well by the purity of his languageand the grace of his style, that while we relish thepungency we do not taste the grossness. He offersus an excitement to our passions, but the gobletappears so pure that we pour from it a libation tovirtue ; he fences with a rapier of the highest temperand polish : while we admire his amazing dexteritywe do not perceive that the blade is poisoned — thatthe same weapon, urged by an infant's hand, wouldinflict a deadly wound.The aim of Junius was not calm conviction, it wastumultuous excitement ; conviction might pen pamphlets,but would scarcely withdraw one vote fromthe well-pensioned majority of the minister ; excitementwould carry terror into the cabinet and thecloset, and constrain, by fear, men who were deaf tovirtue. Thus, the weakest invention which hisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 1^1readers believed, and all things are credible to an en CHAP.VI.raged people, was readily caught up by Junius, and ^-^-embalmed in the amber of his diction. He revived to 1773.the long exploded accusation against Lord Mansfield,that he had drunk the pretender's health upon hisknees. He favoured the popular belief that theDuke of Bedford and Earl Bute had been bribed byFrance to conclude the peace of Paris;* and evencondescended to remark the faded beauty of the Dukeof Grafton's mistress. He caught the topics andscandal of the day, and wrought upon them untilthose who had seen and received them in their nativecoarseness were surprised and delighted to findtruths in which they thought they had an interestpresented in such an elegant and engaging garb.It was thus that Junius excited attention. At thisdistance of time the keenness of his satire attractsthousands of readers who know nothing of the secrethistory of the period, and little of the characters heassails. If his style can charm such persons howmust it have excited his contemporaries, who saw inevery sentence a wound inflicted upon an enemy, andknew that the man they hated was at the moment• A belief which depended en been long since disproved by atimely upon the testimony of Dr. public examination of MnsgravoMargrave, perhaps an honest, but at the bar of the liousc of commons,certainly an imprudent and credu- —Pari. Hint., vol. xvi., col. 7(j;).loss man. 'I'iiis absurd story had But the mob still believed it.\'2'2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, writhing under the infliction. The mystery of theVI.'- — authorship lent an additional shade of interest to theto 177.}. letter's. .Junius was exempt from the failings of humanity,he had no conduct upon which his satirecould be retorted, no personal friendship which hedied not violate, no consistency to preserve beyondhis letters ; cased in impenetrable armour, he mingledwith the crowd, and pointed his unerring shafts insecurity; the throne was not too high, the cottagenot too low, for his visitations.Such were the causes of Junius's popularity ; buthe was not destitute of other excellences. He couldreason clearly and strongly, and his letters containmany beautiful specimens of logical argument. Hewas possessed of profound political knowledge, and hewas immediately and accurately informed of the secrettransactions of the day.* Junius enjoyed every opportunityof becoming a perfect political writer, andhe used them.The effect of these letters may be read in thewords of a man who was too accustomed to contemplateexcellence in himself to overvalue it in others.•' How comes this Junius to have broke through thecobwebs of the law, and to range uncontrolled, unpunished,through the land. The myrmidons of thecourt have been long and are still pursuing him inSee his private letters to Woodfail passim.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 1Q3vain. They will not spend their time upon me, or CHAP,you, or you : no, they disdain such vermin, when the '■■^ . -^ -^ A. D. 1769mighty boar of the forest, that has broke through all to 1773.their toils is before them. But what will all theirefforts avail ? No sooner has he wounded one thanhe lays another dead at his feet. For my part, whenI saw his attack upon the king, I own my blood rancold, I thought he had ventured too far, and thatthere was an end of his triumphs. Not that he hadnot asserted many truths. Yes, sir, there are inthat composition many bold truths by which a wiseprince might profit. It was the rancour and venomby which I was struck. In these respects the NorthBriton is as much inferior to him as in strength, wit,and judgment. But while I expected from this daringflight his final ruin and fall, behold him rising stillhigher, and coming down souse upon both houses ofparliament. Yes, he did make you his quarry, andyou still bleed from the wounds of his talons. Youcrouched and still crouch beneath his rage ; nor hashe dreaded the terrors of your brow, sir ; he hasattacked even you — he has — and I believe you haveno reason to triumph in the encounter. In short,after carrying away our royal eagle in his pounces,and dashing him against a rock, he has laid youprostrate. King, lords, and commons, are but thesport of his fury. Were he a member of this housewhat might not be expected from his knowledge, hislO.\, THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, firmness, and integrity ? He would be easily known^'" by his contempt of all danger, by his penetration, byto 1773. his vigour. Nothing would escape his vigilance andactivity. Bad ministers could conceal nothing fromhis sagacity ; nor could promises or threats inducehim to conceal any thing from the public"*Such were the terms in which Burke spoke of thegenius and the influence of Junius. He knew that,notwithstanding the rancour and venom which hecondemned, the productions of that writer had infuseda spirit of daring independence into the conductorsof political periodicals that had never before beenequalled. Alone Junius did this. At the commencementof his career this same Junius, before hehad yet assumed the title under which he is becomeimmortal, had furnished Woodfall with a report ofone of Burke's speeches in the house of commons.The report was covered with the usual disguise of aspeech at a debating society ; and as it is the earliestso it is the tamest of Burke's reported speeches ; yetWoodfall dared not publish it without several omissionsand alterations. Two years later the sameprinter published, without hesitation, Junius's "Letterto a King." The people had now found a writerworthy of their support and they upheld him.Lord North saw and deplored this consequence ofPar). Hist., vol. xvi., col. 1 155.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 1^5the popularity and impunity of Junius. In answer CHAP,ing Burke, he said, " Can any man recollect a periodA. D. 1769when the press groaned with such a variety of wicked to ma.and desperate libels ? Such is their number that onewould imagine there is not a single pen made, asingle standish used, or a single scrap of paperbought, but in order to manufacture a libel. Thefirst thing we lay our hands on in the morning is alibel, the last thing we lay out of our hands in theevening is a libel. Our eyes open upon libels. Inshort, libels, lampoons, and satires, constitute all thewriting, printing, and reading of our time.** Why, therefore, should we wonder that the greatboar of the wood, this mighty Junius, has brokethrough the toils and foiled the hunters ? Thoughthere may be at present no spear that will reach him ;yet he may be, some time or other, caught. At anyrate he will be exhausted with fruitless efforts ; thosetusks which he has been whetting to wound and gnawthe constitution will be worn out. Truth will at lastprevail. When the feculence of bad humours hasworked itself off, the leaven of Junius will produce nonew fermentation ; he will then be despised for thevery falsehood and malice that now gain him readers ;his pertness will no longer be mistaken for wit, norhis impudence for spirit. The North Briton, themost flagitious libel of its day, would have beenequally secure with Junius had it been as powerfullyIq TIIK IlISTOHY OF PARTY.CHAP. siii)porte(l. But the press had not then overflowedVI.the laud with its thick gall, and poisoned the mindsA. D. 17G9to 1773. of the people. Political writers had some shame left,some reverence for the crown, some respect for thename of majesty, nor were there any members ofparliament hardy enough to harangue in defence oflibels"*It will be expected that, in a work like the present,some notice should be taken of the various hypothesesstarted as to the authorship of these letters.Previously to the appearance of the private lettersfrom Junius to Mr. Woodfall, and the identificationof Junius with letters under other titles, the personswho were chiefly suspected were Burke, Single-speechHamilton, Mr. Copenhagen, General Lee, Wilkes,Home Tooke, Hugh Macauley Boyd, and LordGeorge Sackville Of these Wilkes and HomeTooke could only be thought of by those who wereambitious of starting and defending paradoxes.General Lee's claim depended upon a confession saidto have been made to Mr. Rodney, and is disprovedby the absence of the General from England at a• Pari. Hist., vol. xvi., col. 1163. edition of Junius, and summarilyCollate the reports in W footfall's disposed of by proof, that theyVox Senatus,"and in the " Gen were either dead or absent fromathenian's Magazine." England at some time when histThere are several others father was in almost daily communedby Mr. Woodfall, in his nation with Junius.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 127time when frequent private notes were passing be CHAP,tween Junius and Woodfall. Mr. Rosenhaofen, a '-. . A.D. 17'J9friend of Mr. Woodfall, and an occasional writer in to 1773the Public Advertiser, is said to have propagated areport that he was Junius, in order to induce LordNorth to silence him with a pension. Hugh MacauleyBoyd, " a broken gentleman without a guineain his pocket"* a great admirer and imitator ofJunius, was thought by Mr. Almon to be Junius,because he blushed when charged with the authorship,and because Almon thought he could detectsome resemblance between the handwriting of Boydand that of Junius. Of these competitors Homealone alone possessed a tithe of the ability requisiteto constitute a Junius.Gerard Hamilton, Lord George Sackville, andBurke, stand upon different ground ; they were allmen whom their contemporaries judged capable ofwriting these letters. The principal fact againstGerard Hamilton is, that he mentioned the substanceof a letter of Junius in conversation, which he pretendedto have just read in the Public Advertiser;but which, on reference to the paper, was found notto Ijc there, an apology instead of it being offeredfor its postponement till the next day, when the letter• So described by Almon in republican correspond It ill withhis biography of him. The senti the lofty and aristocratic Junius,nients and fnrf nunc of this youthful1'28 THE IIISTOIIV or PARTY.CHAP, thus previously adverted to by Hamilton actuallymade its appearance. This circumstance, however,to 1773. is easily accounted for by the facts, that Hamiltonwas intimate with Woodfall, and that the latter wasaccustomed to communicate the letters of Junius tohis friends before they were published.* In otherrespects we can find no identity between Junius andHamilton. Junius was a virulent partisan, Hamiltonwas ever a moderate man, and never allied himselfclosely with either party ; Junius was an ardent advocatefor parliamentary reform (such as was thenproposed by the Whigs), Hamilton was so opposedto any scheme of that nature that he declared hewould rather suffer his risfht hand to be cut offthan vote for it. Hamilton himself denied theauthorship with disdain, as an imputation upon hisgood taste in composition. He doubtless had tasteand ability, but not such as would assume the formof Junius.The evidence against Lord George Sackville restschiefly upon a private letter from Junius to Woodfall,in which he says, "That Swinney is a wretched butdangerous fool. He had the impudence to go toLord G. Sackville, whom he had never spoken to,♦ Mr. Woodfall appeared to it, that Hamilton was Junius, waspoint to this construction of the founded upon a misconception. —incident, when he stated that he WoodfaWs Junius.knew that the opinion drawn fromTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 129and to ask him whether or no he was the author of chap.VI.Junius — take care of him"*A.D. 1769Upon subsequent inquiry it was found that Junius to i"73.must have become possessed of this intelligencewithin a few hours after the circumstance occurred.Lord George Sackville's talents were well known andadmitted, his political principles where closely inaccordance with those avowed by Junius, and SirWilliam Draper expressed himself convinced that hislordship was the author. But, on the other hand,Junius's knowledge of Swinney's visit to LordGeorge was probably shared with many others ; theinformation was as likely to come from Swinney asfrom his lordship, and the man who was impertinentenough to go and put the question, was probably agarrulous fellow, who proceeded directly to his clubhouseand told what he had done. Lord GeorgeSackville once declared to a friend that, although heshould be proved capable of writing as Junius haddone, yet there were many passages in his letters hewould be very sorry to have written ; and in the caricatureof the ministry, called, "a Grand Councilupon the Affairs of Ireland, "t written by Junius,but not under that signature. Lord Townshend isrepresented as saying, '* T believe the best thing I• Private Letters, No. 5, Wood I7(i7, before the letters signed(walls Junius. .Iiiniu!> were commenced,t This piece was written invol ill. K\30THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, can do is to go and consult with my Lord George- ^ Sackville. His character is known and respected inA. D. 17r.9 »to 1773. Ireland as much as it is here ; and I know he lovesto be stationed in the rear as well as myself j"* anequivocal compliment and a direct imputation ofcowardice which it is not probable that any manwould, without an object, fix upon himselfeBurke remains. When Junius began to write inthe Public Advertiser, even while he wrote underother titles, the voice of his contemporaries attributedhis productions to Burke ; and Junius was con-vir.Coventry, who has veryelaborately supported Lord GeorgeSackville's claims to the authorshipof Junius, finding this passagea serious obstacle, boldly deniesthat it was written by Junius, andstarts the incomprehensible hypothesisthat this caricature wasdrawn by the cabinet ministersthemselves, to ridicule Lord Sackvilleas Malaria. This letter isidentified as coming from Junius,by a notice in the Public Advertiserof October 21, 1767. " TheGrand Council on the Affairs, &c.is come to hand, and shall have aplace in ovir next ;" and immediatelyunder, " Our friend andcorrespondent C. will always findthe utmost attention paid to hisfavours." Mr. Woodfall, who liasprinted this letter as a Junius,is not likely to be mistaken. Itmust be remembered also, thatCumberland, who published apanegyric upon Lord Sackvillesoon after his death, speaks of himas unusually deficient in classicalacquirements, and as possessingneither the advantages ofliterature, brilliancy of wit, norany superior pretensions to a finetaste in the elegant arts. — Sec thispanegyric in Collins's Peerage. —Could such a man have beenJunius ?f Lord George Sackville, whenLord George Germaine, wasbroken by a court-martial, forcowardice exhibited at the battleof Minded.THE HISTORY OF PAllTY. ^ 131finally assailed in the public papers as "The Hi CHAP,persian Secretary," " The lad whose face had been . ^^ ,^^-' A. D. 1769bathed in the Liffey," "The dealer in the sublime to 1773.and beautiful," with many other similar epithets.Mrs. Burke once admitted that she believed herhusband knew the author of the letters, but that hecertainly did not write them ; and Burke himselfonce indirectly admitted to Sir Joshua Reynolds,that he knew the writer of Junius's letters ; giving atthe same moment an intimation that he wishednothing more to be said upon the subject. SirJoshua Reynolds and Mr. Malone believed thatBurke did not write these letters, but certainlypolished and finished them for the public eye. Mr.Dyer, an intimate friend of the Burkes, and a commissaryin the army, was the person whom Burke'sfriends suspected of having furnished the foundationof the letters ; and their suspicion was increased, orperhaps originated, by the conduct of Burke, who, atthe death of Mr. Dyer, which happened in 177~>intruded into his lodgings, and hastily destroyed aquantity of papers, saying they were of great importanceto him, but of none to any other person. LordMansfield, Sir William Blackstone, and Sir WilliniiiDraper, thought that Burke was Junius ; the last,upon l>urk(!'s (denial, tiirncHl his suspicions uponI^onl (george Sackville : we have uo evideiu'c thatthe other (objects of his att;u'k (•haiii2^(Ml their ()|)ini()n.K 'i1.^2 THE IIISTOUY OF I'AHTY.CHAP. As in the cases of Ilainiltoii and Lord Sackville,a corroborative incident is brought forward againstA. D. 17G9 ^ °to 1773. Burke. The readers of Woodfall's edition of Juniust\Yc aware that all the letters written by that authorwere known to Woodfall by a private mark, *' C/*By this mark many miscellaneous communications,under various signatures, are identified as proceedingfrom Junius, and among others the report of Burke'sspeech already alluded to. In his introduction tothis report, Junius speaks of it as having been spokenby himself at a debating society, and the advocatesof this hypothesis think that expression decisive uponthe subject. This same speech, however, was reportedmuch more correctly in the Political Register ;and appears, probably for beauties which are lost inthe report, to have been much admired at the time.Every member of the house of commons must haverecognised it at once as Burke's speech ; and it ishighly improbable that, if he had reported it himself,he would state that the report came from the author.The legitimate inference from this circumstance appearsto be only an uncertain probability that Juniuswas, at this time, a member of the house of commons.On the other hand, Burke distinctly and spontaneouslydenied to many persons that he was theauthor of these letters. Burke was a decided op-opponentof George Grenville, condemned andrepealed th(! Stamp act, and detested the idea oftriennial parliaments. Junius was a perseveringTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.1 S3encomiast of Grenville, an approver of the Stamp chap.act,* and an advocate for triennial parliaments;points of difference might be multiplied, but these are to 1773.sufficient to show that Burke could not have writtenthese letters. Another circumstance, in itself conclusiveagainst the claims of Burke's friends, is theaction brought by Burke against Woodfall, in 1783,for a libel printed in the Public Advertiser. Considerableinterest was made with Mr. Burke to inducehim to drop this prosecution, but he was inexorable.A verdict of a hundred pounds was obtained and theamount received. Junius could not have acted thus.To any person who has no particular theory toestablish, the mere perusal of Junius's private lettersmust be sufficient to convince him that they werenever written by ]burke ; in these we see the temperof the writer, and it is not the temper of BurkeSince the publication of the private letters, andthe identification of the miscellaneous letters, severalother names have been mentioned. A plausible• " if the pretensions of the same nature with the former. Itcolonies bad not been abetted by is this: That the disturbances arosesomething worse than a faction from the account which had beenhere, the Stamp act would have received in America of the changeexecuted itself"— ./««»«'»• Mis of ministry."extraneous Letters, No. xxxi.— ^ The arguments in favour ofCompare this with IJurke's speech (iurkc will be found collected inon American taxation. " Sir, the Prior's Life of Burke, and startedagents and distributors of false in the two pamphlets that havehoods have, with their usual indus been written in support <>l thetry, circulated inuithcr lie <\\' (lie idrtilitv rec l?iirkc and .Iiiiiinis.[Si THE IIISTOKV OF I'ARTV.CHAT, writer has undertaken to demonstrate that the DukeVI. .^ . of Portland was Junius, and that the antony whichA. U. I7()9to 177:3. inspired these letters was caused by the persecutionhe suffered at the hands of the ministry, under coverof the null ton tempus maxim. This advocate arguesthat the restoration of the duke's estate, which hadbeen granted to Sir James Lowther, was the direct,if not the only cause of Junius's writing. He showsthat, under the signature of " Menon," Juniusenergetically and perseveringly supported the causeof the duke : that upon this subject he was alwaysearly informed, always minutely correct ; while uponothers his information was frequently general, andsometimes erroneous : that in this defence he employsno less than seventeen signatures, and that thegreat grievance, however covertly introduced, isnever absent from his mind. He shows also that theletters in which Junius defended the Duke of Portlandcorrespond, in a remarkable manner, with thecase published, under the duke's authority, by Almon,in I7C8 ; and proceeds, after the manner of all hiscompetitors, to force every ambiguous sentence inthe letters into a declaration that the author was hishero. This practice is so universal with the discoverersof Junius, each is so keen in detecting andridiculing the credulity of his opponents, so credulousand confident himself, that I know no study moreinstructive, as an illustration of the infirmity of humanjudgment, than m perusal of the mass of contriteHISTORY OF PARTY.very upon the authorship of Junius's Letters. The CHAP,advocate of the duke is not without his direct evilA. D. 17(i«Jhence. The duke was intimately connected with to 1773the Cavendish family, both by birth and marriage.A packet received by Woodfall, but recovered byJunius, was sealed with the Cavendish arras. Oneof the letters in Woodfall's possession is sealedwith, what this theorist considers to have been,a ducal coronet,* others are antiques of which hisgrace's mother had a very fine collection. Thehandwriting of Junius and that of the duke are compared,and pronounced identical. In a memoir ofthe duke, his advocate finds it stated, that it waswell known that no gentleman in England could writea better letter ; and again, that he joined with theMarquis of Rockingham in writing down two administrations; for which purpose a joint-stock pursewas collected and employed.The anxiety which Junius showed to preserve hissecrecy, and his protracted silence when the periodof danger was past, arc accounted for with someplausibility. The leases of the Marylebone estatewould expire in 1794' ; the Cumberland property wasalready litigated. Had the duke been even suspectedto be Junius previous to that yeai-, could hehave expected from George III. the renewal of the• 'Flic impression is so imperii the ncmld's College, none olfeet, that when Ml. \\<M»(ir;ill biib- ilicrii (ouM <lctcrniine to whatmitted it to several of his* friends rank it belonged.1^6THE HISTORY OF PARTV.(^ H Ap. Man leboiie estate, under any administration, or from-— the protection of either party ? •' Motives," he toldto 177.-3. Sir William Draper, ** very different from any apprehensionof his resentment rendered it impossible heshould ever know him." It was important to theduke that the Scotch influence and the Tory powerwhich had attacked his Cumberland estates shouldbe overthrown ; but absolute ruin would be the consequenceof his detection as their assailant. Juniuscontended for a mighty stake — he thus secretly gavevent to his bitterness ag-ain't men who were attackinghis patrimony, yet whom he dared not openlyprovoke. The secret was never revealed, becausethe duke, in 1794, changed his party, to procure therenewal of the Marylebone estate. Thenceforwardthe letters of Junius must have been a fountain ofbitterness to their author.Such are the arguments put forth in support of ahypothesis which, like all others that have been advancedupon the same subject, obtained attention bythe solemn air of confidence with which it was usheredin, was heard, and was forgotten.*A second person pointed out, by a no less sanguinesection of the examiners of the private letters,was Sir Philip Francis, whose identity with Juniusis supported by an equal quantity of circumstantialevidence. The advocates of this candidate discover» Letters to h Nobleman, proving a late Prime Minister to havebeen Junius;.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 137that the chief object of the letters of Junius was to CHAP.. . . .VI.vilify' the ministry for having discharge-ed Mr. Francis — -—"^ o o A.D. 1769from a situation in the war-office. They show that to 1773.Junius, under other signatures, dragged before thepublic all the petty details of intrigues among theunderlings of the war office, dwelt upon them withan interest which none but a person intimatelyaffected by them could have felt, and discovered aminute knowledge of the transactions of the place,which none but an officer of the establishment couldhave possessed. They remark that Junius, who isso very sparing of panegyric upon other occasions,lavishes it upon Mr. Francis and Mr. D'Oyly upontheir quitting their situations ; and that Junius himselfappears to intimate that these letters werewritten by an injured man ; since, under the signatureof *' Scotus," he tells Lord Barrington, "You havehad some lessons which have made you more cautiousthan you used to be. You have reason to rememberthat modest humble merit will not always bear to beinsulted by an upstart in office." The signatureunder which .Junius wrote the letters to Lord Barringtonwas " Vetei'dii;'' and, in several of his privateletters to Woodfall, he expressed his anxiety thatVeteran should not be known to be Junius. If itcan be proved that Sir IMiilip Franc-is wrote theletters signed *' Veteran," all further argument fromthe expressions or peculiarities of the letters signed"Junius" is suJ)erHuou^, ils there can exist noLis THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, tloubt that the authors were identical. Those whocontend that Sir Philip Francis was Junius, alsoA.D. 17r)9 1 11 11 1 •to 1773. remark that Junius never attacks Lord Holland, issilent concerning him in his public letters, and in hisprivate communications to Woodfall acknowledges aninterest in his honour. Lord Holland, when Mr.Henry Fox, had given Sir Philip Francis a little placein the secretary of state's office early in life ; Dr.Francis, Sir Philip's father, was Lord Holland's domesticchaplain, and the tutor of his son. It appearsthat Junius and Sir Philip Francis have each declared,the latter in his " Essay on the Regency," the formerin the dedication to his letters, that they heardLord Chatham's speech of the 1 With December, 1770,and noted his expressions. A journey made by SirPhilip to the continent, during the period over whichthe letters of Junius extend, tallies exactly with asuspension of the correspondence between Junius andWoodfall ; Junius was very apprehensive of beingwatched by Garrick ; Garrick was acquainted withSir Philip, and had he caught a glimpse of Juniuscould, under this supposition, have identified him.The styles of Junius and Sir Francis are declared, bythe advocates of their identity, to be similar, and thehandwriting to be of precisely the same general character.*This circumstantial proof is very strong, but(•11 the other hand, those who have some otherJunius Identified.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. \o{)theory to support, speak with great contempt of the CHAP,advocates of Sir Philip. They iirg-e that Sir Philip '-. ^ A. D. 1769wrote to Sir Richard Philips, stating that it was a silly to 1773.malignant falsehood to attribute the authorship of theletters to lira. They remark that the works whichare avowedly those of Sir Philip have not a particle ofthe spirit of Junius in them. They notice that Juniuswas at first the violent assailant of Lord Chatham, andonly gradually dropped his hostility, and became anadmirer and panegyrist of that nobleman ; but thatSir Philip, who had been brought forward in lite byLord Chatham's interest, was always his follower andencomiast ; they remark that Welcome Ellis, who isnever mentioned by Junius but in the most contemptuousmanner, was a man to whom Sir Philipwas indebted for great kindness ; that Sir Philip wasan Irishman, whereas it is now generally admittedthat these letters were written by an Englishman,and that Junius " remembered the great Walpolebattles," and " saw the Jesuitical books burnt atParis" — events which happened before Sir Philip wasborn. By Sir Philip Francis's advocates it has beenthought a fact in their favour, that Mr. ^^^oodfall^the printer of the Public Advertiser, and Sir Philip,had been contemporaries and intimates at St. Paul'sschool. They say that Junius discovered an interestill the prosperity of his printer which he would noth;i\(' tl'It had lie known hiui inerel) as a printer.1 1-0 THE IIISTOllY OF PARTY.CHAP. But the fact is also capable of bailiff auro-ed on theVI. o oother side. Mr. Woodfall must have had someA. D. 17(if)to 1773. knowledge of his old schoolfellow, and when he wasnamed as the author he must have had peculiarmeans of judging whether the report was correct ; healways absolutely denied it. Some years after, Mr.\^'oodfidl, having been to a public dinner at whichSir Philip), then returned from India, was present,remarked to a friend, that he had just met his oldschoolfellow, Sir Philip Francis. "Then," answeredhis friend, ** you met, at the same time, your oldcorrespondent, Junius." — " Certainly not," was Mr.Woodfall's reply. " To my absolute knowledge SirPhilip never wrote one line of those letters"*Upon an impartial review of the claims of each ofthese writers, it will, I think, appear that, althoughit is possible that one of them may have been Junius,no sufficient proof can be brought forward in behalfof either of them. The idea appears, in general, tohave been suggested by some strong coincidence inaparticular point. Struck by this single coincidence,some sanguine inquirer has, in each instance, becomeat once convinced. He has continued the investigationwith a prejudice which nothing could shake, haswrested every ambiguous circumstance to his ownside, given to every sentence a construction corrobo-This anecdote was communicated to me by the present JMr.Woodfall.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.A.D. 1769to 1773.native of his preconceived opinion ; and where he met ^^"^^with a difficulty which could be neither overlooked ^nor destroyed, has avoided it, by the ever readyexcuse, that Junius wrote with a constantly sustaineddesign of avoiding detection. With such advantagesthere is not a public man of the period who could notbe supported, with some degree of plausibility, as theauthor of Junius's Letters.Very recently the inquiry has been renewed with increasedspirit, by Sir David Brewster, whose acumenand discrimination will certainly preserve him fromthe inconsistencies into which all his predecessorshave been betrayed, and who, if the materials exist,will probably determine the question. The candidatewhose claims are at present preferred by Sir David, isMr. Lachlan Maclean, secretary to the Earl of ShellThis gentleman, like every one of his contemporarieswho was known to be a political writer,was suspected by his private friends to be Junius,and when he afterwards received a lucrative appointmentin India, the newspapers of the day adoptedand spread the report. His claims were noticed byAlmon in the introduction to his edition of Junius,but without much rcspcict, and the idea, which wasnever very generally entertained, soon (IcH-lined, andwas forgotten. Its recent revival was the result ofaccident; Sir David IJrcwster, among the papers ofhis relative, Mr. Macpherson, found a number of142 Tlll^ lllSTOltY OF PAurv.CHAP, letters addressed to that gentleman by Maclean,VIwith whom Macpherson was in some way con-ad.1709 ,»,,,. . . rto 1773. netted. Although written upon private or ordinarytopics, the style was so peculiar, the epigrammaticdiction which characterizes the writings of Junius wasso marked, the phrases were in many instances sosimilar, and the general character of the handwritingso closely corresponded with the fac-similes publishedin Woodfall's edition of Junius, that Sir David was inducedto make further inquiries. From the scatterednotices which remain of so obscure a person, it appearsthat Maclean was the son of an Irish Presbyterianclergyman, descended from the Maclean of Coll, inthe Hebrides. He first applied himself to the studyof medicine, and served for some time as regimentalsurgeon in America. Upon his return he was introducedto Lord Shelburne by Colonel Barre, and abandonedhis profession, and became a political writer inLondon. The times were favourable for men of hisclass. The government was corrupt and gave largepremiums for talent ; whilst the keenness of publiccontests, and the variety of administrations that succeededeach other with such unexampled rapidity,sharpened the public curiosity, and fixed it uponparty politics. By several letters and pamphlets,which are not now readily to be met with or recognised,Maclean acquired distinction. He becameprivate secretary to Lord Shelburne, and rose to beTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.143 i|under secretary of state during the time that noble Chapmanwas in office. In this capacity he might haveacquired all that minute and ready acquaintance with to 1773.state secrets which Junius, during the same period,is proved to have possessed. He was the friend ofBurke and Goldsmith, and was, doubtless, a man ofconsiderable ability.If Maclean was Junius he must have been areckless and unprincipled man. In I77I he publisheda " Defence of the Ministry, on the subjectof the Falkland Islands," no copy of which productionhas been yet discovered. At this verytime, when Maclean was publicly defending theministry, we are told (in Campbell's "Life ofHugh Boyd), that he possessed a mortal hatredfor the Duke of Grafton, and indulged his resentmentby painting him in the blackest colours.He had been dismissed from office, and a personof his temperament would thus have many enmitiesto revenge, and many rivals to attack. Macleanhad his reward for his public defence of theministry. In 177'^ he was appointed, by LordNorth, collector of Philadelphia; and his absence uponthis commission, as in the case of Sir Philip Francis,tallies with the interval in the correspondence ofJunius with Woodfall, an interval which lasted fromMay, 1772, to January, 1773. In 1773 Macleanreturned from America, and went to India, with thebrevet rank of" ricntctiant-colonrl. This \v;is anui.THE HISTORY Olm PARTY.CHAP, appointment of no small emolument, and was thoughtA r»-<^« to be the reward of some greater service than theto 1773. <' Defence of the Ministry in the affair of the FalklandIslands." It is certainly a curious coincidence that,at this exact time, Junius ceased to write. Macleanreturned again to England in 177^>> and two yearsafterwards he undertook another voyage to India,being employed by the government, on official businesswith the nabob of Ascot. He was destinednever to return. His last letter was written upon hisknee, in the desert of Suez. *' I have embarked," hesays, ** in a crazy ship, with a crazy captain." Hispresentiment was verified ; the " Swallow" packetwent down, and all on board perished. In the shipwreckof this vessel perished any writings or documentsthat, if Maclean was Junius, might haverevealed the secret to his contemporaries. Macleanleft an enormous property, amounting to two orthree hundred thousand pounds.Such is a brief summary of the leading features inthe career of the man whose claims to the authorshipof these letters are now undergoing investigation.Since this hypothesis has been started, a curiouspassage, in Gait's *life of West," has been pointedout as favourable to its establishment. " An incidentof a curious nature has brought him (Mr.West) to be a party, in some degree, with the singularquestion respecting the mysterious author ofTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 145the celebrated letters of Junius. On the mornings CHAP.VI.that the first of these famous invectives appeared, — — —^ ^ A. D. 1769his friend, Governor Hamilton, happened to call, and, to 1773.inquiring the news, Mr. West informed him of thatbold and daring epistle ; ringing for his servant atthe same time, he desired the newspaper to bebrought in. Hamilton read it over with great attention,and when he had done, laid it on his knees, inamanner that particularly attracted the notice of thepainter, who was standing at his easel. ' Thisletter,' said Hamilton, in a tone of vehement feeling,'is by that d d scoundrel, M'Lean.' — * WhatM'Lean?' inquired Mr. West. 'The surgeon ofOt way's regiment ; the fellow who attacked me sovirulently in the Philadelphia newspaper, on accountof the part I felt it my duty to take against one ofthe officers.' — ' This letter is by him. I know thesevery words. I may well remember them ;' and heread over several phrases and sentiments whichM'Lean employed against him. Mr. West theninformed the governor that M'Lean was in thecountry, and that he was personally acquainted withhim. ' He came over,' said Mr. West, with ColonelBarry, by whom he was introduced to Lord Shell(afterwards Marquis of Lansdowne), and is, atpresent, private secretary to his lordship'"This anecdote is certainly of considerable weight ;some ]passages in the letters, possessed by Sir Davidvol TII. L1 K) Till!: IlISTOKY OF I'AllTV.CHAP. Brewster, bear a strong resemblance to Junius, andVI.niiirht well have been the careless productions of thatA.D. 17(>{) /^ ^to 1773. vigorous mind ; the declaration of Junius that he hadserved under one of the Townshend applies toMaclean. The character of Maclean, habitually agambler and a debauchee, discovers the absence ofprinciple which must have characterized it if Macleanwas Junius. The opinion of his friends, andeven of the government authorities in Ireland,pointed him out as the author. He stood in thesituation in which he could have learned the secretsthat Junius knew — he had been ejected from officeby those whom Junius attacked. These are a few ofthe points favourable to the identity of Junius andLachlan Maclean. They are not put forward as afair abstract of the arguments in his favour, for theinquiry is still in progress, and every day may bringforth some decisive fact.The objections to this hypothesis are certainly notless weighty than those which are opposed to manyothers. To begin with one of the weakest : Maclean,although not a very young man, does not appear tohave been old. Dr. Goode, the author of the preliminaryessay to Woodfall's Junius, who, having noparticular hypothesis to substantiate, is an impartialauthority, was convinced that Junius was a man of ageand experience. When we find that every one of thoseintimations, which are so impossible to be avoided or toTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 1 IJbe consistently feigned, favour this supposition ; that chap.none oppose it, and that, according to the best judges^^ . . . . A. D. )7(i9of handwriting, the handwriting of Junius is that of to 1773,the early part of the eighteenth century, we shall beinclined, in the absence of strong proof to the contrary,to agree with Dr. Goode, and to say that acandidate for the reputation of Junius should havebeen able to remember the great Walpole battles,and to have seen the Jesuitical books burnt at Paris.Another stronger objection is the denial of Mr.Woodfall. Although it is highly probable that thatgentleman did not know who was Junius, yet he hadmany means of discovering who were not. Minutediscrepancies between the delivery of the privateletters and the positions or occupations of any reputedJunius, might have enabled him authoritatively tonegative the claims of many of those with whom hewas intimate. Maclean was one of these ; yet whenhe set out for India, and the report that Junius wasgone was whispered about, Woodfall ridiculed it asabsurd.*The same objection which occurs to negative thepretensions of 13oyd, will apply also to any letters orpamphlets of Maclean, which, written after the dateof Junius's letters, may bear traces of his style. ItI have rLTci\«'il uii :i5isuiaiiCL' ol' this lai t fioiu tlif pix'scnt Mr.Woodfall.L '2Mes THE IIISTOHV OF TAllTY.IIAP. was the fashion to imitate the style of Junius : theVI. .,, ., - whole herd of political writers studied his phrasesA. I). I7(i9 ^ ito 1773, with curious attention, and thought they succeededin rivalling him in proportion as they could forge hispeculiarities. This mania was universal at the time.Sheridan was absorbed by it. Any argument fromsimilarity of style must, therefore, be based uponwritings anterior to the appearance of Junius.Still more serious difficulties are encountered inthe miscellaneous letters. The same letter, called•* A Grand Council upon the Affairs of Ireland,"which has been already noticed as decisive againstLord George Sackville's claims, is hostile to those ofMaclean. If Lord Sackville wrote it, he tauntedhimself with that charge of cowardice which imbitteredhis life — if Maclean wrote it he held up toridicule and contempt Lord Shelburne, his patronand benefactor. In neither instance could this havebeen a sacrifice to security, for the letter did notbear the signature of Junius, and therefore could nothave deceived the public. Junius had not yet commencedhis letters, no especial cause for concealmenthad hitherto occurred.Another of these miscellaneous letters, signed** Vindex," will be conclusive against any thing butunanswerable evidence. Junius, after the terminationof the dispute with Spain upon the subject ofthe Falkland islands, wrote two letters, under theTHE HISTORY OF rAKTY. 1 t9signature of "Vindex," inveighing against the com- chap.promise which had been made. He first attacked the ~ ^ ^^^^ministers, and concluded with an insult to the king, to 1773.so gross and personal that the printer objected topublish it — that part was cancelled ; even at thetime of publishing Woodfall's edition it was thoughttoo offensive to be restored, nor has it ever yet beenmade public. The MS. of this letter is now in Mr.Woodfall's possession, written in the handwritingof Junius, and marked with the private signature*'C." The second letter is a continuation of thefirst, and passes from the ministers to their defenders.Maclean, as we have seen, was one of these. Theletter is as follows :*' Sir, — Pray tell that ingenious gentleman, Mr.Laughlin Maclean, that when the King of Spainwrites to the King of Great Britain, he omits four-fifthsof his titles, and when our king writes to him,his address is always ' Carlo Dei gratia Hispaniarumutrinque Sicilia? et Indiarum Rcgi Catholic.' Itwas reserved for his present majesty to say, in a publicinstrument, ' Falkland island is one of my possessions,and yet I allow the King of Spain to reservea claim of prior right, and I declare myself satisfiedwith that reservation.' In spite of Mr. Laughlin'sdisinterested, unbroken, melodious, eloquence, it is al/iO Tiff, TTTSTOUY OF PARTY.cilAl'. iiiekuK'lioly truth, that the crown of Norland wasVI. : ^— jT — j:— never so insulted, never so shamefully degraded, asto 1773. by this declaration, with which the best of sovereignsassures his people he is perfectly, entirely, completelysatisfied. — Vindex"*As the authenticity of this letter is unquestionable,it follows that, if Lachlan Maclean was Junius, hemust not only have written against himself, but hemust have written also in ridicule of himself ; and thiswithout the object of secrecy, since no one but theprinter knew that Junius and Vindex were identical.If we admit that Junius was such a knave as tovilify his patron, and so foolish as to ridicule himself,it would be idle to insist upon the improbability ofhis writing, at the same time, upon both sides of apublic question ; or to urge that the line of politicsadvocated by Junius is not likely to be that whichwould have been professed by Maclean. Yet itwould certainly require some explanation to accountfor the fact of a secretary of Lord Shelburne writingas a partisan of George Grenville, and making thosevery letters a ground of merit with his patron. Suchmust have been the case if Maclean was Junius ; forLord Shelburne must have known the fact, or theThese letters arc both printed in Woodland's edition of Junius,vol. iii., [). ;j4:3.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 151object of the author could not have been attained. CHAP.Lord Shelburne may be supposed to be ignorant who ^ ^^ ^^^^Vindex was, ignorant also who it was who had exhi- to 1773.bited him as Malaria ; but he could not have beenignorant who Junius was, or Junius must haveremained unrewarded ; and as the present hypothesisrepresents Junius as an unprincipled adventurer, whowrote on either or on both sides, as his malignity orhis interest dictated, such a supposition is not admissible.These are a few of the objections which occur atthe first view, to this hypothesis. When these aresatisfactorily removed, Mr. Lachlan Maclean will beas likely as any one of his contemporaries to havewritten the letters of Junius. Circumstantial evidence,arising from style, handwriting, or particularcoincidence, may then be produced; it may beshown that he had all the facilities of minute information,and all the acerbity of feeling against thewar-office underlings, which fallaciously pointed outSir PhiHp Francis as Junius; — that he had the intimateconnexion with the Duke of Portland which wouldhave ]put him in possession of the intelligence, andplaced him under the influence of the bias that havethrown an improbable sus])icionu})onthatnoblcman; —that he had the personal animosities that might haveactuated Sackville— the vanity which drew ambiguousl.'>'2 THE IIISTOIIV OF Hearty.CHAP, denials tom 1 1 orne Tooke* — or the genius, the vigour■ ., .„ „ of intellect, wliieli ai)])eare(l to point out Burke. AllA. L). 17t)*) ' * ^ 1to 1773. this may be proved, and much more, yet so long asdirect evidence is wanting, and the objections vi^hichhave been before enumerated remain, hearsay anecdotesand circumstantial evidence will weigh as dustinthe balance ; or rather no circumstantial evidencecan exist, since the line of coincidences is not unbroken.It is not altogether improbable that direct evidenceof the authorship of these letters still exists, althoughits publication is reserved for some future period. Itis well known that Sir Philip]) Francis has left memoirswhich, after an appointed time, will see thelight. A suspicion has also long prevailed that thesecret is in the custody of the Grenville family ; andthe answers that have been, on all occasions, returnedto inquiries upon this point, merely denying anypersonal knowledge, but declining any answer to thereal question, whether the secret is supposed by thefamily to be in their custody, certainly favours theVVlicn Mr. Footfall project writer even at that distance ofed his edition of Junius, he ap time, and evidently wished toplied to Home Tooke for any inform favour the absurd report, believednation he possessed upon the sub and kept alive by his immediatesect ; Tooke pretended to evade his followers, that he was Junius,questions, spoke of danger to theTHE HISTORY OF Taurus 153supposition. If this suspicion should turn out to be CHAP,well founded, it will be better to wait, with patience, "7"5~p^for the certainty, than to amuse our curiosity with to 1773.plausible guesses.Such is a condensed account of the state of thecontroversy upon the authorship of the Letters ofJunius.l«5i THE HISTORY OF Beauty.CHAPTER VII.Lord Mansfield's doctrine of libels — Resignation of Lord Camden — Ofthe Duke of Grafton — The North administration — Biographicalanecdotes of John Dunning — Of Thurlow — Middlesex election —Private interference of George IH. in the decision of a cause beforethe courts — Subordinate changes in office — Attempts of the lordsand commons to preserve privacy in their debates — Arrest of theprinters — Released by the city magistrates — Proceedings of thecommons.CHAP. The terror spread among the retainers of the mi-vii.'- — sister, bv the scathing satire of Junius, convincedA. D. 1709 / .to 1774. the Tories of the necessity of silencing the press, andintroduced another topic of party contention. Thecelebrated " Letter to the King" appeared in Decemberof this year ; and, like number forty-five of theNorth Briton, it was hailed by the Tories as an opportunityat which party vengeance might wear thename of loyalty. An ex-officio information was im-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 155mediately filed against Woodflill, the printer of the CHAP.* . . Vll.]paper in which the letters appeared ; and, since furies\ ^ rr » ' J A. D. 1769.chosen from the people would be likely to considerthe satire deserved, and the author guiltless, LordMansfield undertook to withdraw the essential partof the charge from their judgment. It was uponthis occasion that he propounded the doctrine whichbecame such a favourite with his party, that, in questionsof libel, the fact of publication was the onlypoint to be determined by the jury ; — whether thepublication was a libel was for the decision of thejudge. The sturdy common-sense of twelve Englishmenwas, however, superior to the sophistry of theTory judge. The words and effect of their verdict,guilty of printing and publishing only," were thebest reply that could be given to his charge. Sinceit could not be denied that such a verdict amountedto an acquittal, it was evident that something morewas required for a conviction than a verdict upon thefact of publication.The commencement of the session of 1770 was a. D. 1770.signalized by Lord Camden's defection from theministerial side. In the debate upon the address hebroke the silence which he had long preserved.Rising from the woolsack, he said he had sat theretoo long — for some time li(> had beheld, with silentindignation, the arbitrary measures which \v(>re pursuingby the niini.-tr). Jlc had often, he said,A. D. 1770.l.)0 THE lllbTOUY Ol" I'AUTV.CHAP, drooped and hung down his head in council, and disapproved,by his looks, stops which he knew hisavowed opposition could not prevent. He would doso no longer, but would openly and boldly speak hissentiments. As to the incapacitating vote of thehouse of commons, he agreed with Lord Chatham,who had spoken before him, that it was a directattack upon the first principles of the constitution ;and that if, in giving his decision as a judge, he wasto pay any regard to that vote, or any other vote ofthe house of commons, in opposition to the know-nand established laws of the land, he should be atraitor to his trust and an enemy to his country.The ministry, he said, by their violent and tyrannicalconduct, had alienated the minds of the people fromhis majesty's government, he had almost said fromhis majesty's person ; that, in consequence, a spiritof discontent had spread itself into every corner ofthe kingdom, and was every day increasing ; and ifsome methods were not devised to appease the clamoursthat so universally prevailed, he did not knowbut the people, in despair, might turn their ownavengers, and take the redress of their grievancesinto their own hands. In a word, he accused theministry, if not in express terms, yet by direct implication,of having formed a conspiracy against theliberties of their country.*- Gcrillfinan's Magazine I'ur 1770.A.D. 1770.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 157This declaration of hostilities was feebly answered CHAP.VIIby Lord Mansfield ; who, instead of defending theconduct of his party in the house of commons, merelysaid, that he should carry his opinion of the incapacitatingvote with him to his grave. Nothing coulddraw from him any further explanation. He evensat silent when Lord Chatham replied that, if hisopinion was in favour of the ministry, it would bepronounced without hesitation, and called upon himto speak it, if he would not lie under the imputationof being conscious to himself of the illegality of thevote, and yet being restrained by some unworthymotive from avowing it to the world.The unexpected declaration of Earl Camden compelledthe minister to adjourn the house for a week,in order to make the necessary arrangements to supplyhis place. The seals were offered to CharlesYork, the second son of Earl Hardwicke, and whohad been twice attorney-general. Charles York wasa sound lawyer, and an able and honest man. Heaccepted the seals with great reluctance, and at theentreaty of the king, but died before the patent ofhis peerage could be prepared. The vacant dignitywas then offered to Lord Mansfield, but the Torieswere too unpopular to induce that prudent judge toresign a p(M-jnan(;nt for a contingent office ; severalothers also refused, and th(^ Tories were, at length,compelled to put the seals in commission, and makeLord Mansfield speaker of the house of lords.A.D. 1770.1,5S THE niSTOUY Olm PARTY.CHAP. While Lord Caiii(kMi roiiiaincd in ofdcc severalVII.Wliigs, who held subordinate stations, thought themselvesprotected by his authority, and retained theirplaces — these now thought themselves obliged toresign. In the debate upon the address, in thecommons, the Marquis of'Ciranby apologized for thevote he had given for seating Colonel Lustre, as anerror in judgment, to be bewailed as the greatest misfortuneof his life, and he resigned all his placesexcept his colonel's commission. James Grenville,who had hitherto retained his vice-treasurership ofIreland, resigned; Dunning, the solicitor general,the Dukes of Beaufort and Manchester, the Earls ofCoventry and Huntingdon — all who did not wish tobe entirely committed to the Tory party, and involvedin their unpopularity, followed his example.These defections added considerably to the. strengthof the minority, and the attacks of the Whigs wereincessant throughout the session. The Tories appearto have felt that no defence they could makewould convert their enemies into supporters. Theyadmitted their unpopularity,* and nearly abandoningthe debate, reserved their triumph for the division.In the debate on the address, with the honourable gentleman, ifCharles Jenkinsonon said, " The the authority of this house washonourable gentleman seems to be to depend on the voice of thealarmed for the authority of this people out of this house." — Pars.house. I should readily agree Ilisf., vol. xvi., col. Gf)0.A.D. 1770.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 1,59In the lords the opposition was still stronger ; there CHAP.VIIthe Duke of Grafton found himself exposed to theindignant eloquence of Chatham, once his mentorand his friend. Educated in those party principleswhich accustomed him to place some value upon thegoodwill of his countrymen, and finding himself anobject of public hatred ; confounded in the house oflords by the invective and reproaches of his formerfriends, and followed, even into his strictest privacy,by that terrible and mysterious shade, Junius, theduke could endure his situation no longer. On the28th of January he resigned.Thus ended the Grafton administration, havingsown, during a short existence, more germinatingseeds of discontent than years of Whig governmentcould eradicate. It was succeeded by a cabinetwhich, governing upon the same principles, and derivingno experience from the errors of their predecessors,brought national disaster and defeat to fillup the measure of their country's sufferings.Lord North was the new minister, and he commencedthe duties of his office by supplying thevacancies which had occurred upon the resignationof Lord Camden. Of these alterations the mostimportant was, that Dunning, the late solicitor-general,was succeded by Thurlow, a circumstancewhich presents to us two men, each (eminent in theparty struggles of tlu^ time.A. D. 1770.Ici THE IIISTOllY OF I'AlirV.CHAP. Jolin Dunning was, at this time, a successful har-viisister, and the history of his early life would bemerely a recapitulation of the ordinary instances ofpecuniary difficulties and unwearied assiduity whichform the frequent introduction to the biography ofcelebrated lawyers. His most intimate companions,while a student and a junior barrister, were Mr.Kenyon and Mr. Home. We may pause for a moment,to mark the three youths assembled over theirindolent meal,* and look onward to the future, whenone will be dazzling the senate by his sparkling eloquence; the second a powerful demagogue, swayingthe multitude at his will ; while the third presidesupon the bench of justice, revered as one of theoracles of the law. Was it that a secret sympathyemanated from the great although different powers ofthese celebrated men, and brought them thus earlytogether, or should we deem their future fortune theeffect of their early friendship, — that their latent energieswere called forth by contact 1In Stephen's " Life of Horne each. " As to Dunning and m}Tooke," the biographer says, that self," said he, " we were generous,he had been frequently assured, by for we gave the girl who waitedMr. Home Tooke, that he. Ken upon us a penny apiece, but Kenyon,and Dunning, were accus yon, who always knew the value oftoned to dine together, during the money, sometimes rewarded hervacation, at a little eating-house with a halfpenny, and sometimesin the neighbourhood of Chancery with a promise."lane, for seven-pence halfpennyTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. l6lDunning continued to frequent the courts without Chap."^ ^ VII.success, until a happy accident introduced him tonotice. One of the leaders of his circuit being takenill, intrusted him with his briefs, and Dunning wasno longer without practice. He had the good fortuneto be engaged on the popular side in one of thecases upon general warrants, and his bold and ableargument rendered him known to the Whigs, and afavourite with the people. It was the early objectof the Grafton administration to shield their Toryprinciples and Tory measures by Whig names.Dunning, therefore, in IjGS, was made solicitor-general,and was, in the same year, by the influenceof Lord Shelburne, returned for Cane, in Wiltshire.Dunning had many natural disadvantages ; hispersonal appearance was mean and abject in the extreme,his voice husky, his articulation difficult, andhis tone of speaking monotonous and destitute ofanimation ; yet, notwithstanding these formidableimpediments, he soon became eminent as a parliamentaryspeaker. His language was always pure, alwayselegant, and the best words dropped easily from hislips, into the best places, with a fluency at all timesastonishing. 1 1 is style of speaking consisted of theartifices which the old rhetoricians taught, and whichCicero practised, but Demosthenes disdained. Manyproperly censured this style as vicious ; but althoughthey censured as critics, llury were traiis|)uiU'cl asvol Ill ^iA.D. 1770.A.D. 1770.Icy TIIK lllsrUHY OF I'AltTY.CHAP, hearers. The faculty, however, for which he waschiefly famed, and which all found irresistible, washis wit. This relieved the weary, calmed the resentful,and animated the drowsy ; this drew smiles evenfrom such as were the objects of it, scattered flowersover a desert, and, like sunbeams sparkling on a lake,gave spirit and vivacity to the dullest and least interestingsubject. Perhaps the vivacity of his imaginationsometimes prompted him to sport where it wouldhave been wiser to argue, and perhaps the exactnessof his memory sometimes induced him to answerremarks that deserved no notice, and to enlarge onsmall circumstances which added little to the weightof his argument ; but those only who have experiencedthe difficulty of exerting all the mental facultiesin one instant, when the least deliberationmight lose the tide of action irrecoverably, can makethe requisite allowance for the defects of a publicspeaker.Such was Dunning, as he has been described tousby his contemporaries, and as he has been portrayedby the friendly pencil of Sir William Jones.As a party man he was honourable in his engagements,and consistent through life. He entered thehouse of commons as a Whig, and as a follower ofthe Earl of Shelburne — the connexion with his partyand his leader was only terminated by death.Edward Thurlow, who succeeded Dunning asA.D. 1770.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 1(33solicitor-general, was a man of a very different order chap.of intellect. His father was a clergyman, possessedof an inconsiderable living, and his family connexionsdo not appear to have been opulent or influential.*' There were two Throws in my country — Thur-lowthe secretary and Thurlow the carrier. I amdescended from the carrier," was an answer to aninquirer, as illustrative of the character of the manas of the antiquity of his family. Thurlow completedhis education at Peter-house, Cambridge, and manifested,at the university, all the leading features ofhis after character. Haughty and churlish, overbearingand obstinate, idle and irregular, he appearedcalculated to shine neither in dissipation nor in study.But his ability, in some degree, counterbalanced hiswant of application ; and although he never conciliatedhis tutors, he left the university with the reputationof having acquired a tolerable knowledge ofthe classics. From Cambridge he repaired to London,and commenced his legal education. In l']58he was called to the bar, and underwent the usualordeal of obscurity and indigence. For some timehis biography is but a recapitulation of ingeniousdevices for supplying his necessities, and of stratagemsfor reaching an assize town on his circuit withoutthe aid of money. But this period was sur-haunted; he grew into practice;, obtained the; favourof the r('l('])r,'it('(l 1)ih1i(^"^s of QikhmisIxmtv, .ind1<)1 THE IIIsrORY or PARTY.CHAP, through luM', the patronage of Lord Bute, and con-vii.. . .tinned to rise in his profession until, in NovemberIjGS, he was elected for the borough of Tam worth,A.D. 1770.and was now chosen to succeed Dunning as solicitor-general.Thurlow was a Tory by natural disposition.A man whose originally narrow mind hadnever been enlarged by the acquisition of generalknowledge, or even by any very profound study of hisown profession ; and who attempted to cover his deficienciesby a haughty assurance and overbearingdemeanour. He possessed a bigotry upon which allargument fell pointless, an obstinacy which no reasoncould shake, and an intrepidity of assertion which waseither ludicrous from his ignorance, or astonishingfrom his audacity.* He had a turbulent kind of eloquence,which sought rather to overbear oppositionThus, speaking in the house says the Bishop, " asserted thatof commons, of the decisions prior he perfectly well rememberedto the revolution, he undertook to the passage I had quoted fromdefend the Stuart judges, and said Grotius, and that it solely respect-that"even in those times when ed natural, but was inapplicable tojudges were not independent, the civil rights. Lord Loughborough,streams of justice ran with remark the first time I saw him after theable clearness." — Pari. Hist., vol. debate, assured me, that before hexxix., col. 1428. Another instance went to sleep that night, he hadis related by Bishop Watson, in looked into Grotius, and washis autobiography. The bishop, astonished to find that the chaina debate, had cited a passage cellar, in contradicting me, hadfrom Grotius, respecting the de presumed on the ignorance of thefunction of the word " right." house."The chancellor, in his reply,"THE HISTORY OF PARTY. l65than to convince — to silence rather than to confute. CHAP.VII.The sturdy boldness with which he spoke, and the—^ ^ A. D. 1770.uncompromising position which he always assumed,obtained for him, with the multitude, and perhapswith the king, a reputation for honesty of purposewhich his conduct sufficiently shows he did not possess.Although always opposed to the popular sentiment,he was not personally unpopular ; the peoplecould not believe that a man so coarse in his tastes,so rude in his manner, could be a parasite or acourtier.*The chief occupation of the new ministry was torepel the attacks of the opposition. The Middlesexelection was still a fruitful theme for motions. Mr.Dowdeswell, a leading Whig member, was constantin his motions upon this subject, and Dunning,Glynn, Beckford, Sir George Yonge, Townshend,Grenville, and Barre, were always ready to supporthim. Lord North met all their attacks with easyhumour, and, supported by Onslow, Blackstone, Jenkins.Do Grey, and Thurlow, as speakers, and by alarge majority of the house as voters, met a proposedstring of resolutions by a vote, that *' the decision ofthe house upon the case of Wilkes was agreeable to• Strictures on the Lives f)f Roscoe's Lives of Eminent Law-eminentLawyt-is. I'uhlic Players — &c.meters, linter's Reminiscences.l(i(iTIIK HIST()f{Y OF Party.CHAT, the hiw of the hiiul, and iullv authorized bv the lawVII. ' •' ^and custom of parliament."A. D. 1770. ^Similar attempts were made in the house of lords,where the Earl of Sandwich was now the ministerialorator. The Marquis of Rockingham and Earl ofChatham, however, were the only Whig speakers, andtheir motion was negatived by a large majority.* Aresolution was, on the contrary, carried, *' that it wasa violation of the constitutional rights of the com-mons'for the lords to interfere with that house in anymatter wherein their jurisdiction was competent."In this debate the Earl of Sandwich took occasionto charge Lord Camden with duplicity, in havingpermitted those proceedings, in silence, which he nowso openly condemned. But Camden defended himselfwith success. He rose, and declared, upon hishonour, that long before those proceedings had beenresolved upon he had denounced them to the Dukeof Grafton, as illegal and imprudent ; that, when hefound both his advice and opinion rejected and despised,and that those who had the immediate directionof them were determined to carry them intoexecution against every remonstrance he could make,he withdrew from the council whenever those subjectswere agitated, and had declined giving anyfurther opinion or advice relative to them ; that his» Pari. Hist., vol. xvi., col. 798. t Pari. Hist,, vol. xvi col. 822.AD. 1770.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. iG'Jreasons for so withdrawing himself proceeded from a chap.VII.conviction that his presence would only distract measureswhich his single voice could not prevent ; andthat his farther opinion had never been asked, becausethe conductors well knew he would have advisedagainst them. Chatham came to the assistance ofhis friend, and added his testimony to the truth ofhis defence, and the integrity of his conduct. Precludedfrom any further motions, the Whigs attemptedto proceed by bill. Lord Chatham brought it forward,but the attempt only succeeded in keepingalive the spirit of opposition, and in drawing fromLord Camden an able and constitutional speech.The Tory policy with respect to America wasweak and undecided. Alarmed by the menacing postureassumed by the colonists, Lord North repealeda portion of the duties ; but, contrary to the admonitionof the Whigs, and to every principle of soundpolicy, insisted upon retaining the obnoxious tea-tax.This miserable trembling course of conduct met thesuccess it deserved — increased the confidence andexcited the contempt of the Americans.*One triumph the Whigs secured this session, atriumph as glorious as the ministerial legislation wascontemptible. This was their carrying through bothhouses, in spite of the opposition of Lord North and• I'iirl. Hist., vol. xvi., col. HiiiJ.VII.A. U, 1770.1()S Till': iiiSTOHY or rAUTV.CHAi'. his coadjutors, a bill for abolishing the shaincful systemof deciding contested elections according to the interestssofa faction, and establishing that admirable modeof decision which still prevails The evil was so notorious,*and its recurrence was so constant, that itwould be difficult to anticipate the line of argumentwhich could be adopted in its defence. The principleof the bill could not be condemned, fault thereforewas to be found with its details ; and when thegreat parliamentary experience of George Grenvillehad obviated those objections, the Tories retired totheir last and impregnable position, that the oldmethod had worked well, the new one was full ofuncertainty and danger. " While," said the attorney-general,*' we seek to avoid an evil which, in its fullestextent, we have endured for many years, without anygreat hurt or damage, we should not involve ourselvesin dangers which may prove pernicious, and evenIn the debate upon rendering and whose only excuse for votingthis bill perpetual, in 1774, Mr. as they did was, that they were notT. Townshend described the pre in their senses." — Farl. Hist., vol.pious election decisions :" Twenty xvii., col. 1064. Other membersor thirty members attended, and added their testimony, that, uponpossibly half those asleep, during these occasions, the members com-the examination of the evidence ; ing to vote under the old system,but immediately as the question were usually so intoxicated fromwas put, down stairs came turn Arthur's or Alack's, that theybeing a number of members, who could scarcely stand,had not heard a word of the ti i;il,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.destructive. Better to endure those evils of which CHAP,we know the extent, than, in a sudden start of dis ^ ^ ^^^^gust and humoursome passion, to 'fly to otherswhich we know not of.' "*For once this veteran argument failed. As theministers did not condescend to intimate whencethese dangers were to proceed, the country gentlemen,for once, doubted their reality ; some of themalso probably remembered that, during the supremacyof the Whigs, they had been excluded from their owncounties and boroughs by the system which theirministerial friends now extolled. The ministry wasleft in a minority of 123 to 185, and the bill passed.At the rising of parliament, in May, the results ofTory government were evident in every part of theempire. America was in rebellion ; the revival of anobsolete law taking from the Irish house of commonsthe right of originating money bills, had thrown thatisland into confusion ; and at home multitudes wereforcing themselves into the presence of the sovereign,sounding in his ears their fierce remonstrances, andboldly throwing back his reprimanded Such was the• I'arl. Hist., vol. xvi., col. 921. scented an " Address, Petition, andHatsell's Precedents, vol. ii., p. Remonstrance," which lead hen20 unfavourably received, proceededt A few days after the end of to St. James's with a second. Thethe session, the corporation of answer, like that to tit former,London, who had already |iit- was, in effect, a reprimand ; butAi). 1770.170 THE HISTORY OF PAllTY.CHAP, state of things tlurlnor the recess; but Lord NorthVll. .could still reckon upon his parliamentary majority,and lauirh at the efforts of the Whites.The death of George Grenville, which happenedin November, made some difference in the state ofparties. He had been at the head of a section whichbore no very decided party character, and was unitedchiefly by the bond of family connexion and the commonobject of opposition. The Tory portion of thisbody now rejoined their original party ; the Whigsremained with theirs. The old Whigs, under theMarquis of Rockingham, continued, as usual, to extendtheir family connexions, and oppose the ministry; while Shelburne, Temple, and Chatham, eachthe sun of a little system, looked out into the nationfor assistance, and relied upon their popularity fortheir strength.the lord mayor, who headed the draw your confidence and regarddeputation, was Beckford. That from your people, is an enemy tointrepid and violent Whig, to the your majesty's person and family,amazement of the court, and with a violator of the public peace, anda boldness peculiar to himself, a betrayer of our happy constitutean immediate and spirited tion as it was established at thereply, which he concluded in the glorious and necessary revolution."following words : " Whoever has — Annual Register. Aldermandared, or shall hereafter endeavour, Beckford died a few weeks afterby false insinuations and suggests event, and his fellow-citizenstions, to alienate your majesty's erectedamonument in their Guild-affectionsfrom your loyal subjects hall, to commemorate his patrioticgeneral, and from the city of ism and his services.London in particular, and to with.D. 1770.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. l?!The principal feature of the session which com- CHAP,menaced in November, was the attempt made by theWhigs to impugn the doctrine of Lord Mansfield asto the jurisdiction of juries in cases of libel. In thehouse of commons, Sergeant Glynn, the most popularlawyer of the day, brought forward the subject,dwelt upon the importance of the innovation, and demonstrated,both from principle and precedent, thatthe doctrine of the chief justice was not law. Heconcluded with a motion for a committee, to inquireinto the administration of criminal justice, in casesrelating to the liberty of the press. A debate ensued,in which the London members rendered themselvesparticularly conspicuous. Alderman Oliver declaredthat his constituents thought that the courts of justicewere not always regulated, in their decisions,either by the principles of law, or the spirit of theconstitution ; they could see and feel the banefuleffects of court influence and Tory doctrines. Intheir apprehension, he said, maxims of jurisprudencewhich sap the foundation of our free government hadbeen countenanced and propagated by those verymen who ought to preserve the purity of the laws,and to check every innovation upon the rights of thepeople ; and of these men he believed the chief delinquentto be Lord Chief. Justice Mansfield. AldermanSawbridge supported the cause his constituents hadA.D. 1770.I?*^ THE HISTORY Ol' PARTY.CHAT. SO warmly espoused ; but Alderman Townshend said,that the doctrine of Lord Mansfield was only part ofa system, and that the influence of the king wasdirectly exercised to control the judicial decisionsof the judges. He related, as proof, a revelationlately made, upon his deathbed, by Sir Joseph Yates.A late judge," he said, "equally remarkable for hisknowledge and integrity, was tampered with by theadministration. He was solicited to favour the crown,in certain trials which were then depending betweenit and the subject. I hear some desiring me to namethe judge, but there is no necessity for it. The factis known to several members of this house ; and if Ido not speak truth let those who can contradict me.I call upon them to rise that the public may not beabused — but all are silent, and can as little invalidatewhat I have said as what I am going to say. Thisgreat, this honest judge, being thus solicited in vain,what was now to be done ? What was the last resourceof baffled injustice? That was learned froma short conversation that passed between him andsome friends, a little before his death. The last andmost powerful engine was employed. A letter wassent him directly from a great personage ; but, as hesuspected it to contain something dishonourable, hesent it back unopened. Is not this a subject thatdeserves inquiry ?" — The ministers, at the mentionA.D. 1770.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 173of this letter, stared upon each other, but made no CHAP.^ VII.reply.*The debate was continued upon its original ground,and all the distinguished speakers on each side werecalled forth by the occasion. Among a crowd of lessillustrious names, appear Burke, Dunning, and Barre,upon the Whig side, while Sir Gilbert Elliot, Onslow,De Grey, and Thurlow, stand conspicuous among theTories. Thurlow's speech, upon this occasion, isvery characteristic. He held that the question as towhether a paper be a libel, should, whether law orfact, be left to the judge ; and that it was not of anyconsequence which it was. No justice could, in statetrials, be expected from a jury, as they may justly beconsidered as parties concerned against the crown.Having disposed of the question in this summarymanner, he called for punishment upon the promotersof the motion. *' If we allow every pitiful patriotthus to insult us with ridiculous accusations, withoutmaking him pay forfeit for his temerity, we shall beeternally pestered with the humming and buzzing ofthese stingless wasps. I hope we shall now handlethem so roughly as to make this the last of suchaudacious attempts. They are already ridiculous andcontcnij>tiblc ; — to crown their disgrace, let us inflictsome exemplary punishment"! How rarely would• I'arl. Hist., vc.l. xvi., rol. \-2-2'.K f r.iil. Hist., vol. xvi.,(()l. I-J!)l.IJ^ THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Tliui'low have emulated Jofferies. The solicitorI.general was well calculated to remove any disgust forA. D. 1770. ^lawyers which the conduct of Yates might havecreated in the royal mind. A king would neverhave begged a little tyranny in vain from Thurlow.Several incidental debates occurred in the houseof lords also, upon the subject of Lord Mansfield'scharge upon Woodfall's trial. Chatham, Camden,the Duke of Richmond, and the Duke of Manchester,were incessant in their attacks upon the chiefjustice. He met them all except Lord Camden.Before the searching interrogatories of that constitutionallawyer the spirit of Mansfield evidently quailed.Even after pledging himself to discuss the questionhe continued to evade the subject ; and when, havingspecially summoned the lords, every peer came preparedfor the promised debate ; the earl's courageapparently failed, and he merely informed his impatientauditors, that he had left a copy of the judgmentof the King's Bench, in Woodfall's case, withthe clerk, and that those peers who pleased mighttake copies.At the commencement of the year I77I, severalchanges took place, by which the ministry acquiredadditional strength. Mr. Bathurst was createdBaron Apsley and Lord Chancellor, Sir William DePari. Hist., vol. xvi., col. ]fi]-3.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 175Grey became chief justice of the common pleas, CHAP.VIIThurlow attorney-general, and Wedderburne's un ' —certain Toryism was fixed by the post of solicitor to 1774.general. Lord Weymouth resigned the seals toLord Rochford ; the Earl of Sandwich became firstlord of the admiralty, in the place of Sir EdwardHawke ; and the Earl of Halifax succeeded LordSandwich as secretary of state, resigning his office ofprivy seal to the Earl of Suffolk.Among the objects now striven for by the Whigsnone was more valuable, and few more popular thanthe abolition of that veil of secrecy which had beenrecently cast over all parliamentary proceedings.During the long administration of the Whigs, wehave a continued series of reports of the debates,broken only by occasional and short intervals, whichwere generally caused by the resentment of particularmembers, who considered themselves either overlookedor misrepresented. When, however, theTories recovered their power, the opposition of thehouse of commons to the publicity of their debatesbecame systematic ; the established vehicles for thisspecies of information were compelled to discontinuetheir reports ; the parliamentary history becomesmeager and uncertain, and must be sought in thejournals of the house, and in the single speecheswhich were occasionally published by their authors.Every met hod was taken to prevent tlicir dilates170 THE IIISTORV OF PARTY.CHAP, from transpiring beyond the walls of the house.'■ The most effectual precaution was thought to be toA.D- 1771 '■ 1 P • 1 •to 1774. debate with closed doors, and for some time thispractice was strictly observed. In the session of1770, the terror of the Tory peers, lest the speechesof their Whig opponents should go forth to the public,produced a scene in the house of lords which hadnearly brought them into hostile collision with thecommons. The Duke of Manchester was descantingwith considerable eloquence upon the conditionof the country, the causes of popular complaints, andthe contempt with which those complaints wereheard, when he was interrupted by Lord Gower,who moved that the house be cleared. The Dukeof Richmond denied the right of the earl to move toclear the house while a peer was speaking. Immediatelya violent outcry arose, and all became clamourand confusion. *' Clear the house — clear the house !"was echoed from side to side. The Duke of Richmond'svoice was drowned in the clamour. LordChatham arose, hoping that his age, his reputation,his abilities, would force attention ; but invain. He continued, without being heard, for sometime.He sent the Duke of Richmond to thespeaker, to acquaint him that he wanted to speak tothe construction of the standing order. But he couldnot be heard. At length, wearied out, he declaredthat, if he was not to have the privilege of a lord ofTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 177parliament, and allowed the exercise of free debate, ^^i^^-it was needless and idle for him to attend parliament.A. D. 1770He left the house and about eighteen lords followed *« 1774.him. No sooner were these peers retired than thecrowd of strangers, including many members of thehouse of commons, were indiscriminately ejected.Some of these members were intrusted with a billfrom their o^\Tl house, and demanded to be readmitted ;but no sooner had they delivered their bill, than theoutcry began again ; time was not allowed them toreturn of their own accord, but they were hurriedand hooted out of the house, many of the peerscoming down to the bar and almost pushing them out.Such was the zeal of the Tories in favour of secrecy.The commons were highly indignant ; George On-slowreturned to the commons, in a passion, andimmediately moved that the house be cleared, " peersand all." This the Whigs, who wished to take moreserious notice of the insult, in vain opposed. ThoseWhig peers who had left their own house becausethey would not be a party to the insult upon thecommons, were now ignominiously turned out —there was no Tory peer present.*After this scene, which Colonel Barre described• Pari. Hist., vol. xvi., rol. 1317—2!).VOF,. III. N178 The HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, as unequalled by any bear-garden or cock-pit, strictorders were ffivcn bv the lords, to their officers, toA. D. 1770 . .to 1774. admit no persons into their house except commonersintrusted with bills, and to see that these departedas soon as they had made their customary obediences.The delicacy of Sir Fletcher Norton, the speaker ofthe house of commons, was so shocked by the accountof this riot, that, upon the occasion of some clamour,a few days after, he called to the members, " Pray,gentlemen, be orderly ; you are almost as bad as theother house"*The Tories of the house of commons, althoughthey manifested some resentment at their own exclusion,were no less absolute in their own house. Atthe commencement of the debate upon the bill tosecure the rights of electors, upon a lord of thetreasury made the now customary motion to clearthe house, and some little discussion arose. GeorgeOnslow said that, as long as the newspapers publishedthe debates he would always move the house to takethis step ; that none but the house had a right toprint them, and that this would show whether any ofthe members were concerned in writing them.Several of the Whig members replied to him. TheyPari. Hist., vol. xvi., col. seem, which was now the boldest1355. From the London Mu reporter of parliamentary news.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 171>said they were astonished to hear him make this mo CHAP.Vll.tion, seeing that the reporter of the debates, whoever ^ ^^ ,^^^^o I A. U. 1770he was, had greatly improved his speeches, and had to 1774even made them sense and grammar ; and that theimpartiality with which the speeches were reportedshowed that they were not composed by any manunder the influence of party.Onslow and his party persevered, but withoutsuccess. Sir William Meredith, and several otherWhig members, were always ready to report anyimportant debate, and either sent their notes to thenewspapers or published them as a pamphlet. Findingtheir first expedient fail, the Tories advanceda step further, applied the privileges of parliament topurposes of violence, and thus turned the powerwhich had been given them by the constitution toresist the tyranny of the crown, into an instrumentto destroy their responsibility to the people. Insteadof shutting out reporters they undertook to terrifyprinters. In the session of 1771» the house issuedorders for the attendance of two printers, who hadthus offended ; and when these orders were treatedwith contempt, despatched their sergeant-alarms tobring them before them in custody. The printersabsconded, and a reward of fifty pounds was offeredfor thvAv apprehension. TIk^ crusade thus commenced,the majority found no lack of objects ofvengeance ; six other p(ir.sons were soon after den'2ISO The lilSTOHY OF PAUTV.CHAP, bounced* tor the saint ciinic, and a most obstinateVII.- striigforlc ousiuhI between the parties. The Whigs,A. D. 1770 '^'^ ^ Vto 1774. finding that arguments to expediency and justicewere alike answered by cries of question, availedthemselves of every expedient for the delay whichthe forms of the house allowed, and persisted in continualmotions for adjournment. The numbers uponthese divisions varied from 143 to '70 on the side ofthe majority, and from 55 to 10 on that of the minority.The majority, however, were finally victorious; the six printers were ordered to attend ; somewere reprimanded, one was in the custody of thelords for a similar misdemeanor, and one who did notobey, was ordered to be taken into the custody ofthe sergeant-at-arms.tA few days afterwards, the three who stood out incontempt were taken. Wheble, one of those namedin the proclamation, had already obtained the opinionof Mr. Morris, a barrister, upon the legality of thewarrant, and that gentleman had advised, that anymagistrate before whom he might be brought by virtueof such a warrant would, if he did his duty, sethim at large, and commit the assailant (whether hewere a king's herald or a speaker's messenger),unless he gave good bail for his appearances• Colonel Onslow was again said, when he rose to move thethe Tory champion. He had order for their attendance.three brace of printers more," he f Annual Register. Pari. Hist.I Pari. Hist., vol, xvi., col. 96.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 181The city magistrates were not slow to act upon CHAP.writhesopinion. Wheble obtained a friend to discover " . ^^ , „A A.D. 1770him and claim the reward, and was carried before to 1774.Wilkes, who was now an alderman, at Guildhall.Wilkes liberated him without hesitation, bound overthe captor to appear at the sessions to answer for theassault, and obliged the printer, by a recognizance,to appear and prosecute. Thompson, the otherprinter named in the proclamation, was also taken,and carried before Alderman Oliver, who acted inprecisely the same manner. The third delinquent,Miller, the printer of the Evening Post, now surrenderedhimself, and was taken before Mr. BrassCrosby, the lord mayor. The proceedings had evidentlybeen pre-arranged : the deputy sergeant-alarmsfound Aldermen Wilkes and Oliver with thelord mayor, and the three magistrates immediatelydischarged his prisoner, and held himself to bail.This bold proceeding on the part of the city magistratescannot be defended as legal ; but neitheris it to be condemned as factious. That thehouse of commons possessed the privilege they thusabused is indubitable ; but the legality of their proceedingsonly magnified their danger. At a timewhen the independence of parliament was but a name,and when th(» privileges which tlicy held in trust fortheir constituents had been prostituted to strengthenthe j)ri;rogativ(> ol" \\\r crown, it was patriotism loIS 'J THE HISTORY OF I'AllTY.Char. liavo recourse to any means which might call the ate— mention of the ]people to the crisis, and warn themA. D. 1770 ^ 'to )774. of their danger.The commons could not but resent this attack upontheir authority, and they were compelled to perseverein the crusade they had so wantonly commenced.The lord mayor, being a member of the house, wasordered to attend in his place, and he was escortedon his way by thousands of the citizens, who hailedhim upon his arrival with one universal shout, prolongedfor nearly three minutes ; crowds of respectablecitizens thronged around him, and saluted himas " the people's friend," " the guardian of the city'sright and the nation's liberties ;" and, on his return,his horses were taken from his carriage, and he wasborne back in triumph to the mansion-house.* AldermenOliver and Wilkes were also ordered toattend, together with the lord mayor's clerk, whom,having got into their power, they forced to rase fromhis books the recognizance of their messenger.Wilkes refused to attend unless he was allowed toattend in his place ; and he sent a letter to thespeaker, claiming to be sworn as knight of the shireof Middlesex.Brass Crosby and Oliver were committed to theTower, after two debates, in the fonder of which theGentleman's Magazine for 1771.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 188Whigs put forth all their powers. The principal chap.point they made was the refusal of the Tories to allow ^ ^ ^.^^the accused to be heard by their counsel. Colonel to 1774.Barre having spoken against the motion for the committalof Oliver, concluded, '* That I may not be awitness of this monstrous proceeding I will leave thohouse ; nor do I doubt but every independent, everyhonest man, every friend to England, will followme. These walls are unholy, they are baleful, theyare deadly, while a prostitute majority holds the boltof parliamentary omnipotence, and hurls its vengeanceonly on the virtuous"*He then retired, and Mr. Dowdeswell, the Cavendish,and nearly all the Whigs, accompanied him.Upon the next day of sitting, when the motion forthe committal of the lord mayor was to be proposed,crowds besieged the parliament house. Lord Northwas attacked, and only preserved from serious injuryby the interference of Sir william Meredith. tWhen, however, the Tories got into the house, theywere unopposed. Few of the Whigs attended; Burkemade a short speech and Icfl them, and the accusedrefused to defend himself in a case which was alreadyprejudged.Wilkes, even this house of commons was afraid tointerfere with. Having made an order for his attendsTail. Hist., vol. wii, col. I.Vi. t Ibid., 1.^3.si THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, once, which was disobeyed, they issued another, andVII.then escaped from their embarrassment by adjourningA. D. 1770 , . , 1 ,1 1to 1774. over the day on which he was ordered to attend.The Tory majority was, in effect, vanquished, andthe debates were reported more regularly than ever.THE History OF PARTY.CHAPTER VIII.A. D. 1770to 1774.State of the popular mind — Rise of the democratic party — Biographicalanecdotes of John Home Tooke — The Whigs abandon thecause of corruption — Dissolution of parliament.The impunity of Wilkes upon the occasion of his *"y A^*releasing the printers, was a minute, but an importantproof of the presence of a new and gigantic powerin the elements of government ; it was a tacit andunwilling homage to the sovereignty of the people.The long administration of the Whigs had awakenedthe mick; classes from their political slumber ; duringthis interval they learned to note, to canvass, tocriticise ; and if they were then silent it was becausethe mass is not easily moved ; and they saw littleworthy of ODndrmnnticiii. Tli(Mr voice was not in thecm|)ty clamour vvjiicli the /.cjil of Jacobites and theIS() The History OV PARTY.CHAP, spleen ofdisa]>i)ointed place-hunters sustained againstSir Robert Walpole — once, indeed, that statesmanto 1774. heard it, and shrunk in terror from the sound. Noreliance upon a sure parliamentary majority, no rashcounsel from less wary partisans, could induce him toprovoke the repetition of that warning. No soonerdid he feel that it was no longer the fabricated imitationof Bolingbroke and Pulteney, but the genuinevoice of the people which called upon him, thanhe obeyed in consternation — *' I am not so mad asever again to engage in any thing that looks like anexcise"*It was reserved for Toryism to arouse this sluggishbut resistless monster into action. Toryism appeared,and arrested the national exultation in the full tideof victory, drove away the nation's idol, and fixed inhis place a king's favourite. A peace which all butits farmers deemed dishonourable, and a distributionof patronage which all but Scotchmen deemed unjust,produced a murmur that could not be mistaken. Corruptionstrove in vain to silence it — she was not yetequal to the contest. Force, the other instrument ofToryism, was sent forth ; imprisonments, seizures,military massacres, followed, and the voice was heardin thunder. To the ear of the philosophic statesmanit was a fearful sound ; it told the presence of avolcanic fire, whose power could not be estimated,Ante, \o\. ii., p. 185.THE HISTORY OF Party.to 1774.whose extent could not be measured; which ran ^y^^J*"beneath the surface, and was confined to no country, "XTdTittopeculiar to no clime.This heaving in the popular mass was first seen inEngland. One of its earliest and most importantsymptoms was the establishment of public meetings ;a custom unknown to our earlier constitution, and nowadopted as a means through which the people mightdeclare their newly-acquired consciousness of power.These assemblies, in which the nation deliberatedwithout the presence of its aristocratic chiefs, cannotbe distinctly traced higher than the year I7G9 ; butthey were now of daily occurrence. In them energyand talent gave importance to the humblest tradesman; the rights of the industrious classes were discussedand exaggerated until every individual in thenation felt that he had an interest in the politics ofthe state. Hence arose the frequent declamationsagainst the aristocratic form which the governmenthad now assumed, and exciting appeals in favour ofdemocracy. The light which had been kindledin England shone as a beacon to the nations, andsent its glare even across the Atlantic. There,amid the forests of the New World, slept a magazineof the elements of rebellion, the remnant of the samespirit \vhifh had once overthrown the British rao-narcliv. Toryism supplied the t(nv.\\, and it cxplixhulTHE FlISTOltV 01' PARTY.CHAP, with a violence that shook the institutions of the Oldvm.,^ ,„, World, and laid half the thrones of Europe in the dust.A. D. 1 /7() *■to 1774. In England these throes and convulsions precededthe birth of a new party. In the metropolis firstarose a sect of politicians who boldly set at noughtthe creeds of both the established parties, and invitedthe attention of the nation to a third principle ofgovernment.The founders of this party were highly educatedand thoughtful men, and the principles they avowedwere far more philosophical, in appearance, than thoseof the Whigs. They disencumbered themselves atonce of all veneration for ancient usages and establishedformulas ; they noted with industry everydefect, both in theory and practice, which could bediscerned in the government of the country as it wasthen carried on ; and they employed themselves indevising reformation which should remove everyanomaly, and reduce the constitution to a state oftheoretical perfection. In the prosecution of thisscheme they would make allowance for no prevailingprejudices, they would suffer no existing interests toimpede their progress ; every thing was to be madeto bow to the great object of a perfect government ;nothing could be worth sparing which was an impedimentin that path. The difference between thisnew party and the Whigs was, that the former wereTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. performersin gross, the latter in detail ; the one party CHAP,were theoretical, the other practical politicians ; the -former declared war against all abuses, the latter at to i^^***tacked them only when they became unbearable, andwere then careful to adapt their remedy to the existingstate of society.In arguing upon broad and general principles thedisciples of this school of politicians have always possesseda manifest superiority over the Whigs ; theywere confined within no limits, and were not afraidto push their principles lest they should lead them tosome too violent or disagreeable conclusion. But asthey have been superior in theoretical argumentso they have been deficient in power. The subjectwas of too mighty and extensive a nature to beembraced by ordinary minds ; yet it involved thefortune of every member of the community. Uponmatters of mere speculation men are often ready toyield their credence to high authority ; but uponthose which ]practically affect their own interestthey require substantia! proof All knew that thiswas a subject upon wIikK the highest intellect mightwell become bewildered ; they knew also that theconsequences of an error were incalculable, and theytreated the professors of the new doctrines as visionariesand enthusiasts ; they thought their reasoningspecious but unsound, and their object, even if attainsTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, able, not worth the irciioral disorganization throughwhich alone it could be accomplished. The middleA. D. 1770to 1774. classes, therefore, all who had property to lose,remained with the Whigs ; but, on the other hand,the mere populace, who had nothing tangible, and towhom the subject was only a matter of speculation,readily yielded credence to the authority of able men ;and, with the ordinary influence which the characterof the followers has upon that of the leaders, addeda deeper tinge of democracy to the new creed.One of the most able, and by far the most celebratedof the leaders of this new party, was JohnHome, a man who, in addition to his great ability,brought honesty and intrepidity to the task he undertook.The biographer of John Home Tooke, after someprelude about the sword-cutler of Athens, and thefuller of Arcanum, reluctantly admits that his hero wasthe son of a poulterer in Cheapside. John Homewas the youngest and the favourite son ; and as hisfather was possessed of considerable wealth no expensewas spared in his education. He was born in1736, and having passed two years at Westminsterschool, and six at Eton, he, in 17^5, became a memberof St. John's college, Cambridge. Here he appliedhimself with some assiduity, and upon his examinationfor his degree, he obtained a subordinate placeTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 19^among the classical honours. From a diligent stu chap.. VIII.dent at Canibrido;e we find the grammarian and —^ A. D. 1770future demaCToo-ue suddenly transformed into an to 1774.usher at a boarding-school at Blockhead. Thissituation was probably not the choice of young*Home ; he doubtless found the drudgery and themonotony as great a penance as Johnson had found itbefore him ; perhaps it was inflicted upon him by hisfather, to overcome the aversion which he had alwaysdisplayed for his appointed profession, the church.If such was the father's object he was successful. Hisson consented to be ordained, and accepted a curacyin Kent ; but his disgust for the duties of a clergyman,strengthened by an ague which he caught intheir exercise, became unconquerable ; he turned tothe bar as the object of his earliest partiality, andbecame a member of the Inner Temple. This stepexcited the anger of his father ; and the student'sfunds became at length so low that he was obliged toreliiupiish his favourite profession, make his peace athome, and return to the church. Upon this submissionhis father purchased for him the living of NewBrentford, a piece of preferment then producing between200/. and 300/. a year, and which Homecontinued to enjoy for eleven years. While he re-retained this situation, he appears to have faithfullyfulfilled the duties of a parish priest ; he was the19- THE IIISTOUY OF Party.S'Vn * ^*'^^"*^' the adviser, and the physician of his flock ; he"^Td^tto appeared to have overcome his restless spirit, and toto1774. Y^^y^^ reconciled himself to the monotony of his station; seldom enjoying any other excitement thancould be gained from a game at ombre or v^'hist. Hewas orthodox in his doctrines, and plain in his discourses; he could see no defect in the hierarchy, ormerit in a dissenter ; except in his studious habitsand profound philological erudition, he had nothingto distinguish him from the ordinary mass of the bodyto which he belonged.The proceedings against Wilkes, and the nationalenthusiasm which they awakened, aroused all thoseturbulent passions which had so long been chastenedinto silence in the breast of the pastor of New Brentford.The Middlesex election brought the scene beforehis eyes, and the actors to his own door. Thetemptation could be no longer resisted. Squibs,puns, paragraphs, letters, essays, flowed with ceaselessrapidity from his pen, and were readily printedby the London newspapers. As he proceeded hegrew more ardent in the cause ; he published a violentpamphlet, in which he avowed himself a candidatefor the honours of the pillory, and invoked the vengeanceof the ministry. " Even I, my countrymen,"he writes, " who now address you — I, who am at presentblessed with peace, with happiness, with index.D. 1771to 1774.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 19^dependence, a fair character, and an easy fortune, am, CHAP.VIII.at this moment, forfeiting them all. Soon must I bebeggared, vilified, imprisoned. The hounds of powerwill be unkennelled and laid upon the scent. Theywill track out, diligently, my footsteps from my verycradle. And if I should be found once to have setmy foot awry, it is enough — instant they open on me.My private faults shall justify their public infamy; andthe follies of my youth be pleaded in defence of theirriper villany. Spirit of Hampden, Russell, Sydney,animate my countrymen ! I invoke not your assistancefor myself, for I indeed was born a freeman."The prosecution thus eagerly courted did not follow; perhaps the boldness of the challenge preventedits acceptance ; or, which is more probable, the Torieswere unwilling to make the popular insinuationsagainst the Princess of Wales a subject of discussionin a court of justice. Home had become acquaintedwith Wilkes during a residence upon the continent,whither he went as tutor to the son of a neighbouringgentleman. Although the treatment hereceived from the outlawed patriot was not such asto give him great confidence either in his honesty orhis friendship, he continued to correspond with him ;and imprudently poured forth, in these letters, sentimentswhich were buried at other times, and whichwen; probably heightened to suit the taste of thelilHTtini; v,\\\r (jx)!! illic ^^^'sf minster electionvol IN. oiy4< THE HISTORY OV PARTY.CHAP. Horne broke all the bounds of clerical decorum ; heVIII.-— canvassed the county on horseback, opened inns atA. D. 1771 •' '■to 1774. Brentford at his own expense, appeared upon the hustings,and attached his name to a virulent printed attackupon one of the ministerial candidates. In the subsequentcontest with the house of commons he wasno less conspicuous ; he was the author of many ofthe most violent of the addresses which were nowtransmitted to the throne ; he published, in the PublicAdvertiser, an account of the interview betweenthe London remonstrances and the king, concludingwith the remark, upon the king's turning to his courtiersat the conclusion of the interview and laughing,that " Nero fiddled whilst Rome was burning." Itwas Horne, also, who drew up the address, remonstrance,and petition from the London common-council; and it is said that he also composed the reply-madeby the Lord Mayor Beckford to the sovereign'sanswer.In 1769, the party of which Horne was so prominenta member, found themselves strong enough toattempt the establishment of a society which shouldrepresent their opinions. Alderman Townshend andHorne were the founders of this association, whichwas called the Society for Supporting the Bill ofRights. A list of the early members presents uswith the names of the most conspicuous members ofthe new party. These were Sir John Bernard, SirA. D. 1771to 1774.THE History OF PARTY. 19«5Francis Blake Laval, Sir Joseph Mavvbey, Mr. chap.V i J. 1 •Sergeant Glynn, Lord jVIountmorris, Dr. Wilson, -John Home, Mr. Sergeant Adair, Aldermen Wilkes,Sawbridore, Oliver, and Townshend, Robert Morris,and William Tooke. The ostensible object of theinstitution of this society was the support and defenceof all objects of ministerial oppression. Thus, theyencouraged the printers to publish the parliamentarydebates ; and, as we have already seen, they collectedand expended immense sums upon JohnWilkes. But their political tenets most clearly appearin the terms of the test they proposed to candidateswho sought their recommendation. This testrequired them to promise that they would consent tono supplies without a previous redress of grievances ;that they would promote a law subjecting each candidateto an oath against having used bribery or anyother illegal means of compassing his election ; thatthey should endeavour to obtain a full and equal representationof the people in parliament ; that theyshould restore annual parliaments, promote a pensionand place bill, disqualifying all ]pensioners or place-menfor a seat in parliament ; impeach the ministers,vindicate the rights of juries, expunge all records ofthe arbitrary proceedings of the commons, redressthe grievances of Ireland, and restore the right oftaxafiori to America.*Sft'plicns Life (if Illic Toiikf.19^ THE History OF PARTY.Chap. In this inanit'esto matters of the most enduring andVIII. .fundamental importance are minted with others whichA. n. 1771 ^ , * ^to 1774. possessed only a temporary interest. The substantivepart of this party confession of faith is the declarationin favour of the universal right of representation, annualparliaments, and the exclusion of the influence ofthe crown. In the theory of the British constitution,monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy are equallymixed ; but in practice no such equality has everbeen discerned. They are antagonist principles,which can never coexist in equal and active operation.When the monarchical principle fell the aristocraticalsucceeded ; it was now in full domination.The Whigs were prepared to reduce its power, andto throw weight into the democratic scale, to balance,with nicety, the two principles ; but not to give thepreponderance to democracy. The new party deniedthe expediency or practicability of this, and whilethey assisted the Whigs to spoil the aristocracy, theycalled upon them to join them in building up thepower of the populace.The Society of the Supporters of the Bill of Rightswas broken up, by the pretensions of Wilkes, who,caring nothing for the political objects of the foundersof the Society, had succeeded in getting a number ofhis own creatures elected into it, and had rendered apolitical association a mere vehicle for obtaining subscriptionsfor his use. Home and his party then leftTHE HISTORY OF P/VRTY. 197it : the contest between "Wilkes and Home, which so CHAP,much amused the public, ensued ; and a society ;^ •' A.D. 1771called the Constitutional Society, from which the to 1774.Milites were excluded, succeeded it.The appearance of this new party was of considerablebenefit to the AVhigs. The extreme tenets theyprofessed stimulated the populace to action, while theboldness with which they attacked existing institutions,and the startling reforms which they proposed,drew general attention to these subjects, awakened aspirit of inquiry, accustomed the public mind to theirdiscussion, and habituated the educated classes tolook with less suspicion upon the more moderate propositionsof the ^\Tiigs.This increase of popular strength occasioned a considerablealteration in the tactics of the Whigs. Corruptionwas no longer necessary to their party, andthey disclaimed it ; the electors were no longer souniversally devoted to their landlords ; many of themhad begun to think, and the AVhigs were sure of theirassistance. Henceforward, therefore, we find a greatportion of the Whigs strenuous in behalf of short parliaments,and eager to extend the popular influence overth(; elections so far as that could be effected withoutdanger to the monarchical firms of the constitution.In the session of 1771 > Alderman Sawbridgemoved for leave to bring in a bill for shortening theduration (if parliiiiiicuts, a measure which, in tlM> time1!)8 THE HISTORY oi' party.CHAP, of Sir Robert Walpole, was the favourite propositionVIII.of the Tories ; but which now met with so Httlc f'a-A. I). 1771to 1774. your from them that the ministers thought it unnecessaryto reply to the speeches of its supporters, andcrushed it at once by their majority.* In the sessionof 177^2 the same motion was made with the samesuccess, and repeated in 177^^ bait the Tories alwayscleared their gallery, and then put an end to furtherdiscussion by a division. This parliament couldnever be brought to entertain the question, and adifference of opinion among the Whigs, some of whomthought that parliaments should be triennial, andothers that they should be annual, prevented theirpushing the question with that unity which can alonesecure success.On the subject of America the Whigs were moreunanimous, but not more successful. The Tories, trueto no general system of policy, at one time sought toappease the colonists by partial and ill-timed concessions,and at others to bear down opposition by violentand exasperating enactments. The Whigs alwaysattempted to extend the former so as to render themefficacious, and opposed the latter as ineffectual andThe majority was 105 to 34. of the near conclusion of theMany Whigs, among whom was session. — /*«;■/. //w^, vol. xvii., col.Mr Cavendish, opposed the mo 182.tion as unreasonable, on accountTHE Histoire OF PARTY. 199unjust. A motion made in the session of 1774, for chap.VIII.a repeal of the Tea-duty bill, produced Mr. Burke's ^ —1 1 * • • X. 1 A.D. 1771celebrated speech on American taxation, one of the to 1774.most brilliant pieces of oratory heard in our senate,or recorded in our literature. But the power of theminister continued unabated, and even Burke addressedan indifferent or impatient audience.At the end of the session of 1 77^^ ministers foundthat the hostile measures they had pursued withregard to America had produced these effects. Affairsthere stood in a very precarious condition ; andthe news of some violent attempt was daily to be expected.The civil list also was again become deeplyin debt ; and the distresses of the lower part of thehousehold, from the withholding of their wages, werebecome so notorious, and so much spoken of, that itseemed disgraceful to the nation as well as grievousto the sovereign. It would be necessary, therefore,in the ensuing session to demand a large sum ofmoney for the discharge of the standing debt, and ayearly addition to the civil list for the future. Atthe end of the session this parliament would expire,and the minister considered that it would be highlyimpolitic to send their friends to their constituents,burdeiKMl with the odium of the grant to the civillist, and of the measures which were producing suchexcitement in America. It was decided, therefore,that the parliament should be at once dissolMMJ.200 nil: iiisTouY oi' pautv.CHAP. Timidly notice was ffiven to the Tories, who thus hadVlll. . * .time to make their canvass, and secure their elections,A D. 1771to 1774. while the Whigs derived their first information fromthe Gazette. Parliament was dissolved on the 30thof September, and a new one was summoned to meeton the "both of November.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 201CHAPTER IX.Elections to the new parliament — Disputes with America — A contestbetween Whiggism and Toryism — Opinion of the Earl of Chatham —Biographical anecdotes of Charles Fox — American declaration of independence— Contests between the parties upon the American warLord North's propositions.The attempt now made by the Tories, to take the CIIAP.electors by surprise, had been foreseen by Junius, — - — '——A.D. 1774and anticipated in his dedication of the collected to 1778.edition of his letters. It was, nevertheless, to a considerableextent successful ; corruption and influenceobtained the re-election of a great majority of theTory county members ; and the number of treasuryboroughs prevented any apprehension in the ministerol (finding himself in a minority in the new THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, lament.* The commencement of the session .,^ ., — covered that the Tories had calculated accurately.Al). 1774 -^to 1 77a. Ji^ the division upon the address the numbers were264 to 73, a division that was decisive as to the characterof the new parliamentsThe decision of this house upon the Middlesexelection case, the great source of inquietude to theformer house, agreed with that of their predecessors.Mi Ices was again returned member for Middlesex.The people, who seemed to look upon him as onewhom they had created, and to love him as a son,had paid his enormous debts, rendered him easy inhis circumstances, made him Lord Mayor of London,and now sent him again into parliament triumphantover all his enemies. His first attempt was to obtainThe elections to this partial freeholders of that county, and,ment present us with early in- through them, of all the electorsstances of the practice of exacting of the kingdom ; and for repealingpledges from the candidates. At the recent acts which had beena meeting of the freeholders of passed to control the spirit ofMiddlesex, Mr. Wilkes and Ser resistance in America. Similargreat Glynn signed a paper, engagements were proposed and subscribeding their utmost endeavours to in London and some other popu-promote bills for the shortening loss constituencies ; but the lead-theduration of parliaments, for hers of the Whigs disclaimed allthe exclusion of placemen and such obligations as derogatory topensioners from the house of com- their characters as senators, andmons, for a more fair and equal re- restrictive of their rights as men.presentation of the people, for vin f Pari. Hist., vol, xviii., col. 45.tinting the injured rights of theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.that the resolution which had declared him incapable CHAP,to sit in the last parliament should be expunged from ^ ^ ^^^^the journals. His persecutions and his experience to 1778.had moderated his violence, and even Gibbon, who satinthis parliament, could say that, upon this occasion,he spoke well, and with temper. A majority, however,of 239 against I7I rejected his motion.The grand feature in the proceedings of this parliamentwere the debates upon the subject of theinsurrection in America. This question now became,and, while the contest lasted, continued, thetouchstone of the parties, and the point upon whichthey exerted all their energies. Early in the firstsession papers were laid before parliament whichfirst discovered to the nation the magnitude andimminence of the danger. It had been previouslyrepresented by the minister as a mere popular outbreakat Boston ; it was now seen in its true character,as the stern and desperate resolve of anunited people.On the next day the Earl of Chatham commencedthe attack upon the ministerial policy, with a motionfor an address to the king, to withdraw the troopsfrom Boston. The decrepit statesman appeared in-spared with the fervour of his youth, as he combatedagain in the cause of liberty. lie dwelt with anxietyupon the importance of the contest into which thecoimbra livid Immmi phiiigcd, and, with iiidigiuiLioii,'204 THE IIlsrOllY OF PARTY.CHAP. iij)on the injustice of the measures which had provokedit. " Resistance to your acts," he said, " wasneces-A. D. 1774 ^to 1778. say as it was just ; and your vain declarations of theomnipotence of parliament, and your imperious doctrinesof the necessity of submission, will be foundequally impotent to convince or to enslave yourfellow-subjects in America ; who feel that tyranny,whether ambition by an individual part of the legislature,or the bodies who compose it, is equally intolerableto British subjects.** This resistance to your arbitrary system of taxationmight have been foreseen ; it was obvious, from thenature of things and of mankind ; and above all fromthe Whiggish spirit flourishing in that country. Thespirit which now resists your taxation in America isthe same which formerly opposed loans, benevolence,and ship money, in England ; the same spirit whichcalled all England on its legs, and, by the Bill ofRights, vindicated the English constitution ; thesame spirit which established the great fundamental,essential maxim of your liberties — that no subject of'England shall be taxed but by his own consent.This glorious spirit of Whiggism animates threemillions in America, who prefer poverty with libertyto gilded chains and sordid affluence ; and who willdie in defence of their rights as men, as freemen.What shall oppose this spirit, aided by the congenialflame glowing in the breasts of every Whig in Eng-THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 205land, to the amount, I hope, of double the American CHAP.^ IX.numbers ? Ireland they have to a man. In that — — r•' A. D. 1774country, joined as it is with the cause of the colonies, to ins.and placed at their head, the distinction I contend foris, and must be, observed. This country superintendsand controls their trade and navigation ; but theytax themselves ; and this distinction between externaland internal control is sacred and insurmountable.It is involved in the abstract nature of things.Property is private, individual, absolute. Trade isan extended and complicated consideration ; itreaches as far as ships can sail or winds can blow ; itis a great and various machine. To regulate thenumberless movements of its several parts, and combinethem into effect for the good of the whole, requiresthe superintendence, wisdom, and energy ofthe supreme power in the empire. But this supremepower has no effect towards internal taxation, for itdoes not exist in that relation ; there is no such theirno such idea in this constitution, as a supremepower operating upon property. Let this distinction,then, remain for ever ascertained. Taxation is theirscommercial regulation is ours. As an American I^ )-)could recognise to England her supreme right ofregulating connnercc and navigation ; as an Englishman,by birth and principle, I recognise to the Americanstheir supreme unalienable right in their j)i()-party, a rightvvhich tlu'y are justified iji the defence'-iOG Tile IIISTUUV OF I'Airi'Y.CHAP, of to the last extremity. To maintain this principleis the common cause of the Whiffs on the other sideA.D. 1774to 1778. of the Atlantic and on this. ' 'Tis liberty to libertyengaged.' That they will defend themselves, theirfamilies and their country. In this great cause theyare immovably allied ; 'tis the alliance of (hod andnature — inevitable, eternal — fixed as the firmamentof heaven"*Thus was the contest upon this all-absorbingquestion recommenced in the new parliament. LordChatham soon after produced his promised project ofconciliation. This measure declared the absolutedependence of the colonies upon the British parliament,and its right of legislation in all matterstouching the general weal of the whole dominion ofthe imperial crown of Great Britain, and in regulatingnavigation and trade throughout the complicatedsystem of British commerce. Having made thisdeclaration, it proposed to enact that no tax or chargefor his majesty's revenue should be levied from Britishfreemen in America, without common consentby act of provincial assembly there, duly convenedfor that ]purpose.Having thus conceded the great point in issue,the bill proposed to restrain the powers of the Americanadmiralty courts within their ancient limits, toPari. Hist., vol. xviii coi. l.'>4.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 207restore the trial by jury wherever it had been abo ^"^^•wished, to take away the power of removing American ^ ^ ^^^^criminals to England for trial, and to suspend the «•» 1778.acts passed by the last parliament for stopping theport of Boston, altering the charter of MassachusettsBay, regulating the government of Quebec, and providingfor the quartering of soldiers. These actswere to be repealed from the day that the recognitionof the supreme legislative authority and superintendingpower of parliament should be made on the partof the colonies. The judges were to hold their commissions,as in England, quamdiu se bene gesserint,and the charters of the respective colonies were declaredinviolable. The bill concluded, *' So shalltrue reconcilement avert impending calamities, andthis most solemn national accord between GreatBritain and her colonies, stand an everlasting monumentof clemency and magnanimity in the benignantfather of his people, of wisdom and moderation in thisgreat nation, famed for humanity as for valour, andof fidelity and grateful affection from our brave andloyal colonies to their parent kingdom, which willever protect and cherish them"*Such was the Whig proposition of conciliation withAmerica ; a })roi)ositioii introduced by Chatham, andsupported by Lyttelton, Sh('ll)urne, Camden, Richmond,Manchester, and Temple ; which only secured• Pari. Hist., vol xviii., rol. im.'20S THE HISTORY OF Party.t HAP. to British subjects in Anioriea rights that were .ready enjoyed by every British subject in England.A. D. 1774to 1778. But the Tories would not for a moment Hasten to it.The Earl of Sandwich, angry that any one shouldinterfere with the ministerial mismanagement, immediatelymoved that the bill be rejected. The Dukeof Grafton, Earl Gower, and the Earl of Hills-boroughenunciated Toryism and called for war.No one among the Tories, and scarcely any oneamong the Whigs, appears to have entertained anysuspicion of the power of the Americans. The Toriesalways spoke of them with the greatest contempt.In the debate upon the address to the king to haverecourse to active measures to put down the rebellion,Colonel Grant said he had served in America, andknew the Americans well ; he was certain they wouldnot fight. They would never dare to face an Englisharmy, and did not possess any of the qualificationsnecessary to make a good soldier. He proceeded toamuse the house by ridiculing their dialect, their religiousobservances, and their customs, and his audienceappeared highly to relish his powers of mimicry.Thus did the Tories animate each other against theirfellow-subjects by mutual exhortations that theirvictims were incapable of resistance. They prevailedupon the division by a majority of Ol to 32, and theirdescendants at this day feel the effects of their success— they feel it in the existence of a powerful rival.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^09instead of a grateful dependant and an hereditary CHAi'.burden of a hundred raisons of national debt.A.D. 1774In the same session, Lord North brought forward to ins.a ministerial scheme of conciliation. This consistedof a resolution, that whenever any one of the coloniesshould propose to make provision, according to itscircumstances, for contributing its proportion to thecommon defence, and should engage to make provision,also, for the support of the civil government andthe administration of justice, if such proposal should beapproved by his majesty and the two houses of parliament,it will be proper to forbear to levy any duty,tax, or assessment in such colony. This propositionwas opposed by the Whigs as futile and treacherous,and its effect, for it was of course carried, verifiedtheir judgment. The Americans rightly judged thatit merely proposed to throw upon the colonial assembliesthe odium of collecting a revenue to be fixed inits amount by the British legislature. It was ratheran acknowledgment of weakness than an overture ofpeace, and mot with the contempt such indecisivemeasures deserve.*In th(^ session of 177'5, an attempt was made inthe commons similar to that which had already failedin the lords. I5urk(>, the acknowledged lender of theWhigs in that asseuii)lv, brought forward the; subject,• I'.irl Hist., vol. xviii., col. .'V2(>. Hiiitnu's Hist, of the I'liindStates.VOL Ml. r^10 THE HISTORY OK PARTY.CHAP, and prefaced a string of resolutions with one of hisIX. ' . '^-^r — :; — own bursts of genuine eloquence. But eloquenceto 1778. vas of little use before a tribunal which had alreadyprejudged the question, and as the house had beencarefully cleared of strangers before the debate wassuffered to commence, the Whigs had not even thesatisfaction of feeling that they were appealing fromtheir opponents to their constituents. The Toriesrepeated their general arguments on the supremacyof the British parliament, and in favour of the policyand necessity of American taxation. Charles Jenkinscited the practice of the French in their Paisd'etat as illustrative of the true principle of taxation.There, though the people seemed to grant, yet, inreality, the mode alone of raising the tax was left tothe province, the amount was fixed by the crown.That people, he said, had always been satisfied withthis reputed freedom, except in one instance, and inthat the interference of an army had quickly subduedall discontent. Lord Frederick Campbell thoughtany minister ought to be impeached who suffered thegrant of any sort of revenue from the colonies to thecrown. Other speakers followed in a similar strain,and the previous question was carried by a majorityof 270 to 78.The Whigs were unfortunately not supported uponthis question by the people. The city of London,indeed, whose merchants felt the effects of the ToryTHE HISTORY OF PARTV. QHpolicy in the destruction of their trade, was earnest CHAP.IX.in the cause, and the corporations of other large com-, . . A.D. 1774mercia cities and towns followed the example. Ad to 1 778.dresses were presented to Lord Chatham and Mr.Burke, thanking them for their exertions and imploringtheir perseverance, but the feeling was by nomeans general. It did not, as in the case of Wilkes,pervade all classes, or challenge the national sympathy.Many who, in such a cause, would have deemedresistance patriotism in England, thought it rebellionin America. It is seldom that tyrants can discernthe iniquity of tyranny. The English nation werein this instance the tyrants.*The adoption of the American cause, as their chieftopic of opposition, is highly honourable to the Whigsof this period. Any domestic reform would havebeen far more popular, would have offered them a farbetter prospect of restoration to power, and none• In the Declaration of Inde common kindred, to disavow thesedependence, it is said, " We have usurpations which would nevisour British brethren, from table interrupt tir connexionstime to time, of attempts by their and correspondence. They, too,legislature to extend an unwary have been deaf to the voice ofdanube jurisdiction over us. We justice and of consanguinity. Wehave reminded them of the circuit therefore, acquiesce in thesubstances of our emigration and necessity which denounces our se-settlementhere. We have apparition and hold them, as wepealed to their native justice and hold the rest of mankind, enemiesmagnanimity, anil we have con in war, in jicace friends."jurcd tlicm, by tin lies of our'21'2 THE IIISTOIJY OF PAIJTY.CHAP, could have been more distasteful to the sovereign.IX.The cause of the American was founded upon a printed.177 4to 1778. ciple too extensive to be estimated by a multitude,too liberal to be tolerated by a Tory king. Thedoctrine of an universal and inalienable right to freedom,a doctrine which even the versatile Halifaxcould not renounce when he abandoned his party —which he proclaimed to his startled colleagues, evenin the cabinet of Charles the Second,* was a fundamentalprinciple in the Whig creed, transmitted tothe present Whigs from the age of Hampden andRussell, ever cherished and upheld by the thinkingmembers of that party, disregarded or denied onlyby those who had assumed the name without imbibingthe spirit of Whiggism. This principle of their partycalled upon the Whigs of the present day to standforward as opposers of the injustice sought to be inflictedupon the Americans. Unmindful of the frownsof royalty, of the weakness of their numbers, of theloss of their popularity, they obeyed. They kepttheir party faith.The discussion of this question, calling forth appealsto the first principles of liberty, occurred seasonablyto renovate the philosophical character ofAVhiggism, and proposed a theme which might wellattract and develop the highest order of intellect. Inthese party battles, as they are now dimly seen, weSee vol. i , p. 339.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^13can discern the outlines of the form of many a for chap.IXmutable combatant, and amono^ them, one whose ^111 1 A. D. 1774prowess, and whose deeds become shortly better de to 1798.fined, who gained his loftiest triumphs before thepublic eye, and whose fame depends upon recordswhich all may peruse. Burke has been lately the chieffigure in our panorama of the house of commons, hemust now submit to divide our admiration withCharles Fox.Charles James Fox was born on the sith of January,1749, the third son of that Henry Fox, whosecareer we have already traced from its commencement,under Sir Robert Walpole, to its terminationin the house of peers. When but nine years old,Charles was sent to Eton, where it is said he gaveearly promise of his future eminence. When he hadbeen about five years at this school, his father, whosefondness for him was excessive, carried him, duringhis holidays, first to Paris and then to Spa. LordHolland was himself addicted to play, and he incautiouslysuffered his son to participate in his amusements.The love of gaming thus early implantedin the boy became a passion in the man, the sourceof continual unhappiness, and the most serious impedimentto his honourable ambition. From Ftoii,he was removed to Oxford, where \u) was placed a IHertford college, under the tuition of Dr. Newcomeafterwards primate of Ireland. Here the failure'J 11. Tin: nisTOUY of r.MiTY.CHAT, statesman was distinfriiii^luHl by the closeness of hisIX.application as much as by the power of his intellect.A. D. 1774 . * . .to 177S. "Application like yours," said his tutor, in a letterwhich Fox was in after life proud to exhibit, "re-(shires some intermission ; and you are the only personwith whom I have ever had connexion to whomI could say this." He acquired at Oxford an extensiveand intimate acquaintance with ,the Greekand Roman writers, an acquaintance, which duringthe strife and turmoil in which his manhood waspassed, he never suffered to be interrupted, andwhich formed his delight in his declining days.*For the mathematics he had little taste. Notwithstandingthe exertions of his tutor, he brought awaylittle of that kind of learning from Oxford, and althoughhe sometimes lamented he never remediedhis deficiency.In the autumn of 17^^, Fox quitted Oxford, andaccompanied his father and mother to the south ofEurope, where Lord Holland had been advised topass the winter, on account of his health. Heremained with them at Naples during the winter,and was left by them in Italy upon their return toEngland in the ensuing spring. During his re-There are some very interested in the Appendix to Mr.resting letters from Mr. Fox to Trotter's Memoirs of the LatterMr. Trotter, containing criticisms Years of Charles James Fox."iij)ori many of the ancient writersTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 215silence in Italy, Fox acquired proficiency in the CHAP,language and partiality for its literature ; he in- ^ ^^ ^^^^ -dulled freely in pleasure, but, unlike the generality to ins.of those who devote their nights to dissipation, hecould give the morning to study. A visit to Voltaireat Fern ay, and a fondness for private theatricals,in which he appears to have been more sanguinethan successful, are the only other circumstanceswhich are recorded of his residence abroad.Fox returned to England in August, I768, andalthough not of aj^e, he took his seat in the house ofcommons for Midhurst, for which borough he hadbeen elected in his absence. Lord Holland had, aswe have already seen, gradually lapsed into Toryism.Young Fox had been educated in his father'sadopted creed, aid one of his earliest productionswas a copy of French verses written in lyGls full ofinvective against Pitt, and eulogy of the Earl ofBute. Charles Fox, therefore, entered the house ofcommons as a Tory, and immediately proclaimed hispresence, by a speech full of insolence and zealagainst Wilkes, and in favour of Colonel Lustre'sclaim to the representation of Middlesex. Afterthis maiden essay, Tox returned to Paris and thegaming table, and we hear little of him until inFebruary, 177<), when he was retained by the ministrywith the jjlacc of junior lord of the admiralty.W'liile sitting upon the treasury benches, Vox was,2\C) THE History Ol PARTY.CHAP, bv no means niodoratc in his Toryism. He dcIX. " . .claimed in favour of Lord Mansfield, ridicule th(A. D. 1774to 1778. demands of the ]people, opposed the Nullum Tempusact, spoke and voted against Mr. Grenville's bill fordeciding election cases, and was the most energeticand violent man of the party in his persecution ofprinters and anti-ministerial writers. But althoughthe young senator thus endeavoured, with fiery zeal,to propagate the political faith of his childhood, hewas not a submissive subordinate. In 177^-> heopposed the Royal Marriage bill, by which the Toryministry surrendered to George III. tyrannical powerover all his relations. The king could not thinkthis opposition to his own measure expiated by lessthan a twelvemonth's exclusion from office, but noteven this punishment could bring him to the requisitesense of ministerial discipline. Early in1774, Woodfall was brought to the bar of the houseof commons to answer for the publication of a libelupon the speaker, written by Home Tooke. It wasmoved that he should be taken into the custody ofthe sergeant-alarms, and the house, unwilling toengage in a new contest with the press, were aboutto acquiesce. But Fox was warm and independentin his zeal : without communicating with Lord North,he moved, as an amendment, that Footfall be com-united to Newgate ; the minister was compelled tosupport his col](vigue, and found himself in the mi-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 217minority. Lord North, incensed at the disgrace, CHAP.punished the temerity which caused it, by dismissing —Fox from his office.* to 1778,This was the decisive moment of his ife ; but itwas a moment for which he had been some time prepared.Before his breach with Lord North, Fox hadformed an intimate acquaintance with Burke, and,like all that great man's contemporaries, had beentaken captive by his genius. His admiration of theWhig champion led him to re-examine the groundsof their political opposition. Burke was his companionin the inquiry ; he traced, with the finger ofphilosophy, the pervading principle of the apparentlyconfused and entangled state of politics and parties.He showed that the dangerous engines which hadbeen devised and employed by Sir Robert Walpole,and for which Fox probably entertained an hereditaryrespect, had long since been seized by the partywhich Walpole defeated ; that corruption and influencewere now united against the national interest ;and that Toryism, under the house of Brunswick,had lost nothing but its sincerity. From the master'sTlic manner of this dismissal card was delivered to him hy onewas very unceremonious. VVliilc of the door keepers — " His ma-foxwas actually cn{;aged in ( on j<'sty has thought proper to ordervariation with Lord North on in- a new cr)mniission of treasury todirtier-nt sul)j(xts, in alehouse of he made font, in which I do jkiIcannons, the ri.ll.iwitif; laconic see you nainc" — Xmi/i.'218 THE IIISTOHV OK PARTY.CHAP. example and instructions the young senator caught,, .^,. more elevated ideas of public principle than had beenA. D. 1774 IIIto 1778. entertained by the statesmen of the last generation ;and he learned the necessity of party connexions, inamixed government, to counterbalance the influenceof the executive, to watch the conduct of every minister,and to preserve a due balance of power betweenthe crown and the people. The masculinemind of Charles Fox grasped and examined the argumentthus submitted to it ; the scales fell from hiseyes, and he became in principles, a Whig.No sooner had Fox taken his scat upon the samebench with Burke, Barre, Dunning, and Saville,than a new era in his existence appeared to haveopened ; he found himself in the element for whichhe had been designed ; his spirit shook off the earlyfetters by which she had been limited, and spreadforth her pinions for a bolder flight. No sooner hadhe taken the free principles of Whiggism for histopics and his creed than, in the words of Gibbon,he discovered powers for regular debate whichneither his friends hoped nor his enemies dreaded'*It had been injustice to the memory of this greatman had we introduced him into every scene of partycontest which occurred after his entrance into thehouse of commons. In the little-esteemed retainerof a minister, whose speeches were never thoughtmore than clever, whose opposition was not alwaysTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 219considered worthy of notice by the Whiffs, and whose CHAP.IX.support was not always deemed valuable by the^\ -^ ^ ^ -^ A.D. 1774Tories, we could recognise nothing of the Charles t« 1778,Fox whom history honours. In those cramped limbs,swathed in the bandages of Toryism, we see no promiseof the thews and muscle of the mighty partychief ; in those academical speeches we hear no promiseof the voice which was heard above the turmoil ofparty strife, which cheered on a little band of followersto attack the power of a minister and the prejudicesof a nation, and sounded throughout Europe the tocsinof public liberty. The political career of CharlesFox, as he is known to posterity, commences fromthe time when he placed himself among the friendsof freedom and America.The eloquence of Fox, as it appeared at its maturityin the house of commons, cannot be betterdescribed than in the words of Sir James Macintosh,who, during the last fifteen years of his life, enjoyedhis friendship. " Everywhere natural," writes SirJames, " he carried into public something of thatsimple and negligent exterior which belonged to himin private. When he began to speak a commonobserver might have thought him awkward, and evena consummate judge could only have been struckwith the exquisite justice of his ideas, and the transparentsiiiipHcity of his manners. But no soonerlead he spoken for some time than he was changedO20 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, into niiotluM' being ; he forgot himself' and every thingaround him ; he thought only of his subject. HisA. I>. 1774 , 1 1 i. 1to 1778. Genius wanned and kindled as he went on ; he dartedfire into his audience. Torrents of impetuous andirresistible eloquence swept along their feelings andconviction. lie certainly possessed, above all moderns,that union of reason, simplicity and vehemence,which formed the prince of orators. He was themost Demosthenes speaker since the days of Demosthenes.* I kncAv him,' says Mr. Burke, in apamphlet written after their unhappy difference,when he was nineteen ; since which time he hasrisen, by slow degrees, to be the most brilliant andaccomplished debater the world ever saw.' "*Having once embraced the principles of freedom.Fox clung to them under every circumstance ; hiswas not a mind to be frighted from its convictions, toDr, Parr's Collection of Chas did not, as Burke employed it,con-rafters of Charles James Fox. In vey a denial of the right of Foxhis own essay upon the same suh- to he considered an orator. Asect. Dr. Parr finds great favdt good debater, in the ordinary ac-withthis testimony of Mr. Burke, reputation of that term, implies aand attributes his choice of the man who speaks with shrewdnessterm debater to envy. I am un and ready tact, skilfully adaptingwilling to admit that Edmund his language to the temper andBurke could feel envious of any prejudices of his audience. Theman, still less of his early friend man who adds " brilliancy" toand pupil. The word so obnox- these qualities is an eloquentious to Dr. Parr was probably orator,used in an extensive sense, andTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 321start at some unexpected effect, and abandon the CHAP.IX.advocacy of the general cause ; it was too philos '-,. , ' A. D. 1774phial to become the dupe of the common fallacy to 1778.which condemns a principle or an institution, by citinginstances of its abuse. The beautiful simplicity ofhis character extended to his intellect ; he micrhthave required the analytical powers of Burke toaccompany him in his search for political truth ; buthaving found it he needed no other guide thenceforward; his course was clear, and well defined ; hepursued it with the obedience of a child, with thestrength and energy of a giant.In the session of I77'i'» Fox joined the Whigs intheir spirited but unsuccessful opposition to the BostonPort and Massachuset's Bay bills, and althoughlittle record remains of his speeches, his name appearsin every attack made upon the ministerial Americanpolicy. In the debate upon the address in the sessionof 177'^> he moved the amendment, and it was hisspeech upon this occasion that excited the astonishmentof Edward Gibbon, and called forth the estimateof his ability which has been already quoted.*• For this sketch of the early though he has probably wiililuldlife of Mr. Fox 1 .im chiefly in- much that iiiiiy iiereaft r meet thedebtcd to an article in the Sii[)|)!e- i)iiblic eye, he gives a most accidentto the Encyclopedia Hritan- rate, although a concise, view ofnice. The author manifestly li;iil thecharacter.principlcs.and trans-accessto private correspondence actions of Mr. I'ox's piil)Ii<- life.and anilwntic papers ; and nl-2<-2^2 IIH- HISTORY OF PARTY.(chap. The first occasion upon which Fox appeared as a!-■ — leader of* the Whigs, was upon a motion which heto 1778. made in the session of 1775, for an account of theexpense of the army in America. The return hemoved for would, he said, open an astonishing sceneof ministerial delusion, held out by the pretendedestimate laid before the house a few days ago. Itwould bring the staff into the full glare of day whichhad been hitherto artfully held back ; it would show,that the expense of the ordnance this year had exceededany one of the Duke of Marlborough's campaigns,while in the midst of repeated victories hewas immortalizing the British name, and it wouldconvince the greatest court infidels of the temerityof the minister who, to the very last day of the session,insisted-and declared that the military servicein every branch and under every description, wasamply provided for ; that all his arrangements weremade, and who thus durst, in the bare article ofthe ordnance alone, incur a debt of £240,000. Hesaid it would be a farce to sit any longer in thathouse if accounts of this nature were refused ; thatthe motion was parliamentary ; that it would conveyno secret to the enemy ; and within his own knowledgeor reading, he never heard of an instance wheresuch information was denied, unless in instanceswhere it was impossible to comply with them ; suchas the accounts desired not having been received, orTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 223officially made up. Aware of this, he would be per- CHAP.fectly satisfied with copies of those already come to — — —hand, or of those gross computations made by esti- to ins.mate, and wait with pleasure for the remainder, till theministry could venture to face the public and an ensuredmajority with the disgraceful contents.*Thomas Townshend, Burke, and Sir George Seville,all Whigs of experience and importance, were,this evening, led by an orator six and twenty yearsold, and who, at that early age, had fought his wayto the foremost rank in each party successively.Lord North refused the returns demanded, and Jenkinssupported him in his refusal, a circumstancewhich gave the Whigs an opportunity they did notneglect, of taunting Lord North with the protectionof his powerful friend. The motion was negativedwithout a division.It would be tedious to enumerate, from the journalsof the houses of parliament, the various motions bywhich the Tory policy was attacked. The determinedstand of a small minority is an interestingobject of contemplation, when we can trace everyincident of the struggle, observe the weaker partygradually increasing, and mark the effect of their eloquenceupon the public mind, until the mass becomesinoculated with their enthusiasm. But although I'ox• Pari. IIi-,t. veil. xviii., rol. f)U9.\>^2l Ili; IIISTOUV {)! Party.CHAP, and Burke poured forth their eloquence upon thisIX.theme, their niirhtlv invectives died within the wallsA 1^ 1 774 o •to 1778 of St. Stephen's. The Tories carefully closed thestrangers' gallery, and, except when Burke put forthone of his finished orations through the press, thepublic knew no more of the debate than the newspaperwriters could gather from the recollections ofthe members. The contests in the house, therefore,had little effect upon public opinion ; and the minister,who estimated the eloquence of a speaker by thenumber of his supporters, frequently returned to themost elaborate speeches of Burke and Fox no otherreply than a division.A curious instance of the anxiety of the Whigspeakers to address the nation, occurred, in adebate upon the budget, in I776. Upon thisoccasion the minister was about to set forth theresources of the kingdom, and the gallery wasopened. The Whigs eagerly took advantage of thecircumstance. Governor Johnson remarked that, theobject in opening the gallery upon that one day wasevidently to give the minister an opportunity of misrepresentingthe usual arguments of the Whigs, anddispersing through the country his own uncontradictedstatements. Fox made more ample useof the occasion. *' He repeated," says the report,*' the governor's observation respecting the openingof the gallery, asking if it was cooler and more converseHISTORY OF PARTY. 2^5iiient for a crowd then than in January or February ; CHAP.IX.and asserted that the noble lord's speech of this day —^ , . -^ A.D. 1774was the reverse of what he had repeatedly maintained to 1778.in that house ; that it was a custom with the noblelord to contradict himself, but that he believed hemight have prudence enough, with a tolerable shareof preparation, to appear consistent for one day, andto tell the same story, however contradictory it mightbe to his usual argument, than which nothing couldpossibly be more opposite than his flattering descriptionof our situation and ability to answer every wantthe turn of affairs was likely to occasion. He animadvertedwith some humour and great asperity, onthe irregular conduct of the house respecting theopening of the gallery doors ; asserting that the publichad a right to hear in what manner their representativesdischarged their duty, and, that the gallery beingopen or shut should depend on the will of any oneor two persons, was exceedingly unfair. He dwelt aconsiderable time on this point, and after declaringthat he knew that the gallery had been opened on awhisper from the noble lord, when he was preparedto say any thing likely to produce a popular effect ;he asserted, that in his opinion, it was a breachof the constitution to ]prevent the; public fromhearing tlicir proceedings To the resolutions offered,Ik; said, he should give his flat negative, andthat, not because of any ]particular objections to theVOL. ni. Q^2Qi\ THE insrowY of rxuTY.CHAP, taxes proposed (although there might be a sufficientground for urging many) but because he could notto 1778. conscientiously agree to grant any money for sodestructive, so ignoble a purpose, as the carrying ona war commenced unjustly and supported with noother view than to the extirpation of freedom, andthe violation of every social comfort. This, he said,he conceived to be the strict line of conduct to beobserved by a member of parliament ; and to showthat it was justifiable, he found himself necessitatedto state the case of the American quarrel ; for asstrangers were admitted but for one day, it was necessaryfor him to repeat what he had often urged.This he acknowledged was rather out of order, butthe noble lord must expect that the irregularity of hisconduct would give rise to irregular debate.He then, in a very masterly manner, painted thequarrel with America as unjust, and the pursuanceof the war as blood-thirsty and oppressive. He said ithad been repeatedly urged that the Americans aimedat independence, and therefore ought not to be treatedwith until they laid down their arms : nothing couldbe more absurd than this sort of argument ; it wouldhave been just as ridiculous, if in our war with LouisXIV., who was said to aim at universal monarchy,vre had declined to treat about the provinces ofAlsace and Lorrain, on account of the report of hisaiming at universal monarchy. After expressing hisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. i227opinion of the quarrel, and justifying America with CHAP,that rapid flow of words, and that spirit and force of^ . A. D. 1774argument ibr which Mr. Fox was so distinguishable, to 1778.he, at length, took notice of the resolutions offeredby Lord North, and, in particular, spoke of theadditional stamp on newspapers, which he urged asimpolitic and unfair, while the ministerial brochuresremained unstamped. He said he was far frombeing a friend to the licentiousness of the press,although he revered its freedom. The papers wereintolerably licentious and injurious to the peace ofprivate families ; but the ministry had given rise totheir insatiable rage, to their calumny, by sufferinghis hirelings to abuse the gentlemen in opposition,in terms of the most daring nature. He observedthat the press, at this time, teemed with ministerial]publications, many of which deserved the severestcensure. That the pamphlet entitled, ' A Historyof the Thirteenth Parliament of Great Britain,*was a libel on that house, a libel of the mostimpudent kind, and yet it passed unnoticed. Theminister had very triumphantly held up, as a proof ofthe freedom of the press, the information that twelvemillion and upwards of newspapers were stanijx^d inone year ; he begged him to consider that there werenear twelve million of people in thi; kingdom : he,therefore, only ]proved, that every man in the realmmight l)uy one paper in the course of the year. Thei^*^^ THE IlJSTUllY OK PARTY.CHAP, minister told the house wc were able to provide supsj-^ j^ plies equal to any necessity, and yet he was puerto1778. suing an inhuman, unnatural war, for the sake of atrifling and uncertain revenue. lie, however, ratherbelieved what he said in the house, when strangerswere not in the gallery, than what had been sotriumphantly stated by him this day ; for he Wassure his declaration of the people's wealth could onlybe proved by admitting the doctrine, that when byany tax, four shillings in the pound were taken froma subject he was greatly obliged, as he was, in fact,given the remaining sixteen shillings. After a greatdeal of very poignant matter, Mr. Fox sat down, repeatingthat he gave his flat negative to the resolutionsproposed"*In the lords the Whigs were joined by the Dukeof Grafton. In March, 177^> that nobleman, for thefirst time, informed the house that the Tea-duties billhad been carried in the cabinet against his opinion ;and that he had always disapproved the measure ;and he submitted to the house a proposition for conciliationwhich had the support of Lord Camden andthe Whigs. With the duke's assistance, however,the Whigs could only obtain a minority of 31 peers ;91 voted with the ministers.In November of the same year the Whigs resolvedPari. Hist., vol. xviii., col. 1327.THE History OF PARTY. ^^0once more to record their protest against the Tory ^?x ^'policy towards America. Lord John Cavendish ^ p j^^^brought forward a motion, that the house should '^ ^'^'^^'resolve itself into a committee to consider of therevisal of all acts of parliament by which the Americansthought themselves aggrieved. A debate ensued,in which the principal speakers on each sidetook part, and, upon a division, the numbers were47 to 109.*The declaration of independence was at this timeknown in England ; that declaration which declaredthat the history of the then present king of GreatBritain was a history of repeated injuries and usurpations; that he was a prince whose character, markedby every act which may define a tyrant, renderedhim unfit to be the ruler of a free people ; that theUnited Colonies were thenceforth independent states,and all political connexion between them and GreatBritain was dissolved. tMany of the English readers of this documentwere scandalized by the reflections upon the king ;but almost every man felt himself insulted by therenunciation of the sovereignty of his country : thewar also became expensive, and the money was borrowed; lucrative contracts, and advantageous loanscould throw a ray of loyalty even into the city ; posPari. Hist.,voI.xviii.,col.l448. Hist, of the United States, vol. i.,)• Sec tliib dociinniit in llititou's p. ;)j5.'^30TIIH IIISTOUY OF I'AUTV.CHAP, polar excitement (;oiild not be sustained ; and thoseIX.■ ' — of the M'hi<rs who still thoujifht that America wasA. D. 1774 ^ &to 1778. just in her demands, and who foresaw that she wouldmake good her independence, found their warningsunheeded, and their opposition useless. From thistime a great number of this party, particularly of theRockingham section, began to relax in their attendanceupon parliament in either house, or rather towithdraw themselves wholly and avowedly upon allquestions which related to America, and only to attendupon such matters of private bills or business in whichthey had some particular concern or interest. Thisconduct was so marked that some of the principalleaders of opposition, after attending the house ofcommons in the morning upon private business, assoon as a public question was introduced, took a formalleave of the speaker, and immediately withdrew.*The Whigs avowed that they despaired for theircountry.From this state of indolent despondency, theywere roused in the session of 1777> by the surrenderof General Burgoyne, at Saratoga, and by the universalfeeling of indignation and alarm which theintelligence spread throughout the country. The illsuccess of the war had awakened many to itsinjustice : as Wilkes remarked in the house ofAnnual Register. Pari. Hist., vol. xvi., col. 1229.THE HISTORY OF Tasty. 231commons, Washington and Gates were powerful chap.apostles.* The country gentlemen, whom the mia.D. 1774sister had amused by the prospect of decreasing the to 1778.land tax by means of an American revenue, werebeginning to see the fallacy of their hopes ; theWhigs returned to the charge, and the majoritiesof the minister perceptibly diminished.During the debates of this session, a contentiontook place between Lord Lyttelton and the Earl ofChatham, strikingly illustrative of the antiquity ofthe device by which deserters represent themselvesas consistent, and their party as the deserters. LordLyttelton supported the ministers and their war,and Lord Chatham, in denouncing the war, tookoccasion to speak of certain Tory doctrines whichhad been promulgated in print by one of the bishops ;declaring that they were the doctrines of Canterburyand Sacheverell, and, as a Whig, he could neverendure them. Lord Lyttelton, who now found nofault with these doctrines, thought it incumbent uponhim to show that they were perfectly reconcilablewith the purest Whiggism. He avowed himself asgenuine a Whig as the noble earl. He had beenbred in the principles of \Miiggism from his earliestdays, and should persevere in them to the end. Heloved Whiggish principles as much as he despised♦ I'arl Hist., vol. xix., rol. HOn.'^'O'J THE II ISTOKV Ol' Beauty.eHAi\ those of aiiareliv and republicanism. But it* the bare,^ . name ot Wliiir was all that was meant, he disclaimedA. 1). 1774 '^to 1778. the name. It' an impatience under every species ofconstitutional government, if a resistance to legalrestraint, if the abetting of rebels, was the test ofmodern AV higgins, he begged leave to be excusedas one not avowing or professing such doctrines.He would, indeed, much rather share the odiumwhich had been unjustly cast upon another set ofmen, and be accounted a Tory in preference to amodern Whig.*Here we have Lord Lyttelton using the well-wornexpedient of drawing a distinction betweenancient and modern Whiggism, and appealing fromthe new to the old Whigs. Lord Lyttelton was, inhis own estimation, the true representative of theparty of Russell and Essex ; the Earl of Chathamwas, at least by implication, an anarchist and a republican.In the contests of the parties, we continuallytint public men sustaining themselves againstthe reproaches of their friends by similar assertions.Posterity has adjudged all these as apostates, some,perhaps, unjustly ; but the private motives of somany of them can be traced, that the remaining steware designated from this comparison.Previously to the arrival of the news of General• Pail. Hist., vol. xix., col. 491.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.'233Burgoyne's surrender, Fox had extorted from the chap.minister his consent to an inquiry into the state of ^ ^^the nation. The information gained by the oppo- to 1778.sition in conducting this inquiry, formed the basis ofseveral motions directed against the ministerialpolicy, but they received little discussion : the ministerswere now digesting a plan of their own, andshunned any altercation through which their schemesmight become known. In February, 177^> LordNorth laid this plan before the house, and introducedit with an elaborate speech. He declaredthat from the beginning he had been uniformly disposedto peace, that the coercive acts which he hadmade, were such as appeared to be necessary at thetime, though, in the event, they had produced effectswhich he never intended. That, when he found theyhad not the effect he intended, he proposed a conciliatoryproposition before the sword was drawn.At that time, he thought," he said, " the terms ofthat proposition would form the happiest, most equitable,and most lasting bond of union between GreatBritain and her colonies. By a variety of discussionsa proposition that was originally clear andsimple in itself, was made to appear so obscure as togo damned to America ; ^o that the Congress conceive,or took occasion to represent it as a schemefor sowing divisions, and introducing taxation amongthem in a worse mode than the former, and accordsTHE HISTORY OF Beauty.CHAP, ingle rejected it. His idea never had been todraw any considerable revenue, either in that way orA. D. 1774to 1778. any other, from America: his idea was that theyshould contribute in a very low proportion to theexpenses of this country. He had always knownthat American taxation could never produce a beneficialrevenue. " He never," he said, had " proposedany tax on America ; he found them already taxed ;when he unfortunately, as he still must say, whateveruse had been or might be made of the word,came into administration. His principle of policywas to have had as little discussion on these subjectsas possible, but to keep the affairs of America out ofparliament ; that accordingly as he had not laid, sodid he not think it advisable for him to repeal the teatax, nor did he ever think of any particular meansfor enforcing it. One of the bills he proposed tomove for was to quiet America upon the subject oftaxation, and to remove all fears, real or pretended,of parliaments ever attempting to tax them again,and to take all exercise of the right again in future,so far as regarded revenue. That as to the otherparticulars in controversy, he observed, that theAmericans desired a repeal of all the acts passedsince 1763."That as to the late acts, such as the Massachusettscharter, the fishery, and the prohibitory bills, as theywere the effects of the quarrel, they should cease.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^^^5and that as to complaints of matters of a various na chap.ture, authority should be driven to settle them to the .,,,*' ^ A.D. 17/4satisfaction of America. On the whole, his concerto 1778sons were from reason and propriety, not from necessity.That we were in a condition to carry on thewar much longer. We might raise many more men,and had many more men ready to send ; for the navywas never in greater strength, the revenue very littlesunk, and that he could raise the supplies for thecurrent year, as a little time would show. He submittedthe whole, with regard to the propriety of hispast and present conduct, to the judgment of thehouse"*A melancholy silence for some time succeeded tothis speech. It had been heard with profound attention,but without a single mark of approbation fromany part of the house. Astonishment and dejectionhad overclouded the whole assembly. The ministerhad declared that the sentiments he expressed thatday had been those that he always entertained, but itis certain that none had understood him in thatmanner, and he had been represented to the nationat large as, next to the sovereign,! the• Pari. Hist., vol. xix , col. "the king's war," " his majesty's .voiiritc war." The public printsf Instead of liilliiif; the war the teemed with assertions of thiswar parliament, or of the people, kind. Persons were eii)|)loyodit was, by the king's friends, called ,,„ purpose to write hooks, -THE HISTORY OF PAHTV.CHAP, poi-son ill it the most tenacious of those parliamentaryrights which he now ]proposal to resign,A. D. 1774 J )r^ 11 oto 1778. and the most remote from the submissions which henow proposed to make. It was generally, therefore,concluded, that something more extraordinary andalarming had happened than yet appeared, which wasofferee, to produce such an apparent exchange in measures,principles, and arguments. If the Whigs hadthen pressed him and joined with the war party, nowdisgusted and mortified, the minister would have beenleft in a minority. But their conduct was directlythe reverse of this ; they took such a hearty part withthe minister, only endeavouring to make such alterationsin, or additions to the bills as might increasetheir eligibility, or to extend their effect, that noappearance of party remained, and some of his complainingfriends vexatiously congratulated him on hisnew allies. These new allies, however, though theysupported his measures, showed no mercy to hisconduct.*piles, and daily publications, in North's Conciliatory Bill. Pari,order to disseminate these notions, Hist., vol. xix., col. 857.and make them universal. — Lord * Annual Register.Rockingham's Speech on LordTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER X.France concludes an alliance with America — Schism in the Whig partyupon the subject of American independence — Death of Lord Chatham— Yorkshire petition — Burke's plan of economical reform — Motionfor the repeal of the Septennial act — George Byng — Dissolutionof parliament — Elections — The new parliament — Motion against theAmerican war — Carried motion of censure upon the North administration— Dissolution of the North administration.The fears entertained by Lord North's hearers CHAP,were unhappily too well founded. Measures of conciliationwere now too late. France had concluded atreaty with our revolted subjects, and within a fewweeks after the debate upon Lord North's propositions,avowed, through her ambassador, her new engagements.The communication of this intelligence fell likea thunderbolt upon the nation. The Whigs lookedhack to the time when th(Mr ]party had been drivenA. I). 1779.^23HTIIK IlISTOUY OF Tasty.CHAP, from the cabinet, and to the position wliieh tluMrcountry then held ; and they were stung to fury whenthey contemplated the state to which she was nowreduced : her armies defeated, nay captured ; her resourcesdrained, her dominions dismembered, unableto contend even with her revolted subjects, and obligedto bear the insults of her ancient national foe.The Tories met their reproaches with a sullen obstinacy; and, however much they might murmuragainst their leaders in private, made it a point ofhonour to support them with their votes. Thus,when the French treaty with America was communicatedto the house of commons, and the Whigsmoved, as an amendment to the ministerial address,a clause praying his majesty to be graciously pleasedto remove from his counsels those persons in whomhis people, from past experience, could repose noconfidence ; they were outnumbered by a majority of150; and when Mr. Fox attempted to draw attentionto past miscarriages, and moved a string of resolutionscondemnatory of the Canada expedition, hefound himself supported only by 44 votes. Suchbeing the fate of his first resolution, Fox declared, inatone of violent feeling, that he would not makeanother motion, and, tearing up the rest of the resolutions,he threw the fragments upon the floor, andleft the house.The Tories, with the irresolution which had chas1779.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. characterizedtheir policy throughout the American chap.Acontest, were now as timorous as they had before been -rash. Many of their speakers inadvertently betrayedthe despondency which pervaded their counsels, andgave colour to the general idea that they were ready,if provided with a decent pretence, to terminate thewar at any sacrifice. Among the Whigs a considerabledifference of opinion prevailed upon this subject; a difference which soon after became an openschism. The majority of the Rockingham party,abandoning all hope of being able to overthrow LordNorth's administration, observing the deplorable stateto which the country had been reduced, and feelingthat the men who could not maintain it in prosperitycould never raise it from misfortune, wished to putan end to the series of national disgraces upon anyterms. This section of the AVTiig party was desirousof acknowledging the independency of the coloniesat once, rather than continue so severe a contestunder incompetent leaders. Lord Chatham, on theother hand, repudiated the idea of England shrinkingfr-om a contest. The mighty spirit which had bornehis country victorious through a crisis of equal danger,which had raised her once before from a postureof humiliation to the pinnacle of glory, and made herthe arbiter of Europe, could not brook the ignominyof abandoning a civil contest at the command of aforeign ononiy. This ronntrv was great enough to^210 'llIK IllSTOUV OF PARTY.CHAP, be just, without fear that her motive would be miss.construed ; but justice to an injured subject was veryA. D. 1779.different from the dismemberment of the empire. Hisvoice was for immediate war with France, and for thecontinued and uncompromising assertion of the Britishsovereignty. Broken and decrepit as he now was,the danger which threatened his country made him,nevertheless, forget his age and his decrepitude.Roused by the great occasion, his soul appeared toscorn the sufferings of the body ; he appeared nightlyin the house of lords, shaking even the throne withhis vehement invective, and encouraging his countrymenwith his exhilarating eloquence at a timewhen his body appeared scarcely able to performits functions, and life trembled in the flicker whichprecedes extinction.Thus did Lord Chatham spend his last days, andthus he died. On the 7th of April, 1778, the Dukeof Richmond brought forward an address composedof a series of resolutions founded upon the informationwhich had been obtained during the inquiry into thestate of the nation. These resolutions recapitulatedthe events of the war, recounted the efforts that hadbeen made, the treasures that had been expended,the blood that had been spilt, and the successes thathad been obtained, and contrasted all these mightyefforts with the then state of the British cause in America,where our acquisitions were only two openTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^41towns and a few islands on the coast, and our army CHAP.Xand navy were alike reduced and inefficient. The/ A. D. 1779.conclusion drawn from these facts was, that " we seeit impossible to carry on the present system of reducingAmerica by force of arms."Hyacinthus stated their facts and drawn theirconclusion, the Whigs proceeded to account for thecalamities they deplored, and they found their originin the delusive arguments and false representations ofthe ministers. The remedy they proposed was towithdraw from America those armies which were requisiteto our security at home, to effectuate conciliationwith the colonies on such terms as mightpreserve their good will, to restore the ancient moralsof the kingdom and recover the true spirit and principlesof the constitution by some sober, well-digestedplan of public reformation, and to banish from theroyal councils those ministers who had abused hismajesty's confidence, tarnished the lustre of his crown,disgraced his arms, weakened his naval power, anddismembered his empire. The address conchuhHlwith an admonition to the sovereign to look back tothe principles which had placed his family upon thethrone ; to call to mind the circumstances of hisaccession to the crown, when he took possession ofan inheritance so full of glory, and of the trust ofpreserving it in all its lustre ; and to put an end tothe system wliicli had so long prevailed in his courtVOL. III. |{24^ THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and cabinet, which, if suffered to continue, wouldX.■7-7; leave nothing in the country which could do honourA. D. 1779. *=> -^to his government, or make the name of Englishmenthat pride and distinction in which they had suchreason to glory in former happy times.The Duke of Richmond enforced these resolutionsby an able speech. Lord Chatham satopposite to him, and listened with earnest attention.'* He had come into the house," says an eyewitnessof the well-remembered scene that followed,*' leaning upon two friends, lapped up inflannel, pale and emaciated. Within his large wig,little more was to be seen than his aquiline nose andhis penetrating eye. He looked like a dying man,yet never was seen a figure of more dignity : heappeared like a being of a superior species. Herose from his seat with slowness and difficulty,leaning on his crutches, and supported under eacharm by two friends. He took one hand from hiscrutch and raised it, casting his eyes towardsheaven, and said, ' I thank God, that I havebeen enabled to come this day to perform myduty, and to speak on a subject which has sodeeply impressed my mind. I am old and infirm,have one foot, and more than one foot in thegrave. I am risen from my bed to stand up in thecause of my country, perhaps never again to speakin this house.* The reverence, the attention, theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 243stillness of the house was most afFecting: if any one CHAP,had dropped a handkerchief the noise would have -—been heard. At first, he spoke in a very low andfeeble tone ; but, as he grew warm, his voice rose,and he was as harmonious as ever ; oratorical andafFecting, perhaps more than at any other period,from his own situation, and fi-om the importance ofthe subject on which he spoke. He gave the wholehistory of the American war ; of all the measuresto which he had objected ; and all the evils which hehad prophesied in consequence of them, adding atthe end of each year, * and so it proved.' "*My lords," continued he, " I rejoice that thegrave has not closed upon me ; that I am still aliveto lift up my voice against the dismemberment ofthis ancient and most noble monarchy. Presseddown as I am by the hand of infirmity, I am littleable to assist my country in this most perilous conjuncture; but, my lords, while I have sense andmemory, I will never consent to deprive the royaloffspring of the house of Brunswick, the heirs ofthe Princess Sophia, of their fairest inheritance.Where is the man that will dare to advise such ameasure ? My lords, his majesty succeeded to anempire as great in extent as its reputation was unsullied.Shall we tarnish the lustre of this nation by♦ Si'wanl's Anecdote's, vol. ii., |i. 'J8M. I'.iil. Hist., vol. xix.,rol IlK'lii.I{ '2''^'i'i THE IllSTOHV Ol I'AUIY.CHAP, an ignominious surrender of its rights and fairest~-r possession ? Shall this jjreat kingdom that has sur-ad.1779. * fo ftlived whole and entire the Danish depredations,the Scottish inroad, and the Norman conquest ;that has stood the threatened invasion of the SpanishArmada, now fall prostrate before the house ofBourbon ? Surely this nation is no longer what itwas. Shall a people that seventeen years ago wasthe terror of the world, now stoop so low as to tellits ancient inveterate enemy, * Take all we have, onlygive us peace ?' It is impossible I I wage war withno man or set of men. I wish for none of theiremployments, nor would I co-operate with men whostill persist in unrestricted error, or who, instead ofacting on a firm decisive line of conduct, halt betweentwo opinions where there js no middle path.In God's name, if it is absolutely necessary to declareeither for peace or war, and the former cannotbe preserved with honour, why is not the lattercommenced without hesitation. I am not, I confess,well informed of the resources of this kingdom, but Itrust it has still sufficient to maintain its just rights,though I know them not. But, my lords, any stateis better than despair : let us, at least, make oneeffort, and if we must fall, let us fall like men."Lord Chatham sat down, and Earl Temple whisperedto him, " You forgot to mention what I talkedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 245of— shall I get up." Lord Chatham replied, " No, CHAP,no, I will do it by and by." ^ p ^^^qThe Duke of Richmond rose to answer thespeech of his friend, and re-stated the reasons whichinduced him reluctantly to dissent from so great anauthority. While the duke spoke. Lord Chathamlistened with attention and composure ; and when hesat down, he made an eager attempt to rise, as iflabouring with some great idea: but his strengthfailed him. After two or three unsuccessful efforts tostand he fell backwards. He was instantly supportedby those who were near him ; every onepressed round him with anxious solicitude. Hisyoungest son, then a youth of seventeen, was behindthe bar, and sprang forward to support his venerableparent. The house was immediately cleared,the debate adjourned, every consideration was absorbedin anxiety for the life of Lord Chatham.History has no nobler scene to show than that whichnow occupied the house of lords. The unswervingpatriot whose long life had been devoted to hiscountry, had striven to the last. The aristocracyof the land stood around ; even the brother of thesovereign thought himself honoured in being one ofhis supporters ; ]party enmities were remembered nomore ; every other feeling was lost in admiration ofthe great spirit which seemed to be passing lionamong them. He was removed in a state of ingensTIIH IIISTOUY OK PAllTY.CHAP, nobility from the house. M'hen the efforts of hisX.physicians had restored him to some degree of animation,he expressed his wish to die among his wifeand children, and was removed to Hayes. He Angeredfor a short time, but on the fourth day expired.The event, although it could not have been unexpected,was deplored as a national calamity. Thehouse of commons received the intelligence withdeep sensation, and when it was proposed to honourthe departed nobleman with a public funeral, and amonument in Westminster Abbey, orators fromevery part of the house came forward with their tributeof panegyric. It is highly honourable to thecharacter of Lord North that he was the first of hisparty to support the motion to do honour to his illustriousenemy. Lord Chatham died poor ; he hadpassed through offices in which large fortunes hadbeen usually accumulated, refusing even the ordinaryperquisites of his appointments. Upon oneoccasion, no less a sum than 20,000/. thus received,was applied by him to the public service, and this,at a time, when he was scarcely master of 1000/.The country had still, therefore, a debt of gratitudeto discharge. The commons voted 20,000/.or the payment of his debts, and passed a bill,annexing a pension of 4000/. to the title. Inthe lords, this bill was opposed : eleven Torypeers attempted to intercept the gratitude, nay theA. D. 1779.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 247justice, of the nation. The Duke of Chandos CHAP.hinted that the bill was far from being a measurefavoured by the king. The Lord Chancellorthought it a sufficient reason to reject the bill that ithad not originated with the crown, and remarked,with a sneer, that he saw no reason to despondalthough the Earl of Chatham was no more. LordRavenswood could see no merit in the Earl of Chatham.He had, he said, come into parliament withhim, and sat with him for fourteen years in the otherhouse, and he doubtless thought that, if perseverancein a pursuit deserved success, he had himself by farthe better right to a pension. The Earl of Abingdon,the Duke of Richmond, Lord Camden, theEarl of Ramon, Lord Lyttelton, and the Earl ofShelburne, nobly defended their deceased friend.The bill passed by a majority of 31. Bathurst,Chandos, Paget, and the Archbishop of York protested— such public degradation will men welcome inorder to pander to the passion of a king.Lord Chatham's career has been too closely anobject of our attention to require any detailed analysisof his character. lie was a man formed for greatoccasions, possessed of the highest and noblestqualities, which were all subservient to the purestpatriotism ; he was calculated to wield a dictatorship)with energy and success, and might have been trusted248 THE IIlsrOllY OF Inanity.CHAP, to lay it down when the danger had passed ; but he'- was not a statesman for ordinary occasions. He oncedeclared himself a lover of honourable war ; it was inthat that his boldness, his decision, his prompt andpenetrating wisdom, were pre-eminently called forth.He could not condescend to flatter adherents, to paredown differences of opinion in the council, to managethe different interests which obtained in either party ;his genius was of an imperial order, and required anample field and a grand occasion for its development.In his earlier days he declaimed against partydistinctions ; and refused to be known as a memberof either faction ; but as he increased in experiencehe reversed this opinion. As he saw more nearlythe practical working of the constitution he becameconvinced of the necessity of party connexions in afree country ; and, during the latter years of his life,he was frequent and energetic in his declarations thathe was a Whig.Thus, deprived of their champion, that section ofthe Whigs which refused to acknowledge Americanindependence became weak. Lord Shelburne, Barre,and Dunning, were the most conspicuous members oftheir party who adhered to this opinion. Burke andFox, with the great body of the Whigs, wore theAmerican uniform of buff and blue, and declared forpeace and independence. On the day preceding thatTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 24-9of Lord Chatham's death, a motion upon this subject CHAP,was made in the commons ; Fox and Burke spoke in ^^ ^^^^favour of the motion ; but several of the Whigs, whohad become enamoured of the Tory scheme of reconciliation,thought the proposition premature, and itwas lost without a division. Fox, undaunted bydefeat, returned nightly to the charge : whenever anaddress was proposed by ministers, whenever an opportunityfor introducing the topic of America wasgiven, he was found inveighing against the obstinacy,the absurdity, the imbecility of ministers ; and callingfor condign punishment for all the advisers of thepresent policy. His perseverance was not withoutits effect. In the session of 1779 he had nearlyrouted the ministerial ranks by a vote of censure uponLord Sandwich. The country gentlemen, confoundedby his eloquence, appeared to waver ; andLord North only recalled them to their allegiance bydeclaring that the result of a defeat must be a dissolutionof the ministry.* Still the opposition gainedconsiderably, the numbers being I70 to 204. Thesemotions were incessant throughout the session, andthe minority was no longer composed of from 40 to50 members. In a committee of inquiry into theconduct of the American war, the Whigs divided —155 to 189, and 158 to 180, a sign that those who• Aiiiiiial Register.XA. D. 1779.'260 THE HISTORY OF PAllTY.CHAT, had uro;o(l ministers forward in their violent Torypokey would desert them with little ceremony, whenthat policy was found unsuccessful. In November ofthis year, the vehemence of Fox betrayed him into apersonal quail with Mr. Adam, a gentleman whohad just declared himself a ministerial convert, andwho excused his apostacy by declaring that he sawmen on the opposition bench far more incapable thanthose then in office. Fox complimented the ministersupon their success in procuring so able an advocate ;one who had told them he could not defend them onthe ground of their own conduct, but that he would informthe world that the men who opposed them weremore infamous and more disgraceful than themselves.'' Were I a minister," he said, " and so addressed, Iwould instantly reply, * Begone ! begone ! wretch Iwho delighteth in libelling mankind ; confoundingvirtue and vice, and insulting the man thou pretencesto defend, by saying to his face that he certainlyis infamous, but that there are others still moreso."Mr. Adam resented this attack, and the result wasa hostile meeting. In this affair Mr. Fox behavedwith great coolness ; and, although wounded by thefirst fire, concealed his hurt until a second shot hadbeen exchanged and the quarrel settled.While Fox was thus exhausting all his indignantdeclamation upon the minister and his underlings.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 251Burke was pursuing a more laborious system of oppo- CHAP,sition. It was the universal cry of the AVhig-s both —•' , ^ A.D. 1779.in the houses of parliament and without, that the ministerialmajority was held together by bribery ; andthat the parliamentary approbation of the Americanwar formed no inconsiderable item in the list of itsexpences. It was said that the immense sums spentby the administration in the prosecution of this enterprisegave the minister an opportunity of sendinginto the house of commons a number of memberswho, as government contractors, must be devoted tohis service. Several motions had been made, andsevere speeches delivered against this class of members; and the Whigs had even introduced a bill toexclude them from the house ; but Burke had employedhimself upon a laborious and extensive task,which included this amon other acknowledged existingevils, and had given promise of a scheme of economicalreform, which, extending to every branch ofthe public service, should diminish the improperinfluence of the executive, and protect the interestsof the people. This was a formidable instrument ofopposition. If the cause which had rendered the houseso unanimous for the American war was, that thecountry gentlemen had hoped to effect by it a reductionof the land tax, they would probably be equallywilling to accept such a boon from a Whig as a Tory,and if it coiiM be obtaiiunl by abandoning 1 lie war,^52 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, would perhaps sacrifice it and its authors to their primaryobject.A.D. 1779.On the 11th of December 1779, Mr. Burke gavenotice of his plan. After some observations upon themeans he conceived were used to prevent him fromengaging the attention of the house to this subject, hesaid, *' a general sense prevails of the profusion withwhich all our affairs are carried on, and with it ageneral wish for some sort of reformation. Thatdesire for reformation operates every where exceptwhere it ought to operate most strongly — in thishouse. The proposition which has been lately madeby a truly noble duke, and those propositions whichare this very day making in the other house, by anoble lord of great talents, industry, and eloquence,are, in my opinion, a reproach to us. To us, whoclaim the exclusive management of the public purse,all interference of the lords in our peculiar provinceis a reproach.** This is the second year in which France is wagingupon us the most dreadful of wars, a war of economy.M. Neckar has opened his second budget. In theedict of November last the king of France declares,in the preamble, that he has brought his fixed andcertain expences to an equilibrium with his receipt.In those fixed expenses he reckons an annual sinkingof debt. For the additional services of the war heborrows only two millions. He borrows not for per-THE HISTORY OF PARTY.petty, but for lives ; and not a single tax is levied Chaponthe subject to fund this loan. The whole is X^^itto.founded on economy, and on improvement of thepublic revenue. This fair appearance, I allow, mayhave something at bottom which is to be detractedfrom it ; a large unfunded debt is probably left. Beit so ; but what is our condition in respect of debtsboth funded and unfunded ? What millions shall wenot, must we not, borrow this year? What taxesare we to lay for funding these millions ? which of ourtaxes already granted for these three years are notdeficient ? not one, in my opinion. We must tax forwhat is to come ; we must tax for what is past, or weshall be at a dead stand in all the operations of thewar. Are we to conceal from ourselves, that the omnipotenceof economy alone has, from the rubbish andwrecks, and fragments of the late war, already createda marine for France ? Are we not informed that, inthe disposition and array of the resources of thatcountry, there is a reserve not yet brought forward,very little short of an annual two millions and a half,in the war taxes? Against this masked battery,whenever it shall be opened in the conflict of financebetween the two nations, we have not a single workthrown up to cover us. We have nothing at all ofthe kind to oppose to it. The keeping this supplyin reserve by France is the work of economy, of economyin a court formerly the most prodigal, and in anQ5i THE HISTORY OF I'AllTY.CHAP, administration of finance the most disorderly and'-' corrupt. Absolute monarchies have been usually theA. D. 1779. . , . . .seats of dissipation and profusion ; republics of orderand good management. France appears to be improved.On our part, indeed, we are not ; we arenot, indeed, what we have been ; and, in our presentstate, if we will not submit to be taught by an enemywe must submit to be ruined by him. On this subjectof economy, on the other side of the house theyhave not so much as dropped a single expression ;they have not even thrown an oblique hint whichglances that way. What the ministers, whose dutyit is, and whose place furnishes them with the bestmeans of doing that duty, refuse to do, let us attemptto do for them. Let us supply our defects of powerby our fidelity and our diligence. It is true that weshall labour under great difficulties from the weightof office ; and it is a weight that we must absolutelysink under if we are not supported by the people atlarge. This house has so much sympathy with thefeelings of its constituents, that any endeavour afterreformation, which tends to weaken the influence ofthe court will be coldly received here, if it be notvery generally and very warmly called for out of doors.But to offer is all that those out of power can do. Ifthe people are not true to themselves, I am verysure that it is not in us to save them. I cannot helpobserving that the whole of our grievances are owing toTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.thefatal andoverofrown influence of the crown ; and that CHAP.X.influence itself to enormous prodigality, they movein a circle, they become reciprocally cause and effect ;and the affg-reo^ate product of both is swelled to suchCo O JTa degree that, not only our power as a state, butevery vital energy, every active principle of ourliberty, will be overlaid by it. To this cause I attributethat nearly general indifference to all publicinterests which, for some years, has astonished everyman of thought and reflection. Formerly the operationof the influence of the crown only touched thehigher orders of the state ; it has now insinuateditself into every creek and cranny in the kingdom ;there is scarce a family so hidden and lost in the obscurestrecesses of the community which does notfeel that it has something to keep or to get, to hopeor to fear from the favour or displeasure of theA. D. 1779.crown."The people were not unmindful of the call whichBurke thus made upon them. Yorkshire and Middlesex,counties which may be said to represent thelanded and monied jiropcrty of the kingdom, tookthe lead. The Yorkshire petition was comprehensivein its object, and explicit in its avowals ; itwas strong though temperate in language, constitutionalin principles, exact and circumstantial indetails. It set forth that the nation had, for severalyears, been engaged in an expensive and unformed.177?).Q5G THE msToiiv of party.CHAR tunatc war. Valuable colonies had declared them.selves independent, and formed a confederacy withforeign enemies. A large addition to the nationaldebt, a heavy accumulation of taxes, a rapid declineof the trade, manufactories, and land rents of thekingdom, were among the consequences of the war.Alarmed at the diminished resources, and growingburdens of the country, the petitioners were convincedthat rigid frugality was now necessary ibr thesalvation of the state. They observed, they said, withgrief, that many individuals enjoyed sinecure placeswith exorbitant emoluments, and pensions unmeritedby public service. The true end of every legitimategovernment was then declared to be the welfare ofthe community. The British constitution, seekingthe public good, had entrusted the national purse toA motion was brought for are now libelling this housewardby the Earl of Shelburne, Every instance they give, and theythat same day, in the lords, against give many, and strong instances ofthe practice of incurring, under uncorrected abuse, with regard tothe name of extraordinarily, debts public money, is a libel on thiswhich had not been authorized by house. Every argument they useparliament. The motion was lost for the reduction of prodigal a majority of 81 to 41. Fox, pense, and their arguments, arewho was present during the de various, and unanswerable, is abate, went down to the commons libel on this house. Every thinghouse, and said, " I am just come they state on the luxuriant growthfrom another place, where the of corrupt influence (and it neverfirst men in the kingdom, the first was half so flourishing), is a libelin abilities, the first in estimation, on this house."A. D. 1779.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. '257the house of commons. To that house, therefore, CHAP,they appealed, and they represented that until effectualmeasures were taken to redress these grievancesby suppressing all useless donatives, and preventingunnecessary and extravagant largesses, the grant ofany additional sum of money beyond the produce ofthe present taxes, would be injurious to the rightsand property of the people, and derogatory from thehonour and dignity of parliament.This petition was signed by upwards of eightthousand freeholders; it was adopted at a meeting ofsix hundred gentlemen, possessing in the aggregate,more property than the whole of the members of thehouse of commons ;* and a committee of opulent andinfluential men was appointed to advocate its prayer.Other counties had followed the example, and sogeneral was the feeling of the nation, that a recapitulationof the names of the petitioning counties,would be a repetition of nearly all the counties ofthe kingdom. Meetings were held, speeches equallyreprobating the conduct of the ministers, and that ofthe majority of both houses were delivered, and committeeswere appointed in each county to correspondwith each other, and organize the agitation.! Inthe debate upon thi; petition, the venerable Whig,• Sir George Saville's speefli upon |)rt>8eiiting the petition.— y^«'/.//ij/ . vol. XX . rol. I.'}7H. t Annual Register for 1780.vol III. SA.D. 1770.^25S THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Sir GcorQ;o Seville, appeared to advocate the causeof his constituents. Fox proposed the question asatest to determine of vehicle party, corruption was thechild. The AMiiofs were wilHno:, were desirous thatit should be sacrificed : the Tories had made similarprofessions. The time was come, he said, to provethe sincerity of both. " Let us see which willnow acknowledge this dear but denied child corruption."Mr. Turner came forward with a petition fromnearly all the burgesses of York, and Burke producedone from Bristol, declaring that these petitions werenot to be forsaken like an ostrich's egg, to be fosteredby the accidental rays of the sun in barren sands, butto be followed up with care and perseverance, nor tobe abandoned until they had produced their offspring.On the 1 th of February, I78O, Mr. Burke broughtforward his plan for the better security of the independenceof parliament and the economical reformationof the civil and other establishments. The wholescheme was contained in five bills. By the first,all crown lands, except those especially excepted bythe bill, were directed to be sold, and the proceedsapplied to the public service. The second, whichapplied to Wales and Chester, was for more perfectlyuniting the principality and county palatine to thecrown, abolishing useless offices, selling the crownlands, and applying the produce to the public service.A.D. 1780.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^59The third and fourth carried the same reform into CHAP,the duchy and county palatine of Lancaster, and theduchy of Cornwall.The fifth was the celebrated Establishment bill,which proposed to abolish the office of third secretaryof state, a great variety of offices of the household,the boards of trade, green cloth, and of works. Theoffices of keeper of the king's hounds, many of thecivil branches of the ordnance, the whole establishmentof the mint, the patent offices of the exchequer,many offices connected with the payment of the armyand navy, together with numerous other public establishments,were all proscribed by this sweeping reformation.Moreover a new arrangement of the civillist was proposed, by which the debts which were soconstantly accruing upon it would be prevented forthe future, and priority of payment was ensured tothe least powerful claimants, the first lord of the treasurybeing the last on the list.The aiTanjTcment of the details of such a measurewas a herculean task, and many of his contemporariesthought that the genius of Burke was of too elevateda nature to allow him to garner the minute informationnecessary to its accomplishment. They wereio-ignorant of the character of liurkc's mind. The sameindomitable industry and facility of analysis whichenabled liii to resolve into its first principles thesubject of a sj)ocul;iti\(' iiujuiry, iittendctl hint in thiss^2A. D. 1780.ego THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, more practical investigation. Great as was the ideaX.entertained of his talents, expectation was infinitelysurpassed by the introduction of the plan itself. Inthe hands of most men the description of such ascheme would have been a dry and tiresome enumerationof details which could have interested none butthose whose existence it threatened. Burke, however,rendered his subject no less attractive than itwas important. " His bill," says Mr. Gibbon, "wasframed with skill, introduced with eloquence, andsupported by numbers. Never can I forget the delightwith which that diffusive and ingenious oratorwas heard by all sides of the house, and even bythose whose existence he proscribed." Gibbon, amember of the board of trade, was one of these.The demands of the people had been so distinctlymade known, that the Tories did not venture to offera formal and general opposition to the Whig scheme.It was read a second time without opposition,* andI have said without opposition, was attended by a singular cir-although the house divided upon constance. As there was notthe committal. That mischievous room enough in the lobby tomaniac, Lord George Gordon, now contain those who intended toappears in parliament, distracting go forth there were 90 whothe proceedings with his disorderly were obliged to remain within,speeches, and insisting upon divi and being numbered with his lord-sonsin which he hind either the ship, made up 91 against commit-houseor the lobby to himself, ting the bill.Upon this occasion, the divisionX.A.D. 1780.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^^(jlthe care of the ministerial party was confined to chap.destroying it in committee. The divisions in committeewere exceedingly close, and strongly provethe necessity of an opposition applying itself to somequestion which the people can understand to bedirectly beneficial to themselves. Upon the clauseabolishing the office of third secretary of state, theTories succeeded only by a majority of seven.* Afew days after, the Whigs succeeded upon the clausefor abolishing the boai-d of trade, by a majority ofeight. On the third day, however, the Tories recoveredtheir courage, and when the clause which carriedreform a step nearer the throne was proposed, itwas rejected by 211 against 158. Burke now declaredhis bill was gone, and professed to take nofurther interest in its progress, but Fox roused himto his wonted attention, by declaring that the leastadvantage was worthy of the struggle, that theywould together renew the bill from session to session,and if they only succeeded in destroying the sevenlords of trade this session, they would have seven ofthe enemies less to fight against in the next.tThis manifestation of an intention to destroy thebill, which had now become the object of all popularfavour, produced an excitement without doors, whichreanimated the Whigs. On the Gth of April, Mr.• Pari. Hist., vol. xxi., col. ;34n. | Ibi(l.,.'37J.A.D. 1780.-id'Z TllK HISTORY Ol' Taut.CHAP. Duiiniiiir made that celebrated motion vvliieh gavethe first check to the supremacy of the Tories.Ater passing many high encomiums upon Mr.Burke's bill, and contrasting the favour with whichit had at first been received by the house with thehostility by which it had been more recently met, heintimated that he was firmly persuaded the lattertemper and disposition which had appeared againstthe bill originated with the sovereign. That bill, heargued, had been introduced to diminish the improperinfluence of the crown ; Colonel Barre, with thesame object, had introduced a plan for the institutionof a committee of accounts ; Sir J. P. Gierke hadoffered a bill to exclude persons holding contractsprivately made from the house of commons. Allthese attempts to further the prayer of the petitionsupon the table had been met with an appearance ofcandour and afterwards decently destroyed. Everyplan of retrenchment had been rendered unavailing,"And now*' said the speaker, "ministers stand forwardand tell you that it is not competent for this house toinquire into the expenditure of the civil listen'*That the influence of the crown was increased andought to be diminished, was, he argued, a matter ofnotoriety to be decided by the consciences of thosewho, as a jury, were called upon to determine what♦ Tail Hist., vol. xxi., tol. 403.A.D. 1780.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 263was and was not within their own knowledge. " I can CHAP,affirm," he said, 'upon my own knowledge, and pledgeray honour to the truth of the assertion, that T knowupwards of fifty members of this house who always votein the train of the noble lord in the blue ribbon(Lord North), yet who confess out of the house, thatthe influence of the crown is increased, and dangerouslyincreased." To these men, and to the wholehouse, he now proposed a test, the decision woulddeclare whether the petitions of the nation were tobe really attended to or finally and totally rejected.He then moved, that it was necessary to declare thatthe influence of the crown has increased, is increasing,and ought to be diminished. Appending tothis bold declaration, an assertion of the right of thehouse of commons to examine into the expenditureof the civil list revenue, as well as every other branchof the public revenue.A debate ensued, of which we have, probably, butavery imperfect report, since the acknowledgedleader of the opposition is not named as a speaker,and Fox is only mentioned as making an incidentalobservation. We can, however, sufficiently discernthat it was stormy and acrimonious ; that Lord Northwas subjected to the most vehement abuse, goadedout of his usual refuge of wit and good-humour, andprovoked to turn angrily upon his assailants.* An• r'nrl. }|iM,, \n|. xxi., col. 411.A D. 1780.'J(J1. THE inSTOHY OF Tasty.CHAT, abusive is generally a falling minister. At twelveo'clock, the commons divided, and declared by a majorityof IS, that the influence of the crown had increased,was increasing, and ought to be diminished.The effect was electrical. The minister, wont to beso haughty, frequently vouchsafing no other answerthan a division to the arguments of the Whigs, wassuddenly and unexpectedly prostrate, imploring thecommittee to adjourn, and ineffectually protestingagainst its proceeding, as violent and arbitrary. TheWhigs were suddenly raised from despondency totriumph, and Burke afforded them an opportunity forgivingvent to their hilarity by a witty speech whichhe made in answer to the lamentations of Mr. Rugby,the Tory paymaster of the forces.*At the next meeting of the house the Whigs carrieda resolution for securing the independence ofparliament by a majority of two ;* but still Lord Northheld on, confiding in the interest of the court and thedisunion or imprudence of the Whigs. His courageappears to have reanimated those of his old adherentswho had wavered. In resisting a bill introduced bythe Whigs, to prevent revenue officers from votingat elections, he found himself once more in a majority ;the numbers were 224 to 195.* The next day thelords threw out the Contractors' bill,* and the .Hist., vol. xxi.THE HISTORY OF Party.'265A. D. 1780.mental strusrsrle was over; the Tories had regained CHAP,their majority and kept it through the session. Thisrecovery from defeat, a recovery which can be so seldomeffected by a minister who is chiefly supportedby a large body of pensioned adherents, is highly creditableto Lord North as a clever party tactician.After declaring that the influence of the crown haddangerously increased, a few county members were,or affected to be, alarmed, and absented themselvesupon the second division, in which the Whig majoritywas reduced to two. A sudden illness of the speakerthen caused a recess of a few days, and in the interimthe point was gained. Lord North brought overpersons of a doubtful description so successfully that,by the time the house met again, the new convertswere made, the majority secured. All the toil andlabour of the Whigs had been at once demolished bythe magic touch of the minister, with great ease tohimself and doubtless with infinite satisfaction to thepersons thus miraculously converted. Such was theaccount afterwards given of this affair by Mr. Saw-bridgein the house of commons ; and he challengedthe minister, if he denied the charge, to move tohave his words taken down, when he would bring forwardproofs of tampering, which, although probablynot legally sufficient to convict the minister, wouldbe sufficient to justify his accuser. Lord North al-ad.1780.Of)G THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ternately denied and ridiculed the charge, but he didnot accept the challenge.*This session Mr. Sawbridgc changed his annualmotion, in favour of annual parliaments, into a propositionfor the repeal of the Septennial act ; and hismotion, which had hitherto been yearly negativedwithout debate, assumed a different character. Fox,Byng, and even Bai-re, declared themselves convertsto the principle, while the more cautious and morestrictly aristocratic members of the same party joinedthe Tories. Thomas Pitt spoke against the motion,but refused to vote. Lord John Cavendish would, indeference to the popular wish, allow the bill to beintroduced ; but he would not pass it. Burke opposedit altogether, and delivered, upon this occasion,that glittering piece of oratory which has come downto us among his works. Earl Nugent, Lord North,and Mr. Kirby, who were now the most usual Toryspeakers, united with these ; but Mr. Sawbridge succeededin getting 90 members to vote for his motionthe majority was 182.Among the speakers upon this question I havementioned George Byng, a name not so frequentlyseen among the leading speakers in a debate as manyothers, but one which is never absent from those lists• Pari, Hist., vol. xxi., col. 616. t Ibid., 615.A.D. 1780.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 267of divisions which have been preserved, and which CHAP,usually appears as that of one of the tellers upon theWhig side. George Byng was not particularly distinguishedfor eloquence or influence ; and had hedied young, his name would probably have been unremembered.A long life of constant and energeticlabour for the principles of A\Tiiggism, a career unstainedby a suspicion of interest, or even of ambition ;a rare and unsullied consistency of act and principlethese are the sterling qualities which challenge theattention and the respect of the historian ; and whichwill compel him to assign to so solid and so valuablea character a high place among the public men of thisage, many of whom were more brilliant but none sospotless.Byng's first speech in parliament was uponthe Boston Port bill. " I rise, sir," he said, " tospeak my mind upon this bilL Whatever principlesI have hitherto adopted, be they right or be theywrong, I have always adhered to ; and as I live withsuch opinions I hope I shall die in them. Men'scharacters are known after their death ; and to havesteadily adopted one uniform set of principles fromwhich 1 ha e not deviated, I hope, will not be deemedfactious"* These were his first words in the houseof commons, and they contained a pledge which was• I'.iil. Hist., vol. xvii., col. J 176A. D. 178<)..'()S JIIK IllSTOUV Olm I'AUTV.CHAP, honourably redeemed. In popularity and throughodium he still retained his consistency ; and so wellhas he impressed upon his son the character he himselfbore, that, in reading the parliamentary debates,wc must have recourse to extraneous sources of informationto discover where the father's course endedand where the son's beg-an.On the 1st of September, having sat but six sessions,this parliament was unexpectedly dissolved.In reviewing its proceedings, we find Toryism in allthings predominant, but it was not that recklessToryism which distinguished the early days of itspredecessor. Continual discussion, the power andpopularity of the Whig orators, and the necessity ofrecurring to first principles, both for attack anddefence of the great questions which were then agitated,had produced some slight toleration of inquiry,some little relaxation of the usual habit of dogmatizing,and upon questions to which they were notalready pledged, the Tories of this parliament did notrefuse to listen to liberal sentiments, and sometimesto agree to a liberal measure.In 1778, Sir George Saville and Mr. Dunninghad introduced a bill for repealing that sanguinaryact which denounced the penalties of high treasonagainst any Roman Catholic priest who shouldsolemnize the mass in England, and which renderedpersons of that religion incapable of acquiring landedA. D. 1780.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^69property. The Tories, in a very honourable man CHAP,ner, accepted the measure, although it came fromWhigs, and was not even recommended by popularity.The iniquitous bill, the shameful result of aparty stratagem, was repealed. This cautious relaxationof the thongs of bigotry was received witha yell of execration by the ferocious religionists ofScotland ; and although the repeal did not extend tothat country, the presbyterians of Glasgow and Edinburghthought fit to show how they estimated thoseprinciples of toleration, under which they themselvesreposed, by a general conflagration of popish mass-housesand popish dwellings. The flame spread toEngland. Lord George Gordon, whose wild debaucherieswere innocent in comparison with hisreligious frenzies, headed an association of persons,contemptible alike from ignorance and station, butdetestable for their ferocity and power of mischief.The acts of these worthies are well remembered ;the mobs which attempted to overawe the parliament,the drunken champions of Protestantism, who proceededfrom the burning of mass houses to thepiuiuhjr of distilleries, and shouted *' No Popery!"while they let loose the malefactors from their gaolsthese, and their exploits, belong to the generalhistorian. They were abetted by neither of thepolitical parties ; Whigs and Tories were alikeobjects of hostility to the myrmidons of this l*ro-A. D. 1780.270 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.c HAP. testant Association ; the house of Sir John Fielding,and the treasures of Lord Mansfield were ignited bythe same hands and perished in the same cause.The proclamation for dissolving the last parliamentwas, to the Whigs, sudden and unexpected.They were again taken by surprise, and appear tohave remained astonished and inactive, while theiropponents were prepared and vigorous. Thepoverty of the times operating with a general hopelessnessthat any opposition in parliament would becapable of producing a change of parties, had togetherso powerful an effect, that candidates werenot to be found who would expend the immensesums then necessary to a county contest. SomeWhiff members had frown tired of their uselessattendance, and were careless of their election :others were disgusted by the venality of their constituents,and finding that whenever the touchstonewas applied, this alone appeared to be their motive,withdrew in indignation. Such were the reasonsassigned by the Whigs for the general success of theTories in this general election. Of the one hundredand thirteen new members who were now elected,the great majority were Tories. But the feeling,whether of cupidity or loyalty, which had electedthem, did not extend to the most popular constituencies.Middlesex returned John Wilkes andGeorge Byng. Westminster, which since theX.A. D. 1780.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 271memorable struororle which had released it from the CHAP,trammels of the treasury, had always been stanch -in the cause of Whoso-ism, was the scene of anobstinate contest between Charles Fox and the Earlof Lincoln. The Tory was, of course, supported bythe whole weight and power of the court, but the^^^lio• was returned by a triumphant majority. Thepersonal influence of the king sufficed to depriveAdmiral Keppel of his old seat for Windsor, but theelectors of Surrey recompensed him for the loss, andchose him, notwithstanding the great local influenceand connexions of his Tory opponent. Upon thewhole, the new parliament was highly favourable tothe existing ministry ; they had a certain majority inboth houses, and if a creation of six new peers wasnow gazetted, the measure testified the gratitude,not the weakness of the party.*At the meeting of parliament, the anticipationsof the Tories were verified : they carried theiraddress by a majority of 8'-2 ; and although the personalconsideration in which Sir Fletcher Norton washeld, left them in a minority when they attemptedto refuse him a vote of thanks and their majority• Annual Register. the last session, and lead renderedf A majority of 40 returned the himself obnoxious to the king bylate speaker thanks. Sir Fletcher the boldness of his language uponMorton had sustained a personal the presentation of a money bill.altercation with Lord North in — ['nrl. IHx/ vr.l. wi., rol. 87^.A.D. 1782.^2J'2 TIIH HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, grew less in resisting Mr. Byng*s motion for exposingthe corrupt practice of dividing advantageousloans among the Tory members of this house ofcommons, yet it was comparatively a (puget session,the house showing a most exemplary horror of allreforms.*The next session was one of more decisive result.We may pass over the numerous contests in thehouses, which occurred previous to February, 1782.Contests highly interesting to the student of historywho peruses them at length, and enjoys theeloquence of the combatants, but dry and unentertainingin a summary. Upon the 27th of thismonth General Conway repeated the motion whichhad been so often unsuccessfully made against thefurther prosecution of offensive war with America.The subject had been regularly debated for so manyyears, that we cannot hope to find among thespeeches any thing worthy of repetition, but, uponthe division, Mr. Byng, who had been so constantlythe teller of minorities, must have been astonishedto find himself in a majority of 2^54 to 215.Such was the issue of the American contest in thehouse of commons. As success grew more hopeless,This house, by large, com- inquiring into expenditure, in-narrative, majorities, met all the creasing the strength of the navy,ordinary Whig motions for dis &c. — Fail. Hid., vol. xxii.branching revenue officers, forX.A. D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^TjSIand disasters accumulated, disapprobation of the war CHAP,had increased in the nation, and the majority haddiminished in the commons. As Burgoyne andCornwallis successively surrendered, as France,Spain, and Holland, successively declared themselvesour enemies, conversions to the Whig side ofthe question went on. The scales were for a shorttime nearly balanced; several times they vibrated, nowthe fall was decisive, and Toryism kicked the beam.Lord North had often declared that he would holdhis places no longer than a parliamentary majorityshould sanction his measures ; it was, therefore, expectedby the Whigs that he would now immediatelyresign. They were disappointed. The Tories said*ait did not appear by any vote that parliament hadwithdrawn its confidence from them," and until sucha vote was passed, they were resolved to retain theirsituations. The challenge was accepted ; and confidingin their increasing strength, the Whigs resolvedto bring this question to inunediatc issue.Lord John Cavendish, a few days after, proposed aseries of resolutions of censure. These stated that,from the year ly?''^* the nation had expendedupwards of one hundred millions, had lost thirteencolonies, and many West India and other islands,was now engaged in an expensive war with AnKMica,Advance, Spain, and IIoHand, without a single ally ;VOL. III. JA. D. 1782.^74 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and that the chief cause of these accumulated misfortunes,was the united incapacity and misconductof the administration.In the debate upon these resolutions, the mover,Lord John Cavendish, Mr. Powys, Townshend,Burke, Sir Horace Mann, Viscount Maitland,Charles James Fox, Thomas Pitt, Richard BrinsleySheridan, William Pitt, and Lord Howe, were thespeakers among the Whigs. For the Tories appearedJenkinsonon, now secretary at war, Mr. SecretaryElis, Earl Nugent, Mr. Rawlinson, Mr. Adam, thelord advocate, and Lord North ; several country-gentlemen,who were usually silent, also rose to expresstheir high opinion of the ministers.*The A\Tiigs generally contended that a uniformseries of calamity and disgrace was a sufficient proofof misconduct ; weakness or folly, they said, markedeach separate measure of every minister, and collectivelypervaded the whole system of administration.Lord North's speech is badly reported ; but he succeededon the division by a majority of 10.On the 15th of March, the motion, varied only soas to evade the rules of the house, was renewed. TheWhigs were beaten by a majority of 9* Rather animatedthan depressed, they returned to the charge.• Pari. Hist., vol. xxii.THE HISTORY OF PARTY,175 iA.D. 178-2.On the 50th a greater number of members appeared CHAP,in the house than had been before seen during thatsession. The galleries also were crowded, and allthings seemed prepared for a decisive struggle. EarlSurrey rose to brings forward his motion, but LordNorth contested the attention of the house ; and,amid the tumult and cries of "order" which ensued,declared there was no administration.The victory was won ; the Whigs reluctantly withdrewtheir motion, and the house adjourned.Such was the catastrophe of the North administration; a government which, although professing as theircreed the strong tenets of Toryism, were as weak andvacillating in their execution as they were severe intheir resolves. North and his compeers had formedno design against the liberties of their country ; theyhad not even the ability and decision to work outwithordinary success the policy of their party.They were not men who, like the Cabal, would havesold their country to France ; nor did they wish toset up the bayonet as the instrument of governmentin England. Yet, with probably the most honestintentions, they had certainly reduced their countryto the lowest condition of distress and helplessness.Whether this result is to be attributed to their actingupon Tory principles, or to their not pursuing theirprinciples with suiKcient energy, every reader willT Q'J7(3 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, determine according to his preconceived party sympathies.The fact is clear, that, after twenty yearsof Tory dominion, that party restored the Britishempire to the Whigs dismembered, impoverished, andall but undone.A.D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^77iCHAPTER XI.Formation of the second Rockingham administration — Biographicalanecdotes of Richard Brinsjey Sheridan — Of Lloyd Kenyon — Policyof tile Rockingham administration — Pacification of Ireland — Economicalreform — Extinction of the votes upon the Middlesex electionParliamentary reform — Opinions of the Whig leaders upon thissubject — Contractors' bill — Revenue officers' Disfranchisement bill.The Whiff s re-entered the cabinet under the lead CHAP.XI.ership of the Marquis of Rockingham, who returnedto the post he had before held, and presided at thedivision of the spoil. This division strongly exemplifiesthe narrow, exclusive, and aristocratic spiritwhi(;h was so long the bane of the Whig party. TheWhigs would espouse the cause of the people, butthe conduct of the contest must be left wholly tothem ; they alone must be tli(^ headers, fli(>ir f(>llovversA. D. 1 782.A.D, 1782.27s THE HISTORY OF Party.CHAP, were never to aspire beyond the ranks. The Torieswon] 1 oppress the people, but they were generallytoo weak to be exclusive ; and they were alwaysready to share their tyranny with any who could aidthem in their design. Hence the reason why thelatter faction has so often recruited its wasted talentfrom the middle classes ; why so many brilliant men,who made their first campaign with the Whigs, spenttheir lifts with the Tories. Disgusted at finding,among a popular party, a barrier of aristocracywhich they could not pass, they confounded theparty with their principles, and discarded both.Under the new arrangement, Edmund Burke, whohad borne all the labour of the long contest, who hadfor some time, alone, sustained it, who had been formany sessions the acknowledged leader of the opposition,and who, although now joined by a colleagueof equal power, could plead that he had supportedthe cause even against him who now championed itEdmund Burke was excluded from the cabinet,receiving only the post of paymaster of the forces.Those who were considered sufficiently worthy to beadmitted into the cabinet were the premier, the Earlof Shelburne and Fox, secretaries of state, the thirdsecretaryship was abolished ; Lord John Cavendish,chancellor of the Exchequer; Admiral Keppel, createda viscount, first lord of the admiralty ; Duke ofGrafton, lord privy seal ; Lord Camden, president ofTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.the Council ; Duke of Richmond, master-general ofthe ordnance ; Lord Thurlow to continue chancel; 5r ;General Conway, commander-in-chief of the forces ;and John Dunning, chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster,now created Baron Ashburton. From thislist, the reader will notice the absence of names farmore conspicuous in the contest than many of thosewho obtained the prizes, but those efficient servantsof the party who were not qualified by connexionswith the great Whig families to a seat in the cabinetwere compensated with offices which were, perhaps,equally lucrative, although less honourable.* AmongCHAP.XI.A. D. 1782.• The inferior appointmentswere thus distributed ;Duke of Manchester, lord chamberlain;Viscount Newton, vice chamberlain;Viscount Weymouth, groom ofthe stole ;Earl of Jersey, master of the buck-hounds;Earl of Carlisle, lord steward ofthe household ;Lord Rivers, lord of the bcd-chamber;Earl of Effingiiam, treasurer of thehousehold ;Earl of Ludlow, comptroller ;Lord de Carrara, captain of theband of gentlemen pensioners ;Viscount Thorpe, James Grenville,and Frederick Montagu,lords of the treasury ;Sir Robert Garland, Bart., HughPicot, Lord Duncannon, Hon.John Townshend, O. Brett, R.Hopkins, lords commissionersof the admiralty ;Richard Brinsley Sheridan, andThomas Side, undersecretaryof state ;Lloyd Kenyon, attorney-general ;John Lee, solicitor-general ;• 1^1 on. Thomas Townshend, secrc-tary-at-war ;Right lloii. Isaac Barre, treasurerof the navy ;Edmund Burke, paymaster-general«if the forces ;A.D. 1782.*^8l) Tllli History OF Beauty.CHAP, these appointments, we remark names which show- that the most brilliant era which has ever distinguishedthe British house of commons was arrived; that Burkeand Fox were no longer to remain without rivals, butmust share their laurels with competitors who nowstood forward to claim for our assembly perfection inevery style of eloquence, and to render the time inwhich they flourished the Augustan age of Englishoratory. Richard Brinsley Sheridan had recentlyentered the political scene, and now shared thetriumph of his party.The friendship and correspondence of Dr. Sheridanand Dean Swift, and the competition, and evenrivalry, which Thomas Sheridan so long maintainedwith Garrick, the former the grandfather, the latterthe father of Richard, are the first remembered intimationsof that versatile and hereditary talent whichhas, for several generations, distinguished this family.Earl of Tarikerville, Right Hon. Sir Fletcher Norton was createdH. Carteret, joint postmaster Lord Grantly ;general ; The Duke of Portland, lord lieu-lordWilliam Gordon, vice-admit tenant of Ireland ;oral of Scotland ; Earl of Scarborough, Sir GeorgeSir William Howe, lieutenant-gem Yonge, Bart., joint of the ordnance ; surer of Ireland ;Hon. Thomas Pelham, surveyor Colonel Fitzpatrick, secretary togeneral ; the lord lieutenant ;Lord Howe, created viscount, to Lieut-general Burgoyne, corn-commandthe grand fleet; mander-in-chief of the forces inIrelandTHE HISTORY OP PARTY.Richard was born in Dublin in the year 1751, and CHAP.. i XI.having undergone the discipline of a preparatory - — -o a r r- r J a. D. 1782.school was, when twelve years old, sent to Harrow.Here, after some time, he fell under the ferrule ofDr. Parr, who could discover in him neither industrynor emulation, but found him slovenly in his construingand defective in his Greek grammar. Nor wouldso unpromising a pupil have probably excited thedoctor's special notice, had he not remarked in him,when speaking upon subjects foreign to the businessof the school, the vestiges of a superior intellect.Even the particular attention, the probing and teasingof Dr. Parr, did not succeed in making Sheridana scholar. He was at home in Virgil and in Horace ;he could talk copiously of Cicero ; he had read thefour orations of Demosthenes as they are taught inour public schools, and, perhaps, he occasionallylooked into the Iliad. Such was the full extent ofhis classical reading when he left Harrow, and itdoes not appear to have been afterwards extended,except we call his partnership translation of Aristacnetusan extension of his acquaintance with the classics.At Harrow, Sheridan contracted a friendship) withone of his schoolfellows named Halhed, and whenthese two friends left the school, they continuedtheir intercourse. Feeling an ecjual desire of literarydistinction, they set out together, and embarkedtheir first venture in the same bottom. In the let.D. 1782.'282 TIIK 1 11 STORY OF PARTY.CHAP, tens written at this time by Haled to Sheridan, it isXI.said by a very competent judge,* that there is ayouthfulness of style, and an unaffected vivacity ofthought, which could scarcely have been surpassedby his witty correspondent. The superiority of eitherof these adventurers who set out thus amicably togetherin search of fame, could scarcely have been thendetermined. How different have been their fates.One has fully reached the goal of immortality forwhich he started ; the other is lost among the crowdof adventurers who left their homes to push theirfortunes in India. Halhed's name would never beadverted to but as that of the friend of Sheridan.At an early age Sheridan turned his attention topolitics ; there have been found, among his papers,many drafts of letters prepared for the public newspapers.Some of those were written during theGrafton administration, and those which are notavowed and infelicitous imitations of Junius, discovera clearness of thought and style very remarkable inso young a writer.The pecuniary resources of Sheridan were verylimited ; his father now settled in Bath, had nothingbeside the pension of 200/. a year conferred uponhim for his literary merits, and the little profits hederived from his lectures. From him, therefore,Mr. Thomas Moore's Life of Sheridan.A. D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 283Sheridan could expect no material assistance, and CHAP.XI.other resources he had none. At his father's house,Sheridan encountered Miss Linley ; a young ladywho, by her talents and beauty, had attracted universaladmiration, and who had extended her conquestsover half the beaux of Bath. Sheridan hadno sooner seen her than he worshipped among therest. With that peculiar faculty of making himselfbeloved which distinguished him through life, andoften formed his only stay amid a thousand difficulties,he now pressed his suit. It was not an easyadventure. A girl who was beautiful, yet not mercenary,living in an atmosphere of applause, yet gentleand unpretending ; an actress, yet without a filmupon her fame, was not destitute of pretenders to herlove : her personal charms, the exquisiteness of hermusical talents, and the full light of publicity whichher profession threw upon both, had extended herfame, until the Maid of Bath, as she was then called,was on all sides besieged with suitors. Sheridancould scarcely look around him without discoveringa rival. His friend Halhed, and even his brotherCharles, had felt her influence, and not suspectingthat Richard also was a suitor, overwhelmed him bytheir confidence. The power, however, of a superiormind is, where the object is capable of appreciatingits superiority, as great in rivalries of love as instruggles for power ; it was not long before the heart^2Sif THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of the young siivn was all his own. But Sheridan^^- was a jealous lover. It, is said, that he has ridiculedA. D. 1782. jj-^ ^^^ morbid sensibility at this period, in his characterof Falkland, in " The Rivals." The generaladmiration to which his mistress was subjected, theambitious views of her father, the honourable pretensionsof a wealthy old gentleman, named Long, andthe less legitimate persecution of a married man,named Matthews, combined to keep alive his jealousyand perpetuate his misery. At length he persuadedhis romantic songstress to elope with him from thescene of all her triumphs, and to fly to France,where he would place her in a convent. Sheridanwas at this time little more than twenty, Miss Lin leywas just entering her eighteenth year. The youngpeople, accompanied by an old woman, as a preventativeagainst scandal, made good their escape toLondon ; and, when arrived there, having probablybut slender funds at his disposal, Sheridan, withequal boldness and dexterity, introduced his companionto a merchant, an old friend of the family, as arich heiress who had consented to elope with him tothe continent. The prudent old gentleman warmlycommended his wisdom in having abandoned allpursuit of the portionless Miss Linley, and so highlyapproved of his present project, that he accommodatedthe fugitives with a passage in one of his own shipsthen about to sale to Diepi)o, and gave them lettersA. D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^85to his correspondents at that place, who, with the chap.same zeal and despatch, facilitated their journey to -Lisle.Mien they were safe from immediate pursuit,Sheridan found no great difficulty in convincing hischarge, that it was as essential to her fame as to hishappiness that a marriage should precede her entryinto a convent. The ceremony took place, and Sheridanreturned to England, leaving his young wifein a convent, at Lisle, until he could strike out someexpedient for obtaining an income which mightenable him to claim and support her. Upon hisreturn, Sheridan found Miss Linley's persecutor,Matthews, furious with rage, and threatening deathto the stripling who had dared to step between himand his prey. Sheridan was not long in offering himthe revenge he sought, but the courage of thisNimrod to all female fame," as Sheridan had beforecalled him, was not equal to his gallantry. In theduel he disgraced himself — a disgrace which washardly effaced by another meeting which desperationmade him demand, and an unwise generosity influencedhis adversary to grant. In this second encounterSheridan was dangerously wounded.Miss LinKw had been brought back by her father,and as her marriage was known only to herself andher husl)aM(l, she continued in the exercise of herprofession. Sheridan, forbidden her society by herA. D. 1782.286 THE HISTORY oi' parity.CHAP. fatluM-, was reduced to the necessity of beholding hiswife from among the audience of the theatre, or ofsnatching a few words with her in the disguise of ahackney-coachman, as he drove her home after theperformance. Linley, however became, at length,convinced that it was impossible to keep the youngcouple any longer separate. Accident had drawnfrom his daughter a sudden intimation of her marriage,and, at length, the marriage of Sheridan, nowa member of the Middle Temple, and the celebratedMiss Linley of Bath, was formally announced.The necessity of acquiring some more immediatesource of income than could be hoped for from hisprofession, produced from the happy husband thecompletion of a comedy from the numberless fi-agentsof dramatic inventions which had been accumulatedsince his childhood, among his papers. InJanuary, 1775, "The Rivals" appeared, and Sheridan'sfame was at once established as a dramaticwriter.It is not our province to pursue Sheridan'scareer in this character ; his first effort gave himall the dramatic fame he coveted, and a few yearssatiated him with his successes. As a successfulauthor he had obtained access to Devonshire House,whither concentred all that was noble, brilliant,or powerful, of the Whig faction. There he sawBurke, the friend and equal of those with whom heA. D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ' 287lived ; his nobility of intellect received as an equi CHAP,valent for nobility of birth, and his obscure originforgotten in the contemplation of his political power.Sheridan was still the son of an actor, and he sawthat nothing but a successful career in politics couldefface this mark of inferiority from the minds of hisassociates. Thenceforward politics became his business.He began to discipline the enthusiasm whichhad long ago borne him into party controversy, tolay up stores of the necessary knowledge, to bend hismind to the task, and to concentrate its powers.His first effort, in conjunction with the party withwhich he had now connected himself, was the establishmentof the "Englishman," a paper started by theWhigs, in 1779- Sheridan, Townshend, Grenville,and Fox, the conductors of this periodical, were noneof them distinguished for punctuality. The Englishmanwas very capricious in its appearance ; and,after many apologies for omitted numbers, the paperat length ceased altogether.Sheridan now attached himself in an especial mannerto Fox, and his first appearance in public wasunder that party-chiefs auspices, in the year 1780.Then, when I'ox, as chairman of the Westminstercommittee, signed the resolutions in favour of annualparliaments and universal suffrage, Sheridan signed areport on the same subject from the; sub-connnittce,which was also laid before the public.Ai). 178-2.288 ■ THE HISTORY OF 1'.\11TY.CHAP. On the dissolution of Ipso Sheridan was returnedfor Stafford, forming a rare instance of one of thegreat men of this period who did not first enter thehouse of commons as the representative of a closeborough.*Sheridan's first essay in parliament was made indefence of his own seat. The author of " The Rivals"was listened to with great attention and curiosity ;but, apparently, with equal disappointment. Rugby,a veteran debater, turned all his virtuous indignationat the charges brought against him into ridicule ; andSheridan stood fully in need of the extended aid ofFox, who, in turn, demolished the raillery of his opponentby a torrent of vehement crimination. Havingmade his essay, Sheridan hastened to the gallery,where Woodfall, in whose judgment and experiencethe wits of that day had great confidence, was sitting,and asked him, with much anxiety, what he thoughtof his first attempt. WoodfalJ's reply must have beenalmost destructive to so ardent an aspirant. " I amafraid this is not your line," he said, " you had betterhave stuck to the stasfe." Sheridan rested his head• This is no recommendation money by which such recruits wereof the close borough system. Men commonly enlisted. It was genius found the service of a rally felt through life as a fetterparty less arduous than that of the which chafed and confused thepeople, and the reward more sure, most manly intellect.A close borough was the bounty.D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^89upon his hand, and remained silent a few minutes, CHAP.. XI.then suddenly exclaimed with vehemence, *' It is inme, however, and, by God, it shall come out." Hisconfidence was well justified by the event ; but itdoes not appear that his reputation as a speaker wasby any means so suddenly attained as his fame as adramatist. Throughout the great contests which intervenedbetween his return to parliament and theresignation of Lord North, Sheridan is not foundoccupying any distinguished station. A review ofthe occasions upon which he spoke would rather suggestthe opinion that he felt himself unequal to minglein the conflict beside Fox and Burke, and was contentedto try his unpractised pinion in a minor flight.Even these attempts were prefaced by preparationand close study. He wrote out his early speechesbefore he delivered them, as carefully as he sketchedthe outlines of his plays. He was contented tomake his way gradually, but surely ; to avoidshocking the prejudices of those, who would hardlyendure that the son of a player, and the owner of aplayhouse, should seize at once a chieftainship in apolitical party ; or of those, perhaps capitally numerous,who deem a man wedded to the profession in whichhe has excelled, and an intruder and an empiric if heventures to forsake it for another.At his outset, Sheridan does not appear to havediscovered that ricci vein of wit which afterwards ren-vol.in. u200 THE History OF PARTY.CHAP. (Icrcd him the favourite of the house of commons;XIand securing for him a willing audience, when FoxA.D. 1782. 1 T^ 1 1 1 • 1 1-tailed to arouse, and liurke was heard with listlessness.His first efforts in oratory were in agrave and florid style, and we are amused to findhim seriously rebuking Rugby and Courtenay fortreating a subject before the house with levity andraillery. He had, however, sufficiently distinguishedhimself to make him considered an important allyby his party, a fact proved by his appointment toan under secretaryship by this Rockingham administration.*Lloyd Kenyon also was introduced to public life byhis appointment as attorney-general to this ministry.There is nothing in Kenyon's career to distinguishit from that of other successful lawyers. He firstdevoted himself to a branch of the law which requirespatient and unwearied attention rather thanbrilliancy and eloquence ; he gradually acquired areputation as a sound lawyer, and the practicewhich followed this reputation enabled him to amassa fortune. Thus he was toiling on, little knownbeyond his profession, t when a Whig ministerThis sketch of Sheridan's occasion, he was eclipsed by hisearly life is derived entirely from junior, who was no other thanMr. Moore's Life of Sheridan. Erskine. There is a memoir offHe had been, indeed, em Lord Kenyon in the Gentleman'splayed in the defence of Lord Magazine, vol. Lxxii.George Gordon, but upon thisA. D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 291created him at outre, without the usual preparation of chap.the solicitor-generalship, attorney-general. WhetherKenyon obtained this appointment by ardent professionsof Whiggism, or whether, as is perhaps moreprobable, he owed it to the fi-headship of Lord Thur-low,it is difficult to decide. The continuance ofThurlow in the chancellorship was a concession to theprivate wishes of the king, a concession which wasneither prudent or patriotic ; but since it had beenmade, Lord Rockingham probably thought it betterto extend his conciliatory policy, and to deliver upWestminster Hall altogether to the Tories.This appointment was another instance of thatweakness of purpose which has operated to makethe bar a stronghold of Toryism. Ambitious menthought that while obedience was the only passportto Tory favour, opposition was their best recommendationto a conciliating Whig government. HadDunning and Glynn been Tories, they had obtainedthe highest honours of their profession, they certainlywould not have been left, the one altogether neglected,and the other withdrawn fi-om his profession, to beholda political opponent enjoying the rewards theyhad earned, and sitting as lord chancellor in a cabinetof their friends.It now remained to be proved whether the Whigswho had so loudly advocated beneficial reforms whenthe Tories were in power, would remain consistent,u 2A. D. 1782.29^ THE mSTOllY OF PARTY.CHAP, when consistency must bring them into collisionwith the court. An advocacy of principles when inopposition, which they would not put in practicewhen in power, has always been the ready accusationof their opponents ; an accusation, however, which isnot, to any great extent, borne out by the history ofthe party. The American war was certainly the grandtopic of party contest throughout the North administration; but there were other ancillary questionsinvolved in the same general principles upon whichthe two parties were equally at issue. The chiefof these were, the government of Ireland, Mr.Burke's economical reform, the decision of the houseof commons in the case of the Middlesex election,and the great rising question of parliamentary reform.The first of these was a dispute precisely similar tothat which which had produced the American war.Ireland, not yet united to Great Britain, legislatedby a separate parliament, and taxed by a separatehouse of commons insisted upon her right to a perfect,legislative, and judicial independence. Thepatriot party in her house of commons, led by Grattan.Flood, Burgh, and Wolverton, and abetted byLord Charlemont and his party in the house oflords, demanded that the powers possessed by theprivy council of sending down money bills, and suppressing,or altering others that had passed, shouldbe abolished ; that the English house of peers whichA.D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^93had recently usurped the appellate jurisdiction of the chap.XTpeers of Ireland should restore it, that the Mutinybill should be, as in England, an annual measure, andthat the act of 6 George L, which asserted alegislative power in England over Ireland should berepealed. The refusal of Lord North to Hasten totheir complaints had produced in this neighbouringisland, results, too similar to those that had precededthe rebellion in America to be viewedwith indifference. Associations for non-importationand non-consumption of British manufactures arose,and a threat of invasion from France afforded excusefor the enrolment of volunteer companies and militarysocieties. This latter project was no soonerconceived than it was executed. Suddenly, and as ifby preconceived signal, arose vast bodies of citizens,training themselves to arms, choosing their ownofficers, serving at their own charges, and increasingin numbers until they could overawe the regularforces drained off as these had been by the Americanwar, and, until in the pride of their strength, theypointed to America as their example, and to theirarms as their protection. Lord North, alarmed attheir power, made some concessions which allayedtheir immediate violence but did not satisfy theirdemands ; but no sooner had that ministry resignedthan Mr. ICden, the Tory secretary, came over toA. D. 17&2.'2!)1' THE History OF Party.CHAT. England, and insisted upon the necessity of the mediate recognition of all their claims. This factiousattempt failed, the Irish still preferred the partywhich had always been their friend, to that which wasonly become generous when it had no longer thepower to give ; they received the Duke of Portland,the Whig lord-lieutenant, with every manifestationof confidence and esteem : a repeal of the declaratoryact passed the British parliament, the largepower of the executive in Ireland was exerted in aliberal spirit, and Lord Shelburne declared in thehouse of lords, the principle of Whig policy towardsIreland — " that it was just that there should heno distinction between that country and GreatBritain"* The Irish, as grateful for kindness, asimpatient under insult, received the new measureswith loud demonstrations of joy and satisfaction ;an address was carried through both houses, withscarcely a dissentient voice, declaring that no constitutionalquestion between the two countries wouldany longer exist ; and liberal supplies were voted forthe general defence. Thus was the armed populationof Ireland converted by the Whigs fromwatchful enemies to devoted allies.The next topic of the Whigs in opposition wasPari. Hist., vol. xxiii., col. 37.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^95that of economical reform ; it was also one of the first CHAP,measures of the Whiffs in government. A message — — - — —-^ r> o A.D.I 782.from the throne recommended it to the parliament,and Burke revived his bills. His plan enabled hismajesty to pay off the debt upon his civil list, butprovided against the recurrence of such exorbitantencumbrances for the future. The reforms in thehousehold effected an annual saving of 73,000/. Thenext quarter in which he applied the pruning knife,was in that of his own office, which had hitherto beenenormously lucrative, from the custom of allowingimmense sums of public money to remain in thepaymaster's hands. This source of wealth to himselfBurke abolished.Wilkes, who annually moved the extinction ofthe votes of the house upon the Middlesex election,was now successful. Fox, who had beenas violent for his expulsion as any Tory of thehouse, had not now the firmness to own his error :he voted and spoke against his colleagues, but wasleft in a minority of 4-7 to 115. Thus suddenly hadthe house of commons changed their opinions withthe chanfTC of ministers.Reform in parliament was the last and mightiestof all these questions. When the generationwhich witnessed the existence of nomination boroughsshall have passed away, the next will]probably smile at the contest which llicir lathers^J})()THE HlsrOllY Ol' I'AUTV.CHAP, thought SO severe. It will be scarcely believedXI. ^ .■7^-jTTT- that the principles of representation could standin need of advocacy ; still less will it be deemed crediblethat those who were its advocates were deridedas visionaries and mad enthusiasts ; that even theWhigs looked upon it as pregnant with ruin ; or thattheir leaders, finding it necessary to echo the popularcry, took refuge in extremes, and provided againstthe success of their proposals by dashing them withabsurdity. Yet such was the policy of Fox and Sheridan.Annual parliaments and universal suffrage, the wildestinstrument of anarchy that could be devised for acivilized country, formed the repulsive body in whichthey incased the principle of parliamentary reform.Fox thus succeeded in making it terrible to everymoderate person, while Sheridan was equally successfulin making it ridiculous. " He," he said, *' was anoftener if need be,' " adverting to a joke of Burke,who, when the advocates of annual parliaments arguedfrom the ancient act, which provided that parliamentsshould be holden at least once a year and " oftener ifneed be," covered the reasoners with ridicule by inflictingupon them this name.* We may trace thesmile of irony even in the most eloquent of the numerousspeeches in which Fox and Sheridan pretendedto enforce a parliamentary reform. Whenever the• Moore's Lilac of Slieiidaii.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 297remedy proposed was gentle in its nature and gradual chap.in its operation, they were in earnest ; when it in-. , . . A.D. 1782.eluded an organic change they but bandied it m sport.As a moderate party holding the balance between thetwo extreme factions of Toryism and democracy, theWhigs would not sanction a violent reverting even tothe ancient constitution, while it appeared possible toavoid the revolution. In this they were more timorousas statesmen than prudent as party-men. Theold Whig constitution would still have kept the Whigparty in power : it was the treasury boroughs whichexcluded them. Had they been bold enough at thistime to join the democrats in a body, and to forcefrom the Tories a large measure of parliamentaryreform, the long reign of Toryism would not havesucceeded, the crusades in favour of despotism wouldnot have taken place.*Since the rise of the demo whitley were made, and shoutedcritic faction, the Whigs have for the candidates most likely toowed all their reverses, as a party, destroy it. But the possession ofto their timidity of the people, power, generally, not universally,Mankind, when not interested in tends to fit a man for its exercise.the result, love bold and extreme The mind assumes a dignity frommeasures. Interest alone procures the occasion, and reasons hcforc itadmiration for prudence. The decides. The schoolboy monitormajority of the people, knowing of a class is more restrained by histhey possessed no voice in the sense of dignity titian he will be aelections, thought they had no year later, as an undergraduate atinterest in the constitution under a university ; tin masser ol arts!298THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.XI.A. 1). \7&2.But the Whigs, although they trembled to attackthe stronghold of corruption, were very ready todemolish its outworks. They passed through thecommons the bill for excluding contractors, whichthey had introduced when in opposition : and when,after much fighting in the lords, the bill came backto them mutilated, they refused to adopt it, and atlast prevailed upon the peers to pass it in its originalform. This was no inconsiderable blow to ministerialcorruption : it was accompanied by another whichdeprived revenue officers of their votes at elections.Mr. Onslow, Lord Nugent, Sir F. Basset, and someothers of the determined Tories opposed it in thethere is more careful of his deportmentthan he is when he arrives inLondon, a junior student of oneof the Inns of Court ; the sense ofdignity is throughout attendantupon the possession of authority.Even age imposes gravity onlybecause it confers authority. Theanalogy, T think, holds good in politicaldiscussions ; even the concessionof household suffrage and theballot would operate much moreto strengthen the hands of theWhigs than to increase the influenceof that small knot of politicianswho, classing themselves improperlyamong Radical reformers,propose no limit to their organicchanges short of absolute democracy.Nearly all disfranchiseddemocrats would become enfranchisedWhigs. The experiencewe have had of household constituenciesshows that, although theyhave often returned violent men toresist violent enemies, they haveshown no disrespect to the claimsof property, or even of rank. Anassembly thus returned wouldcertainly tolerate no abuse, theywould pass the thumb-nail overthe statue of the constitution, butthey would religiously defend itfrom destruction. But 1 am statingan opinion, not advocating anexperiment.A.D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^9^commons, but their minority never exceeded 14.* chap.XI.In the lords the Earl of Mansfield, whom the deathof Lord Chatham had left without a superior, delivereda long oration against the bill, arguing that the influenceof the crown w as by no means too great, andexhorting his peers not to be hurried away by therage for reformation that prevailed. Lord Rockingham'sanswer was highly interesting, as exhibiting apicture of the magnitude of the evil now redressed.He stated that there w-ere no less than seventy boroughswhere the election depended chiefly on thevotes of revenue officers ; and that the custom-houseand excise could alone command 11,500 votes. Heput it to the house whether it would not be a greatcruelty to oblige these 11,500 persons to vote againstthe persons who had given them their places ; yet,if such means where persisted in by one party, noother party could exist without following their example.t This hint to the Tories that they werepreparing a proscription against their friends had thedesired effect — the bill passed. A bill which releasedseventy boroughs from the thraldom of the minister,was, in itself, no inconsiderable parliamentary reform.An example, also, was exhibited to electors by thedisfranchisement of the borough of Crichdalc, whichhad long been an open market for votes — not that it• Pari, llisi., vol. xxii., cl. l.3;jK. f Phil. Hist., vol. xxiii , col. 101.300 THE HISTORY OF 1»ARTV.CHAP, could be more corrupt than many of its neighbours,XI■ but, because it was more indecent and unblushing inits corruption : the Tories fought for it with a confidenceworthy of their clients, and Lord Mansfield,and his legal friends in the lords, sustained the contestwith considerable pertinacity. But they wereworsted upon division, and the bill passed.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XII.A. D. 178'2.Pitt's motion in favour of a parliamentary reform — BiographicalAnecdotes of William Pitt — Debate upon his motion— Death of theMarquis of Rockingham— The Shelburne administration.Thus far the Whiffs advanced in concert to the CHAPXII.very confines of organic change. Burke, Townshend,and others of the party, would go no further.Among the men who were prepared to overstep thislimit, existed the differences of opinion which mustalways obtain in a body associated for action. Saw-bridge,and a few others in the house of commons,were earnest in their pursuit of universal suffrage.Wilkes made the same cry an instrument of pecuniarygain, and laughed at it in private. Fox andSheridan practised a similar duplicity for a partypurpose. But among the Rockingham party, opposedin heart as this body was to pernicious extremes,there existed a strong feeling in favour of a moderateparliamentary reform. The interest of the fVhigS02 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAr. . parfj/ ahso/ufeh/ demanded such a reform. TheW— vast number of Treasury boroughs placed the delia.D. 1782. - .sion as to which party should govern, in the hands ofthe king, and although the odium arising from a longseries of disasters would sometimes give to thepopular voice a power superior to that of corruption,yet such events must be rare and transient : thehurricane of national indignation might, indeed, foran instant, appear to have mingled the elements, anddestroyed those laws of order which its violencesuspended ; but the next moment it was passedaway, and the trade wind of Toryism blew steadyand continuing as before. So long as seventy seats inthe house of commons were at the private disposal ofthe king, so long the Whigs could only hope topossess the government during fitful moments of highpopular excitement.George III. was the first monarch of the House ofHanover who felt himself secure upon the Britishthrone, or could venture to cancel the debt of gratitudehis family owed the Whigs. The use he had madeof his opportunity must have convinced the Whigsthat the favour of the monarch, though highly to bevalued when fairly obtained, was not their naturalsupport. Patriotism in kings, like virtue in individuals,is doubtless their true interest ; yet howfew of those who repeat this truth are strong-mindedenough rigidly to adhere to it. A monarch, of anTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.enlarged and philosophic mind, would probably prefer ^^f^'the principles of the Whigs as conducive alike to his a. D. 176-2.safety and his glory, but a weak or narrow mindedking would infallibly cleave to the practice of theTories, and the Whigs would be driven from thehelm, precisely at the moment when their vigilancewould be most required.Henceforward, therefore, the great question to bedecided between the factions, was whether the kingor the nation were to judge upon what principles thegovernment should be conducted.Chatham appears to have foreseen that this wouldbe the ultimate question ; and to have foretold itsdecision, when, speaking of the nomination boroughs,he said, *' This is what is called the rotten part of theconstitution ; it cannot continue the century, if itdoes not drop off it must be amputated"* Parliamentaryreform was now become so evidentlynecessary as a party measure, that we must considerany M'hig who is found opposing a rational and well-digestedmeasure of that nature, to have been eitherof very limited comprehension, or very feeble partyprinciple.The question was pressed upon the notice of theRockingham administration by William Pitt, son ofits great originator, the Earl of Chatham. »• I'arl Hist., vol. xvi., rol. ion.i304THE HISTORY OT Taut.CHAP. In producing William Pitt in the position which his^ ^ ., — father would have held, few words of preface will suff1782. '■face. His origin is made illustrious by his father'sdeeds. The traveller, who meets with the infant Rhonetumbling with headlong violence amid the precipicesof Switzerland, prefers to trace it up to its nativeglacier before he follows its course towards the lakein which it terminates ; but he, who meets with thatother Rhone, careering among the fields of France,remembers that it rushes from the lake fed by thewaters of its mountain sire, and does not wonderthat it is so beautiful. The impetuous career of theEarl of Chatham will interest every reader, in tracingthe scattered records of his obscure youth. In theyouth of his son there is nothing of obscurity andlittle of interest. The second son of the Earl ofChatham was designed for the bar and the senate.He received the rudiments of education from hisfather, whose frequent intervals of confinement lefthim leisure for instruction ; and so well did he profitby the lessons of his illustrious preceptor, that, at theage of fourteen he was found qualified for the university.He was probably more indebted to the instructionhe received at the bedside of his father than tohis tuition at Cambridge, or his experience upon the:continent, when, in I78O, he was called to the bar.He went the western circuit once, and appeared, in afew cases, as junior counsel. The duties of a juniorA.D. 178-2.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 305counsel in a circuit cause are too few and trivial chap.• . XIIto offer any opportunity for distinction ; and Pitt'sforensic talents may be said to have been untried inI78I, when, after an unsuccessful canvass of Cambridge,he was brought in by Sir James Lowther,now in opposition, for the borough of Appleby. Pitt,so far as the different character of their minds wouldadmit, had imbibed the political principles of hisfather ; and he made his first speech, in the house ofcommons, in support of Burke's bill of economicalreform. As the son of the Earl of Chatham, he, ofcourse, fixed the attention of the house ; nor had hisauditors listened to him long before they confessedthat he would be able to step forth from the halo ofhis father's name, and work out for himself a title toeminence. Throughout that and the ensuing sessionhe took part in all the efforts made to unseat LordNorth, voting and speaking upon every occasion withthe most decided portion of the Whig party, even tosupporting Mr. Sawbridge's motion for triennial parliaments.When the triumph was achieved, andthe minister fell, Pitt was among those who exultedover his defeat : but the veteran parliamentarydebaters around him nest have smiledwhen they heard a young man of two-and-twentysay, that he himself could not expect to takeany share in a new administration ; but wv.rv his<l()in<r >() iiion- within his reach, \\r iwwv wouldVOL. III. XA. D. 1782.30C THE HISTORY OF 1»AIITY.CHAP, accept of a subordinate situation.* In compliancewith this confident resolve, he refused a seat at thetreasury board, under the new ministry.William Pitt now brought forward the question ofparliamentary reform. *' The moment was come,"he said, " when it was necessary that there should beacalm revision of the principles of the constitution,and a moderate reform of such defects as had imperceptiblyand gradually stolen in to deface, and whichthreatened at last totally to destroy, the most beautifulfabric of government in the world. The countrywas now blessed with a ministry whose wishes wentalong with those of the people, the people wereunanimous throughout the kingdom, and their representativeswere nearly unanimous in that house. Allmen had confidence in the declarations of those whohad so invariably proved themselves the friends offreedom. All things pointed out this as the auspiciousmoment of reformation. The frame of theconstitution had," he said, "in modern times, undergonematerial alterations, which had given a dangerousbias to the commons house of parliament, a biaswhich had become so powerful that the representativeshad ceased in a great degree to be connectedwith the people. The representation had beendesigned to be equal, easy, practicable, and com-Pail. Hist., vol xxii., col. S 1 40.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 307plate. When it ceased to be so; when the repress chap.XIItentative ceased to have connexion with the const1782.tuent, and was either dependent upon the crown orthe aristocracy, there was a defect in the frame ofrepresentation, and it was not innovation, but recoveryof the constitution to repair it.The instances of boroughs either absolutely governed,or totally possessed by the treasury, wheretoo numerous and notorious to require enumeration,and where this influence was opposed, it was usuallynot by the people or for the people, but by an aristocratfor aristocratic purposes. There were otherboroughs which had no existence in property, inpopulation, or in trade, which had no other inhabitantsbut the servants of the person who owned theborough, and himself made the return of its members.Others there were which possessed no other propertythan the votes of their electors, and belonged moreto the nabob of Ascot than to the people of GreatBritain — were more within the jurisdiction of theCarnatic than the limits of the empire of Great Britain.In none of these boroughs did real representationsexist."Having stated the extent of the evil and put severalcases of extreme ruin which might readily accruefrom such a cause, he spoke of the remedy. Declaringhis reverence for the constitution, and his respect(•v«Mi for its vestiges, lie was nevertheless fortirKMl inX '>308 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.(chap, his opinion of the necessity of reform by the assistanceof abler and greater men than himself, ]particle.1). 17&2. ^ IPearly of one now no more, of whom every member ofthat house could speak with greater freedom thanhim. That person was not apt to indulge vague andchimerical speculations inconsistent with practice andexpediency : yet he personally knew that it was theopinion of the late Lord Chatham, that without recurringto first principles in this respect, and establishinga more solid and equal representation of thepeople, by which the proper constitutional connexionshould be revived, this nation, with the best capacitiesfor grandeur and happiness of any on the face of theearth, must be confounded with the mass of thosewhose liberties were lost in the corruption of thepeople. The means of accomplishing the end hewould not pretend to dictate, and to obviate all disunionof sentiment among those who were equallyanxious with himself to secure the object, he movedonly for a committee in which the question might bediscussed, and a remedy meeting the approbation ofall mio^ht be devised."William Pitt upon this day occupied a gloriousposition. Exulting in youth and eloquence, his mindstored with the overflowing of the perennial fountainof his father's wisdom, the repository of the privatethoughts of the revered statesman whom Englandhad not yet ceased to mourn, he stood forward bear-theHISTORY OF PARTY. Jokinghis father's mantle, pursuing the path which he chap.knew he would have delighted to have trod, and dis ^"-^1 • , 1 r. . , A.D. 1782.pending to his countrymen those oracles oi wisdomwhich had been confided to him for his country'sgood. He was supported by those who had knownand honoured his father ; Sir George Saville, one ofthe few who had acted with the first William Pitt inhis days of power and glory, welcomed the promiseof another Chatham ; Sawbridge and Byng were notabsent from the debate ; Alderman Townshend stilladvocated the principles of his youth : while, onbehalf of the Whig party. Fox and Sheridan paidtheir tribute of encomium to the young orator, andexerted all their eloquence in favour of his cause.On the other side, Mr. Thomas Pitt, the head of thefamily, and the proprietor of Old Sarum, defendedthe system which gave him a seat in the house. Heobjected that every innovation is an experiment, andall reformation to be effectual must be gradual ; thatancient and valuable; rights should not be lightlyviolated upon the fanciful grounds of theory andspeculation ; that the ]purpose of a parliament was tobe a balance to the crown, and the aristocraticalweight of property in the commons had alone enabledit to effect that purpose ; and that the principle ofrepresentation inevitably 1(m1 to universal suffrage,and must be either carried through to that point,or abandoned. Defects he admitted to (wist ; ifA. D. 178-2.810 THE HISTOKY OF PARTY.CHAP, specific remedies were proposed for specific defects,he would seriously consider them ; but so general,so undefined a measure would be an act of madnessand infatuation tending only to tumult and disorder.Such were the arguments of an honourable man,who had no wish hostile to the object in view, butwhose immediate interest unconsciously biassed hisjudgment as to the means. Such also was Sir HoraceMann, who opposed the motion as ill-timed. Menwho had not themselves misused their boroughinterest for selfish purposes could not discover that itwas dangerous, or that their country should call uponthem to resign a power that had never been detrimentalto her interests. Many other Whigs, unaccustomedto take any enlarged view of party questions,and still more who preferred their private interest totheir party principles, defended their boroughs. TheTories opposed the motion with consistency, usingthe same arguments, but with a different object, andfighting not only for their borough property, but fortheir party power. Mr. Dundas, the lord advocateof Scotland, and Mr. Rugby, were, however, the onlyeminent speakers of that party who appeared in thedebate. Upon the division the motion was negativedby 161 to 141.*This debate is reported in xxii., pp. 1418 to the end of thethe Parliamentary History, vol. volume.A.D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 311Complaints were rife that this defeat was accom- chap.A. 11.pushed by the insidious hostility of ministers whohad privately opposed a measure they had openlysupported. But this accusation was unjust. Foxand his friends were earnest in support of the motion,and even prevailed upon Burke and the anti-reformingmembers of the "WTiig party to absent themselvesfrom the debate. This is tested by the closeness ofthe division, where the majority was so small, that itoffered, if the Whigs remained in office, a sure andspeedy prospect of triumph to the minority.Such were the events of four months of Whiggovernment. While parliament was still sitting, andseveral of the government measures still in progress,the existence of the ministry was untimely terminatedby the death of the Marquis of Rockingham, whodied on the first of July, having sustained duringa life spent in his country's service, the reputation ofan honourable, consistent, and moderate statesman.The Whig party were still divided upon thesubject of America. Lord Shelburne and his friendsretaining the opinion they had held with LordChatham, were extremely unwilling to acknowledgeher independence, and the king saw in their reluctancea hope that he f-hould not. be compelled toabandon the war. Lord Shelburne, therefore, wasiunncdiatc^ly appointed successor to the marquis,upon the condition that some hold upon AmericaS\Q THE HISTOKY OF PARTY.chap. shoiiltl be retained.* Fox and his friends, who sawXII.;77- no hope of ]peace while such a condition was imposed,and no hope for the country while the war continued,resigned.The Shelburne government was now formed, consistingof the Earl of Shelburne, first lord of thetreasury ; Hon. William Pitt, chancellor of theexchequer ; Lord Graham and Thomas Townshend,secretaries of state ; Lord Thurlow, lordchancellor ; Lord Keppel, first lord of the admiralty ;Lord Camden, president of the council ; Duke ofGrafton, lord privy seal ; Duke of Richmond, master-generalof the ordnance ; Lord Ashburton, chancellorof the duchy of Lancaster ; Sir George Yonge,secretary at war ; Henry Dundas (afterwards LordMelville), treasurer of the navy ; Colonel Barre,paymaster of the forces ; Lloyd Kenyon, attorney-general; Richard Pepper Arden, solicitor-general ;Earl Temple, lord lieutenant of Ireland ; Hon.William Wyndham Grenville (afterwards LordGrenville), secretary.The party must be strong indeed in talent, whichcould afford to exclude such men as Fox, Burke, andSheridan, and yet hope to carry on the government.The division was the more singular since both theremaining and the seceding parties differed moreDr. Franklin.A. D. 1782.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 313amono^ themselves than they did from the friends CHAP,-^ XII.from whom they separated. Thus Fox and Burkehad now very few opinions in common, while Foxagreed with Pitt, Sir George Yonge, Lord Ashbur-ton, and many other members of the Shelburnegovernment, upon the great question of parliamentaryreform, and upon every other question except thatupon which they divided. With all our admirationof the character of Fox, it is difficult to pronouncethat some personal jealousy, of which he was probablyeven himself unconscious, did not influence his judgmentand prompt his resignation.The prorogation of parliament prevented anydisplay of the strength or weakness of the newministry. During the recess, it is said, that LordShelburne made overtures to Lord North* withoutsuccess, and set on foot negotiations for a generalpeace.• Annual Register. But it is their own coalition. Burke stillnot impossible that this rumour held some influence over the An-wasinvented by Burke or his neal Register,friends to cover the disgrace of311. THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XIII.State of parties in the commons — Debate on the preliminaries of peaceCoalition of Lord North and Mr. Fox — Fox's defence of his conduct— Defeat of the minister — Premiership offered to William PittHe declines — Formation of the coalition cabinet — Relative strengthof Whigs and Tories — Mr. Fox's India bill, nature and policy of thisscheme — opposed by Pitt — Passes the commons — Is rejected by thelords — Dissolution of the coalition ministry.CHAP. Upon the meeting of parliament in December,■Y" I T T1782, it was discovered that the question which hadA. D. 1782.formed the ostensible cause of the schism in theRockingham cabinet had been abandoned, and thatthe minister had at length resolved to concede theabsolute independence of America. That Fox shouldfeel injured by the manner in which he had been thusturned out of office, upon a point which his opponentsthemselves abandoned as soon as it was gained, wasbut natural ; a dignified resentment and a distantTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 315deportment towards those by whom he had been chap.XIII.supplanted, were called for by the occasion and hadA. D. 1783.been worthy of his character. Such appeared for ashort time to be his policy. According to the computationof a person likely to be correct, Fox numberedabout 90 followers. Lord North 120, and theminister 140, the rest being unattached. But Foxfound that his followers were not so devoted as hesupposed ; in a division which he ventured uponhis own strength he found himself supported only by46 votes against 219.The nation confused by the distracted state of partiesawaited the issue with some curiosity, not unmingledwith fear lest the dissensions of the Whigs shouldagain let in the Tories. On the 17th of February,the house of commons assembled to take into considerationthe preliminaries of peace that had been nowsigned, and curiosity was at once changed intoastonishment. Charles Fox and Lord North satupon the same bench, their followers intermingledaround them, they proposed the same amendment,adopted the same arguments, spoke, voted, acted inall things as one united ]party. They succeeded, theamendments were carried by a majority of 1(), thenumbers being 224 to 208.*The debate was well contested. When the members• I';iil. IlisL, vol. xxiii col. 4'.W.3i(\Tin: IIISTOKY OF I'AIMV.A. D. 1783.CHAP, of the new opposition attacked the ministers onxiii. .account of a peace which was certainly as disadvantageousas even the disastrous nature of the contestcould have promised, they were answered by bittersarcasms against the unnatural coalition from whichthose attacks proceeded, and by repetitions of theviolent expressions of hatred or contempt with whichthe new allies had been accustomed to assail eachother. A few days later, the coalition brought forwardresolutions of censure upon the preliminaries,and after a debate of great power and interest carriedthem by a majority of I7. The Earl of Shelburne,upon this defeat, immediately quitted his office, andPitt announced that he only held his place as chancellorof the exchequer until a successor should beappointed.The occurrence of this coalition is greatly to bedeplored, as an example to men, who, without any ofthe power, may nevertheless feel inclined to imitatethe errors of Fox. It is to be deplored as a blot uponthe character of a great man ; as a precedent whichstrikes at the foundation of political morality ; and asaweapon in the hand of those who would destroy allconfidence in the honesty of public men.It would, however, be unfair to refuse insertionto the defence which Fox made for this alliance inthe house of commons. *' I am accused," he said,** of having formed a junction with a noble personA. D. 1783.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 317whose principles I have been in the habit of opposing CHAP,for the last seven years of my life. I do not think itat all incumbent upon me to make any answer to thischarge : first, because I do not think that the personswho have asked the question have any right tomake the inquiry ; and, secondly, because if anysuch junction was formed, I see no ground for arraignmentin the matter. That any such alliancehas taken place I can by no means aver. That Ishall have the honour of concurring with the noblelord in the blue ribbon on the present question isvery certain ; and if men of honour can meet onpoints of general national concern, I see no reasonfor calling such a meeting an unnatural junction. Itis neither wise nor noble to keep up animosities forever.It is neither just nor candid to keep upanimosity when the cause of it is no more. It isnot my nature to bear malice or to live in ill will.My friendships arc perpetual, my enmities are notso. Amiciticp sempiferncp inimiciticp placable. Idisdain to keep alive in my bosom the enmitieswhich I bear to men, when the cause of those enmitiesis no more. When a man ceases to be what hewas, when the opinions which made him obnoxiousare changed, he then is no more my enemy but myfriend. The American war was the cause of theenmity between the noble lord and myself. TheAmerican war and th(! American (question is at anA.D. 1788.318 Tin: history of party.CHAP. end. The noble lord has profited from fatal experience.XIIIsmile that system was maintained, nothing could bemore asunder than the noble lord and myself. Butit is now no more, and it is therefore wise andcandid to put an end also to the ill will, the animosity,the rancour, the feuds which it occasioned. Iam free to acknowledge that whom I was the friendof the noble lord in the blue ribbon, 1 found himopen and sincere ; when the enemy, honourable andmanly never had reason to say of the noble lordin the blue ribbon that he practised any of those littlesubterfuges, tricks, and stratagems, which I found inothers, and of those behindhand and paltry manoeuvreswhich destroy confidence between human beings, andwhich degrade the character of the statesman andthe man"*The last sentence of this defence is a confessionof guilt, intimating too plainly that it was personaldisgust, which more powerfully than patriotism impelledFox towards Lord North.The coalition had so completely mingled thetwo parties, had so shaken together the vinegarand oil, that it will be some time before they can beseparated, or can assume their relative positions.The king's strongest antipathy was to Fox, hisnext was to his party. Among the latter, however,Purl. Hist., vol. xxiii., col. 487.A.D. 1783.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 319he thought he had discovered a man who might be CHAP.Xvii.converted to his service, and whose acquisition wouldbe worth any pains he could bestow. George II.had been advised to trust the first William Pitt, andhe would find him tractable. George III. mighthave received from Dundas the same advice withrespect to the second. When Shelburne was provedunable to maintain his ground, Pitt was called intothe royal closet and offered the premiership. To ayoung man of four-and-tw^enty, of brilliant talent andhigh aspirations, the offer must have been almostirresistible ; but the very fact of such a proposalbeing made to one without age, experience, influence,or followers, argues either the ignorance or the arroganceof him who made it ; — ignorance, if he saw notin the then state of parties the difficulties of such anundertaking ; arrogance, if he expected that thesedifficulties should succumb at once to the royal will.Pitt must have reluctantly admitted to himself that, atthis juncture, he could not stand a day. He declinedthe dangerous honour. Lord North was then appliedto, but he refused to treat alone ; and after otherattempts to induce Pitt to assume the reins, the kingwas at last compelled to admit Fox into the negotiation.Many difficulties and delays, however, occurredbefore the arrangements could be completed ; andA.D. 1783.^'■20 The IIlSTOllY 01' TAIITY.CH A P. the country remained for six weeks without a ministry.Those who were not in the secrets of the parties,could not comprehend the delay, and distrusted theintentions of the king. It was not until the houseof commons became impatient, and notices weregiven of motions to address the crown for anadministration entitled to the confidence of thepeople, that there appeared any immediate intentionof filling up the vacancies ; nor was it until themotion was carried, and a strong resolution uponthe subject had been discussed, that the new ministrywas settled.On the 2d of April, the appointments were announced.The Duke of Portland was, by generalconsent of the coalesced parties, constituted firstlord of the treasury ; North and Fox were secretariesof state ; Lord John Cavendish, chancellorof the exchequer ; Viscount Keppel, first lord ofthe admiralty ; Viscount Torment, president of thecouncil ; the Earl of Carlisle, privy seal. Theseseven formed the cabinet, in which it will be seenthat the Whigs had the majority.*• The inferior appointments sinners for the custody of thewere : great seal.Lord Loughborough, Sir William The Earl of Surrey, FrederickHenry Amherst, and Sir Beau Montagu, and Sir Georgemont Gotham, lords commis Cooper, lords of the treasury ;THE HISTORY OF PARTY.In a ministry thus composed, it is evident thatthe great party disputes must either be suffered toHe dormant, or be discussed as open questions. Suchwas the case with that of parliamentary reform. WhenMr. Pitt brought forward his annual motion uponCHAP.XIII.A. D. 178a.Hugh Pilot, Esq., Viscount Dun-cannon,Hon. John Townshend,Sir John Lindsay, WilliamJolHife, and Whitshcd Keene,lords of the admiralty ;The Earl of Hertford, lord chamberlain;The Earl of Dartmouth, lordsteward of the household ;Right Hon. Charles Greville, treasurerof the household ;Viscount Townshend, master generalof the ordnance ;John Courtenay, surveyor-generalof the ordnance ;Henry Strachey, storekeeper ofthe ordnance ;William Adam, treasurer of theordnance ;Hon. Richard Fitzpatrick, secrc-tary-at-war ;Edmund Burke, paymaster tif tiu-forces;Charles Townshend, ireasuni ollh»- navy ;The Earlof Cholmondeley, captainof the yeomen of the guards ;James Wallace, attorney-general ;John Lee, solicitor-general ;John Foley and Henry FrederickCarteret, joint postniastei-s-ge-neral ;Richard Brinsley Sheridan, andRichard Burke, secretaries tothe treasury;Hon. iMr. St. John and Hon. ColonelNorth, under-secretariesof state ;The Earl of Sandwich, ranger andkeeper of St. James's-park andHyde-park ;The Earl of Jersey, captain of thehand of pensioners ;Lord Hiiichinbrookc, master ofthe buck-hounds;The Earl of Mansfield, speaker ofthe house of lords ;The Earl of Northington,lord lieutenantof Ireland ;William Windham, secretary tothe li>rd lieutenant.VOL. IN.A. I). 1783.322 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, this subject he had Fox and his party speaking andvoting with him, North and his followers againsthim. The resolutions moved this year were of avery moderate character ; their objects were todiminish the expense of elections, to disfranchise suchboroughs as should be proved notoriously corrupt,and to make an add lion to the representation ofknights of the shire and burgesses for the metropolis.But they were negatived by a majority of144,* very nearly two to one ; a division, whichcontrasted with that which took place under theRockingham administration, sufficiently proves thatthe Whigs of that cabinet were sincere. Thegreat superiority of the anti-reformers upon thisoccasion seems to intimate that the question havingbeen made an open question, Burke, and his partyof anti-reforming Whips, considered themselves atliberty to vote against their friends and colleagues.The great undertaking of this coalition governmentwas the India bill, which monopolized itsenergies, and at length became its destruction.The affairs of the East India Company had, forsome time, employed the attention of the house ofcommons. Two committees had been diligentlyinvestigating the state of the country that had beenintrusted to the company's governance, and hadPari. Hist., vol. xxiii col. 873.A. D. 1783.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 3Q3discovered abuses which required the prompt inter chap.terence of parliament. The policy of Mr. Hastingswas declared to be equally tyrannical to the Hindoo,disgraceful to his country, and unprofitable to thecompany ; yet the court of proprietors refused toobey the vote of the house of commons which requiredhis recal. Mr. Dundas was the chief agentin this laborious investigation. In a series of onehundred and eleven resolutions he set forth theabuses of Indian government, provided remedies,and punished the perpetrators of injustice. But theeffects of the mal-administration of the company werefelt as severely in the city as in the carnatic. AllIndia was united against them, the expenses of wardrained their coffers, and embarrassed their accounts.In 1783, their debts were 11,200,000/. Their stock3,500,000/. ; while two millions' worth of bills wereon their way to England, for which the companywere unable to provide. The company paid in taxesto the nation an annual thirteen hundred thousandpounds ; a consideration which coinciding with theshock that its failure would give to our credit, forbadethe government to allow it to proceed to bankruptcy.Some interference, therefore, was absolutelynecessary. Fox thought he saw in the conjuncturean opportunity of securing his party againstthe power of the king, and In; seized it with a decisionworfhv of such a pnrtv le.ich'r. lev the bill wliicli 1)(^V 'JsnTHE insToiiY or r.\UTY.A. D. 17.s;3.CHAT, introduced, he rolicvod the company at the sameXii. . , . '^ •'time from their pecuniary embarrassments and theirpolitical duties. He vested the supreme governmentof India, and the distribution of all the patronageconnected with it, in seven commissioners, who,being named by him, were, of course, his politicalfriends, and he placed their tenure of office upon thesame footing as that of the judges of England.Other parts of the plan guarded against the injusticeof the governors, and provided for the protection ofthe governed, but the institution of the commissionwas the chief feature in the bill which demands ournotice. It was a master-stroke of policy ; having asits intention to throw the whole patronage of ourvast possessions upon the continent of India, for atleast one entire generation, into the hands of theWhigs. It was upon this occasion that Pitt, for thefirst time, stepped forward as the chosen antagonistof Fox. He made use of the weapon which Fox hadput into his hands, and declaimed against theiniquity of the coalition ; although he, as well asothers of the Shelburne party who harped uponthis theme, took too much pains to show the inconsistencyof Fox in coalescing with the man he hadcondemned, and too little trouble to point out asingle point in which he had abandoned the principleshe had professed. Pitt attacked the bill uponthe ground that it was an entire abridgment of ancientTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.3'2jA. D. 1783,charters and privileges upon no other excuse than CHAP,necessity : necessity the plea of every illegal exertionof power or exercise of oppression ; the pretence ofevery usurpation, the plea for every infringement ofhuman freedom, the argument of tyrants, the creedof slaves. He opposed it also, because it increasedthe influence of the crown to the destruction of theliberties of Englishmen. That influence, he said,had never, in its zenith, been equal to what it wouldbe, when it should find itself strengthened by thewhole patronage of the cast, and in the possessionof such an extensive source of influence and corruption.The proposed system was, in his opinion,nothing more than absolute despotism on the oneside, and gross corruption on the other — one of themost bold and forward exertions of power that wasever adopted by a minister.*These arguments, together with a discussion ofarithmetical details, which tended to prove that theaffairs of the company were not in so desperate astate as Fox had represented them, formed thetopics upon which the opposition descanted duringthe long and powerful debates which marked thecourse of this bill. Fox, on the other hand, defendedhis bill upon the principles of the revolution. It was♦ i';iil. Ilisl., vol. xxiii., col. 121 1.A.D. 1783..3'^() THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, by neither side of the house denied that gross abusesXlll.existed in the Indian government, and that the mostinfamous tyranny had marked the policy and practiceof the company. No man will tell me, said Fox thata trust to a company of merchants stands upon thesolemn and sanctified ground by which a trust iscommitted to a monarch ; yet every syllable urgedin behalf of this charter impeaches the establishmentby which we sit in this house, in the enjoyment ofthis freedom, and of every other blessing of ourgovernment. Sovereigns are sacred, and reverenceis due to every king ; yet with all my attachmentsto the person of a first magistrate, had I livedin the reign of James II., I should most certainlyhave contributed my efforts, and borne part inthose illustrious struggles which vindicated anempire fi'om hereditary servitude, and recordedthis valuable doctrine, that ' trust abused is revocable.'"Notwithstanding the opposition of Pitt and Dundas,the bill passed triumphantly through the commons,by majorities of more than two to one, andwas, on the 9th of December, carried up to thelords by Mr. Fox.The first debate in the lords showed that theopposition had been successful with the king. LordThurlow, who retained the confidence of his master.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 3^7although no longer in office, declared against the chap.bill. " I wish," he said, " to see the crown great ^ ^ ^^ -A. U. Ivoo.and respectable ; but if the present bill should pass,it will be no longer worthy of a man of honour towear. The king will, in fact, take the diadem fromhis own head, and place it on the head of Mr. Fox"*The effect of this manifestation of the royal will wassoon apparent. Upon the first division, the ministerswere beaten by a majority of eight : and uponthe second reading, the bill was rejected by a majorityof 19.The open use which had been made of the king'sname upon this occasion attracted the attention ofthe commons ; and produced a motion for a resolution,declaring it to be a high crime and misdemeanorto report any opinion of his majesty, upon abill before either house, with a view to influence thevotes of the members. This resolution was supportedby ministers, and carried by a majority of153 to 80. It was followed by a resolution deprecatinga dissolution of parliament.• I'arl. Hist., vol. xxiv., col. consider tlicni as his enemiesand if these words were not strongt Time king commissioned Earl enough, Earl Temple might useTemple to say, that whoever voted whatever words he might deemfor the India bill, were not only stronger or more to the purpose,not his friends, but that he should3^28 THE IIISTOUY OF Party.CHAP. On the Width of December, the king sent to desniand the seals from his secretaries ; dechninff anA D 1783interview. Thus ended the short existence of thecoalition ministry, which had entered office a fewmonths previously with every prospect of its membersholding their places for life. The causes of itsfall were the hostility of the king, who havingavowedly received them upon compulsion soughtthe first opportunity to eject them, and their unpopularitywith a people who never countenance politicaltergiversation. Against the sulky antipathy ofthe king, the favour of the nation and the splendourof his abilities might have maintained Fox as theyhad maintained the first William Pitt ; but under theodium of the coalition he fell. The great parliamentarystrength of the minister, the unequalled blazeof talent by which he was surrounded, serve only torender his fall the more instructive, and to deterany statesman who may have his provocation, or hisambition, from following his example.Had the India bill proceeded from Fox in theheight of his popularity, unstained by any contactwith Toryism, it would probably have been a popularmeasure ; but it came from one who was denouncedthroughout the kingdom as an apostate, one fromwhom all those populous constituencies which hadformerly idolized him had now withdrawn their con-ad.1783.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 329licence, whom London had repudiated, and even chap.. XIII.Westminster had renounced. All the objectionablepoints of this bill were now seen through a microscopicmedium ; it took its character from its author,and reflecting back the colours it had received,deepened the shades of his unpopularity.330 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XIV.Formation of the Pitt administration — Strength of the opposition —The minister left in a minority — Mediation of the country gentlemen— Unsuccessful — Perseverance of Pitt — Diminution of theopposition majority — Dissolution of parliament — General electionAdverse to the coalition — The Westminster election — Westminsterscrutiny — Pitt's motion for parliamentary reform — Debateupon Mr, Beaufoy's motion for the repeal of the Corporation andTest acts — Illness of the king — Contest upon the subject of theregency — Conduct of Thurlow — Recovery of the king.CHAP. Now, when the offer of the premiership was re-^^^' seated, Pitt no longer refused it. Lord Templeto 1789. received the seals ; but alarmed by the storm, raisedby his imprudent declaration of the will of the king,he resigned them three days after. The new premierwas startled bv this stumble at the threshold,and, when his own relations forsook him, appearedto doubt the sincerity of others who were so eagerlycheering him on. The night after this resignation waspassed in an anxiety which banished sleep ; but theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY, 331morning found him resolved to persevere, " though CHAP,very doubtful of the resultsA. D. 1783He proceeded to fill up the offices in the best to 1789.manner he could ; many who wished him successdeclining to share the hazard of the adventure.Thurlow, the king's friend, of course, returned to hisold station as lord chancellor. Lord Gower, afterwardsMarquis of Stafford, without any previous acquaintancewith Pitt, sent to him to say, that althoughhe had wished to spend the remainder of hisdays in retirement, yet in the present situation ofthe king, and distressed state of the country, hewould cheerfully take any office in which it might bethoughthe could be useful. He was made lordpresident of the council, and his extensive Tory connexionswere of no small advantage to the youthfulminister. The Duke of Rutland was lord privyseal. Thomas Townshend who, early in this yearhad been created Lord Sydney, and Lord Carmarthen,were secretaries of state. Lord Howewas first lord of the admiralty.!• Tomline's Life of Pitt, vol. afterwards Lord Grenville, andi., p. 174. Lord Mulgravc, joint paymastersf The chief of those appoint of the forces ; Dundas, treasurerments which did not confer a seat of the navy ; Sir George Yonge,in the cabinet, were, the Duke of secretary at war ; George RoseRichmond, master-general of the and Thomas Steele, secretaries ofordnance; Kcnyoii, attorney-gem the treasury. The Duke ofneral ; Arden, solicitor-general ; Rutland wits lord lieutenant ofWilliam Wyudiiani (grenville, Ireland.'33'Z Tin: iiiSTOUY or parity.CHAP. Such was theccabinet at the head of which Pitt\1 Vundertook to sustain a conflict with a party superiorto 178!). to his own in numbers, and headed by Fox, Burke,Sheridan, and North. Upon scrutinizing this ministry,it will be seen that it was the result of acoalition of parties as open and shameless as thatwhich Pitt professed himself resolved to punish.When Fox and North coalesced, there was a fragmentof each party which refused to follow. These,after raising a terrible clamour against the turpitudeof their late leaders, finding that they were of littleconsequence individually, themselves coalesced, andas they continued to sustain the cry against the unnaturalcoalition between Fox and North, the nationforgot to scrutinize the materials of which this newnoisy party was composed. The complaint againstFox was that he had taken to his bosom a man whomhe had denounced as the author of the miseries ofhis country. The charge was just, but not so theaccusers. Pitt the parliamentary reformer, the hater ofthe American war, the violent Whig, as he made thethe accusation, ranged himself with Lord Gower thecoadjutor of the Duke of Grafton, the promoter ofthe American war, the personal antagonist of theEarl of Chatham,* the violent Tory. Lord Sydney,The reader of the parian tioiis of Cliathain and Gowernectary debates during the Anie assunicd a very personal charitywar, will recollect many dacier,instances in which the altcrca-THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 333who had been accustomed to rank himself araonor CHAP.XIVWhiffs, sat beside the tory Lord Thurlow. The ^ — -■ . ^■^- i"^3Duke of Richmond, violent in his Whisraism as he to 1789.had always been, would readily have found amonghis colleagues a Tory pair. Dundas, the new treasurerof the navy, whose zeal for the American warhad even outstripped that of Lord North,* mighthave neutralized the Whiggism of the duke. TheMarquis of Carmarthen, whose unfrequent efforts atoratory had been hitherto made on the Tory side, wasabout to receive his AVhig equivalent in Lord Camden,who stood at the door of the cabinet, and onlyawaited a vacancy. The joint paymasters werealready well balanced in their party principles.Wyndham Grenville, the able supporter of the Rockinghamadministration, was prudently paired withthat vehement Tory, Lord Mulgrave.t Sir GeorgeYonge, the new secretary at war, the old companionof Fox and Byng, is without a pair. He maybeleft at leisure to contemplate the chequered characterof his companions.The Pitt ministry, therefore, like that of the Dukeof Portland, was the result of a coalition. Rut therewas this difference between them : In the coalition• See his speech upon Lord motion for the sentence of (lieNorth's conciliatory propositions, court-martial on Sir Hugh Vulgar.Ilitt., vol. xviii., col. .3.'12. liscr. — Parl.Hisl., vol. xx.,col. (i27.\ Sec his speech on Mr. Fox's331 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, between Fox and North, Fox and the Whigs had the\ I V^ — '- — nredonii dance ; the principles of action would haveA. D. 178:3 r . •to 1789. been Whiggish, the sentiments of the chiefs wouldhave descended to the followers, the hostility of thecourt and the opposition of a strong body of Torieswould gradually have effaced all Tory predilections,and the followers of Lord North would have beeninsensibly draughted into the Whig phalanx.The coalition of Pitt and Gower, on the contrary,gave the preponderance to the Tories. Weak inparliament, such a party could only rely for supportupon a Tory king, and could only retain that supportby adopting Tory principles of government.Under such an influence it was to be expectedthat the colours of Whiggism would speedily fade,and the hue of Toryism become deep and uniform.Upon the assembling of the house of commons, onthe 19th of December, Fox and North, Burke,General Conway, Lord John Cavendish, Sheridan.the late attorney and solicitor generals. ColonelFitzpatrick, and others of the coalition leaders wereseen sitting upon the opposition benches,* and supportedby a plentiful attendance of adherents. Thetreasury benches were nearly empty ; the ministersFox, upon entering the house, sines have you on this ? Gofinding Dundas upon the opposer to the treasury bench." Thissition bench, jocularly took him raised a laugh, in which the coalsthe arm, saying, " What bu tion party very heartily joined.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 335were gone to their re-elections. Among the few chap.subordinates present, all was saloon and distrust. '- —. . . A.D. 1783Among the opposition, nothing appeared but gaiety to 1789.and good humour. Fox's superiority was so evident,that the Pitt party did not attempt a division. Thefirst attempt of the majority was to provide againstthe possibility of an immediate dissolution of parliament,and, not trusting for this purpose to theefficacy of addresses, they were careful to delay thebusiness of supply.On the 12th of January, Pitt re-entered the house, A.D. 1784.and at once found himself standing at bay againstthe whole band of opposition. A majority of 39against him convinced him at once of the temper ofthe assembly. Fox was still the manager of the houseof commons. It was he, at the head of the opposition,who fixed the day upon which the ordinary measuresof government should be brought on ; and who postponed,or suffered them to pass as they suited hisconvenience. The minister could only offer his suggestionsupon the subject.* Resolutions werepassed, declaring a necessity for an administrationhaving the confidence of that house, and themajority against the minister was now increasedto 5 1<.The opposition appear to have been in perfect• Pari. Hist., vol. xxiv., col. 603.THE HISTORY OT PARTY.^IJ'^r* fi"oo(l-liuinour ; satisfied vvitli their strength, andXIV. o ' ft 'P j„^j rather amused by the embarrassment of the ministerto 1789. ii^r^Yi enraged at their own dismissal. Their returnto office was considered as certain, and there werefew persons who did not think with Fox, that theusurpation of Pitt was a political absurdity totallyunparalleled in the annals of immature ambition.An ordinary minister, beaten in one night, bytwo such majorities, upon questions aimed againstthe existence of his government, would eitherhave resigned or dissolved the parliament. ButPitt was not in an ordinary position. George III.looked upon the contest as one in which hehimself was one of the principals and his ministerbut a second. Every defeat in the commonsbrought a more decided assurance of supportfrom the king. He declared himself ready tostake his crown and his life upon the issue, andPitt knew that treachery to his servants was notin the character of his master.* He neither resignedhis office, nor dissolved the parliament. The senseof the nation was not yet sufficiently in his favour forthe latter expedient ; the former, his ambition, hisconfidence in his own powers, and gratitude to themaster who had exalted him above his fellows, alikeforbade. In the course of a triumphant opposition,• See this correspondence between Pitt and the king, in Tomline'sLife of Pitt.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 337there must occur some errors — these might be exposed CHAP,XIV.with success ; the violence put upon the will of theA.D. 1784king would become daily more plain — his powerless to 1789.state would have a powerful effect upon the minds ofa loyal people. If Pitt fought the battle well, thespectacle of a young and able leader, singly holdingout against such odds, would arouse the generousfeelings of the nation in behalf of the weaker party,and draw the nation to his side.These considerations influenced him to persevere.He now introduced his India bill, which, in additionto the other points of difference from that of Fox,had this marked characteristic, that it left thepatronage in the hands of the company. On thesecond reading, this measure was vehemently attackedby the opposition, as a temporizing temporarymeasure possessed of neither vigour or permanency ;and, on the motion for its committal, it was thrownout by a majority of 222 to 214.Still, through all his defeats, the minister held on.The country gentlemen, as those members whoh(;ld themselves disengaged from cither party arcusually designated, now undertook to interfere. Ameeting of about 7^ of these took place at the St.Allan's Tavern, and an address signed by .03commoners was presented to the Duke of Portlandand Mr. Pitt, urging a lilxM-al and unreservedintercourse between these two statesmen, as a preli-VOl Ml. zTHE IITSTOHY OF PARTY.CHAP, minarv to the formation of a ministry which shouldXIV. • -^^ P j^g^ inchidc all those great and respectable charactersto 1789. ^vho were entitled to the support of independent anddisinterested men.Both parties professed themselves anxious to showdeference to so respectable a meeting. The Dukeof Portland, however, added, that the chief difficultywhich he saw, and the greatest which he thoughtmust be experienced by Mr. Pitt was, Mr. Pittcontinuing to hold office.* Mr. Grosvenor, in thehouse of commons, moved a resolution in accordancewith the address of the St. Allan's Tavern, and itwas carried unanimously.! The king now reluctantlyconsented to allow Pitt to treat with the Dukeof Portland for the purpose of forming an administrationupon a wide basis and on fair and equal terms.The duke, before he would meet Mr. Pitt, requiredan explanation of the sense in which the term equalwas used. Pitt refused any preliminary explanation,and the treaty was at an end. Each party threwthe odium of the failure upon their opponents ; but,from the terms of the letter in which the king conveyedhis permission to treat, it is plain that noequality could have existed, t His hatred of theAnnual Register. Tomline's cation I feel at any possibility of ourLife of Pitt. again seeing the heads of oppositePari. Hist., vol. xxiv., col. 472. tion in public employments, andJ In this letter he says, " Mr. more particularly Mr. Fox * * * *Pitt is well apprized of the mortified confess I have not seen theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 839AVTiig leaders was so great, that it could not be tHAr*.restrained — it appears in every act. '- —TVT 1 -1 1 T • A. D. 1784Meanwhile the coalition proceeded with their to 1789.attacks. They carried a resolution that the continuanceof the present ministry in office was theobstacle to the formation of such an administration asmight enjoy the confidence of the commons; and theysent those members of the house who were alsomembers of the privy council, to lay their resolutionbefore the king. The king returned no answer tothis communication, and the house postponed thesupplies. This last expedient is a very dangerousattempt in this commercial country ; and, unless thepeople are at the moment very highly excited againstthe minister, must infallibly prove the ruin of theopposition which proposes it. Fox, with all his boldnessand decision of character, felt this, and carefullyrepudiated any design of stopping the supplies.To stop the supplies, he knew as well as any man,was an expedient which could be only justified bythe last extremity ; he, for one, was not yet ripe forsuch a strong measure, and he solemnly and earnestlysmallest appearance of sincerity a message to be carried, in myin till leaders of opposition to name, to the Duke of Portland."come into the only mode by which With other expressions casuallyI could tolerate them in my service declarative of his dislike." — Tome• * *. I will, though reluctantly, lini'x Life of Pitt, vol. i., p. '2f)4.go personally so far as to authorize340 THE IIISTOUY OF PARTY.CHAP, protested against the imputation of any such design.*'— ^ — The sui)i)lios were nevertheless ]postponed, while theA.D. 1784 ' ' . . ^ ^to 1789. coalition carried, by majorities of 20 and (gil, a resolutionexpressing the confidence of the house that theking would give effect to the wishes of his faithfulcommons ; and an address founded upon this resolution.The king, in his answer, declined to dismisshis ministers, and demanded the charge againstthem. Another address was proposed and carried bya diminished majority of 12. Symptoms of waveringhad now appeared in the coalition camp. Theresult which Pitt had anticipated had occurred. Thepeople had taken the part of the king. Addresseswere pouring in from all parts of the kingdom. t Ata public meeting in Westminster Hall, Fox wassaluted with cries of " No great mogul !" — " NoIndia tyrant !" — " No usurper !" — '* No turncoat !" —"No dictator"— "No Catiline !"1: When SirHorace Mann accompanied his house to St. James'sto present their address, he met the lord mayor,with several others of his constituents, who had• Pari. Hist., vol. xxiv., col. 603. the Grocers' Company, walked in•)• Pitt's biographer found among procession to their hall, and re-his papers thirty-six addresses of civet all the usual testimonials ofcongratulation upon his appoint civic popularity.ment as minister. He received I Lord Mason's speech on Mr.the freedom of the city, was com- Powys's motion for a united andpliraented by Wilkes, dined with efficient administration.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 341come up to present an address. On seeing them chap.he was surprised, not having been consulted on the ^ ^^business ; but said to them, "I am among my to i789.friends." To which they answered, " We wereyour friends once, but you have joined with thosewho have set up a lord protector." Sir Horace relatedthis anecdote in the house of commons.These popular demonstrations were not withouttheir effect ; the answer to the present address wasno less firm than that returned to the former. Foxthen postponed the ]militia bill ; and his majority fellto nine. He moved a representation in reply to theking's answer, and his majority dwindled to one.*The crisis had now arrived — the victory was won.This division took place on the 8th of March. Thenecessary business of the session was rapidlydespatched ; and on the 25th the parliament wasdissolved.Never, since the accession of the house of Hanover,had a general election excited such enthusiasm,as that which now prevailed. An unpopular ministerwould probably have procured a majority ; but a]popular minister was irresistible. No one entertaineddistrust of Pitt — of Pitt, the parliamentaryreformer — the son of the Earl of C'liathani. Theylooked upon him as the stone which should break in• Pari. Hist., vol. xxiv., tol. 7n-J.:il TIIH HISTORY OF PARTY.(HAP. pieces the image of aristocratic rule; as the youngapostle of reform, who had snatched the standard ofA.D. 1784to 1789. A\'hig principles from the hands of an exclusive party,and threw it among the nation for protection andsupport. No one entertained distrust of Pitt ; constituenciesflocked around him with petitions ; first,that he would be himself their representative, and whenthis was impossible, that they might be representedby a candidate of his choice. That he would supportthe minister was now the unusual pledge everywhereextorted from the popular candidate. Everysuccessive election tolled the knell of the late opposition.Pitt was, himself, seated for Cambridge,against John Townshend. Lord John Cavendishlost his election at York. Mr. Coke, who may bealmost termed the hereditary representative of Norfolk,shared the same fate. George Byng was beatenin Middlesex ; General Conway, Earl Varney, Mr.Thomas Grenville, all disappeared from the house.The rejection of men like these — men of ancientfamily, extensive possessions, and spotless characteris the strongest instance that can be given of theviolence of the popular feeling ; but Pitt thought hissuccess yet incomplete, and sullied his triumph in anattempt to crown it. While the leader of the oppositionsat for a constituency so conspicuous as that ofWestminster, his party might point to his position asaready answer to any taunt of their unpopularity.THE HISTORY OF Party. 848No effort, therefore, was to be spared to drive Fox chap.XIV.from that city. The old members had been Fox^ -' ^ A. D. 1784and Sir Cecil Way. Lord Hood was put forward by to 1789.Pitt, and immediately stood at the top of the poll.The contest was between Way and Fox. Upon thisstruggle the eyes of the whole nation were fixedwhile this remained in suspense the interest of allminor elections was absorbed. Fox and Way werethe watchwords of the two parties, the words which,for successive weeks, rendered Covent-garden a sceneof outrage and even bloodshed.The election commenced on the first of April, andFox saw himself at the bottom of the poll ; duringtwenty days of polling, the most intense exertion onbehalf of his party, aided by the influence of thePrince of Wales, could not alter his position ; he wasstill a few votes behind. In this critical state of thecontest the victory was decided by a woman. Thebeautiful and enthusiastic Duchess of Devonshirestepped forth from the brilliant circle that had formedher sphere, and mingled with the electors as a canvasserfor Fox. Political enthusiasm in so fair aform could not fail to gather converts. The duchessappeared frequently at the hustings, with her carriagefull of electors; and Fox overtook and, at length,passed his competitor. It was in vain the ministerialparty redoubled their efforts; in vain they broughtforward Lady Salisbury to combat the Whig heroine.341<iii; iiisTouv or beauty.CHAP. The duchess was found irresistible, and Fox's maio-XIV. . . .—— IT city increased. At the close of the poll, on the Kithto 1789. of May, he stood '235 votes above Sir Cecil Way.Lord Hood and Fox, therefore, were the memberselected ; but Corbett, the high bailiff, being in theinterests of the administration, thought proper togrant a scrutiny of the votes, and thus delay thereturn to an indefinite extent.The Prince of Wales had now broken all bonds ofdelicacy, in the manifestation of his adherence to theopposition. He met the procession which celebratedFox's victory ; gave fetes upon the occasion, in thegardens of Carlton-house ; and was conspicuous atevery banquet which celebrated the victory.*Parliament met on the 1 8th of May. Fox, whotook his seat for Kirkwall, must have looked aroundhim with very different feelings to those which hehad enjoyed when he last sat in that house ; whilePitt found himself no longer the powerless expostulatoryagainst the acts of a hostile majority, but theleader of an overwhelming party. Ten creations• Blue and buff was still the well as the men, appeared dressedlivery of the opposition. " True in the party colours. The hostessblue and Mrs. Crewe," was the expressed her hospitality and hertoast given by the prince, after party zeal with equal brevity;supper, at an entertainment at that drinking in return, " True bluelady's house, at which the ladies, as and all of you,"THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 345amono^ the peers had riveted his influence in that chap.^ XIV.assembly.A. D. 1784The first division in this house of commons was to 1789.upon a clause in the address, returning thanks to theking for dissolving the last parliament. It wascarried by a majority of les ; a sufficient indicationof the prostration of the coalition leaders.Throughout the first two sessions of this parliament,the Westminster scrutiny supplied the principletopics of opposition eloquence. The manifest dangerof intrusting a returning officer with the power ofevading the right of representation, should have influencedthe house to put an end at once to a precedentso obnoxious to abuse ; but the hope of a partytriumph outweighed all considerations of public safety.Large majorities supported the minister in his approvalof the scrutiny ; and it appeared evident thatWestminster must remain for three years unrepresented.The common sense of the country, however,revolted from such a proposition. Fox, with indefatigableperseverance, kept the subject continuallybefore the house. The ministerial majorities graduallydecreased. They had never been so great uponthis as upon other questions. From 30 they now fellto ; and, at last, Pitt had a majority of 38 againsthim. Jut although the house thus resolved to putan end to the scrutiny, with whimsical inconsistency,they rrfu.s<>d to dcn-lnro it illegal. A very large maratTIIK HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ioritv voted with ministers upon this occasion, toXIV J Jprevent the vote they had ah-lady passed* being con.D. 178j . • • • 1to 1789. ordered a decisive opposition triumph.I pass lightly over the early contests between Pittand the coalition parties, because they are no longercontests between Whigs and Tories. The nationalindite-nation apparent during the general election wasnot against Whig principles, but against the exclusiveand aristocratic spirit that had attached itself toWhiggism — not against the essence but against theaccident. Thus, Wilkes and all his supporters, who,continuing to hold their extreme opinions, denouncedthe coalition, retained the popular favour and theirseats. Pitt, himself, had not renounced his Whigprinciples when he became the king's favourite minister; and although he found himself in an atmospherein which they could not but languish, he still rememberedthat he was pledged to a parliamentary reform.Upon this subject Pitt acted with the energy worthyof a high and honourable man. Knowing the repugnanceof the king to any measure which might " openthe door to parliamentary reform," he intimated, interms which, though guarded, were sufficiently Pari. Hist., vols. xxiv. and that George III. bitterly resentedXXV. It appears from some of the the defection of many of the usualnotes from the king to Mr. Pitt, supporters of government uponpublished iuTouihuc'sLife of Pitt, this occasion.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 347legible, that any attempt on the part of his majesty to CHAP,defeat his motion would be followed by his resiofna- — '- —^, . . JO A. D. 1783tion. The king, regretting that he was committed to 1789.to the measure, acquiesced, and promised to confinehis sentiments upon the subject to his own breast.Pitt's project of reform was to form a fund to buyup the franchises of thirty-six decayed boroughs, addingtheir representatives to the counties ; and to formastandard of the number of houses which should beheldto form a healthy borough. When the number ofhouses should fall below that standard, parliament wouldbuy the franchise upon the application of the borough.The scheme also comprised a provision for the buyingup the exclusive privileges of corporations, and extendingthe suffrage to substantial householders ; and forgivingrepresentatives to four large unrepresentedtowns. Its author computed that it would give 100representatives to the public ; and enfranchise 99,000householders.*This debate called forth the natural party divisions.Lord North ridiculed the measure, the means whichhad been used to get up some excitement in its favour,• Mr. Wyvil, chairman to the lie attention to this subject, gave,Yorkshire committee, with whom at one of these meetings, a " summer.rite conferred on the forma mary explanation of the privationof his plan, and who, hy cir- ciplcs" of the measure from whichciilar letters and public meetings, the abstract in the text is taken,took every means of arousing pidj-Jl-S THE HISTOKY OF Inanity.CHAP, and their total failure. Ho said, Mr. Pitt, listening\ r Vfor popular plaudits for his reform, and terrified byA. D. 1783 ,. - , . ^ r. •to 1 789. the popular discontents at the present state ot misrepresentation,might well say with the man in therehearsal,What horrid sound of silence doth assail mine ear!"In London, out of 8000 electors 300 persons hadattended ; and throughout the country the apathywas the same. He opposed the introduction of thebill because it was uncalled for, and because it formeda precedent for innovation and experiment. Mr.Powys, Lord Mulgrave, Mr. Yonge, Mr. Burke, LordF. Campbell, Mr. Rolle, and Mr. Bankes, were thespeakers against the motion. Bankes, the collegefriend and constant companion of Pitt, althoughavo\^^ng himself a reformer, denounced the ministerialscheme as absurd. He seized upon the real objectionto the plan, and exposed, in animated terms, the inconsistencyof buying a property which the spirit andletter of our laws had alike forbidden to be made thesubject of traffic ; of voting money to purchase whatthe constitution had declared should never be sold.Pitt could only reply that this was a tender point, anda necessary evil.Mr. Wilberforce, who, as the great enemy ofslaver' and author of its abolition, will be regardedby distant posterity as a greater man than either PittTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^or Fox, supported the motion. Fox declared that he ^"iv^'would not be seduced by objections to details to vote a. D. 1783against the principle. The attorney-general eulogizedthe scheme ; and Mr. Dundas threw the houseinto convulsions of laughter, by suddenly declaringhimself a sincere friend to this question. Thus wehave, upon the only question which involved a partyprinciple, a total relaxation of the usual divisions ofministerial and opposition parties, and a return to theold Whig and Tory contests. The motion was negativedby a majority of 74.I find few instances, in the early portion of Pitt'sadministration, of contests which involved the rivalprinciples of government. The debates upon hisIndia bill, and even those upon the Irish propositions,were the contests of heterogeneous masses associatedin the pursuit of power, the different sections of whichoccasionally accommodated each other with theirvotes, as Dundas voted alternately for and againstparliamentary reform. Even the memorable impeachmentof Warren Hastings, tempting as is the occasionto dwell on the unrivalled display of eloquencewhich it drew forth, and to exhibit the group of Whigorators, the greatest and best our country has produced,in their proudest moment— even this templein our })atli offers no excuse for delay. The impeachmentof Hastings was founded upon no partyprinciple \ and, although the whole body of the350 THE History OV PARTY.rUAP. coalition supported the measure, and even Pitt voted-r-TT for the impeachment, Burke and Francis were proa.D. 17H5 ^ ^lo 17^9. bably the only men who were hearty and zealous inthe cause.In 1787 the Protestant dissenters renewed theirclaim to be relieved from the disabilities of the Corporationand Test acts. They had supported Pittand denounced the coalition ; and they consideredthemselves entitled to some consideration from theminister whom they had supported, and the sovereignwhose prerogative they had defended.The dissenters had, for some time, observed thecustom of annually appointing two deputies from eachof their congregations in the metropolis audits neighbourhood,for the management of their affairs. Theythus formed a compact and influential body, whoseassistance at any political crisis was very sensiblyfelt. At this general assembly it was resolved toagitate the repeal of the laws which excluded themfrom office under such dreadful penalties. They putforth and extensively circulated a statement of theircase ; and when this had made some impression uponthe public mind, they instructed Mr. Beaufoy to bringthe question, by motion, before the house.The speech of Mr. Beaufoy, upon this occasion,contains a luminous exposition of the history of theseacts, and a fair statement of the arguments for theirabolition. *' The Corporation act," said the mover,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^"^ ^** declares that no person shall be elected into any ^^iv^*corporation office who shall not, within one year be 'X'dTtsI"fore such election, have taken the sacrament accord *° ^^^^*ing to the usage of the church of England. TheTest act declares that every person who accepts acivil office, or a commission in the army or navy, andwho does not, within the time prescribed by the act,take the sacrament of the Lord's Supper according tothe usasre of the church of Pendant, shall be disabledin law, to all intents and purposes whatever, fromoccupying any such civil office, or from holding anysuch military commission ; and if, without taking thesacramental qualification within the time prescribedby the acts, he does continue to occupy a civil officeor hold a military commission, and is lawfully convicted,then, sir (and I beg leave to entreat theattention of the house to this most extraordinarypunishment), then, he not only incurs a large pecuniarypenalty, but is disabled from thenceforth for everfrom bringing any action in course of law, fromprosecuting any suit in any court of equity, frombeing guardian of any child, or executor or administratorof any person, as well as from receiving anylegacy.After exemplifying with considerable effect thedreadful fate which thiscnactmentpropared for any dissenterwho should venture, in his zeal for his country,to bear arms in her defence j the stigma it inflictedTIIK HISTORY OF PARTY.C H A I', upon the merchant who having' added to the kiuirdom'sXIV. ^ . ^ . , ^wealth, swelled its customs, increased its manus.D. 178jto 178!). lectures, and aggrandized its power, was still alienatedfrom the common rights of citizenship, andbore the same stamp of dishonour, the same mark ofrejection and infamy, as attached to men who hadbeen publicly and judicially convicted of being perjured;the orator proceeds to show that these consequenceswere by no means prevented by the annualact of Indemnity.But I am asked, does not the act of Indemnity,(an act which for the most part is annually passed),protect from the penalties of the Test and Corporationlaws, all such persons as have offended against them ?Sir, if the Indemnity act does protect from thedreadful penalties of those statutes, all such personsas have executed civil offices, or have held commissionsin the army or the navy without the sacramentalqualification, then, what inconvenience canarise from a repeal of the statutes themselves ? Ifby the annual Indemnity act, the execution of thelaw is relinquished, where is the objection to a repealof the law itself. To preserve the claim to a testfrom the dissenters, when the exercise of the claimis abandoned, may answer the purposes of irritation,but cannot answer the purposes of power. Theclaim, in that case, operates merely as a corrosive toa wound that otherwise would heal j it stimulatesTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 353jealousies that otherwise would sleep, it agitates chap.passions that otherwise would be at rest. —^ , A.D. 1785But, in truth, sir, the Indemnity act does not to 1789.protect the dissenters from the Test and Corporationlaws ; for its only effect is, that of allowing furthertime to those trespassers on the law against whomfinal judgment has not been awarded. Should, forexample, a prosecution have been commenced butnot concluded, the Indemnity act does not dischargethe proceedings, it merely suspends them for sixmonths ; so that if the party accused does not takethe sacrament before the six months allowed by theIndemnity act shall expire, the proceedings will goon,and long before the next Indemnity act will cometo his relief, final judgment will be awarded againsthim. Thus it appears that the Indemnity act givesno effectual protection to the dissenter who acceptsa civil office or military command, for he who cannottake the sacrament at all, cannot take it within thetime rctjuired by that act. The penalties of theTest act will consequently follow : he becomes incapableof receiving any legacy, of executing any trust,of serving in any court, or of appealing on any occasionfor justice. He is placed in the dreadful situationof an outlaw."After showing the tyranny and injustice of theselaws, Mr. Beaufoy proceeded to extract from theirhistory' arguin(!nts for their repeal. The CorporationVOL. in. 2 A354 Tin: ihstoiiy or party.CHAP, act was imposed at a time when the kingdom wasXIVstill agitated with the effects of those storms that hadA. U. 178.^to 178!). so lately made a wreck of the monarchy — at a timewhen the act of Uniformity not having passed, thedissenters, as a distinct and separate class from theestablished church, had not an existence. Such wasthe spirit of despotism in which the act was drawn,that one of its clauses gave power to the king's commissionersto remove at their discretion any corporateofficers, even though they might be willing to takethe oaths prescribed. This power had expired withthe commission which held it ; but this was thecharacter of the law, the remnant of which was stillsuffered to harass the dissenters.The Test act passed, under very similar circumstancesof temporary alarm, in 167^, when thepeople were alarmed with an apprehension that thesovereign had formed the design of subverting theestablished religion of his country. They had longknown that his confidential friends were Catholics,that the prime minister. Lord Clifford, and theking's brother, the heir presumptive to the throne,were of this persuasion, and that the king himself wassuspected of having secretly embraced the samehostile faith. But superadded to these differentcircumstances of alarm, they now saw an army underCatholic officers, in the depth of winter, encamped atthe gates of London. A fact so extraordinary —THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 355which admitted but of one interpretation — filled chap.their minds with uneasiness and extreme dismay ; — ^- — '- —A. D. 1785and in the panic of the first impression induced the to 1789.legislature to pass the law that bears the title of anact for preventing the dangers which may happenfrom popish recusants, but which is better known bythe shorter name of the Test act. The minister,Lord Clifford, who was himself a Catholic, attemptedto persuade the dissenters to oppose the bill uponthe ground that its provisions were so worded as toextend to them, who were not in any respect theobjects of the bill ; and that nothing could be sounjust as to subject to the penalties of the law adescription of men who were not within the meaningof the law. The dissenters admitted the force ofthe argument, but waved their right to its benefit ;and one of the members of the city of London whowas himself a dissenter, declared on their behalf that,in a time of public danger, when delay might befiital, they would not impede the progress of a bill,which was thought essential to the safety of thekingdom ; but would trust to the good faith, to thejustice, to the humanity of ]parliament, that a bill forthe relief of dissenters should afterwards be passed.The lords and commons admitted, without hesitation,the equity of the claim. 'J'hey considered the doltthey had contracted to the dissenters as a debt ofhonour, the ]payment of which could not be refused ;'2 A 2356 THE IIISTOIIY OF PARTY.CHAP, and aecortliiiolv a bill for tlicir relief was passed, butXIV. .its success was defeated by the sudden prorogationA. D. 1785 , 1 •to 1789. of the parliament. A second bill was brought inwith a view to the same object, though by a differenttitle, in the year iGSO, and passed the two houses inconsequenceof the same implied compact. Butwhile it lay ready for the royal assent, Charles II.,who was much exasperated with the dissenters forrefusing to support the Catholics, and who alwaysdelighted to obtain the most unwarrantable ends bythe most despicable means, prevailed upon the clerkof the crown to steal the bill, and overreach thethe ]parliament.From this statement of the case the speaker passedinto the more general topics of liberty of consciencethe profanation of a sacred rite to secular andunimportant objects — the inefficacy of the test toexclude the irreligious and the sceptical — the dangerof vesting a clergyman with power to put a vetoupon a royal appointment, and the hardship, on theother hand, of compelling a clergyman to administerthe sacrament to a man whom he may know to beprofligate in his principles and immoral in his conduct— the absurdity of admitting to the legislaturemen who were excluded from the smallest office inthe customs, and the injustice of legislating at allupon subjects upon which no law can justly operate."Thus," concluded the speaker, " I have shown theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 357various bearings of these pernicious statutes. To cHAP.the judgment of the house, to your wisdom as see. . , r> T A.D. 1785senators, to your patriotism as citizens, to your feelings to 1789.as men, I now submit the consideration of the proposedrepeal, perfectly convinced that you will notpermit the continuance of laws unjust in their principle,unwise in their political effect, inconsistentwith all religious regards, and, therefore, every wayhostile to the interests of the state."As this question became one of the leading subjectsof party contest, a somewhat copious abstracthas been given of this speech. It will be necessaryto bear in mind the facts upon which the demands ofthe dissenters were made.Lord North, whom a deprivation of sight hadkept from the house, came down, for the first time,to lead on his followers in defence of the church.Disclaiming all bigotry and intolerance, and declaringhimself a friend to the fair and free exerciseof the rights of conscience, he, nevertheless, rose toprotest against the repeal of an act which was thegreat bulwark, of the constitution, and to which weowed those inestimable blessings of freedom whichthis nation so happily enjoyed. He denied thatany indignity was offered to the dissenters by notadmitting them to offices. " If government finds itprudent and necessary to confine the admission topublic offices to men of particular principles, it has a35S THE IIISTOUY OF PARTY.CHAP, right to adhere to such restriction ; it is a privilegebelonging to all states, and all have exercised it ; allA. D. I78jto 17S9. do exercise it, and all will continue to exercise it.Let us not then," he concluded, " confound tolerationof religious principles with civil and militaryappointments. Universal toleration is established :let us be on our guard against any innovation onthe church. The constitution was always in dangerwhen the church was deprived of its rights."From Lord North this opposition was expected,but it was confidently anticipated that Pitt wouldrejoin his old associates, and testify his adherence tothe Whig principle of toleration. Hitherto, uponquestions of party principle, Pitt had voted with theWhigs, but his conduct upon this occasion discoveredthat he had caught the infection by which hewas surrounded, and that we must henceforwardexpect to find him daily withdrawing himself from theprinciples to which he had been attached by the Earlof Chatham. He now came forward to complimentLord North upon his defence of the church, and refusedthe repeal, not as Walpole had done, becausethe popular prejudice was so strong that it would beimpossible to effect it ; but because, in his opinion,the enactment was just and necessary. Pitt drew adistinction between political and civil liberty, andspared no pains to point out some difference in theexercise of these two rights. Unfortunately theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. S5[)arguments with which he decked out this — the ii^rand chap.XIVfallacy of Toryism in all questions of toleration — have '- —not been recorded. The church and state," he * to 1789.said, *' were united upon principles of expediency ;and it concerns those to whom the wellbeing of thestate is intrusted, to take care that the churchshould not be rashly demolished. The bulwarkmust be kept against all, and I am endeavouring totake every prudent and proper precaution. It isthe right of every legislature and every state, tomake those tests which they think will be most conduciveto the public good, and I cannot vote for therepeal without alarming a great body of the legislature."Pitt's declaration that the church and state wereunited upon principles of expediency, showed thathe had not yet thoroughly learned the language ofToryism, and the last reason he gave for his votewas probably that which chiefly influenced him. Foxrose immediately after Pitt ; demolished his distinctionsbetween political and civil liberty, and accusedhim, while lie disclaimed persecution in words, ofadmitting the whole extent of it in principle. Afterreiterating and enforcing the arguments of the mover,he remarked upon his own situation with respect tothe dissenters. "No person could suspect him," hesaid, " of being biassed by any improper partialitytowards the dissenters. Their conduct in ;t late;3tJ0 THE History OF I'AllTY.CIIAF. political involution was well known ; but he wasXIV.'■ — willing to lot them sec that though they lost sight ofA. 11. 1785 '^to 1789. the principles of the constitution upon that occasion,he should not, upon any occasion, lose sight of hisprinciples of toleration." The motion was rejectedby a majority of 178 to 100.Walpole, with a strong opinion in favour of thisrepeal, had resisted it because the temper of thepeople would not bear it. Pitt found the prejudicesof the king as strong as Walpole had found those ofthe people. George III. made the exclusion of thedissenters a point of conscience ; and where conscienceonly enjoins restrictions upon others, she is seldomdisobeyed.From the odium he had acquired among the dissentersby his opposition to their claims, Pitt betookhimself to financial arrangements and economicalreforms, measures in which the voice of the peoplefollowed him, and to which the opposition gave acandid and manly support. He was interrupted in1788 by the sudden illness of the king, which reviveda hope that had been long sleeping in thebreast of Fox, and introduced a vigour and energyinto the parliamentary contests. When Fox declaredthe absolute right of the heir apparent to take uponhimself the functions of royalty during an incapacityin the king, and Pitt replied that he had no moreright than any other individual subject, they eachTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.took the side of the question favourable to their own chap.XIV.party : the question in dispute was a mere pointA. D. 1785of constitutional law — a point relating only to the to i789.forms, and in no manner affecting the essence of theconstitution.* Fox wished the prince to assume theregency as of right, that he might be able to exert allthe powers of royalty in favour of the coalition. Pittwished the prince to receive the regency from theparliament, that he might be fettered by limitations,which, although they would not prevent him frombringing the coalition party into office, would preventthem fi-om consolidating their power, and leavehis own return to the cabinet open upon the recoveryof the kinof.tThe Pitt party pretended that real his motive. " If," he said,they upon this occasion defended "persons who possessed these prin-theprinciples of the revolution, cipher were, in reality, likely toNothing could be more absurd, be the advisers of the prince, inFox may have been, and probably the exercise of those powers whichwas, wrong in contending that the were necessary to be given, duringheir apparent has a right to exerted present unfortunate interval,case the functions of royalty during it was the strongest additionalthe incapacity of the sovereign; reason, if any were wanting, forbut such a doctrine is no more being careful to consider what theinimical to the constitutional rights extent of those powers ought to be.of the people, than that of the he It was impossible not to suppose,rcditar}' succession of the crown, that by such advisers those powersFox readily admitted, that if such would be perverted to a purposea right existed, it was derived which it wai;, indeed, impossiblefrom, and might be resumed by, to imagine that the Prince ofthe nalioii. Wales could, if he was aware of it,f Pitt did ina pretend to con ever endue' fui a moment." —S6^2 THE IlISTOUY OF PARTY.CHAP. Diirino- the iiiUigues and negotiations whichXIVoccupied this brief interval of strong excitement,to 1789. a circumstance occurred decisive upon the questionof Thurlow's honesty. Sheridan, whose confidence inhis own talent for political intrigue, frequently, as hisbiographer remarks, prompted him to branch off fromthe main body of his party upon secret and solitaryenterprises of ingenuity, had conceived the idea thatThurlow, whose uncouthness so many thought honesty,was to be bought. A negotiation was commencedwith the concurrence of the prince, and Fox,when he returned from Italy, where he was whenthe king's insanity broke forth, found his friends andthe chancellor in correspondence. Fox had formeda just estimate of Thurlow's character, and he wasconvinced the negotiation could only end in embarrassment." It gave him," as he wrote to Sheridan,*' more uneasiness than any political thing he couldremember: and it deranged all the plans he hadformed for future operations. " Fox was right.Thurlow received the overture with readiness, enteredwith apparent cordiality into the views of theWhigs, abused his colleagues to Sheridan and Fox,and only held off from an absolute engagement.But, suddenly, his manner changed ; whether fromhis access to the king he had ascertained that aPari. Hist., vol. xxvii., col. 773. sentiment, that the opposite partyA mere reiteration of the common are unfit to be trusted with power.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.36Srecovery was become certain, or whether he had chap.marked the antipathy which Fox could not disguise, ^ ^ ^and had construed it as treachery, we must be con to 1789.tent to conjecture, but the result is certain. Hesuddenly broke off all negotiation, and, secure in thehonour of the Whigs, rose a few hours after in thehouse of lords, and poured upon them one of hismost violent storms of invective ;* dwelling with anappearance of honest enthusiasm, which had its fulleffect upon the public, upon the favours he had receivedfrom the sovereign, and the debt of gratitudehe owed histDuring this year the Earl of Mansfield retiredfrom the court of King's Bench, and was succeededby Sir Lloyd Kenyon, who, upon this occasion,received a peerage, an honour which Pitt lavishedwith no sparing hand.George III. had early set his heart upon changingthe character of the upper house. If we scrutinize thevotes of the peers from the period of the revolutionto the death of George II., we shall find a very greatmajority of the old English nobility to have been the• " His debt of gratitude to his who was standing in the house,majesty," he said, " was ample for " he'll see you d d first."the many favours he had graces t See the correspondence onously conferred ripon him, which, this sulijcct in Moore's Life ofwhen lie forgot, might (hod forget Sheridan, p. 400.Iiimi" — "Forget you," said Wilkes,THE HISTORY OK PARTY.CllAl'. advocates of Whig principles. The spleiuloiir oftheir name enabled them to espouse popular doctrinesA.D. 1785: '. ^ /to 1789, without fear of being herded with the ignorant demagoguesof the day : the party creed was generally ashereditary as the family estates ; and as these ancienttitles were commonly created by writ, and consequentlydescended to heirs general, there appearedbut little chance of the Whigs being extinguished inthat house. As the tide of royal favour graduallydrifted Pitt away from Whiggism, he also saw theadvantage of having a stable and indissoluble majorityof his owTi party in the house of peers. He wiselydivined that the surest way to accomplish this objectwas to fill the house with men whose descent was notsuch as to enable them to take liberties with theirdignity ; who would vote popular doctrines vulgar, andthink that their new nobility compelled them to be exclusive.George III. had kept the doors of the houseof peers cautiously closed against the coalition ; buthe threw them wide open to Pitt. The change was tobe effected, not by a sudden inundation, but by turninga streamlet into the house. Without shockingthe ancient nobles the aggregate of the Pitt peerssoon became considerable. Within four years afterhe had assumed the government Pitt could reckon42 of his own creations in that house. The presentcreation, that of Sir Lloyd Kenyon, is one of thebest of these. Kenyon had earned his peerage byTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.A. D. 1785to 1789.achieving an honourable eminence in his profession ; ^^^'but he would never have obtained it if the ministerhad not been able to confide in his fidelity. Pittnever lost sight of this object : the chief scope of theRegency bill was to deprive the regent of an opportunityof interfering with his plan, by creating someWhispers The house was to be increased to suchan extent that it would be almost impossible to makefurther additions ; and these creations were to be therewards of Tories in the commons, and the retainingfee of Tories in the lords.The sudden recovery of the king destroyed atonce all the budding hopes of the coalition party, andfixed them again to the opposition benches. .^^*^> TIIK IlISTOllY or PARTY.CHAPTER XV.The French revolution — Effect upon the state of parties — Conduct ofBurke — Speech in the house of commons and breach with SheridanExpiration of the parliament.CHAP. The petty character of* the contests which hadbeen lately carried on in parliament — contests which,A.D. 1789 1 . ,and 1790. for the most part, nothing but the talent of the competitorscan rescue from contempt, was, in this year,entirely changed. France was no longer the ally ofToryism. That slumbering volcano, enthroned uponwhich despotism had sat so long secure, at lengthexploded : the blast was deafening and destructive ;but it purified the atmosphere. Sharp and suddenwas the retribution which overtook the court of France,for their first act of treachery to their natural alliesthe Tories of England. From Whig governmentsTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. SG?France had always experienced war and disaster; chap.XVdisaster which could scarcely be compensated by the'' ^ A.D. 1789facility of the Tories in granting terms of peace. and 1790.To them and their projects she was justly hostile ;but when she attacked the Tories, and declaredagainst the Tory crusade in America, she brokethrough all her ordinary rules of policy, and declaredagainst her most constant friend. Soon were theseeds sown in America manifest in France. The parliamentof Paris, for ages the unresisting instrumentof despotism, suddenly laying claim to a will of theirown — the extraordinary expedient of assembling thenotables, serving no other purpose than the overthrowof the minister — the king's right of taxationdisputed ; the judges of his courts arrayed againsthim ; and he alternately threatening and submittingto all that was demanded ; arresting and releasingthe most conspicuous demagogues ; banishing andrecalling his parliament ; striving by sudden jerksto guide the ship that had ceased to answer to herholm ; his ministers shrinking from his side, and thestone increasing — these arc a few of the eventsthat pass rapidly before us as we look towardsFrance, and mark the return of her troops fromAmerica. But these were only the leavings thatpreceded the coming convulsion. It was not untilthe present year — when the states-general, calledtogether for the first time for a century and n half,368 The HISTORY OF PAllTY.CHAP, hroakinfj their original constitution, became a sing-loXV. >^ t=, f-<body ; when the tiers efaf, the commons, declaredAn. I7S9 '' . ' ,and 1790. themselves the real representatives of the nation,assumed the exclusive power of legislation, and thetitle of *' The National Assembly ;" when the assemblythus formed, contemning the authority ofthe king, began to devise constitutions and to regenerateFrance ; when riotous mobs grew into disciplinedbands of republican soldiers, and the regularsoldiers degenerated into mobs ; when the bastille wasdemolished, its officers massacred, popular vengeancelet loose, and the sway of a ferocious populace unresisted; when a voice was heard to cry " To Versailles,"and the armed multitude rolled onward inobedience ; when that multitude returned, and theking and queen of France entered their capital asprisoners — it was not until the year 1789, whenthese events crowded in rapid succession upon eachother, that the mountain opened, and the Frenchmonarchy, girded by its two hundred thousandnobles, sank into the abyss.The tyranny had disappeared, and the nation wasto devise some new form of government. But theFrench had obtained their liberty too suddenly, andwith too little trouble, to feel for it a proper respect.Unlike England, under similar circumstances, theyhad no guide to follow ; no forms of a free constitutionto retain ; no magna charta and petition of rights toTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 369recur to as standards of rational liberty they were chap.XV.sufficiently emancipated from all precedent to be '- —able to follow the most promising theory, and to and 1790.lay the foundations of a perfect government. Aperfect government in theory is an impossible governmentin practice. It can only be maintained byperfect citizens, and these, unhappily, are not befound. When the revolutionary inundation of 1688spread itself over Britain, it found a channel anda vent in the fosses and ditches of the old constitution,and it irrigated and fertilized the land.In France, there was no such vent : there itstagnated in the hollows and fermented into pestilence.Men, who for the first time in their liveswere allowed to think upon political matters, madeawkward attempts to exercise their liberty ; they metin debating clubs, adopted among themselves a cantof liberty more disgusting even than the cant offanaticism, promulgated their trashy crudities asphilosophical deductions, and although these discoveriesinvariably turned out to be very old truthsexaggerated into falsehoods, yet they were at firstreceived as genuine, and the discoverers magnifiedeach other as original thinkers.Where a nation was without a government, thesediscussions however absurd were not without anassignable object, but these apostles of liberty wereanxious to evangelize their neighbours and to ex-vol,III. 2 IJ370 riiK HISTORY oi' party.CHAP, tend the benefit of their discoveries to all other^^^ nations. Similar societies sprung up in England,and /t'jo, but fortunately the middle class here had been nowaccustomed to think upon political subjects, andthey received the new philosophy either with ridiculeor horror, as their terror or contempt predominated.Events which thus absorbed the attention of thenation were not without their influence upon theprofessors of politics. While the contest lay betweenthe king of France and the parliament of Paris, theTories alone expressed their detestation of theaudacity of the rebels ; the Whigs regarded the dayof resistance as one other spot, among the calamitiesand crimes which blacken human annals, onWhich the eye of humanity might with complacencedwell.* Fox hailed the omen as the harbinger ofuniversal liberty ; Pitt beheld the struggles of thepatriots, and wished for their success. Burke alone,of all men who professed the principles of Whiggism,gazed with astonishment, and knew not whether toblame or applauded The scene moved on, the contestbetween the tiers eat and the other estates wasbeheld, and Burke had resolved to blame, and Pitthad ceased to sympathize. The states-general becamethe national assembly, and commenced, with theassistance of Jefferson, the American minister, to« Vindicate Gallican. neville — Prior's Life of Burke, voltBurke's Letter to Lord Char ii , p. 42.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 37 1demolish and reconstruct ; the bastille fell ; the CHAP.XV.people became the captors of their king ; and Burke T"5~T7rr-grew more furious against those who used their and 1790.liberty unwisely, than he had been against those whohad made their power be felt as tyranny. Pitt, also,had perfected his recantation, and these two ablemen who had commenced their career with principlesthat would readily justify all that the nationalassembly had yet attempted, thus early stood forwardas the champions of monarchical prerogative,and the enemies of a people in rebellion againstdespotism.On the 5th of February, 1790, Fox first alluded A.D. 1790.to this revolution in the house of commons. In adebate on the army estimates he said, that the newform which the government of France was likely toassume would, he was persuaded, make her a betterneighbour, and less disposed to hostility than whenshe was subject to the cabal and intrigues of ambitiousand interested statesmen. In resisting theestimates proposed, he acted from a motive of economy,not from fear of danger. The example of aneighbouring nation had proved that former imputationson armies were unfounded calumnies ; and itwas now universally known throughout Europe, thata man by becoming a soldier did not cease to be acitizen.*• V:n\. U\<.t., vol. xxviii., rol. .1.(0.2 B QA. D. 1790..S7:2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. On the 9tli, when the debate was resumed,XV.he predicted that in three years France would bemore formidable than ever.Upon the first occasion of Fox delivering hisopinion in favour of the French revolution, Burkewas not present. Upon the second he came preparedto answer. After speaking for some timeupon the subject immediately before the house, hesuddenly seized upon the real point of interest inthe debate. "France," he said, "is^atthis time,in a political light, to be considered as expunged outof the system of Europe. Whether she can everappear in it as a leading power is not easy to determine; but at present France is not politically existing,and most assuredly it will take up much time,to restore her to her former active existence. Gallosquoque in hellas floruisse audivimus, may possiblybe the language of the rising generation. Itis said that as she has speedily fallen she mightspeedily rise again. I doubt this. The fall from anheight is with an accelerated velocity, but to lift aweight up to that height again is difficult, andopposed by the laws of physical and political gravitation.In a political view France is low indeed.She has lost every thing even to her name —• ' Janet ingens little truncus,Aviilsumque humeris caput, et sine nomine corpus.'A.D. i7ao.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 373** I am astonished at it — I am alarmed at it — I chap,XV.tremble at the uncertainty of all human greatness.Since the house was prorogued in the summer,much work has been done in France. The Frenchhave shown themselves the greatest architects of ruinthat have hitherto existed in the world. In that veryshort space of time, they have completely pulleddown to the ground their monarchy, their church,their nobility, their law, their revenue, their army,their navy, their commerce, their arts, and theirmanufactures. They have done their business forus as rivals in a way which twenty Families or Blenheimcould never have done.*' In the last age we w^rc in danger of beingentangled by the example of France in a net ofrelentless despotism. That no longer exists. Ourpresent danger arises from the example of a peoplewhose character knows no medium : it is with regardto government, a danger from anarchy, a danger ofbeing led, through admiration of successful fraud andviolence, to imitation of the excesses of an irrational,unprincipled, proscribing, confiscating, plundering,ferocious, bloody, and tyrannical democracy. Onthe side of religion, the danger of their exampleis no longer in intolerance, but atheism — a foul,unnatural vice, foe to all the dignity and consolationof mankind, which seems in France, for a long time,to have been embodied into a faction, accredited and;?74 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP almost avoAvod. These are our present dangers from\v.r ranee.A.D. 17<»0.*' But the very worst part of the example set is,in the late assumption of citizenship by the army,and the whole of the arrangement of their military.I am sorry that my right honourable friend hasdropped even a word expressive of exultation on thatcircumstance. I attribute this opinion of Mr. Foxentirely to his own zeal for the best of all causes —liberty. It is with pain inexpressible I am obligedto have even a shadow of a difference with myfriend, whose authority would be always greatwith me and with all thinking people. My confidencein Mr. Fox is such and so ample as to bealmost implicit. I am not ashamed to avow thatdegree of docility, for when the choice is well made,it strengthens instead of oppressing our intellect.He who calls in the aid of an equal understanding,doubles his own. He who profits of a superior understanding,raises his power to a level with theheight of the superior understanding he unites with.I have found the benefit of such a junction, andwould not lightly depart from it. I wish almost onall occasions my sentiments were understood to beconveyed in Mr. Fox's words, and wish, amongst thegreatest benefits I can wish the country, an eminentshare of power to that right honourable gentleman,because I know that to his great and masterly un-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 375understanding he has joined the greatest possible chap.degree of that natural moderation, which is the bestA. D. 1790.corrective of power. Heisof the most artless, candid,open, and benevolent disposition, disinterested in theextreme ; of a temper mild and placable even to afault, without one drop of gall in his whole constitution.The house must perceive from my comingforward to mark an expression or two of my bestfriend, how anxious I am to keep the distemper ofFrance from the least countenance in England,where some wicked persons have shown a strongdisposition to recommend an invitation of the Frenchspirit of reform.I am so strongly opposed to any the least tendencytowards the means of introducing a democracylike theirs, as well as to the end itself, that much asit would afflict me if such a thing could be attempted,and that any friend of mine should concur in suchmeasures, I would abandon my best friends and joinirifk nil) worst enemies to oppose either the means orthe endHaving thus fulminated his threats of eternal separationagainst all his friends, who should dare to manifestany sympathy for the triumph, or indulgence forthe intemperance of a people who had just overthrownthe most noxious despotism in Europe, Burkephrased on to an eulogium upon our own revolution ol'1688. He dwelt with justice upon the prudenceA. D. 1790.:i'}C) Till': iiisTOKV or rAUTV.c HAP. which had in that case sacrificed the man, but prc-XV.served the constitution ; but he broached an egregiousfallacy when he attempted to establish theanalogy of the occasions. He did not speak thesentiments of a Whig when he mourned the overthrowof the despotism of the Bourbons as thedestruction of the monarchy. He did not speak asaphilanthropist when he lamented the overthrow ofa tyrannical hierarchy as the destruction of thechurch. In England these institutions were good,the man alone, who sought to subvert them, was theobject of national indignation. In France the institutionswere worse than the monarch ; they were themost legitimate objects of hostility.Burke, while opposing the cause of reform, insisted,like many others, that he was a reformer, and appealedto his past career as the voucher of his title ; but heappears to have, in some degree, doubted the proprietyof his former conduct, since, in the last sentenceof his speech, he stated that, with regard to theconstitution itself he wished few alterations in it :happy if he left it not the worse for any share he hadtaken in its service.*Such were the topics of the important speechwhich marked Burke's defection from the Whig party.The charge of interested apostacy so generally aprilHist., vol. xxviii., col. 363.A.D. 1790.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 377placable to men who suddenly change their political chap.views was not yet, however, incurred by Burke.Burke, although a Whig from political connexion —from a coincidence of views upon certain greatquestions, and from a disapproval of the Tories, was,nevertheless, never, in his heart, a friend to populargovernment. With the most extended views ofphilanthropy he hated the people. His philosophicmind shrunk from a contact with the vulgar. Tohim nothing was so disgusting as the mob. Hewould labour for the advantage of the crowd, but hemust be allowed to dispense his blessings from above ;and if the recipients would refrain from dictating whathe should give he scarcely required their thanks.* Sogenuine an aristocrat in heart was, with great difficulty,kept within the pale of Whiggism. It isdifficult to conjecture how he could have persuadedhimself to espouse the cause of the revolted Americans; it is hardly to be conceived how he couldreconcile himself to the formation of their republic.Upon all other subjects he was consistent with thegeneral tenour of his feelings. Economical reformhe laboured to effect — it was a boon thrown to thepeople. Triennial parliaments he strenuously ope" Satis est eqiiitcm filii plaw- peal from the new to the olddere," was a sentiment in which he A\'higs.avowedly concurred. Sec his .D. 1790.3/8 THE HISTORY or taut.CUM', posed — those would have brought the people nearer^^" to himself". Religious disabilities he was ready toremove ; for whatever philosophy sanctioned, andaristocratic feeling did not forbid, Burke was willing toaccord : but reform in parliament gave power to thepeople : and even the possession of office under a cabinetpledged to reform could only extort from him asullen and reluctant neutrality. The French revolutionwas an event which, under any circumstances, wouldhave taxed to the utmost Burke's powers of compliance.In earlier times he might have forgotten allscruples, in his attachment to his party and friendshipfor the men with whom he had acted throughlife, and he might have embraced the first republicansof France as he had embraced the republicans ofAmerica. But Burke was now grown old and lesscompliant ; he had become less powerful with hisparty ; less an object of wonder in the house. Heknew that the Prince of Wales neglected his societyfor that of Sheridan ; and he had cause to conjecturethat, in the arrangements contemplated during theking's illness, the companion of the prince was tohave taken precedence in his office. Burke alsowas poor ; he had passed the greater portion of hislife on the opposition benches, and he was at presentwithout hope of removal. These are not motivesthat would have determined the conduct of such aman as Burke ; but they are considerations whichTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.will have a, perhaps involuntary, effect in the deliver ^^^^•rations of the most honourable mind. They would "^377^strengthen the view he would naturally take of thequestion, and diminish his incentives to compliancewith his party.When Burke sat down, after the delivery of hisphilippics against the French revolution. Fox rose.All eyes were turned upon the great party chief,and expectation strained to hear how he would treatthe defection of his friend. He deplored, in terms ofdeep feeling, the necessity that had arisen for differingwith one whose friendship was so dear to him ;he passed a high eulogium upon his virtues andhis talents, he hailed him as his master, and declaredthat all the political knowledge he had gained frombooks, all. he had gained from science, all he hadgained from knowledge of the world and experienceof mankind, was not greater than that he had acquiredfrom the conversation and instruction of thefriend who now left his side. He vindicated himselffrom the charge of participating in the wild andvisionary projects of all the rabid revolutionists bothof France and England ; but he, at the same time,defended the revolution itself, avowed a communityof feeling with its authors, and denounced only thosewho would abuse the liberty it had created. Heinsisted that there was a strong analogy between thepresent revolution in I'Vauee and that of lOSS ino80 THE IlISTOllY OF PARTY.CHAP. England, and that if excesses had occurred duringthe former that lead not (Hsjrraccd the latter, it wasXV. ^A. D. 1790.because there was so much despotism to destroy inFrance, and there had been so little that requireddestruction in England. He reserved, however, thefull discussion of the question to some future time,cautiously abstaining from any topic that could widenthe breach, and evidently looking forward to someprivate arrangement by which it might be closed.But Burke had taken his party, and from thismoment he appears, far from being actuated by motivesof tenderness or even delicacy towards hisformer friends, to have sought out opportunities forstating and magnifying their points of difference.At this moment, the approval or disapproval of theFrench revolution was a mere speculative question,which might divide the opinions of able men, butcould scarcely be expected to sever sincere friendships,or separate political allies ; yet, whenSheridan arose and defended the revolution, concludinghis speech with an expression of his reverencefor the rights of men, Burke replied with violence,that *' Henceforth he and his honourable friend, ashehad been accustomed to call him, were separatedin politics." He kept his word — thenceforward Burkecould never be persuaded to meet or speak of Sheridanas a fi-end.Sheridan's declaration, as it was supposed to ex-ad.1790.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 381press the sentiments of the heir-apparent, was consist chap.tered as important as that of Fox. It is said, that -when it was known that a breach between Fox andBurke must occur, Sheridan ^^Tote a short note toCarlton House for instructions. ** Follow Fox,"was the laconic reply.The alarm occasioned by the acts of the revolutionistswas early seen in the house of commons. The countdeserted the Whigs in a body. Theywho had been so liberal in the former year, that therepeal of the Test act had only been rejected by amajority of 20, now voted in a mass against it ; andso well did Pitt note the temper of his supporters,that he abandoned all coquetry upon the subject ofparliamentary reform, and opposed the agitation ofthe question.At the close of the session of 1790, this parliamentexpired.38'2 TIIK IIISTOliY 01' Polity.CHAPTER XVI.Review of the last parliament — Biographical anecdotes of John Scott—Of Henry Addington— Of Charles Grey— Of William Wyndham—Of Samuel Whitbrcad— Of Erskine— Leaders of the democraticparty — Reflections on the French revolution — Meeting of the newparliament — Rupture between Burke and Fox— The Whigs decideagainst Burke.CHAP. The election of a new parliament affords a '. place whence we may review the state of the partycontests ; a point of view whence we may look backupon the time we have passed, and mark the changesproduced upon the combatants.Seven years of power had changed Pitt from anadventurous and ardent youth to an experiencedand calculating politician ; from a democrat, whomeven Tooke could trust, to a Tory, in whom evenGeorge III. could find no fault. Seven years of op-ad.1790.A, D. 1790.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 383position had seen the decline of Burke's influence, chap.and the extinction of his Whio-orism. The time hadnot passed unnoted either over Fox and Sheridan. Ithad produced that full maturity to their powers andto their fame whence men begin to look for a decline.Throughout this period we have seen Pitt sittingbetween his humble instruments, Dundas and Yonge,backed by a host of obedient supporters, the representativesof treasury boroughs and courtier peers ;and having upon the cross benches a goodly array ofcountry-gentlemen, who, though not to be dependedupon like his disciplined troops, were very serviceablewhile they could be retained as volunteers. Oppositesat the triumvirate of Whiggism, Fox, Burke, andSheridan, backed by a slender troop of followers ;but these all picked men ; men who had joined theWhigs either because patriotism was the sole motiveof their conduct, or because they possessed a consciousnessof ability to acquire popularity, and tostorm the cabinet at the head of the people. Suchwere the parties within the house, while Tooke andhis democrats rased without. But in each of theseparties some change had occurred ; and, while theleaders were manifesting symptoms of age, and inone instance giving suspicion of desertion, otherswere rising into reputation, ready to supply theirplaces and perpetuate the contest.Upon the Tory side the development of talent384 TIIK IIISTOUY OF PARTY.CHAP, was not very groat. Pitt did not want it. WhereXVI.parties are equally balanced talent will decide theA. D. 1790.preponderance ; but the minister probably foundthat one ekxiuent speech, when multiplied by theciphers of a large majority, was sufficient forevery purpose. Among the most conspicuous, however,of those who became conspicuous in the serviceof this party, was John Scott, whose perseveranceand devotion have since been rewarded by an earldom.Contemporary accounts of public characters are seldomcorrect. John Scott is described to have beenthe third son of a tradesman of no great opulence atNewcastle-upon-Tyne. He was born in the yearly-l'Qj and, having obtained an exhibition from theGrammar-school at Newcastle, was entered at Oxfordin 17^7" At this university he appears eitherto have manifested talent or propitiated favour, sincewe are told that his promotion was prevented by anelopement and improvident marriage. After thisunion, which was equally offensive to both the families,it was determined that the lost young man, as hisbrother called him, should be entered as a student atthe Middle Temple. Here he continued for sometimein very straitened circumstances, until, at length,accident threw into his hands a very important caseupon the circuit. It now appeared that, while hewaited his opportunity, he was diligently qualifyinghimself to improve it. His superiority, however.A. D. 1790.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 38Jwas more apparent as a lawyer than as a speaker, chap.In the court of chancery he was timorous in his address,and submissive to the court. Thurlow, whohad just assumed the chancellorship, was interestedin behalf of one who bowed himself so meekly beforehis footstool. He soon manifested great partialityto Scott, and even offered him a mastership in chancery; a situation which, as it was looked upon as thegrave of ambition, he ventured very thankfully todecline. The barrister was quite right. It soonbecame known that he had the ear of the court, andhis practice prodigiously increased. Thurlow remainedhis friend; in 1783 he obtained for him apatent of precedency ; and in the same year Scottwas returned to parliament for Weobly, a boroughunder the influence of Lord Weymouth. Upon attached himself to the party of hispatron, and made his first essay in a speech againstFox's India bill ; a speech which was remarkableneither for point nor argument, and which appearedto justify the remark of Pitt to Thurlow, that hecould see nothing in his protege. Scott continuedto attend the house, and to speak in behalf of hisparty, but without any extraordinary success. Hisspeeches, however, although they never pretended toeloquence, were always characterized by considerabletact ; and his reputation at the bar procured him attentionin the house. In I788 he was appointedVOL. HI. 2 cA. D. 1790..is TIIK IIISTOKY or I'Ain'Y.CHAP, solicitor-c^oiioral. It is said that when, upon thisXVI. . 'occasion, the attorney and solicitor general kissedhands upon their appointments, Mr. Scott wished todecline the customary honour of knighthood, " Pio,pio, nonsense," said the king, " I will serve themboth alike :" and the lawyer was obliged, reluctantly,to submit to the accolade.Another man risen into consequence with theTory party, was Henry Addington, by the favour ofPitt, speaker of the late house of commons. Addingtonwas the son of an eminent physician, whobeing especially skilful in cases of insanity, hadsteadied Pitt's political faith during the king's illnessby his sanguine anticipations of recovery. He wasas much attached to politics as to physic,* but, as hisaccount of an abortive negotiation between the Earlof Chatham and the Earl of Bute proves, he was notIt is related of him that being absorbed in an argument with thecalled in to consult upon the case physician, who was a Foxite, uponof a person very dangerously ill, the subject of the India bill,he and the apothecary proceeded " Dear sir," said the young man,together towards the sick man's impatiently, " there is no one inchamber, while the family awaited this house denies the transcendentin great suspense their opinion merits of the heroes of Burton-below.After a very long and PjTnent (the Pitt), but my poorpainted pause, the brother of the brother will, I am afraid, be dead,patient was despatched to learn before you get through the Indiathe cause of the delay. He found bill. Upon entering the chamber,the doctor still on the staircase, the event he dreaded had occurredA.D. 1790.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 38?equally successful in their treatment. He retired CHAP.XVI.from practice with a fortune of 100,000/.His son was born about the year 17<56. He wasfortunate enough to be intrusted to a tutor who,discovering in him the germs of considerable ability,advised that he should be taken from his care, andplaced at a public school. Winchester was chosen,and thence he proceeded to Brazen-nose college,Oxford, where we have no record either of hisstudies or his proficiency. His father's politics hadacquired for him the friendship of the Earl of Chathamand obtained for the son the intimacy of WilliamPitt. Their pursuits were the same, forAddington was become a member of the InnerTemple, and their companionship now became strict.When his friend suddenly started from this sphere,and soared towards the highest offices of state,Addington followed with a feebler flight. The recordershipof Devises, obtained for him by his friend,assisted him to a seat in parliament for that borough,and opened to him the path to preferment. In 1789when, on the occasion of some alterations in thecabinet, Mr. Grenville was taken from the chair ofthe house of commons to be made secretary of state,Addington was his successor. He filled his officewith a ]proper dignity, but did not forget his obligationsto \\u'. minister, when th(^ hous(; being incomniitfce cnaljlcd him to mix in the debate.o ^• o388 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The circumstance of Arlington's powers having'T^ ., , proved clearly unequal to the hiffh station which heA. u. I iVO. * ' ^ '^achieved, will be unfortunate for his reputation : thecontemporaries of his feeble government deny himany ability whatever, and admirers he had none.But to this judgment the station he held is a sufficientrefutation. A fortunate concurrence of circumstancesmay give the highest honours to onenot possessed of the highest talents, but no plebeianever acquired political distinction in England withouttalent which would have rendered him eminent inan ordinary station.These two members of the house of commonswere the most prominent acquisitions of the Toryparty in that assembly. On the Whig side thereare higher names to introduce.The Honourable Charles Grey was by far themost valuable of the recent acquisitions to the Whigparty. Descended of an old Norman family whichhad produced many men illustrious in the field andin the senate, heir to the large possessions of hishouse and to the parliamentary interest these gave,and possessed talent of a very high order, CharlesGrey commenced his career with every advantagethat could promise success. In 1786, soon after hehad become of age, the accession to the peerage of theEarl of Beverley left a vacancy in the representationof Northumberland. This was the county in whichTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 389the interest ot his family peculiarly lay, and Mr. CHAP-greywas returned without opposition. Upon en ^ j^ ^ ^^terns the house of commons he placed himselfbehind the bench whence Fox and Burke and Sheridanspoke to present and to future ages. He hadarrived upon the arena of party contest, at a time,when Toryism was growing more faint in the coalition,and when the zeal of opposition gave a dailyincrease to the vigour of Whiggism. He attachedhimself especially to Fox, and when he made his firstessay as a speaker, which he did in the debate onthe treaty of commerce with France, he received ahigh and merited compliment from his politicalchief.* This speech appears to have establishedhis importance with his party. We find him, soonafter, taking a conspicuous part in the debate uponthe Prince of Wales's debts, and calling forth theimmediate attention and reply of the minister. Fromthis time he appears in every debate of importance,zealous in the cause he had espoused, and forwardupon every occasion where a M'hig principle could beasserted. He was listened to with respect by thehouse, and cherished by the older chiefs of his partyas a valuable ally and a worthy successor.The admiration of J'ox and the attentions ofBurke were not inisphifcd. 'J^he character of a♦ Pari. Hist., vol. xxvi,, col. 171—607.A.D. 1790.>JK) THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, politician cannot be finally judged while ho exists;A V I. ^but if the general voice of his contemporaries canavail with posterity, the historian of a future generationwill point to Grey as a name second to noneamong the best and most illustrious of England'sministers. An undeviating consistency of principlewhich none of the lights of the last generationcould boast, a solidity of character which many ofthem so lamentably wanted, unremitting assiduity inhis attendance in parliament, and a persevering zealin the service of his country ; these are qualitieswhich entitle him to our unqualified respect, and callfor a repetition of the applause which was drawn fromus by the patriotism, the steadiness, and the consistencyof the Byng. But Grey added the hightalent, the power of oratory, the political empire,which they did not possess, and compels our admirationas strongly as our reverence. But we are toonear the events of this statesman's career to estimatehis character with confidence. If we would view atemple correctly, we may not stand beneath itsshadow.Similar to Charles Grey in ability, but differing inevery other characteristic, was William Wyndham,who sat by his side upon the opposition benches, andnow shone as one of the minor stars in the Whigfirmament. Wyndham inherited a small patrimonyin Norfolk, and after Eton, Oxford, and a course ofA. D. 1790.THE IIISTOIIY OF PARTY. 391travel had entitled him to be ambitious, he applied CHAP.XVIhimself to acquire notoriety as an opponent of theNorth administration. Zealous in any cause he undertook,and warm and violent in his temperament,he was soon successful. At county meetings, andat public dinners, from the hustings at elections,from the tops of carts and waggons, at popular assembliesin town and in country, Wyndham pouredforth his indignation against the robbers of ourrights, and the spoilers of our wealth, the corruptersof our constitution, and the despots of ourpeople.These oratorical exercises were interrupted by adesign of visiting the North Pole. An expedition, inwhich Nelson took part, was at this time, despatchedby government. Wyndham accompanied it, butfinding the sea sickness intolerable, he was put onshore in Norway, and returned home in a Greenlandwhaler.In 1782 Wyndham was returned to parliamentfor Norwich, and, consistently with his former declarations,took his station among the AVliigs. Herehe soon discovered that he had profited by his practiceof public speaking. In the words of Earl Grey,he appeared "a man of great, original, and commandinggenius, with a mind cultivated with therichest stores of intellectual wealth, and a laney,winged to illic highest flights of a most captivatingA.D. 1790.3(jO THE IIISTOllY OF Hearty.CHAP, iniao-ory."* This, however, must be received with^I!: abatement as a posthumous panegyric. He had certainlyan eloquent although a very metaphysicalstyle of speaking ; but his reputation and his oratorywere the result of some experience and practice inthe house.In 1783 Wyndham was appointed principal secretaryto the Earl of Northington, who was then lordlieutenant of Ireland. The government of Irelandwas, at that time, understood by both parties to betheproper theatre of unquestioned jobbing and corruption.When about to leave England he calledupon his friend Dr. Johnson, and in the course ofconversation, lamented that his situation would compelhim to sanction practices he could not approve."Don't be afraid, sir," replied the doctor, *' youwill soon make a very pretty rascal." Wyndhamwas much esteemed by Johnson, for he was athoroughly accomplished man ; his mind was storedwith the most varied information, and his conversationwas perfumed by the sweets he had collected.Johnson was accustomed to say, that even in theregions of literature (he meant London) Wyndhamwas inter sells Luna minores ; and many other ofhis contemporaries, have testified to the extent of hisacquirements. tGentleman's Map., vol. Lxxx. ham (prefixed to his Speeches) —f Amyot's Memoir of Wynd Gent. Mug., vol. kxx.A.D. 1790.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 393111 health, or as his biographer would insinuate, CHAP.conscientious scruples, caused him to resign hissecretaryship, and, in the following year, he appearsin the house of commons seconding Burke's motionfor a representation on the state of the nation.Henceforward we find him frequently taking partin the debate, not concentrating the attention of thehouse — for what star could hope for admiration in ahemisphere where so many rival suns were alreadyraining light? — but gradually making his way upwards,and speaking with ability and effect.To this parliament also, was returned SamuelWhitbread, who soon proved himself no mean acquisitionto the Whigs. He was born in 1758, the sonof a rich brewer of London, and was educated atEton and Oxford. He made the tour of Europeunder the tutelage of the celebrated William Come,whose biographical labours have been so frequentlyquoted in these pages, and who afterwards dedicatedone of his works to his pupil. Soon after his returnto England, he married the daughter of Sir Charles,afterwards Earl Grey, and was at once enrolledamong the Whig aristocracy. During the generalelection of this year, he became a candidate for Bedford,in which borough and county he possessedlarge landed property ; and, after a sharp contest,he was returned. His eloquence was by no meansA. D. 1790.391 THE IIISTOIIY OF PARTY.CHAP, brilliant, but his speech-lies were replete with fact andXVI.argument : lie addressed himself to the judgment ofhis hearers, and he succeeded in convincing them,because he made it evident that he was himselfconvinced.Erskine's name can no longer be delayed : it musthave appeared long ago, had the house of commonsbeen the chosen scene of his triumphs. The HonourableThomas Erskine, third son of the Earl ofBuchan, was born in the year 1750. In his youth,he appears to have manifested all the impetuous enthusiasmwhich marked his later character. Heentered with ardour into the naval service, to whichbe had been brought up, and outstripped the rulesof the service in the rapidity of his promotion. But, inhis 1 8th year, he grew disgusted with the navy andobtained a commission in the army, proceeded with hisregiment to Minorca, and served there for three years.An imprudent marriage,* and a very restricted fortune,left him neither taste nor opportunities for pursuingThe contemporaneous exam his wife's. Then let him be calledpies of Scott and Erskine appear to the bar ; he cannot fail to suetcountenance the advice given need." Erskine and Scott wereby Thurlow to a father who asked placed at once in the proper poeticchancellor's advice as to his document, without the trouble andson's education for the bar. " Let delay attendant upon spending theyour son," said Thurlow, "spend two fortunes,his own fortune, marry, and spendA. D. 1790.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 395this his second profession. In 1772 he returned to chap.. . XVI.England, and resided for some time in London,where he speedily became distinguished in society.In the company of Dr. Johnson, Sir Joshua Reynolds,and other distinguished characters who wereaccustomed to assemble at the house of Mrs. Montague,he tested his own powers ; and among thesecelebrated men, he attracted, says Boswell, particularattention. It is said that the advice of hismother determined him ultimately to apply himselfto the law. The custom which prevails at Cambridge,of granting a very early degree to the connexionsof noblemen, shortened Erskine's road to thebar ; he was called in the year 177^> and, unlikenearly all of his illustrious predecessors in the samecareer, immediately started into practice. An acquaintancewith Captain Bailey, then under prosecutionfor a libel, placed in his hand a case of considerablepublic interest, and the use which Erskine made ofthis opportunity established his reputation. Hisspeech on this occasion, in the lucid order of itsarrangement, the intimate admixture of argumentand passion, the energy of its language, and thevehemence of its invective, yields to none of thosemasterpieces which emanated from him in the zenithof his fame.The reputation he acquired by this first effort wassustained by his ;iftor performances. in all constitution:HISTORY or party.A.D. i7yo.CHAP, national cases, whore the liberty of the subject was inXVI. , . , , ,daft-er or the Hlx^l law ot the judges was to be denounced,Erskine was retained, and the courts ofWestminster Hall teemed with the triumphs of hiseloquence.Upon the formation of the coalition ministry hewas introduced by Fox into parliament for the treasuryborough of Portsmouth, and throughout thecontest upon the India bill, he strenuously supportedhis political patron. It soon, however appeared thatthe house of commons was not his element. Thesplendid declamation which had aroused the passionand led captive the judgment of juries, was heardwith indifference by men accustomed to the voice ofeloquence ; he no longer carried his audience withhim, and his confidence and his powers together fell.Upon the dissolution which followed Pitt's assumptionof the government Erskine surrendered his seat; nordoes he again appear as a speaker in the house ofcommons until after the meeting of the parliament,which was now in process of election.The services of Erskine to the Whig party, andthese were many and great, were performed rather inthe courts of law than in the house of commons. Tohis defences against prosecutions for libel, and especiallyto his speech in defence of the Dean of St.Asaph, which Mr. Fox repeatedly declared to be thefinest argument in the English language, we holdTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.' 397the universality of the feeling which forced through chap.the legislature Mr. Fox's Libel bill. His proudest ^ ^ ^^^^ -position was as a Whig advocate : to see him in hispride of place, he should be viewed as the defenderof those mistaken patriots with whose blood Pitt attemptedto celebrate his full alliance with Toryism.The democratic party which clamoured without,had also acquired increase of strength and additionalleaders. The leaders, or rather the organs, of thisparty, are usually either calculating knaves, or recklessenthusiasts. Wilkes, the first of the race whonow proceeded through the hissing and groans ofthe multitude to the hustings in Covent-garden, tovote for Hood and Tooke,* was an unmitigatedscoundrel. Home Tooke's honest enthusiasm wasbeginning to ebb, and there was rather a suspicioussediment left when it vanished. Cartwright proceededas he had commenced, intent upon the one object ofhis life, the one idea which perpetually possessed him,the absolute right of personal representation. JohnEbb, whom Cartwright valued as the friend of hisbosom, and proposed as the pattern of his conduct,!had espoused the same theory, and pursued it with azeal equal in purpose, although not in efficiency, tothe dogged perseverance of the great reformer.Thelwall, who having In early life passed through• Mrs. Sheridan's LctU-r to lier Ilusliami, pnitcd in Moore's LifeofSlu-ridan. f Life of Major Cartwright.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.A. D. I7f)0.CHAP, the various situations of a showman, a poet, an actor,Asiatailor's apprentice, and an attorney's articled clerk;and who, during all these transitions, had continueda determined Tory, renounced his Toryism, andbrought the aid of his activity and inflexible resolutionto the same cause. Gerald — poor Gerald ! thefavourite pupil of Dr. Parr, the elegant scholar,skilled in the sciences, gifted with eloquence,thoughtless, generous, and unsuspicious, who spenthis talents as he dissipated his fortune ; he alsofixed his enthusiasm upon the new creed. Muir,Palmer, Skirting, Margaret, Hardy, and manyothers, might be enumerated as eminent either forthe influence they possessed, or the persecutionthey suffered.*Such were the three divisions of politicians who,at the meeting of the parliament of 1790, stoodprepared to renew the contest. This parliament,elected during the alarm, inspired by the successesof the French, soon proved themselves, by theirvotes, as favourable to the minister as the last.Within a few days of the meeting of the parliament,Burke put forth his celebrated work, the*' Reflections upon the French Revolution;" the workin which he proclaimed aloud his difference with hisparty, and made his defence before the country.There is considerable in- formers collected in the rcceiitly-formation upon these early re- published Life of Thehvall.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.All that extreme care, highly-polished style, and ^^^\^'vivid imagery, could accomplish was effected ; no ^ ^ 1790.thing that genius, knowledge, or observation, couldsupply was omitted, to give popularity to this work.Its success was equal to the author's hopes, 30,000copies were sold in England alone. Nearly all thecrowned heads in Europe awarded him their thanks.The Emperor of Germany and Catherine of Russiasent their ministers to express their approbation.Ladislaus of Poland sent him his likeness on a goldmedal. And George III. had a number of copiesbound, and distributed them among his friends, saying,** That it was a book which every gentlemanought to read." — Such are the honours in store forthose who advocate the right divine of kings.It may still, however, be questioned, whether thiswork was very advantageous to the party for whomit was written. It was well calculated to kindle orsustain the enthusiasm of the Tories ; readers, whosezeal required no spur: it may, perhaps, have frighteneda few timorous Whigs. But it called forth inanswer the ''VindicicpGaUiccp" and the "Rights ofMan ;" the first the offspring of an intellect thatmi<rht stand unabashed even before that of Burke ;the last, a fountain of evil, whose poison would penetratewhere J]urk(;'s antidote could not follow. Toan inquiring Whig, whose head was dizzy with theo-orcrcousness of the reflections, the answer of Mr.400 THE IllSTOUY OF Hearty.CHAP. Mackintosh was a sufficient restorative ; but the ras^-XVI. ' ^\ y. god deinocratfi, to whom, in tens of thousands, theRights of ]tian" was distributed, knew nothing ofthe *' Reflections" beyond its title, while they greedilydevoured the licentiousness and impiety it had calledforth.*Fox and Sheridan every where expressed theirdisapprobation of the principles defended by Burke.The feebleness of the tie which bound Burke andFox together, was manifested during the first sessionof the new parliament. When a violent petition,reflecting upon the constitution of the house of commons,was presented from Home Tooke, Burke wasthe first to call for punishment upon the libeller, andcould hardly be restrained by Pitt from makingsome intemperate motion upon the subject.! Theoccasion of the introduction of a bill to repeal someof the sanguinary statutes which inflicted the penaltiesof high treason upon Catholics, discoveredFox and Burke at variance upon the principles oftoleration ; Fox maintaining that a state had noright whatever to inquire into the religious opinionsof the subject on any occasion, and Burke assertingthat it had an uncontrollable superintending powerA common toast at the club to Mr. Burke for the discussion hedinners at this time was, " Thanks has provoked."f Pari. Hist., vol. xxviii., col. 921.A. D. 1790.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 401in all cases and on all occasions.* Burke was now, chap.XVI.having made one move backwards, gradually re- -treating at all points, and apparently seeking anopportunity of open quarrel. This, the AVhigs tooka method of avoiding. Fox never scrupled to haranguein favour of the French revolution ; in thedebate upon Mr. Baker's motion respecting thearmament against Russia, he declared that headmired the new constitution of France, and consideredit altogether as the most stupendous andglorious edifice of liberty which had been erected onthe foundation of human integrity, in any time orcountry.! Burke, upon this, as upon other similaroccasions, rose to reply, but his voice was immediatelydrowned in loud cries of question from theopposition benches, and after a vain attempt toobtain a hearing, he was obliged to give way to thedivision.From this moment an explosion, although it mightbe procrastinated, could not bo avoided. Therewas in the conduct of Burke, as Fox justly remarked," manifest eagerness to seek a difference ofopinion and anxiety to discover a cause of dispute."The debates upon the Quebec (government bill ;a bill which settled the constitution of Canada, fursPari Hist., vol. xxviii col. f Pail. IIi»t vol. xxix , col.1JJ73. '249.VOL. in. '2 Ui'0'2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, wished the occasion. Fox objected to many porer tions of the bill, especially to that which introducedA. D, 1790. ^ •'into the Canadian legislature an estate analogous toour house of peers. Such a question naturally introduceda discussion of the principles of government.On the morning of the 21st of April, the day appointedfor the recommitment of the Quebec bill,Mr. Fox, for the last time, paid Mr. Burke a visitaccompanied by a common friend. Mr. Burke talkedover with them the plan of all he intended to say,opened the different branches of his argument andexplained the limitations which he meant to imposeon himself. Fox in return, entered with candourinto a statement of the prospects of the Whigs andof circumstances which appeared to promise them areturn to office.* The two friends walked down tothe house together, where they found that SheridanThe newspapers of the day advantage to the country, Burke,had stated, that while the subject in his appeal from the new to theof the Russian armament was old Whigs, cites a passage fromunder discussion, the king had the " Argus " to this effect, with-beenheard to say, that he was out confirming or denying it : butnot so wedded to Mr. Pitt, as not it is vei-y improbable. If true, itto be very willing to give his con conveys one of the most severelicence to Mr. Fox, if the latter reflections yet cast upon the chasbe able, in a crisis like the racer of George III, Was he sopresent, to conduct the govern ready to abandon the patriot hement of the country with greater had debauched ?A.D. 1790.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 403had adjourned the debate.* Upon its resumption, CHAP,at an after date, it appeared from some observationsmade by Mr. INIichael Angelo Taylor that theWhigs were still determined to prevent Burke fromspeaking on the French revolution. He, nevertheless,commenced the speech he had prepared, butwas immediately interrupted by the members bywhom he was surrounded, and who, at the conclusionof every sentence, rose one after the other to callhim to order. Persevering in spite of these interruptions,a formal motion was at length made, thatdissertations on the French revolution were irrelevantto the question before the house. Upon thismotion the final separation between Burke and hisparty took place. Fox supported the motion, andaccused Burke of favouring the insinuation whichhad been made against him that he was an advocateof republican principles. He set forth the absurdityof friends, who agree upon all practical points, separatingupon a mere abstract and historical question.He was sorry to find that his friend, who during theAmerican war, had declared that he could not drawa bill of indictment against a whole people, had sincelearned to draw such a bill of indictment, and tocrowd it with all the technical cpitlu^ts of abusewhich disgraced our statute-book. He had been♦ Animal Rpt?istfT'^ \) '2A.D. 171)0.401 THE HISTORY OF Parity.CHAP, tauolit by his friend that no revolt of a nation wascaused without provocation ; he felt a joy ever sincethe constitution of France became founded on thosesame rights of man on which the British constitutionwas founded, and not all the eloquence of his friend,cither in writing, or in debate, could alter his opinion.These sentiments he was prepared to defend wheneverthe house should set apart a day for the discussion,but he objected to the introduction of sucha debate in an incidental manner.Fox having thus imitated the conduct he condemned,the house could no longer refuse to hearBurke in reply. He commenced in a grave and governedtone of voice. He complained that his wordsand his conduct throughout had been misrepresented,and a personal attack had been made upon lira from aquarter he never could have expected, after a friendshipand an intimacy of more than two-and-twentyyears. Thence he burst forth into the subject whichhad now so entirely possessed him, the Frenchrevolution. The readers of history are already sufficientlyacquainted with Burke's opinions upon thissubject — it is the manner in which he made them thecause of rupture with his party with which we havenow to do. Giving the reins to his passion, heplunged with such reckless violence into the subject,that, at last, his vehemence startled even himself,and, stopping suddenly, he drew himself up in anA. U. 1790.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 405attitude of calmness, and, addressing the chairman, chap.XVIsaid, " I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speakthe swords of truth and soberness." He then alludedto his situation — standing in opposition to the friendsof a long life. He spoke of former differences, uponthe reform question especially. He had differed withMr. Fox upon several occasions ; but, in the courseof their long acquaintance, no one difference of opinionhad ever before, for a single moment, interruptedtheir friendship. It certainly, he said, was indiscretionat any period, but especially at his time of life,to provoke enemies, or give his friends occasion todesert ; yet, if firm and steady adherence to the Britishconstitution placed him in such a dilemma, hewould risk all ; and, as public duty and public prudencetaught him, with his last words exclaim, " Flyfrom the French constitution !''Here Mr. Fox said, " There is no loss of friendship."*' Yes," replied Burke, turning to confront him,there is loss of friendship. I know that is theprice of my conduct ; I have done my duty at theprice of myTriend. — Ourfn'endsliip is at an end''So sudden, so violent a renunciation of an ancientfriendship, can only be accounted for by ascribing itto an ebullition of temper, or a determination tosecede from an unprofitable ]party. Modern writersA. D. 1790.UK) THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, arc accustomed to reject all suspicion of interestedmotives in statesmen, as illiberal. They extend tothem when dead the same courtesy which they maintaintowards each other when alive, assuming thatthey are indifferent to that which all other classesmost eagerly seek. But, protesting against so mischievousa delicacy, we would not, nevertheless, representBurke as materially influenced by pecuniaryinterest. Disappointment and adversity had souredhis temper ; he complained, even in this speech, that,latterly, Fox's visits had been rare and short, and hisconfidence in him had been shaken. It could nothave been a sense of duty that caused him to declarein public, "Our friendship is at an end;" for theyhad differed before upon practical points, even uponpoints which Burke deemed vital ; nay, Burke had,himself, in deference to the opinion of his friend, leftthe house when these were discussed ; yet, thesedifferences " never, for a single moment, interruptedtheir friendship," a friendship which snapped with thestrain of a pettish word and a speculative opinion.*Fox, when he heard himself included in the renun-• Yet Burke could declaim any thing, superior to the love ofeloquently upon the subject of one's country, the animating soulfriendship. " It is," he said in whence originated every otherhis speech against the abatement virtue."of Hastings's impeachment, " ifTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 40?citation which had before gone forth against Sheridan, chap.was deeply affected. Manly as was his bearing, and ^ ^ ^,^^commanding as was his eloquence, Charles Fox was aman of a warm heart and sensitive feelings. Uponthis occasion his voice faltered, and the house beheldhim shed tears as he attempted to recal the departedfriendship of his old associate. But as he proceededin his reply, he seemed to remember the absence ofall cause for the anathema pronounced ; he expostulatedwith Burke for turning his eloquence upon hisparty as well as upon his friend ; repeated his opinionupon the French revolution, recapitulated the eventsof the career they had pursued together, and concludedby an offer of oblivion of the past, which wasconciliating, but by no means submissive.Burke's rejoinder, repudiating all such pretencesof friendship, seemed to manifest an anxiety not tospoil the quarrel, and was eminently successful.When the breach became thus public and irreparable,a meeting of the Whig party took place todecide between the two chiefs, and in the MorningChronicle of the 12th of May, 1791, appeared thefollowing account of the decision :The great and firm body of the Whigs of England,true to their principles, have decided on thedispute between Mr. Fox and Mr. Burke ; and theformer is declared to hav(i maintained tlic^ inure dootrines by which th(;y are bound together, and Lq)()niOSTHE History OF PARTY.CHAP.XVI.A. D. 1790.^vhic'h they have invariably acted. The consequenceis, that Mr. Burke retires from parliaments"*Burke did not retire from parliament, but he absentedhimself upon ordinary occasions, coming downto the house occasionally to support any local orpetty amendment, or to oppose any enlarged measureof reform.This paragraph is inserted asaspecies of leading article, a featurein a modern newspaper whichwas only beginning to appear inthat of 1791. Burke cites thisexposition of the sentence of theparty he had deserted, in hisAjjpcal from the new to the oldWhigs." We have seen, in thecourse of this work, that no distinguishedWhig has hitherto desertedhis party without appealing tothe old Whigs as the true Whigs,and abusing the Whigs of his ownday. Burke is no exception.Pulteney thought Walpole a degeneratednew Whig. Burke appealsto Walpole as an old Whig,and brings the charge of noveltyand degeneracy against Fox andhis friends. There have beendeserters since Burke's day whowould appeal to Fox as an oldWhig, and future generations ofapostates will probably find futuregenerations of old and new Whigs.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. '1*09CHAPTER XVII.Mr. Fox's Libel bill— Dismissal of Thurlow— Political clubs— Theirinsignificance — Commencement of the Tory war for the re-establishmentof the Bourbons — Opposition of the Whigs — Mr. Grey's motionin favour of parliamentary reform — Prosecutions for hightreason against parliamentary reformers — Hardy — Home Tooke —Thelwall — Secession of the Duke of Portland and his adherents —Zeal of the apostate Whigs in the cause of Toryism — Prevalence ofhigh Tory sentiments among Pitt's followers — Death of Burke — Mr.Grey renews his motion for parliamentary reform — Biographicalanecdotes of George Canning— Of Tierney — Of Sir Francis BurdettCorruption of Pitt's government — Mr. Grey's motion of 1798 —Catholic emancipation question arising out of the union with IrelandAdvocated by Pitt — Refused by the king — Resignation of Pitt.In 1792 Mr. Fox succeeded in his attempt to CHAP,restore the trial by jury in cases of libel, a privilege-7-3-^^of which the subject had been, for many years, in to 1801.effect, deprived. Twenty years before a similarattempt had been made by Burke, and had failed.The Declaratory bill now passed the commons withthe approbation of Pitt ; escaping an insidious attemptat amendment, by Sir John Scott, in the commons,and the open opposition of Thurlow in the lords.Thurlow made the modest ]proposition that, if the110 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, judge should be dissatisfied with a verdict of acquittal,'- '. — he should have power to order a new trial.*A.D. 1792 ^to 1801. This was the only attempt in which Fox was, thisyear, successful. When he proposed to repeal someof the obsolete penal laws against the dissenters,Cure objected that those people were little entitledto the favour of parliament, as they held up the proceedingsof the French as examples for imitation.!In an amendment moved to the ministerial addressupon the proclamation against seditious doctrines, hefound many even of his own party, and, among others,Wyndham, following in the trail of Burke, and votingwith the minister.In the lords a singular scene occurred. Duringthe progress of a bill for continuing the sinking fund,a bill which had met with no opposition from theWhigs, Thurlow suddenly left the woolsack, loaded hiscolleagues with every epithet of abuse, denounced thebill, and, dividing the committee against its principalclause, was beaten only by a majority of six. Here-enacted the same scene in a debate upon a billfor encouraging the growth of timber in the new♦ Pari. Hist., vol. xxix., col. ed Mr. Paine's book libel on the153G. There are few things more constitution of Great Britain, heimpudent than this upon record. would now observe, that hetAnnual Register. Fox, in thought Mr. Burke's book to bereply to Burke's invectives against a libel on every free constitutionPaine, said, " He had before term in the world."THE HISTORY OF PARTY.forest, and was so violent and abusive that the seers ^^^\^-try of state was compelled to rise to answer the ^^^^-[^lord chancellor. Pitt immediately offered the king to 1801,a choice between the chancellor's dismission or hisown retirement ; and Thurlow, who had found thatPitt had withdrawn all confidence from him, and whoprobably relied on the favour of the king, was dismissed.A proposition was now made to the Whigs to jointhe cabinet ; but, since it was evident that the Torieswere to retain the majority, and Pitt the supremacy,Fox refused to treat.A notice given by Mr. Grey, that he would, inthe next session, bring forward a motion in favour ofparliamentary reform, had occasioned some conversation,in the house of commons, upon the subject ofpolitical clubs — institutions which existed to an extentbefore unknown in England, and exercised aninfluence unprecedented in our history. In theseassemblies the demagogues without and the ultra-whigswithin the house met, and arranged all thedetails of popular agitation. In I78O " The Societyfor Constitutional Information" was founded by MajorCartwright and Mr. Grey, and proposed, as itsobject, the diffusion of such works as should affordpolitical information to the multitude, and arouse themto the pursuit of parliamentary reform. " The QuintupleAlliance," founded in 17SC\ was composed'l-l^ TIIIC HISTORY OF Hearty.CHAP, of men who all soiiirht for annual parliaments andXVII. . T, . .-— — universal suffrage. This society numbered the DukeA 1). 1792 » ^ ^ •'to \^o\. of Richmond (or citizen Richmond, as he then tookpleasure in being called), among its members. Manyothers sprang into being, or increased into importance,at the breaking out of the French revolution.These associations were superseded in popular favourby " The Society for Free Debate," which was establishedin 1791, and which met in Coachmakers*Hall, for the discussion of political and polemicalquestions. At this debating club the most violent democraticdoctrines were debated and approved of; andspeakers might be nightly heard eulogizing the mostfrantic of the French revolutionists, and advocatingthe execution of the French king. A general passionfor oratorical display appeared to have takenpossession of the lower classes ; the debaters inCoachmakers' Hall found imitators in every cornerof the metropolis, and the rooms in which they metwere always crowded by a propitious audience. Bothspeakers and hearers being commonly persons withoutproperty in the country, or influence beyond their ownsociety, naturally looked with longing towards thestate of France, where the ringleaders of the mobwere the ministers of the state. The influence ofthese discussions was seen in the importance suddenlyacquired by the " Corresponding Society,"which was originally an obscure club, composed of aTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 413few mechanics and inferior tradesmen, set on foot by CHAP.XVII.Hardy, in 1792, and professing, as its object, the ^attainment of equality, and the vindication of the to iso.rights of man. These revolutionary principles soonobtained for the Corresponding Society an immenseaccession of numbers and influence ; it ramifiedthroughout the kingdom, and, in a little time, therewas not a populous town in England which had notaclub in active correspondence with the parentsociety. This society dispersed, in every hamlet, thewritings of Paine, levied contributions for mutualdefence, corresponded with the national assembly ofFrance, and ostentatiously published their proceedings.The leaders avowed, as their practical object,nothing further than annual parliaments and universalsuffrage ; but they were tampering with a power theycould not govern. The wishes of the major part oftheir followers tended to anarchy and pillage ; andthe cry for annual parliaments and universal suffragesoon became a demand for a national convention toreform the constitution.*This was a mere movement of the lower classeswhich required to be watched, but was by no meansnecessary to be feared. The few educated men whomambition, enthusiasm, or vanity had placed among• Sec the State Trials of 1793-4. us from ruin ;" and indeed all theGerald's tract, called " A Con democratic writings of the time,mention the only means of Saving414.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, them, were remarkable exceptions to the generalXVII. ' ^^ ^ j^^^., ignorance, and were, in very few instances, exemptto 1801. {'j'Qin the general poverty.* The middle classes ofEngland, the repository of the real power of the state,abhorred alike the clubbists and their doctrines. Thedisgusting cant of republicanism which appeared in thewritings and conversation of the democrats, led moderatemen to confound this nauseous affectation withthe genuine language of liberty, and to shun them both.All desire for parliamentary reform ceased among theEven Burke, who was soanxious to magnify the terrors ofrevolution, and to draw from theexcesses of English democrats anexcuse for his own defection, sometimesbetrayed his own contemptfor the power of these clubs.Upon one occasion he calls themlow intriguers and contemptibleclubbists. In the opening of hisReflections," he speaks of theSociety for Constitutional Information"as a society whose proceedingshave never been accounted,except by some of its members,as of any serious consequence — apoor charitable club ; and of theRevolution Society," as a clubof dissenters, who, until they werenoticed by the French nationalassembly, had never occupied amoment of his thoughts, nor, hebelieved, of any person's out oftheir own set.To the same purpose I mayquote a very celebrated passagefrom the same work. " The vanity,restlessness, petulance, and spiritof intrigue of several petty cabals,who attempt to hide their totalwant of confidence in bustle andnoise, and puffing and mutualquotation of each other, makesyou imagine that our contemptuousneglect of their abilities is ageneral mark of acquiescence intheir opinions. No such thing Iassure you. Because half-a-dozengrasshoppers, under a fern, makethe field ring with their importunatechink, whilst thousands ofgreat cattle repose beneath theshadow of the British oak, chewthe cud and are silent — pray doTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.middle classes ; Toryism never was so strong ; ^JlftT'"Whiggism, nay democracy, never was so weak as ~]~^~[:^while Thelwall was haranguing from his tribune, to 1801.Gerald declaiming among the friends of free debate,and Contorted congratulating the Corresponding Society,that the throne of George III., founded insophistry and error, was nearly sapped through byrepublican truths.The A\Tiigs strove in vain against the current.Finding that their usual supporters among the peoplewere either rabid with republicanism or frighted intoTory-ism, they attempted to concentrate their remainingstrength. For this purpose they established aclub, under the title of " The Friends of the People,"to which Mr. Grey, first of the influential Whigs,gave in his adherence ; but which Fox, and someothers of the party rather reluctantly countenanced.Amid the gusts of Toryism and democracy whichswept around her, it was not easy to keep the Whigvessel precisely straight in her course. The Societyof the Friends of the people was the scene of manydiscussions, nor did it survive through its first yearwithout several secessions.not imagine that those who make though loud and troiiblcsomo iii-thenoise are the only inhabitants sects of the lioiir.of the field ; that, of course, they " I almost venture to affirm, thatare many in number ; or that, not one in a hundred amongst usafter all, they are other than the participates in the 'triumph' >^flittle, shrivelled, meager, hopping, tlx' Revolution Society."4lGTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The commencement of the session of 1793-4XVII.occurred while the country was excited by the exr-A.D.1792 / -^to 1801. petition of war with France. The parties havebeen remarkably consistent in their policy towardsthat country. While she retained her old government,the Whigs, from Russell to Chatham, wagedwar to the knife against her, as the plague-spot ofdespotism which threatened infection to Europe ; butno sooner did she become a republic than theirenmity ceased, and now the fury of the Tories brokeforth. The speech from the throne gave a presageof war, which was responded to with delightthroughout the nation, but which was heard withrage by the democrats, and sorrow by the Whigs.These last saw that the country was falling into thetemper which it was the minister's interest to excite ;that Burke's contortions of horror had producedsome effect, and that the property classes, always soeasily terrified, were eager, at any sacrifice, to kindlea fire between themselves and the object of theirfear. Burke, upon this occasion, put himself in thevan of the ministerial array. When Fox moved anamendment to the address, importing that an ambassadorshould be sent to Paris, he appeared, forthe first time, upon the treasury bench. He lookedupon sending an ambassador to Paris, as a suing forpeace. " Yield to traitors to their king ? to a nationof murderers ? Stain the illustrious pages of historywith such profanation and impiety ? May God, inTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 417his infinite mercy, add vigour to our arm, and enable CHAP,us to check the encroachments of those monsters ofA. D. 1/92society'' Thus did Burke conclude a speech, which to iso.Mr. Courtenay who, after Sheridan, was the mostcaustic of the Whig speakers, correctly analyzed asconsisting of three proportions ; first, that we wereat war with France ; secondly, that to send an ambassadorto that country would be suing for peace ; andthirdly, that we ought to make war in order to exterminatethe French metaphysicians. Windham andseveral other members who called themselves Whigs,but who had lately, with many expressions of regret,voted upon all important occasions with theTories, inclined to the popular side. The speech ofFox was desponding and apologetic. He would noteven venture upon a division.* 'Recent circumstances had shown that the democraticclubbists had not all the elements of disturbanceupon their side. The Tories were notbehind their opponents in assembling in dinner-partiesand clubs. Riots had occurred at Birmingham,at Cambridge, at Manchester, and atother places. Church and king mobs had insultedthe dissenters, attacked their houses, and destroyedtheir property. Stripped of their popularity the\Miig party was become again a mere nucleus, numbI'iirl. Hist., vdl. XXX.VOL. III. '2 E418 TlIF HISTORY OF Party.CHAP, beriiiff scarce sixty members in the house of com-XVII.mons. The arrival of the news of the murder of theAD. 1793to 1801. French king quickened the zeal of the Tories,caused some dissension of opinion even among thedemocrats, and utterly abashed the Whigs. Whenthe king declared in effect that the war in which wehad plunged, was a war of opinions, that it was " tooppose an effectual barrier to a system which struckat the security and peace of all independent nations" —in other words, to a system of government without aking. Fox and Sheridan protested ; but Burkesneered at the smallness of their numbers, and theycould not venture to show their poverty by a division.In the lords, Earl Stanhope appeared asfrantic a democrat as any in Paris. He loudly condemnedthe war, and refrained from all public disapprovalof the execution of the king. He was thesole representative of his party in that assembly.The Whigs were not much more numerous. Loughboroughhad left his party, and vaulted at once intothe chancellor's seat, and the Duke of Portland andmany of his friends were only waiting an opportunityto follow his example. Lansdowne, Lauderdale,Derby, and Stanhope are the only names frequentlyfound as speakers in opposition to the war.Before England was irrevocably committed in aleague with the kings of Europe to force the Bourbonsback upon France, the Whigs determined toTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 419enter a solemn protest against the projected crusade, chap.On the 18th of February Fox brought forward five '- — ■, A.D. 1792resolutions, declaring that it was not for the honour to iso.or interest of England to go to war with France, tosuppress or punish any opinions or principles, howeverpernicious in their tendency, or for the purpose ofestablishing in France any particular form of government.That the complaints made against Francewere not of a nature to justify hostilities in the firstinstance. That negotiation had not been sufficientlytried ; and that it was the duty of ministers to takecare that this country was involved in no engagementswhich might prevent her from making a separatepeace, or compel her to continue the war for theunjustifiable purpose of compelling the people ofFrance to submit to a form of government notapproved by that nation.Fox enlarged upon the topics which these resolutionsintroduced. Looking towards Burke, he saidthat ministers had suffered themselves to be imposedupon and misled, by those who wished to gotowar with France, on account of her internal government; that while disavowing such a motive indebate, they evidenced it by their conduct ; thattheir negotiations had been illusory, calculated onlytor the public eye, while all their private endeavourshad been to render them abortive and to foment thequarrel. Ho ]pointed to Island, lately seized uponO I.' o^ Jrf -^dio THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, by the despots of Russia, Austria, and Prussia.XVII.^ — England, diiriiio- this e^rco-ious act of rapine, stoodA.D. 1702 ^"" ^ o ft ^ 1to it^oi. by unmoved ; for it was done by kings, it was onlyagainst the minor irregularities of an infant republicthat she felt called upon to brandish her thunders.He deprecated very strongly any thing so infamousas our being supposed to be a party to the abominableconfederacy of kings now forming against France.If we had quarrels, let us fight them by ourselves, orif we were to have allies, let us keep our cause ofquarrel completely separate from theirs. Let usnever meddle with the internal concerns of theFrench republic, nor burden ourselves with stipulationswhich should prevent us from making a separatepeace, without the concurrence or approbationof those sovereigns."Pitt left his defence entirely to Burke, who pouredforth one of his usual shining and lava-like torrentsof abuse upon the conductors of the French government.In Burke's speeches at this period, we seenone of that compass of mind which he was wont toexhibit ; he appears in the debates as a man of oneidea, as an enthusiast unable to withdraw his mindfor one moment from the favourite object of its contemplation.In reading some of these speeches, wemay occasionally suppose for a moment that we havelighted upon some of the intemperate trash of Mr.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4^1Drake, or a similar orator,* until some passage of cHAP.overbearing eloquence, some image of exquisite^ n . , . A.D. 1792beauty, arrests the attention, and forces us to admit to iso.with regret that the speaker could only be Burke.The debate called up Grey, who vindicated thearguments of his friend from the misrepresentationsof Burke, Adam (who was an egregious example ofthe efficacy of the coalition, in converting the Toryfollowers of Lord North into Whigs), Jekyll, Maitland,Lambton^ and, lastly, Sheridan ; all of whomdirected their attacks against either Burke or Wind-ham,as their most powerful opponents. The latter,as Sheridan remarked, treated his friends with a sortof French fraternity, and did them more real injurythan their open enemies. Of the avowed Tories, Jcn-pinson was the only man having any pretension totalent who came forward in the debate. Pitt andDundas were silent.Upon the division, the numbers were 44 to 270- 1• What, for instance, could be served, and the list is worthy ofin worse taste than his theatrical insertion, as an illustration of theexhibition of the dagger, in the condition of the Whig party in thedebate upon the Alien bill. It is commons,said by an eyewitness, that the Antonio, W. Lee.house estimated this stage trick at Bouverie, Hon. E.its proper value, and felt more in- Burch, J. R.ruined to laugh than to shudder. Baker, William.f The names of the minority Courteney, .1,ripon this occasion have been pre Coke, T. W.THE HISTORY OV rAUTY.CHAP. It was in circumstances so adverse as these, thatXVII.Mr. Grey undertook to resuscitate in the house ofA. D. 1792 •'to 1801. commons the question of Parliamentary Reform. HeCoke, E.Church, J. B.Calhoun, W.-Crespigny, J. C.Ei-skin, T.Fox, C. J.Fitzpatrick, U.Francis, P.Grey, Charles,Hare, James.Howard, Henry.Hussy, W.Harrison, J.Hotel, D.Jekyll, Joseph.Maitland, T.Macleod, Col.North, Dudley.Plumer, W.Poulet, W. Poulet.Russell, Lord John.Russell, Lord William.Sheridan, R. B.St. John, St. Andrew.Smith, William.Spencer, Lord R.Sturt, Charles.Taylor, M. A.Taylor, C.Thompson, T.Vaughan, B.Combe, Earl of.Wyndham, P. C.Whitbread, S.NVilbraham, R.Western, C, C.Whitmore, T.Bennington, Sir E.Tellers.Adam, W.Lambton, W. H.Many Whigs, however, who werefavourable to Fox's resolutionswere accidentally absent. Uponcomparing the lists of the minorities,it is found that no less than 2 1members who voted with Fox inthe minority of 50 upon the addresswere absent upon this occasion;the names of these membersare :Aubrey, Sir John.Bentinck, Lord Edward.Bingham, Richard.Byng, George.Cavendish, Lord G. A. II.Damer, H.Edwards, J. N.Fletcher, Sir Henry.Grenville, Thomas.Harcourt, John.Jervis, Sir John.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.was appointed to this post of honour by the society ^^-f-^-of the friends of the people, and the prayer of theA. D. 1792petition upon which he founded his motion may be to Isti.looked upon as a declaration upon which the generalbody of the AMiigs were agreed. This prayer ranthus :That your honourable house will be pleased to take such measuresas to your wisdom may seem meet, to remove the evils arising from theunequal manner in. which the different parts of the kingdom are admittedto participate in the representation. To correct the partial distributionof the elective franchise, which commits the choice of representativesto select bodies of men of such limited numbers as rendersthem an easy prey to the artful, or a ready purchase to the wealthy.To regulate the right of voting upon an uniform and equitableprinciple.And, finally, to shorten the duration of parliaments, and by removingthe causes of that confusion, litigation, and expense, with which theyare at this day conducted. To render frequent and new elections whatour ancestors at the revolution asserted them to be, the means of ahappy union and good agreement between the king and the people."Mr. Grey declined to bring forward any specificplan of reform, and moved only for the appointmentof a committee. A debate of two days' durationensued ; a debate interesting chiefly from the for-lee,Anthony. Stuart, John Shaw.Milton, Viscount. Tarleton, B.Martin, .lames. Wharton, .loin.Mihu-s, U. S. Whilmoic, Thoinii>i.4'24 Time IIISTOllY OF PARTY.CHAP, latitude with wliicli a mere handful of Whites bore upXVII. .against the overvvhohnino- majority of Tories, and theA.D. 17f)ito 1801. eloquence with which Fox, Sheridan, Grey, Courtenay,and Whitbread bore back all the eloquence oftheir apostate opponents. But what cared Pitt forcharges of apostacy, while he could look around uponthe numbers who cheered him in his avowal, andeulogised his infamy — while Burke sat by his side,and Yonge, with a long train of inferior deserters,felt that his cause was their own. No one whoreads this debate, without turning to the division,could imagine that the eloquence which convinceshim proceeded from a party consisting only of 43members, while that which was employed in thedefence of corruption, came from a majority of 284,nearly the whole of this being contributed byapostate Whigs.* The cause of Whiggism wasnow desperate indeed.Pitt, however, was still unsatisfied. Havinggiven himself to the kings of Europe, he thoughtthat nothing had been accomplished, while a voicecould be raised against his efforts to work their will.The king, the parliament, the frightened peoplewere with him : the democrats were contemptiblefrom their fewness and their impotence, the Whigswere annihilated. Yet while the grasshoppers wereSee this debate in the Pari. Hist., vol. xxx.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. "^^^still suffered to chirp beneath the fern, he could not CHAP.^ X V 1 1 .think himself secure. The year 1794 gave him all-XTdTTtoThe wished, placed the constitution in abeyance, and ^^ ^^^'^•the liberties of his countrymen at his feet. With adecision always necessary to successful tyranny, heseized the leaders of the democratic clubs, closedthe debating societies in which foolish mechanicsharmlessly vapoured about equality, made spoil of alltheir papers, and having cautiously collected all therubbish of resolutions and correspondence, placed itwith a ludicrous simulation of horror and alarm uponthe tables of the houses of parliament. A secretcommittee of twenty-one of his trusty adherentsexamined the mass, and although nearly the wholeof it had been many months before printed in all thenewspapers in the kingdom, they did not fail to discoverin it much reason for consternation and proofof projected rebellion. Scotland, where the law wasmore tractable than in England, was the scene ofthe first prosecutions ; the paid spies of the ministerproved the treasonable projects they had themselvessuggested, and they alone had ap^n-oved, and althoughone of them was caught in the meshes of hisown net, and abandoned by his masters,* others• See the correspondence be the lord advocate, by which it ap-tweenRobert Watt and Mr. Dun feared that Watt had failed inAiis.—Stnir 7V;rt/j», vol. xxiii., col. sonic of his attempts to sell hisl'.y22. And also the evidence of information..[,26 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, were not wanting to succeed to the task. Gerald'■ — died in a transport ship, ruined in fortune, and heart.D. 1792to 1801. broken by long confinement with common felons ;commending with his last breath, his infant daughterto the protection of the friends of freedom ; others,as guiltless as he, were exiled from their country,and expiated their crime of advocating the reformthat Pitt once deemed so necessary, under the taskmastersof a penal colony — but the required sensationwas created, the Habeas Corpus act wassuspended, the gaols were filled with political delinquents,and no man who professed himself a reformercould say, that the morrow might not see him a prisonerupon a charge of high treason.What could the slender minority of Whigs doagainst a power now grown so terrible. Theydebated, they reasoned, they threatened, they attemptedall that their puny strength could justify,but they were bent like twigs before the blast ; thirteentimes they divided the house against the Suspensionbill, but the utmost number to which theycould raise their minority was 39, and even thisdecreased as their opposition continued. But therush towards despotism against which the Whigscould not stand, was arrested by the people.Although the Habeas Corpus had fallen, the Trial byJury remained and now, as it had done before, whenthe alarm of fictitious plots had disposed the nationTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4^27to acquiesce in the surrender of its liberties, it CHAP.opposed a barrier which Toryism could not pass.A. D. 1792When the minister attempted to prosecute his poll to 1801.tical opponents to the death, it became necessary toadduce evidence before an audience less tractablethan a house of commons, composed of the deputiesof men whom he had bribed with a peerage. Hardywas the first selected for destruction. For ninehours did Sir John Scott labour in an openingspeech to substantiate some charge of treason,evincing by the nature of his exertions the povertyof his case. Then came the proofs ; sufficientproof of a design to levy war against the kingwas sworn to by men who avowed themselves asgovernment spies, but their testimony received nocorroboration. Of all the witnesses called by theattorney-general, upon a trial which lasted througheight days, not one who possessed a credible charactercould depose to a single important fact againstthe prisoner. All their answers, upon cross examination,tended to prove that although the prisoner'spolitical views were visionary, yet his means of propoundingthem had been perfectly legal. The juryacquitted him.Home Tooke came next. Home Took, the earlyfriend of Pitt — with whom he had sat at the ThatchedHouse, and drawn up his own propositions of reform.He lead been seized upon in his old age, and was.[.^28 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, now brought forth from a (lamp dungeon to contend^^'^^' tor his life, limit there was less proof against him thanA. D. i7yj , • IT 1 TT 1to 1801, there had even been against Hardy, lie also wasacquitted. After two such checks the multitudesupposed that the ministers would have desisted fromthe chase ; and when they heard that several indictmentshad been abandoned, they thought the prosecutionswere at an end ; but Scott still clung tothe hope that his spies might be believed. He hadobtained a knowledge of Thelwall's line of defence ;*he had learned from this which of his own witnessescould be discredited, and he hoped, with this chart,to avoid the rocks upon which he had formerly split.The grounds of accusation were much the same asthose alleged against Hardy and Tooke, with theaddition only of certain violent expressions whichwere sworn to by two reporters, as the ministerialspies were now delicately termed, but disbelieved bythe jury. Thelwall also was acquitted.These trials caused many men to pause. Someeven of the active supporters of the minister couldnot look without alarm at the dreadful jeopardy inwhich these men had stood : accused by a powerwhich could command every facility for collectingevidence, all the legal skill necessary for its arrangement,all the eloquence by which it could be enforced ;which moreover produced, by its accusation, a presLife of Thelwall, vol. i., p. 247.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 429judice of the prisoner's guilt, and appeared almost CHAP,omnipotent when arrayed against him ; it appeared ^^scarcely possible that any man who had ever inter to iso.feared in politics could escape. Many men askedthemselves whether an Englishman should be putthrough such an ordeal, upon the uncorroboratedreport of a hired spy, or the occurrence of a ministerialsuspicion — The public joy was very general atthese acquittals.*During the campaign against the parliamentaryreformers, the Whig party suffered a still further diminution— a diminution, however, which was rathernominal than real. That section of the Whig partywhich, headed by the Duke of Portland in the lords,and Windham in the commons, had been, for sometime,withdrawing themselves from their party, atlength, urged forward by Burke, passed the rubicon,and took office under the present Tor)^ minister. InJuly, ]794<, the duke received a blue ribbon and theoffice of the third secretary of state, with the managementof Ireland — the very office which Burke, as aneconomical reformer, had succeeded for a time inabolishing. Earl Fitzwilliam became president of thecouncil, and afterwards lord lieutenant of Ireland.• For thcso trials and the facts wright," by his niece— and cspc-connected with them I have used chilly the " Life of Thelwall."The Suc Trials," vols. xxii. to There is no full-length report ofxxvi.— "The Life of Major Cart the trial of Tlielwall.430 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Earl Spencer was lord privy seal, and, by an afterarrangement, first lord of the admiralty. WindhamA. D. 179-2to 1801. was secretary at war.Our prescribed limits must be indefinitely enlargedwere we to yield to the temptation so often presented,of resting upon every brilliant passage of arms in thehouse of commons. The recent desertions were, ofcourse, followed by many bitter accusations from theremaining Whigs, and defended by many declarationsof disinterestedness from the deserters themselves.Sheridan attacked the seceders with mercilessseverity. The debates throughout the sessionwere replete with personal acrimony ; and Pitt wasnot always perfectly successful in his defence of therecent converts.It has been sometimes asserted that Fox was, atthis time, the deserter ; and that the Duke of Portland,who was the acknowledged head of the party,had a right to lead the Whigs to a coalition withPitt. The Duke of Portland had certainly beenlooked upon as the nominal chief of the Whigs. Asan individual of the highest rank he had been putforward by a party never insensible to the claims ofrank, as their prime minister ; but of all those whothus readily yielded to the duke precedence in office.♦ It was upon this occasion that umphs, and rendered his best ser-erskineachieved his highest tri vice to Whiggism and the Whigs.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4<31there was not one who thought that he was the man chap.XVII.to declare the sentiments or guide the conduct of the^ A.D. 1792party. The Duke of Portland is indeed far more to I801.deeply involved than either Burke or Windham inthe charge of desertion. In 1793, long after Foxhad opened his views upon the French revolution,and Burke had seceded, Fox published his letter tothe electors of Westminster, explaining and justifyinghis views. To this manifesto, which was chieflydirected against Burke, the Whig club responded bya resolution, "That their confidence in Mr. Foxw^asconfirmed, strengthened, and increased, by thecalumnies against him." In this resolution the Dukeof Portland and Lord Fitzwilliam concurred,* whileothers who dissented from the vote seceded from theclub. These noblemen, therefore, not only abandonedtheir party, but renounced their former opinions.To contend that Fox was bound to followthem in this renunciation is an evident absurdity.In their subsequent conduct, the Whigs who nowseceded, manifested all the ardour of apostacy, andsoon discovered a proficiency in the doctrines ofToryism which left Pitt far behind. If attemptsto destroy political opponents, by means of constructivetreasons, failed, it was Windham who stoodforth to brand the intended victims with the name of• Burke's Observations on tho Conduct of flic Minority.43-2 THE HISTORY of party.CHAP. " Acquitted Felons," and who joined Dundas inxvii.sighing for the more efficacious procedure of theA.D. 17<V)to 1801. Scotch courts. If the war with France was denounced,it was Windham who threw off all disguise,and boldly stated the real object of the war. " Witha government so feeble, so precarious, so insecure,we can have no stability"* It was Windham andhis friends who emboldened Pitt to declare that " hewould not acknowledge such a government even totreat with it'* If a dependant of the minister, andthe organizer of Tory clubs, put forth a doctrine thatthe government of England is a monarchy of theancient stock, which may go on in all its functionswithout lords or commons, it is Windham, the secretaryat war, who steps forward to assert, that ** possiblyit was wrong, but as far as he could judge, thesentiment was innocents It was W^indham, theseceding Whig, who stood forth to defend the exhumedabsurdities of the Stuart Tories, and attemptedto do openly, what Pitt, more modest, was contentedto accomplish by a display of tactics — to retain theauthor in the service of the government.• Pari. Hist., vol. xxxii col. 15. conduct of this gentleman deprivedBut the minority against the war him of a peerage,increased to 86, and even Mr. + See the Debate upon Reeve'sBanks, who never voted against Libel on the British Constitution,Pitt but with extreme reluctance, Pari. Hist., vol. xxxii., col. 612.was in the minority. The uprightTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 433Notwithstanding this accession of violent partisans, chap.the war lost its popularity ; bread g-rew scarce ; — ^ '- —• ^ ^ i ur A. D. 1795commerce was crippled; the young republic put to sui.forth resources that Burke* never dreamt she hadpossessed, and the easy success that had been anticipated,was replaced by reverses. t The peopleclamoured and threw stones at the king, and Pitteagerly took advantage of their violence to tearIt is very much the fashion eight millions and a half, has altoextol the prescience of Burke ready swelled to the enormousin that he foretold that great visum of three hundred and tenhence and bloodshed would follow millions ; the annual burden ofthe revolution. But it is not suffi taxes, customs and excise, whichecent for a prophet who deals at the same period, was no morelargely in predictions to be occa- than seven millions, cannot besignally right, and we cannot for computed at less than twenty mil-getthat Burke spoke of the glory lions ; while the poor-rates, which,and the power of France as gone, during the space of two hundredand intimated that the next gene years to the middle of the presentration would listen with astonish century, had been found to in-ment to the tradition that French crease only in a regular progressedhad once been formidable sion of between four or five tliou-enemies. sand a year, have been swelledf An extract from the address during the former part of the proofthe Corresponding Society re- sent reign by an annual increasecapitulates the results of Tory go of between twenty and thirty thou-vermontin the year 1795. — "The sand, and, during the latter part,national debt which oven at the of between fifty and sixty tliou-commencement of the jircsent sand pounds,reign amounted only to ciglity-VOL. III. ^ F4.'3i TIIK HISTORY OF PAIITV.CHAP, away the few shreds of the constitution which yetXVI 1.covered them. He brought forward the SeditiousA. D. 1795to sui. j\Ieetino's bill, and the Treasonable Practices bill.Bills which, among other provisions, placed the conductof every political meeting under the protectionof a magistrate, and rendered disobedience to hiscommand a felony. These outrageous propositionsproduced meetings and petitions throughout thecountry, and the most stormy debates of the sessionin parliament. Finding the ministerial majoritycompact and unscrupulous. Fox declared, that ifthose bills passed, and were enforced, " the proprietyof resistance, instead of remaining any longera question of morality, would become merely a questionof prudence"* Sheridan advised the nationto acquiesce in these bills only as long as resistancewas imprudent'' t Grey asserted that " thepeople should . only be induced to refrain from resistancefrom motives of prudence." t And Whit-breadassented implicitly to the opinion of Fox. ||Some of these Whig leaders explained away this bolddeclaration, and spoke of the resistance they contemplatedas a passive resistance — the resistance ofthe anvil to the hammer ; but Fox repeated his expression,and justified it in one of the most argusHist., vol. xxxii., col. 385, J Ibid., 387.t Ibid., .386. II Ibid., 39.3.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 435tentative and constitutional speeches, which even CHAP.Ill IT • XVII.he has bequeathed to posterity.*^ . . A.D. 1795In the house of lords the sentiments of the majo to iso.city was well expressed by Dr. Samuel Horsey, oneof Pitt's bishops. This prelate admitted, that if anyman should be twice guilty of the crime of publishinga work upon the representation, which should suggestthe general conclusion that the government was corrupt,he would be under one of these bills liable totransportation. But he could see no injustice in theenactment, '* he, in fact, did not know what themass of the people in any country had to do withthe laws hut to obey them"" The minority in thelords against the third reading amounted to 5, whichwas increased by proxies to 7-In the debates in the commons we now miss thepresence of Burke. In June, 1794, that great manhad retired from the house, and awaited his promisedpeerage. This honour before so coveted, was, however,soon afterwards rendered valueless by the deathof his son, and consequently declined. The deathof this young man, whom Burke considered to haveinherited all his genius, and whom he hoped to placein a far happier position for its development than hehimself had (!njoy(Ml, destroyed his most cherishedhope, and hist his life without an object. Upon• In the (Jrbiiti- on the third col. 4'2'2. Trio largest minoritiesreading. — Pml. lint., vol xxxii., against ilicso hills wen 13 and 1.)o Iso'Keg THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CIIAI' retiring into private life, he found his affairs byno means prosperous. A pension of 3700/. whichA. D. 1795to 1801. he now received, was necessary to his comfort, but itwas loudly condemned in parliament. This pensionhas been compared with that of Chatham.* Burkewas a great man, a man to whom much inconsistencyand error may be pardoned. Let us not dwell uponhis faults. But such comparisons are injudicious, —they should never be made.On the 8th of July, 1797> Burke died, leaving avoid among our public characters which has neversince been filled up. In those days there weregiants on the earth ; Burke was the first of these tofall, and those who alone seemed worthy to contendwith him have since followed. The rising generationlooks on the remains of these mighty minds asupon the bones of the mammoth, and turns in vainin quest of evidence that the race is not extinct.While even that portion of the constitution whichprotected personal liberty was suspended, it was tolittle purpose to attempt to repair older breaches.The question of Parliamentary Reform was sufferedto He dormant until the session of 1797* It wasthen again brought forward by Mr. Grey, who proposeda specific plan, having as its scope, to increasethe county representation, and the number of thecounty constituency ; to divide the borough repression'sLife of Burke.A. D. 1795to 1801.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4-37sensation more equally throughout the kingdom ; to ^^^^'extend the suffi-age to all householders ; and to -render parliaments triennial.The arguments advanced in the debate offer nothingespecially worthy of notice ; they were generallyon the side of the Whigs, such as Pitt had himselfadvanced when he was a reformer, with theaddition of instances of extravagance, jobbing, andoppression, derived from the acts of his administration; on the side of the Tories, they were such asLord North had used against Pitt, with the additionalso of topics derived from the democratic spirit prevalentin the nation. On the division the numberswere, 2.56 to 91, showing some increase in the numbersof reformers, or at least some increase of interestin the question.*Among the members on both sides of the house,who divided upon this question, there were severalwho require some introductory notice ; there wasone who was almost worthy to fill the seat vacatedby Burke. George Canning had entered the houseof commons in 1793, and had now taken his naturalstation in the house.George Canning was the only son of a barrister ofgood family but slender means, who having offended• I'arl. Hist., vol. xxxiii., fol hut Whigs and Tories were likeI'M. Tlic iniitiiiy at the Nor mianimoiis ti forwarding the niia-occasioned some parliamentary shires r«'q\iisitp at this daiigcrou.sproceedings during this session, crisis.'l-i^S Tin: iiisrouv of party.CHAP, his family by marrying a portionless wife, was discardedwith a pittance of 150/. a year. A spectlyon. hating disposition and improvident habits, quicklydissipated this annuity ; the first birthday of* GeorgeCanning witnessed the death of his father, who diedin penury and misery of a broken heart. The widowand her infant were left in a state of utter destitution,and the former was obliged for her maintenance toattempt the stage. She appeared as Jane Shore,but failing to satisfy a London audience, she wascompelled to accept provincial engagements, and, atlength, married a person of the same profession. Inyouth she was beautiful and accomplished. In afterlifelittle more is known of her than that she received,to the last hour of her existence, the mostassiduous and affectionate attentions of her illustriousson.*• Mrs. Hung, for that was the 500/. a year, to which he wasname she acquired by her second entitled: he paid an annual visitmarriage, soon became a second to her at Bath, and made it a ruletime a widow, and settled at Bath, with which no engagements wereHer son took the earliest oppor- allowed to interfere, to write to herunity of withdrawing her from every Sunday. Even during histhe stage ; he applied to her sup embassy to Lisbon, when thereport a considerable portion of the was usually an interval of severalmeans allowed him by his family weeks between the mails, the Sun.for his college expenses, and when day letter was never omitted, andhe came forth to the world, his the packet frequently brought fourmother shared every success. At or five together. These lettershis retirement from the office of the delighted parent read with nounder secretary, in 1801, he little pride in the circle of hersettled upon her the pension of friends at Bath.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 439The education of the infant was undertaken by chap.the father's family, and George was placed at Eton — ^ '-by the liberality of his uncle, and it is said, at the ' to issue.recommendation of Fox. Here his surprising powerswere quickly developed : at the age of sixteen hewas not only one of the senior scholars, but thescholar to whom no other boy in the school thoughtit shame to yield precedence. When, in I786, theEton boys determined to put forth a periodical, thegeneral feeling voted George Canning for its editor.Nor was that homage unworthily paid : a remarkablepurity of style and happiness of expression soondistinguished those essays in the '* Microcosm"which where signed *' B.," and rescued that periodicalfrom the ordinary fate of the puerilities which issuein vagrant numbers from our public schools.*In his eighteenth year. Canning left Eton forChrist Church, Oxford, where he fully sustained thereputation that had preceded him from Eton. Hecarried off several of the university prizes, any one ofwhich will build a little reputation, and what was ofmore importance, he cultivated the friendship of themost able among his contemporaries. Among thesewas young Jenkins, the son of the Earl of Liverpool.The intimacy between these two young menbecame strict. The son of the nobleman could ape.\ikI Sfunctinics from our universities.'ll-O THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, preciatc the genius of the commoner, who in returnXVIIdiscerned the talent, and bowed to the rank of hisA. D. 1795to leon. friend. In politics, however, they were altogetheropposed. Jenkinsonon adhering to the Toryism inwhich he had been educated, and Canning espousingWith enthusiasm the cause of the Whigs. Jenkinsononpreceded Canning in their entrance into public life,and made his first essay with so much applause in thehouse of commons, that Sheridan could not forbeartelling the house that great as were the talents ofthe young speaker they had just heard, they wereabout to be eclipsed by those of his friend who wouldshortly appear upon their side of the house.From Oxford Canning became a student of Lincoln'sInn, but he appears to have applied himselfmore diligently to the practice of oratory in the differentdebating societies in the metropolis than tothe study of the law. At that time, the leaders ofthe parties attentively watched the universities, andlost no opportunity of enlisting talent in their ranks.Canning had been known to Sheridan as a schoolboy ;when he left the university, he was introduced by hisuncle to Fox, Burke, Fitzpatrick, and other leadingWhigs. What were the immediate intentions ofthat party with regard to a man of whom every onewho knew him had already conceived such hopesdoes not appear ; but while they were, perhaps, deliberating,Jenkinsonon was gently leading his friendTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4-4 1beyond their influence and discovering to him CHAP.rS, • 1 XVII.the honours and emoluments of office. The period ^ ^^^^ -was favourable for the revisal of opinions; the toisoi.Whigs were abandoning Fox in flights, and clatteringround his rival. Under the mighty shadowof Burke's apostacy, a thousand ordinary desertersmight lurk undiscovered. An opportune messagefrom Pitt, desiring an interview, decided thequestion ; Mr. Canning had an explanation withSheridan,* concurred in the policy which governmentwas pursuing, and took his seat for Newport.• It has been said that Sheri unprofitable set of principles for(Ian, with more individual friend others more marketable, in othership than public honesty, under words, of going over to the mini-tookto convince theyoung aspirant step; and that Sheridan, after hethat Whiggism was productive of had listened to the communicationsbut empty fame and volition with all due gravity, insteadgar admiration ; and that a poor of replying to the private ear ofman, if he would enter the house the querist, broke forth in a loudof commons without ruining him and humorous appeal to the ladyself, must become a Norland sup hostess, demanding her judgmentport the minister. Another story on a point of so much consequencetold upon the same subject is, that to the character and consistencyat one of .Mrs. Crewe's suppers, of the scrupulous and conscicn-wlierc all the W liigs and wits in pious young gentlemen who re-town were accustomed to assemble, quested his advice. Niitlicr ofCanning having contrived to draw these anecdotes appear, however,Sheridan aside into private con to rest upon any adccjuate authorformally consulted him city.on the expediency of giving up an44'^ THE HISTORY OF I'AKTY.CHAP. Throughout his first session Canning's attentionwii , ^ , "^was active and his attendance constant, but he neverA. D. 1793to 1801. spoke ; he was employing himself in the acquisitionof a thorough knowledge of the forms of the house ;and no opportunity, and many offered themselves,could induce him to break his resolution. In January,1794, he made his maiden essay in reply to Fox,upon the subject of the King of Sardinia's subsidy,and elicited applause which sustained but did notincrease his reputation. His oratory, however, improvedas his confidence became established, and hesoon became the greatest master of the declamatorystyle of eloquence that modern times had heard. Hewas a most able and entertaining speaker, with muchacuteness and even subtlety ; with admirable ingenuity,and powers of fancy perhaps never surpassed,clothing his images in rich and even gaudy diction,and casting all his language in sentences exquisitelypolished. With such powers Canning was able tobecome an orator of the highest order: but this hewas not. An orator who remembers himself while heis speaking can never persuade his audience to thinkonly of his subject ; there was, in Canning's oratory,a striving after point, a sacrifice of argument to effecta hurrying over the business parts of the speech, todwell upon passages of brilliancy, all of which tendedgreatly to increase the admiration of the audience,but did not contribute to their conviction. This wasTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 443a splendid specimen of the Asian style of eloquence, chap.rich in ornament, delicate in tissue, and elaborately ~ ^ —A. D. 1795finished, but frequently containing very little sub to iso.stance. No speaker could excel Canning in theaddress with which he shaped his own case, and theunscrupulous dexterity with which he exhibited andcontrasted the propositions to which he was opposed.This declamatory style is little adapted for defence,and Canning, therefore, was most brilliant when deliveringa show speech in the house of commons, aspeech to dazzle the cross benches, and afterwards,when distributed through the country, to allure themany to admire his eloquence and believe his facts.When the rough Whigs attempted to demolish hisairy fabrics, he had a ready and copious tide of wit topour around them, and abundantly stinging sarcasmto launch against their assailants.The character of Canning's oratory was, probably,the produce of his situation, not of his taste. All hisearly sympathies had been given to the cause ofliberty. All his boyhood's efforts had been madeupon that side. After-events discovered that theseearly impressions were never entirely effaced. Whenhe found himself standing in the house of commons,defending, or at any rate engaged to defend, anymeasure upon which a Tory cabinet might resolve,can we wonder that he avoided the strict lines ofargument, that he cultivated a skill lor weaving441" THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, beautiful meshes, or that his eloquence appeared to^ ^^^ ^^'^^ proceed only from his head when he could not vent1801. Jure to trust his heart.I believe that, whatever may have been Canning'sopinions of the isolated acts which he advocated, hehad no love for the general principles whence theysprung. Canning was the second Bolingbroke ofToryism ; he was a Tory from position, but his fundamentalconvictions were those of a Whig. Of allhis party his eyes alone were opened to see the powerof the newly-evoked spirit of public opinion. Tohim alone was it given to see that resistance to thisadversary was vain. He saw as Bolingbroke had seenbefore, that the post which Toryism then held wasuntenable ; and he dragged rather than led her to astronger point, a few paces in advance. But thisappeared afterwards, when he had a voice in thedeliberations upon the measures he defended — nowhe implicitly followed the minister.*As some counterpoise to the advantage gained bythe Tories in the accession of Jenkinsonon and Canning,we may mention the acquisition of Tierney by theWhigs. George Tierney was born at Gibraltar, inI7GI, where his father was then resident as prizeagent, and whence he afterwards retired to Paris• Life of Canning, by Dr. John Edinburgh Review, vols, xxviii.Styles. Memoir by R. Theory, and xxxvii., &c.Esq. Moore's Life of Sheridan.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 445with a handsome fortune. George was educated at chap.Eton, and at Penthouse, Cambridge, where, in 1784, ^ ^ ^^'^^he graduated in laws, and whence he repaired to Ponto iso.don, in order to apply himself to the study of the law.Theme adds another to the continual instances ofmen who have deserted the bar for the senate. Thedeath of three brothers afforded him the means ofgratifying his inclination towards politics. In I788he contested Colchester, a borough renowned for theruinous nature of its contests, and an election committeereported that he was duly elected. In 1790,however, the case was reversed ; his opponent wasreturned, and Tierney's petition was voted frivolousand vexatious. It was said that the Duke of Portlandhad engaged to defray the expense of thissevere contest ; but the arrangement being delayeduntil the duke had changed is party, he chose toforget his promise ; and when Tierney's agent attemptedto refresh his memory by means of a bill inchancery, the chancellor stayed the proceedings uponthe ground of public policy. A sacrifice of twelvethousand pounds was of some importance to a manwho did not look forward to retrieve his losses fromthe public pursy Theme now confined himself topamphlet writing until the general election of 179^),when he was invited to stand for South war. liewas beaten upon the poll, but ousted his antagonistby a petition, and was at length fairly seated in the4i-6 TUF, IIISTOHY OF PARTY.CHAP, house of commons by the operation of the treatingact.A. 1). 1795to 1801. In private ife Tierney is described, by one of hisnoble friends, as delighting his associates by his everready and playful wit, and endearing himself by thepurity of his mind and the kindness and benevolenceof his heart.* In party he was a Whig of the Foxschool, equally removed from Toryism on the onehand or levelling democracy on the other. In thehouse of commons he was the shrewd and sagaciousman of the world. As a speaker he was exceedinglyoriginal and singularly unostentatious. His speecheswere more like colloquial good sense spoken in a parlourthan lofty or studied eloquence uttered in thesenate. His argument was generally sound ; but hisreal power consisted in the cutting sarcasms which,expressed in language level to the most ordinaryunderstandings, escaped from him as if he himselfwere not aware of their terrible effect. Under thesethe most haughty of his opponents frequently winced.There was scarcely another man in the house ofcommons who could provoke Pitt to descend from thepedestal of his dignity .t• Memoir in the New Monthly "Times" and other newspapers,Magazine.for March, 1830, under immediately after Mr. Tourney'sstood to be from the pen of a dis death in 1830 ; from the Annualextinguished Whig nobleman. Obituary for 1830, and from thet This sketch is derived from Memoir already quoted,the notices which appeared in theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 447Sir Francis Burdett also voted in the minority chap.upon this proposition for reform. He had, when very ! —young, become, somewhat unexpectedly, the inherit I801.tor of the ancient baronetcy attached to his family ;and, after the usual routine of education and travel,he purchased, of the Duke of Newcastle, a seat forBorouo-hbridofe. Sir Francis's first effort in the housewas made in seconding a motion made by Fox. Hispresent speech in favour of Mr. Grey's motion, consistingchiefly of commonplaces upon liberty, was hissecond effort ; but he does not appear to have attractedany very great attention by his early speeches, until,with a humanity and perseverance highly honourable,he addressed himself to the exposure of the iniquitoussystem of secret imprisonment under whichPitt and Dundas had now filled all the gaols withparliamentary reformers — men who were cast intodungeons without any public accusation, and fromwhom the Habeas Corpus Suspension act had takenevery hope of redress. The zeal of Sir Francis enlistedin his favour the sympathies of the people ; andthe leading democrats, who quickly perceived theadvantage they might derive from his rank and fortune,advanced him to the head of their party. Atthis time Sir Francis spoke of universal suffrage as asubject for future consideration, but he soon amalgamatedwith his allies. Sir Francis Burdett will probablybe known to posterity rather for the extreme448 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, democracy of his early tenets, and for the power'- '■ — which, nroni])ted by those able men, Home TookeA. D. 179j I I jto 1801. and William Cobbett, he wielded over the populace,than for any traces of superior talent in his speechesin parliament, or for any evidence of ability as a politicianor a legislator.Such were the chief additions made to the roll ofconspicuous public men about this time.The momentous period through which we arcnow passing, studded as it is with scenes of absorbinginterest to the general historian, affords no resting-placeto the elucidator of party principles ; it iscrowded to confusion with events : our business isalmost entirely with opinions. When we have relatedthat the Whigs protested against lavishing theblood of their countrymen, and mortgaging the industryof unborn generations in order to force uponFrance her ancient dynasty of despots, we can onlypass over the struggle that ensued, or repeat inchronological regularity the repetition of their argumentsand their defeats.Pitt had effected what the wildest idolater of corruption,who ever preceded him, would have startedat as an extravagant dream. He had bribed thewhole of the middle class of the country. Never didEngland know such prosperous times, never was theroad to affluence so open. By a species of financialnecromancy, Pitt had called up the produce of theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4(<9labour of their remote descendants, and poured it all CHAP,m lavish wantonness amoncr his contemporaries.° ^ . A.D. 1705Contracts and jobs and pensions, the pebbles which to soi.make up the mountain of our national debt, renderedenormous fortunes rife throughout the nation ; andthese again were partly spent among the lowerclasses in exchange for their votes — in buying seatsby which the heap might be increased. The goldenPactolus which rolled from the treasury had manybranches ; there was not a hamlet in the kingdomso humble, as not to be visited by some streamletfrom the "•htterinsf tide.The state of the Whig party is sufficiently shownby the fact that during the years 1798 and 1799,Mr. Grey, who although naturally possessed of considerablearistocratic feeling had declared in thehouse of commons that rather than have no reform,he would vote for universal suffrage — Mr. Grey, whowas thus determined in favour of reform, abstainedfrom introducing the subject. The Irish rebellionof 1798 produced the union of 1800, a measurewhich was opposed by the; Whigs, on account of theiniquity of the means by which it was attained andthe undisguised detestation of the whole Irish people.During the* discussions on this (question, Mr. (Greymoved that it 1)0 an instruction to the committee totake into their consideration the most effectualmeans of providing for and securing the inde-vol.Ill, '2 a4.)0 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.cilAi'. poiuloncc of parliament. This motion was ratherxvii.directed against Pitt's scheme of Irish representation.nfjjto ISO I. tion than founded on the necessity of parliamentaryreform : it appears to have excited no great interest,and found only 34 supporters.The union with Ireland introduced a new topic ofparty discussion, which quickly became only secondto that of parliamentary reform. In transplantingthe parliament of College Green to St. Stephen's,Pitt had transplanted the questions which were theredebated ; and, of these, none had been more importantthan the demand of the Catholics to beadmitted to the common rights of citizens. Pitt,whose Toryism was rather the imperiousness of ahaughty master, than the cautious cowardice of themiser of power, thought their complaints were just.In his private negotiations with the Irish popularleaders he probably promised that emancipationshould be the sequel to the union. In his place inparliament he certainly gave an intimation, whichfrom the mouth of a minister could receive no secondinterpretation.*Pitt's observations upon this doni, full concessions could besubject are well worthy of in- made to the Catholics without insertion.dangeriiig the state and shaking"No man can say that in the the constitution of Ireland to itspresent state of things, and while centre. On the other hand,Ireland remains a separate king without anticipating the discus-theHISTORY OF PARTY.Pitt was not a minister who governed by pettystratagems, by ambiguous professions, and by skilfulshuffles : he was at least an honourable enemy. Heprepared to fulfil the pledge he had given, and toadmit the Catholics within the pale of the constXVII.A. D. 1795to 1801.sion or the propriety of agitatingthe question, or saying how soon orhow late it may he fit to discuss it,two propositions are indisputable ;Hast ; when the conduct of theCatholics shall be such as to makeit safe for the government toadmit them to the participation ofthe privileges granted to those oftho established religion ; and whenthe temper of the times shall befavourable to such a measure —wlitMi these events take place,it is obvious that such a questionmay be agitated in a unitedimperial parliament with muchgreater safety than it could bein a separate legislature. In thesecond place, I think it certain,that for whatever period it maybethought necessary after theunion to withhold from the Catholicsthe enjoyment of thoseadvantages), many of the objectionswliicli at present arise out of theirsituation would be removed if theProtestant legislature were nolonger separate and local, but<2general and imperial ; and theCatholics themselves would atonce feel a mitigation of the mostgoading and irritating of theirpresent causes of complaint. IIowfar, in addition to this great andleading consideration, it may alsobe wise and practicable to accompanythe measure, by some modeof relieving the lower orders fromthe pressure of tithes which, inmany instances, operate at presentas a great practical evil, or tomake, under proper regulations,and without breaking in on thesecurity of the present Protestantestablishment, an effectual andadequate provision for the Catholicclergy, it is not now necessaryto discuss. It is sufficient to saythat thief and all other subordinatepoints connected with thesame subject arc more likely tobe permanently and satisfactorilysettled by a united legislature,titian by any local arrangements."Pari. List., vol. xxxiv., col.27.'3.r. Q4o'2 TIIK HISTORY OF PARTY.ciiAT. tuition. It lind been better for the character ofGeoriro III. had he imitated the candour of hisA. n. 1795to 1810. minister ; had he told him that he had made a promisehe would not be suffered to fulfil, before he hadobtained the advantage to gain which that promisehad been made. When Pitt ]proposed Catholicemancipation as one of the topics of the king'sspeech, for the session of 1801, the royal negativewas at once interposed, and when Dundas persistedin his attempt to overcome his master's objections,the king abruptly terminated the conference, saying,*' Scotch metaphysics cannot destroy religious obligations"*Pitt immediately tendered his resignation, butremained in office, at the request of the king, untilthe supplies had been voted,# Gifford's Lite of Pitt, vol. iii., p. 037.THE HISTORY OF Tasty. 453CHAPTER XVllI.The Addington administration — Peace of Amiens — Resignation ofMr. Addington — Pitt returns to office — Secession of the GrenvilleDeath of Pitt — Lord Grenville's administration, comprising " Allthe Talents" — The Catholic question — Death of Fox — Consequentministerial arrangements — Dissolution of parliament — Refusal ofthe king to grant indulgence to the Catholics — Dismissal of ministers— Formation of a Tory cabinet under the Duke of Portland —Biographical anecdotes of Spencer Perceval — Of Lord CastlereaghIrish policy of this ministry — Resuscitation of the question ofreform— Curwen's bill— Boldness of Canning and the Tories inresisting every inquiry that might lead to reform — Motion of SirFrancis Burdett — Duel between Canning and Castlereagh — ThePerceval administration — Committal of Sir Francis Burdett to tlifTower — Incapacity of the king— The Regency bill.All that was brilliant in Toryism passed from the chaircabinet with the late minister. When Pitt andCanning were withdrawn, with their satellites, nothing t,) iwicremained of the Tory ]party but the mere courtierswho lived upon the favour of the king, and the insipidlees of tln^ ]party ; uwu who voted upon everysubject in accordance with their mic ruling idea — the454 THE iiiSTOuY of party.CHAP, certain ruin which must follow the first particle ofXVIII. .innovation.A.D. ISO!to 1810, Yet from these relics the king was obliged toform a new cabinet, for application to the Whigs wasout of the question. These were more strenuousfor emancipation than Pitt.* Henry Addington,Pitt's speaker of the house of commons, was theperson upon whom the king's choice fell ; and hesucceeded, with the assistance of the late premier,in filling up the offices at his disposal. We are notnow surprised to find the Duke of Portland gazettedas president of the council in a ministry formed upona triumph of religious bigotry.The peace of Amiens was the great work of thisfeeble administration, and formed a severe commentaryupon the boastings of the Tories. " Unlessthe monarchy of France be restored," Pitt had said,eight years before, " the monarchy of England islost for ever." Eight years of warfare had succeeded,yet the monarchy of France was not restored, andthe crusade was stayed. England had surrenderedAs appeared in the debate emendation (as it was reported itupon the address at the com- would do), to consider of takingmcnccment of the session. "1 off those disabilities to which theshould, indeed, have augured Catholics of Ireland are subject*'more favourably of the union, — Mr. Grci/x Speech on the Ad-hadI found that the speech from dress. Pari. Hist., vol. xxxv., col,the throne contained a recoil 893.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. <t55 Qher conquests, France retained hers ; the land CHAP,marks of Europe had been in some degree restored ; ^ ^^^^^England, alone, remained burdened with the endure iso.ing consequences of the ruinous and useless strife.The peace was approved by the Whigs, who wereglad of any respite from such a war, and by Pitt,who gave his support to the Addington administration.But he could not control his adherents ;Windham stigmatized it as an armed truce, andCanning was only restrained by his personal obligationto Pitt from throwing his weight into theshame scale. Pitt's influence in the house of commonscontinued as great as ever ; and when an ill-advisedmotion was made to censure his administration,an amendment, conveying an express vote ofapproval, was carried by a majority of '211 to 52.As the instability of the peace grew manifest, theincompetency of the administration became generallyacknowledged : with Pitt* sometimes chiding,Windhamt and Canning, and Lords Spencer andGrenville continually attacking, and Pox and theWhigs only refraining from violent opposition from aknowledge that if Addington went out Pitt would be• Sec his spercli on Mr. Tat Kci^istcr wis now in lu-king. Heten's motion.— /V//. //w/ , vol. said that writer merited u statuexxxvi., coi. 1J7(). of gold for his conflict in Anic-•f- A debate in the committee rica ; that lie lead resolutely op-iiithe Military Service hill, intro po-sed all the bad jiriixiplcs wliiehiliuid Mr. W iiidliMiii paiicfiyri/in^ Mr. Fox had s<-'I'l.n m-cil inWilliam Corbett, whose Political ih. hnnsc.'k5() THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, his successor, the conduct of the government wasXVlll. , f. 1 ,by no means an easy or a ffrateiul task to a manA.D. 1804 "^ . .to 1810. destitute of commanding talents. When to theseparliamentary difficulties were added a recommencementof the war, and a popular panic at Bonaparte'sthreatened invasion, Addington's embarrassmentsbecame inextricable. He had performedthe business which Pitt had assigned him ; he hadmade an experimental peace, and had saved Pitt'shonour with the Roman Catholics. The object ofhis appointment he had unconsciously completed,and no sooner did his predecessor manifest an intentionof returning to office, than the ministerialmajorities began to diminish, and Addington foundhimself without support. On the l'2tli of April itwas announced that Mr. Addington had resigned,and Pitt appeared to resume his station as a matterof course.*During his temporary retirement, Pitt had, however,lost one section of his supporters. The Grenvilleparty and the Whigs had gradually approximated,and the former now refused to come into the new• In a memorandum circus these papers in the Pari. Histlated in Ireland, and sent in the vol. xxxv,, col. 906. In the sc-nameof the Marquis Cornwallis, cont, Pitt is alluded to as pledgedPitt promised the Catholics " to not to embark in the service ofdo his utmost to estahhbh their government except on terms ofcause in the public favour, and the Catholic privileges being ob-preparethe way for their finally gained.attaining their objects." SeeTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 457arrangements unless Fox was introduced into the chap.. XVIII.cabinet. To this Pitt offered no objection, but the ~ '- —\ , A.D. 1804king was firm — or obstinate, and Pitt did not consider to iso.the refusal as any insurmountable impediment tohis own resumption of the government. Thechanges, therefore, were not considerable. Pitt,attended by Dundas, now created Lord Melville,Canning and Pluskisson, infused into the cabinetthe talent of which it had been so lamentably deficient; and in the following year, Addington himself,now created Viscount Sidmouth, returned to officewith the subordinate appointment of president of thecouncil.The conflagration had again spread throughEurope. England again strained herself to pulldown the greatness of France, and to arouse, at anysacrifice, the energies of her torpid allies. Butalthough checked upon the ocean by the heroism ofNelson, by land the wonderful man, who now as heremperor guided her destinies, was still omnipotent,and Pitt had the mortification to sec his grand continentalcoalition, the produce of such immenseexpense and the object of such hope, shattered inone campaign. At home, Lord Melville, his mostfaithful political supporter, was attacked by a chargefrom which he could not defend him, and undcrutMitthe impeachment of the cannons for mal practices inhis office as treasurer (•!' the navy. Lord Sidmoufliaid sacral (ither.-? seceded tioiu the cabhict, andK's TIIIC IIISTOHY OF PARTY.CHAP. Pitt, broken in health, and dispirited by reverses,xviii. , , .had lost nuieh ol' his wonted encrp^y.Al). 1804 ^•'to 1810. Thus passed away the year 1805. On the '23dof.lanuary, 180G, Pitt expired. — At a time when thewhole political horizon was enveloped in darkness,when little hope appeared of the ultimate attainmentof his dearest objects, and when the whirl of eventsaround him might well call forth his last patrioticaspiration, " O save my country, Heaven !''Pitt was a man of high ambition and strong lust ofpower ; qualities which, according to the situation ofthe possessor, will make either a patriot or a tyrant.Untainted by the suspicion of a sordid vice, indifferentto the wealth and titles for which his followerswere scrambling, Pitt appeared to move apart fromthe herd of men, and, wrapped in his own dignity, tolook with contempt upon their petty ambition. Hisability was great, but it was inferior to his confidence; that confidence rendered him intolerant ofopposition ; it induced him to undertake an unwise,but, as he evidently thought, an easy project, andto persevere through disasters which would havedeterred any other statesman. Let those statesmenwho hope to gild over disastrous policy byshining talents, peruse the speeches of Windhamand Fox, upon the motion for bestowing upon Pittnational honours.* The deliberate judgments of a• Hansard's Vail. Debates, \o\ Cobbett's Parliamentary History ;vi. We have now taken leave of the most valuable historical workTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 459colleague and an opponent scarcely vary. They CHAP,both deem him unworthy of national latitude, or of•^ f . A.D. 1804the title of an excellent statesman. The veneration to I810.which, in the minds of those who gained fortunes andtitles during his lavish administration, attached to thename of Pitt, is now fast fading. We begin to lookupon him as a statesman whose lofty bearing andpersonal integrity cloaked a system fraught withcorruption and ruin ; and wc abandon his shrine tomen, who, in their anxiety to claim the protection ofsome one historical character, adopt, as their tutelarsaint, a man whose best title to the respect of posterityis, that he opposed their policy and detestedtheir principles.The death of Pitt was the dissolution of his administration.The Tory party was scattered in divisionsand subdivisions innumerable. Canning nowrecognised no political leader, but retained his oldcontempt for Sidmouth and his friends, and his hostilityto the Grenville for their breach with Pitt.Castlereagh, William Dundas, llawkcsbury, or Bar-ham,although sufficiently effective when Pitt waspresent to direct and to defend, would have made ain o\ir language. It requires no the debates of this century as littlelittle resolution to sink a shaft known as those of the time ofinto that solid mass of mixed ore Queen Anne. These voluminousand rubbish which succeeds it, and reports of unimportant debateswhich, however valuable for the will, in time, form rather an em-purposeof detection: individual in- harassing mnnuiiinif of the vanityconsistence, will, perhaps, londrr i>f our Senators.ifH) THE HI STORY OF Inanity.llAP. lifeless figure without him in face of such an opim-XVlll. 1 o ' »^ sition as the house of commons now afforded.A. 1). 1806to 1810. The administration, which was ironically designatedby its opponents as *' All the Talents," succeeded.Lord Grenville was first lord of the treasury. Foxchose the office of secretary for foreign affairs withthe hope of putting an end to the war. Windhamwas colonial secretary. Earl Spencer had the sealsof the home department. Erskine was lord chancellor.Mr. Grey was first lord of the admiralty.Sheridan, treasurer of the navy. Lord Sidmouth wasprivy seal. Lord Henry Petty, who,* although nowonly in his 26th year, had already acquired considerabledistinction as an eloquent Whig speaker, wasadvanced to the post of chancellor of the exchequer,the vacant chair of Pitt.Such were the men who now assumed the reinsunder circumstances of unparalleled difficulty ; theirpolicy detested by the majority with which Pitt hadpacked the house of peers, and themselves in someinstances labouring under the personal antipathy ofthe sovereign. Unfortunately for the popularity ofthese illustrious men, they found a war, which themajority of them had ever deprecated, in full activity,and they did not think fit to copy the ancient precedentsestablished by Tory ministers, of making animmediate peace at any sacrifice. The people, whoTlic present Mantis ol Laiisdowiio.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.expected a prompt reduction of taxation, were disap- CHAP,pointed ; the Tories, who knew how little the king.D. 1806and his ministers agreed upon the Catholic question, to •^•oraised the cry of " No Popery," and Canning, in thehouse of commons, lost no opportunity of attackingthem with all his powers of wit and eloquence.The acts of this administration offer no prominentsubjects of remark ; we may notice, however, thatFox, even under the peculiar circumstances of thetime, did not tamper with his principles of religioustoleration. Knowing that his tenure of office dependedupon the non-agitation of the Catholic claims,he nevertheless stated in reply to a question put tohim in the house of commons, that he was ready toadvocate them, as he always had advocated them,whenever the subject should be brought forward.I have made little mention of the continued contestsupon the abolition of the slave trade, for thatwas not a party question. Pitt and Fox, Sheridanand Canning, Windham and Whitbread, were allagreed upon the principle of this measure. It ispleasing to find it making some real advancementunder this administration ; and to see the kind andoverheated Charles Fox making almost his lastspeech in parliament a successful effort in its favour.This great man did not long survive his rival.When he assumed the duties of office he was evidentlyill a declining state. The onerous labours ofI(^'2 THE IIISTORV OF PARTY.(chap. the house of commons, which he never couhi be .. .11 1 1 r.wailed upon to nitcrmit, and the ceaseless attacks oiA D. 1806to 1810. (^aniiing, and other less worthy antagonists, worehim out. A dropsy, to which medicine could giveno alleviation, made rapid progress ; and his dangerousillness and dissolution were announced in quicksuccession. He expired on the 13th of September,bequeathing to after British statesmen an example ofnoble simplicity of conduct, of high and disinterestedmotives, of comprehensive and liberal policy, and ofactive and zealous philanthropy, which the best andbrightest leaders of future generations may be proudto imitate.The two rival statesmen who had so long dividedthe suffrages of the nation now slept in peace side byside ; and with them passes away that surprisingbrilliancy which gives such interest to the politicalcontests of the North and Pitt administrations.Sheridan, indeed, still remained ; but Sheridan,broken in spirit, involved in inextricable embarrassments,and incapable of that laborious application bywhich his apparently impromptu efforts were alwayspreceded, was no longer the same man who had socruelly lashed Dundas, and had so pertinaciously tormentedPitt. He now appeared as a speaker muchless frequently. His dearest friends and his mostworthy foes were gone, and he now evidently tooklittle interest in party politics.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.By the ministerial arrangements consequent upon CHAP,the death of Fox, Mr. Grey, who, by reason ofA. D. 1806his father having been created Earl Grey, was to iso.now become Lord Howick, succeeded to the vacantsecretaryship. Mr. Grenville received the admiralty ;Tierney succeeded him as president of the board ofcontrol ; and Lord Sidmouth exchanged his office oflord privy seal for that of president of the council.By this arrangement only one cabinet office was leftvacant. This was bestowed upon Lord Holland, thenephew of Fox, who had already, in the house ofpeers, taught those who had sneered at him for hisyouth to respect him for his talent. He had been,for' some time, one of the few Whig noblemen whopersevered in their attendance in the house of lords,and who had so vainly opposed argument and eloquenceto the proxies of Pitt's peers.* The unwaveringconsistency of this eminent member of theWhig party may be applauded even by a contemporary',for the journals of the house of lords are itsvouchers ; but his importance as a party man, andhis powers of light and graceful oratory, cannot be• The possessors of Sir Egerton barons created, by this minister,Bridges's edition of " Colchis's within sixteen years, and whosoPeerage," have a striking example titles were all in l)(;ing when theof the rapidity of Pitt creations, work was piil)lished. — This wasThe eighth vohimc of that work one order of the peerage,consists of an account of sixty-one4r)4THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, historically estimated hv one who sees them in fullXVIII.T^ . operation.A. D. 1806 ^to 1810. A dissolution of parliament followed the completion'of these arrangements, and the Whigs, of course,gained considerably. Sheridan succeeded Fox forWestminster. Mr. Paul, the democrat candidate,was rejected ; and even Sir Francis Burdett, hispatron, having commenced his canvass with a slurupon the memory of Fox,* and a sneer at thepatriotism of Lord lIowick,t was unseated forMiddlesex.In the following year the cabinet of which Foxhad formed so conspicuous a member, perished in anattempt to pursue his policy ; the ministers havingsupposed they had obtained the king's consent, introduceda bill, extending to all British subjects, withoutdistinction of religion, the privilege of serving inthe army and navy. It was vehemently opposed bythe Tories ; but was, nevertheless, carried throughits earliest stages by a considerable majority. At thisjuncture the king interposed, withdrew his consent,insisted that the bill should be abandoned, and requireda pledge from his ministers that they wouldnever advise any similar measure. To such a pledge,• Address to the Middlesex f Speech reported in Cobbett'sElectors, in the " Morning Political Register for 1806, p.Chronicle" for October 29, 180C. 742.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 465as unconstitutional in itself, and inconsistent with chap.Xvii.their oaths as privy councillors, the Whio-s refused '- —° A. D. 1807to subscribe, and, determined that the cause of their to iso.retiring from office should be well defined, they,instead of resigning, waited for a formal dismissal.Under a monarch thus determined in his resolve,and holding in his own hands the majority of thehouse of commons, all interest in party strugglesmust be at an end. It is evident that nothing butarevolution could have procured toleration to theprinciples of the Whigs. Nothing can more clearlyprove the subserviency of the house of commons as atthis time constructed, than that the same assemblywhich had pronounced in favour of the GrenvilleCatholic bill readily turned over to a Tory administration,and refused, by a majority of 32, to vote thatit was contrary to the duties of a minister to restrainhimself by a pledge as to the advice he should offerto the king.The composition of a new ministry was confidedto the Duke of Portland, who replaced Lord Eldonupon the woolsack ; committed Ireland to Karl Camden,and the admiralty to Lord M nigra ve ; appointedLord Castlereagh, Lord Tewkesbury, and Canning,the three secretaries of state, and Mr. Percevalchancellor of the exchequer.Among the members of this cabinet are two menwho require some particular notice, chiefly on .iccoiintvol III. '-? IIAmTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.Cli.vr. of the conspicuous place they successively held as^ -^ . ,,^ leaders of their party. Spencer Perceval, the newA. D. 1807 I J I 'to 1810. chancellor of the exchequer, was born in 1J6% thesecond son of the Earl of Egmont ; he was educatedat Harrow, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, wherehis ability and unwearied assiduity procured himdeserved distinction. In I78I Perceval was calledto the bar, and soon acquired the character of a timorousspeaker, but a diligent lawyer. His professionalsuccess does not appear to have been very great ;since a biographer, who shows every disposition toglorify his memory, does not estimate his income,even after he had been attorney-general, at 3000/.a year.* But Perceval lived at a time when evenmoderate talent was eagerly sought. A clever pamphletupon the question as to the abatement of WarrenHastings's impeachment made him known to Pitt.He received the appointment of deputy recorder ofNorthampton ; and at the next vacancy was returnedto parliament for that borough. In parliament Percevalbecame conspicuous for his extreme horror ofpopery, and his violent advocacy of what the Toriescalled the Protestant interest. These qualities renderedhim dear to his master and useful to the minister.Under the Addington ministry he becamesolicitor-general and attorney-general successively.Gentleman's Magazine, vol. Lxxxii., p. 591.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 467He was now allured, by the offer of the chancellorship CHAP.XVIIIof Lancaster for life, to abandon his profession alto ^1-11 '^•^- ^^^^gether. Mr. Perceval was ready in debate, well to Unacquaintedwith parliamentary tactics, a placid andnot ungraceful speaker, and an excellent man ; butthose who believed a story circulated after his death,to the effect that Pitt, when proceeding to theground on the morning of his duel with Tierney,mentioned Perceval as the only other man who couldcope with Fox, and recommended him as his successorin case he should be killed — must either haveforgotten that Canning had appeared, or must havea poor opinion of the judgment of Pitt. The estimationin which Perceval was held by his party, wasproduced less by his parliamentary ability, in whichhe surpassed very few of his colleagues, than by hisknowTi influence with the king. That influence wasobtained by his conscientious zeal in swelling theshout of " No popery," and his undeviating hostilityto every thing which was disapproved by the establishedchurch.A second member of this administration, havinga])lacc among the minor lights of the Tory party, isLord Castlereagh, the new secretary at war.Lord Castlereagh was born in 17^9, and is saidto have oxhil)itcd, as a boy, many instances of that]personal intrepidity which lie, upon all occasions, in manhood. II(; discovered an early lasl.e'J n '24GsTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.x!vm' ^^^ ^ political life ; and soon after ho became of ageA.D. 1807 ^^^ father spent 30,000/. in obtaining for him a seatto 1810. jjj |.jj^3 li'lsli parliament, for the county of Down.Having gained his election the young noblemanmade his entrance upon this stage as a parliamentaryreformer ; cultivated a friendship v^^ith the most determinedpatriots of that country ; and, if not a member,was certainly an approver and a patron of theSociety of United Irishmen, established at Belfast in179^. It would be vain to speculate upon the causesof the conversion of so sanguine an Irish patriot ; butin1795 we find him seated among Pitt's supportersin the British house of commons, and seconding theministerial address. Having acquired the requisiteexperience under Pitt's tuition, he was, in 1797,again transferred to the Irish parliament, and he wasmade chief secretary to the lord lieutenant. In thissituation he was very active in all the negotiationswhich produced the Irish union, and when the objecthad been accomplished, he returned to England.Under the Addington administration, he obtainedthe post of president of the board of control, whichhe retained when Pitt returned, but relinquished in180.5, for the more honourable office of secretary forthe war and colonial departments. Lord Castlereaghwas a man of considerable ability, a debater of sometact, and a Tory of great determination. In privatelife, he is said to have exhibited unassuming maniTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 469news, simple tastes, and a kind and generous dispose chap.. o 1 XVIII.sition.A. D. 1807During the debates which followed the entrance of to I810.this ministry upon office, the recriminations were hotand frequent. The Whigs accused the Tories ofhaving bought their return to power by a sacrifice ofthe constitution. The Tories replied, "No popery!"and designated the Whigs as persons under the controlof the White-boys of Ireland.* " Concessions,"said Perceval, " only serve to keep Ireland in an unsettledstate. There is only this alternative, to establishthe Catholic church in Ireland, or to preservethe Protestant establishment in its full streno'th."tThe difference between the last and the present administrationwas well drawn by a speaker upon themotion for approving the conduct of the Grenvilleadministration. " There was," he would admit,much shrewdness, great dexterity, and considerabletalent among the present administration. Butas to those great and commanding qualities whichshould characterize the government of a country,maintaining the pre-eminent situation that this did,they were removed from their predecessors to an incalculabledistance"!The persevering resolution of the king in refusingAmiiial KogistcT for 1807, p. f Hansard's Debates, vol. ix,,152. Haiisiml's Debates, vol. ix., c«l. n-20.col. ;i01. I il)itl., Mil. ix., rol. .JDJ.170 THE HISTORY OI" I'AllTY.CHAP, to hear of any proposition of Catholic emancipation,had reduced Ireland to a state bordering on rebelsD. 1807 . . • J 1to 1810. lion; and serious apprehensions were entertained, thatif any body of French troops should effect a landingin that island they would be joined by the great massof the population. This ministry, instead of a measureof conciliation, inflicted a Coercion bill, disarmingthe people in the disaffected districts, and directingthe arrest of those who should be found out oftheir houses between sunset and sunrise. That billwas introduced upon the motion of Sir A. Wellesley,and bore his name — a name which was not yet knownto England as her second and her greater Marlborough.Since all ideas of concession were repudiated,this measure was, doubtless, become necessary, andSir Arthur Wellesley's bill was well adapted to theobject proposed — that of ruling Ireland by the sword.In the session of 1808 several distinct casesbrought forward by the Whigs, of interference withthe independence of electors seemed to promisesome resuscitation to the question of reform. Thesecomplaints received importance from the contemporaneousaccusations against the Duke of York,and from a general sentiment which now prevailed,that every department of the government wascrowded with abuses. While the feeling was yetfresh, Mr. Curwen, an old Whig member, broughtforward a bill, not lor altering the representation, butTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 471for discouraging bribery, and suppressing the at pre chap.sent notorious marketing for seats, by imposing an — ^ '- —. ' , ^ ° A.D. 1807oath upon the sitting member. The arguments to iso.against the introduction of this measure were fromWindham, that it was a project of parliamentary reform,and from Mr. Perceval, that it held out tothe people hopes of reform that would never be realized.The latter, nevertheless, consented to its introduction,reserving his opposition to its futurestages.Mr. Curwen's bill was aided by a charge broughtby Mr. Haddocks against Perceval and Castlereagh,of having compelled Mr. Quintain Dick, whosat for a treasury borough, to resign his seat in consequenceof his known intention to vote against theDuke of York during the late inquiries into his conduct.Into this charge the Tories refused to enter.Canning denouncing it as the first step towards parliamentaryreform, and calling upon the house tomake a determined stand against the encroachmentsof the factious. A majority of 310 to 85, encouragedthe ministers to continue to deride the idea ofpurity of election.The disclosures and consequent agitation whichhad taken place were, nevertheless, productive ofsome fruits. Mr. Curwen's bill, after sufrciiiig coii-llaiiijard's UubaU-s, vol. ix., cul. .V20.17'2 THE IIISTOIIY OF PARTY.CHAT-^idiM-ablo initiation* from the hands of the Tories,was suffered to pass into a law, and the words^•D 1807 . . 11 1to 181U. parliamentary reform were attain occasionally heard mparliament. Sir Francis Burdett at last reproducedthe question before the house. The plan which SirFrancis submitted, included — the extension of thesuffrage to all who were subject to direct taxation —the subdivision of counties into districts according tothe number of electors ; the votes of each district tobe taken by the parish officer upon one and thesame day, and — that parliament should be broughtback to a constitutional duration.These propositions Sir Francis enforced in aspeech of considerable length, bearing marks ofcareful preparation ; and he was seconded by Mr.Haddocks. But the debate which ensued is by nomeans of important interest. The house was soevidently hostile to the mover, that Perceval felthimself able to treat the motion with levity, andexcused himself from replying at any great length,Windham said that the bill proposition to change its title towas so completely changed, that " A bill for more effectually preman who had voted against it in venting the sale of seats in par-thefirst instance might incur a lament for money, and for pro-chargeof inconsistency in voting noting a monopoly thereof toagainst it when it came out of the treasury, by means of pa-committee.Lord Folkestone ac tronagc." — Pari. Deb,, vol. xiv.,tully divided the house upon a col. 1015.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.from an apprehension " lest he might thereby chap.raise the plan of the honourable baronet into an im importancewhich it did not deserve." There were no ' ^^ /gjo.illustrious names among the Whigs who spoke, togive it splendour. Of those who had mingled asequals with Fox and Burke, Sheridan was grownindolent and silent, and Lord Howiek, as Earl Grey,had taken his seat among the peers.* Whitbread,Tierney, and the ^\^ligs, could not forget that thepresent mover had profaned the memory of Fox,and had ridiculed the patriotism of his survivingfriend. A line of conduct which would probably havebeen treated with disregard by Earl Grey, was resentedby his friends : the Whigs absented themselves; and Sir Francis obtained but fifteen votes infavour of his motion.The present administration of the Duke of Portlandwas terminated by a dispute between LordCastlereagh and ]mr. Canning. Canning thinkingCastlereagh unequal to the war department, a judgmentwhich the disastrous expedition to W^alcherenin this year too fatally confirmed, had demanded hisdismissal, and had received a promise that he should• Earl Grey succeeded his the peers, having been createdfather in his peerage, November Lord Hawkcsbiiry in November,14, 1807. On the other side, 1808, and succeeding his fatherJenkinsonon, the early friend of in the earldom of LiverpoolCanning, was also seated among within a month after his creation.474 THE HISTORY OF TAllTY.CHAP, be removed, so soon as it could be done upon termswhich would be satisfactory to himself. LannintrA. D. 1807to 1810. disapproved the delay, but continued to transactbusiness with Castlereagh, who had no intimationof what had taken place. At length, Canning grewimperative ; the Duke of Portland found he couldnot fulfil his promise and resigned. Castlereaghdiscovered what had been arranged, threw up hisappointment, called Canning to an account, andwounded him in a duel. Canning also resigned,and the administration was thus dissolved.*The Tory party appeared now so destitute of menof eminence to form a ministry, that proposals weremade to Lords Grey and Grenville to coalesce withPerceval. But to these statesmen the terms uponwhich the late ministry had been appointed were aninsurmountable objection : they refused to treat.Perceval, therefore, received the high office, andthe Marquis of Wellesley, the Earl of Liverpool,Lord Palmerston, and Mr. Ryder, were his principalassociates. Lord Eldon and several others of theold ministers retained their appointments.At the meeting of parliament, in January 1810,the Perceval administration was fully formed, and itsoon appeared that the house of lords would now beThe correspondence upon be read in all the periodicals ofthis subject, and especially Can the time,king's letter to Earl Camden, maTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 475the theatre of the severest conflict. Not that the CHAP.minister had any cause to fear the numbers of theAMiigs in that assembly ; but they had there arrayed ' to iso.against them all the remains of the Augustan age ofBritish eloquence — Grey, Grenville, Erskine, withHolland and Lansdowne,* who, although they hadnot fought as equals with the great men of the lastgeneration, had arisen in turn to kindle theirtorches from theirs — these men now from the oppositionbenches of the lords, pointed their indignanteloquence against the weakness, the incapacity, andthe bigotry of this administration, and, save theEarl of Liverpool, could find none to answer thembut by their votes.The subject of the debates in the lords were generallythe conduct of the war, and the causes of disasters; but the commons soon found means to embroilthemselves with the people. When the ministrywere compelled to grant some species of inquiryinto the expedition to the Scheldt they alsodetermined to close the strangers' gallery during theinvestigation. Sheridan, Lord Folkestone, Tierney,and the rest of the Whigs, assisted also by SirFrancis Burdett, protested against this proceeding,and proposed to modify the standing order. Pcr-• Lord Hairy Pi-tty succccdftl his Itrotlicr jus Marquis of Lansdownein 1H09.ij6 THE Historic OF PARTY.CHAP, coeval persevered, and was aided by Windham, who'— tlioiio-ht the maintenance of the standing order proa.D. 1807 " 1 • 1 1 Jto 1810. tested the nation from that despotism which had solately desolated other countries. Windham spokeof the contributors to the daily press as bankrupts,lottery office keepers, footmen, and decayed tradesmen,and of the press itself as an engine always tobe purchased by the highest bidder. Windham,like his great Apollo, Burke, when it was his cueto speak Toryism, soared beyond all bounds, andleft the regular professors of the creed in admirationat his superior boldness. Upon this occasion, Percevalavailed himself of his aid, and negatived Sheridan'smotion, but he did not repeat Windham'sanathema against the press.John Gale Jones, the president of a debatingsociety, held a discussion, and published some resolutionsupon this debate, and the Tories of the houseof commons thought it consistent with their dignityto call him to their bar and commit him to Newgate.This Mr. Gale Jones was a person of considerableauthority among the frequenters of the British forumand similar institutions ; and now that his importancebecame increased by the persecution of the commons,his popularity threatened to eclipse that of moreestablished demagogues. Sir Francis Burdett preventedthis : he delivered in the house of commonsa speech denying the power of the commons to com-THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 477mit to prison any but their own members ; but find CHAP., . , ^ , . . XVIII.ma: only thirteen members to support rum m soflagrant an attack upon the existence of the house, to iso.he repeated his arguments in a letter to his constituents,published in " Cobbett's Weekly Register,"and this letter being brought before the house, hewas ordered to the Tower.The offence of Sir Francis Burdett was indisputable.The power of committal in the commonsis essential to their efficiency ; but it is a powerwhich will not bear to be imprudently or violentlyused, or to be exercised at all by an assembly inwhich the people have not confidence. Crowds surroundedthe house of Sir Francis, who affected toresist the warrant by force, and barricaded hisdoors. Twenty police officers, assisted by detachmentsof cavalry and infantry, were necessary toexecute the warrant. Burdett still resisted ; and lestthe theatrical display should be incomplete, the constables,when they broke into the house, found himteaching his infant son to read and translate MagnaCharta. As he was borne along to the Tower, thecrowds assembled attacked the soldiery ; pistol-shots• The Whigs also voted for the pressed himself anxious to rescuerelease of Jones, but upon a tithe house from its contest withfervent principle. He had, before the British i'orum. — Purl. l)c-the house, expressed contrition bales, vol. xv.for his offence, and Sheridan THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, were fired on each side, and the troops did not re-turn from their ungrateful (City without a sanguinaryA. D. 1807 , . Ato 1810. conflict in which several people were slain. A moreuseless, or unnecessary provocation of a scene ofcarnage does not occur in our history.Sir Francis brought an action against the speaker ;and being defeated, thus had the merit of formallyestablishing the important principle of the constitutionwhich he had attacked.During this session no other subject obtained attentionexcept the imprisonment of Sir Francis Burdett.The Whigs made motions against sinecures,*for Catholic emancipation, t and for parliamentaryreform ;t but neither of these questions had anychance within doors, and the whole attention withoutwas monopolized by the democratic party.In November the parliament which lay underprorogation, was suddenly called together by the illnessof the king, whose grief, occasioned by the deathof his youngest and favourite daughter, had produceda recurrence of the malady that had before suspendedhis reason. A repetition of the contests which hadtaken place in I788 now took place. Perceval, whofeebly sustained the part of Pitt, was armed with aBy Mr. Bankes. 234 to 115. The minority is in-f By Grattan. The division creased this year, because the pro-was213 to 109. position was such as the WhigsX By Mr. Brand. Division could vote for.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4<79precedent, and the celebrated answer of the prince, cHAP.• • XVIIIformerly composed by Burke, was again brought into 1use by Sheridan. The claim of right, so imprudently ' to I810.advanced by Fox, was not, however, renewed. Experienceof what had before occurred, and the expectationsof recovery held forth by the physicians,rendered the opposition feeble. The principal restrictionsupon the authority of the regent were tocease in February, 1812 ; and, satisfied with thisearly period, the Whigs appeared contented to letthe bill pass.At the passing of this Regency bill, the reign ofGeorge III. may be said to have terminated.Henceforward George IV. reigned, although forsome years under the title of a regent.At the death of George II. we took a review of along period of Whig rule. The term of Toryism isnot yet accomplished ; but the fifty years which haveelapsed since the death of that monarch, and duringwhich the Tories, if not in the commons, yet in thepeers and in the court, have been uniformly dominant,offer a retrospect unhappily contrasting with the picturewe then drew. The burdens of the countryincreased to an amount which our forefathers wouldhave deemed incredible, and their descendants findalmost intolerable ; the heroism of our countrymenshining as it always has done, yet without any per-4S0 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ceptiblc effect ; the nation still involved in a warXVIIIwhich threatened its existence, and committed to aA.D. 1807 . . 11to 1810. dispute with a maritime power which was then dependent,but was now a rival — and all these contestscommenced against the opposition of the Whigs, fortyranny in America and despotism in Europe — thesewere the effects of Tory influence upon our foreignand colonial policy. At home we have to view along period of popular discontent restrained by treason— trials, and military slaughter ; or of popularapplause gained by universal corruption ; the suspensionof the safeguards of English liberty; thecontinuance of religious discord; the undisguiseddisaffection of Ireland; and the accumulation ofabuses which clogged every wheel of government ;a penal code the most bloody in Europe; and a governmentthe most expensive that history had everknown — these were the effects of the reign of aTory monarch, who was lauded by the Tory partyas the best of kings, and who was, in his privaterelations, moral and respectable man.If we compare the characters of George II. andGeorge III., we shall seek in vain for the superiorityin that of the former, which rendered his reign soprosperous, while that of his successor was so disastrous.The solution of the problem must be soughtin the principles of their government. Under theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.one monarch, the counsels of the nation were di chap.XVIII.erected by "Whigs, who guided the progress oi"r~p; — ~~liberty, under the other by Tories, who in attemptingto extinguish liberty gave birth to licentiousness.VOL. III. 2 I48'.^THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XIX.Views of the two parties — The Prince Regent abandons the Whigparty — Lord Morpeth's motion for Catholic emancipation — RobertPeel — Refusal of the Whigs to coalesce with the Tory ministry —Assassination of Perceval — Ministerial negotiations — The Liverpooladministration— Canning's motion for Catholic emancipation — Conclusionof the war — Revival of popular interest in domestic questionsScarcity and riots of 1716 — Suspension of the Habeas Corpus actCoercion bills — Massacre at Manchester. — Indignation of thepeople — Shared by the Whigs— Castlereagh's Six Acts — Lord JohnRussell's motion on the subject of parliamentary reform — Death ofGeordie Il'o^Chap That very ambiguous phrase, " the British con-xix.'- — situation," has two distinct meanings ; and its inter.D. 1810 . , , , p ,to 1820. relation must depend upon the party oi the personby whom it is pronounced. In the mouth of a Whigit is a democracy tempered, but not controlled, bythe prerogatives of a sovereign and the interventionof an aristocracy — in the mouth of a Tory, since theaccession of the house of Hanover, it is an aristo-theHISTORY OF PARTY.483 Icrack fortified with all the prerogatives of the crown, CHAP,and tempered, but not controlled, by the admixture — ^—^ —\ -^ A. D. 1810of a portion of popular influence.* to i8-20.According to the Tory idea of perfection the constitutionwas now perfect. The peers, by virtue oftheir nomination boroughs, could direct the exerciseof the prerogative ; and, with the sovereign's assistance,they could command a majority in the house ofcommons ; yet there was still a strong minorityreturned to that house by the popular voice, whichhad an influence on its deliberations although it couldnot direct its decisions.The Whigs, of course, thought the British constitutiondestroyed ; and they had decided upon themeasures necessary to its restoration. These were,by stripping the aristocracy of their nomination boroughs,to restore the democracy of the house ofcommons, and by depriving the church of its monopolyof political power, to further weaken the aristocracyby diminishing the political influence of its(after the house of commons) most powerful engine.practically, therefore, it was, by the Whigs, deemednecessary to the restoration of the constitution, that• Many theorists amused tlicm- occasionally talked of our l);ilaii(((lselves with the idea of an inipos- constitution, lout ucitlicr li;is everbible equipoise of power ; lull I .ictcd will ;i view to jilting thededuce the principles of the parties scales exactly even,from their ruts. \v.h-\\ party has'2 I <Z484" THE HISTORY or party.CHAP, a repeal of the Test aet, an emancipation of the Catholics,and a reform in parliament, should take place.A.D. KMOto 1820. It was upon these questions that the parties reallycontended. It is to the progress and conclusion ofthese contests that we must now hasten.The Prince of Wales had been long associatedwith the Whigs, because they had long opposed hisfather's government. From that party he had receivedprotection and derived consequence, and whilehe placed himself under the guidance of Fox heavowed himself " a party man." But of the principlesof his party he probably knew little, and liked stillless.When the Regency bill had passed, the princeintrusted Lords Grenville and Grey with the task ofdrawing up his answer to the address of the housesof parliament. One of the embarrassing consequencesof coalition now appeared. In the discussions uponthe regency question in 1789, these political allieshad been opponents ; and it was a necessary, butvery difficult, part of their commission, to preservethe consistency of the prince and Earl Grey, withoutpalpably betraying that of Lord Grenville. Thisdifficulty, the answer submitted to the prince did notvery skilfully surmount, and his royal highness objectedto almost every part of it. Sheridan then, bycommand of the prince, drew up a second answer,and he and Mr. Adam were sent with the new draftTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 485to Holland House. A warm discussion ensued; Sheri CHAP.XIX.dan's answer was adopted : but Lords Grey and -—^ ' •' A. D. 1811Grenville presented a joint representation to the to i82u.king, severely reflecting upon Sheridan's interference.This remonstrance was quite sufficient to disgustthe prince with Whiggism. Counsellors were notwanting to strengthen his displeasure, and after allowingthem to go on for some time in daily expectationof their dismissal, he at length, to thesurprise of the Tories, signified to Perceval andhis colleaofiies his resolution of retaining: them ashis ministers.During the debates of this year many instancesoccurred to exemplify the impunity with whichinjustice may be committed under the Tory constitution.Sir Francis Burnett Mr. Brougham, andColonel Wardle brought the sulycct of militaryflogging before parliament. Colonel Wardle detailedthe case of a man, who being found guilty of speakingdisrespectfully of his colonel was sentenced to receive1000 lashes. When ho received his sentence hewas so weak that he was obligcul to Ix; supported atthe halberds, and having received '200 strokes wasconfined to the hospital under the endurance of excruciatingagony from August to November, whenhe was offered th(! alternative of hoeing taken ti»rth tobe again mangled, or to scivc for life in ;i condciuntMl4Sr> Tiff, IIISTOKY OK Tasty.CHAP. ro«»imont in the West Indies. Rather than expireXIX.-' — under the lash he chose the latter punishment. OutA.D. 1811 ^to 18-20. of the whole house of commons no member could befound to second Colonel Wardle's motion for inquiryinto this horrible case except the colonel of the regimentin which it had taken place. He was confidentthat no more had been done than was necessaryto military discipline. Such an atrocitymight have occurred under the Whigs, but thatparty would not have had the boldness to refuse aninquiry.While Perceval and his party continued in power,the progress of any one of the three Whig measurescould not be expected. The complaints of Irelandcould not be stifled, but they were punished, andWellesley Pole's efforts in this way form the frequentsubject of parliamentary discussion. The Catholicquestion was brought forward by the Earl of in the lords, and Grattan in the commons,but both motions were rejected by large majorities.*The question of parliamentary reform fared• Lord Sidmouth introduced a with petitions against it. Lordsbill to amend the act of Tole Holland and Erskine powerfullyration, by placing restrictions enforced these petitions, and evenupon the licences of dissenting the Archbishop of Canterburyteachers. But the dissenters im and Lord Eldon, although highlymediately took the alarm ; and the approving of the bill, thought ittable of the house was covered unwise to press it.ITHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 487Ino better, and it was evident that the Tory ministry CHAP,of Perceval, and the once ^yhlg Prince of Wales ^ ^ ^^^^were now thoroughly consentient. to ^^-^•Early in 1812 an important attempt was made toachieve Catholic emancipation. The regent was understoodto be favourable to the measure, and it wasimagined that upon this subject he and his newfriends might disagree. The motion was broughtforward in the commons by Lord Morpeth. Duringthe debate some wavering was observable in theTory ranks. Canning, who had always treated thequestion as one of expediency, although he stillvoted with the Tories, began to prepare the way forachange. " When," he said, "I look to the presentstate of Ireland, with a great and growing population— a population growing not in numbers onlybut in wealth and intelligence, and aspiring fromwhat they have already tasted of freedom, to a moreenlarged and etjual enjoyment of privileges fromwhich they are still excluded ; when I consider thatto this situation they have been gi-actually raisedfrom a condition wherein no class of people had everbefore been placed by the laws of a Christian country;I cannot think it probable that in this situation theyshould long contentedly continue : neither can Ithink it wis(^ if it were practicable, to dctcnuiiieupon permanently shutting tiiein out from the paleTIIK HISTORY OF rARTY,rump. of the constitution'' Even Wellesley Pole, afterA D iso setting forth at full length the violent things theto 1820. Catholics had said against him, in return for his proclamationsand prosecutions, as his reason for votingagainst them, found it expedient to conclude with apromise, that if at any time he should see a propertemper and disposition actuating the body of theCatholics, he should be the last man in the house tooppose their pretensions. A speaker also, who wasoften alluded to in the debate as a young member, andwho had recently appeared among the Tory party,declared that although he then gave his vote againsta motion, which in the present instance was, at least,unnecessary, he would by no means pledge himselfwith regard to the Catholic question. This wasRobert Peel, the future leader of the Tory party,the future instrument of the triumph of the greatquestion which he now opposed : a man, who in parliamentarytact and thorough knowledge of thehouse of commons, yields to no Tory chief who haspreceded him ; who in eloquence yields only tothose of the highest order, and who, had he beentrusted by his party in council, as he has been reliedon by them in action, would probably have obtainedfor them a long monopoly of power ; yieldingPari. Debates, vol. xxi., p. 230.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 489gradually, but gracefully, to the force of public opi- chap.non, and even wresting from the Whigs the honourA. D. 1812of those reforms which were the natural offspring of to 1820.their exertions. J\Ir. Peel was already a man far inadvance of his party ; a man whose intellect and politicalviews belonged to the same class as those ofPitt and Canning.The sentiments of the Tory party are, however,rather to be read in the speech of the premier. '* Ihave before said, and I see no reason to alter myopinion, that I could not conceive a time or anychancre of circumstances which could render furtherconcession to the Catholics consistent with the safetyof the state"* This was the speech which drewforth the loudest cheers from the treasury benches,and formed the theme of no popery sermons, andthe rallying cry of no popery mobs. This wasrecognised as orthodox Toryism.The Whigs were not wanting in argument oreloquence. Lord George Grenville powerfullycontrasted the demeanour of the Catholic withthe petulance of his persecutor. Sheridan laughedat the absurdity of a man's violently abusinganother for incivility of language, and Whitbreadfixed with considerable ]pertinacity upon the inconsistenciesof Canning. " Is this," he said,• Pari. Achates, vol. xxi., p. 663.\,[)0 TIIK IIISTOliy OF PARTY.Chai "really the man who has hitherto been the enemyof the Catholic claims — who when in office distant.D. 1812 . ,.lo 18J0. (Wished himself as the strenuous opposer ot Catholicconcession — who concurred in the vote which wentto disqualify a Catholic from being a bank director inIreland — who was of opinion with his late colleaguesthat it was dangerous for a Catholic to become anadmiral or a general ? Alas ! such is the inconsistencyof human nature, this is the very man'*Other speakers showed the insufficiency of replyingto a demand for justice that the claimant was importunateand loud; and Grattan protested againstthe protection of the established church being madethe pretext for refusing liberty to Ireland. *' Thechurch," he said, *' was not made for the ministry orthe king, but for the people. It had been thoughtproper to give the religious establishment of Englandto the people of Ireland ; in which, perhaps,they were right : but they were wrong if they imposedupon the people of Ireland the English churchand then made that a reason for disqualifying themfrom the enjoyment of their rights. Was it to besaid that the establishment of the English churchwas not compatible with the liberties of the people ?'*On the division, Lord Morpeth's motion was rejectedby a majority of 229 to 135.The expression of Tory sentiments made by Percevalupon this occasion, instead of precipitating hisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 491dismissal, was followed by the communication before CHAP.XIX.alluded to, which was made thrush the Duke of . ^ ,,.;'=' A. D. 1812York, and at the same time expressed an anxiety to 1820.that Lords Grey and Grenville should be includedin future arrangements. The consequent propositionmade to these noblemen was rejected. Disclaimingall personal exclusion, they, however, replied, thattheir differences of opinion where too great and tooimportant to admit of union ; they alluded to theopinions of the present ministers upon the Catholicquestion, and added, *' To recommend to parliamenta repeal of the disabilities under which so large a portionof his majesty's subjects still laboured, on accountof their religious opinions, would be the firstadvice which it would be their duty to offer to theprince regent ; nor could they, for the shortest time,make themselves responsible for any further delay inthe proposal of a measure with which they could entertainno hope of making themselves useful to hisroyal highness, or to the country"*The Whigs being thus impracticable, Percevalfound a more congenial ally in Sidmouth, who tookoffice as president of the council, and introduced hisparty.Meanwhile Grattan again brought forward theCatholic suction, and Canning not only spoke, but• New Aiiiiuul Register for lyi'i.4i)'2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, voted in favour of the motion ; ]public interest be-xix.~ — came fixed upon the subject, and the division wasA.D. 18P2 ^ ''to 1820. 300 to 215.In May this administration was destroyed by theassassination of its chief, who was shot by a crazybankrupt as he entered the lobby of the house ofcommons. The private worth of this unfortunatestatesman neither Whigs nor Tories disputed ; andwhen it was stated that he had died poor, both partiesagreed to grant 2000/. a year to his widow, and50,000/. to his children. When, however, the Toriesthought this insufficient and proposed an additionalpension to his sons, the Whigs resisted the grant asonly to be justified by services very different fromthose which Perceval had performed. The Toriesnevertheless persevered and obtained a party triumph.The Tories are a grateful party ; the posthumous rewardsobtained by them for Perceval were nearlyequal to those with difficulty obtained by the Whigsfor Chatham ; yet, what historian will ever placethese names together, except for the purpose ofstrong contrast ? Who now dissents from the judgmentpassed upon Perceval in the house of lords byhis colleague the Marquis of Wellesley? " Withallmy respect for the virtues and excellencies ofthe late minister," said that nobleman, " I still feelit my duty to say that I did not consider him a fitman to lead the councils of this great empire."THE HISTORY OF PARTY.Upon the death of Perceval, Lord Liverpool was, ^^ix^*in the first instance, authorized by the prince regentA. D. 1812to form an administration. The earl's first applicant ^^-^•tion was to Lord Wellesley and Mr. Canning ; butthese influential men, finding that Lord Castlereaghwas to retain the secretaryship for foreign affairs andthe lead in the house of commons, and that theCatholic question was still to remain unsettled, refusedto treat. When this failure became known, anaddress was carried by a small majority against ministers,praying the prince regent to appoint an efficientadministration. The arrangements were nowconsigned to the Marquis Wellesley, who undertookto construct a coalition government upon the principlesof moderate concession to the Catholics, and thevigorous prosecution of the war in the peninsula.With Wellesley, however. Lord Liverpool and theTories refused to treat, and Earl Grey and the \VTiigswere still deliberating, when the commission of themarquis was withdrawn. An attempt to form a cabinet,of which Lords Grey and Grenville should namefour members out of twelve, was of course unsuccessful; these noblemen rejecting a compromise whichexcluded their principles. The marquis expressedin the house of lords his deep regret that the mostdreadful personal animosities, the most terrible difficulties,arising out of (questions the most complicatedand important, should have interposed obstacles to4<)4THE HISTORY OF PARTY.*"\V\^' pi'^^'vont that. aiTaiio-ement vvliich was so desirable tor^ P jj^j., the interests and welfare of the country.to 18-20. It was plain that the prince regent avoided all intimateconnexion with his ancient friends, and wasunwilling to admit them into any cabinet in whichhe should not have sufficient power to control theirconduct. He afterwards, through Lord Moira,offered them more extensive powers; but refusing togive them power over those great offices of the courtwhich, if occupied by opponents, take from a ministryall character of efficiency and stability ; this overturewas also declined.*On the 8th of June Lord Liverpool rose in hisplace in the house of lords, and stated that he hadaccepted the appointment of first commissioner of thetreasury. The arrangements were soon completed.Eldon, lord chancellor ; Harrowby, president of thecouncil ; Westmoreland, lord privy seal ; Vansittart,chancellor of the exchequer ; Melville, first lord ofthe admiralty ; Mulgrave, master-general of theIt appears, however, that a appointments was the result of anknowledge of the confidence re- intrigue set on foot by Sheridan,posed in Sheridan by the prince and of which Lord Moira becameregent, and a well-founded distrust the dujjc. — Sec Moore s Life ofof the sincerity of the proposals Sheridan — and the Correspondencemade to them, had equal effect dining those involved negotiationsupon the Whigs. Even the rupture in the Slate Papers for 1812.upon the article of the householdTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 495ordnance ; Sidmouth, home secretary ; Castlereagh, CHAP.foreign secretary ; Earl Bathurst, colonial secretary ;the Earl of Buckinghamshire, president of the board to iso.of control ; and the Marquis of Camden, who heldno office — these were Lord Liverpool's colleagues inthe cabinet. Without, his chief supporters wereLord Palmerston, secretary at war ; Mr. Robinson,treasurer of the navy, and Mr. Peel, secretary forIreland.The Perceval administration has been mentionedwith regret by the Tories even of the present day,as the last administration formed upon pure Protestantprinciples. That of Lord Liverpool wasformed upon the understanding that the question ofCatholic emancipation should be an open question.The effects of this relaxation of ministerial disciplinewere immediately visible. Scarcely were the ministersappointed when Canning moved a resolution,that the house would, in the next session, take intoconsideration the laws affecting the Roman Catholics,introducing his motion with one of those brilliantspeeches, radiant with all the force and beauty of hisearly feelings, which always carried captive the mindsof his audience when he spoke upon this subject. Inthe constantly repeated debates upon the Catholicquestion, others repeated the same ideas, and retrotheir old track ; but Canning was always Drigiiial ;his fruitful mind appeared to teem with arguments in49(3 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, favour of that religious liberty which he now defended.XIX.~ Of him alone can it be said that, upon this loner con.D. lyi-j -Jto 18-20. tested question, he never repeated himself. LordCastlereagh now used his freedom to redeem thepledge he had been the first to give and break ; andupon the division the numbers appeared 9,55 to 106in favour of the resolution.In the following week the same question was introducedinto the house of lords by the MarquisWellesley ; to the horror of Lord Eldon, who said,that, while fighting side by side with that noblemarquis he had entertained little suspicion that suchopinions as these existed in his mind. Of the cabinetministers Lords Harrowby, Mulgrave, Camden,and Melville, spoke in favour of the motion ; andLords Liverpool and Sidmouth against it. The motionwas lost by one proxy, the numbers being 12Gto 125.After such an unequivocal recognition of the Catholicclaims by the commons, and so very equivocala refusal of them by the lords, the question mighthave been considered as decided, as only awaitingthe next opportunity for its final arrangement.But a long interval must still elapse beforethe Catholic could taste the cup which appeared tobe almost at his lips. To the session of 1812 succeededa general election ; and the zeal of the clergy,calling forth the reprimand even of one of their ownTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 497bishops, and the exertions of the high Tories, had chap.made the "No popery" cry productive. In the ' ^'IA D I S 12next year, when Grattan introduced a bill granting a to Incomprehensiblemeasure of emancipation, the resolutionupon which it was founded was carried in thecommons, after a debate of four days, by a majorityof but 40. The bill was introduced and passedthrough the early stages. In the committee, however,the speaker threw all his weight and abilityinto the scale against it ; declared that if that billpassed, the crovm itself might become Catholic, andmoved the omission of the clause by which Catholicswere admitted to parliament. Upon a division hesucceeded by a majority of four, and the bill was immediatelyabandoned.Thus did the coveted success vanish from the Catholicsas they attempted to clutch it. The brightnessof their prospects had proceeded from thedangerous state of Ireland during the supremacyof Napoleon, and the general belief as to the sentimentsof the prince regent, rather than from any realprogress of liberal principles in the nation. Thedisastrous issue of the invasion of Russia had destroyedthe former motive to conciliation ; and morerecent observation of the inclinations of the princehad removed the latter. With the moment of dangerpassed away the idea of concession. 'I'lu^ Torieswere again strong and intolerant ; and the advocatesVOL. iir. 2 K498 THE HISTORY Ol' Party.CHAP, of Catholic emancipation became again a small mi-xix.noritv in the Icirislaturc. W' hile the armies of theAn. isi-2 •' ^^ 1 1 • •to 18-20. allies were marching upon Pans, and were achievingthe triumph of Toryism in the restoration of theBourbons, the popular exultation was too great toallow even a momentary interest to mere domesticquestions ; and the great events which ensued, andwhich were terminated by the battle of Waterloo,sustained the excitement, and fixed it upon externalobjects.A. D. 1815. The termination of the mighty struggle, whichso few of the great men who were flourishing atits commencement had survived to see decided, wasindeed glorious to us as a nation ; but even glorymay be too dearly bought. In a war commenced,from no dictates of sound policy, but from the meremotive of humouring a Tory king and vindicating aTory principle, we had spent energies that should havebeen reserved for some crisis of extreme necessity,and had made efforts which can never be repeated.The success and ambition of Napoleon, which wasfound so ready and so valuable an excuse for thelater periods of this war, can afford none for its commencement,of which they could not be the cause,but were probably the effects.During this year the nation was deprived ofSamuel Whitbread, whose brain reeled beneath thepressure of constant and laborious mental application.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 499The duties of the house of commons, and the still CHAP.XIX.more ungrateful task of settling" the involved accountsA. D. 1815of the Drury-lane theatre, overthrew a noble mind. to 1820.He died by his own hand.Early in 1816 Canning joined this administration, A. D. isle.as president of the board of control. His motives,as he interpreted them to the people of Liverpool,were, of course, very lofty and disinterested ; butwhen he condescended to place himself again underCastlereagh, he could not but feel himself degradedby his office.No sooner was the country returned to a state of(peace than those domestic questions which had, forso long, been the objects of very secondary interest,became the chief subjects of popular attention. TheCatholic question was re-produced, and although^ with no immediate success, hopes were again heldout that it would be more favourably entertained inthe next session. The re-agitation of the subjectalso produced its effect, in the speech of the Bishopof Norwich, who stood forth from among his brethrento disavow the objection that the emancipation of theCatholics would be the destruction of the churchof England : observing that the only way to securepermanently the existence of any establishment, civilor ecclesiastical, was to evince liberal and conciliatorysentiments to those who differed from us, and to layits foundation in tho love, afFertif)n, and esteem, ofo K- o'H)0 Tin: insToiiY or pautv.CHAP, all within its influence. This, he said, was the truefoundation of our church ; with this it was secureA D. 181(5to I8J0. from all clanger, without this every other was futileand fallacious.The first effect of that peace, which had beenlooked forward to by the younger portion of thenation, as the harbinger of an age of undefinedprosperity, was to throw the labouring classes out ofemploy, and to produce discontent and riot throughoutthe kinsfdora. While war stores were in constantconsumption, employment abundant, and wages high,the operatives having no time to listen to demagogues,ate their meals in peace ; or, if they thoughtof politics at all, echoed the " church and king"doctrines of their employers. Even thus low hadPitt's bribery reached. For five-and-tw^enty yearsthese men had been earning the purchase-moneyof their own and their children's future industry.When this expenditure ceased, and the dreadfulscarcity of 181(3 pressed, they became hungry anddiscontented, and were ready to listen to the evilsof the system which, as they before thought,worked so well. Choosing to themselves a leader,in the person of Mr. Henry Hunt, whose stentorianvoice, farmer-like appearance, and imperturbablepowers of face, enabled him to retail, withgreat effect, the ordinary common-places of hustingsoratory, the crowds of unemployed artisansTHE HISTORY OF PAUTV. 501held meetings, drew up petitions, and passed resolve chap.tions ; and as their zeal or their necessities increased,, A. D. 1817passed from deliberation to action, sacking gunsmiths' to i8-2o.shops, and taking possession of different parts ofthe city.The conduct of a prudent party, "which had riotedso long in a lavish expenditure, should have been, atthis moment of reaction and depression, to reducethe public burdens to the lowest possible scale, andto carry economical reforms into every portion of thestate — to foresee that such reforms must be called for,and to avoid the necessity of submitting the inquiryto a hostile party. Had there been, at this time,any leader of the Tory party worthy of the name,perhaps such would have been his policy, althougheven Pitt might have found some difficulty in callingP off the pack from their prey. Castlereagh and Liverpoolsuspended the Habeas Corpus act, re-enactedand strengthened with the penalty of death similarbills to those which Pitt had called for when theftnation was stunned by the noise of the French revolution; and adopted, generally, every measure ofcoercion, but none of conciliation. These acts werevehemently opposed by the Whigs, who denied theirnecessity, and expatiated upon their atrocious cruelty.A low estimation of the value of human life hasbeen remarked to be a curtain symptom of despoticlb tendency In ;i government. If we are to aptly this502 THE HISTORY OF Party.CllAi'. maxim closely, looking at the enactments of the■ ■ Tories, and their constant advocacy of sanguinaryto 18-20. punishments, we should judge the other principles ofthat party to be fitted rather for the meridian ofConstantinople than for that of England. On thisoccasion the Whigs, headed by Sir Samuel homilyand Sir James Mackintosh, men whose names willalways be illustrious among the friends of liberty andhumanity, proposed numberless amendments, andoffered a protracted opposition. But the Tories werenow in earnest to put down the mobs that were attackingall that rendered office desirable. Canningcame forth in great power on the occasion, and theirbills passed by large majorities.Meanwhile the Catholic question made no progress; every year brought its vernal promise andautumnal disappointment ; every successive sessionappeared to give promise of some measure in thatwhich should succeed it ; but when this arrived,Mr. Peel in the commons, and Lord Liverpool inthe lords, still talked in general terms of the insufficiencyof the securities offered, and called uponthe members " to weigh the substantial blessingswhich they know to have been derived from thegovernment that is, against all the speculativeadvantages which they are promised from the governmentthat is to be." This year the majoritieswere 2-1' in the commons, and 52 in the lords;THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 503nor was the question renewed until the meetings of a chap.XIX.new parliament in 1819, when the event was the '- —. . . A. D. 1817same ; the legislature asreeino^ with Lord Liver to \s-20.pool, who said, he fully subscribed to that systemwhich maintained itself by a protestant religion witha protestant monarchy and a protestant parliament.The years 1816 and 1817 made some havoc amongthe Whig party. On the 7th of July, 1816, deathreleased poor Sheridan from his sufferings. Thelast days of this illustrious man are disgraceful tothe nation whose history he adorns, disgraceful tothe Whigs whom he so long and so faithfully served,but still more disgraceful to the heartless and selfishvoluptuary to whom he sacrificed every other friendship.Were history altogether silent upon the characterof George IV., were the biographer of Sheridanalone admitted to relate his story, we shouldlook upon the deathbed of Sheridan, observehis misery, nay his absolute want, the sheriffsofficers surrounding his pillow, and almost contendingwith death for his prey ; we should markwith disgust the prince who owed him so muchlooking from a distance on his misery, extending tohim a paltry pittance in so paltry a manner that itwas refused with scorn, and we should admit thatGeorge IV. was worthy of all the contempt thathas been poured upon his memory.Sheridan had outlived his political importance,)0l THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, but (ieorgc Ponsonby, who survived him but one day,died while he was nominally at the head of the Whi<^A.D. 1817to 18J0. party. Ponsonby was the second son of a speaker ofthe Irish house of commons ; he had risen from theIrish bar, by the favour of the Whig party to whichhe faithfully attached himself, to the chancellorship)of Ireland. "When Lord Howick became Earl Grey,Ponsonby succeeded him for thorough of Tavistock,and was immediately installed as the ostensibleWho" leader in the house of commons. He is eminentrather for the office of trust he held than forthe talent he manifested. As a statesman, a debater,and an individual, he was a respectable man.He was seized by an apoplectic fit in the house ofcommons, and died a few days afterwards.*Early in 181 7 died Francis Horner, anothervaluable member of the Whig party. Horner's parliamentarycareer had been run at a time when littleattention was fixed upon the race, when the peninsulaattracted more interest than the houses of parliament.He was brought into parliament by hiscollege friend. Lord Henry Petty. His strengthseemed to lie in political economy ; it was in thenumerous debates which arose out of the report ofthe bullion commerce that he made the most conspicuousfigure. Horner was a good debater, anCicntlfman'? Magazine, vol. Lxxxvii j>nrt 2, p. 83.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 505honest politician, and a consistent Whig. The CIIAP.XIX.closeness of his application to his early studies had^* •; A. D. 1817laid the foundation of a consumption which at length to i^-^-destroyed him.In compensation for these losses the party hadobtained several new members who could well supplyevery other loss save that of Sheridan ; — but these aregenerally the distinguished party champions of thepresent day, men of whom a contemporary cannotspeak with the freedom of history.The year 1819 witnessed events that, by bringingforth into view the most odious of the characteristicsof Toryism, gave some hope of a change in the situationof parties. The large towns which were, underthe present system of representation, without representatives,resolved upon the wild experiment ofchoosing each at a public meeting a legislatorialattorney who should claim his scat in the house.Sir Charles Wolsey w-as unanimously chosen forBirmingham ; and a meeting was convened for asimilar purpose at Manchester : but the magistrateshaving denounced the proposed object as illegal, theelection was abandoned, and the meeting was summonedavowedly for the legal object of petitioningfor parliamentary reform, lliis meeting took placein an open space in the town, called St. Peter'sField ; the ground was kept by special constablessworn in for sho purpose; Hunt was in the chair,and sixty thou-and men and wdhicu were asMniil'lci]50i) TllK IIISTOKY Ol' PARTY.CHAP, around the hustings. The multitudes had advancedXIX.- — ^ — to the place of meeting in a kind of procession. EachA. I). 1S17 ^ ^ ^to 1820. reform club contributed its company and its banners,and two companies of women preceded by white silkbanners led the march. This assembly was notmore formidable than many others which had beenrecently held, and had dispersed without any breachof the peace ; but wherever we find liberal principlespopular and predominant, we may look for anucleus of Toryism which concentrates all the bitternessof the party, and compensates for its smallnessby its intensity.* The authorities of Manchesterwere Tories of this description, eager to do goodservice to the minister on whom they fawned, and towreak their vengeance on the populace whom theyhated. Scarcely had the proceedings begun when abody of yeomanry cavalry appeared charging throughthe crowd and advancing towards the hustings.The multitude offered no resistance, they fell backon all sides, while men and women, members of theclubs, and mere spectators, were stifled in the crush,or trampled to death by the horses. Still, however,there was no resistance, the troops attained the hustings,dashed down the flags which hung there, andseized the chairman and others who appeared activein the business of the meeting. When thus muchhad been accomplished their work appeared done ;An Irish Toy, for instance, is an English Tory run mad.THE HISTORY OF PAUTY. 507but the people began to hoot. A cry was raised chap.among the yeoraanrv of " Have at their flaffs !" and '- —^ J J to A. D. 1817the troop dispersed among the crowd, each man to i820,hewing his way with his sabre through the compactand powerless human mass, and spurring towards thebanner, he intended to strike down. In ten minutes,four hundred persons, killed, maimed, or wounded,lay upon the ground ; the crowd had disappeared,and the soldiers were in possession of the spot theyhad so chivalrously won.The people of England heard of this terriblecatastrophe with that thrill of indignation whichmust ever vibrate through a free country at the ideaof the slaughter of fellow-citizens by the soldiery ;this feeling was not decreased when it was addedthat the bodies of women and children were foundamong the slain, and that one woman had receivedher death-wound from a sabre ; but it was not untilthe party in power had avowed and justified themassacre that the cry for justice or revenge becameloud and terrible. The coroner's jury was carefullycomposed of men who would return verdicts upon whichno legal proceedings could be founded. Accordingto their decisions, some of the victims died " an accidentaldeath ;" a child died " by a fall from his mother'sanus ;" and a third victim, " by the pressureof the military, being und(U' the civil ]power." Theexultation of the authorities of the district Bund ventiOS rill IIISTOHV OF Party.CHAP, in an address of thanks from the united magistracyXIX.of Lancashire and Cheshire to the officers and sola.1). 1817to 18*20. tiers engaged, and these Tory squires did not forgetespecially to remark " the extreme forbearance exercisedby the yeomanry when insulted and defied bythe rioters." At Lancaster, the grand jury threwout every bill preferred by the sufferers, and at Manchesterdepositions against the yeomanry or policeofficers were altogether refused. The people werecut down by the soldiery, and the courts of justicewere closed against their complaints.Even thus far the Tories of the district were notunsupported by the rulers of their party. The answerto a despatch forwarded to London, contained a letterfrom Lord Sidmouth, conveying the regent'shigh approbation of the exemplary conduct of theofficers and men who had assisted and supported thecivil power of the county palatine of Lancaster. Thisformal approval of the slaughter set the country onfire. The Whigs, who had strongly disapproved ofthe conduct of the democrats, disapproved still morestrongly of that of the Tories. The meetings convenedthroughout the kingdom were no longer composedof mere rabble ; men of rank and educationheaded the movement, and the county of York petitionedunder the sanction of one of the lords lieutenant,the Earl Fitzwilliam. The city of Londonpresented a strong remonstrance, which was respondedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 509to by what Earl Grey justly designated as an imper chap.tient and flippant answer ; many cities and counties — ^—^ —^^ . A. U. 1S17followed the example, while the Tories on the other to i8-20.hand besieged the throne with counter addresses,and were importunate in their offers to form themselvesinto yeomanry corps, that they might imitatethe heroism of their brethren of Manchester, andperhaps attain to equal honours.Upon this subject, therefore, the parties were atissue, and it was a question in which blood had alreadybeen spilt — wantonly* spilt, and loudly exultedin. The battle of Manchester, as it was called bysome of the demagogues, called into being a spiritof fierce hostility between the labouring and the propertyclasses ; a spirit of revenge for the slaughterof their kinsmen and companions, a spirit whichnever should or does exist under a just and free government— which at once exemplified the impracticabilityof the Tory system, and more than thetongues of an hundred orators, enforced the necessityof reform. Castlereagh attempted to eradicateor repress this settled desire of revenge by penal♦ Wantonly, for in no instance they should be subjected to itsdid any of the great reform meet attach. Tbc Spaniels riots werekings terminate in a breach of the by no means occasioned by thejjcace, unless the magistracy inter dcclani.iti. f Hunt, tlu- buiii;ryfercd. It is well that such meet and desperate conspirators merelykings should know trial a military came to this rendezvous to recruitforce is near , it is not well that tlicir numbers.510 Till 111 STORY OF PARTY.CHAP, statutes. Now it was that he introduced and car-xix.red those coercive measures which, under the title ofA.D. 1817to 1820. "The Exacts," and "The Gagging Bills," are so celebratedin the speeches and writings of the demagoguesof the day; fettering the press with heavy stamps,and onerous securities ; introducing the punishmentof banishment for libels ; empowering the magistracyto disarm the people, and subjecting the homes ofEnglishmen even to nightly visitations : restrictingthe exercise of the right of meeting to petition, andcontracting, to an alarming extent, that personalliberty which Englishmen are educated to consideras their birthright. These were the measures whichpersistence in the principles of Tory governmentrendered almost necessary, and in which the Torieswere supported even by the Grenville, and werefruitlessly opposed by the Whigs.* The Marquis ofLansdowne and the Whig party refused to surrenderthe constitution even to avert the consequences ofTory mismanagement ; but the timorous property-classesthronged around the minister, and all oppositionwas vain.Meanwhile the question of parliamentary reform• The eloquence of Sir James great advantage in the debatesMackintosh, whom Fox, in the ripon these measures. See speciousof commons, claimed as his chilly his speech against the News-friend,and whose Indica: GaUicce paper-tax bill,has been before noticed, is seen toTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.was gently agitated. It had found in Lord John chap.Russell an efficient and a persevering advocate.How many great men passed away from the house of to 1820.commons leaving this question undecided I We nowhave those in sight who have lived to witness itstriumph and enjoy its fruits. Lord John Russell'sproposition of reform was exceedingly moderate : itextended no further than to grant facilities for provingbribery against electors ; and to transfer thefranchise of any borough thus proved to be corruptto some populous town. From this plan the Whigscould not promise themselves any increase of popularity." There are," said Lord John Russell, " twoparties dividing the country, both greatly exasperated,and both going to extremes ; the one makingunlimited demands, and the other meeting them withtotal and peremptory denial : the one ready to encounterany hazard for unknown benefits and imaginaryrights ; the other ready to sacrifice, for presentsecurity, those privileges which our ancestors thoughtcheaply purchased with their blood." The man whointerfered between such combatants could not hopefor favour. The Whigs were, accordingly, more detestedby the democrats — the radicals, as they wereabout this time first called — than the Tories.Cobbett, so felicitous in attaching nicknames to hisopponents, lampooned them as '* shoy-hoys ;"* and" Iii' Ilampsliirr word for tl)ipvi>li sparrows, and looking;a scarecrow, |jiif ii|> to friplitcn very R)rriiiilalil(' al a distaiicc, It«51'2 THE IIISTOUY Ol' I' ARTY.CHAP. Canning addressed tliein as " the mud-bespatteredXi. ^ . '^ . , , \j — ^ — Wliio's, who, w ili laurels iu their hats and brickbatsto i8i>o. at their heels, bedaubed with ribbons and rubbish,were forced to be rescued from their overpoweringpopularity by a detachment of his majesty's horse-guards'*Each party, bold in their own unbridledprinciples, agreed to look upon the men who professedthe principles of each modified until they couldblend in harmony, as a base and truckling faction.Yet the Whigs were not diverted from their steadycourse. Lord John Russell, in speaking of theapostles of universal suffrage, was not afraid to characterizeMajor Cartwright as a man who resembledNestor in nothing but his age, or to laugh at thenatural rights of men to meet in their parishes andchoose members of parliament by putting white andblack beans into a box : even Tierney congratulatedthe house upon the opportunity afforded ofunanimously and decidedly discountenancing thewild and visionary doctrines of reform that had latelyagitated the country. The Whig party appears tohave been alarmed at the recent demonstrations, andalthough they retained their characteristic repugnancesoon discovered to be perfectly crown of the list of a sham manharmless. The boroui'limonjiers that lead been stuck to frijihtcn thecare no more for such men than sparrows away." — Register, vol.the sparrow in my neighbour Mor xxxv., p. 22.rel's garden at Motley, which sat * Canning's speech in the de-hammeringout the pna? upon the bate on the state of the nation.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 513to repressing the people by the strong arm of power, CHAP.and preserved their partiality for conciliation and —concession, they advanced with great caution, alto to i820.gether refusing to argue the question of reform uponthe principle of reconstruction.Castlereagh opposed Lord John Russell's resolutions,but offered a compromise, by engaging to throwno impediment in the way of a bill for the disfranchisementof Grampound, and the transfer of its franchise.The offer w-as accepted. Lord John Russellwithdrew his resolutions and introduced his bill.The little interest attached to this gradual andpartial measure of reform was quickly dissipated.Early in 1820 George II L died , and although thechange of title of the reigning prince, from that ofregent to that of king, appeared at first to be theonly consequence of this event, yet, that changebrought in its train other questions which gave fulloccupation to the parties, and excitement to thenation.vol III. 2 Lv511« THE HISTORY OV Beauty.CHAPTER XX.Thistlewood's conspiracy — The queen's trial — Unpopularity of theTories — Efforts of the Whigs to undermine their power — EducationHume's motions — Progress of the Catholic cohesion — Mr. Plun-kept's bill passes the commons — Canning's bill — State of Ireland —Death of Lord Londonderry — Accession of Canning to the ministryIts effect upon the Catholic question — Cabinet changes of 1823 —Irish Catholic Association — Burdett's Catholic bill of 1825 — Rejectedby the lords — Question of parliamentary reform — Mr. Lamb-ton'smotion of 1821 — Lord John Russell's — Lord John Russell'smotion of 1822 — Petitions in its favour — Canning's speech against itState of the question in 1826 — General election of 1826 — Illnessand retirement of Lord Liverpool — The new house of commonsdecide against the Catholics — Formation of the Canning administration— Secession of the high Tories — Canning is supported by theWhigs — Death of Canning — Appointment of Lord Goderich as hissuccessor — Resignation of Lord Goderich.CHAP. If example were wanting of the ferocious spirit ofhostility to the higher classes which pervaded theA.D. 1820 . .to 1828. populace, since the slaughter at Manchester, it wouldbe abundantly found in the desperate conspiracyheaded by Thistlewood, which was discovered andsuppressed early in this year. Such a number ofmen could not be gathered for such a purpose ; norTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 515could the secret have been kept even so well as it chap.XXwas, unless the band of union had been the strong andA. D. 18-20bitter hatred only engendered by oppression. The to 18-28.cheer with which the rabble met the prisoners whenthey appeared on the scaffold and expressed theirsorrow only that they had failed to revenge theManchester massacre, showed that the feeling whencethis conspiracy sprung was widely diffused. Themidnight training in Yorkshire, the rising at Huddersfield,and the riots at Paisley and Glasgow,showed that it was not confined to the metropolis.While the kin^^ and his government were thus theobjects of popular hatred, the Princess of Wales, nowthe Queen of England, returned to the capital,, andclaimed to share her husband's throne. This hiffh-spirited woman was very unfit to be the wife ofGeorge IV. She could not tutor her spirit toacquiesce with humble fidelity, while her husband ranhis course of shameless and undisguised debauchery.Irritated with his infidelity, and, if the anecdotes ofthe day have any truth, disgusted with himself, shedid not disguise her sentiments. Before she left Englandfor the continent, the prince had declared hisfixed determination never again to meet her either inpublic or in private. Cast off by lier husband, andleft to roam the; eontiiuuit at h(>r will, it had beenwonderful indeed if her conduct had been, in everyinstance, correct; but it had been still more wonder\. 'I."iK) iii: lusTOKV oi' rAiirv.CHAP, ful if slander had allowed it to be so reported. SpiesXX.— '- — were placed upon her actions ; her most confidentialA. 1). 18-20 ^ \to 18-28. servants were in the pay of her husband, and everyact was known in England through the interestedreport of her own menials. Such a mass of criminationhad been thus accumulated that the king thoughtit out of the question that she should ever return toEngland ; and took no steps to relieve her from thedistresses and indignities to which she was subjectedabroad. Her bold resolution to confront her enemies,confounded him. All negotiation was fruitless ; hewas compelled to assert his dishonour before theworld, and to adduce his proof. In support of LordLiverpool's bill of pains and penalties, this proof wasgiven at the bar of the house of lords. She stoodthe trial dauntlessly, while the king himself shookbeneath the terrific denunciations which were pouredupon him by her counsel. The infamous hirelingswho had watched Caroline's conduct, and now testifiedto her guilt, were, upon cross examination, soutterly destroyed as to their credit, that no honestjury could receive their evidence. The majoritiesupon the bill continually decreased, until, upon thethird reading, it amounted only to nine. Anotherquestion remained to be put — the house of commonshad yet to be encountered — nine cabinet ministerswere in the minority. The bill was abandoned. Theking had thus succeeded in conveying to all thereasoning part of his subjects, a moral conviction ofTHE HISTORY OT PARTY. 517his wife's sfuilt, while he failed to obtain any release CHAP.. XX.from the tie which bound him to her. ^A. D. 18-20But the principal feature of this contest was the to 18-28.universal popularity of the queen. From the instantof her arrival in England she became the rallying-pointfor the disaffected. Her cause was one whichwould lend an air of chivalry to the hatred withwhich the recollections of Manchester, and thetyranny of Castlereagh, had inspired the people.In her they saw a victim to the same king and thesame party who had protected the murderers of theirfriends. They knew that, even if guilty, she wasless guilty than her prosecutor — they saw her friendlessand persecuted, and they espoused her causewith enthusiasm. Addresses, expressive of absoluteconfidence in her innocence, and of vehement indignationat the unmanly conduct of her oppressors, encumberedher by their numbers ; and so widely didthe feeling spread, that the counter addresses whichwere presented to the king, scarcely ventured to approvehis conduct, but dwelt chiefly upon the violenceof hers. The Whigs, headed, upon this occasion, byBrougham and Denman, the queen's principal counsel,led the ]people. Had the house of commons beenless absolutely dependent upon the proprietors of boroughs,had it been one degree less the property of itsshareholders, the Tory ministry could not have stoodbefore the storm, ]^\\t the circumstances of this trialare only appropriate to (sur subject as they exemplify>18 Tin: iiisToiiY oi" tahiti.CHAP, the (disaffected state of the nation under this Torygovernment.A. D. 18-20 " , . 1 , 1,7, .to 18-28. One noble means by which the Whigs undertookto restore the democratic principle to the government,was the general diffusion of education. A party dependingfor its existence upon popular support, couldnot be too anxious for the enlightenment of the peoplethey could not be too diligent in preparing them forthe comprehension of the arguments they addressedto them — in conferring upon them that knowledgewhich is power. In this department laboured HenryBrougham : a man whose prodigious talents and unweariedindustry, whose multitudinous acquirements,indomitable perseverance, and enlightened philanthropy,rendered him worthy to be the apostle of thenew creed of universal education. At first he wasfeebly supported and fiercely opposed. Many Whigsthought his views chimerical — all Tories thought hewas demoralizing the people. Still he pressed on, andlight remained upon the track he had trod. Alarmedat his progress, the Tories (although such argumentsare still heard in private) no longer talked publicly ofthe danger of education to the people. They attemptedto rival the course they could not stop.The National Society sprang into being — schoolsmultiplied, and education spread. But while theTories were obliged to follow the movement, theyexecrated its author. His design had been to spreadeducation among every class, among the followers ofTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 519every creed ; to treat it as an affair utterly distinct CHAP,from religion, and to remove it from the custody of-'-^ —» . "^ A.D. 1820those who had carefully confined it within the pale of to isis.the church. Their maxim had always appeared tobe, " Ignorance or orthodoxy ;" his was, " Universaleducation." Mr. Brougham objected to the admixtureof religion in a national plan of. education,because it must render the operation of that plan partialinstead of universal. He would teach the childrenof the poor to read and write, and leave theirreligious instruction to their parents : he wouldteach men to think and reason, but leave to themthe choice of subjects upon which they shouldexercise their powers. The Tories have alwayslooked upon education as an instrument of proselytismin the hands of the establishment.They thought the church in danger from the newtheories of education, and instituted schools in whichit was rendered subservient to the dissemination ofthe doctrines of the church of England. Thus, fromthe opposition of the parties arose an important publicgood ; and while the Edinburgh and Quarterly*Reviews, the organs of their several parties, wereexchanging the epithets, *' bigot" and "infidel'' thegeneral cause was advancing, and the public attentionwas fixed upon the subject.• The article in No. 38 of the ever, be received as genuine Tory-quarterlyReview must not, how ism, foi it was written hv f'nnnini;.520 Tin: HISTORY of I'akty.CHAP. But the labourers were still far from equal to theXX.extent of the vinevartl. In 181G the metropolisA. n. lS-20 -^ ^to 1618. alone contained 120,000 children destitute of themeans of education, a promising mass of ignorance toact as an incubus upon the advance of civilizationamong their contemporaries. Brougham now obtaineda parliamentary committee, which laid openinstances of entire misappropriation and bold embezzlementof educational funds, such as no man couldhave imagined who had heard the declamation of theTories upon the sacredness of such institutions, andupon their vital importance to the prosperity of thechurch. He carried through, against every opposition,*a bill for a commission of inquiry into theabuses of public charities ; but his discoveries hadalready been too embarrassing, and the minister preferredthe odium of excluding him from the commissionhe had originated, to the exposures which mustinfallibly follow his appointment. Still, however, thesubject never slumbered in Brougham's active mind ;through the press from his place in parliament,through the Edinburgh Review, by popular and" Under the flimsy pretence," poor ; and I w ill tell those shame-saidMr. Brougham, " of great ten less persons that the doctrine theydearness for the sacred rights of promulgate of charitable funds in aproperty, I am well aware that the trustee's hands being private pro-authorsof this outcry conceal their party, is utterly repugnant to theown dread of being themselves whole law of England."dragged to iiglit as robbers of theTHE HISTORY OV PARTY. 521widely-read pamphlets, the object was kept before CHAP,the country. Without abandoning for a moment theA. D. 1820education of children, he comprised in his endeavours to 1828the improvement of adults ; he resuscitated an idea,which owed its origin to Dr. Birkbeck so long agoas the year 1800, of forming classes of labouringmechanics, and lecturing them in the rudimentsof natural philosophy and mathematics. Societies,under the title of " Mechanics' Institutes," wereformed, libraries were collected, laboratories procured,professors appointed, and cheap publicationson scientific subjects were published and found extensivesale. The Tories saw the change withalarm ; and their oracles, unable openly to denouncethe abandonment of sensual for mental enjoyment,turned their violence upon the author of the change.Party abuse, unless it degenerates to private calumny,seldom injures any man. Brougham appearedto luxuriate in it. His powers of readyeloquence, fierce invective, and withering sarcasm,left horn nothing to fear from an opponent. Whenthe barking of the pack which has so long surroundedhim is forgotten, and a future generation comes toanalyze and compare the powers of mind of those whohave ]preceded them, Brougham will probably be placedat the head of contemporary statesmen ; he, will certainlybe regarded with admiration, as th(* leader ofthe little hntid of ])ioti('ci's who first entered the forest5'2^ riiK HISTORY or party.CHAP, and cleared a space throuo;'h which the sunbeams, thatXX.had hitherto rested upon the topmost branches, dead.18-20 '■ 'to 1S28. scended to dissipate the darkness that reigned below.While Brougham was teaching his countrymen toreason, Mr. Hume was diligently supplying themdata. The necessity of covering corruption andconcealing extravagance had led to a designed confusionof the national accounts. Items of expenditurecould never be obtained, totals only werebrought forward, and these were communicative oflittle more than the extent of the ministers demand.Perhaps there was not another man in England,except Mr. Hume, who could have reduced theseaccounts to an intelligible state. Gifted with no extraordinarytalent, although a shrewd and sensible speakeryet by no means an orator, he discovered neverthelessan imperturbable perseverance, an indifference todefeat, a disregard, appearing like unconsciousness, ofthe invective by which he was assailed, and of thewit by which he was ridiculed. Equally undisturbedby the jeers of Canning, the indignation of Husksand the majorities of Castlereagh, he was nightlyat his post calling for explanations, and demandingreturns. Whenever his importunity was successful —to perseverance like his, all things are possible — andhe was admitted to inspect the details of a suspiciousitem, he almost invariably discovered the grub, aroundwhich the mysterious web had been woven, in theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 523shape of a sinecure, a pension, or something equally cHAP.XXdesirous of concealment : and picking it out and hold —11 Pi J . A. D. 1820ing it up to the house ot commons he passed on to to 182S.the next. At first the house laughed, and the publicechoed the laugh ; but at length the affair becameserious, the examples became numerous — an impressionwas made — the agriculturists who felt presentdistress were inclined to listen to tales of extravagance— in the debate upon Mr. Curwen's motion forarepeal of the agricultural horse-tax, Mr. Hume'slaborious exertions became the subject of praise insteadof ridicule, and Castlereagh, after a vehementopposition to the motion, was left in a minority.These successes afterwards became frequent, Castlereaghwas beaten upon many minor subjects ofeconomical reforms, and he at last was compelled toform a compact with Mr. Hume, by which he grantedhim all the returns he immediately wanted.These intermitted and wearying motions werefar more formidable to the ministry than those whichinvolved general principles of government. Of thesethe Catholic cpicstion appeared to be advancing.Early in the session of 1821, Mr. Plunket introduceda bill by which the Catholics were proposedto be admitted to all offices except the lord chancellorshipand the lord lieutenancy of Ireland. Afterprotracted debates, in which the balance of eloquencemay bo readily assigned fo tlm libcnil party, since524 THE IIISTOKY OF Beauty.CHAP. Peel was the only Tory orator of note, and Plunket,XX.- Mackintosh, Wilberforce, and Canning, were his opt)i8"j8. parents, the second reading was carried by a majorityof 11. This bill ultimately passed the house — aconsiderable step in the progress of the question.In the lords it met with less success, and being opposedby the Earl of Liverpool, Lord Colchester, th echancellor — but above all, by the Duke of York, itwas thrown out by a majority of 39.The failure of this bill was succeeded by an attemptat legislation made by Mr. Canning, who proposedthat the Catholic peers should be restored to theirplaces in the house of lords. This was opposed byMr. Peel, and still more vehemently by Mr.Wetherell, an eccentric speaker, who admirablyrepresented the real Tory party in the commons, asEldon represented it in the lords. It passed thecommons by a small majority, but was lost in thehouse of lords.Peel opposed this bill as home secretary ; anoffice which he held in consequence of the ministerialarrangements made at the commencement ofthe year. By these arrangements the Grenville,abandoning the only distinctive principle which dividedthem from their brother Tories, consented tojoin a cabinet which contemplated no concession toIreland. Lord Grenville, indeed, retired frompublic life, but the Marquis of Buckingham wasTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. t)Q,5created a duke, and his immediate followers were CHAP.XXprovided for. One behoof made president of the board^ . . A. D. 18-20of control, and another receiving minor appoint to isis.ments to the amount of 4000/. a year. By thisarrangement the Tory ministry gained but little,either in interest, popularity, or talent ; a few votesin the house of commons secured, a few loud-tonguedagricultural members silenced, and the name of anoble family detached from opposition, constituted alltheir advantage. Mr. Peel's advancement wasbrought by no such dereliction of principle. LordSidmouth resigned, retiring altogether from officialduties, but retaining his seat in the cabinet. Peelwas his successor. "This gentleman's politicalpredilections, sympathies, principles, and prejudices,"says a writer in the Annual Register,* "werevery much the same with those of Lord Sidmouth ;so that the substitution of the one for the othercould have no effect in the course of administration."Mr. Peel certainly appeared at this timeworthy the friendship of Sidmouth, Eldon, Liverpool,In IH'21 we lose the An the Annual Register is worthyniial Register, which has been so of a worst wiiicli could countlong our companion, and which Kdniuiid; Ruiive among its con-mustform the foundation of every traitors. The continuation is ahistory of the period it compress syllabub of frothy and flippanthcnda. The grave and temperate Toryism,tone of the historical articles of5'2G TiiK iiisroiiY OF Beauty.CHAP. Wetlierell, and the other marriages of high Toryism ;but ho wanted the dogged and impracticable obsti-XX,A. D. 18-20 '^'^to i8~2e. nay which that class seemed to have caught, bycontact, from George III. Even while he foughtwith his party against all concession, there is reasonto think that he believed the time to be near athand, if not present, when the point in disputeshould be conceded.*The Marquis of Wellesley was now lord lieutenantof Ireland where he was sincerely hated by theOransremen for discouramnor their ferocious toasts,and for discountenancing the party processions bywhich they taunted the Catholic majority with theirsubserviency. He was little more popular withthe Catholics when they found that he, in commonwith the other Tories who were pledged to theSince this was in print I in his new position. Yet, at thathave seen the following passage, in very moment. Sir Robert had inan article upon the state of par his writing-desk the letter whichties, in the Edinburgh Review : he had himself addressed two"In 1827 Sir R. Peel told Mr. years before to Lord Liverpool;Canning and the house of com- having stated therein that in hismons, that his unlocked for opposition the time was come whensition to the administration of the measure of Catholic reliefwhich Mr. Canning was the pre ought to be conceded, and havingmeer, was grounded solely on the proposed that he should retireeffect which Mr. Canning's well from office while it was carryingknown operations in favour of through." — Edinburgh Review,Roman Catholic relief must have No. xxxii., p. 281.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 527question, had taken office without any stipulation in CHAP,their favour. That unhappy country was still the '- —^^•^ -' A. D. 18-20scene of continual outrage, the Protestants there were to isis.enraged tyrants ; the Catholics were exasperatedrebels. Where the arm of the law could be felt itwas the instrument of vengeance upon the Catholic ;where it was not feared, opportunities were seldomneglected of inflicting a fearful retaliation upon theProtestant. Canning's fragment of legislation was intendedas his last brilliant display previous to leavingEngland for India, whither he was about to proceedas governor-general, having been excluded from thecabinet on account of his refusal to join in the prosecutionof the queen. While he was yet preparingfor his departure the suicide of Lord Londonderryoccasioned an important breach in the cabinet, and,notwithstanding the disinclination of the king, andthe objections of Eldon, it was felt that he alonecould fill it. Canning became foreign secretary.The administration thus formed, although containingso strong a party in favour of the Catholicclaims was their most strenuous opponent. It wassoon noticed that Canning, and Plunket, nowattorney-general for Ireland, were less earnest in the cause.Their conduct was severely arraigned in the commons.Broufj-hain designating that of Canning asthe most incredible specimen of monstrous trucklingfor the purposing obtaining office, that the whole THE History OF rAllTV.CHAP, tory of political tergiversation could furnish.* Thiswas partially true : the iutluencc of the lord changed.18-JO I J . , Tir 1to 1828. cellar was greater than any coadjutor who teredfrom him should have borne ; the high Tory peerslooked upon him as the real minister ;t and confidingin his protection threw out some bills granting atrivial indulgence to English Catholics, which hadpassed the commons with the approbation even ofPeel, and which in the lords had the support even ofLiverpool.In 1823 some further change occurred in thecabinet, Mr. Vansittart being; raised to the house oflords as Lord Bexley, was succeeded by Mr. Robinson,and Huskisson became president of the boardof trade. The latter gentleman was of no greatimportance as a party man. Although an adherentof Canning, and favourable to the Catholics, he onlyonce spoke in favour of their claims. Huskisson'sCanning exclaimed, " That is of a man who was possessed offalse !" and a scene ensued, which nearly absolute influence in theended according to the approved councils of a nation for a quarterfashion of house of commons of a century, and of whom it canquarrels. be said, that he never originatedf Posterity will probably pass one measure that the next generalsevere judgment upon the me tion judged to be beneficial to hismore of this statesman. Ministers country, and never allowed onewho would have aided Castle such measure to be discussedreach in his violence and tyranny, without his strenuous and gene-haveexisted before Eldon ; but I rally fatal opposition,believe there is no other instanceTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. o29value was as a political economist. Finance, cur chap.XX.rency, and commerce, were the departments in which '- —A. D. 1820he stood unrivalled. Canning truly described him as to istathe best practical man of business in England.The Catholics ceased not to cry from their bondage,but their friends among the Tories had ceasedto listen, and the Whig's thought the annual debatea mere farce ; never intended to have any seriousevent. Deserted by their former advocates, theIrish now began to threaten; the Catholic Associationunder the guidance of Daniel O'Connell — oneof those commanding spirits which come forth whena national crisis calls, had assumed an almost parliamentaryform. Enjoying the full confidence oftheir countrymen, this assembly ordered a census,levied taxes, and assumed to themselves in everyrespect the representation of the wrongs and wishesof Catholic Ireland.The session of 1825 commenced with an attemptto put down this dangerous Association. In supportof the bill brought in for this purpose, thecabinet were unanimous. Canning, Plunket, Peel,Ooulburn, were all consentient in its praise.Brougham, Tierney, Mackintosh, supported by atroop of Whigs, many of whom were now first risinginto notice, pointed to emancipation as the truesuppression bill, and prolonged the debate duringfour nights. I've bill, when ]passed, was laughed atVOL. m. 2 mTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, by the Irish, and successfully evaded by the boldand skilful man who now held the destinies of thisA. 1). IH'-iOto 18-28. country.Sir Francis Burdett brought forward the questionof emancipation, and introduced a bill which passedthe commons by a majority of 21, and was rejectedby the lords by a majority of 48.Upon this occasion the Duke of York deliveredthat memorable declaration which theTories printed in gilt letters, and hung up intheir libraries. They now exulted in the convictionthat the conscientious scruples of the heirpresumptive would rival those of his father.The question was not again agitated in this parliament,which having completed its sixth sessionwas dissolved on the 2d of June, 1 826.In the parliament now dissolved we see considerableadvance made towards the settlement of theCatholic claims. The Whigs but feebly assisted bythe people, who were generally either apathetic orhostile, joined by a portion of the Tories whom theirmore influential companions disavowed, had forceda full measure of emancipation twice through thehouse of commons. Let us now turn to the questionof parliamentary reform.In 1821 two motions where made upon this subject.The first by Mr. Lambton, member for Durham,a man of great energy, talent, and honesty of pur-theHISTORY OF PARTY. o31pose, and one whose large property exempted him chap.from all suspicion of wishing the destruction of the• i.-i i.- 1 1 n ^T ^ , A. D. 1820institutions he proposed to reform. Mr. Lambton to 1828.proposed to divide the borough representationequally among the householders of the kingdom, toextend the county suffrage to copyholders and leaseholders,and to render parliaments triennial. Thesecond, made by Lord John Russell, was the moderatemeasure of reform proposed by the Whigs.Both were rejected. iVIr. Lambton's in a housecontaining only 98 members, and Lord John Russell'sin a house of 279. Grampound was, however,this year disfranchised against the strong oppositionof the chancellor and of Lord Lauderdale, whonow came forward to recant all his former declarationsin favour of parliamentary reform.In the following year Lord John Russell's annualmotion was preceded by numerous petitions in itsfavour from all parts of the country, and was introducedby a most elaborate speech, in which, fromstatistical tables, his lordship demonstrated a progressin the state and condition of the people in one direction,and a change in the state of the house of an oppositetendency. The awakening intelligence of thelower classes he evinced by the increased numbersand circulation of newspapers. In the year 1782,seventy-nine newspapers were published throughoutthe British dominions; in 1821 that number was2 M 25S2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, become '2Si>. The tendency of the house of commonshe exemplified from an analysis of divisions.A. D. 1820 • , 1 . 1 1 1to 18-28. Taking a question of economical reduction, he showedthat, of the members for places having less than fivehundred electors, nineteen opposed and one supportedthe reduction ; while, of the members for countiesand large towns, sixty-nine supported and thirty-fouropposed it. Canning, whose brilliant speeches atLiverpool against parliamentary reform had calledforth universal admiration, now came forward todazzle its advocates in parliament, and, contemplatingan immediate departure for India, to leavebehind him a speech upon the subject which shouldbe remembered. The close of this elegant piece oforatory appeared to betray that Canning foresaw theultimate triumph of the question he was then opposing," That the noble lord will carry his motion thisevening I have no fear ; but, with the talents he hasshown himself to possess, and with, I sincerely hope,a long and brilliant career of parliamentary distinctionbefore him, he will, no doubt, renew his efforts hereafter.Although I presume not to expect that hewill give any weight to observations or warnings ofmine, yet, on this, probably the last opportunitywhich I shall have of raising my voice on the questionof parliamentary reform, while I conjure thehouse to pause before it consents to adopt the propositionof the noble lord, I cannot help conjuring theTHE History OF PARTY. 533noble lord himself to pause before he again presses it CHAP.upon the country. If, however, he shall persevere, ^ —and if his perseverance shall be successful, and if the to isis.results of that success shall be such as I cannot helpapprehending — his be the triumph to have precipitatedthose results, be mine the consolation thatto the utmost and to the latest of my power 1 haveopposed them."The minority upon this occasion numbered 164.In the following year they reached 169, and werefortified by a petition from Yorkshire, signed by17,083 freeholders, upwards of two thirds of thewhole number in the county. The interest excitedby the more dubious divisions upon the Catholic billnow caused some abatement in the cry for parliamentaryreform. In 1826, when it was again broughtforward, the house was less full, and the reformerspresent were only 123.Still, however the cause of Whiggism had madesome progress. Lord John Russell had rescued thegreat question from the hands of the Cobbett, theBurdens, and the Hunts ; under his protection itbecame an object which moderate men would stop tonjgard, and which excited neither ridicule nor horror.It was no slight advantage that it had assumed a temperateform, and had become the subject of seriousargument. Converts to the ]principle were continuallycoming over, and among them flic \\'hig.s THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, served, Nvith pleasure, many scions of noble families;nor was it an evil sign that the people appeared,A. 1). 1820to Isis. although equally resolved, to be more moderate ;that they appeared to look up to the Whigs for guidance,and sometimes refused to listen to the wildschemes of representation, and infamous projects forplundering the national creditor, which were put forthby Cobbett and his crew.The general election accomplished but little forthe Whiffs. Their efforts in favour of the Catholicsformed a powerful topic against them. In largetowns the self-elected corporation, filled exclusivelywith Tories, formed a little Tory citadel. In thecounties the ignorant constituency blindly obeyedtheir landlords. Thus, at Liverpool, the return of aWhig was hopeless ; and Brougham had no chancein Westmorland against the influence of the others.In the rural districts, and in remote boroughs,the *' No popery" cry had great success ; while in themore populous and educated constituencies. Catholicconcession excited but little enthusiasm. The peoplehad too much to demand for themselves to bestowmuch advocacy upon the claims of others. Thesubject was never very popular, and they appearedrather to consent to Catholic emancipation in returnfor the support they received from Ireland in favourof parliamentary reform. It is the Whig party, notthe people, the leaders, not the followers, who hadTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 535always laboured to obtain a free government for CHAP.Ireland. '■ —T^ 1 . . A. D. 1820Early m 1 827 the Duke of York died. Soon after, to isis.a fit of paralysis deprived the cabinet of its head ;thus removing two of the most powerful opponents ofthe Catholic claims, two of the most sturdy assertorsof genuine Toryism. Under these circumstancesSir Francis Burdett brought forward the Catholicclaims, with considerable expectations of success.In addition to the usual speakers upon this question,Mr. Spring Rice, who had been rapidly rising intonotice with the ^\ whig party, appeared conspicuouson the liberal side ; and Sir John Copley, the masterof the rolls, brought forth all his talent to aid theTories. The latter, however, who seemed to haveassumed the tone of the Earl of Eldon, was completelydemolished by the raillery of Canning, whoheld him up most mercilessly to the laughter of thehouse.* Peel, although expecting to be left in a minority,and to see a cabinet formed by Canning, uponthe principle of concession to Ireland, showed nosign of yielding. " I have stated," he said in conclusionof his speech, ** the principles which myreason dictates, and which honour and consciencecompel me to maintain. The influence of some great• Sir Jolin winced under the clans. It was not, however,infliction, and a twenty-four their interest to be ciioniies, sohours' intermission of friendship only one sun went down uniontook place between the politic their wrath.'^>3() THE HISTORY OF Tasty.CHAP, names, of some great men, has lately been lost to thecause I support ; but I never adopted my opinionsA.D. 1820 . . .to 18-28. upon it from deference either to high station or to highability. Keen as the feelings of regret must be withwhich the loss of these associates is recollected, it isstill a matter of consolation to me, that, in the absenceof these individuals, I have now an opportunityof showing my adherence to those tenets which I formerlyespoused ; of showing, that, if my tenets beunpopular, I stand by them still when the influenceand authority that may have given them currency isgone."Mr. Peel was mistaken in his anticipations of eviLNotwithstanding the loss of the Duke of York and ofLord Liverpool, the high Tories were still so strong,that Sir Francis Burdett's resolution was rejected bya majority of two — 276 to 274.The arrangements which the incapacity of LordLiverpool rendered necessary, now absorbed thepublic attention. Canning had caught a severe coldby attending the funeral of the Duke of York, hishealth had been since very precarious, and his exertionsupon the Catholic question had produced arelapse and occasioned some further delay. Whenthe sentiments of the divided cabinet, as to theirfuture chief came to be gathered, it was foundthat the Duke of Wellington, Lord Eldon, and Mr.Peel, the chiefs of the anti-catholic party, had resolvednot to act under a minister favourable to the Catho-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 537lie claims. Mr. Canning, upon learning this deter CHAP.mention, was equally resolved not to admit that the ! —advocacy of those claims could disqualify a man for to 1828-the station of minister. Since a division was unavoidable,and the Wellington and Peel party confessedtheir inability to form a cabinet without theassistance of their late colleague, Canning, who wasdesignated alike by the national voice, and the favourof the king, became Lord Liverpool's successor ; thekino at the same time telling him that he would himselfoppose any attempt at Catholic emancipation.No sooner was this appointment made than thelate cabinet fell to pieces like a toy house of cards.*The Duke of Wellington, Mr. Peel, Lords Eldon,Bathurst, Melville, and Bexley, sent in their resignations.They were followed by all those of the" On the l'2th of April," said Providence by relinquishing. Thethe London Magazine, " being rest continue 'flints'the day before Good Friday, seven " Musa viii causes memory. —cabinet ministers struck work What could have tempted sevensimultaneously, like so many jour ministers,grave,reputable people —neymen tailors, in consequence of four of the seven certainly as littlethe appointment of Mr. Canning suspected of any exuberance ofto the premiersiiip. One of fancy or understanding as any menthem, Lord Bexley, iras since in the king's dominions; peoplebecome a ' dung' and returned far too stupid, it was suppose,to his work, or rather to his even for a freak like this — whatidleness ; for he enjoys a snug could have tempted them to throwsinecure, which nothing but an their bread upon the waters in theaccess of extraordinary fury rous hdjir uf seeing it again after manyinduce so pious a man to tempt days"'538 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, high Tory party who loved Toryism better thanwplace. Sir Charles Wetherell, whose sincerity hasA. D. lyJO , .11 1to 1828. never been questioned, threw up the attorney-generalship,and the Marquis of Londonderry ceased tobe a lord of the bedchamber. Many other subordinatesretired, but Lord Bexley retracted his resignation.Among those who remained, were Mr. Huskisson,Lord Palmerston, and Mr. Wynn, all of whom belongedto Canning's school of Toryism ; the vacancieswere filled up by the appointment of Sir JohnCopley as lord chancellor, now created Lord Lynd-hurst ; Mr. Surges Bourne, home secretary ; Mr.Robinson, created Lord Goderich, colonial secretary;Lord Dudley, foreign secretary ; the Duke of Portland,privy seal ; Mr. Canning retaining the officesof first lord of the treasury and chancellor of theexchequer. Lord Melville's resignation was followedby the popular appointment of the liberal Duke ofClarence to be lord high admiral.It may well be asked, why the Tory party, uponthis occasion, deserted Canning ? In the explanationswhich ensued, Mr. Peel spoke of his opinions uponthe Catholic question ; but surely with no greatsuccess, since the house could not but remember thatSir John Copley, whose speech upon that questionwas yet ringing in their ears, was now seated uponthe woolsack which Eldon had vacated. Mr. Peelalso was doubtless aware of the king's protestTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 539against Catholic concession being made a cabinet CHAP,question, and we who can recur to his after conduct ^^. A. D. 1820cannot avoid some scepticism as to the intensity of to 1828.his horror of popery. But, admitting Mr. Peel'sjustification, what shall we say to Lord Melville andthe Marquis of Londonderry, who voted with Mr.Canning upon the Catholic question ? Does not theirretirement with the Wellington and Peel party, showthat other considerations than those connected withthe Catholic question prompted the party to abandonCanning ? If the real reason was personal jealousyin some and aristocratic pride in others, it was amotive contemptible in some and absurd in others.The most able of the seceders was doubtless Mr.Peel, yet he would be a very injudicious friend whoshould attempt to draw a comparison between himand Canning. Jealousy in Mr. Peel of Canninghad been as absurd as aristocratic pride in the Dukeof Wellington* had been contemptible. Yet while,remembering the disavowal of such motives, we admitthat such was not the inducement which led these• Tie Duke of Wellington in order to be appointed to a stagdenied that he had ever tion to the duties of which I wasaspired to the ortice of minister unaccustomed, in wiiicli I was nothimself. Alluding to his appoint wished, and for wiiicii 1 was notment as commander-in-chief, and qualified? My lords, I should haveto its congenial duties, he said, been worse than mad if I hadDoes any man believe that I tiioii>;ht of such a tliinj,'." — I)c-would give up such gratification Aa/t«, A^. 5., vol. xvii,, col. 401.51.0 THE IIISTOUY 01' rAUTY.CHAP, influential men to abandon their illustrious friend, welook at the circumstances which accompanied andA. D. 18-20 . , ^ 1 1 , 1 ^to 18-28. followed the transaction, and find ourselves unable toassign any other.The Whigs, who saw in the hostility of the Toriessome hope of liberal measures, and who agreed withCanning upon the subjects of Catholic emancipation,foreign policy, and commercial regulation, extendedto him their support. A close and immediate coalitionwas not advisable, nor perhaps practicable ; butMr. Scarlet, an active member of that party, becameattorney-general, and an arrangement was enteredinto bv which Lord Lansdowne, Lord Carlisle, andMr. Tierney, were to have seats in the cabinet at theend of the session.*The appearance of the opposition soon showedthe homely materials of which the substance of theTory party was composed. Lord Londonderry, inaburst of indignant eloquence, exclaimed, "When Ilook at the building which has been erected, I findit divested of all its main pillars, and it is composednow of a sort of rubbish. The artificer has certainlybeen dexterous in forming the building with respectto its durability. Could he have found out such amass of rubbish in any other quarter, formed as itwas by the two parties ? The artificer has made aStapleton's Political Life of Cunning.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.dexterous endeavour to unwhig a part of the Whigs, CHAP.A. Aand untory a part of the Tories." Some of this ^ d.i820nobleman's late colleagues objected to the con to 18-28.tempestuous term " rubbish," by which, in the pride ofsuperior intellect, he designated them ; but themarquis explained that he alluded only to the newmembers of the cabinet, and Lord King cruelly suggestedthat the rubbish is that which is sent awayfrom the building. The Duke of Newcastle thoughtMr. Canning " the most profligate minister that everwas in power"' and his retainers in the house of commonsdid not fail to reiterate the opinion. In his enfeebledstate of health the constant recurrence of eventhe most contemptible attacks would be wearying :he could, indeed, call to his assistance the searingeloquence of Brougham, and he could tell his accuserswith an easy indifference that he had had toendure the assaults of the opposition benches whenfilled with other persons of a quality which he wasnot likely soon again to experience ;* yet constantlabour and continual harassing increased his disease.He was employing himself t in gathering• During the progress of the at the close, Lord Lansdowuesession, Lord Lansdowne took his became home secretary, and Lordseat in the cabinet. Lord Car Carlisle, privy seal,lisle was made first commissioner f Life of Canning, vol. ii.,of woods and forests, and Mr. p. 434.Tierce, master of tbf mint ; and54*2 THE HISTORY of party.CHAP. Information for an extensive economical reform whenhe was seized with the illness which became soA D 1 8'^0to 1828. rapidly fatal. Canning died on the 8th of August.He reached the pinnacle of his ambition, and expired— perhaps happily for his fame; for the restrictionsby which he was bound were so galling, thestate of parties so involved, the support he receivedso equivocal, and the opposition which threatenedhim so determined, that no fair opportunity wasafforded him for the development of the liberality ofhis views of government, or for the unfettered exerciseof his extraordinary genius. Standing betweenthe two parties, and differing more essentially fromthat which gave him a disinterested support, thanfrom that which pursued him with unrelenting hostility,he must probably have fallen a prey to thecannibal pursuit of his own party, or have forfeitedhis consistency by a thorough coalition with theWhigs.The Whig party were wise and politic in tenderingto Canning their support in parliament. AsCanning himself admitted in the house of commons,the circumstance of the prime minister being anavowed advocate of Catholic emancipation gave amoral support to that question which in its presentposition ensured its success. How far the Whigswere justified in taking office under a man who waspledged to oppose all parliamentary reform, andTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 5if3avowed his intention of upholding the Test act, is a CHAP,more dubious question. It was differently answered -^ A. U. lo'Juby Earl Grey and Mr. Tierney ; and will be differ to 1828.gently resolved by all those who differ as to the rightof a statesman to make a temporary sacrifice of principleto expediency.Lord Goderich attempted to supply the place ofCanning as first lord of the treasury : and the chancellorshipof the exchequer having been refused byTierney, Huskisson, and Surges Bourne, whowished that Lord Althorp should take it, was atlast conferred upon Mr. Berries, who had beensecretary of the treasury under Lord Liverpool, andwas a Tory of that school. It very soon appearedthat Lord Goderich, although a man of respectableability, was unequal to the baton of Canning. Thespirits that had bowed before his genius, rose inrebellion against the interference of his feeble successor.*The Whigs, who wished to strengthenthe ministry with the high reputation and the solidabilities of Lord Althorp, and Mr. Berries who hadas strong a repugnance to that nobleman's views,« " Celia sect aeolus arec, Nothing but the ascendancy ofSceptre tenens ; mollitquc animus such a superior mind could hopect temperate iras," to restrain the discordant elementsis a quotation made by Canning he had cooped togctiicr in thein reference to England. It is cabinet,not ip«s applicable to himself.0l4 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAT, wore soon at open strife, each applying to Lord— Godericli and each threatening to resign. The paca.I). I8-J0 ° , *^ . .to 18-28. lier distracted between their rival applications, andoppressed by domestic sorrows, took the step whichhis colleagues threatened. On the 8th of January,1828, he resigned his office.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XXIFormation of the wellington administration — Beaten by the Whigsupon the question of the Test Acts repeal — Debates upon therepeal — Catholic question — State of Ireland— Emancipation billbrought forward by the Duke of V\ ellington — Rage of the Torieswhen they find themselves betrayed — Debates upon the bill — In thecommons — In the lords — Catholic bill passed — Resentment andopposition of the Tories — Generosity of the Whigs, who support theDuke of Wellington against his own party.Upon the resignation of Lord Goderich the king CHAP.XXIimmediately confided the formation of a new ministry '-to the Duke of Wellington ; and the duke, forgetting&'or repenting the [public declaration he had made a fewmonths before, readily accepted the commission. TheWhigs beheld the appointment with the utmost dismay.Although no one of tli(; party doubted thatthe duke was actuated by the most honest — by theVOL. III. '2 NA. D. 18-28.546 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, most patriotic motives ; yet, there was none who did notxvianticipate dang-cr from his elevation. They saw in himan iron-minded soldier, accustomed to hold in utterscorn the opinions of the multitude ; habituated to formhis decisions in his own mind, and to act upon them withrapidity and promptitude. They did not doubt thathe sincerely believed that the creed of the high Torieswas the belief of patriots ; but they feared that hewould attempt to use a soldier's argument to propagatehis creed, and govern England as he would rule acamp. Their alarm was not lessened when they sawhim re-enter the cabinet surrounded by all thoseveteran Tories who had admired Lord Castlereagh,and idolized Lord Liverpool ; and they derived nogreat consolation even from the fact that Huskissonand Lord Palmerston were suffered to remain. LordCarnarvon prophesied a return to the policy ofCastlereagh, and anticipated "green bags again upontheir table, and red coats at the next popular meetings"*Brougham, however, ridiculed such fears, anddefied the soldier. He thought the appointment ofthe Duke of Wellington was bad in a constitutionalpoint of view ; but as to any violence being, in consequence,directed against the liberties of the country,the fear of such an event he looked upon as futileIn allusion to the queen's trial. The papers were laid upon thetable in a sealed green bag.XXI.A. D. 1828.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 547and groundless. "These," said he, "are not the chap.times for such an attempt. There have been periodswhen the country heard with dismay that ' the soldierwas abroad.' That is not the case now. Let thesoldier be ever so much abroad, in the present age,he can do nothing. There is another person abroad,a less important person — in the eyes of some an insignificantperson, whose labours have tended to produce thisstate of thing's — the schoolmaster is abroad ; and I trustmore to the schoolmaster, armed with his primer, thanI do to the soldier in full military array, for upholdingand extending the liberties of my country's*The confidence of Mr. Brougham was soon justified.Canning had destroyed the opinion that hadalmost grown into a superstition, of the invulnerabilityof the Tories ; and part of the nation hadbecome convinced that they had not an absolute propertyin the places they had so long held. Manypersons thought the foreign policy of the new ministertimid and irresolute ; nearly all agreed that hisplans looked like petty pieces of confusion, whencompared with the bold clear outlines traced byCanning. The Whigs were seen mustering theirforces to the assault. Ireland, bound by a commonhatred of the party of Castlereagh, and giving to thewinds every hope she had cherished, swayed upon• Debates, N. S., vol. xviii., cni. bH.'2 N 'iA. D. lys.548 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the verge of rebellion. There the relations of society' ' were gone, property had lost its influence, rank nolonger commanded respect, a tremendous organizationextended over the whole island ; the Catholicgentry, peasantry, and priesthood, were all combinedin one vast confederacy, while, in England, O'Connell,as their leader and representative, was thundering atthe doors of the house of commons, and struggling,in defiance of law, to force a way into that assembly.The onset against Toryism was led by Lord JohnRussell, who, in the commons, gave notice of a motionfor the repeal of the Test and Corporation acts.The country, watchful and alarmed, answered thecall, and petitions poured in from all parts in favourof the measure. On the 2Gth of February, a daymemorable in the history of the parties, the motionwas made. It was not the argument or the eloquencewhich the occasion called forth, that rendered thisdebate so remarkable. Upon the subject of the motionlittle more could be said than we have alreadyrecorded. It was that the orators who advocated itappealed with a newly-born confidence to the advancingspirit of public opinion. They did not attemptto wear away prejudice by argument, nor did theyattempt to win by conciliation. They spoke with aconsciousness of strength ; a confidence that theywere supported by a power which, like the wind uponthe waters was invisible but irresistible. ** I haveA. D. 1828.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 549heard," said Lord John Russell, " that it is the in- chap.mention of the new ministry to array all the powerwhich influence can muster against this question. Iam sorry to learn this ; not on account of the questionitself, whose progress a minister may retard, butwhose ultimate success he never can prevent ; butbecause it is an indication on the part of governmentof a determination to resist those liberal sentimentswhich are daily gaining ground in the great mass ofsociety. Kings and parliaments, however they mayestimate their power, must more or less submit to beinfluenced by the spirit of the times in which theylive. Even the illustrious person now at the head ofhis majesty's government must consult that voice —must conform to that standard. No matter howgreat his achievements or his glory ; to the spirit ofimprovement which has gone abroad he must bow.It is wisdom to do so without reluctance or hesitation— it is wisdom to take his lesson from the signsof the hour." Among those who followed the mover,himself an illustrious scion of one of England's mostillustrious houses, were Lord Althorp, Lord Nugent,Lord Milton — names which gave earnest that someof the aristocracy had not been left unvisited by thespirit which was troubling the waters, and connectedwith speeches which lose nothing when they an; readeven with that of Brougham.Ou the other haud, Sir Robert Inglis, a countryA. D. 18-28..').'50 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, gentleman, whose character as a consistent, sincere,and immovable Tory, merits our unqualified respect,represented the squirearchy of the country, andstanch opposed all innovation. Mr. Peel opposedit as the representative of the clergy, and as a ministerof the crown. Mr. Huskisson and Lord Palmerston,who had both voted for Catholic emancipation,voted with their colleagues, and attempted toexplain away their votes. All the ministerial strengthhad been gathered for the division, and the whippersin upon the Tory side had been ironically complimentedby the Whig speakers upon their activity.When the numbers were declared, there appeared237 for the motion, and 193 against it, giving amajority to the Whigs of 44i.Whatever may be the differences of opinion as tothe general tendency of the Duke of Wellington'sprinciples of government, there can be none as to themanliness and masculine decision of his domesticpolicy. Defeated by that spirit of improvementwhose power he had so much undervalued, he wastedno time and energy in petty skirmishes, but fellback at once to a stronger position ; he would havedefended even the frontier of Spain had his forcebeen sufficient ; as it was not, he fell back at onceupon the lines of Torres Vedras. Finding the wholeinterest of government in vain opposed to the emancipationof the dissenters, he at once determined toA. D. 1828.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 551concede the point. Sir Robert Peel said that he CHAP.XXI.should offer no further resistance to the declaimedwish of the majority, and the bill passed the commonswithout further serious opposition.It was introduced into the house of lords bv LordHolland, in a speech which proved that to him it wasa misfortune to have been born to a peerage. Thecourse of the debate immediately discovered thepower of the premier. The Archbishop of York roseafter the mover, but only to claim, on behalf of thechurch, some securities in exchange for these acts,and to give his voice for the second reading of thebill. The Earl of Winchilsea impotently gnashedhis teeth against it as a bill for rejecting Christianity,and quoted Burke to show that an infidel is*' an outlaw of the human race never to be tolerated."The Earl of Eldon as the impersonation ofToryism protested against the repeal. " He hadheard much, he said, of the march of mind, and theprogress of information, and of persons changingopinions which they had held for years, but he didnot think it possible that the march of mind couldhave been so speedy as to induce some of thechanges of opinion which he had witnessed withinthe last year; least of all did he expect that such a billas that proposed would ever have been received intotheir lordship's house even under the idea of makingamendments on it. Forty years ago he had voted~)5'2 THE IlISTOUY Ol' PARTY.CHAP, against the repeal of those acts. He has thus votedXXI .' ' — at a time when a o^reat many noble lords whom heA- »• 18-28. , - - . \ . 11-1.then saw around him were not born, and he mightsay the same of some of the reverend prelates whonow supported the measure before their lordships.He had examined the question deliberately, and theresult of his deliberation was that he had been right.He could not, therefore consent to give up the constitutionas well as the church establishment to theextent that the present bill proposed. He could notdo this ; it must be the work of others. He wouldsolemnly say, as he then did, from his heart andsoul, non content to the present bill. The Duke ofWellington, in answer to his old colleague, defendedthe bill, not by any means as being a desirable measure,but as being a necessary concession. Severalorators followed, but there was more of reluctantretreat than of defiance in the tone of the Tories,and the bill was at length read a second time withouta division. In the committee there was considerableconflict ; the Earl of Eldon grew violent and personallyoffensive, but fortunately wasted all his waspishnessupon the Bishop of Chester. After he hadmade an attempt to convert the declaration into anoath, an attempt which signally failed ; after the Earlof Winchilsea had been equally unsuccessful in an attemptto exclude the Unitarians, by what the Bishopof Chester designated as dogmatizing, and after LordA. D. 1828.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 553Tenterden had moved an amendment which certainly CHAP.J XXI.did not bear the impress of his customary goodsense, the bill passed.Thus was the first outpost of Toryism carried,and the artillery that had been used for its defencewas withdrawn to oppose the onset of the Catholics.Catholic Ireland was still united, her population wasstill perfectly organized and ably commanded, nowraging like the surges of their ocean, now silent asthe waters of their own dark lakes ; in each respectobeying implicitly the voice of the chief upon whomevery eye was turned, and to whom every Irish heartwas devoted. '* I know not how to draw a bill ofindictment against a whole people," said Burke,when the Americans were struggling in a bondagewhich was freedom compared with that the Irish suffered.The Americans were unjustly treated by adistant and a powerful nation ; the Irish were groundby the oppression and goaded by the insults of amiserable minority who were present among them toprevent their wrongs from sleeping, and whosecruelty was in proportion to their weakness. TheDuke of Wellington appeared to share this ignoranceof Burke's better days. Warrior and hero as he was,he appeared stupefied with the scene which Irelandnow presented, 'i've Brunswick Club had arisenas the antagonist of the Catholic Association,which, bv the expiration of its Suppression bill, wasA. D. 1828.5.51. THE HISTORY OF Hearty.CHAP, become affair endowed with life. The state of thecontest was well described by Mr. Shell, one of themost eloquent of Irish orators. "The CatholicAssociation owes its political parentage to heavy-wrongoperating on deeply sensitive and stronglysusceptible feelings. Oppression has engendered it.The Protestant Association has its birth in the hereditarylove of power and inveterate habits of domination,and thus two great rivals are brought intopolitical existence and enter the lists against eachother. As yet they have not engaged in the greatstruggle — they have not closed in the combat ; butas they advance upon each other and collect theirmight, it is easy to discern the terrible passions bywhich they are influenced, and the fell determinationwith which they rush to the encounter. Meanwhile,the government stand by, and the minister folds hisarms as if he were a mere indifferent observer, andthe terrific contest only afforded him a spectacle forthe amusement of his official leisure. He sits as iftwo gladiators were crossing their swords for hisrecreation."The orator was wrong in supposing that theminister looked on with apathy. Castlereagh wouldhave renewed his Coercion acts, suspended theHabeas Corpus, imprisoned, perhaps hanged, O'connell,and poured in troops, and he would have hadhis reward in a bloody and a doubtful contest, andTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 55.5in a reaction in England which might have shaken chap.XXI.even the throne. The Duke of Wellington atA.D. 1829.tempted to moderate the violence of the combatants,and made public an ambiguous promise in case thequestion were buried for a short time in oblivion.But the Catholics had experience of such promises.Pitt's sense of honour was not less rigid than that ofthe Duke of Wellington, yet they remembered thatthe party which had allowed Pitt to promise took fromhim the power to perform. The agitation continued,and it remained to be seen whether the duke wouldreconquer Ireland, or would suffer a Whig governmentto come in and carry an Emancipation bill.The high Tories, and especially the Irish Tories,clamoured for the former course ; the Whigs werenot without hope that he would adopt the latter.Such were the expectations of the parties,* whenthey assembled to hear the king's speech at the commencementof the session of 1829- With what surprisethen did they hear in a speech proceeding froma Wellington cabinet, after an exhortation to putdown the Catholic Association, another to review the• The Tories revised to listen that a desperate effort will beto the sounds which were already made by the pro-popery factionin the air. A few days before on the very first day of the ses-themeeting of parliament, the sion. This is the key to the mulethe most aide and ac titii<l<' of false stories of convertorgan of the Tory party, sons, and of minisl.ii.il rancid"Thrrf is no doubt whatever pat ion biJK."556 '•'HE HISTORY of party.CHAP, laws which imposed civil disabilities upon his magiestys Roman Catholic subjects!It now at length became indisputable that theduke had deserted his party. Their rage knew nobounds, nor was it unprovoked. The arguments bywhich the Tories had combated every proposition ofCatholic emancipation were not such as could yieldto expediency, or could be replied to by a threat ofcivil war. The arguments by which they justifiedthe exclusion of their fellow subjects from the rightsof citizens, went to prove that the existence of ourchurch, the preservation of our religion, and theintegrity of our constitution, were involved in therestrictions the Whigs sought to remove. Thesudden abandonment of these arguments, and of thecause they supported, might preserve a ministry, oradd fame to a minister, but it could not but inflict afatal blow upon the party which followed him. Whatsecurity could the nation have that the party whichturned round thus readily at the command of theirchief had ever themselves been convinced that themeasure they withstood was noxious? How couldthe people be called upon to put faith in any futureassertions, or to believe them in earnest in any futurecontests ? In popularity, the gain was very doubtful,for none would be so blind as not to award the prizeof valour to the party who had fought the whole ofthe fight, and who had only been cheated of theglory of victory. In character, the loss was inevitableA. D. 1829.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 557and incalculable, it was a surrender of their principles, chap.XXI.an admission that so large a portion of them wasunsound, that the people who had once thought themsacred looked on and applauded, while the Whigsdemolished the rest.It was the Duke of Wellington and Mr. Peel, notthe Tory party, who carried this question, and thelatter was singled out as the especial object of theirvengeance. When the first whisper of his recreancyreached the Tories, their organ exclaimed, " Whyhas Mr. Peel in every case discouraged every risingProtestant of talent in parliament? — Why have allhis official appointments in the church or in civiloffices been of pro-papists or of inferior men ? Weanswer both questions at once : Because he is a littleman, and he has the miserable jealousy natural tosuch a consciousness. Had the Duke of Wellingtonthrown himself upon the country last year, the Protestantcause would have triumphed ; but Mr. Peelwould have set for ever ; a general election wouldhave thrown into parliament 100 abler men than Mr.Peel." To Peel they attributed the desertion of theduke. " He spun his meshes round the Duke ofWellington, threatened him with the Huskissonparty, and entangled him inextricably in that dubiousand dishonest line of policy from which it is impossiblefor him to escape."Again. " Mr. (banning is receiving a posthumousvindication from the lips of those who wore his fiercestA. I). 18'20.558 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, accusers. Not only do they go beyond his mischievouspolicy in practice, but they renounce thoseeternal principles upon which these accusations weremost hypocritically founded. Mr. Canning knewthe men ; he knew them more dishonest than himself,inasmuch as they affected an immunity fromambition to which he never pretended ; they affectedan indifference to salary and patronage which, freeas he was from such sordid passions, he must stillhave seen was falsely affected. He knew them moredishonest than himself, and he knew them immeasurablyhis inferiors in talent, and he scorned themaccordingly. The time has arrived which shows whowere they * who did that they did in envy of greatCaesar,' and who acted from ' a noble general principle.*The test has been applied by which we candistinguish the Greys from the Newcastle, the Peelsfrom the Chances."Such were the sentiments of the Tory party,* asexpressed through their favourite organ, and everyreader will remember the impatience with which thenightly Standard was waited for in every Tory family,♦ Passages still more contemp these characters of Mr. Peel consciousand virulent than those cited trusted with the overwroughtin the text might be multiplied ; eulogium poured upon him by thebut these are sufficient to show same persons before and since,how little the Tory party had to may also teach us the utter worthywith the passing of the Catholic lessees of such praise or suchbill. The palpable injustice of blame.A. D. 18-29.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 559and the eagerness with which these spirited articles CHAP.XXI.were devoured. The same sentiments were echoedby Tory speakers at Tory gatherings, and upwardsof a hundred petitions nightly were presented to thehouses of parliament against the contemplated measure.Oxford was not wanting to the party whoseprinciples she had ever espoused. While Peel washarassed in the commons by the reproaches of theparty he had betrayed, and standing at bay againstthe members who, armed with petitions, were on allsides assailing him, the university of Oxford, whichhad chosen him instead of Canning, when Canningput off his anti-catholic principles, called upon himto resign his seat. He obeyed ; and when heoffered himself for re-election, the Tories sought outan opposing candidate, whose success might be anindisputable triumph of sound Tory principles. Theirchoice was happily made in Sir Robert Inglis ; and,against all the influence of the government, all theinfluence of the talent and character of Mr. Peel,and the unexampled exertions made in his favour.Sir Robert was returned,* Peel abandoning thecontest as hopeless on the second day.• The enthusiasm of the count sonal sacrifice, had left their cura-tryclergy was, upon this occasion, ties and their livings in remoteextraordinary — knots of old men parts of the kingdom, spending nomight be seen in the convocation small portion of their slender stirmany of whom had not pend to come and vote against thevisited Oxford for nearly half a man whom they called the archcentury, and who, at immense per- apostate.A. 1). 18-29.560 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. In parliament the scheme was introduced by a billfor the suppression of political societies in Ireland,which, as the prelude to emancipation, was sufferedto pass with little direct opposition. The CatholicAssociation anticipated its operation by a voluntarydissolution.On the 6th of March, 1829, Mr. Peel, havingbeen returned for a nomination borough, introducedthe question, and, after a speech of four hours' duration,amid cheering so loud as to be heard in WestminsterHall, and the passages leading to the lobbyof the house, he moved that the house resolve itselfinto a committee of the whole house, to consider ofthe laws imposing civil disabilities on his majesty's RomanCatholic subjects. Now it was that Mr. Peel declaredthat ever since the year IS^^, when he foundhimself in a minority upon that question, he had lookedupon the success of the measure as ultimately inevitable,*and that he espoused the side of concession,not because he had changed his opinion of its impropriety,but because he feared the more imminentdanger of protracted resistance, Mr. Peel representedToryism not converted to Whiggism, butreluctantly yielding to compulsion.Although it has been inferred quite justified by his expressions,from this passage of Sir R. Peel's which are very guarded. It is to bespeech, that he advised Lord Li regretted that his offer to produceliverpool to carry an Emancipation the letters that passed was notbill, yet such a conclusion is not accepted.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 56\On the first night of the debate, Sir George Mur chap.ray,* a follower of the Duke of Wellington, by whomhe had been brought forward into political life, wasthe only Tory who supported the minister. Againsthim appeared many members of that party. Thatrespectable and consistent veteran Tory, Mr. Bankes,the indefatigable Mr. Grant, Mr. O'Neill, and therod of the apostate Sir Robert Inglis, all came forwardto denounce the measure which was indeed nowfound to be a full and fair concession of civil rights ;such as would give the Catholic a voice in the governmentof the country, and enable him to vindicate hisown perfect equality.Upon the second night, Sir Hussy Vivian andSir Thomas Lethbridge were the only convertsamong the speakers. Messrs. Escort, JonathanPeel, Moore — a favourite Tory orator. Hart Davis,and several others who were little known to thehouse as speakers, but who, as parts of the substratumof Toryism, were valuable specimens of thenature of the mass, spoke against the measure.Upon the division, Sir Charles Wetherell, the actorsand Lord Lowthcr, the chairman of thecommissioners of woods and forests, voted against their• This gentleman had kept having absented himself wheneverhimself hitherto quite unshackled, the question was discussed.VOL. IN. 2 OXXLA. U. 1829.56'2THE HISTORY OF Party.A. 1). \S'29.CHAP, collcao^ucs. Ill the Stain house of commons, whichXXI. *had formerly rejected a similar motion by a majorityof 2, it was now carried by a majority of 188.This majority was decisive, and the Tories atonce saw that they had nothing to hope, at least inthe commons. Bitterly did they complain of themanner in which they had been taken by surprise,and industriously did they taunt their treacherousleaders with their fear of appealing to the country.But all in vain, "the atrocious bill," "the constbill," was introduced. After twonights of debate, it was read a second time by amajority of 353 against 173. One of the chieffeatures of this debate, apart from the reiterationof the usual topics of argument for andagainst the question, and the now customarypersonalities against Mr. Peel and the Duke ofWellington, was a brilliant speech from Mr. Sadler,who had just been returned by the Duke ofNewcastle for Newark, and in whom the Toriesimagined they had obtained an unapproachableorator ; a delusion which was not dissipated untilthey heard him sometime after wearying the housewith a stammering and unconnected speech, whensuddenly called up by a personal allusion. Anotherwas a speech from Sir Charles Wetherell, inwhich he cast from him the trammels of office,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.and attacked his late leaders with all his constitutionalvehemence. " So, sir,' exclaimed thisstanch Tory, *' the old Protestant firm — a veryvaluable firm — the firm of Peel and Co., is dissolved.They are broken up, though they had200 constant customers, and though the partners arethe same in respectability in character and in worth.They are a disbanded firm, but they have not desertedthemselves. They have formed a new firm, thoughwith new names at their head"* It was here theCHAP.XXII.A. D. 18-29.Sir Charles was especially severeupon Lord Lyndhurst, whohad obeyed the command of theduke to his cabinet — " Let us notrun a muck against the Catholicsfor their disregard oaths, butseewhat bound some Catholic consciencesWhen my attentionwas called to this bill, I felt it myduty to look over both the oathtaken by the lord chancellor andthat taken by the attorney-general,and it was my judgment,ri!:ht or wrong, that I was calledupon to draw a bill subversive ofthe Protestant church, which hismajesty was bound ley his coronationoath to support." Tiicn, afterrecounting the circumstances ofthe contest between Sir John Copleyand Canning upon this question,lie exclaimed, " Am I thento be twitted, taunted, and attacked,for refusing to do that inthe subordinate office of attorney-general,which a more eminentadviser of the crown declared onlytwo years ago that he would notconsent to do. Let the attackcome — / have no speech to eatup — / have no apostacy to explain/ have no paltry subterfuge toresort to — / have not to say thata tiling is black one day and whiteanother — / was not in one year aProtestant master of the rolls, andin the next a Catholic lord chancellor.I would rather remain asI am the humble member forPlympton (ruin be guilty of suchapostacy, such contradiction, suchinexplicable conversion, suchmiserable, such contemptible ;ipns-lacy."O Q.^G4THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Tories failed : they had no new names to replace thoseof the deserters, and while they were astonished andA. D. 1829. ■^disunited, the battle was won. At the close of thedebate, Mr. Peel formally yielded to the Whigs thehonour of this victory. " One parting word," hesaid, " and 1 have done. I have received in thespeech of my noble friend, the member for Donegal,testimonies of approbation which are grateful to mysoul ; and they have been liberally awarded to meby gentlemen on the other side of the house in amanner which does honour to the forbearance of partyamong us. They have, however, one and all,awarded to me a credit which I do not deserve forsettling this question. The credit belongs toothers, and not to me ; it belongs to Mr. Fox — toMr. Grattan — to Mr. Plunket — to the gentlemenopposite, and to an illustrious and right honourablefriend of mine who is now no more. By their efforts,in spite of my opposition it has proved victorious."The bill now got into committee, and every Torymember had his amendment to propose, his additionalsecurity to bring forward. Night after night werethe most pertinacious endeavours, even to threats ofcontinual adjournments resorted to in order to obtaina little delay. Meanwhile the Tory press was callingthe people to the rescue, representing the Duke ofWellington as entertaining a design to usurp themonarchy, having placed the army of England in theA. D. 1829.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 565hands of his late second in command, and the army chap.XXIin the colonies in the hands of his late quartermastergeneral,* and speaking of Mr. Peel as a fit instrumentfor such a deed. The king, according to thesame authority, was oppressed and coerced, and waswaiting for his loving subjects to deliver himself fromthe hands of his ministers. t Even this appeal, whichas a factious cry is more ancient than the time whenthe parliament of Charles I. routed the royal armies,in the name of the king, failed. Even the denunciationsof divine wrath poured forth by a Tory clergyman,in the columns of the Standard, were ineffectual.Large majorities continued to reject the amendments,and on the 30th of March, the bill passed the houseby .320 votes against 142.On the 2d of April, the Duke of Wellingtonmoved the second reading in the house of lords.The Archbishop of Canterbury moved the amendment.He was followed by a formidable opposition.The Primate of Ireland, the Archbishop of York,the Bishops of Durham, Salisbury, and London — thelast in what his own party sneered at as a trimmingspeech — were the speakers against the bill from thebishops' bench. Of the lay peers, the Duke ofRichmond, the Earl of Winchilsea, the Marquis of• Lord Mill and Sir George f See the Standard and Moni-Murray. ing Journal of tliib lime.56C) THE IIISTOIIY OF Hearty.CHAP. Salisbury, the Earl of Firewood, the Earls of Enniskillen,Falmouth, and Mansfield, and Lords Kenyon,A. D. 18-29.Sidmouth, and Tenterden, spoke in opposition. Infavour of the bill, the emancipating Tories were theBishop of Oxford, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Goderich,the Marquis of Anglesey, the new Earl ofLiverpool ; the majority of whom had voted all theirlives on the other side. The Whigs were representedin the debate by the Duke of Sussex, EarlGrey, Lord Holland, the Marquis of Landownerand Lord Plunket (for we must now class thatnobleman among the Whigs) — men who will all beknown to posterity — men who had spoken and votedall their lives for the question they were now advocating.The division upon this question is highly disgracefulto the peers. The absolute devotion of the majorityof that house to their leaders, their haughtiness tothe commons and constant subserviency to the court,has been especially remarkable since Pitt interferedin the composition of that house. They appear tohave very early perceived that they could not withstandthe current of popular feeling without the aid ofthe crown. In a house that had so frequently rejectedthe same measure, and in which not five of the latemajority knew that the measure was in contemplationwithin a week of the commencement of the session.A. D. 1829.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 567only 79 peers were present to vindicate their con chap.sisterly. The numbers, including proxies, were 217to 112. The usual succession of short sharp battlesfollowed in committee. A final general discharge oforatory occurred upon the third reading ; the bill waspassed by a majority of 104, and it received the royalassent.It was amusing to see in an after part of the session,several of the high Tory party giving vent totheir rage against their late leaders by loud haranguesagainst boroughmongers. The Marquis ofBlandford,* Mr. O'Neill, and some others, even wentso far as to bring forward a motion in favour of parliamentaryreform. They were supported by Mr.Hume and Mr. Hothouse, who never lost an opportunityof voting for any proposition for a reform inparliament, but they were wisely discountenancedby the Whigs, who felt little inclined to leave animportant question in such hands, or to base agrand constitutional principle upon party pique.The Duke of Wellington when he projected theCatholic Emancipation bill, conceived that he was sonecessary to his party, that submission on their partIt is curious to observe the sliccp, the gentle manner in whichcomplimentary tone adopted by the bleating runaways were calledthe ministerial leader of the idolise back to the fold,of commons to these strayingA. D. \&29.50s THE HISTORY Ol' PARTY.CHAP, must be unconditional and unanimous. He alonecould restrain the childish fancies of the king, couldscare away the minions who ruled him, could represswithin the bounds of moderation the personalantipathies he nourished ; he alone of his party hadstrength of mind to govern the king, and reputationto content the people. The duke had, however,made the mistake which many great men had madebefore. He had treated his subordinates with toomuch contempt, and seeing that the majority wereswayed by interest, he forgot that some were influencedby principle. Even in the session of 1829he discovered that the consequence of this error hadbeen to place him in a position of all others themost unpleasant to a man of his high spirit ; that ofholding office by the favour of his opponents. Theconduct of the Whigs upon this occasion had indeedbeen an instance of almost romantic generosity.Not only did they take no advantage of the minister'sdefenceless situation, but they even allowedhim to presume on their forbearance ; actually supportinga disfranchisement bill to which they weregenerally opposed, in order to keep in office anopponent who had stolen their principle. It wasdoubtless, however, expected that the schism in theTory party would close when the discussion whichhad divided it was over j and although the Duke ofA. D. 1830.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 569Cumberland, in his speech upon the third reading CHAP,of the Catholic bill,* had declared, on behalf of hisparty, that he could never again repose confidencein the duke, yet this and similar demonstrationswere looked upon as hasty declarations or vainthreats.The opening of the session of 1830 discoveredthat the resentment of the Tories was more enduringthan the duke had anticipated. In the lords anamendment to the address was moved by the Dukeof Cumberland, seconded by the Duke of Richmond,and supported by Newcastle, Stanhope, Winchilsea,King, and Radnor ; a list in which the extremes ofeach party, the highest Toryism and the most ultraWhiggism, mingled• Tins declaration does not light manner in which the distressoccur in the report of this speech of the country was mentioned,in Hansard's Debates. It is given Now that the Catholic questionin a report afterwards published was disposed of, this noblemanin the Standard, and apparently was no longer a Tory, nor was heby authority. The reply of the one of those who were driven byDuke of Wellington places it disgust into the opposite ranks.beyond doubt that the version A man of liberal mind but of noof the Standard is the more accu- party, he is one of the very fewrate. who have often changed theirf We must except the Duke associates in divisions withoutof Richmond, who probably t.up- tarnishing their character or comportedthe amendment simply sisterly.because he distij)provcd of theA. D. 1830.570 THE IlISTOUY OF PARTY.CHAP. In the commons the same hostility appeared, and' exhibited the ministry in a condition of most pitiableweakness. Sir Edward KnatchbuU moved, and theMarquis of Blandford seconded the amendmentwhich asserted an undoubted fact, that the distresswhich his majesty had been advised was confined tosome particular places was general among all theproductive interests of the country. This amendmentreduced the Whigs to considerable perplexity ;to vote against it would be to compromise theirprinciples as a party, and to draw upon themselvesthe unpopularity of the minister ; to support it,would be to turn out a minister from whose weaknessthey hoped much in favour of their own party principles,and to accomplish the revenge of the Tories.The difficulty was overcome by a finesse : theacknowledged leaders of the Whig party, Mr.Brougham, Lord Althorp, Mr. Spring Rice, andothers, spoke and voted for the amendment, all ofthem, at the same time, expressing their regret, andMr. Brougham declaring that the vote he was aboutto give was literally extorted from him. Others,however, appearing to act on this occasion in oppositionto their party, but probably really acting inconcert, declared their intention of voting for theaddress, although they did not disguise theirpreference of the amendment. Thus AldermanA. D. 1830.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 571Thompson acted, telling the Tories in opposition, CHAP,that they were quite as anxious for a change of menasthey were for a change of measures. Thus, also,Mr. Whitmore, Lord Howick, Mr. W. Smith, Mr.Mildraay, and many other undoubted Whigs acted ;and they were thoroughly justified. The real questionat issue, was not whether the distress was partialor general, but whether it was for the nationalinterest to maintain the Duke of Wellington inpower. That romantic morality which would give avote in parliament without any regard to its politicalconsequences, is never advocated but by knaves,or practised but by their dupes. Had the Whigs,upon this occasion, assisted to carry the amendment,they had pursued the shadow of truth, and embraceda falsehood.By this finesse* the address was carried by amajority of 53.The position in which the Wellington administrationwas thus kept existing by the sufferance ofthe Whigs, was highly favourable to that party'sviews. Their different objects were now kept beforethe eyes of the nation ; abuses were diligently• The manoeuvre which is subtle organ of the \\h\gs.—E(lm-ficicntly apparent in tin dchatc, burgh licvictv, \i>\. V\., [)■-jli.was afterwards acknowledge liy572 THE History OF PARTY.CHAP, sought out and exposed : Mr. Hume and Sir JamesXXII f yGraham, the latter of whom had now risen intoA.D. 1830.high reputation with his party, vied with each otherin their eagerness to discover the lurking-places ofcorruption. The whole party seemed alive tothe truth of a remark made by Sir James Grahamin his speech on the public salaries debate, that"it is only in moments of distress that usefulpurposes are effected :" a remark which all experienceof party contest verifies, and which noWhig should ever forget. The requisite distressnow unfortunately existed. The public attentionwas fixed upon the subject. In the house ofcommons, details of corrupt distribution of patronage,of cabinet ministers creating offices and puttingtheir sons into them, then abolishing the officesand retaining the compensation pension,* mighthave little effect — the members were accustomedto contemplate such things : but they had greateffect upon the country. They were treasured upin the hearts of the people to be remembered at theproper season.The question of parliamentary reform made noSir R. Heron's motion con Bathurst was carried against discerningthe pensions for the Hon. sisters by a majority of 18.H. Diindas and the Hon. W, L.A. D. 1830.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 573advance in this house of commons. The Duke of chap.WeHinffton made some economical reforms, and Mr.Peel adopted, in some degree, the sentiments ofReilly and Mackintosh, upon the subject of thecriminal code ; but parliamentary reform was not tobe approached.*The Marquis of Blandford, however, again cameforward as a reformer. He proposed a standing committeefor the disfranchisement of decayed boroughsand the transfer of their franchise ; the abolition ofthe property qualification, the admission of theclergy to the house of commons, the exclusion ofall placemen, the adoption of household suffrage,and the payment of members at the rate of 9,1.per diem for burgesses, and 4/. for knights of ashire.This notable scheme somewhat perplexed theWhigs ; yet as the marquis appeared perfectlyserious, they could not vote against the principleinvolved in his bill. Lord John Russell and the• Not a little effect also was do what he would with his own,produced by a discussion upon rang through every village. Mr.the conduct of the Duke of New Peel's open justification of thecastle in ejecting those of his principle in the house of corn-tenantrywho had voted against mons kept up the sensation. Hcn-him in the recent election for than's idea of the ballot was nowNewark. His celebrated justified to the popular project of afixation that ho had a right tn |)arliainr'nfary reform.A. D. 1830.571. THE IIISTOllY OF PARTY.CHAT, loaders of the party supported him, but Mr. Stanley,the grandson of the Duke of Dorset, a young oratorwho had claimed at once a very high position amongthe Whigs, perhaps more reasonably, voted at onceagainst so absurd a measure.Lord John Russell's very moderate propositionfor extending the franchise to Manchester, Leeds,and Birmingham, was happily defeated by a majorityof 48. Mr. Peel, who upon this occasion firstdelivered his opinion upon the subject of parliamentaryreform, took shelter behind the authorityof Burke and Canning, and said, "he saw nothingwhich led him to think that an alteration in themode of construction of the house of commonswas necessary. Mr. Swiss and Sir George Murrayeach declared that they were no enemies tolegitimate reform ; but, although they strenuouslyopposed the present very inefficient scheme astoo violent, they left the house in ignoranceof what they conceived to be legitimate reform.Brougham, Dr. Washington, O'Connell,and Huskisson, enforced the principle of thebill ; the last speaker seeming to speak in thespirit of prophecy when he said, the time wasfast approaching when ministers would be compelledto come down to the house with somemeasure or to resign their situations, and thatA.D. 1830THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 5'J5nothing was more unwise than for a government to CHAP,delay important propositions till driven forward byoverwhelming majorities.On the 25th of June, George IV. died.The conduct of George IV. towards the twonational parties was characterized neither by principlenor consistency. His early popularity wasbased upon a gentlemanly address and an affabilitywhich cost him nothing ; the extravagances of hisyouth contributed to it ; they were thought to betheweeds of a generous soil. But in the shallowheart of George IV. principle could take no root —self was his motive, his principle, according to thedictates of which he adhered to, or abandoned aparty or a mistress. As Prince of Wales hewas a Whig, because he wished to annoy hisfather ; as Prince Regent and George IV. hewas a Tory, because he wished to remove fromhim the prayers of his people. Sheridan he abandonedto shame and death, because, having sacrificedfame and friendship to his favour, that greatman had no more to offer, and his fickle patrongrew weary of him. Earl Grey and the Whigshe drove from his councils because they wouldmake no such sacrifice, and he hated them everafterwards because he had betrayed them. TheDiikc of Wellington he clung to in his latter5jG THE insTOin' of party.CHAP, (lays of feeble indolence; for although the dukeXXI .was probably rather an imperative and troublesomeA. U. 1830.inmate of the closet, yet he kept him quite securefrom any intrusion from without.THE HISTORY OF Party.«577CHAPTER XXII.Prospects of the Whigs at the accession of William IV. — French revolutionof 1830 — Duke of Wellington's declaration against reformDefeat of his administration — Formation of the Grey administration— Introduction of the first Reform bill — Debates — Rejectedor the second reading — Dissolution of parliament — Elections —Meeting of the new house — Reform bill re-introduced — Debated —Passed — In the house of lords — Debated — Rejected — A short prorogation— State of the country — Power of the press — Parliamentre-assembles — Second Reform bill brought forward — Passes thehouse of commons — The Whigs defeated in the house of lords —Resign — State of the country — The Duke of Wellington fails toform an administration — Earl Grey returns to office with power tocreate peers — The Reform bill passes the lords.The death of* George IV. occurred at a very cri chap.XXIItical period. The charm had begun to work,* thesteps of the schoolmaster had been faithfully fol " to 1832.The Tories heard the wind l)ecn pushed too far among theapproaching. " We cannot help lower classes," groaned a Tory inexpressing an apprehension that the Quarterly Review, vol. xxxix.,both education and reading have p. 494.VOL. [II. 2 I'578 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, lowed by the newsboy, who supplied the want asquickly as it was created. Within a very few yearsA. D. I'mto 188J. the daily journals had sprung from mere chroniclesof robberies upon Hounslow-heath, with occasionalreports of parliamentary proceedings, and occasionalcommunications from correspondents, to powerfuland thoroughly-organized engines for the disseminationof party principles and the universal distributionof political knowledge. In them, thattalent which had hitherto bubbled forth in an occasionalpamphlet, now flowed in a continued streamof political instruction ; in them, the principles andthe acts of the parties were daily attacked and desfended J not a Tory abuse was brought to light,not one of Mr. Hume's discoveries took place,without being thoroughly paraded and eloquentlyamplified in the Whig papers. A very few of theseinstances, acting upon a state of general distress,were sufficient to inoculate even the middle classeswith discontent. The Whigs felt that their sails,which had so long been spread in vain to catch thepopular breeze, suddenly began to fill, that afterseventy years of exclusion and persecution theirtime, at length, was come. It was not the men ofManchester nor the reformers of Birmingham — itwas that voice never heard in vain, the voice of themiddle classes which called upon them now, andthey prepared to obey.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 579Even in the debate upon the answer to the mes chap.XXIIsage of the new monarch, the Whigs discovered '- —. A.D. 1830that they were no longer disposed to guard the to ista.chariot of the Duke of WelHnorton, A retainer of theduke, supposing that the Whigs had, by a concessionto one of their principles, been bound to an enduringdebt of gratitude, expressed surprise that any symptomof opposition should proceed from such a quarter,and began to speak of inconsistency, and the advantageof knowing who were true friends, and whobut concealed enemies. He was soon silenced.Earl Grey enabled him to see the difference betweengiving a disinterested support to a minister whilepursuing a just measure and protecting him againstits consequences, and continuing to support the sameminister when his measures were no longer just.He challenged the ministerialists to produce oneinstance of his having professed a general confidencein the duke's administration, and repeated the undeniabletruth that it was incapable of managing theaffairs of the country. The high Tory party hadnot yet forgotten their cause of quarrel ; the Dukeof Newcastle and his friends voted with the Whigs.In the lords the duke was sufficiently strong to beatboth parties, but the experiment was not tried in thecommons.On the 24th of July parliament was dissolved, anda house of commons which had been in advance of2 r 25H0 TIIK insTOUY OF Inanity.CHAP, the public sentiment upon the subject of toleration,XXII'— but far behind it upon the subject of parliamentaryA. D. 1830 ^ , .to \s:)'2. reform* was sent back to the constituency.The news of the events of the three days of July,the almost concurrent intelligence that the elderbranch of the house of Bourbon had attacked theliberties of France — and had ceased to reigns cameto swell the deep murmur for reform which was nowrising from the whole people. As the elections proceeded,the depth of this feeling became manifest.Not a single cabinet minister obtained a seat by anythingapproaching to open and popular election.The relations of Mr. Secretary Peel sustained noless than five defeats. The nephew of the Duke ofWellington was at the bottom of the poll, and noThis is very readily accounted the events of the succeedingfor. By Catholic Emancipation the month. There is another in theprivate interests of the members (Tory) Quarterly Review, whichwere not affected; by parliamentary was pointed out by Dr. Boringreform they were fearfully threat and other speakers,' at publicened. I think it is Hobbes who meetings, as contributing in somehas observed that the axioms of degree to those events. " Thegeometry are only admitted to be nation is nothing," said the lattertrue, because ther-e is no class of periodical to the French king,persons interested in proving them " You are every thing ; cut up thefalse. press that disturbs you by thef There is an article in the very roots ; by firmness we have(Whig) Edinburgh Review, foi done every thing ; follow our ex-june,1830, which foretels, with ample— be you firm also." i •an accuracy that is astonishing.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. '581Other connexion of the government ventured to chap.XXII.show themselves at any place. Of the thirteen ffreat — — — ^ —^ ^ . A. D. 1830popular constituencies returning twenty-eight mem to 183-2.hers, the minister could claim but three votes. Onthe other hand, Mr. Hume was spontaneously chosenby the electors of the metropolitan county. Mr.Brougham was claimed by the freeholders of Yorkshire.A Whig colleague was given to Mr. Cokein Norfolk — that venerable Whig, who, in the proudposition of the first commoner of England, couldafford to smile as Pitt's merchants and contractors,creations of the national debt, passed him into thehouse of lords. Devonshire returned two Whigs.Cambridgeshire, in spite of the great influence ofthe Duke of Rutland, followed of the same track.Wherever popular feeling could have effect upon anelection, the result was the same.* The resentmentof the high church Tories was now also felt bythe minister. Very numerous were the instancesin which a Tory constituency rejected their formermember for voting for the Catholic bill, and electeda fanatic in his stead In these exchanges, whatthe Tories gained in energy, they almost invariablylost in talent. This was especially shown in theelection for the Dublin University, where Mr.Croaker, a fluent and oftentimes even a brilliant• Sec a pamphlet tallied " What gained by the Dissolution," gene-hasii Hiike (if Welliiiuloii rally attainted to Mr. Kroiipham..^8*2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, speaker, who had constantly voted in favour of theXXIICatholics, but who, in all other respects, had dato1832. served well of the Tories, was rejected in favour of acandidate who was certainly his inferior in efficiency.The new parliament met in November, at a timewhen the middle classes were discontented, and thelabouring classes were desperate ; when the despairof the latter was manifested by the most wanton andun-english attacks upon property, and when not anight passed in the agricultural districts in which aspectator could not stand and count several conflagrationsof farms or corn-stacks, all lit up by thehands of wilful incendiaries. This class of personshad lost all confidence in the honesty or humanity oftheir rulers : when they read animadversions upon thecorruption and careless extravagance of the house ofcommons, they contrasted this waste with their owndestitution. Toryism had already created a hatredbetween the property classes and the labouring populationin towns ; the same dreadful political disorderwas now observed in the counties.On the first night of the session. Lord Grey advertedto the state of the country, and spoke ofremedies. " We see the hurricane approaching — wemay trace presages of the storm on the verge of thehorizon. What course ought we to adopt ? Weshould put our house in order, we should secure ourdoors against the tempest. How? By securingTIIK HISTORY OF PARTY-58Sourselves of the affections of our subjects, by re- CHAP,moving grievances, by affording redress, byA. D. 1830may I venture to use the word ? — the adoption of to i832.measures of temperate reform. I know not whetherwe can expect that ministers will undertake suchmeasures, but of this I am satisfied, that if theydo not make up their minds to the course indicated,in time, it will be ultimately forced upon them, andreform will be carried under circumstances much lesssafe and advantageous than now present themselves.I have been a reformer all my life, and I will add,that never — in my younger days, when I might besupposed to have entertained projects wilder or moreextensive than maturer years and increased experiencewould sanction — never would I have pressedreform further than I would do now, were the opportunityafforded."In answer to this speech the Duke of Wellingtonmade his memorable declaration against reform. " Iam fully convinced," he said, "that the countrypossesses, at the present moment, a legislature whichanswers all the good purposes of legislation ; and thisto a greater degree than any legislature ever hasanswered in any country whatever. I am not onlynot prepared to bring forward any measure of thedescription alluded to by the noble lord, but I will atonce declare, that as far as I am concerned, and aslong as I hold any station in the government of the.''>84' THE History OV PARTY.CHAP, country, I shall always feel it my duty to resist suchmeasures when proposed by others"*A. D. 1830 ^ ^ -^ 1 J 1 nto 1832. The publication of this answer was the death-blowto the duke's administration. The king was exceedinglypopular ; his frank and open manners, and hisgenerous oblivion of all the personal quarrels of theDuke of Clarence, contrasted strongly with the conductof his predecessor ; yet such was the unpopularity,or the apprehension of his ministers, that apromised visit to the city was indefinitely postponed,avowedly through fear of popular tumult. It addednot a little to the cry against the Duke of Wellington,that he had attempted to involve the king in hisown unpopularity — that he had held forth those whodisliked his administration as disloyal to their sovereign.At length the blow which forbearance or policyhad so long held suspended, fell. On the 15th ofNovember, on a motion made by Sir Henry Parnellupon the civil list, ministers were left in a minority.Mr. Hothouse immediately asked whether it was theintention of ministers to resign ? anc^ when Mr. Peelremained silent, added that he would bring the questionto an issue. The hostility and determination ofI have given the chief sen haps strengthened by reiteratedfences of this celebrated declare expressions of admiration at theration which was considerably existing system of representation,amplified by repetition, and per-THE HISTORY OF PARTY.the house was manifested by the cries of *' Move, CHAP.^ XXII.move !" bv which the member was encouraged to ——7; .^^^° A.D. 1830make some decisive motion. No further division, to 1832.however, took place. Mr. Peel persisted in refusingto notice the unreasonable question put to him ; butit was known the next morning that the Wellingtoncabinet was at an end.William IV. immediately sent for Earl Grey, andcommissioned him to form a cabinet. The result ofthe arrangement made by this highly respected nobleman,was the formation of a Whig administrationconsentient upon the subject of a thorough parliamentaryreform. Of this reform administration. EarlGrey was, of course, the premier ; the Marquis ofLansdowne was president of the council ; Mr.Lambton, whose labours as a reformer in the houseof commons had been arrested in 1828, by his elevatedto the peerage, as Lord Durham, was lord privyseal ; Lord Holland was chancellor of the duchy ofLancaster. The Duke of Richmond, after once ortwice looking back, overcame his scruples and amalgamatedwith the Whigs, accepting office as .Lord Lyndhurst, it was said, reluctantly,*resigned the chancellorship, and, after some• There was certainly somctliiiig iiiHucncc, advocated his retention.very suspicious in the manner in Perhaps an indifferent observer,which a powerful journal wiiieh reading the articles wiiieiiap[ii'aredI. did Lyndiiurst was supposed to in iliis patter during the formation"58^^ THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, slight delay, Mr. Broufrbam succeeded him. This^ appointment was, no doubt, reluctantly made. Itto 1832 was unfortunate for Mr. Brougham's party, that theonly adequate reward of his great ability should deprivethem of his presence in the scene where hisservices were most valuable. Lord Plunket was lordchancellor of Ireland. Lord Melbourne, who wasnow chiefly known as a man of literary taste andhighly-cultivated mind, and as a Whig in politics, butwhom posterity will probably remember as a second,but more fortunate, Lord Rockingham, was home secretary.LordGoderich was secretary for the colonies.In the commons the leadership was committed toLord Althorp, whose sterling sense, industry, andstraightforward conduct quickly gained him the confidenceof the house, and obtained for him a respectand almost affection from the members of that numerousassembly which had been denied to manymore brilliant men. Lord Althorp was chancellor ofthe exchequer. Lord John Russell was paymasterof the forces. Sir James Graham, who had soeminently distinguished himself by his zeal, andability, was, notwithstanding his extreme Whiggism,raised to the head of the admiralty. Lord Palmerston,who setting out with the advanced guardof the reform ministry together, hurst was never absent from thewould suspect that Lord Lynd- writer's mind.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. ' 'of the Tories, had sometime since overtaken the ^^^j^-Whigs, was foreign secretary. Mr. Stanley, who Xlxlsao"was one of the very few men in the house of com- to 1832.mons who could be pitted against O'Connell with anyhope of success, was secretary for Ireland.* Mr.Denman was attorney-general. Mr. C. Grant presidentof the board of control. Mr. Poulet Thomson,treasurer of the navy.Had Huskisson survived, he had, doubtless, joinedthis administration, which contained nearly all thepersonal adherents of Canning. The principleadopted by that sagacious leader of yielding to publicopinion where he could not guide it, was in fact aWhig principle ; and his followers, when public opinionran strong, found themselves driven to the veryposition occupied by the Whigs. Mr. Huskisson,however, was now no more ; on the 15th of Septemberof this year, he had met a dreadful death.On that day, the ceremony of opening the Liverpooland Manchester Railway took place; Mr. Huskissonwas present ; he had crossed the railway to shakehands with the Duke of wellington, and was returning,when seeing an engine rapidly approaching, he• Mr. Stanley, who sat for Pres level in the house of commons —ton, was opposed and beaten when the firebrand was in another ele-he went down to be re-elected, and ment, it hissed a few moments, andhis opponent was Mr. Henry Hunt, went out.This gentleman (iviickly found hisTHE HISTORY OF PAUTY.CHAP, stood for a moment irresolute; before he could <:^etXXII.- — ^ — clear of the railway, the engine was upon him, andto 183-2. his thigh was dreadfully shattered : he ling-red a fewhours and expired. His character as a statesman isvery lair. Upon the contested question of the soundnessor fallacy of his commercial policy, it is not our^ province to enter : as a party man he betrayed nofriendships, he abandoned no principles ; and thosewho charge him with too great anxiety to recal hismisused offer of resignation sent to the Duke of Wellington,forget to state that that anxiety did notinfluence his vote, and that there were obviousreasons why he should not wish that a hasty noteshould be exhibited as a formal letter of resignation.The Whigs were now again in power, with thenational voice in their favour, and with a king who,if he was not himself a Whig, had only relinquishedthat character as inconsistent with the impartiality ofa monarch. They came into office determined toclear away the foul deposits of nearly seventy yearsof Toryism ; and to turn a stream of popular influencethrough the government, which should run withsufficient force to prevent any future accumulation.Reforms in every portion of the state were immediatelyprojected ; not a nest of corruption was leftthreatened, although few, except the victims threatened,heeded the threats. Minor abuses and minorreforms excited little attention among a people whoto 1832.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. '^89were expecting that great reform which should be ^^J\^'the instrument to effect all others. ^ j^ ^^^^An affair of so great magnitude was not easily arranged.The first draft, as it proceeded fi'om thoseto whom the preparation was committed, contained aprovision for the ballot. This was rejected upon discussion,and considerable alteration was made in thequalification for voters. All those parts of the billwhich involved a principle appear to have been muchagitated ; and when we estimate the difficulty of obviatingopposite objections from a number of independentmen we are not very sanguine as to the per-fiction of the measure in preparation.To Lord John Russell, whose persevering effortsin the cause deserved the distinction, was committedthe task of introducing into the house of commonsthe measure which was to restore the Whig constitution.The approach of the bill was preceded byan advance-guard of petitions, which choked eventhe deep and dark receptacle for such documentsunder the table of the house of commons, and theirdiscussion employed the attention of the housefor many days. On the first of March Lord JohnRussell entered the house of commons amid thecheers of the majority of the assembly, and thespeaker called upon him to move. In the early partof his speech, he stated the position in which theministry stood, " placed between two hostile parties ;neither agreeing with the bigotry of the one, that nosoo THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, reform is necessary — nor with the fanaticism of theXXII.-— other, that only some particular kind of reform can,A. D. 1831 .to 1832. by any means, be satisfactory to the people." Hepassed on thence to a recapitulation of the argumentsin favour of reform, assuming, at last, that no man ofcommon sense pretended that the assembly in whichhe stood represented the people of England. Thenecessity of some community of feeling between thepeople and the assembly by which they were taxed, andthe existing state of the country as the consequenceof the absence of such community of feeling, weretopics which naturally followed, and introduced thedescription of the remedy proposed. " Ministershave thought," proceeded the speaker, *' and, in myopinion, justly, that it would not be sufficient to bringforward a measure which should merely lop off somedisgusting excrescences, or cure some notoriousdefects, but would still leave the battle to be foughtagain with renewed and strengthened discontent.They have thought that no half measures would besufficient ; that no trifling, no paltering with so greata question could give stability to the throne, authorityto the parliament, or satisfaction to the country."Hitherto the Tories had listened with considerableinterest, but with no very violent alarm. They hadanticipated some mock measure to hush the reformcry ; the gradual disfranchisement of a few convictedboroughs ; the gradual enfranchisement of a few largeTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.to 1832.towns ; some denunciations against bribery ; and per- ^^^f *haps a proposal for the purchase of Gaston and Old "^7571837Sarum. The reality fell upon them as a thunderclap— sixty boroughs struck off by one blow —forty-seven to be reduced to a single member — nocompensation proposed to the holders of the illegalproperty — these propositions spread utter dismayamong the members sitting on the opposition benches.Nothing could have been more perfect than theastonishment and confusion of the Tory borough-holders,as, one by one, the names of their boroughswere pronounced, amid the cheers of the Whigs, andas Lord John Russell read in their ears the death-sentenceof their political existence.It is not our province to follow the speaker intothe details of this bill. Its principle was the restorationof the democratic influence in the government.It acted by disfranchising decayed boroughs, and enfranchising,although in a very sparing manner, themore recently-risen towns. The duration of parliamentswas not altered ; not because the ministersdisapproved of alteration — for Lord John Russell, inthat case, would have assigned no other reason ; butbecause the object could be much more convenientlyconsidered in a separate 1)111. According to thedecision of the committee which framed the bill, theballot was not adopted in the machinery of elections. —Lord .John Russell even stated the arguments againstit ; but so faintly that he did not appear to feel them.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. No sooner did the Whigs propound this plan in"T'^^Tc^rr the house of commons than the schism amonor theA. D. 1831 "to 1832. Tories at once closed. The high church Tories forgottheir wrongs ; the political Tories forgot thatthey had been deserted — both parties joined. Murrayand Wetherell were united ; Peel and Ingliswere no longer enemies ; all domestic strife was laidaside, to concentrate their energies against a measurewhich went to destroy the supremacy of the Toryparty. Sir Robert Inglis was the first to attack themeasure, which, if the speech as it was spoken bearsany relation to that which was afterwards published,he did in a speech discovering very considerableacquaintance with the authorities upon the subject,and what, in a Tory, is more extraordinary, considerableconfidence that the cry for reform was perfectlyharmless.Seven nights of debate succeeded the introductoryspeech of Lord John Russell, and upwards of seventymembers spoke upon the question ; but this mightywar of words closed without a division. The Toriesdid not know their strength; they had not formallycomposed their differences, and united under oneleader.This error was rectified before the second reading,which was moved by Lord John Russell on the21st. The usual amendment that the bill beread this day six months was intrusted to Sir R.Vyvyan one of the members for Cornwall, who avowedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. .59^that he was action in direct opposition to the wishes of chap.XXII.his constituents. "And in this respect'' he added, " I — -—^ A. D. 1831believe I am in the situation of very many honourable to 1832.members who object to the bill ; for it cannot bedenied that the speech of the noble lord (Lord JohnRussell) which has circulated in every part of thekingdom has produced a very strong excitement inits favour." Mr. Shell, one of the offspring of theCatholic Emancipation act, brought his eloquenceto aid the party which had enabled him to sitin the house of commons, and was rather morethan equal to the baronet to whom he replied.Mr. Charles Grant was less fervent but more argumentativeupon the same side. Mr. W. Bankes wasindia-nant on behalf of Dorsetshire. Lord Norrisrather startled the house by saying, that he had comedownwith the intention of voting for the bill ; but herestored the equanimity of his party by adding thatlie had changed his mind. Mr. Villiers Stuart, arepresentative of one of the boroughs ]proposed to bedisfranchised, not having been yet able to resignhis seat, declared his intention of voting, as a pointof honour against the bill ; but expressed a hope thathe should vote with llu; minority. The solicitorgeneral, by no means a violent Whig, defended thebill from the imputation of being of a revolutionarycharacter. Sir iMlwanl Sudden, a Tory, whose politicaliiiiportancc was entirely dnivcd from his extra-vols.III. "^ Q391 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ordinary reputation as a profound equity lawyer,'■ — '■ — declared that the ffrcat object of the government inA. D. 1881 .to 183-2. bringing forward this measure was to preserve theiroffices. He closed the first day's debate. On thesecond day Lord Mason, a young nobleman of whomthe Tories conceived high expectations, drew a pictureof the terrors of democracy, and aspired for onehour of Canning's aid to combat its advance. Sir J.Shelly, an old member of the house, regretted thathe differed from his constituents upon this question,and honestly declared, that at a recent reformmeeting in his borough, he was the only personpresent who raised his voice against the measure.Mr. Ormsby Gore invoked the spirits of Sir WilliamBlackstone and Lord Bacon, and quoted and commentedupon the remark of the latter — " Omnissuhita immutntio periculo est." Captain Molehillwished that the bill had been more comprehensive.Mr. W. Ward admitted, like many others, that hewas opposing his constituents in opposing the bill,Mr. Wyse dismissed the spirit of Sir W. Blackstone,which had been invoked by Mr. Gore as an anti-reformer,and restored him to his rest as a reformer ;he adduced the authority of Mr. Locke, also, uponthe same side, and then set off upon the track of historicalargument in favour of the bill. Sir R. Bate-sonopposed the measure ; because it '* would addweight to the aristocracy, while it took away all influencefrom the mercantile, manufacturing, and ship-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 595ping interests" — an objection which, although it ap CHAP,feared absurd to his audience, was not without con '- !A D 1 ft^ 1miserable truth. The Earl of Mountcharles ex " to impressedhis willingness to sacrifice his private interests,since he was conscientiously convinced thatthe necessities of the public required the surrender.Lord Castlereagh opposed the bill ; expressing considerablealarm at the ultimate views of the reformers,and quoting in justification of that alarm aspeech made by a gentleman named Emerson, inwhich he had declared that theRace,The tenth transmitters of a fooHsh face,"would be destroyed by the Reform bill for ever. Mr.Shaw, a stout defender of Toryism, expressed himselfready to vote for a moderate plan of reform, but certainlynot for this. The attorney-general asked forsome clearer view of that indefinite reform which hadso suddenly become the object of Tory favour.* Sir• This speaker, in answer to of the constitution. There wasthe imputation upon ministers of his venerable friend the memberbeing actuated by interested mo for Norfolk (Mr. Coke); thetimes, alluded with much effect to noble lord who then, as now, re-tic old reformers then in the presented the county of Derbyhouse — " the friends of reform in (Lord George Cavendish). Thethe last century and the consistent honourable and long trusted mom-advocatesof the present bill, hers for Middlesex (Messrs. HungWhen he looked around, be saw and Hume) ; and .Surrey (Messrs.them filling the same place in the Venison and Roscoe); and Herk-fjamo ranks, and fighting the battle shire (Messrs. Charles Dundas5y() THE HISTORY OF PAllTY.CHAP. James Scarlet (the parliamentary lawyers always 1 pear to prefer debating with each other) replied to theA. D. 1831 1 TT 1 r. 11 rto I8yi>. attorney-general. He also was favourable to retort,and having once been a Whig, his idea of reformhad probably been less shadowy and flitting than thatof Mr. Shaw, " but he was bound," he said, "by novote he had before given, to adopt the specific measurebefore the house, and deeming it inconsistentwith the constitution, he should oppose it'' SirThomas Dyke Aslant remarked that no memberhad taken part in the debate without expressing hisreadiness to make some reform ; a remarkable changewhich had taken place since the seven nights' debate.He briefly advocated the second reading. LordJohn Russell replied ; and after Mr. Hunt had attemptedto obtain a hearing, the house divided. Thenumbers were SO^Z to 301. The second reading,therefore, was carried by a majority of one.In ordinary circumstances, after such a division,a ministry must either have retired or dissolved parliament.The reform administration did neither.The country was in such a state that they had a rightand Robert Palmer). Others he minster (Sir F. Burdett), whocould name ■ the noble lor.I who, then gave his first vote, and madefrom 1797 to the present time, his first speech in favour of asat in parliament for Lancashire cause which he had ever since so(Lord Stanley); his honourable honourably and so steadily de-friendthe member for West fcnd»'d."THE HISTORY OF PARTY.to expect that the Tories would not force them to a chap.dissolution by which they must be annihilated. The ~^;~]5rT837Tories, on the other hand, where well aware that if ^o 1^32.the bill was passed, a dissolution must follow, and tothe owners of the condemned boroughs, the passingof the bill was the accomplishment of all they couldfear.On the 18th of April, upon the motion that thehouse go into committee on the bill, the Tories madeanother grand effort. The conduct of this was intrustedto General Gascony, who had recoveredfrom the reform fit which succeeded the passingof the Catholic bill, and who moved as an amendmenta resolution against the reduction of the numberof members of the house. There can be nodoubt that this point was well chosen. The originalministerial bill was by far too favourable tothe agricultural interests which had a manifest predominancein the representation. But the object ofthe amendment was avowedly to throw out the ministry.It was seconded in a set speech by Mr. Sadler, whowas replied to by Lord Authors). A debate of twonights succeeded ; a debate which called up Mr.Stanley, Sir James Graham, Sir T. Denman, andLord John Russell, who were supported with greatability by two less known members, Henry LyttonBuller and Mr. Hawkins : the former, at that time,better known in literature than in j)()Htics, the lattera favourite exanij)l(' with the 'I\)ri(»s, wlm |)i»in(((l Id598 THE HISTOKY OF PARTY.CHAP, his eloquent speech, and remarked that he sat for theX \ 1 1'. J decayed borough of St. Michael. Several of theA D 1831to 183-2. AVhig party, among' whom was Sir R. Wilson, whomMr. Stanley severely castigated for his inconsistency,voted with the Tories, who were supportedby their usual speakers, and especially by Sir RobertPeel. Upon the division the ministers were defeatedby a majority of 8. The numbers being 299to 291. Two days afterwards, upon a motion for anadjournment, they were again beaten by a majorityof 22. Ministers had now no alternative but to dissolvethe parliament.At this moment all depended upon^the king,whose power of dissolving parliament at the propercrisis of public opinion, and of dismissing and appointingministers, renders him, in ordinary cases,the absolute arbiter as to which party shall rule inEngland. The present was not, however, an ordinarycase : had William IV., at this moment, refusedto dissolve, we should have had to tell how theReform bill was temporarily repressed by a veryextensive system of dragooning, and, perhaps, howthe Reform bill was lost in a great national convulsion.The Tories appear to have placed theirhopes either upon the timidity of William or of hisministers ; nothing could exceed the rage with whichthey learned that the king was on his way to Westminster; nor could any scene enacted at the dissolutionsof the exclusion parliaments of Charles II.THE HISTORY OF PAUTY. 599have been more riotous than that which was exhibited chap.XXII.in each house. It is said by the reporter of theA.D. 1831lords' debates, that the peeresses present to witness the to 1^32.ceremony of the prorogation where alarmed ; and thatsome of the peers were, as it appeared in the confusion,almost scuffling, and as if shaking their hands at eachother in anger. The commons were scarcely lessdisorderly. Sir Robert Peel was pouring forth denunciationsagainst the ministers amid the fiercestcries, which were passing like shouts between theWhig and Tory benches, when the usher of the blackrod appeared."The bill, the whole bill, and nothing but thebill," was now the cry throughout the nation. Neverwas there in England an enthusiasm so universalamong the middle classes as that by which they wherenow animated. The influence of property was gone ;all ordinary tics were broken ; Tory nominationboroughs threw off' their fetters, and elected reformers ;counties which had never before resisted the voice ofthe landlords now put by their claims, as men wouldhush a child prattling its nonsense out of season. SirEdward KnatchbuU, whose influence in Kent hadhitherto been irresistible, deemed it madness now toattempt a contest. Sir R. Vyvyan was, at once expelledfrom Cornwall ; Mr. Bankes was defeated inDorsetshire ; no Tory appeared in Yorkshire, TheOthers, who had held Westmorland, ( "uuil)erlaiHl,and Carlisle in their hands, obtained only oiu' seat(loo THE History OF PARTY.CHAP, for Westmorland. The Duke of Newcastle's influx— '— encc vanished. Newark, Bassetlaw, and the county ofA.D. \m\to 183*2. Notes, upon this occasion, returned reformers. LordNorris was rejected in Oxfordshire. In everycounty the feeling was the same. Thousands ofvoters miffht have been heard to declare their affectionfor their landlord, and their sorrow to voteagainst him; "but they must have parliamentaryreform." When this was once carried their landlordshould be again their representative.In the towns the Tories dared not appear; for thepopulace being equally with the electors enamouredof the Whig measure of reform, having no othermeans of testifying their zeal, destroyed the housesand attacked the persons of the Tory candidates andvoters.The new house of commons met on the 14th ofJune. The Reform bill was introduced on the 24th.This was an assembly of men intent upon the accomplishmentof the object for which they had beenelected ; an assembly that would endure no sevennights' debate upon a preliminary motion, which impatientlybrooked any discussion at all upon a measurewhich had been already so tediously debated, and ofwhich the success was now so certain. The bill wasintroduced, and read a first time without debate. Thesecond reading was moved on the fourth of July.The debate was twice adjourned ; at the close of thethird ni<rht the house divided— .367 for, and 231THE HISTORY OF PARTY.to 183-2.against ; srivinff a majority of 1 36 in favour of the chap.Whigs. Of the minority there were certainly not ^ ^ ^^,^^fifty members who were not directly interested inthe fate of the bill.From this lengthened debate we miss many namesaccustomed to stand forth very conspicuously in thelist of Tory speakers — the winnowing only remained.Fortunately, Sir Robert Peel and Sir CharlesWetherell sat, each for private boroughs, and the billhad no sooner got into committee than the lattergave proof of his indomitable resolution. Delay wasnow the only object to be striven for, delay until thepopular impatience should beget disorders, or untilsome happy accident should defeat the bill, A motionwas made, which, if carried, would have entitledeach borough proposed to be disfranchised to beheard by counsel at the bar of the house It was ofcourse resisted by a large majority. An attemptwas made to get up another debate upon the principleof the measure ; Lord Althorp objected that ithad been agreed that one discussion of the principleof the bill on the second reading should be deemedsufficient. Sir Robert Peel agreed that such hadbeen the understanding, declared that he would beno party to any vexatious delay, and left the defenceofTorvism to Sir Charles Wetherell. Sir Charlesgave imme(liat(; proof of the hiirh Tory stubbornnessin party warfare. Under his guidance, Mr. Gordon602 THE HISTORY OF I'AllTY.CHAP, moved an adjournment at twelve o'clock, and was ofXXII.course beaten. Mr. Cresset Pelham immediatelyA. D. 18.-^lto 183J. made the same motion with the same success. SirCharles Wetherell succeeded, and a sharp discussionensued ; the Whigs accusing the Tories of havingput forward Sir 11. Peel as their leader, obtaining acertain delay upon certain conditions, and then,when the delay had been obtained, repudiating SirRobert's authority, and refusing performance of theconditions. Sir Charles Wetherell, however, refused tolisten to any such compromise ; another division tookplace. Lord Bridewell declared he was ready to sitthere till five o'clock the next day, and made another motion,which was followed by another debate and anotherdivision. Sir Charles Wetherell now took his turn.Ministers, whose supporters were still upwards oftwo hundred, while those of the minority were lessthan forty, refused to yield to a factious opposition,which might, if successful, be nightly repeated.Sir Charles taunted ministers with their comic appearance,dancing in and out of the house like a cometwith its tail, and declared he should not think ofgiving up until they had made up a full score of divisions,*' I have made up my mind to perseverance,and persevere I will."The Whigs, however, remained at their post, andat seven o'clock in the morning, Sir Charles, hisnumbers having dwindled to twenty-four, agreed to aTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 603compromise. The ministers carried their point of chap.XXII.moving the bill into committee, and the house ad '- —° AD. 1831journey. to 1832.Popular oppositions have moved a series of adjournments,and have attained important advantages by it.This privilege of a minority was at present enforcedby twenty-four of the most hated men in the kingdom,and with no other effect than a night of wearisomelabour to the majority. The firmness of theWhigs was not without effect ; the adjournment experimenthad failed, and the Tories had recourse tothe more usual weapons of opposition. Heavy andlaborious was the task of pushing the bill throughcommittee, where every clause was to be won by adebate and a division.* Three nights of debateupon the question, that the bill do pass, closed thescene. On the 21st of September the bill was carriedby a majority of 109.And now came the ordeal of the house of lords.• Upon one important question quench of the adoption of thethe ministers were defeated in amendment would be a very gcne-committee by a majority of 84. oral and early agitation for the bal-theMarquis of Chandos proposed lot. Mr. Hume, however, and histo give the right of voting for count party of ultra Whigs, upon thisties to tenants at will holding at a occasion, joined the Tories ; pro-rentof 501. Lord Altliurp saw bably because tlioy thought thatthe object of the amendment, and the consequence which Did appointedout that these tenants were thorp deprecated would be highlyentirely dependant upon tlicir hew (iciahlandlords, and that (lie conseil*THE IlISTOUY OF I'AKTY.CHAR Expectation had long been anxiously seeking some- symptom by which the intentions of this assemblyto i88:.Mnight be divined: ' What will the lords do?" inquiredthe author* of a powerful pamphlet. Mr.JNIacauley pointed to the long line of deserted hallsand desolate mansions in a well-known quarter of aneighbouring metropolis as enduring lessons what theyshould not do. " From those mansions and castlesof the aristocracy of France, as proud and as powerfula body of nobles as ever existed were driven forthto exile and to beggary, to implore the charity ofhostile religions and of hostile nations. And whydid such destruction fall upon them ? Why was theirheritage given to strangers, and their palaces dismantled,but because they had no sympathy with the'people f" While the intention of the Tory peers wasyet unknown, the multitude looked on with a surlyimpatience ; watching the debates in vain ; andwaiting to know whether they were to laugh at theircowardice, or to roar them into submission.On the 22d of September Lord John Russell,attended by upwards of one hundred Reformers ofthe house of commons, carried the bill up to thelords, and it was read a first time, upon the motionof Earl Grey, without any debate.On the 3d of October the same nobleman movedSupposed to be Lord Brougham.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.the second reading. It must have been with strange chap.» , XXII-andmingled feelings that Earl Grey rose to speak —^ ^^^^that night ; the object of his early partiality which to 18;J2.he had nursed and reared through nearly half acentury, when nearly all others laughed at it as adelusion, had at length become the object of universalenthusiasm ; but the exultation this thought mightprompt would fade again as the occasion called upthe images of his departed friends ; for what generousman could contemplate present success without thinkingof those who had striven with him to obtain it, orcould feel a confidence that the long watched for hourof victory was come without a pang, that those whohad joined him in his watches could no longer sharein his success ?Earl Grey could well affirm, after glancing atthe most prominent facts of his public life, ** I standbefore your lordships the advocate of principles fromwhich I have never swerved. It is not, however,enough," he continued, " for a public man pretendingany claim to the character of a statesman , toshow that he is sincere and consistent in his actions ;it is not enough for him to show that what he hasproposed has been in conformity with opinions longestablished in his mind ; he is bound to entertain theconviction, forced upon him through all the chancesand changes of a long political career, that in proposinga measure affecting the mighty interests of theOc)THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, state, the course he takes is called for by justice andXXII. . nilnecessity. He has a further duty to perform ; he hasA. 1). 1831to 183-2. to prove that he has not forced into notice even rightopinions, rashly, precipitately, or at a dangerousseason ; but that he has done so from the sincereconviction that the measures which he proposes areessential to the well-being of the country ; that theycan no longer be delayed with safety ; and that whenpassed into a law they will bind together and unitein affection to the government a loyal and confidingpeople."In the pursuit of these objects the earl branchedforth into all those topics which the fate of the Wellingtonadministration and the present state of thecountry so numerously presented ; proving the necessityof reform, and of a bold and decisive measureof reform. The justice of the measure was now aworn out topic, which the Tories had long since refusedto argue. Thence the earl passed to a minuteexplanation of his measure, disapproving in a markedmanner, as he passed along, of the Chandos clause,giving votes to tenants at will. " It is one which Ishould certainly not have myself proposed, and thegovernment are not answerable for it. I hope it willbe found to act well ; but even then it is liable to thisobjection, namely, if the same influence be exercisedover tenants in counties that has been exercisedin other places, it will be likely to generateTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 607a very strong feeling in favour of a regulation to chap.which I am myself opposed, and in favour of which, ^^^as I believe, there is not a word in the petitions re- to indecentlypresented to this house — I mean the adoptionof the vote by ballot." He concluded by a ferventappeal, first to the house generally, and then particularlyto the bench of bishops, entreating them notto reject a measure of justice and conciliation, andwarnings them to be wise in time.The debate which succeeded is one of very extraordinaryinterest ; discovering a mass of talent whichmight vie very successfully with any of those in thehouse of commons upon the same subject. LordWharnclifFe attempted to answer Earl Grey, andmoved that the bill be rejected — an unusual motionwhich from the tendency of other speeches upon thesame side appeared to have been deliberately resolvedupon, in order to mark their lordships' detestationof the bill. Earl Mulgrave, whose name willin future times be associated with the dawn of goodgovernment in Ireland, followed upon the Whig side.Earl Mansfield brought considerable talent and researchto recomnuMid the Tory amendment. Tohim succeeded Lord King, whose caustic speechesand ultra-Whig sentiments had long rendered him anobject of especial terror to the bench of bishops.The Marquis of Bute followed. At the close ofhis speech an adjournment was moved, and it wasCos TlIK HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, now violent that the debate would extend throughXXII. . *several nights.A. D. 1831 ^ ^to 183-2. The Earl of Winchilsea commenced the secondday's discussion. The Earl of Harrowby, an agedTory nobleman, followed him, and surprised thehouse by a speech of great power and extraordinaryeloquence ; a speech which was highly complimentedby all parties, and which formed the general object ofattack and eulogium. These Tory speeches wereably answered by Lord Melbourne, who skilfullyadapted his arguments for parliamentary reform tothe topics before urged by the Duke of Wellingtonin favour of Catholic emancipation. This called upthe Duke of Wellington, who after defending hisown consistency, made an attack upon that of EarlGrey, picking out a passage from one of the earl'sspeeches in favour of Catholic emancipation, after abill to that effect had passed the commons, andarguing from it that the earl was, at that time, wellsatisfied with the constitution of that house. TheEarl of Dudley made an elegant speech against theWhig ministers, applying himself to every point inwhich he thought them vulnerable, and asking whethersuch men were to be allowed to pull to piecesour constitution. This attack was eloquently retortedby the Marquis of Lansdowne, who spoke ofLord Dudley's speech as bearing little upon the presentquestion, and as composed for a different occa-THE HISTORY OF PARTY. QQgsion, remarking that it was an excellent example of chap.Exita good speech kept too long. Lord Londonderry '—denounced the measure before the house, and was to 183-2.answered by Lord Goderich, who was succeeded bythe Earl of Haddington upon the Tory side. LordRadnor, a nobleman professing extreme Whig principles,and who can boast the distinguished honourof having been declared by Mr. Canning and Mr.Windham to have delivered the best speech theyhad ever heard, advocated the bill. Lord Falmouth,the Earl of Roseberry, and the Earl of Carnarvon,the first and last Tories, the second a Whio-, followed,and the fourth day's debate was closed by apowerful speech from Lord Plunket.Lord AA^ynford, who, as Chief Justice Best, hadbeen one of the oracles of the law and was now becomeone of the magnates of Toryism, opened thefifth night's debate ; being allowed, on account of hisinfirmities, and, upon the motion of the Duke ofCumberland, to deliver his sentiments from his seat.Lord Eldon attempted to follow ; but was unable torender himself audible across the house. The tediumwas reliev(Hl by I^oi-d Chancellor Brougham, who,rising from the woolsack, delivered the most masterlyspeech which even he lead ever uttered. Taking areview of the d(!l)ate, he called up each Tory speakerwho had ])r(!ced(!d him, but only to destroy him bysome burning sarcasm, or to display upon him hisVOL. in. y u(ilO THE IIISTOllY OF Beauty.CHAP, exquisite skill in tormenting. Lord Dudley, the in-^^\b — consistent Lord Winehilsea — who, angry at theio \ss-2. authors of the Catholic bill, had ]promised, at a publicmeeting, to be present in the house of lords to supportthe Reform bill — Lords Mansfield, WharnclifFe,and even Harrowby, successively passed the ordeal,and the speaker proceeded until the assembled peerstrembled at the terrible powers of the spirit that hadbeen placed among them. Lord Lyndhurst came tothe rescue, and his speech, as every speech of hismust be, was one of great ability ; but it fell tamelyon the ear amid the almost tragic interest which hadbeen excited by his predecessor. The night wasnow wearing, and the house grew impatient. LordHolland did not attempt to speak to the question ;Lord Tenterden shortly opposed the bill ; the Archbishopof Canterbury pledged his bench against it ;the Duke of Sussex insisted upon being heard, andin a manly speech supported his principles as a Whig.The Duke of Gloucester opposed the bill as too violent;Earl Grey replied, unnecessarily vindicating himselffrom certain aspersions thrown upon his early politicalconduct. The house divided.* The bill was thrownout by a majority of 41 . The numbers were 199 to 1.58.The house of commons immediately passed a voteThe motion that the hill he hill he read this day six months,rejected had been withdrawn, and substituted.the ordinary amendment that theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 611of confidence in ministers. The king interposed a ChalkXXIIshort prorogation, expressly for the purpose that the —bill might be again introduced. The speech was to 183-2.couched in terms which plainly indicated that thesovereign continued faithful. Every method wasadopted which could palliate the news of the rejectionof the bill, and avert the thunderstorm which threatened.The Whigs were, in a great measure, successful; the lightning did not strike the lofty towersof our monarchy, nor strip off the Gothic fretworkof our house of peers ; but strange sights were seenthroughout the nation ; and a voice was gone forthwhich told that the end was not yet. In London tensof thousands of men marching in close array, andcrowding all the avenues to the palace; the housesof the Tory peers in a constant state of siege ; thepeers themselves venturing abroad at the danger oftheir life : in the metropolis of a generous people,the Duke of Wellington, whose reputation is hiscountry's glory, unable to appear without insult anddanger ; in the metropolis of a people remarkable fortheir respect to the laws, Lord Londonderry strucksenseless from his horse by a flight of stones : in thecountry, Nottingham Castle, the ancient possession ofthe Duke of Newcastle, given to the flames ; Derby inthe power of a mob, the gaol destroyed, the houses ofknown Tories demolished ; the city of Bristol on fire,and Sir ('harl(;s Wetherell fleeiiitr in <lis[rnise by fire'i If '>(31*2 THE IIISTOUY or PARTY.Chafe light ot'thc conflagration — men of all oradcs banded town,o o »gethcr in unions, pledged at any cost, to obtain paria.L). 18ulto 183-2. monetary inform ; a hundred and fifty thousand menassembled at Birmingham, and threatening to marchupon London ; — these were the signs of the times,varied by public meetings all over the country, comprehendingnearly the whole mass of the middleclasses, and a large portion of the aristocracy, whojoined in the expression of indignant surprise, that awhisper of a fiction" should be allowed to renderabortive the expressed desire of a nation. Well was thenational sentiment expressed and sustained by thepress. Morning and evening did these batteries ofreform pour forth their incessant fire, and the noise reverberatedthrough the kingdom. A very large majorityof the journals were in the interest of the Whigsand the people, but the combined power of all the restof these shrinks into insignificance when compared withthat of the leader of them, a paper which, in the prideof conscious power, had styled itself the leading journalof Europe. Never was there so tremendous a partyengine as the " Times," at the period of which wearenow treating, presents. The receptacle of talentsufficient to form three brilliant reputations, backedby the admiration, the applause, the obedience of anation, it is impossible to look back upon its careerwithout strong excitement ; to see it guiding, counselling,exhorting, exciting, moving onwards, exult-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 613ino" in its own miffht ; crushing at a blow the CHAP.O O ' <-3 XXIIincipient reputation of any Tory in whom it dish.D. 1831cornet talent that might render him formidable, yet to 1832.stooping to cherish and to draw forth into blossom thesmallest bud that might be discovered among its ownparty. Its advocacy of the party it espoused was notconfined to forcible leading articles and to able argument; in all those numberless arts by which a partymay be strengthened or injured this journal wasperfect. The principal conductor of that paper appearedplaced, like the Listener in the Ear of Dionysius,in a focus of sound, whither the most secretwhisper and the loudest clamour were alike wafted.*Yet, orreat as was the influence of the " Times," itonly blew the flame, it did not ignite it. The'* Times" was supporting the Duke of Wellington'sadministration, and repeating his declaration againstreform, without disapproval, when it caught the muratis as absurd to charge a desertion of an influential news-newspaperwith inconsistency as it paper is a circumstance rather towould be to rail against a captured bechargcd as an evidence of incompleteof ordnance for throwing its potency in the party it deserts ;eliot among its former ministers. A since, in ordinary cases, it showsnewspaper is a mercantile advent that Whig shareholders have beenlure, in which a large capital is obliged to sell their shares to(•ml>arkcd, and by which large Tories, or vice versa. Never was aprofits are made ; and the part it greater political blunder made,Likes upon any (question must, of than by those Wliigs who resolvedcourse depend upon the will of the " to make war on the Times."majority of tin' proprietors. Th'()\l THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, mur of the coming storm, and, with infinite tact, prc-XXII.pared to ride it.A. D. 1831 ' , 1 1 1 /- 1 rto 1832. The parliament was re-assembled on the l)tn otDecember, while the excitement was still strong andrelaxing. Lord John Russell immediately introduceda new bill of parliamentary reform, not lessefficient than the one of last session, but embodyingall those improvements which the abundant discussionof the question had suggested. The tone ofthe opposition was now considerably moderated, andalthough Sir Charles Wetherell and Sir RobertInghs indignantly denied the charge of meetingthe present bill with only a modified opposition,vet it was sufficiently manifest that the spirit of theTories was cowed, when they let the bill be introducedand read a first time without debate or division.On the loth the second reading was moved.The principal features of this debate were a speechfrom Mr. Macauley — a speech from him must beaprominent feature in any debate — and a pieceof clever but somewhat rambling declaration fi'omMr. Croaker, which was demolished with considerablepromptitude by Mr. Stanley, who mercilessly held uptoview his victim's historical blunders. In praisingthe new bill above the last, Mr. Stanley addressed itas ** Metre jndcJird filia pulchrioryMox daturaProgonicm vitiosiorcm,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 01-5happily retorted Sir Robert Peel The second chap.XXII.reading was carried by a majority of 162. In —J J . A. D. 1831twenty-two evenings of debate, the details of the to 1382.bill were discussed, and almost every clause disputed.The hatred of the Tories yet inspired themwith sufficient strength to sustain three nights ofdebate upon the third reading, at the close of whichthey were finally defeated by a majority of 110. Onthe 23d of March the Reform bill passed the houseof commons.Again the hated measure was brought before thepeers, and symptoms of division and dismay appearedamong the Tories. Lord Harrowby, the valiantdestroyer of the former bill, was now weak enoughto speak of some concession to public opinion. SeveralTories followed him, and although the Duke ofWellington reiterated his opinion against all reform,yet the resolution of his party was evidently shaken.On the 9th of April the second reading was moved,and on the 13th it was carried by a majority of 9 ;the numbers being 184 to 175. The Duke of Wellingtoninserted in the journals a strong and uncompromisingprotest.It was very evident that this majority was only illusory,and would dwindle to minority in committee.The cry now was, " Create peers :" " create,"shouted the Times, "create," shouted the oratorsat public meetings. Lord (grey was not yet satisfied{')\i\ THE IlISTOUY Olm PAUTY.CHAP, of the necessity. The bill passed into committee,XXII—and the scheme of Tory operations immediatelyto 183L'. became manifest. Lord Lyndhurst now took uponhimself the protection of the bill, and prepared tomould it into a specimen of Tory reform. His firststep was to propose the postponement of the considerationof the disfranchising clauses ; this theWhigs, of course, opposed, and they were beaten bya majority of 38.The time was now arrived, in the judgment of theWhig ministers, when the extreme remedy, providedby the constitution against the stoppage of the statemachine through the opposition of a factious majorityin the house of lords, should be applied. EarlGrey and Lord Brougham waited upon the king,and demanded authority to create a sufficient numberof peers to render the sentiment of that house consonantwith those of the sovereign, the government,and the people. This demand proceeded from aminister whose decisive policy was matured by deliberationand supported by wisdom. It is not tobe expected that an inferior intellect should at oncepartake of his firmness, nor can we blame the king,when looking rather on the violence of the remedythan on the danger of the disease, he refused hisconsent. The Whigs, of course, immediately resigned.The announcement of this event was answered byTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^17a storm of petitions calling upon the house of com- CHAP,mons to stop the supplies until the Whigs were re-A. D. 1831stored to office and the Refomi bill was passed ; by to 1832.a prompt address, and numerous notices of motion inthat house; by simultaneous public meetings, at whichresolutions were taken to pay no taxes ; by a runupon the bank for gold ; and by the general adoptionof every expedient which could render the prosecutionof the present unreformed system of governmentimpracticable. Considerable discussion followedin the house of lords, in the course of whichEarl Grey stated and defended the ground of his resignation." If a majority," he said, " of this houseshould have the power of acting adversely to thecrown and the commons, and was determined toexercise that power without being liable to check orcontrol, the constitution is completely altered,, andthe government of the country is not a limited monarchy; it is no longer, my lords, the crown, lords,and commons, but a house of lords, a separate oligarchygoverning absolutely the others." He pledgedhimself that unless he could be assured of the abilityof carrying the bill fully and efficiently through thathouse, he would not again return to office.Meanwhile the king sent for Lord Lyndhurst, andthrough him conveyed to the; Duke of Wellington, astrong wish that he should form an administrationable to carry some plan of" extensive ref(M*m. Tir018 TIIK IIISTOIIY OF PARTY.CHAP, ink lethe strong anti-reform protest which the dukehad recorded against the second readings of the billA. 1). I8;Uto 1832. was scarcely dry upon the journals of the house, yetthe duke, whose loyalty appears to be of an orientalcharacter, at once consented, declaring afterwardsthat he could not have shown his face in the streetsfor shame, if he had refused to assist the king in hisdistress. Sir Robert Peel, however, read the crisismore wisely, and saw the impossibility of the undertaking.Without his assistance, the duke couldnot prevail upon one man to sit with him in thecabinet — the attempt was abandoned ; and Lord(Grey, receiving the power he had demanded, returnedto office.No sooner was it known that the earl was armedwith the terrible power of creating peers, thanthe watch-dogs of Toryism, lately so loud andfurious, crouched in sulky submission at his feet.Loudly did the Earl of Firewood lament that thereception of such a measure was necessary toprevent an infusion of a large body of new peers.Deeply did the Duke of Newcastle and LordsWinchilsea and Carnarvon bewail that they wereno longer members of an independent body. TheDuke of Newcastle retired from the house ; LordLondonderry said, that if the minister would distinctlystate that he had authority to create peers,he would withdraw his opposition. Lords Kenyon,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.Winchilsea and others continued their nightly hose ^.^^P-tihty ; — they were tantalised by the possession of apower to crush the bill which they dared not use. Intheir opposition to the enfranchisement of the TowerHamlets, an opposition which drew forth an elaborateand eloquent speech from Lord Durham, they wereleft in the minority 55 ; and upon another occasionin a minority of 61. The mass of the Tories darednot vote ; but they vented their rage in angry personalitiesagainst Earl Grey. Seven days of harmlesssnarling in committee, — a dying growl at thethird reading — and the supremacy of Toryism passedaway. On the 4th of June the Reform bill passedthe house of lords. The friends and disciples ofEarl Grey — the link in the chain of Whiggismwhich connects Chatham with the present generation— crowding around him, congratulated himupon having achieved the great object of a long life.A. D. 1831to 1832.6'20THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XXIII.CONCLUSION.Thus, after seventy years of deprivation, did theWhigs recover for the people their constitutionalinfluence in the state.At the close of a period of forty-five years ofWhig government, we took a review of the fortunesand condition of England while under the guidanceof that faction. We saw that she had been surrenderedinto their hands disgraced by a dishonourable peace,threatened by civil war, and divided by the animositiesengendered by a disputed succession ; we sawher return flushed with conquest, elate with victory,with unspent energies and unwearied strength, rich inacquired possessions, and secure in the respect of thewhole world. Thus did Lord Oxford surrenderEngland into the hands of Lord Townshend ; thusdid Lord Chatham resign her to Lord Bute. TheTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. G^lperiod which has passed under our review since thenhas presented many scenes of defeat and many oftriumph. The American war was one of the genuineoffspring of Toryism ; the Pitt and Burke crusadewas another. The unpopularity which, during theformer half of the reign of George III., rendered itunsafe for him to appear in public, was the naturalproduction of the same soil ; the church and kingacclamations of a later period were bought with athousand millions of money. Toryism cannot bepractised abroad without being proceeded in at home.Without the mine of bribery which Pitt discoveredand exhausted, discontents must arise, and must bepunished. While the constitution remains entire,this is not readily effected ; one by one, therefore,the safeguards of personal liberty arc withdrawn, thepower of secret imprisonment is grasped at and obtained,the house of commons is carefully managed,and Toryism being secure can afford to be generous.Such at least were the gradations by which Toryismadvanced during the reign of George III., and suchalso were its gradations under Charles II., who,however, failed in tir* important point in which hissuccessor of the house of Hanover was so signallysuccessful, the management of the commons. Charleswas obliged to rely much upon plots, and to introducethem upon a grand scale ; Pitt, to whomfortune had given much greater resources in this ,only pro(hiced tlieiu incidentally.d'i'i THE HISTORY OF PARTY.Toryism certainly never had so fine an opportunityof justifying her principles by results, as when whileshe struck with one hand she could scatter gold withthe other ; yet, even under these favouring circumstances,she failed. Let the state of Birmingham• and Manchester, and the carnage at the latter place,exemplify the state of England under Castlereagh,and the manner in which it was attempted to be concealed; let the utter disorganization of society inIreland tell the result of Toryism there ; let themurderous designs of Thistlewood and his companionsmark how deep and bitter was the hatred oftheir Tory rulers which had at that time penetratedthe hearts of the English people ; let the great andfinal burst of national energy which threw off theTory nightmare and won the Reform bill, show theunanimity of the verdict by which Toryism was atlength condemned.When the Whigs came into power, in 1714, theyfound the nation encumbered with an annual chargeof 3,351,358/. interest upon the national debt.Forty-eight years after, when the Tories succeeded,in 1762, andhad concluded bathe peace of Utrecht theglorious war by which the Whigs had broken in piecesthe empire of Louis the Fourteenth, they found theannual interest to be 4,840,821/. In 1830, sixty-eightyears later, when the Whigs returned, findingin their turn that the country had just concluded asuccessful war, the annual interest was 29,118,858/.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.The Reform bill was not a measure conceived inthe spirit of party. The object of its framers waspurely and solely that which they held out to theworld— the infusion of such a portion of popular influenceinto the legislature as should prevent therecurrence of enormous instances of misgovernment.Had the object of the Whigs, who framed this measure,been the permanent assurance of ofllce to theirown party, they must have been the most shortsightedof mankind. They threw a great proportion of therepresentation which they took from the corruptboroughs into the hands of the county freeholders —hereditary Tories ; they allowed this constituency tobe increased by the addition of tenants at will, whose^ ones are, of course, in times of tranquillity the propertyof the owner of the farm ; and they strenuouslyopposed the only means which could give their party achance of success in the counties — the ballot. TheWhigs, when they framed these clauses, must have perceivedtheir effect : that they would give to the middleclasses in the counties a mighty power, but a powerwhich could never be exercised without a sacrifice ;that they would form a constituency which wouldreturn a majority of Wliigs in every moment of strongexcitement, but would invariably replace them byTories when the AV'liigs had corrected the misgovernmentand the excitement had ceased ; a constituencywhich a continual trade-wind of i)ri\af(' interestwaflod towards Torvistn, mike wliicli only nii occa-6^3C)'2i< TIIK HISTORY OK PARTY.signal storm of piiblio enthusiasm could impel towardsWhoso-ism.Soli must be the condition of a constituencywhich is left under the influence of the larger landholders.Our law of primogeniture compels thisclass of men to nurture abuses in the state, and hewho would profit by state abuses will not wiselybecome a Whist.The ten-pound householders of the boroughs formaconstituency more favourable to Whiggism : but themajority of our populous towns have always returnedWhigs. In an election, taking place in a time oftranquillity, the Whigs will gain but little by theReform bill, even in the borough representation ;the rate-paying clauses, and the cumbrous machineryof the registration, offer endless opportunity formanagement to a party in possession of union, perseverance,and money ; and there is still a sufficientnumber of small constituencies left to aid the Torymajority in the counties.If the Whigs, therefore, looked a step beyondprinciple while framing the Reform bill, or regardedit as an instrument of future supremacy, they couldnot have relied upon the actual operation of the bill.They must have relied either on popular gratitude —a sentiment which is, doubtless, generous and warm,but which no sane man would reckon upon as lastingor upon the necessity of preserving their party inpower, in order that they might protect their ownTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. ^-^Swork. That necessity is not unreal ; the extremelyartificial construction of this system of representationrenders it quite unable to protect itself ; and its popularcharacter might be effectually destroyed bymeans which would, with proper management, probablyescape observation, and be felt only in theireffect. It is not unreal also, because the Toriescould not retain power for any considerable timewithout making an effort of this description. Thelandholders, since the cessation of war expenditurereduced their rents, and the alteration in the currencynearly doubled their mortgages, are one of the mostnecessitous classes of our community, and wouldquickly desert any leader who denied them the necessaryand customary privilege of providing for theiryounger children without increasing the burdens oftheir own estates. This, however, must be denied,or but very partially granted, so long as popular influencepredominates in the commons, or in otherwords, so long as the Reform bill continues in electiveoperation. The Whigs, therefore, to whomlong exclusion from office renders even the legitimateemoluments of government an unexpected advantage,are probably the only party which could carry on thegovernment for any considerable time, while theReform bill retained its spirit ; but the Tories couldgovern very well under its forms.This reason for keeping the Whigs in power is not,VOL. in. !2 sn^j(jTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.However, very likely to be acted upon or discernedby a multitude ; nor can any other be assignedconnected ^vith the reform bill, which can suggestthat the framers of this bill contemplated it as aninstrument for creating a supremacy to the Whigs.Had it borne more marks of party spirit it wouldprobably have been more effective and more enduring.The difference between the policy of Earl Greyand that of the Earl of Bute exhibits the latter tosome advantage, as a party leader. Bute, when,after a long exclusion, he placed his own party againin power, cleared every public office of his opponents ;and failing in Englishmen to replace them, importedan army of adventurers from Scotland ; yet, notwithstandinghis decision and the steady patronage of theking, so great was the power of a party long in possessionof office, that it was not without numerous shortWhig irruptions that the Tories succeeded in rootingup the foundations of their opponents' influence. Grey,on the contrary, attempted to conciliate the enemieshe had conquered ; and hoped to gratify, by a divisionof legitimate patronage, a party whom their own chiefscould not content with less than a monopoly ofabuses. The resources of that faction might wellhave terrified Earl Grey from driving them to extremity,could he have entertained any rational hope ofgaining their friendship. They had with them thehouse of lords, a very powerful auxiliary in a strugglewhere all other advantages were nearly equal, but oneTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.which should never be placed in the van when the tideof popular influence runs strong. The power of thelords is based upon prerogative, and prerogative inEngland was never stretched without snapping.The Tories had with them also, nearly all thatvery numerous class who counted upon emolumentfrom government favour. These looked upon theTories as the habitual occupants of office — upon theWhigs as only occasional intruders. In their timeand that of their fathers it had been so. Littletradition remained among them of the long period ofnational prosperity and Tory opposition during thereigns of the two first Georges.The Tories still retained the great body of theclergy ; an incalculable advantage, since it secured tothem, in almost every parish, an agent possessed ofzeal, influence, and leisure.They still possessed, also, all the local patronagethroughout the country. Tory lord-lieutenants stillappointed Tory magistrates, and Tory magistratesstill directed the most humble rivulets of patronagein the same direction.They possessed great wealth to expend in partypurposes, for the party was composed of men of greatwealth, although often of still (n-eater necessities.Money so laid out was looked upon as a profitableinvestment, and was always abundant.They were a party, also, uiiit(Hl under one name.Had the l)ui<c of Cumberland, with Newcastle,6'28 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.Kenyon, Winchilsoa, Woden, and other noblemen,continued separated from the Duke of Wellington,and called themselves Absolutists, or by any otherbold and undisguised title, it would have been atonce seen that their principles were dangerous toproperty ; and any Tory administration would havebeen injured by their support. These, however,submitted to have their differences forgotten underthe general name of Tories ; while the Radicals,refusing to call themselves Whigs, became unpopularallies, terrible to all timid Whigs, and a finetopic of declamation to the Tories.At the passing of the Reform bill, therefore, theWhigs appeared to have but a slender tenure ofoffice. Nothing but the undeviating support of apatriotic monarch, and a government of great wisdomand vigour appeared capable of continuing theirpower. With these advantages that power mightpossibly become consolidated ; and England mightenjoy, for some time a mild and an economicalgovernment. But the source of Toryism is in humannature, and can never fail ; nor can I doubt thatfuture writers will have to record future losses ofpopular influence, and future struggles for its recovery.THE END.Whiting, EEAlfnm HOUSE.