THEHISTORY OF PARTY.THEHISTORY OF Party 7FROM THE RISE OPTHE WHIG AND TORY FACTIONS,IN THE REIGN OF CHARLES II.,TOTHE PASSING OF THE REFORM BILL.BY \GEORGE Mangrove COOKE,BARRISTER AT LAW,AUTHOR OF " MEMOIRS OF LORD BOLINGBROKE," &C.V ^ VOL. II.A. D. 17141762. Yft <%*AF%-~.>V *LONDON:JOHN Machine, ST. JAMES'S SQUARE.MDCCCXXXVII.J7//1 1 11IWhiting,BKAUKOKT HOUSE, STRAND.CONTENTS.CHAPTER I.PACKRelative strength of the Whig and Tory factions at the accession ofGeorge T. Leaders of the Whigs Townshend General StanhopeWilliam Pulteney Leaders of the Tories Sir William WykehamCharacter of George I. . . . . . 1CHAPTER II.Expectations of the two parties Appointment of Lord Townshend assecretary of state Formation of a Whig ministry Elections favourableto the Whigs Meeting of parliament Inquiry into the conductof the late ministry Impeachment of Boiling broke, Oxford, Ormond,and Strafford . . . . . . . . 20CHAPTER III.The Tories now a Jacobite party Rebellion of 1715 Unpopularity ofthe king Dangerous state of the nation The Septennial bill Contestof the factions upon Shippen He teaches the Tories to adopt forthe occasion popular sentiments . . . . .34CHAPTER IV.Disagreement between the king and the Prince of Wales Schism in theWhig cabinet Its origin Sunderland His discontent IntriguesIs joined by Stanhope Progress of their Intrigues Dismissal of TownshendReview of Stanhope's conduct Formation of the Stanhope administration. . . . . . . .52CHAPTER V.The Tories gradually less unanimous in support of the pretender 'sefforts to detach them from his cause His letters to SirWilliam Wyndham The Stanhope administration preserves the tolerantprinciples of the Whig party The Whigs in opposition violatethem Death of the Earl of Shrewsbury The Peerage bill Coalitionbetween Walpole and' Sunderland Death of Stanhope The South Seascheme . . 74CHAPTER VI.Commencement of the Walpole administration Discussion among theWhigs Lord Carteret Death of Sunderland General electionBishop Atterbury's plot Death of Marlborough Coalition betweenVI CONTENTS.Bolingbroke and Pulteney Causes, of Pulteney's secession from hisparty Change of the principles of Toryism from monarchical to aristocraticThe Craftsman Objects of the contributors to that paper-deathof George I. . . . . .92CHAPTER VII.Conduct of George II. upon his accession Sir Spencer ComptonStrength of the Walpole government Character of the king Hismistress The queen Her power over the king Walpole continuesin office . . . . . . . .118CHAPTER VIII.A general election A Whig majority returned Onslow Success ofthe Whigs in the house of commons Charge against Walpole, that hegoverned by corruption The motives that prompted the charge Itstruth Necessity of corruption to the Whigs as an instrument of of that necessity Effect of the change in the Toryprinciples of government upon the house of commons Power of influencingthat assembly possessed by the earlier sovereigns Wrestedfrom them by the people The Tory aristocracy recover it for themselvesInfluence of the Tories opposed by the money of the WhigsDebates upon the item of secret service money . . . 130CHAPTER IX.Resignation of Townshend Causes of this event Jealousy betweenhim and Walpole Biographical anecdotes of the Duke of Newcastle,Lord Harrington, Lord Chesterfield Retirement and death ofTownshend . . . . . . . .152CHAPTER X.Bill to render the officers of the army independent of the crown ThePlace bill Motion for the repeal of the Septennial bill Debate uponit Biographical anecdotes of Sir John Barnard . . .183CHAPTER XI.Preparations of the parties for the general election Progress of electionsTheir result Motion for repeal of the Test act Biographical anecdotesof Lord Pol war tii The Quakers' bill defeated Resentment ofWalpole 204CHAPTER XII.Biographical anecdotes of Frederick Prince of WalesHis friendshipsanecdotes of George Lyttelton Of the Grenville Of WilliamPitt . 219CONTENTS. viiCHAPTER XIII.PAGEAdvance of the Whig principle First essay of Pitt and Lyttelton in thehouse of commons Attempt to obtain an independent establishment forthe Prince of Wales Secession of the Tories Its cause Expulsionof the Prince of Wales from the royal palace Death of Queen Caroline. . . . . . .231CHAPTER XIV.Motion to reduce the standing army Shippen's eulogium upon ToryismReply to Walpole Review of the debate . . . .246CHAPTER XV.Popular outcry for a war with Spain Convention Debate upon the ConventionSecession of the opposition Conflict between Wyndham andWalpole Consequences of the secession Attempt to repeal the Testact Opposed by the Whig ministers . . . 257CHAPTER XVI.Death of Wyndham and Marchmont Motion to remove Walpole fromthe king's presence and councils Review of the debate The Toriesagain forsake the Whig opposition Fate of the motion, and its consequences274CHAPTER XVII.A new parliament State of the elections The Westminster election-meetingof parliament Strength of the opposition Contest in theelection committees Motion upon the conduct of the war Decisivedefeat of Walpole on the Chippenham election Resignation ofWalpole . 293CHAPTER XVIII.Situation, power, and conduct of Pulteney Intrigues of Walpole Negotiationsfor the formation of a new ministry Their event The newadministration Indignation of the opposition Meeting at the FountainMeeting of parliament Place bill Inquiry into the conduct ofWalpole Its termination 303CHAPTER XIX.Increase of the influence of Carteret Carteret becomes minister Attackedby the Pitt section of the Whig party Debate upon takingthe Hanoverian troops into British pay Comparison between theeloquence of Pitt and Murray Death of Wilmington Contest betweenPelham and the Earl of Bath for the vacant office Formationof the Pelham administration Intrigues in the cabinet-the influenceof Carteret still continues . . .317Vlll CONTENTS.CHAPTER XX.I'AGKMeeting of parliament Opposition to the Pelham administration Attacksupon Carteret Disunion among the opposition Expectationsof invasion Conduct of the parties Intrigues in the cabinet Expulsionof Carteret Formation of the Broad-bottomed administration . 3.7CHAPTER XXI.Conduct of the Broad-bottomed administration Secession of the ToriesThe short administration of the Earl of Bath Issue of the intrigueagainst the I'elhams Their restoration to office Changes in thecabinet Biographical anecdotes of Henry Fox Death of Bolingbroke 538CHAPTER XXII.Death of Pelham Is succeeded by the Duke of Newcastle Ministerial'negotiations Opposition of Pitt and Fox Biographical anecdotes ofWilliam Murray Difficulties and dissolution of the Newcastle administrationAppointment of Pitt as secretary of state Joy of thenation Prospects of his government Is suddenly dismissed by theking Difficulty of the king in an attempt to form a ministry . . 363CHAPTER XXIII.The Pitt administration Energy and supremacy of Pitt The presenta Whig administration State of the Whig principle Biographicalanecdotes of Charles Pratt Habeas Corpus bill Foreign policy ofPitt Death of George II. . . . . . . 38 JCHAPTER XXIV.Character of George III. upon his accession Rise of the Earl of ButeAlterations in the cabinet Resignation of Pitt Of the Duke ofNewcastle Over-throw of the Whigs, and commencement of the supremacyof the Tories 396CHAPTER XXV.Review of the conduct of the Whig party during the long period of theirpossession of the government 40?APPENDIX . . 4WTHEHISTORY OF PARTYCHAPTER I.Relative strength of the Whig and Tory factions at the accession ofGeorge the First Leaders of the Whigs Townshend GeneralStanhope William Pulteney Leaders of the Tories Sir WilliamWyndham Character of George the First.THE year 1714 witnessed a revolution unparalleled CHAP.in the annals of nations. The hereditary sceptre ofa great and powerful empire passed from the hands ofthe ancient dynasty, without one act of violence orone word of opposition. The new dynasty, to whichthe mere declaration of the people had transferred it,succeeded as quietly as if they had been the immediatedescendants of a long line of British kings.This event was caused by the active zeal andsuddenly exerted energy of one of the great factions,and by the fear, the surprise, and the disunion of theother.VOL. II. BTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Of these factions the Tories were at that time,although broken and inactive, the most numerousA. D. 1714.throughout the nation. A very large majority ofthe agricultural portion of the population has alwaysadhered to this party. The landholders saw, in thepower which they themselves exercised over theirtenantry, a miniature representation of Tory government.The feudal feeling, which expired withoutleaving a trace of existence among the inhabitants oftowns, was little more than modified among the cultivatorsof the fields. The descendant of the feudallord succeeded to his possessions, and almost to hispower; his tenantry derived from their fathers anhereditary loyalty to his house, they claimed aninterest in the honour of its representative. Thiswas an instance of that patriarchal state which, underfavouring circumstances, the Tories have delightedto eulogize ; it is not surprising that the possessorof such influence should look with horror upon principlescalculated to disturb it, should declare waragainst a system which promised, eventually, to makethose who were then, upon all political subjects, themere doers of his will, reasoning men and independentagents.There were few of this class of men who were numberedamong the Whigs, but these exceptions weregenerally found among those who were most eminentfor wealth and intellect. Those whose possessions wereTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.of sufficient extent to give them importance in the CHAP,higher house of legislature could, as they mingled in A p 'the world, correct the prejudices imbibed during theirchildhood. It required, however, honesty as wellas intelligence to disavow errors which gave thempower.Hence we may perhaps draw the reason, that thesmaller landholder was universally a Tory ; the clergymanwhom he patronized was a Tory by education,almost by profession, since, the smaller beneficesbeing generally in the hands of the second-rate landowners,the inferior clergy were compelled to adoptthe politics of the patron to whom they looked forpreferment ; the tenantry were Tories because theywere habituated to the influence of the landlord, andwere accustomed to receive, as incontrovertible truths,the political sermons of the rector ; they were Tories,also, because they were sunk in ignorance and knewno other creed, because not one in ten of them couldread, and those few who possessed this rare acquirementnever thought of exercising it upon the subjectof politics. Political pamphlets never penetrated tothe remote dwellings of the agriculturist ; theirsphere of circulation was confined to cities.While the villages and smaller towns were monopolizedby Tories, the larger cities, the manufacturingdistricts, and the ports of commerce, formedthe strongholds of the Whigs. Here there existedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, no shadow of that hereditary connexion betweenD | landlord and tenant, so powerful in the country ;here the usual pursuits of handicraft or commercerequired some rudiments of education, or at leastsome mental exertion. The facilities for acquiring thefirst elements of knowledge were incalculably greater ;no guide was present, upon whom the mind was accustomedindolently to lean, and from whom it wasthought heretical, nay atheistical, to dissent. Thepress was at work, it produced nothing but controversy; society was more general, the clash of opinionswas more frequent. Here, where all were contending,every man must think for himself, and a mind onceaccustomed to independence would naturally prefer asystem essentially progressive, whose action wasbounded only by the confines of a rational moderation,to one which was fettered by precedents andenclosed within dogmas.The Tories of the manufacturing and populousdistricts were usually those whom some connexionwith a Tory government, or some family influencehad directed in the choice of a party, or those who,having acquired great wealth, thought only of itspreservation, and dreaded the slightest departurefrom ancient rule as subversive of the rights ofproperty.The class which formed the strength of the Whigparty had greatly increased in consequence and re-THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 3sources since the expulsion of James. The wars by CHAT.'which England had wiped away the accumulateddegradation she had suffered from France had givenan impetus to commerce, and had called into being anew class of persons, whose interest was distinct fromthat of the landholder. The ministers of Williamand Anne had mortgaged the land and the industryof the kingdom for the supply of its immediate exigencies.That powerful body, which soon becameknown as the moneyed interest, was the immediateoffspring of the expedient, and increased in influenceas the debt became augmented. The merchants,who gained by the vast expenditure of these years,commonly became the holders of the national mortgages,and gradually began to rival in wealth and influencethose who drew their income and honoursfrom the possession of land, This circumstancegreatly increased the power of the Whig party.The French envoy, Somerville, professing torender an account to his court of the state of partiesin England during this year, describes the Whigs asathoroughly united party, boasting the best purses,the best swords, the most able heads, and the handsomestwomen. This party also he describes as themore rich in money and paper, the Tories in land.He mentions as the leading Whigs Halifax, Somers,once the leader of the faction, but then become nearlyimbecile from the decay of his faculties, Wanton,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.eHAP. Sunderland, Nottingham, Oxford, Bradford, Chesterfield,but above all, Walpole.*Among these names we find several not properlybelonging to the Whigs ; Oxford, if the name is notwritten by mistake for Orford, notwithstanding hisrecent intrigues, certainly had no right to rank himselfas of that party ; and Nottingham, although hehad deserted his former friends, and was now becomethe chief object of their abuse, was, although a respectable,but an unsteady convert. There were othernames, however, omitted in this catalogue, which hadnow become illustrious in the eyes of their party.The first in rank and importance among these newleaders was Charles, Viscount Townshend, the representativeof a Tory family, and the son of a man whohad been raised to the peerage for his devotion toCharles the Second. When, in 1696, Lord Townshendtook his seat in the house of peers, he embarkedall his youthful zeal in the cause of his family, andhis name appears attached to several of the violentprotests of the Tory minority. It would be uselessto inquire the immediate reason of the sudden changein the political convictions of the young nobleman ;but we soon after find him among the disciples ofSomers, cordially co-operating with the Whigs, andcontented with a subordinate station among his newlyMackintosh MSS.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.adopted party. His services were not overlooked by CHAP,the Godolphin administration ; he was named one ofA. D. 1714.the commissioners for arranging the union with Scotland,and he was rewarded for his exertions in thisstation with the captaincy of the yeomen of theQueen's guard. Gradually he was placed in moreconspicuous posts ; he was joint plenipotentiary withMarlborough, at Gertruydenberg, and he negotiatedwith the States-general the barrier treaty. Hithertohis youth had kept him, in the estimation of his party,in the rank of a follower; the persecution of theTories raised him to the station of a leader. When,upon the formation of the Harley ministry, Townshendwas dismissed from his places, censured by avote of the Tory house of commons, and marked outto be associated with Marlborough in the prosecutionthen threatened, he was immediately exalted inthe eyes of his own party, and he obtained an influencewhich he was careful to cultivate.Townshend maintained a close correspondencewith the court of Hanover; he had the chief directionof the practices by which Robertson and Bothmar, theformer the secretary, the latter the agent in England,of the Elector, were gained to the Whigs, and hesucceeded in obtaining the entire confidence of theprince who was so soon to become his sovereign.Another Whig, now risen into importance in theestimation of his party, was James Stanhope, a man8 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, who, in his after career, was more successful thanpopular, and whose station was more conspicuous thanA.D. 1714.the means by which he attained to it were honourable.Stanhope was descended by a younger branch fromthe Earls of Chesterfield, and his early ambition wasto distinguish himself rather in the field than in thecouncil. While yet a youth, he left Oxford to accompanyhis father to Spain, and, passing thence intoItaly, commenced his military education as a volunteerin the service of the Duke of Savoy. As asoldier of fortune, ever ready to turn his sword in anycause against France, his courage and conduct procuredfor him considerable reputation. When in 1694he presented himself to King William in Flanders,that monarch made him a captain in his regiment offoot-guards, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. Inthe following year he was severely wounded at thesiege of Namur, and his name being now known inEngland, he was elected by the borough of Newporta member of William's last parliament. Stanhopedoes not appear, however, to have deserted his chosenprofession for the duties of his new trust ; his namenever occurs in the parliamentary debates of thattime, but it is prominent in most of the accounts ofmilitary enterprise. In 1702, he fought under theDuke of Ormond at Cadi ; the following year hewas engaged, under Charles the Third of Spain, inPortugal y and in the next he distinguished himselfTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.at the siege of Barcelona. His rise in the Britishservice was rapid ; he was made a brigadier-general A D 1714in 1704, sent as envoy extraordinary and plenipotentiaryto Charles the Third in 1706, made major-generalin 1707> and declared commander-in-chief ofthe British forces in Spain in 1708. In this capacityhe performed his most celebrated exploit, the reductionof Port Mahon. During the continuance of hiscommission he fought and gained the battle of Al-megara,and temporarily seated Charles at Madrid.That, notwithstanding this frequent appearance inactiveservice, Stanhope contrived to obtain someinfluence in the house of commons, is apparent fromthe occurrence of his name in the list of the twentymanagers of the impeachment against Sacheverell.*He had previously taken, as appears from his lettersto Robert Walpole great interest in the proceedingsof the house, and he had been a strenuous supporterof the Whigs ; but his appointment to thisprominent post is doubtless to be attributed to hisgreat intimacy with Walpole and Townshend, withwhom he was in constant familiar correspondence. 'One of the earliest appointments of Horace Walpolewas that of private secretary to General Stanhopeduring his embassy in Spain. It was certainly thepatronage of Townshend and Walpole which hadParl. Hist, vi. 825. 1 1, p. 4. This letter was written inf Coxe's Life of Walpole, Ap. 1 703.10 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, raised General Stanhope to the rank of a pariaD I7i4~ mental leader, rather than any talent for debatewhich he had yet evinced.Another distinguished man among the Whigs, farsuperior to this last in talent, was William Pulteneya name illustrious in the annals of his party ; but,like that of the great majority of statesmen in everyage, not altogether unsullied. Pulteney was therepresentative of an ancient English family, themembers of which had been members of the Whigparty ever since it had grown into being. His grandfather,representing the city of Westminster, hadobtained a considerable reputation for eloquence andzeal ; the grandson, in emulating his example, farsurpassed his success. While yet at Oxford, he hadso favourably distinguished himself, that he wasselected by Dean Aldrich to deliver the congratulatoryspeech to Queen Anne upon her visit to ChristChurch. After leaving the university, he passed theusual period in travel, and returned to England withabilities of a high order, cultivated by observationand study.Mr. Henry Guy, who had been secretary to thetreasury, was Pulteney' s guardian, and had been anintimate friend of his grandfather. By this gentleman'sinfluence, the young aspirant for public honourswas returned to parliament for the borough of Hey-don,in Yorkshire ; and he afterwards received a stillgreater proof of his guardian's affection, since, uponTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 11his death, he became possessed by his will of a legacy CHAP.of 40,000, and an estate of 500 a-year.*Pulteney's conduct in the house was cautious ; hemade no attempt to dazzle by a brilliant and well-learntspeech delivered upon some important debate :for it was his maxim, that there were few real oratorswho commenced with set speeches. He applied himselfto the study of the practice and the temper ofthe house, and exercised himself cautiously and conciselyupon unimportant topics. It was only gradually,therefore, that Pulteney's powers of oratorybecame developed ; the house had been occasionallystartled by the bitterness of a passing sarcasm, t orimpressed with the justice of a single remark ; but itwas not until the latter end of the feign of QueenAnne that he began to compete in excellence withthe first orators among the commons. He is thensaid to have centred the chief advantages which cangive effect to the harangue of a speaker. " He was,"says the fastidious Chesterfield, t " the most completeorator and debater in the house of commons elo-Coxe's Life of Walpole. In sands of pounds per annum."a tract called Memoirs of the Life p. 1 1.and Conduct of William Pulteney, f " Cerberus has received hisEsq., which appears to have form sop and barks no more," was theed the basis of Mr. Coxe's sketch ; contemptuous phrase in which hethis person is called Sir John Guise, alluded to Montague's desertionBart., and the bequest is stated to upon the Place bill. Coxe, 354.have been " an estate worth thou J Chesterfield's Characters.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, quest, entertaining, persuasive, strong, and pathetic,- as occasion required ; for he had arguments, wit, andeven tears at his command." Pulteney possessedgreat fluency of speech, flexibility of voice, and gracein delivery ; his arguments were well chosen andforcibly presented ; according to the hyperbolicaldescription of his biographer, "it is impossible forthe thought of man to conceive with what dexterityhe unravelled such points as seemed most arduous,and detected the false gloss that was put upon themto conceal their imperfections"* By the testimonyof his contemporaries, he appears to have united themost opposite advantages ; so clear was his apprehension,that he could readily simplify the most involvedaccounts, making their purport plain even tothe distracted attention of a large assembly ; so livelywas his fancy, and so brilliant his declamation that,upon a more general subject, he compelled the houseto admire and follow him ; so perfect was his knowledgeof the classics, that delicate allusions and aptquotations were always at his command, to shed theirlight over even the most unpromising subjects ; andso exquisite was his art, that he always persuadedthose those who heard him, that he felt every sentimentwhich he uttered. tMemoirs of William Pulses f Chesterfield's Characters.ney, Esq. Chesterfield's Characters Reviewed,p. 29.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 13Such was the eloquence which this great man dis CHAP,played, when at the height of his reputation and inthe full blaze of his popularity. We are told, however,that this power of speech was the growth of time andpractice, and, doubtless, although Pulteney had vindicatedthe principles of the revolution at the timeof the impeachment of Sacheverell had defendedWalpole, when expelled the house of commons, andhad battled, during years of Tory supremacy, by theside of the Whigs, it was only recently that he hadacquired the reputation and influence of a leader.In character, Pulteney was passionate and impetuous,but supported by great personal courage ;greatly addicted to social and convivial pleasures, butit is said, enslaved by avarice a vice, of all others,the most incompatible with this disposition. Manyinstances of his peculiarity, in this respect, are mentioned.Pulteney affected great splendour in hisentertainments. It is said, that he once borrowedof the Duke of Newcastle M. Close, at that time, themost celebrated cook in England, to superintend adinner. Close attended ; but finding that the masterof the house directed all the arrangements with aview to economy, and continually curtailed all hisplans, he grew at last so enraged, that he threw uphis task, and left the house in a passion.* No manCharacters Reviewed.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, was more punctual in paying his tradesmen; but it issaid that it was, when Earl of Bath, his custom toA.D. 1714.amass a great quantity of Portuguese coin of all sorts,from pieces of the value of 4s. 6d. to those of 31.all which he was extremely expert in reckoning.The tradesman who received them was expected tobe as quick in counting them as himself, and if hewas not, he was told to despatch or call again. Manyof course received their money, and took it awayuncounted ; but none ever did so without afterwardsdiscovering that there was a very considerable miscalculation,which was always in favour of the payer.These instances of parsimonious habits, if true, mustrather be looked upon as eccentricities, than as proofsof a dominant and continual avarice : but such anecdotesare usually useful, rather to show what contemporariesthought probable to have occurred, thanto tell us what did occur. They derive their consequencerather from their currency than their truth.If Pulteney's avarice tempted him in earlier life tobe niggardly in his hospitality, and in his old age toput a dotard's cheat upon his tradesmen, it does nottherefore follow that he was through life a miser.On the contrary, we learn that, when a young man,he subscribed liberally to a very unprofitable loan,made by the Whig party, to the emperor during thenegotiations at Utrecht. Even Chesterfield, whohas deepened every shadow in This character, allowsTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 15that he affected good nature and compassion, and CHAP.admits that, perhaps, he might feel the sorrows anddistresses of his fellow-creatures ; when he adds,"his hand was seldom or never stretched out torelieve them," he is directly contradicted by Dr.Zachary Pearce, bishop of Rochester, who averred,of his own knowledge, that Pulteney bestowed thetenth part of his income in charitable uses"*Such was William Pulteney, who, at the accessionof George I. was looked upon as one of the greatleaders of the Whigs.Among the Tories, in addition to those who wereso recently conspicuous as ministerial leaders, wasSir William Wyndham, whose wealth and influencehad already been rewarded with important posts inthe Tory ministry, but whose youth had hithertorestrained him from assuming any prominent characterin debate. Wyndham was descended from a veryancient family, and born heir to one of the richestbaronetcies in England. His father dying when hewas very young, his inheritance naturally accumulatedduring a long minority. He was educated at Eton,and gave early promise of those talents by which hewas afterwards so distinguished ; he entered theworld at an early age, and had no sooner attainedThis declaration is quoted in some one of the bishop's numerousChesterfield's Characters Review published sermons. ^ed, and may doubtless be found in16 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ms majority than he was elected to the house ofI.commons.A.D. 1714.The young senator immediately attached himselfto the Tory party, Bolingbroke was his politicalguide and private friend, and under his able instructionhe became soon expert in all the arts of oratoryand all the practices of debauchery. The proficiencywhich he acquired by this friendship appears to haveextended to all the minute details by which influenceis obtained and preserved in an assembly constitutedlike our house of commons. Although so youngand inexperienced, Wyndham, at the accession ofGeorge L, stood forward as the undisputed leader ofhis party in that assembly, and his patriotism, hiseloquence, and his self-possession have found aneulogist in one who, by achieving fame himself, hadacquired the power of conferring it on others.*How far we can coincide in the praise of Wynd-ham'spatriotism is very questionable ; for, althoughwe have already seen him declaring that the pretenderwas " an impracticable man, and would neverbe brought in," we shall presently have occasion toview him actively engaged in the intrigues whichwere so restlessly pursued for restoring the exileddynasty. The man who could think of cursing his" Wyndham just to freedom and the throne,The master of our passions and his own." Pope.fHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 17country with another Stuart king, could never be CHAP,really a patriot.When twenty-eight years old, Sir William is describedto have been a middle-sized fair man, veryhandsome, and extremely good-humoured; thepossessor of an ample fortune, and generous in itsexpenditure; frank, courageous, and resolved; a manof strict honour, a generous and faithful friend, kindand affectionate in his domestic relations, and althoughprofessing himself a man of pleasure, rather affectingthe reputation than practising the excesses of alibertine.*Lords Bolingbroke, Single, and Harcourt, theDuke of Ormond, Sir Thomas Hammer, and Mr.Bromley may be enumerated as the other most prominentpersons among the Tories.The sovereign who was called by the election ufthe nation to act as moderator between these hostilefactions, and to curb the violence of these able men,was utterly destitute of ability for the task he hadundertaken. We must always keep in mind theinvaluable principle which triumphed in the successionof the House of Hanover, if we wish toview with complacency the reign of the first kingof England of that house. George the First hadpassed his life in the rule of a petty principality,Gentleman's Magazine, vol. liv., p. 589,VOL. II. C18 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, his ideas of government had radiated as far as thefrontiers of his electorate, and had been stopped byits confines ; habit had formed them to their sphere,and even when transplanted into a nobler field, theyrefused to germinate. George upon the throne ofEngland was still only the Elector of Hanover; hewas ignorant of the language, he hated the habits,he was even impatient of the acclamations of hisnew subjects. Lazy and inactive, and therefore lowlysensual, even in his pleasures, the ordinary duties ofhis station were to him intolerably wearisome ; hisdisregard of splendour, and his utter ignorance ofambition, took from these onerous duties their correspondingrewards ; what wonder, therefore, that hethought little of the honour or advantage of a nationhe did not understand, and in questions of foreignpolicy looked only to the interests of his own electorate?This partiality to his native country cannot beobjected personally against this prince, it was theprice which the nation paid upon changing thefamily of its kings. At the age of fifty-four, Georgehad the formed habits of a German ; it was England'smisfortune, not his fault, that he did not possess orseek any knowledge of our history, our laws, or ourconstitution.In his private character, although jealous and resentful,this prince was not without benevolence, and,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 19although dull and phlegmatic, he was not destitute of CHAP,ordinary ability, nor, when among those whose com- -any he chiefly affected, even of pleasantry. A rareinstance is recorded of a happy and ready reparteetoo curious an achievement for George I. to beomitted: At the time of the Scotch rebellion, BishopAtterbury, so celebrated as a Jacobite, a scholar, and,as his contemporaries judged, a deist, was detailingto the king, with many expressions of affected sorrow,the progress the rebels had made. " My LordBishop," interrupted the king, " I fear the rebels aslittle as you do Jesus Christ."The disadvantageous parts of the king's characterwere already well known to the nation' as they hadbeen carefully sketched and artfully heightened bythe emissaries of the Stuartss f they were also themost prominent and obvious features : his simplicity,economy, and love jos peace, required tone to be developedand appreciated.*Coxe. Chesterfield. " Chesterfield's Characters Reviewed."20 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER II.Expectations of the two parties Appointment of Lord Townshend assecretary of state Formation of a Whig ministry Elections favourableto the Whigs Meeting of parliament Inquiry into theconduct of the late ministry Impeachment of Bolingbroke, Oxford,Ormond, and Strafford.CHAP. QUEEN Anne died on the 1st of August, and, atthe privy council which 'was immediately held, instruct.D. 1714.ments were produced under the seal ot the Elector otBrunswick, nominating lords justices of the kingdom,until he could arrive to assume the reins of government.The measures of these lords justices immediatelydiscovered that their power was wielded by theWhig party. The most rigorous measures were takento anticipate and crush any attempt of the Jacobites ;Addison was chosen their secretary ; the functions ofthe ministers of state were, in effect, suspended; andBolingbroke, the chief of the party which, in the precedingweek, seemed rooted in its power, now stoodat the door of the council-chamber, exposed to thetaunts and insults of the lowest retainers of the successfulfaction.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 2Both parties, nevertheless, looked with great in- CHAP.terest towards Hanover, each having secret hopes of A D 1?]4favour from the new sovereign. The Whigs, consciousof the magnitude of their services, and possessedof the influence of Bernsdorf, the principalminister of Hanover, Robertson, the private secretary,of the elector, and Bothmar, the Hanoverian agent inEngland, were confident of preserving their ascendancy; but the Tories were not without hopes of anequal share of power, although they could not hope forthe monopoly which the return of the Stuartss promised.The Earl of Clarendon, who had recently arrived asenvoy-extraordinary at the court of Hanover, wasentirely in their interest ; and George and his ministershad conducted themselves so prudently towardshim, that he wrote home the most flattering accountsto his party. Goerty, an influential minister atHanover, was devoted to their interest,* and theking himself, while the succession was yet insecure,sedulously avoided giving them any alarm.With these hopes, the Tories pretended extraordinaryloyalty to the king, whom they wanted onlypower to declare a public enemy. In the parliamentwhich immediately met, they bid largely for hisfavour. The Whigs proposed to continue the revenuewhich had been enjoyed by the late queen, butLetter from Horace Walpole to the Rev. Henry Etough. Coxe.Vpp.,vol. ii., p. 47.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the Tories urged its augmentation to 1,000,000;the Whigs, however, had the courage to interpose,and defeated the artifice. This temper in the Toriesdid not long continue ; no sooner had the king arrivedso far on his way as the Hague than their fall becamemanifest. A despatch arrived, removing Lord from his post of secretary. The circumstancesof the dismissal of this champion of his partypresaged a coming persecution. Shrewsbury, Somerset,and Cowper, were deputed by the lords justicesto receive the seals, and to secure his papers, and itwas apparent that this latter precaution was takenwith a view to future inquiry. The communicationof the contents of this despatch and its enforcementwere nearly immediate, but it is said that Bolingbrokeyet found time for the removal of a certain box, inwhich alone any dangerous correspondence was preserved,and that this was conveyed away just previousto the arrival of the lords justices,* The means ofinformation possessed by the author of this statementdoubtless give it great authority; if true, it completelyaccounts for the unconcern which Bolingbroke au Roi, 24 Jan. 49. Dr. King, among his anec-1715. Mackintosh MSS. Stan dotes, states that Bolingbroke's se-hope,in the house of commons, secretary removed certain papers, butpublicly stated that papers had Bolingbroke sent them back. Thisbeen conveyed away from the se is by no means inconsistent withsecretary's office, in order to prevent D'Iberville's information,discoveries. Parl. Hist., vol. vii , p.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.wards manifested with respect to the papers of his CHAP.office, and for the failure of the Whigs, to obtain from. , , A. D. 1714.them evidence of transactions which they were certainhad taken place.On the 18th September the king arrived at Greenwich,and the Tories flocked around him, anxious toknow their fate. Immediately upon his arrival, Georgesent for those of the council of regency whom he esteemedhis friends, and conversed with them inprivate ; but it was noticed that none of the latequeen's ministers were included in the invitation.Oxford had boasted that his influence was unimpaired,and had, unasked, promised several of his colleaguesthat they should retain their offices. He was receivedby the king with the most marked contempt. ,who had more wisely absented himself,enjoyed the conspicuous disgrace of his rival, and wascontented with making private, but unavailing applicationsfor an interview.The frequent dismissals, and the new appointments,discovered that the king was not disposedeven to maintain appearances towards a party whichhe looked upon as composed of enemies. The ministerialarrangements were now completed.On the 17th of September, Lord Townshend hadbeen sworn in secretary of state, and being allowedto nominate his colleague, he, at the instance ofHorace Walpole, had chosen Stanhope. The ministryTHE HISTORY OF PARTYCHAP, which Townshend formed was of course entirely Whig- in its party character. Cowper was Lord Chancellor,A. D. 1714. r JMarlborough commander-in-chief; Walpole contentedhimself with the office of paymaster of the forces ;Halifax was placed at the head of the commissionersof the treasury ; Wharton was privy seal ; Pulteney,secretary at war ; Sunderland, whose talents and patriotismhad effaced the recollections of his parentage,and had earned for him popularity, was lord lieutenantof Ireland ; Orford was first commissioner of the admiralty; Devonshire, lord steward of the household ;and Shrewsbury, whose recent services had atoned forhis former desertion, received, as a pledge of reconciliation,the place of groom of the stole. Nottingham,who had for some time acted with the Whigs, was declaredpresident of the council, and the inferior places weredistributed exclusively among the Whigs. Somers,whose character and ability had for so long a timerendered him the leader of the constitutional party,has been already mentioned, his melancholy decay ofintellect had deprived his country of the most able ofher statesmen.He must be very ignorant of the history of thisperiod, and of the extent to which the two partiescarried their hostility, who censures Townshend forforming his ministry entirely from his own party.The animosity which raged between Whigs andTories was at this time so violent, that it assumedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.the complexion of personal hatred ; the factions never CHAP.consented to meet in the council-chamber, exceptA. D. 1715.with the intention of contesting its undivided possession.Halifax, when disappointed in his expectationof the premiership, is indeed said to have advocated acoalition administration, which he undertook to construct; but this proposition was founded upon jealousyof Townshend and personal ambition, no such aministry could have been stable. This considerationwould alone justify Townshend in the exclusivenessof his choice ; but he had a much graver reason.How could he recommend to posts of confidence andpower men whom he looked upon as traitors to theircountry, and whom he knew had been lately engagedin a conspiracy to destroy her institutions and trampleon her liberties ?In January the parliament was dissolved by proclamation.This document was in itself a manifestoagainst the Tories ; it significantly pointed at them asevil men, who were disaffected to the Protestant succession; attributed to them all the national difficulties,the stagnation of trade, the interruption ofnavigation, and the accumulation of debt ; and calledupon the electors to send up to parliament such ashad shown a firmness to the Protestant successionit was in danger.*Parl. Hist,, vol. vii., p. 24.26 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.,CHAP. The Tories endeavoured in vain to raise their cusst 9tomary rallying cry of " The church is in danger ;'A. D. 17J5. ., ,.,the people were more occupied in estimating the perilto which it had just been exposed, than in readingthose prognostications of Whig spoliation which wereso assiduously dispersed about the country. In theelections the Whigs had a great preponderance ;many of them being returned with particular instructionsto inquire who were the promoters of the treatiesof Utrecht. The nature of these treaties was nowbecome fully known ; the much-prized stipulation forthe demolition of Dunkirk was discovered to be useless,and the Spanish treaty of commerce, when actedupon, was found, instead of giving England peculiaradvantages, to burden her commerce with dutiesseven per cent, greater than had before been paid.*This discovery had great effect upon the elections.In the house of lords, the ministry carried theelection of their list of the sixteen Scotch representativepeers. No trifling success, since defeat wouldhave made a difference of thirty-two votes in ahouse containing only one hundred and fifty-sevenEnglish peers capable of voting Against this goodfortune must be placed the death of the patriotic Earlof Wharton, whose whole course of public life hadTindal. vii., p. 27 The number stated inf See the list of peers for this the text is exclusive of the bishops,parliament in the Parl. Hist., vol.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.been honest and consistent, who never injured the CHAP.cause of liberty, except by his violence in its advo-A. D. 1715.cay, an error which often accompanies sincerity,and whose private life has been too much blackenedby men, in whose eyes his real crime was his politicalconduct. He died on the 12th of April, at theage of sixty-seven, having lived to give his vote toswell the majority for censuring the measures he hadso constantly opposed.The first division in the two houses proclaimed theascendancy of the Whigs. The address proposed ineither house conveyed a direct censure upon the lategovernment. The lords promised their exertions torecover the reputation of the kingdom in foreignparts, the loss of which, they added, they hoped toconvince the world, by their acts, was by no meansto be imputed to the nation in general. The majoritywas sixty-six against thirty-three. The commonswere yet stronger in their censures, and added athreat, that they would bring the authors of these disastrousmeasures to condign punishment ; a threat,which the minority well knew was not idly put forth.The division in the house was two hundred and forty-fourto one hundred and thirty-eight.In the debates, which preceded these parliamentaryvictories, the Tories distinguished themselves bytheir bold defence of the measures which were calledin question. Bolingbroke, in the lords, and Wynd-theHISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ham, in the commons, showed no signs of apprehension,and abated nothing of their usual confidenceof tone ; but they failed to produce any effect upontheir auditors : the commons listened more attentivelyto Stanhope, when he denied the report thatthe present ministers never designed to call the latemanagers to account, than they did to the transparentsophistry of Wyndham, which was no sooner exhibitedthan demolished.*The measures of severity, which were now commenced,had been resolved upon before the kinglanded in England. It is said that Walpole, smartingunder the recollection of his expulsion and imprisonment,and aided by Stanhope, had thus earlyobtained from the king a consent to the proscriptionswhich the most violent of his party meditated. Butwhen he triumphantly related this consent to Somers,the infirm old statesman endeavouring in vain todissuade him, shed tears at the prospect of the miserieswhich so extensive a persecution would bringupon his country. Bolingbroke, who saw in the distancethe rising sands, thought that it was Marlboroughwho had conjured up the storm. Marlborough,doubtless, had every incentive to vengeance,and, although he assumed no prominent part himself,lent his best wishes to the prosecutions. As earlyParl. Hist., vol. vii., p. 50.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 29as January, in this year, Bolingbroke, in an interview CHAP,with Somerville, said, he knew that the Whigs hadA. D. 1715.resolved to cut off the heads of Oxford, Strafford, andLondon, that Marlborough forced it on ; and althoughHalifax and the Whigs of the junto were opposed toitin their hearts, they thought it necessary to followthe torrent. He would, he said, to France.*In pursuance of their design, the commons addressedthe crown for possession of the papers whichhad been seized ; and appointed, by ballot, a secretcommittee of twenty-one members to examine them.Walpole declared, in private conversation, that duringthe progress of the recent Tory intrigues, many particularsof them had been revealed to the Whigleaders ; and that he himself had received particularinformation, from eyewitnesses, of a meeting betweenthe leading ministers and members of parliament, atwhich, the object of discussion was, the means ofrepealing the act of Settlement. With such information,the Whigs, doubtless, now looked forward tothe complete development of the recent Jacobiteplot. They were entirely disappointed. Boling-broke'scaution had been so great, that there was nopaper among this voluminous collection, which furnishedany direct proof upon the subject. Morefortunate than Coleman, he had overlooked no evilan Roi, Mackintosh. MSS.30 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, hence of his treason, but had conveyed it all away,or, more prudent, perhaps, he had never sufferedA. D. 1715.such documents to exist after they had been read.Foiled in this expectation, the committee were,therefore, compelled to found their charges upon thepublic acts of the late ministers ; and they certainlyproduced, from the secret machinery by which thepeace had been wrought, abundant matter for censure.But when they tortured these delinquenciesinto acts of high treason, they regarded the endrather than the means ; they acted with the usual violenceof a triumphant party when individual responsibilityis lost by its division ; they punished theerror they could prove with the penalty of the crimethey could not, and revived that weapon of constructivetreason which had so often been wielded againstthe constitution.It is a subject of satisfaction, that no blood wasspilt upon the impeachments which followed uponthe report of the secret committee. Bolingbroke,having remained in England until the last moment,appearing every where in public, and making everyexertion to rally his party, seeing that all was lost,suddenly fled from London by night, and reachedCalais in disguise. On the 10th of June, Walpolemoved his impeachment. This demonstration wasfollowed by the impeachment of the Earl of Oxford,and so powerful was the feeling of the house, thatTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 31neither of these two ministerial leaders, lately so pow CHAP,erful both in the senate and throughout the nation,A.D. 1715.could find an advocate bold enough to divide thehouse upon the question. The Duke of Errand,who came next, was the most popular nobleman inthe kingdom; honoured and respected, even by theWhigs, magnificent in his style of living, liberal tothe people, of undoubted bravery : esteemed by allparties as a man of unblemished honour, and lovedfor his real benevolence, Ormond was the idol ofthe crowd. Perhaps, had he relied less on this popularity,he had escaped impeachment ; but when hemade use of it to insult the victorious party,* andappeared to insinuate, that those who were afraid toaccuse intended to assassinate him, the ministers nolonger hesitated. The duke's conduct certainlyadmitted of defence, since he had acted only as asoldier, under the orders of a responsible minister ;but a majority of two hundred and thirty-four againstone hundred and eighty-seven, after a long debate,voted his impeachment.The Earl of Strafford, who had been ambassadorextraordinary at the States, and one of the Britishplenipotentiaries at Utrecht, was the next and thelast of those who were deemed worthy of impeachmentfor their misconduct during the late reign.Tindal.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The resolution against this nobleman was carried bya majority of more than three to one. It affords acurious illustration of the power of the church at thisperiod, that amid the general indignation, which hadnot spared even the popular Duke of Ormond, themere instrument of others, no one attempted to callto account the Bishop of London, who had been anactive plenipotentiary during all the negotiations.The most intrepid of the dominant party confinedthemselves to a sneer at his escape, by his benefitof clergy, while the ministerial speakers nearlyavowed their apprehension of attacking a churchman.Mr. Islay, who moved the impeachment of Strafford,congratulated the house "that nothing couldbe proved against the bishop, since it gave them anopportunity to convince the world that the churchwas not in danger." *The resolution to prosecute these four noblemen,had been not a little strengthened by a recent proclamationissued by the pretender, in which, speakingof the late queen, he said, " of whose good intentionstowards us we could not for some time past welldoubt, and this was the reason we then sat still,expecting the good effects thereof, which wereunfortunately prevented by her deplorable deathsIf these expressions were intended to punish theParl. Hist., vol. vii., p. 72. f Tindal.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 33vacillating conduct of the late ministers, the design CHAP,was not without its success ; the publication of theA. D. 1715.manifesto strengthened the hands of their prosecutorsand increased their peril. It was not long beforethe conviction of the nation was justified by theintelligence that Bolingbroke and Ormond hadbetaken themselves to the mimic court of the pretender,and had received parts in the pageantrieswhich were there performed.VOL. II.34> THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER III.The Tories now a Jacobite party Rebellion of 1715 Unpopularityof the king Dangerous state of the nation The Septennial BillContest of the factions upon Shippen He teaches the Tories toadopt for the occasion popular sentiments.CHAP. I N the reign of Anne, it was only a section of theTories which plotted for the succession of theA.D. 1715 i i P ^ -ni-to 1717. pretender ; in the reign 01 George the .first, therewere but few of that party who were not also Jacobites.The prosecution of their leaders had enragedtheir followers ; nothing but a king of their own, theythought, could raise them to their wonted supremacy,and enable them to retort the indignities they hadrecently endured. According to the testimony ofthose who had the best opportunity of judging, theTories were now entirely committed, as a party, tothe cause of the pretender. Bolingbroke's conductis alone decisive to this. Bolingbroke was a man whohad no sympathy with the common notions of hisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 35party. A deist, he cared nothing for the Church ofEngland, save as a party engine, and a convenient A D 1715theme for declamation. He laughed to scorn the claimof divine right put forward by the Stuartss ; and hedespised the dogma of non-resistance, as an attemptto eradicate by an apothegm, passions which thewhole artificial fabric of society has been constructedonly to control. As a statesman, he saw nothing inthe character of the pretender which promised advantagesto England, from his government, thatcould compensate the cost at which he wouldreach the throne. Hear his own description of thatperson. " The chevalier's religion is not foundedon the love of virtue and the detestation of vice ; ona sense of that obedience which is due to the will ofthe Supreme Being, and a sense of those obligationswhich creatures formed to live in a mutual dependenceon one another lie under. The spring of his wholeconduct is fear, fear of the horns of the devil and ofthe flames of hell. He has been taught to believethat nothing but a blind submission to the Church ofRome, and a strict adherence to all the terms of thatcommunion, can save him from these dangers. Hehas all the superstition of a capuchin ; but I foundin him no tincture of the religion of a prince"*The pretender's education has rendered himLetter to Sir William Bingham.D 236 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, infinitely less fit than his uncle, and at least as unfit- as his father, to be king of Great Britain. AddA. L). 1 1 15to 1717 to this, that there is no resource in his understanding.Men of the best sense find it hard to overcomereligious prejudices, which are of all thestrongest ; but he is a slave to the weakest.The rod hangs, like the sword of Damocles, overhis head, and he trembles before his mother and hispriest"*This description was certainly written when Boling-brokewas no longer a Jacobite ; but it appears thathe held this opinion of the pretender's character evenwhile employed in his service. The Earl of Stair, whowas ambassador at the French Court, writing toHorace Walpole an account of the ill-founded reportsthen prevalent at Paris with respect to Bolingbroke,remarks, " I believe all poor Harry's fault was, thathe could not play his part with a grave enough face ;he could not help laughing now and then at suchkings and queens."tBolingbroke's conduct was not therefore promptedby any affection for the person, or respect for thecharacter of the pretender ; his real motive may beassigned in his own words. Accounting for his nothaving joined the pretender immediately upon hisLetter to Sir William Wind f Coxe's Walpole, App. vol. ii.,ham. p. 308.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 3Jarrival in France, he says, " Had I engaged with CHAP.the pretender before the party acted for him, orA.D. 171.5required of me that I should do so, I had taken to 1717.the air of being his man ; whereas I looked uponmyself as theirs: I had gone about to bring theminto his measures ; whereas I never intended, evensince that time, to do any thing more than to makehim, as far as possible, act conformably to theirviews"* " At last," he tells the Tories " yourcommands came." And he gives a circumstantial de xtail of the manner in which he received and how heexecuted them. He joined the pretender, becausehe looked on his party to be under oppression andto call for his assistancesAnd what was the object of the Tory partyin thus identifying themselves with the Jacobites?The question may be again answered in the wordsof their great leader : " You thought of restoringthe pretender by the strength of the Tories, andof opposing a Tory king to a Whig king. Youtook him up as the instrument of your revengeand of your ambition ; you looked on him as yourcreature, and never doubted of making what termsyou pleased with him. This is so true, that thesame language is still held to the catechumensin Jacobitism. Were the contrary to be avowedLetter to Sir William Bingham. f Ibid.38 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, even now, the party in England would soon dim- ' i, *mmish. *A.D.1715to 171 7. The event of all these intrigues was the rebellionof 1715, happily frustrated by the imprudence of itsprojectors and the vigilance of the ministry. Fortunatelyfor themselves, the chief parliamentaryleaders of the Tories were unable to consummatetheir treason ; the seizure and temporary confinementof Bingham and his friends, doubtless saved theirlives. It is a remarkable instance of that recklessnessof falsehood and contempt of probability, so oftenfound in the professions of a fallen party, that thecry by which the Tory chiefs rallied their followersaround the standard of a popish prince was, " Thechurch is in danger." The church was in dangerfrom the spoliation propensities of the Whigs, andthey called to its rescue a Roman Catholic and aStuart. Insulting as this pretence was to the commonsense of the people, it was nevertheless sounblushingly and so successfully repeated, that itwas even thought worthy of particular notice in aspeech from the throne. tLetter to Sir William Wind has been the main artifice em-ham,played in carrying on this wickedfParl. Hist., vol. vii., p. 222. "The and traitorous design. This in-endeavouring to persuade my insinuation after the solemn assurethat the Church of England is ranee I have given, and my havingin danger under my government, laid hold on all opportunities toTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 39The column of British freedom, reared with such CHAP.persevering labour and guarded with such sleeplesszeal, at this moment trembled to its base. It was to inr.not only that the youthful scion of a chivalrousfamily, clothed with the mysteriously potent mantleof hereditary right, and surrounded by devoted bandsof hardy mountaineers, held possession of one sectionof the kingdom, and prepared to seize upon what hecl aimed to be his birthright it was not only that,throughout every county of England, there smouldered,unseen, a fire of loyalty to his house, which abreath could convert into flame these, alone, weresymptoms pregnant with danger; but there was onestill more fearful : the constitutional king who filledthe throne was become personally unpopular. Imminentdanger had once aroused the nation to contest,and the people had struggled manfully for the principlewhich placed a Hanoverian upon the throne.But a multitude looks rather to tangible facts thanto mere abstracts. It is not often that a large bodycan be prevailed upon to keep a principle long inview. The people began now to seek the fruitsdo every thing that may tend to the minds of my faithful subjects,the advantage of the Church of or that they can be so far misledEngland, is both unjust and un as to think the Church of Englandgrateful ; nor can I believe so is to be secured by setting a popishgroundless and malicious a calumny pretender on the throne."ny can make any impression upon40 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of theirs. They found little cause of satisfaction. Aincontempt of foreigners is a prejudice common to allA. D. 1715to 1717. nations ; in England its strength almost forms partof the national character ; what then must our forefathershave felt at seeing the avenues of their nationalpalaces clogged with the underlings of a miniatureprincipality ; at seeing the menials and confidants ofa potentate almost too minute for the recognition ofthe powerful sovereigns of Europe, stilting themselvesinto importance as their master increased in dignity,and mingling, with an air of confident superiority,among the nobility of England? In the young chevalier,as he was painted by his partisans, they saw thebrilliant qualities of his uncle, and they had forgottenthat man's vices. They saw also, with that sympathywhich courage and constancy will always command,the severities which stripped of patrimony, deprivedof liberty, or shed the blood of, the representatives ofmany of the most ancient of the national families.The exhibition of the rebels of the nobler ranks,which were taken at Preston, and paraded, pinioned,through the streets of London, excited only rage inthe breasts of the Tories even Whigs thought thatBritish peers, although rebels, might have been sparedthis degradation.The justice of the impeachments which followednone could deny, but many dissuaded the executionof the sentences. Upon this point Nottingham se-theHISTORY OF PARTY.ceded from his new friends, and rejoined his original C ?, AP 'party. His brother and son followed in his train, A D 1?15thus removing all leaven of Toryism from the cabinet. to 1717 -Even Stanhope is said to have interposed his influencein favour of one of the prisoners ; and the voteof the house of commons, by which all interference wasdeclined, was carried only by a majority of seven.*That the measures of severity which were at thiscrisis adopted were just in themselves, and mercifulin their consequences, few will now dispute ; thatthey were absolutely necessary to the safety of thenation the characteristic humanity and mildness ofWalpole, their chief instigator, will not allow us todoubt ; but the divisions which they produced in aWhig house of commons, and even in a Whig cabinet,enable us to judge of the effects which they musthave had upon the nation at large. The effervescingelements of rebellion, which the defeat at Preston hadforced back, at the moment when they were about toburst, were still struggling for a vent; not a county ofEngland, scarcely a hamlet in Scotland, was withoutits local conspiracy. In this conjuncture the hopesof the conspirators were placed upon the dissolutionwhich must take place at the end of the followingsession. England, dizzy with the clash of factionsSeward's Anecdotes, vol. ii., p. 316, edit. 1795. Parl. Hist. Coxe'sWalpole.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and sickening at the spectacle of civil bloodshed,would then be called upon to elect the arbiter of herA. D. 1715to 1717. destiny. Such the new house of commons it wasallowed must be. The avowed expectations of theTories, the anxiety, and even terror of the Whigs,show that there was at least reason to fear that theelectors would return a Tory majority. Had thishappened, the second session of the next parliamentwould have been opened by James III.This approaching danger was met by a bold andunconstitutional* assumption of power, which nothingbut necessity could in any respect justify, and whichthe necessity of the present case did not justify in itsfull extent. When Townshend proposed, and theWhigs in their alarm agreed, to introduce the Spaneditor of Blackstone's went features of a constitution,Commentaries argues this ques settled by a recent revolution, wastion in the spirit of a mere lawyer, surely unconstitutionally exercised.He denies that this was an uncouth learned editor has confoundedstitutional exertion of authority, the terms legal and constitutional ;because " it never can be supposed his author was more clear headed,that the next, or any succeeding he cites the circumstance only asparliament, had not the power of an instance of the " vast authorityrepealing the Triennial act." Un of parliament'" Christian's Black-doubtedthey had the power to stone, vol. i., p. 188. Every newrepeal either the Triennial act or safeguard of the privileges of theMagna Charta ; they had the power subject becomes, in a free country,also to consent to an act annihi- immediately upon its acquisition,hating their house altogether ; but amalgamated with the constitutesdestructive power, when exertioncited upon one of the most promiseHISTORY OF PARTY. 43genial bill, and alter the constitution of parliament, CHAP,they adopted a permanent remedy to meet a mo A D 1715nectary danger. The most perfect of human institutionsmust experience emergencies to which theyare unequal. In such a case, the Romans endured atemporary despotism, the Spartans suspended theirlaws for a day. But neither thought it prudent tochange their ordinary constitution, in order to preparefor a conjuncture which might never recur. Thedictatorship was not perpetual, nor were the laws ofLycurgus abolished. In suspending, at all hazard,the general election, and in placing it beyond thereach of early expectation, the Whigs were doubtlessright ; in disguising their design under the transparentmask of a general measure, they were ascertainly wrong.*When the preamble of the Septennial bill stated,that "a general election might probably, at that con-such,according to Boyer, was roughs in England having been,the original opinion of the pro for several years past, both bribedmothers of this bill. " It was at and preached into the pretender'sfirst proposed only to suspend the interest, and a dislike of the Pro-triennialact for once, whereby this testant succession, it becomes ratherparliament would have continued necessity than choice to apply anthree years beyond the time at extraordinary remedy to an extra-whichit was to determine." Po ordinary disease." Par. Hist., vol.political State, vol. xi., p. 428. Upon vii., p. 31 1. This is the only con-introducingthe bill to the com- sister paragraph of that gentleman,Mr. Liddell said, " The man's speech,electors and people of all the THE HISTORY OF PARTY.juncture, when a restless and popish faction wereD 1715 designing and endeavouring to renew the rebellionto 1717. w within the kingdom, and an invasion from abroad, bedestructive to the peace and security of the government,"it stated the only argument that was availablein its favour. It is amusing, however, to mark theother arguments with which this measure was supportedand attacked. These debates furnish a remarkableinstance of how easily men adopt anypropositions, when they have once become convertsto the conclusion they appear to favour. Unwilling tomanifest any distrust of the electors, and denying thatthey were at all unpopular, the Whigs became suddenlyawake to the great inconvenience of populartumults ; the debaucheries occasioned by elections,and the corruption of the morals and principles of thepeople. They sighed over the animosities whichthese frequent contests created throughout the country,and declaimed against the exorbitance of theirexpense as ruinous to the candidates. They appropriatedfor the occasion all the common-places ofToryism, and paraded inconveniences which are aspowerful to prove that parliaments should enduretwenty years as that they should last for seven,The Tories, on the other hand, seized the artilleryof their opponents. The Whigs would not avow thatthey proposed this measure because they were unpopular,but the Tories dare not avow that theirTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 45ground of opposition was their hope of bringing in CHAP.the pretender. They, therefore, harangued on thetopics of liberty, and discovered a sudden panic at to 1717.the power of the crown, and a vehement affection forthe rights of the people. They became assertors ofthe privileges of the house of commons, and suddenlystood forth as the champions of those principleswhich it had long been the business of the partyto persecute and deride.*When the measure was first proposed, it was receivedwith a shout of disapprobation by the greatbody of the Whigs ; it was only, as a contemporaryobserves, time and good arguments t that changedtheir opposition into support. Doubtful of its success,therefore, the ministers first introduced it intothe house of lords, that, should it fail there, its unpopularitymight not affect the elections of their partyin the commons. The Duke of Devonshire, the sonof the friend of Russell, brought it forward; thirtynoblemen having met the night before at his house,and arranged its details. In the debates, the mostpertinent remark was that made by the young Earlof Dorset, who worthily inherited a title which theelegant taste, as well as the patriotism of his father,"bad distinguished above the common crowd of heritableto Horace Walpole ; Coxe's Walpole, vol. ii., p. 62f Ibid.46 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, able dignities. When he said that, "Those whointhen spoke against the bill would be for it, if itto 1717. served their turn," he stated an undoubted truth ;but it was one which might have been retorted withequal justice upon himself and his party. TheTories thought the most witty observation was thatmade on their side by the Earl of Peterborough, whowas a Tory because Marlborough was a Whig. Thisleading member of a party which claimed to be thechampion of our Protestant church, said that, " if thepresent parliament continued beyond the time forwhich they were chosen, he knew not how to expressthe manner of their existence, unless, beggingleave of that venerable bench (he continued, turningto the bishops), they had recourse to the distinctionused in the Athanasian Creed, for they would beneither created nor made, but proceeding." Thebill passed the lords by a majority of thirty-six.The character of the question at issue appearsmore distinctly in the debate in the commons. Theopposition was there led by Shippen, whose energyand talent had placed him at the head of his party,but whose Jacobite principles were so strong, that hescorned to cloak them in conversation, and could notalways prevent their ebullition even in debate.William Shippen, who played so conspicuous a partin the contests of the two factions at this time, wasone of the few honest statesmen of the period. TheTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 4/7son and brother of clergymen, he was, of course, educatedto admire the absolute and indefeasible title of A D 1?15the hereditary monarch, and to feel the dignity of ablind obedience to his will. His frugal habits wereamply satisfied by a patrimonial estate of about 400a-year, and, although he received the large sum of70,000 upon his marriage, the penurious and unsocialtemper of his wife afforded him no temptation toexpense. Thus amply provided, he espoused thecause of his party for itself alone. Walpole frequentlydeclared, long after his power had passed away, thathe would not say who had been corrupted, but hewould mention one whom he had found incorruptible,and that man was Shippen. So strongly and unreservedlyhad this man attached himself to the causeof the Stuartss, that neither misfortune nor lapseof time could shake his affection. " Robin and I(he was accustomed to say of himself and Walpole)are two honest men. He is for King George and Ifor King James." Shippen was one of those partisanswho suffer no considerations of expediency tocheck the direct pursuit of their object. When thepeculiar circumstances of the time had driven himinto an alliance with a section of the old Whig party,he did not hesitate to provoke their indignation, byfrequent propositions of bringing in the pretender ;aid he often avowed, in conversation, that he shaped48 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, his conduct in parliament in accordance with the in-lii.instructions he received from Rome.*to 1717. This Tory chief, therefore, since he acted uponprinciple, must have held those original tenets of hisparty, which alone would justify his present acts ;under Charles, he would have been an abhorred anda subscriber to the Oxford decree ; under James, hewould have mourned over the "general and imperfectrepentance" of Monmouth. Yet this advocate forabsolute monarchy, this assertor of the impotence ofparliament to alter the succession, now haranguedthe commons upon the importance of maintainingtheir privileges, and declared that it was inconsistentwith their honour to receive from the lords any billwhich concerned the constitution of their house. Hedeprecated a despotic and military government asthe greatest calamity that could befal a freebornpeople. t He made an elaborate review of the historyof parliaments from the time of Edward I. ; he spokeof parliaments that had acted like slaves, and kingsthat had acted like tyrants ; he pointed to the parliamentsof Henry VIII. and that of Charles II., andthe conclusion he arrived at was, that, " Long parliamentswill naturally grow either formidable or contemptible."Coxe's Life of Walpole. f Parl. Hist., vol. vii., p. 313.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 49One of the most remarkable passages in this speech CHAP,is that in which the speaker declares, " There is no A p 1?[5injury or dishonour to the crown to be obliged, by to 1717 -a law, to what, in justice to the subject and convenienceto itself, it ought to do, without a law ;" asentence which, had it appeared in "Julian theApostate," had certainly been deemed worthy ofdamnatory observation in the Oxford decree.*These debates form an era in the history of thenational parties, since they afford the first instance ofthe Tories assuming, for a temporary purpose, theadvocacy of popular rights. Since that time theexpedient has been so commonly practised, that itis now an ordinary and well-understood branch ofparty strategy ; but we should not forget to renderto Shippen and Wyndham the honour of its invention.The conduct of these able leaders appears tohave been prompted by a profound knowledge of theresources of their party. Toryism was formed forgovernment; it is only a creed for rulers. Possessedof the countenance of the monarch, the influence ofthe court, and the administration of the national re-This speech is printed at but as they interrupt the con-lengthin the Appendix A. The tenuity of the narrative, some fewplan of this work appears to re- which can be depended upon asquire copious specimens of the accurate, and some others whichoratory of the party chiefs, and the are interesting from their subjectsspeeches are useful to enable us to have been thrown into an Ap-understandthe subject in debate; pencil.VOL. II. E50 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, sources, it has proved vigorous, resolute, and efficient ;but, deprived of these, it is nothing. When drivenA.D. 1715to 1717. from the council, the Tory leaders were generalswithout troops ; upon political matters they had nosympathy with the people ; and unless the efforts ofthe clergy could procure for them mobs to shoutthe church is in danger," they were compelled towait in patience until some private intrigue, or somewant of compliance upon the part of their rivals,should enable them to supplant them at court.Shippen and Wyndham now undertook to removethis weakness ; and the protean character of theparty has been so well sustained, that Tory writershave appeared who have argued, with equal plausibility,some, that the principles of their party areessentially democratic, and others, that the presentWhigs are, in fact, the ancient Tories. It is notbecause these paradoxes are laughed at by all butthe most illiterate of the members of the party forwhose service they are made, that therefore they arequite incapable of defence. The inconsistencies inthe professions of their party will yield abundantspurious arguments, we must refer to their acts andobjects to demonstrate their political character. Ship-pen,in this debate, commenced the new system ; heassumed the mask of a patriot, in order that he mightintroduce a tyrant.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 51The Septennial bill passed the commons by a ma CHAP.majority of two hundred and sixty-four against oneA. \~) 1 Y 1 Qhundred and twenty-one.* to 1717 -No sooner was the bill become law, than theTories, in conversation, threw away the mask, andconfessed, in bitter and railing disappointment, thatthe Whigs had broken all their schemes.Parl. Hist., vol. vii.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER IV,Disagreement between the king and the Prince of Wales Schism inthe Whig cabinet Its origin Sunderland His discontent IntriguesIs joined by Stanhope Progress of their intrigues Dismissalof Townshend Review of Stanhope's conduct Formationof the Stanhope administration.CHAP. THE king was already impatient of his residencein a kingdom, to the language and habits of which hewas alike a stranger. His ministers had found themselvescompelled to indulge him with a repeal of thatclause in the act of Settlement, which restrained thesovereign from leaving the kingdom, and the Torieshad readily consented, willing, under any circumstances,to get rid of the presence of a king theyhated. No sooner, therefore, had the parliamentbeen prorogued, than George, accompanied byStanhope, set out for his electorate. Previously,however, to his departure, it became necessary toprovide for the safety of the kingdom during hisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 53absence, and modern usage prescribed that the Prince CHAP,of Wales should be left as regent, with all the power A D 1717of the absent sovereign. To this, however, the kingstrongly objected ; and his undisguised reluctance totrust his authority to his son, discovered to thenation a jealousy which, although it had long beenknown to the courtiers, had never before been publiclyavowed. The dislike which George so openlymanifested for his heir, is apparently so unnatural,that a French memoir writer* has not scrupled toattribute it to a suspicion that the prince was not hisson. The variance may, however, be accounted for,without having recourse to so extreme a supposition.The natural affections are seldom found to flourishSt. Simon. This person, doubt this passage in her life could throwless, draws his inference from the no doubt upon the paternity ofsubsequent accusation against the her son born long before George I., the beautiful and ningsmark came to Hanover, andhapless Sophia of Hell. The fame long before suspicion rested uponof this princess had reached every her fame. Whatever her errorscourt in Europe, and the neglect they were rigorously atoned for byof her husband had been censured two-and-thirty years of captivity,long before the story arrived that and a death which happened short-countKoningsmark had been ly before the accession of a son,seised, proceeding from her prig who believed her innocent, and che-latechamber, and stabbed in the wished her memory, and whose firstpresence of the elector. But wheat after his accession, would havether Sophia was really guilty, or been to release her from confinedether, as appears to be now the ment, and acknowledge her queenmore prevailing opinion, she was dowager of England.th( victim of a woman's jealousy,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, with great luxuriance under the shadow of a throne ;IV.-g that of Great Britain is peculiarly hostile to theirgrowth. In England, there is always a great andpowerful party in opposition ; this party is alwayseager to obtain, as an accession to its ranks, the heirto the crown, and it is usually able to protect himfrom his father's resentment. Where such a refugefrom parental authority is open, it will seldom beneglected, and when a breach has once occurred, nopains will be spared to keep it open. The Tories ofthis time were not ignorant of the advantage suchtactics offered ; they had paid all the homage whichwas due to the throne to its next heir, and the princewas too proud of the importance he thus obtained toconsider himself any longer dependent on hisfather. Under such circumstances, a family rupturewas inevitable ; the Prince of Wales was soon at thehead of the opposition to his father's government.George, learning from his ministers, that there wasno precedent for limiting the power of his son, whilethe kingdom was left in his hands, did, nevertheless,all that precedent could be found to warrant. Insteadof leaving him with the title of regent, he bestowedupon him that of guardian of the realm, and lieutenant.*Boyer, and after him Coxe, unknown since the time of Ed-andthe writers who have followed ward the Black Prince ; but thishim, say, that this was an office appears to be incorrect.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 55This disagreement had considerable influence upon CHAP.IV.the fortunes of the public men of this reign, sinceA. D. 1717.upon no subject was the king so intractable asthat of suspecting his ministers of caballing with theprince.During the king's absence in Holland, a schismoccurred in the cabinet, which threatened great dangerto the power of the Whigs, and tarnished thecharacters of those who contrived it. Several occurrenceshad already taken place, which hadchanged the relative positions of many members ofthe party, although that of the faction itself remainedunaltered. In the preceding year, the eloquent andingenious Halifax had been withdrawn by death, ata time when, it was more than suspected by his colleagues,that he was caballing with their opponents.It was the misfortune of the Whigs of this generationthat they had too many leaders. Halifax hadthought himself entitled to the influence whichTownshend obtained, and to a still higher post ; andSomerset had been removed, on account of the indiscreetresentment he expressed upon the arrest of hisson-in-law, Sir William Wyndham.The unfortunate division, which now took place,was occasioned by the ambition of Stanhope andthe jealousy of Sunderland. The latter noblemanhad long been known to be disaffected towards hiscolleagues. As the son of the infamous minister ofTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. James, Sunderland had, upon his entrance into publiclife, little claim to the confidence of his countrymen ;A. D. 1717. Jbut when his father retired from a world where nonewould any longer trust him, to await at Author, theclose of a conspicuous but dishonourable career,the son came forward, and threw himself with suchhearty zeal into the ranks of the Whigs, that hisfather's faults were speedily forgotten in admirationof his own personal merit. Having married thesecond daughter of the Duke of Marlborough, hecame recommended also by the patronage of thisillustrious man, under whom he had already served,both in military and diplomatic capacities. Throughoutthe reign of Queen Anne he had steadily adheredto his party, who had raised him, against thewill of the queen, to the office of secretary of state.We have already seen that the first unequivocal noticeof the ascendancy of the Tories, in that reign, was thedismissal of Somerset without the knowledge of his colleagues.Upon this occasion, Anne offered him a pensionof 3000 a-year ; but the young earl, with a nobilityof spirit, which he did not inherit, replied, that,if he could not have the honour to serve his country,he would never plunder it." Having thus suffered forhis party, Sunderland considered himself entitled tothe rank of its leader ; and although the omission ofhis name from the list of lords justices might haveconvinced him that such was not the opinion of others,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 5Jhe is said to have proposed himself for the chief CHAP,secretaryship upon the accession of George, and didA. D. 1717.not conceal his disgust when his application wasrefused. He now conceived a jealousy of Townshendwho had carried away the prize he coveted, a jealousywhich could not be allayed by his appointment tothe lord lieutenancy of Ireland, a post nominally ofhigher dignity. Sunderland retained this office onlya few months, and then resigning upon the plea ofill health, he accepted that of lord privy seal. Duringthis time he had never been absent from England,but his name very seldom occurs in the journals ofthe house of lords, and he appears to have taken nopart whatever in the direction of affairs or the defenceof his colleagues. Soon after the departure of theking, Sunderland also left England avowedly for thebenefit of his health, but not before he had sought ameeting with his colleagues, assured them he hadforgotten all former differences, and pledged himselfthenceforward to labour heartily in their service.Walpole reported these professions to Stanhope, buthe added, " When I consider that common interestshould procure sincerity among us, I am astonishedto think there is reason to fear the contrary"* Sunderlandimmediately set out for Aix la Chapelle, andafter a short residence there, applied for leave to visitWalpole to Stanhope. Coxe.58 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the court at Hanover. So little was he at that timeIV.the favourite of the king, that this permission wasA. D. 1717.with difficulty obtained by Stanhope, who at thistime certainly had no intention of joining him in aplot against his colleagues. Upon his arrival therehe found Stanhope high in favour with the king, onaccount of the successful issue to which he hadbrought the negotiation he had been conductingwith France ; and George, eager for the conclusion ofa treaty which would leave him free to indulge hispersonal enmity against the Czar, and at leisure toanticipate the threatened hostility of Sweden. Sunderlandimmediately applied himself to gain theconfidence of the king and the friendship of Stanhope.He had already a party in England who shared hisdiscontent. Carleton, Cadogan, Lechmere, Hampden,and even Marlborough, were discontented withtheir treatment : could he add Stanhope to the numberhe might yet satisfy his pique. A circumstanceoccurred which greatly facilitated his design. Thetreaty with France had been concerted with theDutch ; they were to be parties to it, and the Britishplenipotentiaries at the Hague had solemnly assuredthem that it should not be concluded without theirbeing made parties. When, however, the terms hadbeen definitively settled, it was found that the formsof the Dutch republic were upon such occasions sonumerous and dilatory, that a considerable time mustTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 59elapse before they could be completed. As no ob CHAP.section was raised to the treaty itself, the king andA. D. 1717.Stanhope both considered that the spirit of the compactwith the Dutch would be fulfilled, if a provisionwas inserted that they might come in whenever theypleased ; and they therefore directed the immediateexecution of the treaty. With this, Horace Walpole,one of the plenipotentiaries at the Hague, thinkinghis personal honour pledged to the Dutch, refused tocomply. A delay ensued, which, upon a comparisonof the dates of the letters that passed betweenEngland and Hanover, seems likely to have beenattributed by the king and Stanhope to Townshend.Several of Stanhope's recent letters appear theproductions rather of a courtier than a minister.He had pressed Townshend and Walpole to complywith the king's demand of money, for payment of theauxiliaries hired from Saxe Gotha and Munster ; acommand which Stanhope well knew Walpole couldnot legally obey without a vote of the house of commons; and he appeared ready to advocate the northerncrusade which was now the favourite project of theking.* Townshend had warmly defended his friend,but seems to have already become aware that he wasrapidly losing the confidence of the king. He accusesBothmar as the author of this change, andLetter to Townshend of October 16. Coxe.60 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, attributes his hostility to his having thwarted himin some of those infamous projects to get moneyA. D. 1717.which he had every day on foot.* It may, however,be doubted whether he had not already begun tosuspect Stanhope. Even at the commencement ofthis year, it occurred to the French envoy, thatWalpole and Townshend entertained a jealousy oftheir colleague. His knowledge of the French languagegave him great facilities for ingratiating himselfwith the king, and he had used these so carefully thathe was admitted to him even in his convivial moments,and often supped with him and his mistress in privatea privilege which no other member of the cabinetenjoy edit If Townshend did entertain such suspicionsthey were soon too amply verified. Nosooner did circumstances present a plausible groundfor supposition that Townshend had opposed orneglected the immediate execution of the Frenchtreaty, than Stanhope, without communicating withhis friend, or offering any opportunity for explanation,went to the king and tendered his resignation. Theresult could not but have been foreseen. Georgebeing as anxious as his secretary for the conclusionof the treaty, of course would not allow his ministerto retire ; on the contrary, he turned all his indigna-townshendto Stanhope, Oc f Mackintosh MSS.sober 16, O. S. Coxe.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 6ltion upon those whom he supposed to have thwarted CHAP,his views. Stanhope was ordered to write a letter A pexpressive of the king's displeasure, couched interms of great severity, and calling upon Townshendto justify his conduct. The same post conveyedone from Sunderland, which, as it had not the pretenceof the royal command, was impertinent as wellas insulting. These letters immediately made knownto Townshend the real state of affairs. Stanhope hadterminated their private correspondence by requiringthe minister to reply in French, that his letter mightbelaid before the king. Townshend complied, andby a plain and manly statement of facts, entirelyrefuted the charge which had been brought againsthim. To Sunderland's letter he vouchsafed no answer,to Stanhope he wrote only a few lines, expressive ofthe grief and disappointment his conduct had causedhim, " The enclosed," he said, " is a copy of my letterto the king; my heart is so full of the thoughts ofhaving received this usage from you, to whom Ihave always been so faithful a friend, that you willexcuse my not saying any more at this time ; I prayGod forgive you, I do"*In the mean time, and before the receipt of theking's letter, Horace Walpole, who had returnedTownshend to Stanhope, November 1, 1716.62 THE HISTORY OF PARTY,CHAP, from the Hague, was despatched with a communicationto Hanover, intimating, in answer to a desireexpressed by the king, that it would be possibleto hold the parliament without his presence inEngland.Upon his arrival in Holland, Horace Walpolelearned the nature of the letter which had been justsent to England. Being in possession of all thefacts and in the general confidence of the ministry,he explained the reason of the delay which had occurred,and exerted himself so effectually, that theking acknowledged himself deceived. Stanhope andSunderland also confessed they had been in error,and desired a reconciliation. Townshend was admittedby all parties to stand fully justified. Townshend'svindicatory letter arrived in season to confirmthis state of things, and Horace Walpole set out fromHanover with the confidence that he had destroyedevery cause of dissension. How great thereforemust have been his surprise when, upon his arrivalin England, he found that a despatch had accompaniedhim, removing Lord Townshend from the post of secretary,and containing a letter from Stanhope tothe astonished minister, announcing, in the severeirony which may be so often read in the formalwording of an official document, that his majestyhad, in consideration of the viscount's great services,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.advanced him to " the greatest employment a king CHAPof England has to give" that of lord lieutenant ofIreland.During the absence of the king, the Tories inEngland had been active in getting up addresses tothe prince, thus increasing the confidence of theirpatron, and increasing even into hatred the jealousyof his father. Horace Walpole had disabused theking of the prejudices he had entertained againstTownshend's conduct of the French treaty ; butwhen the despatch of which he was the bearer wasread, it furnished occasion for the secret advisers toobserve, that Townshend and Walpole were caballingwith the prince, and that it was at his instigation theysuggested the possibility of holding a parliamentbefore the king's return. No insinuation could bemore false, but none also could be more fatal. Theresult was the immediate transmission of the dismissalwhich has been related, and which, travelling muchfaster than Horace Walpole, arrived immediatelyafter his tidings of reconciliation.*Horace Walpole had de the very day upon which Towns-snatcheda messenger, by way of lend received his dismissal. TwelveCalais, from the Hague on the 8th, days had sufficed to remove all the(see", his letter to Secretary Stan favourable impressions which Ho-hopeof that date), with a full race Walpole had made, and toaccount of his success. He how erase from Stanhope's memory allever did not himself arrive in his recent protestations of fidelity.London until the 22d, which was64 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The messenger who brought this sentence ofdismissal to Townshend, was instructed previously toA. D. 1717.deliver to Walpole a copy of the official letter, togetherwith another from Stanhope, explaining andattempting to justify his conduct. Stanhope in thisletter accuses the discarded secretary of courting thecountenance of the prince, but insinuates that theking obtained his knowledge of this pretended intriguethrough other channels than those known tohimself and Sunderland. He intimates his wish thatTownshend and Walpole should continue membersof the government, as it was about to be remodelled,but plainly threatens, that if they should proverefractory, he was able to do without them. " If myLord Townshend accepts of Ireland, which for athousand reasons he ought to do, the cabinet councilwill remain just as it was, with the addition of theDuke of Kingston as privy seal. Mr. Methuen andI shall continue secretaries. But if my Lord Townshendshall decline Ireland ; and if, which by somehas been suggested, but which I cannot think possible,he should prevail upon you to offer to quit your appointments,the king, in this case hath engaged myLord Sunderland and myself to promise that hislordship will be secretary, and I, unable and unequalas I am every way, should be chancellor of theexchequer for this session ; the king declaring, thatas long as he can find Whigs that will serve him heTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.will be served by them. Which good disposition his CHAP,majesty shall not have reason to alter, by any back A phardness in me, to expose myself to trouble orhazard. I am very-sorry that my Lord Townshend'stemper hath made it impracticable for him to continuesecretary. The king will not bear him in thatoffice, be the consequence what it will. This beingthe case, I hope and desire that you will endeavourto reconcile him to Ireland, which I once thought hedid not dislike, and which I think he cannot nowrefuse, without declaring to the world that he willserve upon no other terms than being viceroy overfather, son, and their three kingdoms. Is the Whiginterest to be staked in defence of such a pretension; or is the difference to the Whig party, whetherLord Townshend be secretary or lieutenant ofIreland tante ?" *Such are the facts of this schism in the Whig party,as they have been discovered by the papers publishedby Mr. Coxe. These papers do not, however,enable us to judge, with certainty, whether Stanhopeacted with deliberate treachery, or whether he yieldedonly to the sudden dictates of a dishonourable ambition.They do not enable us to determine how far theking was acted upon by the secret advice of his Germanconfidants, how far by Sunderland, and how farStanhope to Walpole, December 15, 1716.VOL. II. F66 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, by Stanhope. The hostility of Sunderland was hardlydisguised; had he made no parting promise toWalpole, he could scarcely be accused of dissimulation; as he was never trusted, he cannot bejudged guilty of treachery. But the case isfar otherwise as regards Stanhope. Those whoare disposed to think harshly of all the publicmen of this period, may plausibly contend that, fromthe time that Stanhope had attracted the jealousy ofhis colleagues, by the familiarity of his intercoursewith the king, he had entertained the design of supplantingTownshend. If he did entertain such a design,the opportunity he enjoyed when the king wasseparated from the rest of his responsible advisers,and surrounded by a set of greedy courtiers, was certainlynot one to be neglected. At this conjuncture itwould have been the policy of a skilful intriguer totake part with his master in all disputes ; to embracewith readiness the overtures of Sunderland ; tostrengthen his own interest ; to undermine that of hisrivals; and, at the first colourable opportunity, to affectresentment and tender a resignation which hewould then be sure would not be accepted. Havingeffected his object, his policy would be to close assoon as possible the breach his ambition had caused,and to unite the party under his own sway. Suchare precisely the circumstances which appear againstStanhope ; but his ordinary conduct seems to rebutTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 6?the presumption, that he acted with such refined and CHAP.calculating treachery. We would rather believethat he found the king prejudiced against his minister,by the arts of those minions whose rapacity hehad baulked, and that he was really indignant at thedelay, which he construed into a tacit disapproval ofthe treaty he had negotiated.But, even receiving this the most favourable versionof his conduct, how can we reconcile, with thedictates of an honourable mind, his immediately actingupon the impression he had received, without makingany private remonstrance to his colleagues, or allowingtime or opportunity for explanation? How can wejustify him, when he added his voice to that of thecrew of parasites who were railing against his friend ?Above all, how can we defend him when, after hewas convinced that he had already wronged him byhis suspicion, and condemned him without cause, heseized the first opportunity which he found (I am notsupposing that he contrived it) to dispossess him, andto seize his post ? The defiance which he cast tothe friends of the minister he had supplanted, betraysan exultation which no man of public virtue or privatefriendship could have felt ; the charge he made wasnotoriously false, and the excuses he condescended toassign were even more contemptible than his conduct.That George, because he suspected his ministers ofcivility to his son, should discard them for a partyF68 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, which openly supported that prince in his opposition,used him only as a means of personal annoyance, andhad ever as their present object, the restoration ofthe Stuartss, is a supposition too absurd for any rationalbeing to entertain. Yet this is the only excuse whichStanhope attempted to urge. In the most unfavourableview, Stanhope was guilty of wary and deliberatetreachery ; in the most favourable, his conduct wassuch as will never be imitated by any man who possessesa high sense of personal honor.When the news of Townshend's removal was madepublic, the opinion of the nation was unequivocallyexpressed. The funds fell the outcry against theGerman counsellors and their treacherous ally wasgeneral the Jacobites openly rejoiced and betswere freely offered upon the success of the pretender.The messenger who brought the important despatchwas himself confounded, and he could find no betterreason for the conduct of his principal than that, " toprevent the further torrent of the German influence,the secretary found himself, for the present, obligedto come into their measures, so disagreeable to himself."He thus describes the effects of the despatch :When I go into the city, all the considerable mencrowd about me, and press me in the most earnestmanner to give some reasons for these sudden andunexpected resolutions, to tell them who I thoughtwere the advisers and contrivers of them. When ITHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 69go to the court, the very great ones there, to whom I CHAP,had scarce the honour of being known before, saluteA. D. 1717.me, and are also very solicitous to find out the truesprings and causes of what they don't scruple aloud tocall these extraordinary proceedings. Nay, it hasthere been said already, that never was any thingmore unprecedented, than for his majesty, when outof the nation, with the counsel of one single ministeronly, to make so prodigious a change in his ministry.I must take the liberty to let you know, the worldcries aloud against the secretary, and if his correspondentsfrom hence be faithful, he must be sensibleof it. For God's sake won't he consider ; he not onlyforfeits his private honour, but will draw upon himselfa number of enemies which he will find it impossibleto subsist against"*The accounts he received of the popular indignationalarmed the new minister. He refused to acceptTownshend's indignant refusal of the lord lieutenancy,and called upon him to sacrifice his resentment tothe public good. He wrote the most importunateletters to Walpole and others of Townshend's friends,and procured similar applications to be made by thoseof the Dutch ministers, whose intimacy Townshendenjoyed, and whose judgment he respected.Upon the arrival of the king in England, he seemedThomas Bretton to Charles Stanhope. Coxe, vol. ii., p. 149.70 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, as fully impressed as Stanhope was of the danger hehad drawn upon his crown. At an interview withA. D. 1717.Townshend, he confessed that he had been deceivedby false reports, and apologized for his precipitation.He afterwards sent Bernsdorf to entreat him to acceptthe lieutenancy; to show him the danger whichwould accrue from his opposition ; to point out that hecould not, consistently with his dignity, restore theseals he had just withdrawn, and to promise, that nofurther changes should be made, and that he shouldbe allowed in a short time to change his appointmentfor any other he might prefer. Townshend, knowingthe mischievous effects which must follow anypublic breach in the Whig party, consented. Thecabinet was apparently again united, and Stanhopewas successful.But although Townshend had thus patrioticallyrefrained from any public expression of his resentment,it was not to be expected that cordiality orconfidence could exist between him and the newminister. His immediate followers could not but resentthe insult that had been offered to their leader ;and without any instructions from him, perhaps contraryto his wishes, they became less strenuous intheir support of the administration. Had Townshendand Walpole, immediately upon the dismissal of theformer, gone into active opposition, they would havecarried with them nearly the whole of the old WhigTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.party, and a hostile majority in the house of commons CHAP.would have strangled Stanhope's administration in itsbirth. The king would then have been compelled totake back his minister ; the disaffected Whigs wouldhave rejoined their party, or would have sunk intopolitical nonentities; and the Hanoverian junto wouldhave received a salutary check. It is sufficient proofthat such must have been the event, that the newadministration was so weak, from the apathy ofTownshend's friends, that it could, at first, scarcelystruggle forwards; had they been in opposition itmust have fallen. The possession of the power andemoluments of office soon, however, enabled Stanhopeto withdraw many of these clients to himself, andhe at length felt strong enough to. discard theirpatron. The promptitude with which this was effected,can hardly be mentioned as an additionalproof of Stanhope's jealousy of Townshend. Townshend'sfirmly established administration could affordto allow Sunderland to slumber in the cabinet, butStanhope had need of all his patronage to secure activesupporters. He appears to have become fullyaware of this, after the division upon the vote ofsupply for the expected war with Sweden. Althoughboth the Walpole* appear among the speakers uponCoxe is in error when he on this occasion. The parliament-statesthat Walpole was silent up mary history mentions him amongTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the ministerial side, they succeeded only by a majorityof four. That same evening, the 9th of April, Stanhopenotified to Townshend, in a letter of a fewlines, that he was dismissed. It is said that theking's assent to this measure was obtained with greatdifficulty j and that all the representations of Stanhope,the endeavours of the German junto, and thepersuasion of the Duchess of Kendall were in vain,until they succeeded in convincing him that the resignationof Walpole would not be a consequent.The next morning undeceived him. Walpole appearedto surrender his seals of office, and no entreatycould prevail upon him to retain them. Thatnight he declared in the house of commons, that hewas now only a country gentleman. With Walpoleretired the Duke of Devonshire, the Earl of Orford,Paul Methuen, and William Pulteney. Strongindeed must have been the party which could affordto throw such men as these into opposition.By the new arrangements consequent upon thisdefection, Stanhope became first lord of the treasuryand chancellor of the exchequer, Sunderland andAddison secretaries of state. The Duke of Boltonobtained the vacant lieutenancy of Ireland. Thethe speakers, and, from the meagre he was less strenuous or less influxthere given of the debate enthral than usual,there is no reason to conclude thatTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.Duke of Newcastle succeeded Devonshire, as lord CHAP.chamberlain. The Earl of Berkeley had Orford'sA D. 1717.post of first lord of the admiralty, and the Duke ofKingston was made privy seal.A glance at these creations will show, that whatthe Whig government now gained in unity they lostin talent. Addison, indeed, had been in himself ahost, had the selection now made been for a societyof essayists or poets ; but it was soon found that histalent for poetry was not available in the secretary'soffice, and the elegant writer was silent in the houseof commons. The genius of the Whig party seemedto have passed away with the seceders ; it was onlythe names of Stanhope and Sunderland that gaverespectability to the new cabinet.74 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER V.The Tories gradually less unanimous in support of the pretenderBolingbroke's efforts to detach them from his cause His letter toSir William Wyndham The Stanhope administration preserves thetolerant principles of the Whig party The Whigs in oppositionviolate them death of the Earl of Shrewsbury The Peerage billCoalition between Walpole and Sunderland Death of StanhopeThe South Sea scheme.CHAP. THE year 171? produced no change in the *situationof the Tory party, save that the assistance whichto 1721. they derived from the accession of the secedingWhigs enabled them to marshal forth a more respectableminority. The principles of the great bodyof the faction underwent, however, about this time, avery considerable modification. Nearly the wholeparty now began to consider the cause of the pretenderdesperate ; the Tories, as a body, ceased to hope,many had now ceased to wish for its success. Certaininformation as to the character of the man, forwhom so many sacrifices had been made, had recentlybeen obtained in England ; they learned, with inditeHISTORY OF PARTY. ^nation, that those of their faction who had lost all in CHAP.v.his service were treated with neglect, that his onlyA. D. 1717councillors were priests, and that the only passport to to 1721.his confidence was the recommendation of his confessor.The most intelligent of the Tories could nolonger disguise from themselves that such a mancould never be moulded into a Tory king ; theycould not but remark the Jesuitical equivocationswhich, even then, filled his manifestoes, and theymust have had many misgivings, lest they should becompelled to join in expelling the prince they werethen so eager to restore.This gradual change was, doubtless, much assistedby the efforts of Bolingbroke, who, having beenshamefully ill-used by this shadow of royalty, consideredhimself now free to warn his friends of thenature of the cause in which they were engaged, andof the disposition of the man in whose service theyhad enlisted. At the latter end of the former year,when Charles XII. of Sweden was preparing to takeup the cause of the pretender, with that indomitableenergy which so peculiarly characterized him,Bolingbroke had written to Wyndham, advising himto have nothing to do with the projected attempt, andalluding to similar communications which he hadbefore transmitted.* This warning was not intendedfor his friend Wyndham alone. "The use to be madeCoxe, vol. ii., p. 308.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of this," he says, " ought to be as general as yourconcern for persons reaches." In furtherance of theto 1721. design he had formed of undeceiving his party, andof separating them from a dangerous and unworthycabal, Bolingbroke, during this year, drew up anddespatched into England that elaborate statement ofhis conduct, while employed in the Jacobite interest,which I have already so largely quoted. Whetherthis letter was printed, and extensively distributed,is of no very great consequence. It appears from amemorandum, written in his own handwriting, uponthe MS. yet extant, that it was drawn up in thisyear. We know that he was, at this time, in thehabit of sending letters, having a similar object,both openly, through the post, and privately toWyndham ; and since this letter bears internal evidenceof having been intended for immediate transmission,there can remain no shadow of a reason fordoubting that it was sent and reached its destination.In that case, so great was Wyndham's veneration forBolingbroke, that it would have been received as thecommand of his political chief; it would have rapidlycirculated among the leaders of the party, and wouldthus have fully answered its intended purpose.There is, however, great reason to believe, thatthis letter was printed upon its arrival in England.Bolingbroke was, it is well known, in the habit ofprivately printing those of his productions, which heTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 77intended for the immediate perusal of his friends. CHAP.Thus, printed copies of his letters on history, and hisidea of a patriot king, were in the hands of his friends ' to 1721.long before they were known to the public. Asthese, however, were but sparingly distributed, andalways under the implied condition that they were tobe considered as MSS., they are now exceedinglyrare. With the exception of a fragment of a copyof the letters on history, bound up with the Boling-brokeMSS., now in the British Museum, it would bedifficult to point out the existence of any copy ofthe works which were only privately printed beforehis death, bearing a date anterior to 1752. No inference,therefore, is to be drawn from the absenceof any such copies from our large libraries. Thefollowing extract from a letter from Bolingbroke toLord Hardwicke, raises a strong presumption that theletter to Wyndham was printed, and therefore circulated:" The letter writ to Wyndham I found, andI send it with two others ; one was writ to LordStair, on what he communicated to me from LordSunderland. His lordship took so little care of it,notwithstanding the caution given him in it, that,falling behind his scrutore, it was found by M. deMembers, in whose house he had lived, and printed,as you see it, for reasons obvious enough." Fromi;his extract it is evident that, whether the letter toWyndham was in print or not, it was well known to78 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the Tory party, and, at a distance of twenty-sevenyears* from the time it was written, Harcourt mightto 1721. well have forgotten its contents ; and Bolingbroke,amid his numerous removals and vicissitudes of fortune,might well require some search to discover asingle copy.Minute proofs to the same effect might be multipliedto a tedious extent. Horace Walpole, uponthe appearance of the published edition of 1753,speaks of it in his correspondence, as the publicationof the " famous letter" to Wyndham. The letterthen was already famous. Chesterfield, who mentionswith enthusiastic praise all the works of Bolingbrokeas they appeared after his death, omits the letterto Wyndham, a circumstance inexplicable, exceptupon the supposition that he was already conversantwith that work. Even Warburton, although nofriend of Bolingbroke, and therefore far less likely tohave received one of the private copies, had evidentlyread it : he speaks of it upon its appearance as " thecurious and well written letter to Sir William Wynd-ham,"and adds in a postscript " I have looked overthe letter to Sir William Wyndham, it is castrated ofone of its most curious anecdotes."^ Anotherequally decisive circumstance is, that the answers toThe letter to Hardwicke is f Letters from a late eminentdated Nov. 12, 1 744. Coxe, vol. ii., prelate to one of his friends, p. 136.p. 343.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 79this letter which issued from the press, immediately CHAP.upon its publication, contain no word of suspicionthat it was now heard of for the first time. How to 1721.triumphant would have been the reply of the Jacobites,to the description which Bolingbroke gives ofthe court and character of the pretender, could theyhave alleged that this work was written only forposterity ; that it was kept carefully concealed duringthe lifetime of the author, and was only intended tobe read when all the actors in the scenes it describedwere dead ; when no eye-witness should survive torefute its calumnies, or expose the statementswhich made up the author's elaborate defence. Themost ignorant reviewer could not have overlooked soobvious and so crushing a reply : but the assailantsof the letter to Wyndham drop no hint of such asuspicion. The best and most known of these answersis a tract called " Remarks on the late LordBolingbroke's famous Letter to Sir William Wynd-ham,"a title which in itself proves, that the letterhad long been known by report, for this answerappeared too quickly upon the publication of theletter, to allow us to suppose that its fame had beenacquired by its publication. This writer commencesMs pamphlet by saying, " As I always had a verygreat regard for the late Lord Viscount Bolingbroke,I waited with impatience the publication of his letterto Sir William Wyndham. How am I disappointed,"80 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. &c. His knowledge of its existence, was evidently- antecedent to its publication. And again, " TheA. D. 1717to 1721. minister and not Lord Bolingbroke chose the other,[that is that Bolingbroke should earn his pardon byloading the pretender with bigotry, and the Dukeof Ormond with incapacity, and not by becomingevidence or informer against his friends 1 which hisO Ilordship obliged himself to set about directly, andbegan to put it in execution, by writing this letterto Sir William Wyndham."* The Jacobite authorof the Remarks concludes, that " this letter waswrote purely for the sake of gaining a permission toreturn to his native country, and to enjoy his paternalestate, "t a motive evidently inconsistent with theidea that the writer concealed the letter, which wasto work this effect, until his death. These proofsrender it almost demonstrable that the letter toWyndham was extensively circulated among theTory party soon after it was written.But this inquiry is only important to our presentpurpose, so far as it discovers that the Tories werenow fully aware of the weakness and wickedness ofthe Jacobite causeRemarks on the late Lord history, as it relates to one of theBolingbroke's famous letter to Sir most trusted and valuable historicWyndham, p. 12. cal authorities of the time. Thef Ibid., p. 24. mass of proof which is afforded byJ It is important also to general all contemporary literature, wouldTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 81Recent circumstances had rendered this party CHAP,more open to conviction upon this subject than theyA,D. 1717had hitherto been. A ray of promise now beamed to 1721.through the hopeless despondency in which they hadso long been sunk, and encouraged them to expectthat at no distant period they might rise again intolight, and obtain a monopoly of power even under thehouse of Hanover. The variance which had solong existed between the Prince of Wales and hisson, now broke forth in a public quarrel. Enragedat the interference of the king in the choice of a godfatherto one of his children, the prince gave vent tohis indignation in words, and was immediately expelledthe palace. The nation was now edified by apublic disclosure of the domestic differences in the royalfamily. A rival court was established at LeicesterHouse, and thither the Tory party resorted, settingat open defiance the monarch upon the throne, andavowing that they looked forward to his death as theadvent of a Tory millennium.The Whigs had nothing to hope from the crownrender, this inquiry superfluous, vicious ignorance of the Englishhad not a contrary opinion been language, and infantine simplicityexpressed by a writer in a recent as to the facts and authorities ofnumber of the Quarterly Review, history, be worthy of grave com-Nor indeed would the speculations ment, but that I find they haveof this person who writes with hi been noticed elsewhere.VOL. II. G82 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, when it should pass from the head of their presentmaster ; they attempted to establish a claim upon the"to 1721. gratitude of the people. Sunderland and Stanhopewere true to the public principles which had alwaysdistinguished their party. No sooner were they establishedin power than they undertook the repeal ofthose persecuting statutes which the Tory ministryof Queen Anne had passed against the dissenters.The occasional Conformity act was so impolitic, aswell as intolerant, that it was plainly intended ratherto degrade the dissenters than to protect the church ;and the Schism act, as it was called, which, in effect,withdrew from dissenting parents the control of theeducation of their children, was a flagrant violationof natural rights, and a blot upon the statutebook of a free nation. These recent encroachmentsupon the principle of toleration the new cabinetresolved to abolish. The king and his chiefministers were even prepared to carry this principlemuch further. The repeal of the Test act was agitatedin the council, and a scheme was debated bywhich even Roman Catholics should, under certainrestrictions, be admitted to a participation of civilrights;* a bold experiment when a Catholic pretenderThere is, however, little evenly to "some liberty, and securityhence as to the extent of the relief for their religion."projected, it probably extendedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 83was struggling towards the throne. These propos CHAP,nations were strictly in accordance with the principlesA. D. 1717avowed by the patriarchs of the party, who always to 1721.spoke of penal statutes as temporary evils forced uponthem by the necessity of the times ; but they werefar in advance of the spirit of the age ; even therepeal of the Test act, after much consideration, wasabandoned, Sunderland rightly observing that suchan attempt would "ruin all."The scanty measure which was now proposed didriot pass without violent opposition. In the lordsthe Archbishop of Canterbury inveighed loudlyagainst the repeal of two acts, which formed " thebulwark and supporters of the established church,"and he was strenuously supported by a great majorityof his brethren on the bench, and by the lay Torypeers, headed by Lord Vanstone. In the commonsthe members of the same party were no less vehementin their opposition ; they laboured consistently intheir vocation ; but, to their eternal disgrace, Walpoleand his friends appeared upon the same side ;endeavouring, from the most paltry of motives, frompersonal pique and private resentment, to thwart anact of national justice. The parliamentary historyaffords no specimen of the arguments by whichWalpole defended this vote. It must have beencurious to hear a speech against the repeal of an act,I which, when originally passed, the speaker had in-G84 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, weighed against as a measure more worthy of Julianthe Apostate, than of a Christian legislature. Butto 1721. such inconsistencies are so common in the lives ofstatesmen that they almost cease to excite disgust.Meanwhile some alteration had taken place in thecabinet. Stanhope, having for some time held thepost of chief, yielded it, as if by previous agreement,to Sunderland. He was now removed to the upperhouse, receiving an earldom together with the secretaryship.Sunderland became first lord of thetreasury and president of the council ; but the chancellorshipof the exchequer, as it could not be heldby a peer, was given to Aislabie. Lord Cowperalso had resigned the great seal, and was succeededby Parker, afterwards so unhappily notorious as theEarl of Macclesfield. Shrewsbury, who had acted soprominently, and in such varied characters, in thepolitical drama, died in the year 1718, far moreregretted by his private friends than by his politicalallies. This nobleman's mind was like his body, toodelicate in its texture for the storms of a politicallife. His conduct seems to have been controlled byan extreme attachment to Protestantism, the faith ofhis adoption. His political prepossessions were thoseof a Whig, but he was often frightened from his partyby the cry of "the church is in danger," and as oftendriven back by a discovery of the real danger whichthreatened it from the rashness of his temporaryTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 85allies. Add to this some allowance for the impulses CHAP.of a mind morbidly sensitive to any thing bearing the A Dsemblance of a slight or insult, and we have a key to to 172Lthe inconsistencies in the life of this amiable nobleman,and to the career of this conscientious butvacillating politician.The next enterprise of the Whigs was one whichcan admit of no defence. It was an undisguised attemptto perpetuate the power of their faction, at theexpense of the constitution. I allude to the Peeragebill which was, in 1719, introduced into the house oflords, and which, although for a short time abandoned,at length passed that assembly. The Whigs nowpossessed so decided a majority in the peers, that theonly means by which the Tories could hope to carryon the government, upon the accession of the prince,was a large creation ; and they did not conceal theirintention of following the precedent which their ownparty had established in the reign of Queen Anne.Sunderland, aware that they would not scruple to putthis threat into execution, prevailed upon the king tosanction a bill, by which the crown surrendered theright of unlimited creation. This, like the Septennialbill, was an efficient provision against an expectedexigence ; but, like that measure also, it establishedg, certain and permanent change, as a provision against*, contingent and temporary danger. The change,however, now proposed to be effected was infinitely86 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, more important, and its noxious character was farv ' less problematical than had been that of lengtheningto 1721. the duration of parliaments. The instances are comparativelyrare in which irresponsible power has beentrusted to an individual, and has been used with moderation; there is no instance of it having been possessedby a body of men without being abused. Theconstitution, therefore, had wisely reserved a powerwhich, although not intended to be frequently orlightly resorted to, was of infinite value, since theknowledge of its existence would frequently preventthe necessity of its exercise. By this reservation anassembly, which the ends of the constitution requiredshould not be acted upon by every breeze of popularfeeling, was nevertheless controllable by the deliverjudgment of the nation. No rationalmonarch, at the risk of his throne, no rational minister,at the peril of his life, would dare to put violenceupon this assembly, unless he felt that the house ofpeers, as then constituted, was plainly hostile to thesentiments of the great majority of the nation ; andunless he felt that this majority were not acting fromimpulse which a moment might check, but from a deliberateconviction, which would ensure permanentapprobation and support. Had this responsibilitybeen destroyed the consequences would probablyhave been more fatal to the peers than to the country.When commoners could no longer look up to a seatTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.among them as an attainable object of honourable am CHAPambition, all sympathy for the order would quickly havedied away ; when they beheld them, as they must to 172have beheld them, in frequent collision with their representatives,having separate interests from thebody of the nation, they would look upon them as abody permanently hostile to the whole untitled populationof the kingdom. It would require only therecollection that there existed no constitutional meansby which this spirit could be overcome, to suggestthat where these had been found wanting, force had,heretofore, efficiently supplied the defect. A revolution,favoured by the great majority of the landholders,and the whole mercantile interest of a commercialcountry, could not fail of success. There canbe little doubt that, had the Peerage bill succeeded,the popular indignation would ere long have sweptaway the house of lords.*The honour of defeating this short-sighted measureis due to Walpole, although, from his recent conduct,we may be allowed to doubt whether his motiveswere as patriotic as his acts. It was he alone whoprevailed upon the Whigs in opposition to exertthemselves against a measure which came artfullyrecommended as a pledge of salvation to theirThe contest between Addison attracted the public attention dur-andSteele, the " old whig" and the ing the agitation of this subject.plebeian," was that which chiefly88 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, party,* and it is generally admitted that it was his~T"^ speech in the debate in the commons which decidedA.D. 1717 rto 1721. the house to throw out the bill. It was rejected bythe large majority of ninety-two.tThe signal defeat of so important a ministerialmeasure discovers the slender tenure by whichSunderland held his office. His embarrassmentsincreased so rapidly, that he was, at length, compelledto solicit a reconciliation with Walpole, who honourablydeclared, that the price of his co-operation mustbe the pardon of the prince whose confidence he hadlately enjoyed. This was with much reluctance conceded; a reconciliation took place between the kingand his son, and Walpole was gazetted as paymasterof the forces.Although the seceders were thus recovered fromthe opposition, and the Whigs were apparently nowa united party, the late opponents were no verystrenuous supporters of Sunderland's administration.But many circumstances soon occurred to cause analteration in the domestic arrangements of the governingfaction. One of these was the death ofEarl Stanhope, which occurred in February, 17^1,a blow which entirely destroyed the predominanceof that section of the Whigs, which had relied uponthe personal favour of the monarch. That part ofSpeaker Onslow on the con f Sec Walpole's speech uponduct of the Opposition. this occasion, Appendix B.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 89the conduct of this illustrious statesman, which was CHAP,degraded by the motive of personal aggrandizement,has been already animadverted upon with the veto 1721.city which it appeared to merit. With this exception,however, his public life must always be regardedwith admiration and gratitude by those who cherishthose principles of civil liberty and religious toleration,which he so consistently advocated. His parliamentarycareer was that of a stanch Whig. Hedefended no abuses, because they were venerable tothe vulgar eye from the rust of antiquity in whichthey were incrusted ; he shrunk from no propositionwhich he thought of public benefit, because the voiceof the crowd condemned it as an innovation ; if hefixed his eye too steadily upon the pinnacle of politicalpower to notice that his foot in climbing pressedupon a friend; when the height was obtained, althoughhe leant upon a court to support him in his elevation,he used the influence it gave him with the dispositionof a patriot. He was unfortunately a prominent supporterof the Peerage bill ; this, although it derogatesfrom his character as a statesman of extendedviews and comprehensive mind, is not incompatiblewith" the purest intentions. He looked upon thismeasure as the only expedient against the early andpermanent ascendancy of a faction which wouldquickly overturn the results of the persevering labour}f thirty years.90 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. But a still greater event than the death of Stanhopewas at hand. We are now arrived at the periodA. D. 17J7to 1721. when the explosion of the South Sea project spreadconsternation and ruin throughout the island. Thecry which arose from the multitudes whose shadowywealth was so suddenly changed into bankruptcy anddestitution, hushed, for a moment, all political controversy.The immediate and personal interests nowinvolved were too mighty to bow to the spirit ofparty. The national indignation raged with indiscriminatingviolence ; the question was not now, Arethe parties accused political friends or foes ? it was,Are they, or are they not participators in the schemeby which we have been brought to ruin ? Happily,amid the general contamination, the only man, whosewell-tried financial talents could command confidence,was found irreproachable with any connexion withthe cause of the misfortune. The public expectationwas turned solely upon Walpole, nor was it disappointed.Whatever could, under the circumstancesof the case, be effected, he performed. His proposalswere approved by all parties, and so great was theinfluence he thereby attained that he was enabled toscreen some of his colleagues, whose conduct, 'withrelation to this transaction, had not been so pure ashis own. Sunderland, his most dangerous rival,owed his escape entirely to Walpole's exertions ; andalthough Aislabie's case was too flagrant for defence,THE HISTORY OF PARTY, 91Walpole employed all his eloquence in palliation, and CHAP,he was partially successful. The public confidencereposed in this able leader, and his fortunate freedom to 1721.from any implication in this business, was, doubtless,the salvation of the Whigs. Had he not stood atthe door of the cabinet and concealed the delinquenciesit contained, the private avarice of a few individualswould have caused the ruin of the wholefaction. The Tories would have been called intopower, not because they, as a party, were unconnectedwith the transaction, but because a ministrycould be selected from their body, which was so jwhile the actual Whig ministry was tainted by thedelinquency of its leader.*" Although the public voice tons, that he did not, at least,criminated Sunderland,yet several enrich himself or his friends ; thatextenuations may be urged in his he expressed great satisfaction thatfavour. For it appears, from prig neither himself or his friends hadlate documents, which have ca sold out any South Sea stock, asusually fallen under my inspection, he would not have profited by thethat so early as July, he had re- public calamity." Coxe, vol. Ufused to recommend to the direct 153.tors any more lists for subscribeTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER VI.Commencement of the Walpole administration-^Disunion among theWhigs Lord Carteret Death of Sunderland General electionBishop Atterbury's plot Death of Marlborough Coalition betweenBolingbroke and Pulteney Causes of Pulteney's secession from hisparty Change of the principles of Toryism from monarchical toaristocratic The Craftsman Objects of the contributors to thatpaper Death of George I.CHAP. THE odium which attached to Sunderland tered it no longer possible for him to hold the officeto 1727. of chief minister of the crown. He resigned, butwith great reluctance, and he abandoned his controlover the secret service money with still greater. Whonow could be chosen as his successor, but he towhom all classes had appealed in the recent distress?The Whigs were unanimous in intrusting the negotiationto Walpole, and the king, who placed an unboundedconfidence in the abilities of this minister,willingly commissioned him to form a cabinet. InTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 93April, 1721, Walpole became first lord of the treat CHAP.sure and chancellor of the exchequer ; and that ada.D. 1721ministration commenced its course, which, from its to 1727.duration and its acts, forms so important a feature inthe history of the factions. The influence of Walpolehad been before apparent when, upon the death ofStanhope, he had been suffered to recommend Townshendas his successor in the secretaryship. Theavowed hostility of the German courtiers, and eventhe personal dislike of the king had been then overcome.Reinstated in his old office, Townshend recoveredall his wonted energy ; and the perfect unitywhich must proceed from the relationship, friendship,and entire community of political views between theleaders of the government promised the happiestresults. In others of his coadjutors Walpole was lessfortunate. Sunderland had, indeed, ostensibly retired,but his private influence was still unimpaired.Lord Carteret remained secretary of state for thesouthern department, and forwarded in the cabinetthose views which Sunderland, his leader, could onlynow advocate in the closet. Sunderland, Carteret,Carlton, and Cadogan were now the chief membersof that section of the Whig party, which looked withdisgust upon the ascendancy of Walpole and Townshend.Of these, after Sunderland, Carteret was certainlythe most dangerous. This nobleman was anopponent of no ordinary abilities. He was esteemed94 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, one of the most eloquent speakers in the house oflords ; he possessed a dignity of manner and proa.D. 1721to 1727. piety of elocution to enforce arguments which werenot less convincing because they were clothed inthe garb of a metaphorical diction. He was notmore eloquent in the house of lords than he wasassiduous and effective in the conduct of the detailsof office, and profound in his knowledge of the foreignrelations of his country. His private accomplishments,as an elegant classic and an extensive linguist,endeared him to the king, and he appears to havebeen the only minister who could speak to the sovereignin his native tongue. Upon the schism in1717> Carteret had attached himself to Sunderlandand Stanhope ; to them he had been indebted forhis elevation, and to their party he still continuedfaithful.The endeavours of this section seem to have beennow wholly directed to the expulsion of the presentministers from the cabinet, and to irritating the jealousyof the king against his son, their open enemy.There is some reason to believe, that in pursuingthese objects, they intrigued for the restoration of theTories, if not even for that of their king. Mr. Coxe*states upon the authority of the Walpole papers, thatSunderland made proposals to Bishop Atterbury, theCoxe's Memoirs of Walpole, vol. i., p. 165.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.most strenuous leader of the decaying Jacobite fac CHAP,tion. But to what point these extended we are nottold ; the idea of a restoration was at this moment to 1727.a mere vision of madness, yet less could not havesatisfied Sunderland's hatred, or favoured his ambition.He proposed," says the author, upon whoseoriginal information every writer upon this periodmust mainly rely, " at a time when the ferment occasionedby the South Sea scheme was at its extremeheight, to dissolve the parliament ; and induced theking to sanction his views, by persuading him thatthere was not money enough in the treasury to securethe return of a Whig majority, and that the Tories,under his influence would screen the projectors of theSouth Sea, and suppress all inquiry on the subject.The pretender and the Jacobites, certainly at thistime entertained the most sanguine hopes. Sunderlandbecame a great favourite with them and theTories; his health was constantly drank by them,and they affected to be secure of attaining, by hismeans, the accomplishment of their wishes"* Wemust not however forget, that we are hearing thebiographer of Walpole against his hero's rival. Theargument attributed to Sunderland, discovers thatcorruption was already used as the ordinary andindispensable instrument of a ministerial majority.Coxe's Memoirs of Walpole, vol. i., p. 165.96 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. It appears from Mr. Coxe's authorities, that .A p pole did not oppose the proposition of his rival,to 1727. so l e ly by taking upon himself the charge of findingthe sums necessary to procure a Whig house ofcommons. If this should be esteemed at all hazardous,he had resolved to take advantage of the dangerousprecedent himself had assisted to make, and to proposea bill, by which the house of commons, whichhaving been chosen for three years, had already satseven, should prolong its own existence for a furtherperiod.*Baffled in his last intrigue, Sunderland madeanother less direct attempt to destroy the influenceof Walpole. Under the semblance of a desire tofavour him, he requested the king to create him for life, an office of great emolument,but which must have withdrawn him from parliamenthad he accepted it, while his refusal might probablyhave been resented by the king. George appears tohave been by this time aware of his confidant's designs,and his answer was an inquiry whetherWalpole had desired the appointment, or was acquaintedwith the application ; upon receiving ananswer in the negative, it is said that the king rejoined,Do not, then, make him the offer, I parted withhim once against my inclination, and I will neverSir John Brodrick to Lord Middleton. Coxe, vol ii., p. 217.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 97part with him again as long as he is willing to serve CHAP.me"* -A. D. 1721These intrigues were however all discomposed by to 1727.the death of Sunderland, which occurred in April1722 ; his death took place at a peculiarly criticalmoment, during the progress of the general election,when his countenance was peculiarly necessaryto inspire the Tories with hope, and stimulatethem to exertion. The disappointment they sustainedwhen the result of the elections becameknown, and a large Whig majority appeared, probablyproduced what has generally been called BishopAtterbury's plot, a conspiracy which was revealed tothe English court before it could grow into maturityby the Duke of Orleans, who was glad of this opportunityto prove the sincerity of his professions to thereigning king.Another circumstance which occurred betweenthe dissolution of the old and the meeting ofthe new parliament, would, some years before,have changed the state of parties in England, andthe politics of Europe. It now created but littlesensation. This was the death of the Duke of Marlborough,who survived the Earl of Sunderland, hisMr. Coxe relates this anecdote pencil of his Memoirs, Correspondingthe authority of a letter from hence, period III. There is, how-horaceWalpole to Etough, July 3 1 , ever, no such letter there. It was131, for which he refers to the Ap doubtless omitted by mistake.VOL. II. H98 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, son-in-law, about a month, and who had been recentlyVIof infinitely less importance in the state. Since theto 1727. accession of George I., Marlborough had beentreated with great outward courtesy and real neglect.While levelling the colossal power of Louis XIV.,and scattering and pursuing his armies, Marlboroughhad been so unreasonable as to postpone to theinterests of Europe, the peculiar interests of theelectorate of Hanover. This want of deference tothe elector the King of England never could forgive.It was necessary to respect the national admiration,and to retain him in public employment ; but he wasallowed no particle of influence. So little was heconsulted, even upon subjects supposed to be immediatelyunder his control, that he was unable tonominate to a vacant lieutenancy. If he wished toobtain for another a favour from the crown, he wascompelled to make the application through a privatefriend having less distinction and more influence ;but " Don't say it is for me, or you are sure to berefused," was his invariable and necessary injunction.*Disgusted by such unworthy treatment, and unable,after having ruled so absolutely in the court andcabinet, to recommence the arts of an expectantcourtier, Marlborough retired entirely from publiclife. In the magnificent domain of Blenheim, theCoxe's Walpole.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 99splendid testimonial of his country's gratitude, he CHAP.could fly from the present to the future ; he couldA.D. 1721anticipate the time when his name would still be fa to 1727.miliary, and his deeds still fresh in the memory of all,when the acts of his contemporaries had ceased tointerest, and their names were with difficulty remembered.Neither the neglect of a court, nor the moretormenting tyranny of an ignoble vice,* could renderunhappy a man who had such a refuge. If, duringthe declining days of Marlborough, the" present wasdim and cheerless, he could, while reason yet remained,look back upon acts whose brightness eventhe treachery and meanness of Lord Churchill couldnot destroy, and forward into fields of time, wherehis glories should only be more widely diffused,as the deeds whence they radiated became moredistant.As a political chief, we have seen Marlboroughthe leader and mainstay of each party alternately. Inthis character we must record his acts, but it wouldbe vain to attempt to trace them to any principlesof government. The early part of his life was spentin working out the fortune of a courtier ; so long ashestrove only to attain this object, or to preserve itwhen attained, he continued a Tory. His manhoodAvarice is not a vice likely to was involved in continual disputeseradicated by age, Marlborough with his workmen at Blenheim.H 2100 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, was spent in building up the fame of a soldier. Warthe prostration of France was his object, and, as theto 1727. Whigs alone were heartily inclined to second him inthis, Marlborough became a Whig. I believe it wasthe bitter hatred he conceived for Oxford, the persecutionhe suffered from the Tories, and the controllinginfluence of the masculine mind of his duchess,strong, even when yoked with that of a hero, thatpreserved his party consistency. I can rememberno proof that he was ever governed by any theoreticalpreference for a peculiar principle of government.For some short time previously to his death, theduke had offered a sad spectacle to those who couldremember him as he once was. He, who in thewords of Bolingbroke, had been " the fixed importantcentre which united in one common cause the principalstates of Europe, who broke the power ofFrance when raised the highest, when exerted themost, rescued the empire from desolation, asserted andconfirmed the liberties of Europe"* lay a wretchedwreck of humanity, sunk into a hopeless state ofmental imbecility.Marlborough died on the 16th of June, 1722.The discovery of the Atterbury plot, induced Wal-inscriptionupon the pedestal Bolingbroke, at the request ofof the monument at Blenheim, the duchess. Memoirs of LordThis inscription was written by Bolingbroke.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 101pole to call the parliament together in October. CHAP.Again, an occasion occurred in which extraordinary A D 1721circumstances required extraordinary measures. It to 1727>was necessary at any expense to crush the hopes ofthe Jacobite conspirators, and since the evidence wastoo defective to bring them within the power of theordinary courts of justice, moral certainty was substitutedfor judicial conviction, and bills of pains andpenalties passed against the notorious offenders.Under one of these, Atterbury, the classical andeloquent but guilty Bishop of Rochester, was sentencedto deprivation and perpetual banishment.*It affords a curious instance of party infatuationscarcely credible, that this able and learned prelate,striving as he was to place a Catholic upon the throne,It furnished a subject for the that this dog was sent over fromhumour of Swift, that the proof France, as a present to Mrs. Matterswhich the secret committee bury, and some of the interceptedchiefly relied, as connecting Matters letters mentioned it as sent tobury with certain treasonable do the fictitious name, which it wascements, resulted from an accident before suspected applied to At-thathappened to a little spotted mercury in the treasonable corridor,called Harlequin. Some of spondee.the persons examined, admittedNow let me tell you plainly, sir,Our witness is a real cur,A dog of spirit for his years,Has twice two legs, two hanging ears,His name is Harlequin, I wot,And that's a name in every plot :" &c.102 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. was nevertheless himself as strenuous a Protestant asA D 1?21 he was a Jacobite. Atterbury had no intention ofto 1727. can gi n g his faith, whether he held it from conviction,which many have doubted, or as a point ofhonour, which some have affirmed. While attachedto the service of the pretender and dead to England,Atterbury still retained and defended his religion ; hespoke in language of indignant contempt of thoseexiles, who purchased by a change of creed the favourof the pretender, and he lost no opportunity of discountenancingCatholicism even in its stronghold. Itis necessary to remember the career of this man ofhigh and cultivated intellect and unbending spirit,to enable us to credit that a Protestant party couldhave striven with such constancy for a Catholicking.The minute changes which are brought about bythe intermitting agency of court intrigue, so longas they only affect individuals, are rather the subjectsof a memoir writer, than portions of a history inwhich the progress and triumph of principles are theobjects of illustration. I pass over, therefore, thelong and intricate contest which was carried on betweenCarteret, at the head of the remnants of theSunderland section, and Walpole and Townshend.It ended in the discomfiture of Carteret, who receivedan honourable banishment from court, as lord lieutenantof Ireland. I am not called upon to followTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 103Carteret to Ireland, and detail the contest which oc CHAP.VI.copied that island upon the subject of Wood's patent, -A. D, 1 721an instrument of opposition which was seized upon to 1727.with desperate hardihood, and to which the humourand bold mendacity of Swift gave unhoped for effect.I have little either to remark upon the English departmentof the domestic policy of the Whig ministryduring the remainder of this reign. They were toostrong against the Tories to dread any attacks fromthat party, or to invite any attempt upon theirplaces ; they were too weak in themselves, too disunitedin the cabinet, and too jealous at court, toplan any great design, or propose any further legislativerecognition of any principle of their party. Intheir foreign policy they were watchful of that Protestantsuccession, of which they were the peculiarguardians. The cabinets of Vienna and Madrid,having settled their differences, proposed to celebratetheir reconciliation by a common crusade upon England.The crushed hopes of the unfortunate Stuartagain budded ; the barbarian power of Russia accededto the league, and it was declared at Madridthat, in a very short time, it wouii be criminal tospeak of George I. as the king of England. But theWhigs prevented the storm ; the treaty of Hanover,by uniting England, France, and Prussia, in a strictdefensive alliance, put an end to the project.*Coxe's Life of Walpole, and Correspondence.104 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The Tories, meanwhile, had gained very considerablyby the restoration of Bolingbroke to his country.A. D. 1721to 1727. They had now obtained a leader of consummatetalent and matured experience ; a veteran in all thearts of state intrigue and party warfare ; one who, himselfunable to mingle in the parliamentary contests,could with cooler attention direct the movements ofothers.But it was not only in tactics and strategy thatthe Tories gained by the return of Bolingbroke ; his cooperationproduced an immediate and powerful influenceupon the principles of that party, and removedfrom them the most odious of their reputed crimes.No one could now attribute to Bolingbroke any taintof Jacobite predilection. He, who had been attaintedby the pretender, who had bid the whole body ofJacobites defiance, and was in return inveighedagainst as a recreant traitor and their bitterest foe;who, stung by unmerited insult, flung all the scornand hatred of his own fiery spirit upon them andtheir cause, could never be supposed to act with menwho looked forward to the restoration of the Stuartdynasty. In abandoning the pretender, Bolingbrokehad abandoned the principle of the old Tory party ;he was compelled, at the same time, formally to surrenderthe old doctrines of divine right and absolutemonarchy. These rusty tenets had hitherto onlybeen withdrawn from view when Bolingbroke under-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 105took to separate the Tories from the Jacobites they CHAP.were brought forth to be derided and disavowed.A D 1721From this time the principle of that party has been to 1727.rather aristocratical than monarchical. They descendedfrom the post they had held as the guards ofan unconstitutional throne, and became merely theenemies of all popular institutions. They abandonedthe hopeless cause of royalty, and addressed themselvesto win back its spoil from the people, that theymight monopolize it themselves. There has, ofcourse, been since then individuals, and even classes,which remained steadfast to the old principle of Toryism;but henceforward we never find the Tory partystruggling to extend the prerogative of the crown.This change was forced upon the party by circumstances,but it was Bolingbroke who first saw thenecessity, and boldly altered his course to meet it.Yet so unsupported was this great man when rejectedby the pretender, and so coldly was he at firstlooked upon by the Tories,* that had Sunderland or" The Tories," he says, in his we are prepared for it, and weletter to Wyndham, " have not, sometimes triumph in it ; but whenindeed, impeached nor attainted our friends abandon us, when theyme, but they have done, and still wound us, and when they take toare doing, something very like to do this on an occasion when wethat which I took worse of the stand the most in need of theirWhigs than the impeachment and support, and have the best title toattainder. From our enemies we it, the firmest mind finds it hardexpect evil treatment of every sort; to resist*'106 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Walpole, when they found him without a politicalfaith, tempted him with the offer of an entire restored.1721to 1727. tion, he might, notwithstanding his high sense ofparty honour, have been brought over to the Whigs.Bolingbroke would have remarked, with truth, thathis party had abandoned him, not he his party. Hadhe made this change he would have done no violenceto his principles, for these were always of a veryconvenient laxity ; but his ambition was so ungovernable,and so well known, that no minister could hopeto find in him a subservient ally, nor would any oneseek to introduce so dangerous a rival. This was,doubtless, the reason that Sunderland delayed andWalpole opposed his pardon;* and that the latterminister haughtily rejected the offer of a coalitionbetween Bolingbroke and the Tories he could influence,and the Whigs. Owing his partial restorationentirely to the exertions of his wife, the influenceof his private friends, and the purchased advocacy ofthe Duchess of Kendal, Bolingbroke returned toEngland in 17^5, resolved to make the minister whohad refused his alliance feel his vengeance.The conjuncture was highly advantageous to hisviews. At this time Pulteney had recently, fromprivate motives of disgust, seceded from the ministry.So early as the negotiation between Walpole andTindal. Mr. Coxe labours in was guilty of ingratitude in hisvain to prove that Bolingbroke opposition to Walpole.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 107Sunderland, which ended in a reconciliation between CHAP,the king and the prince, and the return of Walpole A D ]72Jand his friends to office, the seeds of discontent had to 1727 -been sown in Pulteney's mind. During the courseof Pulteney's opposition, in answer to an eulogisticnotice of him in the Craftsman, a somewhatabusive pamphlet issued from the press, attackingthe motives of his conduct. The object of thisabuse replied in a powerful pamphlet, which he calledAn Answer to one part of a late infamous Libel,intitled ' Remarks on the Craftsman's Vindication ofhis Two honourable Patrons.' ' Speaking of himselfin the third person, and addressing Walpole as theauthor of the attack upon him, Pulteney gives thefollowing account of the secret history of the schism :He avers, upon his honour, that you sent to himone day, as he was going out of town, desiring tospeak with him, that when he came you told him ofthe reconciliation between the late king and the thenPrince of Wales, and that a bargain was made forthose Whigs who had resigned their employments tobe put in again by degrees. To this the gentlemanreplied, ' Who, pray, is it that hath had authority tomake this bargain ?' Your answer was, * I have doneit with the ministry, and it was insisted on thatnobody but Lord Townshend should know of thetransaction. Neither Lord Cowper, the speaker, norly one else, knew it ; and, therefore, we hope you108 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, will not take it amiss that it was kept secret fromVI.- - you.' ' Not I,' said the gentleman, ' but I think itto 1727. very odd that any one should presume to take aplenary authority upon himself, to deal for suchnumbers as were concerned in an affair of this consequence.'' We have not,' said you again, ' had ourown interests alone in view. We have bargained for allour friends, and in due time they will be providedfor.' You named several who were to come intoemployments, and said to this gentleman, ' Weknow, sir, that you do not value any thing of thatkind ; so we have obtained a peerage for you.'It seems that you did not, at that time, pretend thatthe gentleman either expected or insisted on any employment,and therefore told him, that the king hadconsented to make him a peer. To this, the gentlemanreplied, with some warmth, * Sir, if ever Ishould be mean enough to submit to being sold, Ipromise you, that you shall never have the selling ofme. A peerage is what, some time or other, I maybeglad of accepting for the sake of my family ; but Iwill never obtain it by any base method, or submitto have it got for me upon such terms by you.'"* ButPulteney, although he privately attempted to preventthe acquiescence of the prince in the arrangement, tdid not forsake his party. He supported Walpole andAnswer to one part of a late f Ibid., p. 57.infamous libel, &c., p. 55.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 109Townshend, and received from them the place of CHAP.VIoffered of the household, a reward which rather re-, , . A. D. 1721strained his immediate opposition, than satisfied his to 1727.expectations. Upon the discovery of the Atterburyplot, Pulteney was chairman of the secret committee,and acquitted himself with great vigour and talent ;but after the first misunderstanding, no cordiality everexisted between him and the ministers. His disgustcontinually increased, until it became known that heonly sought an opportunity for an open rupture.Walpole discovered, too late, the danger of alienatingso powerful a debater. He took an occasion of remarking,that whenever a vacancy should occur ineither of the secretaryships, the ministry intended torecommend him to the office ; but it was now toolate : Pulteney only replied by a bow and a smile, andabandoning the distant prospect of promotion, threwhimself into the ranks of the opposition. By makinghis first essay against the payment of the debts whichhad accrued upon the civil list, an affair personal tothe sovereign, he cut away all means of retreat, andplaced himself in open hostility to the present king.It is evident, that the opposition of Pulteney wasprompted only by personal disappointment, and byenmity to a minister who, he thought, had underratedis services ; but this did not render it less dangerous; he was always Walpole's most bitter anddreaded enemy.HO THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. This secession occurred about the time of Boling-broke'sarrival in England ; and the veteran intriguerto 1727. no sooner found that he was not likely to succeedwith Walpole, than he assiduously cultivated thealliance of the discontented Whig. These oldantagonists soon became cordially united in thepursuit of their common object, the destruction ofWalpole administration ; and they pursued that objectwith no less vigour because their ulterior viewswere less consentient. The question of the division ofspoil was deferred until the enemy had been slain.Such leaders as these, one of whom enjoyed thereputation of an intrepid Tory, and had governed theparty in its days of success, could not but have analmost despotic power over their factions. Pulteneywas, indeed, only an auxiliary Whig, but Bolingbrokewas a Tory, and to him they might trust their principlesas well as their conduct. On the 5th of Dec.,1726, was published the first number of a paper whichwas established to represent the sentiments of thenew united opposition, and which, under the conductof Bolingbroke and Pulteney, soon acquired extensivepopularity, by its furious abuse of the existingadministration, and its daring use of the usual topicsof opposition. It was useless to profess loyalty whenthe king upon the throne was the professed patronof their opponents, and when no hope appeared of amonarch more favourably disposed ; the Craftsman,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. Illitherefore, treated the rights of princes with little CHAP,ceremony, and even ventured to canvass with severityA. D. 1721some of the acts of the Stuartss. It was the present ^ to 1727.policy of the party to purge themselves from the accusationof being Jacobites, and they had no reasonto exalt the kingly power now that it was vested inthe house of Hanover. The sentiments of theCraftsman cannot be cited as the sentiments either ofWhigs or Tories. A great number of the paperswere written, or at least dictated, by Pulteney,* who,although in alliance with the Tories, frequently andpublicly reiterated that he never had and never wouldabandon the principles of the Whigs.The Tories, in deference to their more popularallies, and knowing that Whig principles were themore adapted for opposition, declined the assertion oftheir own peculiar tenets ; and the Craftsman, fetteredby no creed of principles, became the instrumentfor strengthening and preserving the unity ofthe two parties. The following extract, from one ofits early numbers, will show how openly and steadilythis object was pursued :Every body knows that, for near a century past,Horace Walpole in his Correct that periodical. But we haveprudence, has related that Franck the authority of Bishop Newton,Hn, the printer of the Craftsman, the chaplain to the Earl of Bath,denied that Pulteney ever contrite the contrary,united any thing more than hintsTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, this kingdom hath been almost continually agitatedwith contentions ; occasioned by mutual jealousiesto 1727. and uneasiness between the prince and the people,for liberty on one side and the prerogative on theother; in which also religion has been not a littleconcerned. These disputes, which have divided thenation into two great factions, and brought aboutseveral wonderful revolutions in our government,seem at present to be, in a great measure, terminatedby the firm establishment of the Protestant successionagainst all attempts to defeat it, and by thegeneral affection of the people to his majesty's person,family, and government.Notwithstanding this, the names of distinctionare still kept up, when our differences are so generallyreconciled; and we preserve the same bitterness,hatred, and animosity against each other, whilst wearein the same interest and pursue the same end aswhen we professed contrary views and took measuresdiametrically opposite.If you ask a Whig for his opinion of a Tory,he'll tell you, in general, that he is a Jacobite or apapist ; a friend to arbitrary government, and againstthe liberties of the people, both in church and state.Take the character of a Whig, in like manner,from a Tory, and you will hear him described to be aman of republican principles ; a presbyterian, and asworn enemy to the church of England and the regalTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 113prerogative ; nay, it will be well for him if he is not CHAP,set forth as a downright atheist or libertine, and an ~ A D 17aienemy to all government whatever"* to 1727 -How uniform have been the mutual accusations ofthe two parties ! take from the Tory character theepithets which arose from their connexion with thenow extinct house of Stuart, and we find the terms ofparty abuse, which were fashionable under George I.,in undiminished estimation under William IV.But the writer in the Craftsman proceeds in histask ; he shows that neither party avows the principlesattributed to it by its opponent, and althoughhe admits that the Tory ranks contain Jacobites, hehopes that they are inconsiderable in numbers, andmore so in riches and strength. " What, therefore, isto be wished," he continues, "in our present circumstancesis, that all persons, however distinguished byparty appellations, who are truly in the interest of thepresent government, and desire the continuance ofit, would consolidate themselves into a body, andunite in measures against the common enemies oftheir country, whether foreign or domestic ; thatthey would forget all their former unreasonable animosities,and whilst they are equally exerting theirendeavours to accomplish the same end, viz., the happinessof their country, that they would not quarrelCraftsman, No. 40.VOL. II. I114 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, one with another about any differences in judgmentA p 1721 concerning the means.to 1727. " Let the true sons of the church, and especiallythe clergy, lay aside all unnecessary fears or apprehensionsof its danger ; and content themselves withthose rights, immunities, and powers with which thelaw hath invested them, without endeavouring tostretch them any further. Let the Protestant dissenteracquiesce, under that toleration and those privilegeswith which the legislature hath thought fit toindulge him. Let the Whig enjoy his liberty andproperty in its fullest latitude, without reproachingthe Tory as an enemy to both ; and let the Tory, inhis turn, drop all his bitterness and malevolenceagainst the Whig, as disaffected to monarchy and religion; or rather, let the very names of Whig andTory be for ever buried in oblivion"*This necessity of waving all agitation of principles,and breaking down the partition which separatedWhigs from Tories, in order to form a strong body inopposition, was well understood by the leaders andconstantly observed. Hence the continual allusionsto the baneful effects of party spirit which occurthroughout the political writings of Bolingbroke.The whole series of letters in the Craftsman, whichwas afterwards published under the title of a "DissertNo. 40.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 115nation on Parties, "is avowedly but an elaborate essay CHAP,to prove this then necessary doctrine. "There isA.D. 1721.no complaint which hath been more constantly in the to 1727.mouths, no grief hath lain more heavily at the heartsof all good men, than those about our national divisions; about the spirit of party, which inspires animosityand breeds rancour ; which hath so oftendestroyed our inward peace, weakened our nationalstrength, and sullied our glory abroad. It is time,therefore, that all who desire to be esteemed goodmen,and to procure the peace, the strength, and theglory of their country by the only means by whichthey can be procured effectually, should join theirefforts to heal our national divisions, and to changethe narrow spirit of party into a diffusive spirit ofpublic benevolence.""Wicked and unhappy men!" he says of those whowould oppose this union, "who seek their privatesafety in opposing public good. Weak and silly men!who vainly imagine that they shall pass for a nation,and the nation for a faction ; that they snail be judgedin the right, and the whole body of the people in thewrong ! How long do they imagine that so unequala contest can last ? " *No contrast can be greater than that betweenBolingbroke's public acts and published writings.Dissertation on Parties. Letter I.116 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. One of the most notorious characteristics of the admitdistraction to which he belonged, was its imposition ofA. D. 1721 .to 1727. the newspaper tax, and its systematic oppression ofthe political printers and writers ; yet the firstsubject handled in the paper published under hiscontrol, is the liberty of the press. Another veryprominent act of his administration was the persecutionof the dissenters, and the aggrandizement of theestablished hierarchy ; yet more than the half of thevolumes, in which his works are comprised, are filledwith attempts to prove that this establishment is acorporation of knaves, and the religion it professes, afable. Yet, in the political works of Bolingbroke, nosuch inconsistencies occur. Happily for himself,during his days of open Toryism, he had written nothingupon general principles of government ; hadan essay upon this subject proceeded from his pen atthat time, we should have discovered in it no denunciationsof the doctrines of divine right and passiveobedience as principles "such as would shock thecommon sense of a Samojede or a Hottentot"* Ifthe recent revolution warned him against their bolddefence, they would have, at least, received the respectof a minister who owed his power to his predecessors'prosecution of Sacheverell. But Bolingbroke, nowwriting anonymously for a motley party, wore theDissertation on Parties. Letter II.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.mask of the more popular section. He put forth the CHAP.principles of Pulteney and his friends as those of theA. D. 1721whole party; concealed, under the mantle of the Whig to 1727.leader, the unpopular tenets of Toryism, and declaredto the nation that they had ceased to exist. Meanwhile,the less accommodating partisans looked on insilence, content with the working of any artifice whichpromised them a restoration to power.Such was the situation of the two factions in theyear 17^7> when the death of George I. occurred,and roused, for a moment, all the hopes and fears ofeach.118 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER VII.Conduct of George II. upon his j accession Sir Spencer ComptonStrength of the Walpole government Character of the king Hismistress The queen Her power over the king Walpole continuesin office.CHAP. SINCE the reconciliation which had been effected byWalpole, between the prince who now ascended thethrone and George I., although there had been littlecordiality, there had been no open hostility betweenthe father and the son. The prince had taken nopart in politics, but had lived in a secluded manner atLeicester House. His chief friends had been theEarl of Scarborough, his master of the horse, and SirSpencer Compton, his treasurer ; and although Pul-tenet,and seven of his friends, had been frequentvisitors, and were well received, it was never supposedthat the prince participated in any of the oppositioncabals. The expectations of Pulteney andBolingbroke were, nevertheless, highly excited byTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 119the news of the king's death, since their recent at CHAP.VII.tempts to infuse into the mind of the prince a dislikeA D 1727.to Walpole had been so successful, that some of hisattendants had heard him declare, that that minister'stenure of office should cease with his accession. Hehad even given out that he designed his friend, SirSpencer Compton to be Walpole's successor, andthose who were acquainted with the exact relationsof the different political interests well knew that sucha selection could not be made or supported withoutbeing followed by very important consequences.Sir Spencer Compton, whom George II. had thuschosen by anticipation to be his minister, was a manwho laid claim to no brilliant parts ; he was the leaderof no particular section of politicians, nor, indeed,had he ambition to attempt or abilities to managethe formation of a separate party. He possessed nosuperiority in debate, but he was assiduous, exact,and methodical in business; and these qualities recommendedhim to a prince who, minutely regular inthe management of his personal affairs, looked uponexactitude and application as the chief essentials in aminister. Compton's public life had been that of aconsistent Whig; he had distinguished himself amongthat party so early as the prosecution of Sacheverell,and had been one of the managers of the impeach-lentagainst that ecclesiastic. His zeal had beenTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, rewarded with several lucrative appointments, andamong others, with the speakership of the house ofcommons, a situation for which, by the nature of histalents, he was eminently qualified, and to which hewas elected without opposition.From a passage in that pamphlet, by Pulteney,that has been already quoted, it appears probable,that Pulteney had caused or increased the new king'sdislike of Walpole, by repeating, and perhaps exaggerating,for the man who would repeat, would nothesitate to exaggerate, a conversation said to havetaken place between him and Walpole at the time ofthe accommodation between Walpole and Sunderland.In his pamphlet, Pulteney professes to havebeen particularly tenacious of the interests of theprince. He says he asked, "What are the terms youhave made for the prince, who hath acted so honourableand steady a part to those with whom he engaged,and who are now in opposition to the court? To thisyou answered with a sneer, ' Why he is to go to courtagain, and he will have his drums and his guards andsuch fine things.' At this the gentleman was astonished,and thought proper to press you a littlefurther, by asking you whether the prince was to beleft regent again, as he had been when the king wentout of England. 'No,' said you, 'why should he? hedoes not deserve it, we have done too much for him,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.and if it was to be done again we would not do so CHAP,much"* VILA. D. 1727.Such a conversation, reported to the subject of it,was well calculated to raise a bar to Walpole's employmentunder George II., which nothing butnecessity could overcome. Walpole was aware ofthis, and is said to have remarked to a Sir GeorgeYonge, " I must soon go out, but (he added,knowing his own strength) let me recommend younot to go into violent opposition, for we must sooncome in againstThe confidence of Walpole was by no meanswithout foundation. With him he well knew wouldretire Townshend, Devonshire, and Newcastle, andagainst the interests of these powerful leaders,Compton might despair of obtaining a majority infavour of any Whig ministry he might form. Theformation of a coalition government from the coalescedopposition, was an enterprise of no less difficulty.It now became evident that the Utopian dreams ofthe annihilation of party spirit, substantial and philosophicalas these appeared in the stately cadences ofBolingbroke, were utterly incapable of realization.Pulteney took a pride in declaring that he was stillWhig ; and he never intended to become a memberAnswer to the remarks on the f Coxe's Life of Walpole.craftsman's vindication.THE HISTORY OF Party.CHAP, of a Tory government. The nation was not preparedfor a government of Tories, headed by Boiling.D. 1727. , . . .broke, nor, indeed, had the king any intentions infavour of that party. It was some time since hisreconciliation with his father had freed him fromreliance upon them, and like Pulteney's, his connexionwith them had been produced rather bynecessity than choice.Yet notwithstanding these difficulties, which mustbeset the path of the minister, the palace was rifewith intrigues, elaborately woven by the differentcandidates for office. The new king was a man slowin forming a decision, but of indomitable obstinacy inmaintaining that which he had once formed. Twochannels were open through which it was supposed hemight be influenced his queen and his mistress.George's favourite mistress was Henrietta Howard,the wife of a younger son of the Earl of Suffolk, andafterwards, by the succession of her husband to thetitle, Countess of Suffolk. Mrs. Howard had, someyears before, accompanied her husband to Hanover,and she there became bed-chamber-woman to Caroline,then electoral princess. In this capacity shereturned with her mistress to England, and becomingthus also known to the prince, she was employed byhim to plead his cause with Miss Bellenden, thereigning beauty of the day, and afterwards Duchessof Argyle. Mary Bellenden, however, was insensibleTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.to the solicitations of a phlegmatic admirer, whose CHAP.VII.gallantry was so little equal to his impatience, thatA. D. 1727.he was compelled to procure a substitute to declarehis passion. It appears to have happened, whenMrs. Howard was detailing to him her ill success,that he, discovered that she also was a beautifulwoman, and as she was not so cruelly blind to themerits of a prince as Mary had proved, he soonforgot his late disappointment in his present success.In the works of Swift, Pope, and Gay, we find encomiumupon this lady which would lead us to supposethat her accomplishments were as great as herinterest was thought to be potent. Pope describes her*to Swift in such a manner, that the dean could onlysupply a name to the description by a reference to themythology, whence he pronounced it to be richestBut his friend replies, " Gay puts his whole trust atcourt in that lady whom I described to you, andwhom you take to be an allegorical creature of fancy.I wish she really were riches for his sake ; though,as for yours, I question whether, if you knew her,you would change her for the others Swift didvery soon afterwards know her, and attempted,through her influence to have his deanery in Irelandexchanged for some preferment in England. Itappears, from the correspondence between this ladyPope's Works, by Wharton, f Ibid., vol. ix., p. 55.ol. ix., p. 51. Ibid., vol. ix., p. 58.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and Swift, that she was afflicted with deafness andVII.-^ great weakness of sight. Swift writes to her in hisown style of coarse, humorous, flattery. In oneof his letters he considers his deafness an honour,since it enables him to resemble her in his calamities.You boast," he says, " that your disorders nevermade you peevish. Where is the virtue, when allthe world was peevish on your account, and so tookthe office out of your hands ? Whereas I bore thewhole load myself, nobody caring three pence what Isuffered, or whether I was hanged or at ease."Another extract from these letters exemplifies, in anamusing manner, the opinion generally entertainedof Mrs. Howard's influence and the court that waspaid to her.There, are, Madam, thousands in the world who,if they saw your dog use me kindly, would, the nextday in a letter, tell me of the delight they heard Ihad in doing good ; and being assured that a wordof mine to you would do any thing, desire my interestto speak to you to speak to the speaker to speak toSir Robert Walpole to speak to the king.*One place I humbly beg for myself, which is inSwift never hints at the pro The dignitary of the church, probabilityof Mrs. Howard being the ever anxious to obtain an Englishmistress of the king ; he, therefore, preferment, could not avow that itsupposes that she could only thus was to be the reward of a doublecircuitously forward a petition, adultery.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.your gift, if it be not disposed of: I mean the CHAP.perquisite of all the letters and petitions you receive, A pwhich, being generally of fair, large, and strongpaper, I can sell to good advantage to the bandboxand trunk makers, and, I hope, will annually make acomfortable penny"*But, notwithstanding all the complimentary effusionsof courtier poets, Mrs. Howard was only apretty woman. There is no reason to assert that shewished to do mischief; but, if she did, she had notalent to accomplish her wish.Queen Caroline was a woman of masculine mindand very considerable acquirements advantageswhich frequently render a woman rather formidablethan attractive and particularly dangerous in thewife of a man who was acutely sensitive to any thingbearing the semblance of dictation, jealous of hisauthority, and dogged in his resolves. But Carolinehad the good sense to conceal her ambition under afeminine submission to the authority of her husband ;her arts were only those of persuasion, and, whileGeorge resolved and acted, it was she who influencedhis mind, supplied him arguments, and suggested hisresolutions.Caroline's character has been drawn with greatseverity by some of her contemporaries, and partibusto Mrs. Howard, July 9, 1727.126 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, early by Chesterfield, who had suffered from the lossVIIof her favour, and who had incurred that loss by agross breach of policy, and even of politeness, whichwe little expect to meet in the life of so great amaster of courtly conduct. The queen had, doubtless,many of the weaknesses of a learned lady. Wecannot notice, without a smile and a suspicion ofaffectation, her great affection for metaphysics ; norcan all the eulogy of Doctor Clarke divert the ridiculewhich attached to her when she assumed theplace of arbitress in the contest which was carried onbetween that profound divine and Leibnitz. Butwhatever might have been her skill in the abstractsciences, and however much or little she was capableof judging the merits of Sir Isaac Newton's discoveries,and the influence they had upon the evidencesof Christianity, her judgment upon the morepractical points of government was generally sound,and uniformly moderate. Although supreme in acouncil of contending divines, and authoritative at aconference of disputing philosophers, she was modestand unassuming in the closet. She always declaredthat she knew nothing of business, gave her opinionwith apparent reluctance, and seemed to decline thepower she loved, even at the moment that she exercisedit.At the time of the death of George I. no one suspectedthe power she possessed over her husband ;THE HISTORY OF PARTY.no party had made their court to her, and even CHAP.VII.Compton, numerous as were his opportunities of ob p 7servation, had ventured to treat her with disrespect.The Whigs in office appear either to have trusted totheir political strength, and the occasional obligationsthey had rendered to the prince, or to have despairedof gaining his personal favour. Pulteney and hisfriends, and Bolingbroke and the Tories, had beenassiduous in their attentions to Mrs. Howard, andthought themselves, through her, secure at court. Itwas natural for men who had received from theirfathers traditions of the court of Charles II., andwho had themselves lived in that of George I., tolook upon the mistress as the monopolizer of allpower, and upon the wife as a cipher ; but in thisthey entirely miscalculated the disposition of Georgeand the talents of his queen. George II. was fondof women, and he indulged his passion, but he neverbroke through the decorum that was due to his wife.He had seen too clearly the ill effects that followedthe indolent acquiescence of his father in the corruptsolicitations of his mistress, and he was warned bythe example. It soon became apparent that Mrs.Howard had little influence in dispensing the mosthumble scraps of patronage, and none at all to directthe state appointments. The queen, in pursuance ofher usual policy, made no open complaint of thefidelity of her husband; she received his mistressesTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, at court, and even treated them with a simulated cor-vii'- duality ; perhaps she acknowledged to herself that theravages which, since her marriage, the smallpox hadmade in her beauty formed his excuse ; but sherevenged herself by opposing the preferment of everyperson who openly made the favour of the mistressthe foundation of their hopes. Thus it was that Gay,once her favourite, remained unpensioned ; thatSwift continued till death dean of St. Patrick's, declaring,at last, when tired of his unrewarded adulation,that Lady Suffolk was a mere courtier ; * thusit was also that Pulteney and Bolingbroke now remainedin opposition, and Walpole remained minister.When Walpole awakened George II. from hissleep, to tell him that he had commenced to reign,his answer was an abrupt command to send forCompton, to prepare the usual declaration to thecouncil. Walpole obeyed, and had the mortificationto hear this friend of the prince named as his successor.Compton was, however, unequal to theemergency, and he had sense enough to know hisinsufficiency. While the necessary negotiations wereWhen this was told the conn deny into great disgrace with thetess she mildly observed, that the poets and writers of the day ; theydean had once written to her a accused her of insincerity in hervery different description of her promises ; she acutely felt the wantcharacter. This lady fell very sud of power to perform them.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 129proceeding, the queen, who had heard from the late CHAP.king frequent allusions to Walpole' s skill in finance,*. . A. D. 1727.appears to have communicated with that minister.Sir Spencer Compton had only dared to promise herajointure of 60,000 a year upon the king's death;Walpole now boldly guaranteed her 100,000, andoffered, moreover, to carry in the house of commonsa vote for an augmentation of 130,000 to the civillist. This promise, together with the dislike sheentertained for Compton, decided the queen in Walpole'sfavour ; and the offer of the addition tothe civil list, the admitted incapacity of Compton,and the well-known affection of the Whigs for theirpresent leader, supplied her with cogent arguments.The promise already given to Compton was now theonly obstacle ; but, this being willingly remitted, tWalpole was continued minister. The cabinet remained,with slight variation, as it was, the hopes ofthe opposition were entirely blighted, and Boling-brokeleft London.Caroline was accustomed to there were no funds to pay them,tease George I. a great deal about " No," replied her father, " I shallpolitics, and their conversations not ; Walpole could turn theseupon this subject were often held stones into gold." Minutes of ain chapel, where they constantly Conversation with Mr. Scope.met. Upon one occasion she re"* Etough Papers,marked, that he would be obliged f Minutes of a Conversationto disband his Hanover troops, for with Mr. Scope. Etough Papers.VOL. II. K130 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER VIII.A general election A Whig majority returned Onslow Successof the Whigs in the house of commons Charge against Walpole,that he governed by corruption The motives that prompted thecharge Its truth Necessity of corruption to the Whigs as aninstrument of government Causes of that necessity Effect of thechange in the Tory principles of government upon the house ofcommons Power of influencing that assembly possessed by theearlier sovereigns Wrested from them by the people The Toryaristocracy recover it for themselves Influence of the Tories opposedby the money of the Whigs Debates upon the item for secret servicemoney.CHAP. AT the meeting of the parliament, Walpole performedhis part of the bargain he had made, when heto 1730. proposed . that the entire revenues of the civil list,amounting to about 800,000 should be settled uponthe new king for life. Shippen alone opposed themotion. This intrepid Jacobite boldly censured theexpenses of the former reign ; he denounced thefrequent and costly journeys to Hanover, and contrastedthe civil list of George I. with that ofTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 131Anne. He denied the necessity for any present CHAP,augmentation. His amendment, however, was notA.D. 172/even seconded, and the original proposal passed with to 1730,out further opposition.* The promised dowery wasvoted to the queen, apparently without observation.This necessary business being completed, the parliamentwas dissolved and another called.The general election immediately occupied theentire attention of the two parties, and the energiescalled forth on both sides were worthy the prize ofthe contest seven years of political power. Walpole,however, had a great advantage ; he not only wieldedall the ordinary influence of the government, but heheld the secret service purse, and was unscrupulousand lavish in its use. The new parliament metJanuary 23, and their early proceedings denoted aspirit which equalled Walpole's most sanguine anticipations.The commons elected as their speaker Mr.Arthur Onslow, who so long and so worthily filled thesame distinguished station. Mr. Hatsell, his friendand pupil, writes of this distinguished patron of hisyouth with generous enthusiasm. " Superadded tohis great and accurate knowledge of the history ofthis country, and of the minuter forms and proceedingsof parliament, the distinguishing feature of Mr.Onslow's public character, was a regard and vene-Parl. Hist., vol. viii., p. 603.K 2THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, ration for the British constitution, as it was declaredVTTT- and established at the revolution. This was theA. D. 1727to 1730. favourite topic of his discourse ; and it appeared fromthe uniform tenour of his conduct through life, that tomaintain this pure and inviolate was the object atwhich he always aimed. In private life, though heheld the office of speaker of the house of commonsfor above three-and-thirty years, and during part ofthat time enjoyed the lucrative employment of treasurerof the navy ; it is an anecdote perfectly wellknown that, on his quitting the chair in 1761, hisincome from his private fortune which had alwaysbeen inconsiderable, was rather less than it had beenin 1727> when he was first elected into it."The commencement of the session was highly favourableto the ministers. Their subalterns* write ingreat exultation at their prosperous commencement,and Walpole could congratulate himself that thosewho put themselves most prominently forward in oppositionwere notorious Jacobites. " You will havelearnt from others our success," writes HoraceWalpole, " where the division was 290 against 86,the greatest majority that ever was known in acommittee, and there is all the reason in the worldto believe, that the rest of the public business will beWilson, under secretary of state, to the Earl of Waldegrave, Feb.2, 1727-8.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 133carried on by the same spirit and unanimity"* The CHAP,victory thus celebrated by Horace Walpole, wasA. D. 1727gamed upon a motion for reducing the number of to 1730.land forces. Six days afterwards, a debate upon asimilar subject, was followed by a similar division, thenumbers being 280 against 84. After these decisivedefeats, Horace Walpole tells his correspondent thathe looks upon the dispute about foreign affairs, asgood as over. Daniel Pulteney, who had beenintended for the office of secretary of state by Sunderland,and who, cherishing the memory of hispatron, seemed to live only to carry on his plans ofhostility against Walpole, t next attacked the ministryupon the subject of the national debt. Thehouse, however, declared against him by a majority of250 to 97, and pronounced that Walpole had, by theoperation of the sinking fund, decreased the nationaldebt to the amount of upwards of two millions and ahalfe Daniel Pulteney must not be confoundedwith his relation and political ally William Pulteney;* Horace Walpole to the Earl succeeding in it preyed upon hisof Waldegrave, Feb. 12, O. S., spirits ; which, and with his living1727-8. much with the Lord Bolingbrokef Speaker Onslow says, " Daniel (as an enemy to Mr. Walpole),Pulteney gave up all pleasures threw him into an irregularity ofand comforts, and every other con drinking that occasioned his death."iteration, to his anger, and fell at Remarks on the Opposition.last a martyr to it, in his quarrel \ Parl. Hist., vol. vii., p. 6.59.with Mr. Walpole. For his not134- THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, for, although they acted in concert in parliament,there was no private friendship between them, andf^.D. 1727to 1830. n o other political sympathy than a common hostilityto Walpole. Daniel Pulteney was a Tory, Onsloweven insinuates that he was more.Foiled in all these attempts, the opposition neverthelesspertinaciously returned to the charge, andchose a subject more generally understood, andtherefore more extensively popular. The accusationof wholesale corruption is that which has alwayspressed the hardest upon Walpole and his administration; it may be palliated, but it cannot be denied,it may be excused, but it cannot be defended. Theaccounts for the year 17^7 contained an item of250, 000 for secret service money; an immense sumaccording to the amount of the revenue of thosedays. This was fastened upon with eagerness bythe Pulteneys and the other opposition leaders, andwas made the subject of incessant motions in thecommons. The Craftsman, and its fellow-labourers inthe same cause, teemed with invectives against aministry which had its power in the venal basenessof its supporters ; the people were excited by splendiddeclamation, which seemed to breathe the spiritof the citizens of the ancient republics. The youthfulscions of noble houses were taken from theuniversities and poured into the house of commons,their minds yet occupied with the deeds of theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 135patriots who live in the writings of Herodotus, CHAP.Thucydides, and Livy. Their fresh enthusiasm andA.D. 1727real indignation lent the charm of sincerity and J to 1 730.patriotism to the tactics of a faction. If many ofthese young declaimers wanted talent, none weredeficient in energy and good will. " It was indeed,"says Mr. Speaker Onslow, " from the applause forspeaking which these had acquired, that it became afashion for most of the young men of birth and fortuneto set themselves against the court, and toendeavour to obtain seats in parliament, for the sakeof the fame they hoped to get as the others had doneby popular declamations there, against the evil powerand corruption of the administration, which theychiefly, or rather only, applied to Sir Robert Walpole,and too often in a language that by no means becametheir youth to give, or his years to have it given tohim. But for this also, they had their applauders ;and it is scarcely to be imagined to what a height itarose, and how much general mischief he receivedfrom this spirit and licentiousness of speech in theseyoung patriots. It went the further, because in them itwas deemed native virtue and disinterestedness, the resultof untainted minds, and hearts too young to be corruptedby envy of power and profit (the usual motivesof older men in faction), and in many or most ofthem, indeed, I am persuaded, in the beginning, atthe least, they were made to believe they were saving136 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, their country from destruction, and that they onlycould do it. But they were the tools and instruct.D. 1727to 1730. ments of those who meant no such thing, and whowere in opposition only because they had not power,and made use of the virtue of these younger andbetter men to the quicker obtaining of it for themselves,which when they had done, and manifestedby their after actings what their former motives hadbeen, many of their young followers soon discernedthe cheat and showed their resentment accordingly.Some, however, who were older and grown wiser, sawthe prospect the change had opened, and made asable a use of it as the best experienced of their principalshad done ; but alas, with a change too of styleand behaviour"*Such were the reflections of this able and moderateman, upon the debates over which he had presided ;such was his estimation of the motives which promptedthe exhibition of so much patriotism and so muchpious horror of corruption. But because the objectof the opposition was selfish, are we therefore toinfer that the corruption denounced did not exist ?By no means. That its extent was greatly exaggerated,we cannot doubt, since it is described in thelanguage of Pulteney and Bolingbroke ; and skilfulexaggeration is the aim of eloquence. But the gene-speakerOnslow's Remarks on the Opposition. Coxe, vol. ii., p.569.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 137oral testimony of contemporaries denies the remark of CHAP.Burke, that it is mere cant to charge him with havingA D 1727reduced corruption to a system.* " All those men to 1730.have a price, "t was his common expression, as helistened with incredulous contempt to one of thechief patriot speakers, and his eye passed in scornover the ranks of his supporters. In his practice,and, some assert, in his conversation, this maxim wasgeneralized into "All men have their price." Heacted upon it with a boldness which proved his confidencein its truth, and with a success which appearedto be the reward of penetration. But Walpole'stask was only to procure a majority, and it wasno new discovery that the majority of men are corruptibleIt is no intimation of a generous or comprehensivemind that, because he found the many readyto sell themselves to his service, he sneered at everyprofession of patriotism, and laughed to scorn theidea of public virtue. His biographer, in affectingto doubt that such was Walpole's custom, rejects the" Appeal from the New to the his friends were the " Old Whigs."Old Whigs." Since the revolution Attempts to found the same dis-theterm " Old Whig 1 ' has been a tinction have been made since then,title much contested. The very Burke's Works, to, vol. iii., p.man whom Burke here brings for 437.ward as a specimen *of the Old f Coxe, vol. i., p. 757.Whig, was railed at as a New Whig J 'QI ir\tovtc Kaicoi is a truthby his contemporaries. According older than the age of Bias,to the Opposition, Pulteney and138 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, concurrent testimony of all who knew him. It wouldVIII.be a tedious and unnecessary task to put togetherA.D. 1727to 1730. the numerous and often-repeated anecdotes whichtell with how little ceremony Walpole was accustomedto offer a bribe, and with what avidity it was usuallyreceived ; of these many are, doubtless, fabrications ;but their number, and the rapidity with which theycirculated show, at least, the universal opinion in theirfavour. Pope, who, although the friend of Boling-broke,was no lampooner of Walpole, lends them hisauthority, when he says,Would he oblige me, let me only findHe does not think me what he thinks mankind."And I might crowd these pages with authorities tothe same effect.Corruption, open and undisguised, was, indeed, thevice of this age. Many of Walpole's most vehementaccusers lived to be themselves personal proofs thattheir accusations had been well founded ; and manyothers, whom he could not or would not corrupt, discoveredthat if they kept their party honour it wasnot preserved by their public virtue. It was not theminister who corrupted the age ; his crime was, thathe pandered to the prevailing depravity.It is an observation startling, but true, that nothingbut corruption extensive, almost universal corruption,could have now preserved the Whig party. TheirsTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 139was the triumph of influence over prerogative of CHAP.VIII.money over power. A D 1727I have said that about this time the principle of to 1730.the Tory party underwent a change ; that from monarchicalit became suddenly aristocratical ; that,despairing of recovering for the crown the prerogativeby which they chiefly had been benefited, theTories had conceived the design of recovering it forthemselves. The contest had already commenced.The foolish and unbending obstinacy of the Stuartkings had given such a predominant influence to thehouse of commons, that it was plain that within thewalls of that house the battle must be fought. TheTory cause was now the same as that of the kingswho had contended for an absolute prerogative hadbeen, but the present claimants followed rather thepolicy of the predecessors of the Stuartss, who wereaware that their power was effectually exercised uponthe elements of a house of commons, but dangerouslyexerted against the united body.Traces of the exercise of the power of the crown overelections to parliament exist from the earliest times.The sheriff, to whom the writs were directed, was chosenby the sovereign, and was consequently devoted to hisinterest : he could, therefore, neglect to hold an electionin any borough which he had reason to supposewould choose a person unfavourable to the court. Thisresolute power of packing a house of commons was140 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, controllable only by the house, upon the applicationof the borough thus disfranchised ; but while wagesto 1730. were regularly demanded and paid, and the choice ofa representative was considered rather a burden thanaprivilege ; while petitions to the king to be relievedfrom the charge were not unfrequent, and none butthe largest towns were jealous of their right, such anapplication was very unlikely to be made. The complaisanceand servility of the early houses of commonsis thus accounted for, by the illegal exercise of thepower of the crown upon their election. When,however, a seat in the commons house of parliamentbegan to be considered an object of ambition, thepower of returning representatives was naturallysought. Many boroughs that had long since discontinuedto hold elections, now remembered theirdisused right, and recovered it upon petition to thecrown. The power of controlling the elections bymeans of the sheriffs was then lost ; but another,although not so efficient method, remained. It wasan undisputed prerogative of the crown to create newboroughs, and this was frequently and skilfully exercised.At the accession of Henry VIII., the houseof commons consisted of two hundred and ninety-eightmembers, which that monarch increased by theaddition of thirty-eight.* This increase was madeParl. Hist., vol. i,, p. 567.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 14<1by granting the right of election to Wales, Calais, CHAP.and Berwick ; but the genius of Wolsey, doubtless,provided that the privilege should be bestowed where to 1730.it would be discreetly used. Edward VI. createdtwenty two boroughs, returning forty-four * members;and, during the short succeeding reign of Mary,the enfranchisement of fourteen boroughs, returningtwenty-five members, was, doubtless, thought convenientto assist the revolution she contemplated.Her able successor did not neglect this privilegethe creation of thirty-one boroughs, returning sixty-twomembers, occurred during the reign of Elizabeth. JThe addition of fourteen boroughs and twenty-sevenmembers to the list, during the reign of James L, isattributable rather to a resolution of the house thatany town which had, at any time, sent members toparliament, could resume at pleasure its customaryprivilege, and to the fondness of that king for exhibitinghis prerogative, than to any design of managinghis commons. The assembly had now becometoo large to be much influenced by any reasonableexertion of the prerogative of the crown : Charles I.,Parl. Hist., vol. i., p. 603. gesses a sure indication that thef Ibid., vol. i., p. 632. charters were conferred to answerJ Ibid., vol. i., p. 958. It her own purposes. No monarch wasvail be remarked that Elizabeth ever so sparing in granting honourscreated no borough without confer and immunities as Elizabeth,ring upon it the full number of bur Ibid., vol. i., p. 1511.ITHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, who hated all parliaments, thought the commonsalready too numerous ; he expiated his own and histo 1730. father's folly in attempting to dam up the river in itsmight, which their predecessors had been contentedto turn at its fountain head.A glance at the names of the places which werethe objects of the favour or* the successive monarchswill abundantly show, that their object was not tokeep pace with the increasing population, or to extendthe elective right to newly-risen towns, but toincrease the number of their friends in the lowerhouse. At the accession of Henry VI., only fivetowns in Cornwall made returns ; but at the death ofElizabeth, there were twenty-one boroughs in thatcounty which sent members to parliament. Thepreference shown to this county was not on accountof any superiority in trade or population over the restof England, for it could claim none : nor did thesize or importance of the enfranchised boroughs challengethe distinction the great majority of them werethen the petty villages, which they continue to thisday. The true reason is assigned by a contemporaryhistorian. " The county of Cornwall wasmore immediately subject to a coercive influencethrough the indefinite and oppressive jurisdiction ofthe Stannary court"* If we could lay open theHallam's Constitutional History, 8vo, vol. iii., p. 54.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 143secret history of the rest of these charters, we should CHAP,find that others were similarly recommended ; somewere contained within the ancient demesnes of the to 1730.crown, others were situated upon the estate of acourtier all were, doubtless, considered securelywithin the influence of the court. Charles II., findingthat the old expedient was worn out, inventedanother far more efficacious, and by his celebratedattack upon the charters, held all the borough representationof the kingdom at his mercy. This expedientwas equal to any thing short of the mad designsof James II.Thus is the interposition of prerogative in electionsto parliament seen to be, with one short andfatal interval, coexistent with parliaments. Thisancient and valuable prerogative of placing its dependantsin the house of commons, the crown hadnow lost. The Tories were resolved to recover itfor themselves. It is impossible to look over thelists of the different houses of commons, for severalcenturies, without noticing the regularity with whichcertain boroughs were represented, from generationto generation, by persons of the same name. Thesewere many of them boroughs created by early sovereignsfor temporary purposes, which, being placedoriginally under the patronage of a courtier of approvedloyalty, had descended in his family with theestate upon which he stood. They had served to144 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, introduce the heir into public life, or to aid the ex-viiinations of a younger son : to prepare the former for aA.D. 1727 11-iito 17SO. seat in the lords, or to give the latter a means otobligation by which he might push his fortune atcourt. These boroughs had not been hitherto verynumerous, but their existence was the germ of anall-important power which might be indefinitely increased.The Tories, possessing the great bulk ofthe landed property of the kingdom for the possessionsof individual Whigs, however enormous, wasbut as a drop against those of the Tory noblesjoined to that of the great body of second-rate landholders,were the landlords of the electors, and possessedmeans of coercion more effectual than any thathad ever been possessed by the Tutors or the Stuartss.We have no proof that, in early times, this influencealways possessed had been severely* exercised. Thenobles were by no means anxious to preserve the plenitudeof an undefined prerogative, and were verywilling that the odium of opposition and the stigma ofdisloyalty should rest upon the people ; inferior proprietorswere not anxious to leave their estates andfield-sports for a political life, which then offered fewadvantages. What they disregarded themselves theydid not think proper to harass their tenantry, and de-perhapsthey had little reason miserable progress that the tenantryfor severity, for it was not until pretended to a will in such mat-theWhig doctrines had made con tears.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 145stroy the harmony of their district in order to obtain for CHAP,another. But when the great landlords found that theA. D. 1727struggle for power must be made in the commons, a to 1730.very different conduct was pursued ; rents were raisedabove the real value of land; small borough towns weredecreased until they could be readily managed ; corporations,possessing the exclusive power of election,were carefully filled with the dependants of the landlord; every method, which ingenuity and experiencecould devise, was employed to increase the dependenceof the tenant upon the owner of the land. Thus theTories obtained a more extensive prerogative thanhad been enjoyed by Elizabeth, and a power nearlyas great as that usurped by Charles II. ; a powerwhich had this essential advantage over that of thecrown, that whereas the exercise of the latter hadbeen unpopular, tyrannical, and notorious, that of theformer was usually secret, certainly legal, and investedwith all the sacred character of private property.Against this demonstration, which threatened toannihilate their party, the Whigs were bound to providesome countervailing expedient they were obligedto have recourse to their exclusive possessions, astheir opponents had had recourse to theirs. TheTories had nearly all the land, the Whigs had all themoney, of the kingdom ; the former had recourse tocompulsion, the latter to persuasion ; the former used:bree, the latter corruption. Armed with this weapon,VOL. II. L146 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the Whigs invaded the strongholds of their advertseries, and often did the promises of the Whig candiaD 1727to 1730. date deafen the elector to the threats of the Torylandlord. I say nothing of principle as having weightin the contest ; for, while this degrading system offorce and bribery reigned unchecked by education,the wretched class which formed its subjects neitherknew nor cared ought of politics beyond the contestin their own village. But it was not always necessaryto carry corruption among the vassals of anopponent, it was often more easy to gain the patron.While office, titles, and ribands, were in the possessionof the Whigs there would be no lack of willingchapman ; and it was found highly practicable toconvert into supporters some of those whom a Torypatron had sent into the commons as opponents. Inlargetowns, where neither intimidation nor corruptionwere possible, the contest of principle was carriedon, and here the Whigs were uniformly victorious.These formed the nucleus of the Whig party in thecommons, which, swollen by the numbers that influenceor corruption could detach from their opponents,resisted the encroachments of the Tories.The violence of party feeling had long since introduceda practice of increasing the majority of thevictorious party to an overwhelming degree, by decidingall the election petitions according to thepolitics of the parties to the petition. Instances ofTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 147such a practice have already occurred in the course CHAP.of this work, but it became now more open and *A. D. 1727avowed. The ballot and the oath, which preserve to 1730.the impartiality of an election committee of thepresent day, were then unknown ; the member whovoted upon such questions did not even affect to beswayed by the merits of the case, nor did he imaginethat his personal honour could be compromised bythe most absurd or iniquitous vote. The committeeformed to decide upon these questions was avowedlypacked by the minister, and so shameless were itsmembers, that so long ago as the time of Charles II.we find one of Darby's adherents, in an election casebetween Trenchant and Bertie, boasting that hisparty had just won the day, and carried it, by a goodmajority, that thirteen were more than one-and-twenty.*Such was another effect of the power ofthe Tories and the necessity of the Whigs.This state of things did not, indeed, continue long.The advantages of having a party in power, whichrecognised and acted upon the old Whig principles,and a party in opposition which, for their own immediatepurposes, pretended to embrace those principles,and to carry them to the verge of democracy,were soon apparent. The knowledge of and affectionSee a pamphlet, called " A and 1695, upon the Inquiry intoCollection of Debates and Pro Briberies and corrupt Practices."meetings in Parliament, in 1694L 2148 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, for popular rights gained ground in the nation ; thepopular party every where increased and grew intoto 1730. strength, even in the country ; the advance of commerceand manufacture and the augmentation of thenational debt added to its power. The Whigs wereno longer in danger of annihilation, and the Tories,upon their return to office, found that, if it waspleasant to bestow the revenues of the state in rewardingtheir friends, it was necessary to employ apart of the booty in corrupting the people. Butthese were the circumstances of a later period ; atthe time of which I am now treating, the stateof the contest between the parties was such ashas already been described. A recollection of thisdescription will enable us to understand why it isthat the Tory, Bolingbroke, inveighs so eloquentlyagainst corruption, and why it is that, throughoutthat elaborate series of remarks upon the History ofEngland, which he published in the Craftsman, hisonly aim appears to be to prove the superiority ofprerogative over influence ; in other words, of forceover bribery. It may also account for the constantand energetic attacks upon the subject of the magnitudeof the items for secret service money, and may,perhaps, point out the reason that they met withsuch signal defeats.In the midst of a very violent debate upon the subjectof the 250,000, which appeared in the public ac-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 149counts under this head, Walpole received a despatch CHAP.VIIIthat the convention with Spain had been signed at Pardon.The news quickly passed round the ministerial to 1730.benches, arid Walpole, availing himself, with his usualskill, of the exultation of his supporters, rose, anddeclared that the money about which so much hadbeen said, was spent in procuring the honourable andadvantageous terms of the convention, which he submittedto the house.* The opposition were silent,henceforward he heard no more upon this subject.The Bribery bill, which became a law in the sessionof 1729, is one of those invaluable measureswhich have resulted from party contests. It wasintroduced by the Tories, to put an end to theexpensive contests which had recently shaken theirdominion, even over their own boroughs ; its titlewas highly popular, and Walpole did not attempt toresist it. When, however, the opposition found thatthey had failed in one of their objects, that of entrappingthe minister into resistance to a popularmeasure, they became less eager in their promotionof the bill. Many of the Tories thought its provisionsinconvenient, and so careless were they of itsfate, that, when it was returned from the lords, it wasreceived in a very thin house, and passed only by aDe la Face to the Earl of Coxe, vol. ii., p. 550, and vol. i.,Waldegrave. Waldegrave Papers, p. 297.150 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, majority of two.* But we, nevertheless, owe thisVIIIbill to the Tories ; it certainly would not at this timeA D 1727to 1730. have been proposed by the Whigs.An occurrence, which took place in the same session,testifies that the Tories wanted rather theability than the will to imitate the conduct theycondemned. The king demanded of his minister115,000 as an arrear of his civil list, stating^thatthe arrears upon the several revenues were so greatthat they fell short of the full sum of 800,000 votedby parliament to this account. Upon an examinationof the accounts this pretence appeared entirely withoutfoundation, and Walpole is said to have usedevery effort of address and reasoning to dissuade theprosecution of the demand. He succeeded only inoffending his master, not in shaking his resolution.This point of difference between the king and hisminister quickly became known to the opposition ;the leading Tories immediately attempted to improvethe opportunity, and made secret offers, that, if theking would abandon Walpole, they would not onlyprocure for him the sum he demanded, but add to it100,000. When these proposals were communicatedto Walpole he could no longer resist. The seasonfor the regular introduction of such a motion was longsince past; according to accounts then upon the tableParl. Hist., vol. viii. Tindal.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 151of the house, the civil list revenues far exceeded the CHAP.Visumvoted. Altogether, this was one of the mostA. D. 1727impudent motions ever submitted to the commons; to 1730.but it was carried by 241 against 115, notwithstandingthe strenuous opposition of the Tories and theirallies, who did not hesitate to expose the fraudulentnature of a transaction by which they no longer expectedto profit.*Parl. Hist., vol. vii., p. 703. Coxe (from the Etough Papers),vol. i., p. 300.THE HISTORY OF PARTY,CHAPTER IX.Resignation of Townshend Causes of this event Jealousy betweenhim and Walpole Biographical anecdotes of the Duke of Newcastle,Lord Harrington, Lord Chesterfield Retirement and death ofTownshend.CHAP. AT the prorogation of parliament, in May, 1730,IXD 17go Townshend resigned his office of secretary, and materialchanges took place in the constitution of theadministration. That same ambition, which severedthe friendship that had existed between Stanhopeand the brother ministers, had now corroded eventhe confidence that had united the latter. It had forsome time past been well understood among theirmutual friends, that the unanimity which once existedbetween the heads of the administration was nomore. The jealousy that now arose was occasionedby the increase of the power of Walpole, and theconsequent decrease of that of his brother-in-law. Itwas by no means unnatural that Townshend, whoTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 153had long accustomed himself to consider Walpole ashis subordinate, and who had long been the acknow- A D 1730ledged leader of the Whigs, should feel displeasurewhen he found that his influence was rapidly decaying,that the eyes of his party were turned to Walpolerather than to him, and that he was evidentlynow ranked as second to the man whom he had beenused to lead. Many circumstances had combined toproduce this effect. The most obvious was, doubtless,the superior talent of Walpole ; his exquisiteskill in debate, his great financial abilities, and hisalmost despotic influence in the house of commons.But Townshend contributed almost equally towardshis own downfal. George I. had complained of theabruptness of his manner, and the irritability of histemper ; these faults had not been corrected bytime, and the best intentions and most unblemishedintegrity could not prevent their ill effects. Townshendgrew unpopular in the cabinet; he found thatall the members of the government looked to Walpolefor direction and assistance ; even foreign affairs,which had been ostensibly left under his control,were in fact guided by Walpole and the Duke ofNewcastle. Every retainer of the government knewthat Walpole influenced the queen, and that thequeen was all-powerful with the king ; they saw thejealousy which Townshend could not conceal, and,yy openly siding with the stronger party, increasedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the breach. Unconscious of any reason why he wasthus gradually sinking to the condition of a mereA.D. 1730.cipher in the cabinet, Townshend resolved to makean effort to recover his supremacy, and to effect theremoval of those who appeared his most active opponents.Among these, the first was the Duke ofNewcastle, his colleague in the secretaryship aperson of too much importance in the party historyof his time to be passed over without particularnotice.This representative of the noble family of the Pelhamhad been remarkable throughout his life for hiszeal for the succession of the house of Brunswick.While a very young man, he had succeeded to thefamily peerage by the death of his father, Lord Pelham,and George I. had rewarded his attachment bycreating him, firstly, Earl of Clare, and afterwardsDuke of Newcastle. Although related in the samemanner as Walpole to Viscount Townshend, he hadattached himself to Sunderland and Stanhope uponthe schism of 1717 j but, upon the coalition whichtook place in 17^0, he returned to the side of his oldcoadjutors, and was admitted into their entire confidence.Newcastle no longer considered himselfidentified with the section which continued for sometimeas a separate interest in the cabinet ; duringthe cabals of Carteret and Cadogan, he continuedsteadfast to Walpole, and when the contest was con-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 155eluded, by Carteret's dismissal from the post of CHAP.secretary, the duke was his successor.The Duke of Newcastle's appearance upon the politicalstage had been very early. Notwithstanding theimportant parts which he had already performed, his appointmentas secretary of state took place when he wasbut thirty years old, a circumstance much commentedupon by those who were attached to his predecessor,and appreciated the undoubted talent and business-likeability of that nobleman. The contrast was indeedgreat: the duke's want of method and regularity was soconspicuous that it immediately disgusted the king,who spoke of him with the utmost contempt, complainingthat he was compelled to keep, as a minister, aman who was not fit to be chamberlain to the smallestcourt in Germany. Like the majority of those menwho act without order or system, the duke was alwaysin a hurry and always busy ; it was remarked of himby Lord Hervey, that, " he did nothing with thesame hurry and agitation as if he did every thing."It was quite in accordance with this characteristicthat he should be profuse in promises and careless oftheir performance, and his reputation upon this pointsoon exceeded that which is ordinarily acquired bymen in office. To his colleagues he was fretful andcapricious, entertaining a lofty opinion of his ownimportance, and indignant at the most trifling instanceof neglect; but notwithstanding this, he was greedyTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of flattery himself and prodigal of it upon others. InIXD 173Q the house of lords he was a frequent speaker and anuseful debater, possessing great presence of mind,and a ready reply to meet any sudden difficulty ; hisoratory was like his conduct, without scope or method;but his speeches, as well as his correspondence,discovered a great flow of language and power of expression.His high rank, immense wealth, extensiveinfluence, high integrity, and reputed disinterestedness,rendered his alliance of great value to theadministration, and entitled him to aspire to the firstpost in the government.For some time, this nobleman had lived in thegreatest cordiality with Walpole and Townshend.The three brothers-in-law were allies, which it wasthought no political event could separate. In thecorrespondence between Townshend and Walpole,he is spoken of as their dear friend, from whom nothingwas concealed ; but when Townshend' s growingcoldness showed that he could not brook theascendancy of Walpole, the duke, although claiminghimself to be a leader and a patron, evidently inclinedto the support of the more powerful minister.His interference with Townshend's management offoreign affairs was particularly offensive to the irritabletemper of the viscount, and he resolved that oneof his first efforts should be to thwart the Duke ofNewcastle.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 157An opportunity soon offered: Newcastle, whose am CHAP.ambition extended to the formation of a party of personalr . m J A. D. 1730.followers, had long since fixed upon William Stanhope,a distant kinsman of the late Earl Stanhope, as a manwho would reward his patronage. Aided by theduke's powerful support, Stanhope abandoned theprofession of a soldier, in which he had earned distinction,for that of a diplomatist, to which his talentswere still more adapted. In 1717 he was appointedenvoy extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the kingof Spain, and upon the rupture which broke outbetween Spain and England, in 1718, he receivedsimilar credentials to the court of Turin. After anintermission of his diplomatic duties, during whichhe resumed his sword, the peace with Spain restoredhim to his former post. The court of Madrid was,at this time, the theatre of the most delicate andinvolved negotiations ; the frequent revolutions bothin the court and in the policy of that kingdom, requiredthe exertion of the highest order of diplomatictalent to watch and meet them. He watched overthe interests of England during the mad career ofRipped, and managed that weak visionary withsuch consummate skill, that he drew from him thewhole secret of the negotiations which had recentlytaken place between Spain arid the empire.The siege of Gibraltar put an end to Stanhope'smission to Madrid, he returned to England and was158 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, appointed vice-chamberlain to the king, and afterwardsjoined with Horace Walpole and StephenA.D. 1730.Points, as one of the English plenipotentiaries atthe Congress of Soissons. Stanhope was fully equalto this important office. He was possessed of greattemper and moderation, and had acquired such a habitof patience and forbearance in his deportment, that itis said he never interrupted those who spoke to him.To these professional advantages he added strongsense, strict honour, and a singular reputation forveracity. Philip of Spain said of him, " Stanhopeis the only foreign minister who never deceived me."The friendship of the Duke of Newcastle nowencouraged Stanhope to aspire to the peerage ; buthe found in the king and Sir Robert Walpole unexpectedenemies. The causes which are assigned forthe hostility of these two powerful persons are somewhatsingular. Stanhope's brother Charles had beensecretary to the Earl of Sunderland, and in thiscapacity had copied a memorial which that ministerhad presented to George I., advising the adoption ofstrong coercive measures against the prince. Thismemorial George II. found among his father's papers,and, as the author was dead, he vented his resentmentupon the copyist. He forbade Walpole to mentionCharles's name to him,* and extended his resentmentMemoirs of Sir Robert Walpole, vol. i., p. 300.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 159to the whole family. Walpole's biographer attributes CHAP,the opposition of that minister to his having takenA. D. 1730.an aversion to the very name of Stanhope,* since thedifference which occurred between him and the earl :a reason which just equals in absurdity that assignedfor the dislike of the king. But such whimsicalantipathies are not usual in ministers who are obligedto sustain themselves in power, by a skilful managementof parties ; and Walpole had already incurredthe anger of the king by recommending CharlesStanhope to be a lord of the admiralty, a fact notvery compatible with the indulgence of his generaldisgust.Stanhope's services, in conducting the negotiationswhich ended in the treaty of Seville, gave suchweight to the recommendation of the Duke ofNewcastle, that the peerage could no longer berefused. In November, 17^9, he took his seat inthe house of peers as Baron Harrington, lookingupon the Duke of Newcastle as the patron to whomhe owed his elevation. Encouraged by this successthe duke proposed to bring him into the cabinet, assecretary of state; and this attempt, thinking thejuncture highly favourable, Townshend resolved tooppose. The candidate whom Townshend proposedto set up against Harrington, was the Earl of Chessof Sir Robert Walpole, vol. i., p. 331.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, garfield, a man far more distinguished as a diplomatistIX."A D i73o an( ^ a wr ^ er than as a P ar ty leader. This nobleman,however, failed to attain that place among the mosteminent statesmen of his country which he ambition,rather from the force of adverse circumstances,and from important results arising fromerrors and omissions, in themselves trivial, thanfrom any inferiority of talent. Chesterfield wouldhave graced the highest station, but perhaps hisintellect was too delicate for the continual clashingof party warfare. His biographer thus describes histalents for debate : " Lord Chesterfield's eloquence,though the fruit of study and imitation, was in greatmeasure his own : equal to most of his contemporariesin elegance and perspicuity, perhaps surpassed bysome in extensiveness and strength, he could haveno competitors in choice of imagery, taste, urbanity,and graceful irony. This turn might originally havearisen from the delicacy of his frame, which, as onthe one hand it deprived him of the power of workingforcibly upon the passions of his hearers, enabledhim on the other to affect their finer sensationsby nice touches of raillery and humour. His strokeshowever poignant, were always under the control ofdecency and good sense. He reasoned best whenhe appeared most witty ; and, while he gained theaffections of his hearers, he turned the laugh on hisopposers, and often forced them to join in it. ItTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. l6lmight, in some degree, be owing to this particular CHAP,turn, that he was not heard with so much applauseA L) 17 Sointhe lower as the upper house. Refined wit anddelicate irony are often lost in popular and numerousassemblies. Strength either of argument or voice,or a flow of pompous words, and a continual appealto the passions, are in such places the best arms tosupport a good cause or to defend a bad one. Thecase is very different in the house of peers. Mindscast in a finer mould, affect to despise what they callthe vulgar arts, and raised equally above fears andfeelings, can only be affected by wit and ridicule,and love to find some of that elegant urbanity andconvivial pleasantry which charms them in privatelife"*Philip Dormer Stanhope, Earl of Chesterfield, wasborn in September, 1 694, of a lineage which requiresno description. At the age of eighteen, he appearsto have inspired those ideas of politeness and delicacywhich characterized him in after life. He choseTrinity Hall, Cambridge, as his college, becauseit was filled with lawyers who had seen the world,and knew how to behave," and he adds, " whateverDr. Mates Memoirs of the of the mimicry of one of theEarl of Chesterfield, vol. i., p. 39. members who was in the habit of1 1 is said that he was prevented amusing the house, by imitating infrom speaking in the commons by his speeches the tones and gestefear of being made the subject turns of his opponents.VOL. II. MTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, may be said to the contrary, there is certainly verylittle debauchery in this university, especially amongA. D.I 730.people of fashion, for a man must have the inclinationsof a porter to endure it here"* His readingat this time appears to have been rather diffuse thansolid, he had a great aversion to Greek grammar,and a particular affection for royal roads to learning ;yet, when at the age of nineteen, he left the university,he says he came into the world an absolutepedant. When I talked my best I talked Horace ;when I aimed at being facetious I quoted Martial ;and when I had a mind to be a fine gentleman Italked Ovid. I was convinced that none but theancients had common sense ; that the classics containedevery thing that was either necessary, oruseful, or ornamental to men, and I was not withoutthoughts of wearing the toga viridis of the Romans,instead of the vulgar and illiberal dress of themoderns."t But even thus early, the young LordStanhope turned his attention to the cultivation ofthat eloquence which could alone obtain for him po-theyoung Lord Stanhope Wine and tobacco, only because Idid, however, like many others, thought it genteel, and that itsoon learn to endure it. In one made me look like a man." Fromof the letters to his son, he says, one of his letters to his tutor, itWhen I first went to the universe appears also that he did not ne-city,I drank and smoked notwith- gleet Newmarket, Mates Correspondingthe aversion I had to spondee, vol. ii.f Letters to his son, vol. ii., p. 174.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 163political power; he writes, that pieces of ancient and CHAP.IXmodern eloquence had been at that time his principalA T\ I 7 OAstudy, and that he used to write down the shiningpassages and then translate them as well and aselegantly as he could : if Latin or French, intoEnglish : if English, into French. This, which hepractised for some years, not only improved andformed his style, but imprinted in his mind andmemory, the best thoughts of the best authors.The trouble," he says, " was little, but the experienceI acquired was great"*A little experience in the world was sufficient toremove any of the rust of pedantry which Stanhopemight have gathered at Trinity Hall. He was sentfrom the university, unattended, to pursue the ordinarycourse of travel, and aimed at perfection as aman of shining rank and character. " I was then,"he says, " young and silly enough to believe thatgaming was one of these accomplishments ; and as Iaimed at perfection, I adopted gaming as a necessarystep to it. Thus, I acquired by error, the habit ofa vice which, far from adorning my character, has, Iam conscious been a great blemish to ittIt is pleasing to be able to make such aman as Chesterfield relate the incidents of his life.The description he gives of himself soon after hisLetters to his son, vol. ii., p. 341. f Ibid., p. 352.M 2164 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, arrival in Paris, forms a strong contrast with theT Yportrait he has drawn when he emerged fromA "P\the cloisters of Cambridge. Writing to his earlytutor, Mr. Jouneau, he says, " I shall not give youmy opinion of the French, because I am very oftentaken for one, and many a Frenchman has paid methe highest compliment they think they can pay toany one, which is, * Sir, you are just like one of us !'I shall only tell you, that I am insolent ; I talk a greatdeal ; I am very loud and peremptory ; I sing anddance as I go along ; and lastly, I spend a monstrousdeal of money in powder, feathers, gloves, &c." *His allusions to this period of his life in thoseletters which conveyed the results of his maturedexperience, are by no means so favourable : whenwriting these, he acknowledged that this constanttalk, and loud and peremptory manner were awkwardlyassumed to hide a rude bashfulness andawkward timidity.His opinions upon political subjects, as he thenexpressed them, are certainly very much in accordancewith the character which he himself drewthey are sufficiently strong and dogmatical to vouchthe accuracy of the rest of the picture. They arenot only those of a Whig, but those of a Whig soblinded by party feeling, as to credit the most monaTo Jouneau, Dec. 7, 1714. Maty, vol. ii.,p. 12.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 165strolls and extravagant reports. Thus he assumes, CHAP.as well known facts, not only the illegitimacy of theA.D. 1730.son of James II., but also that Queen Anne was aRoman Catholic. This ignorance may, perhaps, beexcused by his residence abroad; but his observationsupon the queen's death are curious, inasmuch as theyshow what improbabilities some of the Whig partywere driven, by their terror, to credit : " Had I noother reason, the sorrow alone, which appeared in theFrench and in the English who followed the pretender,on the death of the queen, would be enoughto comfort me for that event ; but when I see howfar matters were already advanced in favour of the pretenderand popery, and that we were on the very brinkof slavery, I absolutely look upon the death of thatwoman as the happiest thing that has ever befallenEngland ; for, had she lived three months longer,she was certainly going to establish her own religion,and, of course tyranny ; would have left us, at herdeath, a bastard for our king, just as great a fool asherself, and who, like her, would have been led bythe nose by a set of rascals. The pretender's declaration,and a thousand other things, are convincingproofs of the designs of those conspirators, theministry, to bring him in." *To Jouneau, Dec. 7, 1714. Maty, vol. ii., p. 12,166 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Upon the formation of the Townshend administration.tion, Lord Stanhope's abilities had been so favourablyspoken of, that he was sent for by his kinsman, GeneralStanhope; and upon his arrival in London, wasappointed one of the gentlemen of the bedchamberto the Prince of Wales. In this situation, he obtainedthe friendship of the Earl of Scarborough, then LordLangley, and the favour of the prince, although notyet of age. He procured a seat in parliament, bymeans of a Cornish borough, and made his first essayin parliament in a speech against the Duke of Ormond,almost equal in its violence to his letter on thesame subject. A member of the opposition havinghinted to the young senator, that he was aware ofhis exact age, Lord Stanhope thought fit to return toParis, where he employed himself in the study ofdiplomacy ; and, it is said, in searching after Jacobiteintrigues. When the cause of his absence was removed,he returned to England, and to the house ofcommons ; and, upon the occasion of the quarrel betweenthe king and the prince, attached himself tothe interest of the latter. Lord Stanhope now joinedthe opposition, and outraged his principles by voting,with Walpole, against the repeal of the occasionalConformity and Schism acts. He has recurred to thisvote as an error; if he mentioned it at all, it shouldhave been as a dishonesty. The Stanhope wereTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.opposed upon ordinary subjects ; but they all divided CHAP.IXin favour of the Peerage bill. This was a boon to the A p 173Qaristocracy too weighty not to break through thetendril patriotism of the young nobleman. Thedeath of his father, in 17^6, placed him in the houseof peers as Lord Chesterfield.Upon the accession of George II., in whose servicehe had been engaged for thirteen years, Chesterfieldexpected to divide the offices of the state with thosewho had been his associates at the little court atLeicester House. His name, however, was not inthe list of promotions, nor was he even restored tothose places which his devotion to the prince hadcaused him to lose. Sometime afterwards he wasdespatched as ambassador to the Hague, where hisconduct and skill is admitted to have merited thehighest approbation. In the eyes of George theywere particularly meritorious, since they were exertedwith success, to ward off a Prussian invasion from hisbeloved electorate. " I am persuaded," says one,who was not ignorant of Chesterfield's character,that his being sent to Holland was rather anhonourable exile than a mark of favour ; he would, inall probability, have been troublesome at home.Walpole did not envy him the honour of shiningamong the Dutch, and eclipsing a French envoy bysuperior adroitness." Yet it was this adroitness168 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, which so far recommended him to the king, that~A D 1730 Townshend was able to play him off with a hope ofsuccess against Newcastle and Walpole.*Chesterfield's conduct at this juncture forms a remarkableproof how much easier it is to pen speciousprecepts, and to clothe them in elegant language,than to recommend them by practice. In the conductof the author of the courtly letters to PhilipStanhope, we expect to meet the skilful managementof the light meshes of intrigue ; unremitting, but unobtrusive,assiduity in cultivating the favour of thedispensers of honour and power ; a profound knowledgeof the tempers and dispositions of those whomhe hoped to influence ; and a delicate use of even theirslightest prejudices. But, according to the secrethistory of this transaction, as it is revealed by thebiographer of Walpole, Chesterfield destroyed hisown hopes and those of his patron by an error sopalpable, that it would have been despised by theyoungest of the candidates for the royal favour whocrowded the levees of St. James's. When he firstaspired to the office of secretary, Chesterfield appliedhimself to gain the confidence of the queen as anxiouslyas he had laboured to ingratiate himself withthe king; and when Townshend inquired whetherMaty. Coxe. Life of Chesterfield. Anon.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 169he expected opposition from this quarter, his answer CHAP.IXwas that every thing was in his favour. When everythinghad been arranged between him and the secretary,he begged the queen to mention the affair tothe king, and obtain the appointment. She readilypromised ; but Chesterfield, anxious to make hissuccess still more secure, went from the presence ofthe queen to that of Mrs. Howard, and begged herintercession also in his favour. This ill-timed homageto her rival was, of course, reported to the queen ;and when Walpole visited her, to represent the mischiefwhich must accrue from such an appointment,he found a ready audience. The queen put her vetoupon it, and it did not take place.*This intrigue, which seems to have proceeded veryfar without being suspected by Walpole, was the occasionof an open and unseemly quarrel between thebrothers-in-law. As we derive our knowledge of thisI have attempted, in the text, in his Character of Lord Townsreconcile the somewhat incog lend, says, " Lord Townshend resistentaccounts given by Mr. solved to make one convulsiveCoxe of this affair ; for the anec- struggle to revive his expiringdotes related in p. 281 and p. 335 power, or, if that did not succeed,of his work, are evidently the to retire from business. He triedsame, although some of the circle experiment upon the king,substances are varied, apparently with whom he had a personal intoanswer the purposes of the terest. The experiment failed, asauthor, who uses it the first time he might easily and ought to havewith a particular object. Chester foreseen." There is some truth,field, speaking of this circumstance, but more spleen, in this remark.170 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, affair from Mr. Coxe, its circumstances may be re-IXlated in the words of that author.A 1"On quitting the palace, after a conference withthe queen upon the means of averting Townshend' sdesign, Walpole met that nobleman at Colonel Selwyn'sin Cleveland Court, in the presence of theDuke of Newcastle, Mrs. Pelham, Colonel and Mrs.Selwyn. The conversation turned on a foreign negotiation,which, at the desire of Walpole, had beenrelinquished. Townshend, however, still requiredthat the measure should be mentioned to the commons,at the same time that the house should be informedthat it was given up. Walpole objecting tothis proposal as inexpedient, and calculated only togive unnecessary trouble, Townshend said, ' Sinceyou object, and the house of commons is your concernmore than mine, I shall not persist in myopinion ; but, as I now give way, I cannot avoid observingthat, upon my honour, I think that mode ofproceeding would have been more advisable.' Walpole,piqued at these expressions, lost his temper, andsaid, ' My lord, for once, there is no man's sinceritywhich I doubt so much as your lordship's, and Inever doubted it so much as when you are pleased tomake such strong professions.' Townshend, incensedat this reproach, seized him by the collar ; SirRobert laid hold of him in return, and then both atthe same instant quitted their hold, and laid theirTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.hands upon their swords. Mrs. Selwyn, alarmed, at CHAP.tempted to go out and call the guards, but was preventedby Pelham. But, although their friendsinterposed to prevent an immediate duel, yet thecontumelious expressions used on that occasion renderedall attempts to heal the breach ineffectual"*This anecdote exhibits the character of Walpole inno favourable light. If neither friendship nor relationshipcould restrain his passion, the ties of gratitudeshould at least have forbidden him to throw thisatrocious and unmerited insult upon a man whosepublic life had been far more spotless than his own,and who had then many reasons for dissatisfaction athis own situation, if not of complaint at the conductof his friends. Further attempt at reconciliation was,of course, useless.Townshend, being defeated in every attempt bythe interest of the queen, at length resigned thecontest, and, having retired from office, betook himselfto Farnham, with a resolution of never againappearing in public life. This resolution was noblykept. Sometime afterwards, Chesterfield, then inopposition to Walpole, paid a visit to the retiredstatesman, and begged him to be present at an importantdebate which was coming on in the lords.Townshend however declined. " I recollect," heCoxe's Life of Walpole, vol. i., p. 336.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, said, " that Cowper, although a stanch Whig, hadbeen betrayed, by personal pique and party resent.D. 1730.ment in his opposition to the ministry, to throw himselfinto the arms of the Tories, and even to supportprinciples which tended to serve the' cause of theJacobites. I know that I am extremely warm ; andI am apprehensive, if I should attend the house oflords, I also may be hurried away by the impetuosityof my temper to adopt a line of conduct, which, inmy cooler moments, I may regret." This determinationLord Townshend persevered in. It is nosmall eulogium upon a nobleman accustomed topublic life, and highly interested in all its excitingpursuits, who conceived himself ill-treated, and wasnaturally irritable and passionate, that he refused toplace himself at the head of a party which courtedhim with open arms to come and avenge himself, andchose rather to let his personal rivals reign, with aparty whose rule he thought advantageous to hiscountry, than reign himself with a party whose principlesof government he thought mischievous.Townshend never afterwards visited the metropolis ;he passed the evening of his life upon his own estates,and died in 1738, aged 84, leaving a reputation,if not for brilliant talents and commandinggenius, yet for high integrity and a steady consistencyin sound and constitutional principles of government,which has never been surpassed. Towns-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 173bend's public life was not without error; occasional CHAP,acquiescence in the German politics of the GeorgesA. D. 1730may, doubtless, be charged upon him, and many, to 1734.who had none of his virtues, have assiduously aggravatedhis faults. In the history of the parties weshall find many more brilliant, but very few morerespectable or patriotic statesmen than Charles ViscountTownshend.Walpole was now undisputed dictator of the cabinet; he was supported by large majorities in bothhouses of parliament, and, fortified by the favour ofthe queen, was all-powerful with the sovereign. In1731, the paper controversy between Walpole andPulteney took place, which has been already referredto as revealing the secret history of the negotiationfor the reconcilement between the present king andhis father. The contemptuous observations with regardto the prince which Pulteney, in his reply,attributes to Walpole, were, of course, intended toshake his interest at court. So far, however, fromhaving this effect, they only aroused the anger of theking against the reporter of them. It is said that itwas upon this occasion that George called for theprivy-council book, and with his own hand struck outPulteney's name from the list.During this period of the government of the Whigs,the country was in a highly flourishing condition.Anxious to conciliate the Tories, and to draw that174 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, class, among which their great strength lay, into theinterests of the reigning family, the minister strainedto 1734. every nerve to lighten the burdens of the landlordsand agriculturists. He gradually reduced the land-taxfrom four shillings to two shillings in the pound,while the sinking-fund was annually paying off1,200,000 of the public debt. In 1732, the land-taxwas only one shilling in the pound ; a reductionwhich was accomplished by the re-imposition of thesalt-tax, and an intimation was at the same time made,that a measure was in agitation which would enablethe government to repeal this tax altogether. Itis very seldom that a government gains eitherstrength or popularity by attempts to conciliate opponents; the abolition of no tax can compensate theleading few for the power and emoluments from whichthey are excluded. The present case was no exception.The opposition rightly conjectured that theprojected equivalent was an excise ; and they seizedupon the word as an invaluable theme for declamation.So odious had these species of revenue been, on accountof the inquisitorial power it lodged in thecrown, the cloak which it afforded for the most monstrousoppression, and the well-remembered extent towhich it had been abused, that our ancestors, underthe old dynasties, could not endure the mention ofthe name, and it was sometimes dangerous for amember to speak the word in the house of commons,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 175even in illustration of a foreign argument. The CHAP.1 ~Ydanger had ceased at the revolution ; but the odiumstill remained, and the opposition, citing the author to 1734.cities of Hampden and of Marvel, denounced a meremethod of collecting a revenue, in terms of indignationwhich those illustrious men had used toreprobate a system which, under the cloak of anexcise, established a despotism.* We laugh at theinvectives of the Craftsman and its fellow-labourersin the work of agitation, and at the absurdity of thecharge they brought against Walpole, that he wasattempting to "bring in absolute power :"t theysucceeded, however, so well in confounding the casesof power given to an irresponsible monarch, andpower intrusted to responsible ministers, that an outcryagainst the contemplated measure burst forthfrom every part of the nation. It is very improbable,however, that the inflammatory rhetoric of PulteneyCoxe's Walpole, vol. i., p. 372. collected into a volume, under theParl. Hist., vols. viii. and ix. title of, " An Argument againstf The papers in the Craftsman, Excises," bearing on its titlepageupon this subject, were afterwards those lines of Marvel :Excise, a monster worse than e'er before,Frighted the midwife, and the mother tore ;A thousand hands she hath, a thousand eyes,I Breaks into shops, and into cellars pries ;With hundred rows of teeth the shark exceeds,And on all trades, like Caspar, she feeds."The argument in prose is about as cogent as that in the poetry.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. an d his friends would have found such immediate suet~Vcess, had not the excise been rendered unpopular byto 1734. more practical considerations than a traditional hatred.However much necessity and habit has since reconciledus to its existence, this species of impost alwayswas and will be unpopular. The restrictions it imposesupon trade ; the necessary, but troublesomeand minute forms it requires ; but, above all, thepower it rests in a petty official, to violate, at pleasure,the sanctity of the domestic hearth savourstrongly of slavery, and are abhorrent to the feelingsof Englishmen. When Walpole, early in 1733,brought forward the subject in the house of commons,the popular excitement was intense. It was in vainthat he, in a luminous and well-managed speech, setforth the advantages of his proposition ; detailed thedreadful abuses which a recent investigation into theexisting method of collecting the revenues hadbrought to light, and demonstrated that he had onlylegitimate objects in contemplation ; it was in vainthat he stated those objects to be the augmentationof the revenue ; the simplification of the taxes ; thefacilitating the collection and reducing its cost ; andthe division of a tax, which now pressed heavily uponindividuals, until it became scarcely perceptible amongthe great mass of the population. The opposition answeredhim with florid declamation ; and the Toriesrejected his proposed boon, with the then fashionableTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 177sophism, that all taxation ultimately fell upon the CHAP.land. The public voice, out of doors, re-echoed thesentiments of the opposition within. Those members ' ' to 1734.who supported the minister were pelted by the mob ;and crowds assembled round the house of commons,while the debates were proceeding, bearing in theirhats placards inscribed, "Liberty and no Excise,"and strengthening, by their shouts, the arguments ofthe opposition. Still, however, the bill might havepassed into a law. The ministerial majorities, both inthe commons and the lords, were still firm, and Walpolewould, doubtless, have been supported, during thecontest.* But that minister paid the deference topublic opinion, which the principles of his party enjoined.When he saw that this was clearly and unequivocallyagainst him, he at once yielded. Hetold his supporters that he was conscious of havingmeant well. But in the present inflamed temper ofthe people, the act could not be carried into executionwithout an armed force. That there would beanend of the liberty of England, if supplies were totobe raised by the sword, and he would not be theminister to enforce taxes at the expense of blood. tThe bill was therefore dropped ; the house ad-thecommons had agreed to bill was founded by a majority ofi.he resolutions upon which the 266 to 205. Parl. Hist.f Coxe's Memoirs of Walpole.VOL. II. N178 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, mourning over the day upon which it was ordered tobe read a second time.A. D. 1730to 1734. Whatever we may think of the policy of this purposedalteration in the finance of the country, we cannotcharge the Whigs with any important dereliction fromtheir party principles in bringing it forward. It wasa weak attempt to conciliate their adversaries, and metwith the usual fate of such attempts. The error ismore apparent in the conduct of Walpole, since noman was better aware of the impolicy of such acourse.* It has often been repeated by his party,and has as often involved them, without any othereffect, in the unpopularity of their rivals. The Torieshave sometimes, but more rarely, made the same experiment,and always with the same success.But, although this means of abolishing the land-taxwas abandoned, Walpole did not forsake his resolutionof keeping that impost as low as possible.The rate made in 1733 was not raised above oneshilling in the pound. This, however, was accomplishedby encroaching upon that fund then so activelydecreasing the burdens of the country. Posterity,which has felt the consequence of this alienation,has loudly condemned the minister who proutI should be but a pitiful against him, "if I suffered thoseminister," said Walpole, upon one who are in opposition to continueoccasion, when reproached with in employment" Gentleman's Ma-dismissingtwo officers who voted gazing, vol. xxxiv., p. 418.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 179posed the measure, but has never scrupled to imitate CHAP.his conduct. Nothing was more popular, with allmi ' ' 173parties, at the time it was proposed. The Tories to 1734.gained in the reduction of the land-tax ; the Whigs,gained in the perpetuity of the moneyed interest,formed as it was upon the public debt. That self-denial,which bears contentedly a burden that may beshifted to the next generation, is not common inindividuals ; it is scarcely known to nations. Theonly parties that disliked Walpole's project were theopposition in parliament; they knew that the popularityhe must gain by it would diminish their chanceof enjoying his places.If Walpole had been a minister of comprehensivegenius, of penetrating mind, and extended views,this compliance with circumstances would have beena blot upon his administration ; but Walpole has noclaim to any such qualities. His object extended nofurther than his own day. To keep the countryin peace abroad and in prosperity at home, the houseof Hanover upon the throne, and the Whigs in power,during his own time were all he sought ; if thiscould be done by the dexterous management of everymeans at his command he was content. He left futurecontingencies to future ministers. His conduct, inthis instance, was, therefore, consonant with his characterand his policy.The opposition, flushed with their success uponN 2180 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the subject of the excise, resolved to improve theiradvantage. Bolingbroke, who directed their count.D. 1730 ., ill P i i ito 1734. cil, supposed that the storm of unpopularity, whichhad recently raged around the cabinet, must haveshaken the influence of the minister, not only over hiscolleagues, but also with the king. He resolved,therefore, upon a trial of strength, at which theminister's supporters should vote as they pleased. Aballot for a committee to inquire into the frauds inthe customs, was the chosen opportunity, and thehopes of the opposition were highly raised ; but theywere raised only to be dashed, for the ministerial listwas carried by a majority of eighty-five.The firmness of the king was manifested as unequivocally.The Earl of Chesterfield, who had influencedhis three brothers in the commons to voteagainst the Excise bill, was dismissed from his officeof lord steward of the household. The Duke ofBolton was required to resign his places of lordlieutenant and custos rotulorum of the county ofSouthampton, his regiment of horse, and his governmentof the Isle of Wight. The Duke of Montrose,lord privy seal of Scotland, the Earl of Marchmont,lord registrar, Lord Clinton, gentleman of the bedchamberand lord lieutenant of Devon, and LordCobham, colonel of a regiment of horse,* shared theIt was upon the occasion of the dismissal of Lord Cobham andTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 181same fate. Walpole appointed his own son to the CHAP.lieutenancy, whence Lord Clinton was dismissed. - ;The occasion of these changes was the discovery of an to 1734 *intrigue by which Chesterfield, taking advantage ofthe popular effervescence upon the excise scheme,had hoped to supplant Walpole. In this attempt hehad been supported by the Scots lords not from anyhostility to the excise, but because they wished todestroy the influence of the Earl of Islay, brother tothe Duke of Argyle. To this nobleman Walpolehad intrusted the affairs of Scotland ; and by his conducthe had incurred the hatred of his brother peers,and deserved the support of the ministers.To counterbalance the force gained by the oppositionin the lords, by these numerous removals, SirPhilip Yorke, who had passed with almost unexampledrapidity through the various grades of his profession,and who, in 1723 had been appointed attorney-general,being then only in his thirty-fourth year,was now made lord chief justice of the King's Bench,and called to the upper house by the title of BaronHardwicke, a title which his talents and learningrendered illustrious. Lord Hardwicke's style ofthe Duke of Bolton, that Walpole were stanch Whigs, the removalsmade the remark above mentioned, were far from popular, althoughBut as most of the persons now to Walpole highly necessary,discarded, LordCobham especially,182 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, oratory was that most adapted to the higher practiceof his profession ; it was precise, argumentative, temp1730 . .to 1734. operate, and sound. He seldom rose into animation,but his language was uniformly fluent, well chosenarid elegant. His speeches were more adapted tothe assembly in which he was now placed, than tothe commons. The minister found him a veryefficient ally in the house of lords.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 183CHAPTER X.Bill to render the officers of the army independent of the crown ThePlace Bill Motion for the repeal of the Septennial Bill Debateupon it Biographical Anecdotes of Sir John Barnard.THE session of 1734, was the last session of this CHAparliament ; at its conclusion a general election would01 11 , . A D. 1734.test the popularity of the minister, and the relativestrength of the parties. For this occasion, therefore,all the artillery of opposition had been carefully prepared,and it was determined to keep up throughoutthe session a constant battery of charges, with thehope, that, at least, some one of them would takeeffect.The body of opposition was, however, now lessunited than it had been. The immediate expectationof the downfal of Walpole, which had been entertainedduring the last year, had caused its chiefs tothink of a successor, and it became evident that a184 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, government could never be formed from the incongruouselements, the disaffected Ultra Whigs andA.D. 17S4. . . . .the Aristocratic lories, which made up the opposition.Pulteney, and Wyndham, who was the mere mouthpieceof Bolingbroke, therefore beheld each otherwith considerable distrust, it was only immediatenecessity which held them together.The result of their mutual concessions was a courseof conduct too wildly revolutionary in its tendencyto be seriously approved even by the most violent oftheir Whig allies. The object, incessant opposition,was allowed to be controlled by no consideration ofprinciple or expediency. The more violent the proposition,the greater they thought was its probability ofbecoming popular, and of securing the votes of theelectors for those who had given it their advocacy.The question of foreign policy was attempted first.But in vain ; the public looked on with apathy, andimmense majorities in parliament rejected their motions.The excise had proved too fortunate a speculationto be easily abandoned. The session was not faradvanced before an opportunity was created by thepresentation of a petition, to renew the subject. Theopposition put forth all their powers of invective inabuse of the defunct measure, and Pulteney, afterdwelling upon the wickedness of the scheme, andTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.citing a remark of Walpole, that many who then CHAPenvied him in other things, would come also to envy A Dhim the honour of having originated that project,added, " I am persuaded he still has the same goodopinion of it, and waits only for a proper opportunityto renew it." Walpole seized the occasion to setthe question at rest. He declared the purity of hisintentions in bringing forward the measure, confessedthat his opinion was unchanged, and attributed thetumultuous opposition he had experienced, to thefactious proceedings and artful misrepresentations ofhis political opponents. But he repudiated the ideathat he ever intended to revive the project. " I, formy own part," he said, " can assure this house thatI am not so mad as ever again to engage in any thingthat looks like an excise"* This distinct contradictionprevailed over all the rhetoric of his opponents.The house decided in his favour by a majority of 247to 184. The disavowal of the minister had preventedany popular excitement, and nothing was yet accomplishedtowards the elections.The next attempt was one of no inconsiderablemagnitude in a constitutional point of view. It wasfounded upon the dismissal of the Duke of Boltonand Lord Cobham from their rank in the army. Suchan exercise of ministerial power would certainly, inParl. Hist., vol. ix., p. 254.186 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the present day, be considered highly irregular: butsuch was not the case in the time of Walpole. DownA. D. 1734.to this period the instances are constant of the removalof officers for opposition to the government,* andWalpole openly declared in the house of commons,that he could never advise his sovereign to continuein his employ a man who, because he had been deniedsome unreasonable request, pursued a course of systematicopposition to his government. A bill wasnow brought in to deprive the crown of the right ofdismissing the superior officers of the army, exceptupon a sentence of a court martial, or upon anaddress of one of the houses of parliament. Theintroduction of such a measure as this into the senateof a free country, is an egregious instance of the intemperanceand heedless precipitation of an enragedfaction. The same men who had lately aroused thenation to resist a vexatious species of taxation, now,in their anxiety to protect their friends in the army,exposed the country to a military despotism. Thepower of the sword is always dangerous to freedom ;it can only be rendered coexistent with liberty, by aEvery reader will remember my, and of allowing no officer toinstances of the exercise of this hold a commission who would notpower. Bolingbroke had been so promise to serve the queen " with-unscrupulousin the use of this out asking questions." Boyer'sprerogative, that he was accused Political State.of a design of remodelling the ar-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 187complete and unqualified subserviency to the civil CHAP.magistrate. Render the army once dependent onlyA.D. 1734.upon its own courts martial, or upon the votes of anassembly to which its members have access, and themagic power is gone which prevents it becoming thelawless despot of the country it was created to defend.Walpole well observed, that if this bill passed,the government of England would be no longer amonarchy, but a stratocracy.* Had this measurepassed, we might have had the deeds of the PraetorianBands re-enacted upon British ground.It cannot be imagined that the able men who advocatedthis measure were ignorant of its tendency,or that those who assumed to themselves exclusivelythe title of patriots, were anxious to bring theircountry under the rule of the sword. It is morecharitable to adopt the supposition of Tindal. " Tosay truth," remarks that historian, " the party neitherexpected nor desired to succeed. All they intendedwas to have an opportunity of saying severe thingsagainst the minister." They created and used theopportunity ; but with little effect towards their chiefobject, which was to influence the coming elections.Another popular measure brought forward with thesame view was, what was then called the Place bill ;Parl. Hist., vol. ix.188 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, a measure to limit the number of officers of the crown-r-~ who should be eligible to a seat in parliament. ThisA. D. 1734.bill was opposed rather by votes than words : theminister appears to have spoken merely for the sake ofform, and many of his supporters were silent, becausethey dreaded to oppose a popular bill upon the eveof a general election. It was thrown out only by amajority of seinanother effort the Tories were more earnest.Bolingbroke had long since suggested to his party tobring forward a motion for the repeal of the Septennialact. Such a measure would combine generalpopularity with advantage to the best interests of theTory party. But their Whig allies were very unwillingto assist. Determined as was their hostility tothe minister, they had yet some respect for consistency,and shrunk from proposing the repeal ofa bill of which they were themselves the advocatesand authors. Now, however, when every part oftheir reserved power was to be forced into action,this scruple was overcome, and it was agreed thatWalpole's speech was chiefly ix., p. 388. This remark is importadefiance to the opposition to ant, since it shows that membersbring forward their threatened im of parliament had begun to speakdetachments ; threats, which he said to the public. Mr. Coxe was de-turnedout to be " mere words to civet by Chandler into the error,amuse the galleries and embellish that Walpole gave a silent votetheir speeches." Part Hist., vol. upon this occasion.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. sqa motion should be made condemnatory of this CHAP,act.A.D. 1734.To this contest the opposition summoned all theirenergy, and the debate which ensued was the prominentfeature of the session. Pulteney and his friendswere upon this occasion placed in a false position.The contest was in reality strictly between Whig andTory, between corruption and influence, briberyand prerogative. It was plainly the interest of thelandlords to have frequent elections. Their influenceover their tenantry was always existent, its exertioncost them nothing. On the other hand, the sacrificeby which the Whigs overcame this influence wasvery great, and could not be sustained if it wasnecessary that it should be frequently repeated.This was not only felt by the Tories, but it wasopenly avowed. Sir Watkin Williams Wynri, whopossessed at that time the influence in his nativeprincipality which his descendants still hold, who wasa cautious Jacobite, but a bold Tory and a skilfulelectioneering, openly denounced the Septennial billas destructive of the influence of country gentlemen,and professed himself, for this reason, an advocateeven of annual parliaments. " Give me leave thento suppose," said this gentleman, " two gentlemenset up in opposition to each other, for representingone of our little boroughs in parliament ; one of thema country gentleman, of a great natural interest in theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, place ; the other a citizen of London or a placemanxA D 1734 not near equal to him in interest, but dependingentirely upon the money he is able to lay out.Suppose the citizen or placeman comes to a calculation,and finds that it will cost him, at least, 3000to buy the country gentleman out of his interest inthat borough ; if the parliament were to continue butfor three years he would very probably resolve not tobe at such an expense, and so would refrain from beingguilty of the crime of corrupting his countrymen ;but when the parliament is to continue for sevenyears he may, as probably, resolve to be at thatcharge"*Sir Watkin Wynn, in this speech, states the realquestion, and exposes the real nature of the struggle.He does not even affect to regard the question as oneinvolving the rights of the electors ; he states, atonce, that it is intended to favour the landed anddiscourage the moneyed interest. The members ofthe latter were, of course, being in administration, inthe language of the Tories, placemen, pensioners,dependants, and courtiers.After stating what, in his idea, are the uses of aparliament, Sir Watkin proceeds, " Now I would beglad to know who are the most proper representativesfor these purposes ; gentlemen who have large propertiesin the country, who are independent of theParl. Hist., vol. ix., p. 429.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 191ministers and officers of the crown, and who, by CHAP,living in the country, are perfectly acquainted withA. D, 1734.the circumstances of the people ; or gentlemen who,for their chief support', depend upon the ministersand officers of the crown, who know nothing of thosethey represent, and are not only ignorant of theirtrue interests, but are really indifferent about theirwelfare. I hope it will not be controverted which arethe most proper representatives of the people ; andif so, annual or triennial parliaments are better thanseptennial, because there is a greater probability oftheir being chiefly composed of such gentlemen."In these extracts I look only for the ingenuousacknowledgment of an influential Tory as to thereal nature of this motion, as a party question. Asaspecimen of argument, to prove the superioreligibility of one class of candidates, Sir Watkin'sspeech has certainly no pretensions to be revived.It is immediately seen that his comparison proceedsonly upon certain unproved assertions, and upon theaccidental circumstance, that the party which wascomposed of country gentlemen was then in opposition," independent of the ministers and officersof the crown"*Such were the party motives which rendered theTories the advocates of triennial, or even annualparliaments. But the debate gave rise to a personalParl. Hist., vol. ix., p. 431.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, altercation between Wyndham and Walpole, whichA 1734 has been considered, by subsequent writers, far moreinteresting than an examination of the nature of thequestion upon which it arose. It was an easy transitionfrom declamation against the evil of corruptionto indignant reprehension of the minister, who wasaccused of maintaining himself in office by its influence." We have been told, sir," remarkedWyndham, " in this house, that no faith is to begiven to prophecies ; therefore, I shall not pretend toprophecy. But I may suppose a case which, thoughit has not yet happened, may possibly happen. Letus then suppose, sir, a man abandoned to all notionsof virtue or honour, of no great family, of but a meanfortune, raised to be chief minister of state by theconcurrence of many whimsical events, afraid, orunwilling, to trust any but creatures of his ownmaking, and most of them equally abandoned to allnotions of virtue or honour; ignorant of the trueinterest of his country, and consulting nothing butthat of enriching and aggrandizing himself and hisfavourites ; in foreign affairs, trusting to none butsuch whose education makes it impossible for them tohave such knowledge, or such as can either be ofservice to their country or give any weight or creditto their negotiations. Let us suppose the trueinterest of the nation by such means neglected ormisunderstood ; her honour and credit lost, her tradeTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.insulted, her merchants plundered, and her sailors CHAP.murdered ; and all these things overlooked, only forfear his administration should be endangered. Supposehim next possessed of great wealth, the plunderof the nation, with a parliament of his own choosing,most of their seats purchased, and their votes boughtat the expense of the public treasure. In such aparliament let us suppose attempts made to inquireinto his conduct, or to relieve the nation from thedistress he has brought upon it ; and when lightsproper for attaining those ends are called for, not,perhaps, for the information of the particular gentlemenwho call for them, but because nothing can bedone in a parliamentary way till these things be in aproper way laid before parliament ; suppose theselights refused, these reasonable requests rejected, bya corrupt majority of his creatures, whom he retainsin daily pay, or engages in his particular interest, bygranting them those posts and places which oughtnever to be given to any but for the good of thepublic. Upon this scandalous victory let us supposethis chief minister pluming himself in defiances, becausehe finds he has got a parliament like a packedjury, ready to quit him at all adventures. Let us,further, suppose him arrived to that degree of insolenceand arrogance as to domineer over all themen of ancient families, all the men of sense, figure,or fortune, in the nation ; and, as he has no virtueVOL. u. o194 THE HISTORY OF PARTY*CHAP, of his own, ridiculing it in others, and endeavouring- "- to destroy or corrupt it in all.I am still not prophesying, sir, I am only supposing; and the case I am going to suppose I hopewill never happen ; but, with such a minister andsuch a parliament, let us suppose a prince upon thethrone, either for want of true information or for someother reason, ignorant and unacquainted with the inclinationsand the interest of his people, weak, andhurried away by unbounded ambition and insatiableavarice. This case, sir, has never yet happened inthis nation ; I hope, I say, it never will exist ; but,as it is possible it may, could there any greater cursehappen to a nation than such a prince on the throne,advised, and solely advised, by such a minister, andthat minister supported by such a parliament"*Walpole answered this attack, not by retorting hispersonal abuse upon the assailant, but by directinghis eloquence against the unseen magician who conjuredup these stories and suggested these onsets.The life and character of Bolingbroke formed aplausible theme for invective, and, although thatveteran party leader was grown too callous, from longhabit, to feel or care for the most eloquent abuse,Walpole well knew that an arrow shot towards thatmark would be followed, not only by the acclamationsParl, Hist., vol. ix., p. 464.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 195of the ministerial party, but also by the secret sym CHAP,path of a large section of the opposition : he wellknew, also, how to make it glance from the shield hecould not hope to penetrate, and wound and ranklein the body of its followers. This was the minister'sreply.Sir, I do assure you, I did not intend to havetroubled you in this debate, but such incidents nowgenerally happen towards the end of our debates,nothing at all relating to the subject, and gentlemenmake such suppositions, meaning some person, orperhaps, as they say, no person now in being, andtalk so much of wicked ministers, domineering ministers,ministers pluming themselves in defiances ;which terms, and the like, have been of late, so muchmade use of in this house, that if they reply meannobody either in the house or out of it, yet it mustbe supposed they, at least, mean to call upon somegentleman in this house to make them a reply ; and,therefore, I hope I may be allowed to draw a picturein my turn ; and I may likewise say, that I do notmean to give a description of any particular personnow in being. When gentlemen talk of ministersabandoned to all sense of virtue or honour, othergentlemen may, I am sure, with equal justice, and Ithink more justly, speak of anti-ministers and mockpatriots, who never had either virtue or honour, butinthe course of their opposition, are actuated onlyo 2I196 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, by motives of envy and of resentment against thosewho have disappointed them in their victory, or maynot, perhaps, have complied with all their desires.But now, sir, let me, too, suppose, and the housebeing cleared I am sure no person that hears me cancome within the description of the person I am tosuppose. Let us suppose, in this or some other unfortunatecountry, an anti-minister, who thinks himselfa person of so great and extensive parts, and ofso many eminent qualifications, that he looks uponhimself as the only person in the kingdom capable toconduct the public affairs of the nation, and thereforechristening every other gentleman, who has thehonour to be employed in the administration, by thename of blunderer. Suppose this fine gentlemanlucky enough to have gained over to his party somepersons really of fine parts, of ancient families, and ofgreat fortunes, and others of desperate views, arisingfrom disappointed and malicious hearts ; all thesegentlemen, with respect to their political behaviour,moved by him, and by him solely ; all they say,either in private or public, being only a repetition ofthe words he has put into their mouths, and a spittingout that venom which he has infused into them;and yet we may suppose this leader not really likedby any, even of those who blindly follow him, andhated by all the rest of mankind. We will supposethis anti-minister to be in a country where he reallyTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 1Q7outfit not to be, and where he could not have been but CHAP.by an effect of too much goodness and mercy ; yetendeavouring", with all his might and all his art, todestroy the fountain from whence that mercy flowed.In that country let us suppose him continually contractingfriendships and familiarities with the ambassadorsof those princes who, at the time, happento be most at enmity with his own ; and if at anytimeit should happen to be for the interest of any ofthose foreign ministers to have a secret divulged tothem, which might be highly prejudicial to his nativecountry, as well as to all its friends, I suppose thisforeign minister applying to him, and he answering,< I will endeavour to procure it for you.' Upon thishe puts a speech or two in the mouths of some of hiscreatures, or some of his new converts ; what he wantsis moved for in parliament, and when so reasonable arequest as this is refused, suppose him, and hiscreatures and tools, by his advice, spreading thealarm over the whole nation, and crying out, * Gentlemen,our country is at present involved in manydangerous difficulties, all which we would have extricatedyou from, but a wicked minister and a corruptmajority refused us the proper materials ; and uponthis scandalous victory, this minister became so insolent,as to plume himself in defiances.' Let us,? further, suppose this anti-minister to have travelled,and at every court where he was, thinking himself the198 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, greatest minister, and making it his trade to betray~ the secrets of every master he ever served. I couldA.9 J-J. 1 /O^X*carry my suppositions a great deal further, and Imay say I mean no person now in being ; but if wecan suppose such a one, can there be imagined agreater disgrace to human nature than such a wretchas this ?"*But this personal altercation, as Mr. Henry Pelhamsensibly remarked, was certainly foreign to thequestion in debate. It is very improbable that eitherorator obtained a single convert. As a gladiatorialdisplay, Walpole, certainly, had the advantage, if welook at him merely as a Whig leader fighting for theWhigs, for Wyndham's conduct was in this respectimprudent, since his highly indecent attack upon theking strengthened George's dislike of the Tories intohatred. Pulteney appeared this debate with evidentreluctance ; nor did he rise at all until Sir John Barnardcovertly reproached him and his friends, by expressinghis wonder that so many members, who were accustomedto take prominent parts in the debates, were thensilent.This Sir John Barnard was by no means the leastdangerous of Walpole's opponents. He was a merchantof very moderate fortune, whose ability, fortunately,discovered to his fellow-citizens, had placedhim in parliament, and whose experience, sterlingParl. Hist., vol. ix.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 199sense, and incorruptible integrity had obtained him CHAP,a degree of influence which many more brilliantA. D. 1734.speakers strove for in vain. The occasion whichmade known the extent of Barnard's powers, occurredupon the introduction of a bill in the house oflords, intimately affecting the interests of the winetrade. The parties threatened by the bill united tooppose it ; and Barnard was, without his knowledge,chosen to state their case to the house. Such anecdotesare seldom thought perfect unless ornamentedwith some flagrant improbability : accordingly, it issaid that the deputy, thus chosen, knew nothing ofthe merits of the cause he was to plead until theevening before the morning for which the discussionwas fixed. Notwithstanding this disadvantage, thedisplay he made was so astonishing, that his reputationwas immediately established. Popular favour,so often courted in vain, pursued the unambitiousmerchant ; his admirers placed him in nomination forthe city of London, at a time when a close strugglewas expected and ensued. Barnard was returned toparliament, and soon discovered that he was the onlymember in the house of commons who could copewith the minister in questions of finance. He tookhis seat in the year 1722; and, for some time, appeareddetermined to preserve the character of anindependent member, watching, without deference toparty, the commercial interests of the nation. But200 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, such a member was too important to be neglected by1 - the opposition. Flattered by the attention he received,and proud to find himself contesting withapplause that department of statesmanship in whichWalpole had been deemed unapproachable, Barnardgradually approached within the influence of faction,and was immediately hurried within its vortex. In1733, he moved the amendment to the address, andhis name occurs throughout that session among theopposition speakers. He made himself particularlyconspicuous in resisting the Excise bill, and it washe who aroused the indignation of the populace againstthat part of the minister's speech, in which he termedthe crowds which then surrounded the house of parliament," sturdy beggars." Barnard presented thepetition which was used as the means of resuscitatingthis agitation, and he zealously joined in the propositionto render the army independent of the crown.He now appeared among the speakers for the repealof the Septennial bill. To Walpole's frequent observation," Every man has his price," it was oncetriumphantly objected, " What, then, is Sir JohnBarnard's?" " Popularity"* was the minister'sreply. His constant and undeviating oppositionseems to justify the remark. The confession of anopponent to the power of his hero is so valuable toMemoirs of the late Sir John Barnard, page 12.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 201a biographer, that the recorded instances grow nu CHAP.serous, and public men obtain credit after death, forA. D. 1734.a candour which they were never suspected of possessingwhile alive. Thus Walpole is said to havedeclared, that he dreaded Pulteney's tongue morethan another man's sword ; but varying his opinionin favour of Barnard, he is also said to have laughedat those who praised the speeches of Pulteney, andto have observed that, when he had answered SirJohn Barnard and Lord Polwarth he thought he hadconcluded the debate.* The eulogist of Barnard haspreserved another tribute from Walpole. " Ridingout on the same day, in two parties, they happenedto come where only a narrow close prevented theirview of each other. Mr. Barnard, talking with hiscompany, was overheard ; and the gentleman of theother party said, * Whose voice is that?' Sir RobertWalpole replied, ' Do not you know ? It is one I.shall never forget I have often felt its power.'Upon meeting at the end of the lane, Sir RobertWalpole, with that enchanting courtesy he possessed,saluting Mr. Barnard, told him what had passed. "tBarnard's power lay in his being a practical speaker,t;< He had not," says speaker Onslow,t with whomthis member was a great favourite, " the advantagesCoxe. J Remarks on the Conduct offMemoir of the late Sir John the Opposition.Barnard, p. 8.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, of learning, language, or manner, to ornament or setoff his natural or acquired endowments, the latter ofA T -.which lay chiefly in the knowledge of trade, itsfoundation and extent, and of the whole circle oftaxes, funds, money, and credit ; and in this it wasthat he chiefly affected and hurt Sir Robert, thoughseldom with any real superiority."Barnard, although attached to the Whig section ofthe opposition, and fervently professing the generalprinciples of that party, was free from the difficultywhich oppressed so many of his friends. He had notbeen in parliament when the Septennial bill had beenproposed by Whigs and supported by Tory arguments.He, therefore, had to bear no charge of inconsistency;he had no former speech to explainaway ; no change of sentiment to palliate or defend.The only effectual method, sir," he said, " of preventingfatal effects is to restore annual elections ;the consequence of which will be, that none butcountry gentlemen and those who have a naturalinterest in the place will ever appear as candidates"*It argues but little for the shrewdness which is attributedto Barnard that he, one of the representativesof the trade and commerce of the country,should wish to see it ruled only by an assembly ofagriculturists, and leaving them the power to compel,Parl. Hist., vol. ix., p. 449.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 203should seek to withdraw from his own party the CHAP,power to persuade. The motion was negatived by aA. D. 1734.majority of two hundred and sixty-seven to one hundredand eighty-four.On the 16th of May, the parliament was prorogued;and on the 18th of April, it was dissolved by proclamation.204 THE HISTORY OF PARTY,CHAPTER XLPreparations of the parties for the general election Progress of electionsTheir result Motion for repeal of the Test act Biographicalanecdotes of Lord Polwarth The Quaker's bill defeated Resentmentof Walpole.CHAP. THE whole power of the ministry was immediatelyXTbrought to bear upon the elections, and the crisis wasA. D. 1734to 1738. so important that Walpole thought no personal sacrificestoo great. It is said that he advanced from hisprivate fortune no less a sum than 60,000 towardsthe contest.* The power of the opposition was, indeed,very formidable ; and, of course no topic likelyto benefit their cause was overlooked.The question of foreign policy is always an inexhaustiblemagazine of materials for opposition : it isa subject upon which few men even of the educatedCoxe upon the authority of E tough.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.portion of the nation are capable of judging ; yet it is CHAP.one upon which the most ignorant seldom doubts hisown infallibility. A state of hostility requires no to 1738.declamation to raise from it discontent ; the increasedtaxation, injury to trade, and occasional disasterswhich must attend the most successful war, are fruitfulsources of dissatisfaction. Peace is prolific intopics of opposition; for, upon a cursory review ofour parliamentary debates, it will be found, thatEngland has never either made or preserved peace,but by forfeiting her honour and submitting to nationaldegradation. The sentiments of a multitudeare always highly chivalrous the sentiments of individualsare naturally so ; these latter are restrainedby personal interests ; but a fluctuating multitude,composed of members who incur no distinct responsibility,can afford to laugh at the idea of prudence,and give the reins to their enthusiasm. Thedebates to which I have just alluded show thatthere has never been any lack of persons to takeadvantage of this ignorance.Walpole felt the effect of this excitability duringthe elections. He had striven, against the opinionsof several of his colleagues, against the avowedwishes of the king, and even of the queen, to preventEngland being plunged into a war merely to sustainthe obstinacy of the emperor, and to give a kingto Poland. The same men who, had he succumbed206 THE HISTORY OF PARTY-chap,to the court and called for war supplies, would haveXIbeen vehement in their denunciations of his GermanA. D. 1734to 1738. policy, now complained that the minister had compromisedthe honour of his country a charge whichhad, and always must have considerable effect uponEnglish electors.As the contest proceeded, Walpole and his supportersbecame more sanguine. On the 6th of May,Sir Charles Wager writes to Horace Walpole, " Wecast the elections up, the other day, at Sir RobertWalpole's, and then we had gained nine upon thebalance more than we had in the last parliament ; andI have reckoned three gained since, and I suppose weshall still gain, so that your majority will be rathertoo great than too small."This expectation was not fulfilled : the mostdesperate exertions could not avert several signaldefeats. Even in Walpole's own county Coke andMordent, men whose personal influence and hereditaryclaims should alone 'have ensured their return, were,after an expenditure of 10,000, beaten by the Torycandidates. The Whigs, nevertheless, could count aconsiderable majority. The Duke of Newcastle,writing to Horace Walpole, dwells much upon theirsuccess in Sussex, and enumerates Kent, Cheshire,Hampshire, Yorkshire, Gloucestershire, and Essex,as counties in which the ministerial candidates hadalready suffered defeat. " Our parliament," he adds,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 20?"is, I think, a good one, but by no means such CHAP.XIa one as the queen and your brother imagine. ItA.D. 1734will require great care, attention, and management, to 1738.to set out right, and keep people in good humour"*Walpole could, however, have better spared twentymembers to the opposition than endure the presenceof two or three men who were now, for the first time,returned to parliament, but whose unknown nameswere heard with indifference during the progress ofthe elections. They did not remain long thus undistinguished.The strength of the opposition appears in nothingmore conspicuously than the fact, that the contestedelections were decided in the house almost as frequentlyagainst as for the administration ; a circumstancewhich by no means proves that the decisionsupon individual cases were at all influenced by anyapplication of the scales of justice. In the lords theiopposition was particularly violent, but their numberlessformidable. The Scotch lords, who had beendriven from their places, were very indignant thatThe duke could not yet reckon list of opposition triumphs camethe extent of their ill success, for forth in a mass. The oppositionhe says, " Norfolk is by this time were equally confident. We areover. I know not the event ; but two hundred and fifty in the com-I am not in much pain about it." mons, said Chesterfield ; a numberThe counties have always been the which, with proper management,strong holds of the Tories, and as cannot long remain a minority.these elections were commonly held Marchmont Papers .nftor those for the boroughs, the208 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, their body should have adopted the list of representativepeers submitted to them by the government.A. D. 1734 . .to 1738. An event which, however inconvenient to those whowere now for the first time omitted, was far too frequentto excite surprise, and had been formerly foundtoo advantageous to themselves to form a just subjectfor their reprehension.*In the session of 1736, a motion was made on behalfof the dissenters for a repeal of the Test act ; acircumstance which occasioned no small embarrassmentto the minister and his supporters. Walpolehad long counted the Protestant dissenters amongthe most active and useful of his friends ; and he hadretained them by courteous language and repeated, butalways deferred, promises ; promises which, extendingno further than that he would be ready to serve themat a proper time, were easily postponed and plausiblyevaded. They had been continually negotiatingwith the minister for the removal of their disabilities,since 1732, when they were told that it was not thena proper time, because the application came too late ;that it would be a short session, that the business ofThe Earl of Marchmont, what not that invention couldwriting just before the election, reach. Those that, till now, havesays, " There has been great pains been known and declared enemies totaken by the agent here ; money the present establishment are caughtgiven, promises of more money, of by them" Marchmont Papers,acts of grace, of reversals of at This is an unwilling eulogy oftaiuders made, threats used, and Walpole's policy.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 209it was already laid, and, therefore, would not admit CHAP,of interruption by any thing else. The applicationA.D. 1734was repeated in the succeeding year, but with a to 1738.similar event. The excuse then was, that a new parliamentwas about to be called, and that the agitationof such a question might be of dangerous consequenceat the elections ; and therefore, though it was areasonable thing, yet it was a very improper time topush it. The dissenters submitted with such evidentreluctance, that Walpole was afraid they were aboutto desert him. He sent, therefore, for those to whomthe negotiation was intrusted, and told them, thathe was in their power, that they might ruin him,and that he could not choose a parliament withouttheir assistance ; but, if they would give him theirinterest, they might depend upon his utmost endeavoursto serve them"* This speech answeredhis purpose. The teachers and leaders of thedissenters about London were immediately con-thesepromises were repeated them. To this end the administrationthe ministerial papers, the Lotion desire the Protestant dis-donJournal and the Gazetteer, enters to choose their known andThe Whigs in his majesty's ser unsuspected friends members ofvice, who have ever been the most the ensuing parliament, that thehearty friends and supporters of administration may not be dis-theProtestant dissenters, desire to tressed in attempting to gain themgive them all reasonable satisfies such an indulgence, either throughtion, by repealing or explaining the power of a Tory faction, orthe Tests, so that the Protestant through the combination of veterandissenters may not be excluded by Tories and apostate Whigs."VOL. II. P210 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, vexed ; circular letters were despatched through thekingdom, with instructions to their brethren how toA. D. 1734 . .to 1738. vote at the ensuing elections, and these instructionswere, generally, implicitly obeyed.At the meeting of this parliament the claims ofthe dissenters were, of course, more confidently putforward. But the affairs of Europe were now unsettledthe high church party had recently discoveredthat popery was gaining ground in the kingdomno time could be more improper for consideringtheir case.These repeated disappointments taught the dissentersthat they must rely upon their own effortsfor success. Previous to the meeting of parliamentin this year, they signified their intention ofbringing on the question, and were told by Walpolethat if they did so, he should be obliged to opposethem with his whole strength. They persevered. Aprolonged and important debate ensued, the report ofwhich is, as it comes to us, quite useless, from thearguments of the different speakers upon the sameside being all mingled into one mass. From apassage in the Craftsman, it appears that Walpoledenied that he had ever promised to serve the dissentersin this particular;* but Tindal, on the contrary,affirms that, in his speech against the motion,Craftsman, No. 509.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.he expressed himself so cautiously, with regard to the CHAP.church, and so affectionately with regard to the dis-ad.1734enters, that neither party had cause to complain of to 1738.him." The motion was negatived by two hundredand fifty-one against one hundred and twenty-three.If this motion was embarrassing to the minister itwas no less so to the opposition ; it brought forth,very conspicuously, the various principles of itsmembers. The names of the speakers discover theconfusion which it caused in the parties.* The oppositionWhigs supported the dissenters, although solittle did Pulteney and the usual leaders of their bandlike the debate, that Mr. Plumer and the young LordPolwarth were intrusted with its management. TheTories, on the contrary, now voted with the minister,and Shippen and Walpole were again united in thecause of intolerance. It was by their assistance thatthe minister triumphed, for many of his ordinary supportersnow divided against him.Walpole's conduct, upon this occasion, was entirelyin unison with his general character and policy. Heremembered the effects of the impeachment ofSacheverell, and he shrunk from an attempt whichwould have revived, in all its potency, the cry of,"The church is in danger." He had been successfulThe Craftsman formally de to abuse Walpole for breach ofdined giving any opinion upon the faith, and ingratitude,general question. It was contentp 2THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, in his endeavours to reconcile the Tories to the sent dynasty ; he feared to shock them by a propos.D. 1734to 1738. sition which they considered little less than impious.The opposition of the clergy was now so languid thatit was nearly counterpoised by the skilful use of theministerial patronage ; he dreaded to arouse theirslumbering energies, by an attack upon a stronghold,which they looked upon as essential to their preservation.No man knew better than Walpole theresources of his party. He knew that their strengthlay in possession ; if once driven from the positionthey then held, it would be very long beforethey would be able to storm it when garrisoned byTories. He did not renounce the tolerant principleof his party ; but he would not avow it when it mustprove their destruction. The motives of the ministerare well-expressed in an article which appeared, duringthe agitation of this question, in one of those periodicalswhich were conducted under his immediatesuperintendence. " If the dissenter," says the minister,for we may consider it as his language, " haththe gift of common sense, he will carry his claim ofindulgence no further than may be compatible withthe genius and circumstances of the people ; he willhave the wisdom to insist on no other demands ofright than what he may probably maintain againstthe power of the church and reconcile to the opinionof the common people. He will rather wait till theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.former have less dominion, and the latter fewer pre C *JA P.A.1.judices, before he contends for full and perfect liberty; A D 1734since to set up his scheme, while such power remains to 173aunbroken and such bigotry unconvinced, must drawthe united violence of both upon him, and probablyend in the destruction of his beloved cause"*But although Walpole refused to remove the yoke,he endeavoured to render it less galling. At thecommencement of the present reign, a bill was introducedto indemnify the persons who had exercisedpublic functions without complying with the provisionsof the Test act ; and this measure was, with a few exceptions,renewed every year. Upon a reference tothe journals it appears, that the bill, when first introduced,passed both houses without opposition; acircumstance so extraordinary, in a measure of suchimportance, that it can only be accounted for bysupposing that the minister made the assent of thehigh church party to this bill the price of his oppositionto any permanent enactment. The Tories weresatisfied with retaining a power, which, in these daysof adversity, they could not hope to exercise.The conduct of the Whigs upon this occasion wasthat rather of prudent than of lofty-minded men.But it is a melancholy fact, that the chivalrous honour,unswerving regard to principle, and recklessness ofDaily Gazetteer, No. 227.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, consequences, so admirable in private life, utterlydisqualify their possessors for the government of ato 1738. free country. The statesman, like the surgeon,must often inflict 'an evil to prevent a greater. Fiatjustitia rust coelum is imperative upon individuals,it is enthusiasm, incompetence, or even madness inastatesman.The debate upon the Test act, introduced to thenotice of the house of commons, Hugh, Lord Pol-earth,already mentioned as honourably associatedwith Sir John Barnard, in the compliment said tohave been paid them by Sir Robert Walpole.Lord Polwarth was the third son of Alexander,Earl of Marchmont, but by the death of his two elderbrothers in the same year (1724) he became heir tothe earldom. The earl of Marchmont was one ofthose Scotch noblemen who had been dismissed theiroffice for caballing against Walpole, and who, by theinfluence of that minister, had been excluded fromthe house of lords upon the recent election. To revengethe indignity he had suffered, he obtained thereturn of Lord Polwarth for Berwick upon Tweed,and of Alexander Hume Campbell his twin brother,for Berwickshire. From the manner in which LordPolwarth is spoken of by Walpole, it appears that theforce of his speeches lay in the sound argument, greatinformation and extensive knowledge of the subjectwhich they displayed. That he was a very eloquentTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.speaker, or gifted with the brilliant abilities and CHAP.XI.oratorical talents which some writers have bestowedA. D. 1734upon him is highly improbable. A writer in the to 1738 -Gentleman's Magazine, who deals out panegyric impartiallyto each party, after saying of Mr. SamuelSandys, " He is not reckoned the most gracefulspeaker in the house, but what he speaks is clear,strong, and distinct," remarks of Polwarth, " Heseems to form himself entirely upon the model of thelast mentioned member, by whom he has been instructedin all the different branches of senatorialduty. Though young, yet he gives the most intenseapplication of any member in the house, except Mr.Sandys, and has improved a great stock of naturalparts and eloquence, by his study of the ancients andthe histories of other countries"* .Lord Polwarth entered the house of commons withthe somewhat unusual acquisition of a knowledge ofthe civil and Scotch laws. While yet a younger son,both he and his twin brother were intended by theirfather for the bar, and they studied with that viewGentleman's Magazine, vol. x., translated the terms Hugo andp. 230. These sketches are dis China, and the names Hogarthguise under the title of" Clara and Salem Snadsy ; which last,tears of the Grandees, Senators, &c. although sufficiently intelligible atof Lilliput." I have in the text, the time, is not quite so at present.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, at Utrecht and France. The younger, Alexanderpursued his profession.*to 1738. J n atonement for his rigid opposition to the claimsof the great body of dissenters, Walpole undertookto protect one section of them, the Quakers, fromthe vexatious persecution they suffered from theclergy. The bill he introduced only provided thatthe tithes and church dues, which they conscientiouslyrefused to pay, should, when the amount was not liti-If the likeness between the nobleman, upon the subject of abrothers was so great as is repress law-suit in which he was interestedseated, it appears doubtful whether and the advocate had been re-the nobleman did not sometimes tained. After some time spent inobtain credit for the exertions of conversation, Ramsay came up,the advocate. The editor of the and addressing Alexander as LordMarchmont papers, relates an anec- Polwarth, thanked him warmly fordote upon this subject. The two his exertions in his favour. Thebrothers had promised to procure barrister was too sensible of hisa certain number of subscribers to own remissness to point out thethe Travels of Cyrus, which the error, and he let the author goChevalier de Ramsay, with whom away undeceived. No sooner wasthey were both intimate, was then he gone, than the nobleman, whoabout to publish. Lord March was equally intimate with bothmont*completed his list, and wrote the brothers, exclaimed, " My dearto the Chevalier to tell him so ; lord, I entreat your pardon for mywhile the lawyer, who was either extreme stupidity, I took you formore busy, or less zealous, had en your brother, and have been thustimely forgotten the subject. Alex annoying you with my tiresomeunder passing through Westmin- law-suit, on which you have heardstep Hall, was accosted by a me with so much patience."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 217gated, be levied by a summary process before two CHAP,justices of the peace. This appears to be no greatA.D. 1734indulgence, but it was regarded as a very valuable toboon by those who asked it. They complained thatthey had undergone grievous sufferings by prosecutionsin the exchequer, ecclesiastical, and othercourts, to the imprisonment of their persons, and theimpoverishing and ruin of them and their families.Instances of vindictive suits were so recent and sonotorious, that the measure was opposed in the commonswith little success, it passed by a majority of164 to 48.The power to persecute was never yielded withouta struggle : the bishops sounded the alarm, and whenthe bill reached the lords, the whole clergy were arrayedagainst it. The opposition was led by Gibson,Bishop of London, hitherto Walpole's chief counsellorupon ecclesiastical affairs, and so highly in his favour,that he was taunted by Whiston as the heir-apparentto the see of Canterbury. This prelate having stirredup the clergy to petition to be heard by counselagainst the bill, repaired to the house at the head offourteen of his brethren, to give effect to the resultsof his agitation. He was joined by Lord Hardwicke,and a few other law lords who trembled to see theshadow of innovation resting upon the walls of Westminster.These men were influenced by prejudiceswhich professional habit had rendered strong, andTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, age inveterate ; but the conduct of the clergy had nosuch excuse ; their privileges were untouched, theirto 1738. legitimate power was not attacked, their pecuniaryinterests were decidedly promoted by the bill. Insteadof proceedings of a considerable duration,ruinous expense, and uncertain event, they wereoffered a remedy, prompt, simple, and certain. Theyrefused it, because they had more pleasure in theruin of a schismatic who thought the taking of tithean extortion, than they had in the receipt of theamount. It is a fearful sight to behold the ministersof a Christian church, standing forth before theirbrethren to claim a power that could be only usefulto gratify the darkest and most malignant passions ofour nature. Fifteen bishops divided against thisbill, not one for it. It was rejected by 54 votesagainst 35.Walpole, whose genius was certainly not of anabstract order, could not understand why men shouldwish to persecute without an object. Gibson's conductupon this occasion lost him the friendship of theminister, and the archiepiscopal mitre which he hadconsidered as his own, was, when a vacancy occurred,conferred on Potter.*Parl. Hist., vol. ix., p. 1220. Coxe's Memoirs of Walpole.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 219CHAPTER XII.Biographical anecdotes of Frederick Prince of Wales His friendsBiographical anecdotes of George Lyttelton Of the GrenvilleOf William Pitt.LORD CARTERET seems to have spoken in the spiritof prophecy, when he said, upon the occasion of the A.D. 1738.quarrel between George I. and his son, " This familyhas quarrelled, and will quarrel from generation togeneration." It has been already remarked, that asufficient cause for the perpetuity of such differences,is found in the existence of two antagonist nationalparties. George II. knew by experience, that itsaction could only be suspended by keeping his sonbeyond the sphere of its influence.Frederick Louis, Prince of Wales, was born in1707. Notwithstanding the censure of the opposition,and the remonstrances even of his ministers,the king was resolved that he should complete hisTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, education in Hanover. The education he there re-XIIcivet was not that which was the most adapted to aA T\future king of England ; when it was completed, hewas as ignorant of the manners and constitution ofhis country as his grandfather had been, and althoughthe sceptre had been held by two generations of thenew dynasty, the language of the next heir still pronouncedhim a foreigner. His youthful studies had,nevertheless, taught Frederick some knowledge ofthe arts, and had inspired him with some taste forliterature. He was a youth of feeling and sentiment,and although impregnated with much of the jealousyand some of the obstinacy of his ancestors, he wasdecidedly superior to the ordinary herd of Germanprinces.During the reign of George I., a negotiation hadbeen opened for a marriage between this prince andthe princess royal of Prussia, a scheme which waschiefly supported by the Queen of Prussia, who, beingalso a daughter of George I., naturally felt anxiousto unite interests that were both so dear to her. Thecontinual changes which at this time took place inour foreign relations, and the conduct of FrederickWilliam, King of Prussia, in seceding from theTreaty of Hanover, interrupted, or at least delayedthe negotiation until the death of George I. placed theprince under the control of his father. The affair wasnow desperate. Frederick William and George II.,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.although educated together, and connected by the CHAP.marriage of the former with the sister of the latter,had conceived an early and enduring hatred foreach other. A puerile and contemptible, but oftenan efficient reason for a change in national policy.This mutual dislike was manifested in their ordinaryconversation. Frederick spoke of the King of Englandas " Mon frere le Comedies," and George ofthe King of Prussia, as " Mon frere le Sergent"*Frederick had still no objection to the proposedalliance, but he refused to sacrifice to it his schoolboyenmity. He joined the allies of Vienna in oppositionto those of Hanover, and when his side wasthus taken, he began to arrange an alliance for hisdaughter more in consonance with his presentpolicy.But in the mean time the Prince of Wales and theprincess had become intimate, and had conceived amutual attachment. The queen disappointed in herendeavours to conquer the enmity of the fathers,encouraged and stimulated the affection of the children.She succeeded so far, that the prince abandoninghimself to his passions, and rendered desperate bythe negotiations going on for the marriage of theprincess with another, sent privately to the queen,requesting permission to repair in disguise to Berlin,Memoires pour servir a Histoire de Brandebourg, torn, iii., p. 58.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and secretly espouse her daughter. The messagewas received by his aunt with the greatest exultation ;A. D.I 738.the king came from his hunting seat to Berlin, allthings were prepared for the ceremony, and thebridegroom was hourly expected. But the princehad enjoined secrecy as to the subject of his message,an injunction which the weak woman to whom it wassent, thought so unnecessary, or so impossible toobey, that she immediately revealed the secret toDubourgeay, the English envoy ; of course accompanyingit in her turn with a condition, that it mustbe kept inviolate. Dubourgeay, in execution of hisduty, instantly despatched a courier to England withthe tidings ; and the prince was astonished by receiving,while at a ball, a peremptory order for hisimmediate appearance in England. He obeyed thecommand ; he set out that same night with only twoattendants, and appeared at St. James's. There hewas received with rigid coldness by his father, andleft in a country and a court where all was strange,and where the eyes of every courtier were avertedfrom him, to chose his friends as he might, and toadopt the principles which chance might recommend.The result it was not difficult to predict. Avoidedby all those who dreaded his father's frown, he wasopen to the advances of those who sought in him aninstrument of opposition to his father's government.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.A little time brought with it a knowledge of our CHAP.XIImanners, and a perfect acquaintance with our language.A Pl i,- i. j- -j. A - D - 1738 -An estimation of his own high dignity and power inthe state, was not slow to follow. The dread he hadentertained for his father's authority gradually decreased,he beheld in him an estranged and authoritativeparent, but he no longer looked upon himas an irresistible master. The consequences of thisawakened spirit of active hostility were seen in thenames of the men by whom he was surrounded.Again, there was a rival court within the precinctsof St. James's. The insidious and intriguing, buthighly gifted Carteret ;* the courtly Chesterfield ;Pulteney, brilliant in conversation as in debate ;Wyndham, who preferred the allegiance of the oldJacobites to a Tory prince; above, and revered by,all these, the " all accomplished Bolingbroke," whoconversed in language as elegant as that he wrote,and whose lightest table-talk, transferred to paper,would, in its style and matter, have borne the test ofthe most searching criticism ;t these, the veteranleaders of the united opposition, formed the societyin which the young prince lived ;t these were his politicaltutors, and his personal friends. Truly, theThe Marchmont Papers, if the history of his public life, fullyother proof were wanting beyond justify these epithets,f Chesterfield's Letters to his Son Characters.Bolingbroke left England early in 1 735.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, genius of the age appears to have been monopolizedby this opposition. Where can we hope again tofind collected such a galaxy of sterling talent ! Therewas not only wisdom to impart, but art to win, learningto illustrate, and eloquence to persuade. All theprimitive colours of political knowledge appeared tocoalesce to form one stream of pure light. Swiftstrengthened by his writings, sentiments which hisdistant friends had implanted by conversation ; hisabsence was well repaid by the presence of Pope andThomson, who were scarcely necessary to completethe charm.But Frederick was not the only pupil in thisschool of politics; he had younger friends and companions,who, prepared by the same tutelage, weresent into the house of commons, to herald the adventof a new generation. Of these, Polwarth has beenalready mentioned ; the delicate and sensitive GeorgeLyttelton must be noted as another.Lyttelton is already rendered well known by thepen of Johnson, who has unwillingly allowed him aniche in the gallery of British poets. But his stationas a political leader is higher than his rank as a poet.George Lyttelton was the descendant of an ancientfamily ; the son of Sir Thomas Lyttelton, and heirto his baronetcy. He was born two months beforethe usual time, and was at first thought to be dead.The weak and sickly child was reared with theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.greatest difficulty, but he soon discovered abilities CHAPwhich might compensate him for his deficiency in-^physical strength. At Eton he established a claimto mental superiority ; and removing thence, whileyet a boy, to Christ Church, Oxford, he evinced hisearly ambition to be thought a poet, by putting forthsome verses upon Blenheim. Several other productionswere the results of his short residence at Oxford.When yet only nineteen years of age, he left the universityfor the continent, but quickly returned ; andfavoured by the influence of his father, who was oneof the lords of the treasury, obtained the office ofpage. But Lyttelton, while aspiring to the honoursof poesy, had sought the acquaintance of Pope, who .encouraged his advances and introduced him to .Once within the magic circle of thatsociety, neither the calls of interest, nor the exerciseof paternal authority could free him from its influence.He discovers a genius," remarks the same contemporarywriter, from whom I have quoted for thesketch of Polwarth, "that will one day fit him for themanagement of the greatest public concerns. Heentered into the senate at an age when others arescarcely fit for the university, and has distinguishedhimself ever since by a zealous opposition upon alloccasions against the minister. He possesses all thequalifications of an accomplished scholar, and these hemakes subservient to the duty of a senator. He is"VOL. II. QTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, highly in favour with the prince ; and all the virtuosiand ingenious in the liberal arts, particularly in poetry,A D. 1736.expect to see the golden age revive when he shallcome into court." George Lyttelton was one of thepersonal friends and ordinary companions of the prince.Prominent in the same class were Lyttelton'scousins, Richard, George, and James Grenville, thenephews of Lord Cobham, and grandsons of the sameSir Temple, who has already figured in these pages asaconspicuous advocate of the Exclusion bill. RichardGrenville, afterwards Earl Temple, was the eldestson of Richard Grenville, of Wotton, upon whosewidow, long afterwards devolved, by the limitationsof the patent, the honours of Lord Cobham. He wasborn in the year 171 1, and received an educationsuitable to his birth, as the representative of an ancientfamily, and the heir to a respectable inheritance.The honours which afterwards accumulated upon himwere then unexpected; they might have contributedto the importance of his after career, but they couldhave no influence upon the estimation in which hewas now held by the prince, and the friends whosurrounded him. Richard Grenville had obtained aseat during the recent election, being returned forthe town of Buckingham.*George, the second son ; was born in 1712, andCollins. Almon.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.the narrowness of his early prospects compelled him CHAPto choose a profession. " He was bred," says Mr. X1LBurke " to the law, which is, in my opinion, one of A * D> 1736 *the first and noblest of human sciences ; a sciencewhich does more to quicken and invigorate the understandingthan all the other kinds of learning puttogether." Grenville's capacity was not of thehighest order, he possessed, according to the sameauthority, " a manly understanding, a stout and resoluteheart, and an application dissipated andunwearied." But his was a mind of no remarkableenlargement : it was a disposition to desire presentsuccess rather than future fame, his zeal and applicationpromised to render his aid invaluable, whendirected to a particular subject, but his mind was toomicroscopic for the duties of a statesman.* GeorgeGrenville was not yet in parliament. James was ofless importance as a political leader, but he was notless valued by the prince as a private friend.But the greatest of all these, the master spirit ofthe new generation yet remains behind. Among thebrilliant society which thronged the apartments ofthe prince, was seen William Pitt, who, having obtaineda seat in the house of commons, at the recentelection, was repressing with difficulty his fieryCollins's Peerage. Burke's Gentleman's Magazine, vol. xxxv.,Speech on American Taxation, p. 308,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP genius, and waiting with impatience an opportunityNil to flesh his virgin sword.Pitt was the senior of the majority of the youthfulband, who were about to start together ascompetitors for fame. He was born in November,1708, the younger son of a Cornish gentleman,who, although the representative of a family, whichhad been ennobled in some of its younger branches,was not possessed of sufficient affluence to encourageWilliam to aspire to be a statesman. Pitt'seducation, was nevertheless equal to the part hewas destined to fill. He was placed upon thefoundation at Eton, and remained in that school ata time when Lyttelton, Fox, H banbury Williams,and Henry Fielding, were his contemporaries. Acommunity of suffering might have attracted Pitt andLyttelton to each other, and developed the powersof each. The weak and sickly boy, who shut outfrom the pleasures of his comrades, devoted his play-hoursto reading and rhyming, was not more helplessthan Pitt, who, although robust in his constitution,had not attained his sixteenth year, when he wasattacked by an hereditary gout. The power of education,is in nothing instanced so strongly as in thenumerous examples we possess of mighty minds accompaniedwith some deformity of body or earlycorporeal weakness ; the gout, which confined Pittto his dame's parlour at Eton, perhaps first revealedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.to him that he had powers, which might shake a CHAP,senate, or direct a kingdom.A. D. 1736.When eighteen years old, Pitt removed fromEton to Oxford, where he became a gentlemancommoner of Trinity College. While at the universityhe did not neglect his classical studies,for we find among the Oxford verses, written uponthe death of George I., by no means the leastelegant in the collection signed " Gul. Pitt." Thedreadful distemper with which he was afflicted,increased during his residence at Oxford, and heattempted to fly from his enemy, or relieve thetedium of his frequent confinement, by changing thescene during his intervals of ease. He remainedsome time in France and Italy, but, finding themalady incurable, returned to England, and addressedhimself to the pursuit of such objects as were stillopen to him. Pitt's patrimony, it is upon all handsadmitted was small ; Chesterfield, in this instance, aquestionable authority, says, that it consisted only ofan annuity of 100. To increase these slendermeans, he was compelled to make choice of a profession.Why, with his constitution, he chose thearmy we are not told; probably he was averse to anystudies which would withdraw him from preparationfor the course upon which he really intended to start.He obtained a cornetcy of horse, his first and only230 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, commission, and was also among the new memberswho had been returned to the parliament of 1735.A. D. 1736.The Cornish boroughs, created to increase the influenceof the crown, had long since sunk to swell theimportance of individuals. Old Sarum belonged toPitt's family, and its representation was of courseappropriated to his elder brother. That gentleman,however, had the good fortune to be elected to themore honourable representation of Southampton, andhaving made his election for that town, William wasentitled to claim the family borough. At the openingof this parliament, William Pitt, George Lyttelton,and Richard Grenville took their seats upon the samebench, and continued for years after to sit next eachother in the house of commons.*Chesterfield's Characters History of the Life of the EarlCharacters Reviewed, Almon's of Chatham. Thackeray's Life ofAnecdotes of the Earl of Chatham, the Earl of Chatham .THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 231CHAPTER XIII.Advance of the Whig principle First essay of Pitt and Lyttelton inthe house of commons Attempt to obtain an independent establishmentfor the Prince of Wales Secession of the Tories Its causeExpulsion of the Prince of Wales from the royal palace Deathof Queen Caroline.IT will be seen from this sketch of the rising race CHAP."Y TT Tof politicians, that it was the Whig principle of got. A.D. 1736.government which was now gaming ground. In introducingthe most valuable acquisitions of the unitedopposition, I am describing the first efforts ofillustrious Whigs. The union of parties in the oppositionwas highly favourable to the disseminationof Whig principles. The spirit of Whiggism mustoften be tempered when its professors are in power,but true Toryism cannot show itself in opposition.Bolingbroke could not preach to the young enthusiasts,who burned to beard the minister surroundedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, by his friends, who hoped to prostrate his power byXlll. .~i TT; the aid of the people, and who relied upon the voiceA. JL). 1736.of the nation to dissipate the adverse majority whichnow protected their enemy he could not preach tosuch men, even the mitigated doctrines of Toryism.The danger of democracy, the incompetency of thepeople for self-government, the necessity of keepinghermetically sealed, every channel by which themultitude might obtain access to the controllingpower of the state these would have been no gratefultopics to men, who saw a king, a government,and the two houses of legislature arrayed againstthem. Such men could only be taught to addressthemselves to the people. Their youthful integritywould make them scorn to be the willing instrumentsof party hypocrisy they must be themselves convincedof the truth of the popular sentiments theywere to utter. When they were so convinced theywere Whigs, and if their virtue proved superior totheir cupidity, they would remain so. It is moreeasy to sow than to eradicate such seeds.During this year the Prince of Wales was marriedto the Princess of Saxe-gotha.* The circumstanceMr. Coxe says, " The Prince does not appear to have been theof Wales espoused the Princess of case ; for, a year afterwards, theSaxe-gotha, in whose beauties, prince complained to Dodington,accomplishments and virtues, he that " he had sacrificed himself toforgot his former passion." Life the nation, by demanding a Walpole, vol. i., p. 523. This rage." Dodington' s Diary, p. 457.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 233offered an opportunity to his young friends to display CHAP,their affection to his person, and to commence theirA 13. 1737.opposition to the minister. The motion for an addressof congratulation was made by Pulteney ; itwas seconded in a maiden speech by Pitt, and supportedby Lyttelton, who followed his friend, andalso made upon this occasion his first essay. Wecannot judge the oratory displayed upon this occasionby the reports of the speeches as they have come downto us ; the coarse outline remains, but the elaborateornament and characteristic colouring are gone. Onehistorian has furnished us with what may be consideredas the judgment of their contemporaries. Hesays, " Mr. Lyttelton, in some parts of his speech,showed how well he had studied Cicero; particularlyin his celebrated compliment to Caesar upon his pardoningMarcellus ; but notwithstanding the whole ofit was one continued though just panegyric upontheir royal highnesses, it contains several severeclauses against the minister. The speech of Mr.Pitt is unmixed with any strain but that of declamation; and we have few models of antiquity moreperfect in that kind; it being more ornamented thanthe declamations of Demosthenes, and less diffusethan those of Cicero.*The declamation of Pitt was not less indicative ofTindal.'THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, hostility to the court and government than the sparksof fiery indignation which scintillated from the ella.D. 1737. xquench of Lyttelton. We can find, from the meagrereport of the speech, that Pitt took occasion covertlyto attack the king by dwelling in polished encomiumupon the dutiful conduct, the love of freedom, theconstitutional principle, and the universal popularityof the prince : he set forth, in the most glowingcolours, the national advantages which would arisefrom the alliance that had just been contracted ; andwhile he showered praises upon the son for havingsought and proposed this alliance, he coldly, nay,almost sarcastically expressed his gratitude to thefather that he did not oppose the patriotic request.The morbid jealousy of George II. thrilled under thedelicate touch of the orator, and as the prince acknowledgedhim as his advocate and his friend, thebreach between the father and son was widened beyondrepair.Walpole, as he heard the voice of the new orator,admired and trembled. " We must muzzle thatterrible cornet of horse ! " he exclaimed to thosearound him ; and with his usual confidence inthe power of corruption, he made large offers ofpromotion in the army, upon condition that thenew member should give up his seat in parliament.*We can imagine the answer which Pitt would# Chesterfield's Characters Reviewed.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.return to such a proposal ; nor are we surprised to CHAP,find that that answer called forth the last effort ofA.D. 1737.ministerial wrath, and that he was suddenly deprivedof his commission.* The Gazetteer, and other papersin the employ of Walpole, were instructed to pourforth all their abuse upon him ; but the writers confesshis importance while they attempt to deny it. Heis accused of looking upon himself as a second Tully,and told that, though his neck may be as long andhis body as slender, yet he must remember, that everyonewho has the same natural imperfections as theRoman, has not therefore the same essential perfections.These trashy personalities called forth answersfrom the Craftsman which are only interestingas they show how brilliant was the very commencementof the career of the Earl of Chatham.The prince now determined to put in practice ascheme which had been several years ago suggestedby Bolingbroke. This was, to apply to parliamentHis friend Lyttelton invoked his muse upon this occasion,Long had thy virtues marked thee out for fame,Far, far superior to a cornet's name ;This generous Walpole saw, and grieved to findSo mean a post disgraced that noble mind.The servile standard from thy freeborn handHe took, and bade thee lead the patriot band."Sir Hanbury Williams also alluded to it in his manner :Sir Bob to hang, thou didst harangue ;While he in joke, the cornet broke."THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP f r a jointure for his wife, and an independent allow-xiionce of 100,000 a year. Soon after his marriage,he mentioned this design to the queen, with whom hehad never been a favourite ; but she treated it as ajest, and laughed at the idea of so desperate and impracticablean attempt.* Bolingbroke's last advice,before his retreat into France, had been to pursueunremittingly this one favourite object, and hedoubtless repeated by letter the injunction he hadpersonally enforced.The prince now collected his whole power for theattempt ; and the present state and future prospectsof the parties rendered this power by no means inconsiderable.The state of the king's health was very critical:in February, 1736, the Duchess of Marlboroughwrites that she had heard, from a pretty good hand,that his majesty had been worse than they cared toown ; but upon remedies they applied, his fever lessened,and he was better. " However," she adds,The derision with which the " The queen is quite furious in betweentreated this threat probably ing disappointed in her hopes ofprovoked him to proceed : he al managing the son as she did thelegend this as one of the reasons of father. She overdue and mistookhis perseverance to Dodington her measures in keeping the sonDiary, p. 445. The queen became too much under ; the game is notnow openly his enemy ; in a me to be retrieved." Marchmont memorandummade at this time by the pers, vol. ii., p. 72.Earl of Marchmont, it is remarked,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 237"the physicians say, that, if he does get over this ill CHAP,ness, he cannot live a twelvemonth." Upon this veryA.D. 1737.occasion, she adds, "It is apprehended that the kingis in so very bad a state of health that, though he hasgot over his illness so far as to appear in public, yetwe shall not be so happy as to have him long ; andevery body that sees him tells me that he looks, atthis time, extremely ill"* At this time, the fact ofthe king being in "a languishing condition" wasurged by those who tried to dissuade the prince fromhis project ; but Frederick answered, that the kingcould not live many years, but might linger thus agood while, and he could not stay that while Hefirst mentioned the matter to Pulteney, and desiredhim at once to bring it forward. That able leader delightedat a proposition so favourable to his party, immediatelyconsented for himself ', although he requiredto consult before he could answer for his friends :He expressed himself so handsomely upon the firstOpinions of the Duchess of the hands of Mallet. That personMarlborough, p. 86. Bolingbroke destroyed every thing which therealso says, in a letter to Wyndham, was no immediate prospect of turn-yousay, my friend, that the affair ing into money. How clear wouldof the prince alarmed the minister be all the party intrigues of thispurely because of the state of the time, if we had the letters writtenking's health in that point of time." to Bolingbroke by his friends durstis greatly to be regretted that ing his residence in France.Bolingbroke's papers passed into f Dodington's Diary, p. 445.238 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, notice," said the prince, "that I shall never forgetit"* The Whigs of the opposition joyfully receivedA.D. 1737.the proposal of which Pulteney was the bearer ; andChesterfield, Carteret, and Jekyll (master of the rolls)immediately sent in their adherence. Sir WilliamWyndham, the leader of the Tory section, was no lessready. He replied, " that he had long desired an opportunityof showing his regard and attachment to hisroyal highness ; that he would answer for his wholeparty as well as for himself; and that he was veryhappy that an occasion presented itself to convincehis royal highness, by their zealous and hearty appearancein support of his interest, how far they werefrom being Jacobites, and how much they were misrepresentedunder that name."t"The whole body of opposition being thus pledged,he next attempted to gain over George Dodington,who, although holding office under Walpole, was butawavering adherent, and commanding six votes inthe house of commons was worthy of some solicitationin an affair in which the division promised to be morethan usually close. That skilful politician, however,had no inclination to sacrifice his present advantages,and to render his hopes of advancement desperateDodington's Diary, p. 443. and even spoke against it. SeeJekyll, however, when the motion the Parl. Hist., vol., ix., p. 1147.came on in the commons, voted-j- Dodington's Diary, p. 444.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.during the lifetime of the present king: he firmly CHAP,refused to become a party to the measure ; but heagreed to keep the secret. It is a singular proofeither of the confidence or carelessness of Walpole,that the whole plan of this measure was arranged beforehe was aware that it was in agitation. About a fortnightbefore the motion was appointed to be made, thedesign became public ; and the minister was so alarmed,that he persuaded the king to send the lords of hiscouncil to his son with a message, which, althoughimperious and unbending in its language, was not soinits matter, since it promised him an increase ofrevenue for himself and a jointure for his wife, uponhis abandoning the threatened motion. But it wasnow too late. The prince replied, that, " as to themessage, the affair was now out of his hands, andtherefore he could give no answer to it."On the %'2d of February, Pulteney brought forwardthe motion in the house of commons. Havingvindicated the right of the commons to examine intothe appropriation of sums voted by them for a specificpurpose, the orator proceeded to cite precedents infavour of the motion he was about to make, and ransackedthe English history for instances in favour ofhis position that the Prince of Wales always had andought to have a sufficient provision, settled upon himin such a manner, as to render him as independentof the crown as any other subject can be. He argued240 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, that such a provision was wise as well as customary ;XTTTthat the civil list of his present majesty had beenA. D. 1737. .11increased, in order that he might be enabled to pay100,000ayear to the Prince ofWales; and that to theallowance thus mentioned by the king and sanctionedby parliament, the prince was in law and in equityentitled. Walpole replied. He began by complainingof the conduct of those who brought forward themotion " a motion which must necessarily bringevery gentleman of the house under one of the greatestdifficulties any man ever was or even can be in ;"he examined the precedents brought forward by Pul-tenet,and declared that they were either such asought not to be followed, or such as were by no wayapplicable to the case then before the house. Hereprobated the proposal of a parliamentary interferencewith the private and domestic arrangements ofthe monarch. "Even in private life," he said, " it isgenerally held to be officious and imprudent for astranger to intermeddle in the family affairs of hisneighbour without any call from the parties concerned; if there was no breach before, it generallyoccasions one ; and if there was a breach, it makes itwider much oftener than it occasions a reconcilement.We ought to consider our sovereign in a twofoldrespect. In all cases which regard his politicaland royal capacity, we have certainly a right to judgeof the measures that are taken, and may recommendTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.what we think most expedient ; but in affairs which CHAP.XIIIregard his natural and paternal capacity, we have noA. D. 1737.right to judge ; it would be officious in us to recommend,without some sort of application from him forthat purpose ; and as the providing of every branchof the royal family is an affair which regards onlyhis natural and paternal capacity, it would be officiousin us it is inconsistent with true wisdom orgood policy for us to pretend to judge or to prescribewhat ought to be done, or in what manner itought to be done"*From this sketch it would appear, that no questionarose during this debate which could impartto the question the quality of a touchstone ofparty principles. In favour of the motion appearedPulteney, Barnard, Lyttelton, Pitt, Grenville, andWyndham ; illustrious among a crowd of less distinguishednames against it were, Walpole, Jekyll,Henry Pelham, and Sir Wm. Youngest On the division,thirty-five members, who had never beforebeen known to vote against the minister, went overto the opposition, t The triumph of the prince appearedsecure, when an event occurred which hasnever been satisfactorily explained, but which changedthe fortune of the day. Wyndham, who had spokenin favour of the motion, left the house without voting,Path. Hist., vol. ix. $ Dodington's Diary, Appendix,f Parl. Hist., vol. ix., p. 1 147. p. 469.VOL. II. RTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and forty-five Tory members had either absentedXIIIthemselves from the debate altogether, or now dead.1737.parted with him.* In consequence of this secession,the minister obtained a majority of thirty ; the numbersbeing two hundred and thirty-four to two hundredand foretWe seek in vain for a reason for this sudden desertion.Mr. Coxe ascribes it to a conscientiousmotive, and praises the Tory party for adhering totheir principles, and opposing a proposition which heconsiders democratical and unconstitutional. Thisexposition might have been satisfactory had the secederskept themselves aloof from the affair from thecommencement ; but when we see them pledged bytheir acknowledged leader to its support, that leaderenforcing it with all his eloquence upon the floor ofthe house of commons, and then suddenly headingthe secession which left the victory to the ministerialWhigs ; we naturally suspect that it was some morecogent cause than that assigned by the biographer ofWalpole, which induced them to pledge themselves,and their leader to speak, on one side and act uponthe other. In the absence of direct evidence it isperhaps the most probable supposition that, whenDodington Diary, p. 444. his knowledge of the circumstance,Mr. Coxe says that they left the merely states that they were absent,house in a body ; but Dodington, f Parl. Hist., vol. ix., p. 1147.from whom he, no doubt, receivedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 243success appeared certain, ulterior arrangements were CHAP.XIIIprivately discussed among the leaders, and thatA D 1737a dispute then arose which disgusted the Tories, andcaused them to leave the house domestic hatred isalways more violent than public hostility. Theletters which Bolingbroke addressed to Wyndhamappear to favour this hypothesis : he is constantlylamenting the want of union in the opposition, anddeclares, when adverting to this very subject, that awell-arranged plan of ulterior conduct would haveconverted defeat into victory.* We may, at least,see in this circumstance how impossible it was forany members of the two factions cordially to coalesce,and we see, also, how small was the numerical forceof the Tories in this house of commons. Theseforty-five members doubtless formed the core ofToryism, and it was the core only which now remainedin the commons, all the unstable particleshad been attracted by the influence of ministerialpatronage.The birth of the prince's first child occasioned anopen rupture : the king conceived he had beentreated with disrespect, and George II., who, twentyyears before, had, upon a very similar occasion, beenordered by his father to leave the royal palace, nowinflicted the severity he then experienced.Bolingbroke to Wyndham, June 9, 173?. Coxe's Life of Walpole.correspondence, vol. iii.244 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Those of the minister's adherents who held officesXIIIin the prince's household immediately resigned; andA. D. 1737.members of the opposition were installed in theirplaces. Among other changes, Lyttelton becameprivate secretary to the prince, and Pitt was recompensedfor the loss of his commission by an appointmentas groom of the bedchamber.Lord Hardwicke, upon this occasion, attemptedto prevent the public separation ; but Walpole, wholooked upon it as a triumph over the opposition, andthe queen, who was governed by the minister andurged by her private resentment, had resolved toproceed to extremes. It was they who instigatedthe king to expel the prince from his palace. Thedeath of Queen Caroline occurred about twomonths after this circumstance. On her death-bedshe recommended the king to the protection of Walpole,a method of expressing her high opinion of hisservices which the minister thought dangerous to hisfuture favour. But, although she sent the prince aformal message of forgiveness,* she refused to seehim, " lest it might embarrass and irritate theking."t The death of Queen Caroline was certainlyCoxe, upon the authority of Lord Orford.f The prince's friends animate of a relentless spirit. Chesterfield,versed with much justice and great in some lines written upon the oc-severityupon this last testimony casion, speaking of Caroline's lasthours, says,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 245a national loss ; * for, although she was probably too CHAP.implicitly guided by the minister in her judgment -upon domestic affairs, her influence was the onlypower which could withdraw the king from his absorbedattention to his continental dominions, orpreserve the minister from the necessity of spendingthe treasure and the blood of England upon somemicroscopic question of German politics.And unforgiving, unforgiven dies."Pope's satirical epitaph is well known :Here lies, wrapped up in seven and twenty towels,The only proof that Caroline had bowels."And again :hail her passage to the realms of rest,All parts perform'd, and ALL her children blest''To neutralize these satirical at of Marlborough which savourstacks we have the poetical eulogy more of the ridiculous. Some timeof Savage, Dodington, and Stephen after, the king was playing at bas-duck,and a more valuable and set, and a queen was turned up ;endearing prose panegyric from the king became greatly affectedthe pen of her friend, Dr. Alfred nor could his emotion be over-clarke,come until one of the ladies pro-theking was for a long time posed to throw all the queens outinconsolable for his loss, and se of the pack ; the expedient wasveal rather pathetic ebullitions of adopted, and the king, having re-his grief are related by Mr. Coxe. covered his equanimity, continuedAn instance is given by the Duchess his game.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XIV.Motion to reduce the standing army Shippen's eulogium uponToryism Reply to Walpole Review of the debate.CHAP. THE session of 1738 commenced with a debate, inXIV.which the principles of Whiggism and Toryism wereA. D. 1738. , , ,.largely discussed, and each section of the Whigparty contended that it was they alone who weretrue to their principles. This debate occurred upona motion, made by the opposition, for a reduction inthe standing army. Sir George Barclay opposedthe ministerial estimate upon the broad principle,that the keeping up a standing army in time ofpeace was a thing unknown to the laws and constitutionof Britain, and destructive to the liberty of hercitizens"* This speaker was supported by Shippen,who descanted upon the same topic, dated the rise ofParl. Hist., vol. x.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. C 24?7a standing army from the ninth year of the reign of CHAP.William, insinuated that it was one of the productionsA T~^ 1 7 *}ftof the revolution, and inveighed against it as subversiveof the people's liberties. He then proceeded toclaim for his own party the merit of having consistentlyadvocated the principles of the revolution. " Iown," he said, " that it gives me great concern tosee gentlemen who have always valued themselvesupon treading in the footsteps of those who broughtabout the revolution, act a part so inconsistent withthe principles of their ancestors, by voting for thisquestion. I know a set of men, under a differentdenomination, who have always been more moderatein their pretensions but more steady in their adherenceto these principles. I am not at all inclinedto revive any party distinctions, but, I will ventureto say, sir, that, let any man compare the conduct ofsome gentlemen, who have affected to pass forWhigs, with that of gentlemen who have alwaysbeen looked upon as Tories, he shall find the latteracting a part most consistent with the revolutionprinciples. He will find them opposing the crown inevery encroachment upon the people, and in everyinfringement upon the claim of right. He will neverfind them complimenting the crown at the expenseof the people, when in post, nor distressing it byopposing any reasonable measure when out. Cansome gentlemen, sir, who now affect to call themesTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, selves Whiff s, boast of such an uniformity ofXIVconduct ? can they say that times and circumstancesA.D. 1738.never influenced the measures they pursued ; orthat, when they were in posts, they always acted inconsequenceof the principles they professed whenthey were out ? Sir, I believe I have sat long enoughin this house to convince gentlemen, if there wereoccasion, of very great inconsistencies in certaincharacters."There was much truth in the crimination thrownout against many of the Whigs, but there was somethingludicrous in the claim put forward on behalf ofthe Tories.The notoriously Jacobite character of Shippenenabled Walpole to reply with considerable effect,that a standing army was necessary to maintain thepresent family upon the throne. " No man," he continued," of common prudence will profess himselfopenly a Jacobite ; by so doing he not only mayinjure his private fortune, but he must render himselfless able to do any effectual service to the cause hehas embraced. Therefore there are but few suchmen in the kingdom. Your right Jacobite, sir, disguiseshis true sentiments ; he roars out for revolutionprinciples ; he pretends to be a great friend toliberty, and a great admirer of our ancient constitution; and, under this pretence, there are numberswho every day endeavour to sow discontents amongTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 249the people, by persuading them that the constitution CHAP.is in danger, and that they are unnecessarily loadedA. D. 1738.with many and heavy taxes. Mr. Henry foxtaunted the opposition Whigs with Shippen's eulogyupon the Tories, and called upon them, since theygloried in still acting upon Whig principles, toanswer that part of his speech. But the invitationwas not accepted ; Lyttelton and his friends contentedthemselves with attacking the minister, repeatingthe arguments which Shippen had alreadystated, and repudiating the title of the ministerialparty to call themselves Whigs. " Sir," said SirJohn Hynde Cotton,* " I have had the honour andhappiness to be intimate with many gentlemen ofthat denomination, I likewise, sir, have read thewritings of many authors who have espoused theseprinciples ; I have sat in this house during some ofthe most material debates that have happened betwixtthem and the Tories ; and, sir, I can declarefrom my own experience that I never knew one, whoacted on true Whig principles, vote for a standingarmy in time of peace. What the principles of theWhigs in former days were, sir, I can only learnfrom reading or information ; but, sir, I have heardof Whigs who were against all unlimited votes ofThis gentleman, although we a Tory, and even a Jacobite.should riot suspect it from the Opinions of the Duchess of Marl-tenourof his speech, was called borough, p. 62.&50 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, credit : I have heard of Whiff s who looked uponXIV.open corruption as the greatest curse that couldA. D. 1738.befal any nation : I have heard of Whigs who esteemedthe liberty of the press to be the mostvaluable privilege of a free people, and triennial parliamentsthe greatest bulwark of their liberties ; and,sir, I have heard of a Whig administration Ti r ho haveresented injuries done to the trade of the nation, andwho have revenged insults offered to the British flag.These, sir, are the principles, if I am rightly informed,that once characterized the true Whigs.Let gentlemen apply these characters to their presentconduct, and then, laying their hands on theirhearts, let them ask themselves if they are Whigs."Sir William Yonge replied on behalf of the ministry,and Barnard and Pulteney then rose in thedebate. The stinging sarcasm of the latter oratoragain called up Walpole, who did not forget toremind the house, that there was a time when Pulseshad put forth all his strength in favour of aproposal similar to that which he was now opposing.He concluded a powerful reply in these words: " Sir,I have known the time when gentlemen acted upontrue Whig principles ; and at that time, sir, theyseemed to be of opinion, that the best, if not the onlyway to secure us from popery and arbitrary powerwas, by securing the present establishment of thecrown in his majesty's person and family. TheyTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.were then of opinion that this was best done by our CHAP.keeping up a regular body of forces ; and I should beA. D. 1738.glad to know if the same reasons do not subsist nowas did then, or if they, who are the enemies of ourpresent establishment have been weakened by theopposition of those gentlemen to the administration."Pulteney thus pressed, appeared to be confused,he had recourse to the hackneyed excuse for inconsistency," that, although a man's whole life has beenbut one continued vote upon one side, yet, he oughtneither to be ashamed nor afraid to oppose it as soonas his own judgment, or the situation of things, isaltered." Conscious that this general defence wasequally available to the most patriotic and the mostcorrupt, he abandoned all personal defence, and rushedamong the topics of popular declamation. ' ' Establishment! government !" he exclaimed. " I know of no establishment,I know of no government, I know of noadministration that ought to be kept up but for thepreservation of the liberties of the people : for it isnot two pence matter to me, whether the prince'sname under whom I am to be enslaved, is Thomas,James, or Richard."Sir William Wyndham followed, but it was onlyto ridicule the minister's fears of the pretenderthe spirit of the debate had evaporated ; and, afterMr. Pelham and some others had spoken, the votepassed without a division.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. This was a contest carried on between Whigs :XIV.each party of the combatants were jealous of the title,A. D. 1738.and defended their right to the name. Shippen'sclaim in favour of the Tories, served only to embarrasshis friends and to strengthen his adversaries ; Wynd-hamcautiously abstained from the topic. The Toriesappear to have tacitly admitted that the acquisitionof popularity and the active conduct of the oppositionmust be left to their Whig allies.During the conduct of this debate, no sentimentfell from any of the ministerial speakers inconsistentwith those principles of popular government, whichhad formed the original foundation of their partycreed ; but on the morrow the debate was renewedupon the bringing up of the report by Colonel Mor-daunt,one of those unhappy partisans, whose zealis far more fatal to their friends than to their foes.I have always gloried, sir," said Colonel Mordant,in being thought a Whig ; I hope I shall never, bymy behaviour, either in this house or without doors,give the least occasion to the world to think otherwiseof me ; and for this very reason I am for keepingup an army, because I think the keeping up an armyabsolutely necessary for supporting the Whig interest,and preserving the peace and quiet of the people. Inevery dispute which has happened of late years aboutour army, I have looked upon the question to bechiefly, whether Whig or Tory should prevail ; and asTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 253I have always thought, and as I believe every unpre- CHAP.judice Whig in the kingdom thinks, that if the armyA.D. 1738.should be disbanded, or very much reduced, the Toryinterest would prevail, therefore I have generallybeen against such redaction, and always shall be extremelycautious of agreeing to any such proposition ;nay, I am so firmly attached to the Whig interest,that if I should think four times the number of troopsabsolutely necessary for supporting that interest, Iwould be for keeping up an army four times as numerousas that we have now on foot."This suicidal speech was seized upon with eagernessby the opposition. Polwarth inflicted upon itsauthor a merciless chastisement, and Pitt wasaroused to inveigh against the motion ; but Mordantwas left to endure the storm he had raised, andalthough Sir Thomas Sanderson* made a reply to thegeneral arguments which had been urged, no soundcame from the treasury benches, which could indicatethat the ministerial Whigs either avowed or favouredthe sentiments expressed by their officious supporter,tIt is a flagrant instance of the partiality withIn fact, no reply whatever was acted with the opposition. Wit-madeby the ministers or any of ness his speech against the Con-theiradherents. Sir Thomas San mention with Spain, Parl. Hist.,person, although he voted in the vol. x., p. 1259.majority on this occasion, generally f Parl. Hist., vol. x., pp. 375-467.254 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, which Smollett compiled his history, that while heextracts the arguments of the opposition upon thisA.D. ms. .question, he omits all those employed by the ministerand his colleagues, and substitutes as theirs the mostoffensive sentiments in this unsupported and tacitlyrepudiated speech.Upon the abstract merits of this question therecan be now no second opinion. The Jacobites, whosaw in a permanent body of troops an insuperablebarrier to the restoration of their king, and some ofthe most violent of the opposition Whigs, who sostrongly panted for power, that they would gladly beborne to it upon a torrent of national calamities :these men were in earnest in the opposition. But themere Tories and the more reasonable of the oppositionWhigs, looked upon the question only as aconvenient vehicle of opposition they threw all theirgaudy eloquence around it, and set it up to dazzleand attract the multitude. Sixty years anterior tothis time, the existence of a standing army wouldhave been fatal to the liberties of the country ; aWhig of those days would have used the language ofPulteney and Cotton, and the whole nation whichsulkily permitted Charles II. to maintain about5000 guards, would have risen in a mass to resist anattempt to raise his levies to 17,000. But circumstanceswere materially altered. The army was notnow a force maintained by the king out of his ownTHE HISTORY OF PARTY, 255private revenues, the mere instrument of the royal CHAP,will supported by the sovereign to work his purpose,and holding it as its chief duty to protect him againsthis parliament and his people. Instead of being aninstrument of offence, it had now become a shield ofsafety. The dissipation of the mysterious halo whichhad so long surrounded the throne, required that itshould be supplied by some more reasonable defence.An armed faction of Jacobites rendered a standingarmy necessary to our domestic peace; the modernpolicy of the surrounding nations, all ever ready forwar, rendered an army necessary to our national existence.But still it was felt, that although an indispensable,it was also a perilous instrument, and whileits direction, according to the forms of the constitution,was nominally intrusted to the crown, the power ofits dissolution was retained by the parliament ; theguidance of the fiery coursers was again intrusted tothe charioteer who had before abused his power, butthe commons held the bolt which could instantaneouslyarrest their career.There was at this time no cause for national alarmat the power of the crown, nor any possibility thatthe military force now asked for would be abused.This debate is chiefly valuable to our purpose, as itdiscovers how fallen and almost forgotten were theTory principles of government at this time, and howcompletely the contest was between Whig principlesTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, held in moderation and curbed, perhaps too tightly,XIV.A ^ . 00 by extreme caution and a timorous tenderness forA, U. loo.ancient prejudices, and those same principles abusedto purposes of private ambition, and urged to the veryverge of democracy.*How utterly ridiculous, there should be disbanded or even con-fore,is the assertion of Smollett, miserably reduced, the Tory interthe adherents of the mini rest would prevail."step fairly owned, that if the armyTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 257CHAPTER XV.Popular outcry for a war with Spain Convention Debate upon theConvention Secession of the opposition Conflict between Wynd-hamand Walpole Consequences of the secession Attempt torepeal the Test act Opposed by the Whig ministers.THE all-absorbing question which engaged the CHAP,nation during the years 1738 and 1739, was that of - 'A. U. 1738the quarrel with Spain; a question, which as it does to 1739 -not, as some other points of foreign politics do, involveany opposition to particular principles of government,can engage our attention no further, thanas it may be necessary to inquire whether the Whigs,who were now in power, were careful to maintain thenational honour. The opposition leaders who broughtwitnesses to the bar of the house of commons, torelate the most horrible tales of cruelty they hadsuffered from the Spaniards, and who made the nationVOL. II. S58 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, resound with what Mr. Burke calls "the fable ofXVJenkins's ears," loudly exclaimed that the honour ofA "P) "1 700to 1739. England had been betrayed, and that in the hands ofWalpole, Britain had become an object of scorn toher enemies, and her sovereign a mark for the mockeryof the humblest of her foes.The pretence for all this declamation was, that theSpaniards claimed, and constantly exercised a rightto search the British merchant-ships which passednear their American ports ; and that, in conductingthis search their cruisers were guilty of great crueltiesto the crews, and often illegally confiscated our ships.The opposition, supported by the public voice, deniedthe existence of such a right, and called upon theminister to restrain its exercise by force. Walpole,who knew that there were as many stories of Britishcruelty current in Spain, as there were tales ofSpanish atrocities believed in England, who knewalso that it was more easy to allege that no right ofsearch existed, than to prove it from treaties or practice,and who, above all other reasons, clung withtenacious grasp to the last hope of peace, withstoodthe public cry, and refused to plunge headlong intoa war.The causes of this quarrel may be shortly statedthus : Upon the discovery of the new world, PopeAlexander VI. had, in the plenitude of his apostolicalpower, bestowed it upon Ferdinand the Catholic.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 59Spain was at this time in the enjoyment of one of CHAP,those transient gleams of prosperity and power whichA D 1738fall so fitfully upon her history, and vanish as sud " to 1739.deny as they appear. She could at this period haveestablished a title far more ridiculous than that underwhich she then claimed ; and Britain, who trembled forher own existence, had no thought to bestow upon theprospect of distant acquisitions. When the power soterrible in the hand of Philip II., had fallen to ruinsunder the mismanagement of his feeble successors,the claim was still as haughtily maintained, althoughthe ability to enforce it was gone. It was not untilthe year 1670, that Spain ever formally acknowledgedthe right of another nation to any part of the newworld. By a treaty concluded in this year betweenEngland and Spain, the title of the former nation toall her then present possessions in the West Indies,was expressly recognised ; but it is forbidden to eithernation to trade with the colonies of the other, unlessunder a licence from the sovereign to whom suchcolony belonged. This licence it was not difficult toobtain from the Spanish court ; which, during a considerableperiod, looked upon England as the naturalally of Spain, and the only power able to preserveher low countries from the ambition of France. Aflourishing and very profitable, although frequentlyillicit trade sprung up between the English and260 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Spanish colonies, and much British capital was emsbarked in this commerce.to 1739. This continued uninterrupted until the Tories ofQueen Anne's reign suffered a prince of the houseof Bourbon to hold the Spanish sceptre. The policyof the court of Madrid then became changed. Itwas no longer necessary to propitiate England ; theLow Countries were lost, and France was no longeran enemy. The framers of the treaty of Utrecht hadfailed to meet this consequence by turning customand general sufferance into an admitted right; theyhad provided only that the English South Sea Companyshould be permitted to supply the Spanishcolonies for thirty years with a certain annual numberof negroes; that the English should be allowedto send once a year, to Spanish America, a ship of astated tonnage laden with European articles ; andshould retain the privilege of putting into Spanishharbours for the purposes of refitting and provisioning.The British merchants were reluctant to abandona lucrative commerce. The annual ship whichthe treaty allowed was found by the Spaniards to beinexhaustible, since she was continually supplied byother vessels which followed her for that purpose.The merchantmen which put into Spanish ports torefit were generally laden with British goods whenthey arrived, but commonly departed in ballast. TheTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.contraband trade was attempted to be carried on as CHAP.XVextensively, now that it was the policy of Spain to, .111 i i ,. A. D. 1738put it down, as it had been when it was her policy to 1739.to encourage it. The consequences were unavoidable.The Spanish cruisers made many seizures ;and the British, when opportunity offered, retaliated.Barbarities were committed upon both sides, untilthe merchants at home, alarmed at their frequentlosses, invoked the national protection.It will be readily seen that this was not a questionso straightforward and indisputable, that the honourof the country required the enforcement of immediateconcession. Whether occasional abuses of the rightof search might not have afforded such an excuse forabolishing that right as policy would dictate shouldnot be allowed to escape, is a question admitting ofdiscussion, and upon which men would form differentopinions, as they were the more impressed with thevalue of the object or its probable cost.Of the policy of a country, every minister mustdecide according to his judgment ; nor have we aright to asperse his memory because some may holdthat that policy might have been more skilfully directed; but the national honour is beyond his province,his duty is not to speculate upon, but to vindicateit. There appears no reason to accuse theWhig government of having, upon this occasion, beenguilty of such a dereliction of duty. Instead of de-theHISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, charing war, Walpole negotiated, and the result wasa convention, which was ratified immediately beforeA T") 1 7 Stto 1739. the meeting of parliament in February, 1739-The terms of this convention were by no meanssatisfactory to the nation, now tortured into a stateof excitement, which rendered it deaf to reason andcredulous to the most evident absurdities. No soonerwas the document made public, than a violent outcryarose against its conditions from all parts of the country;and the general indignation, carefully fosteredby the opposition leaders, and at last gathering into afocus, burst with terrific violence within the walls ofthe house of commons.On the 8th of March, Horace Walpole opened thedebate, by an elaborate defence of the convention ;and concluded a speech of more than two hours' duration,with a motion for an address to the crown,returning thanks for its communication, and approvingits terms.The tongues of the opposition were now loosed,and the whole garnered store of criminatory eloquencewas poured forth. The elegance of Lyttelton andthe strength of Barnard, the polished irony of Grenvilleand the blunt eloquence of Shippen, the passionof Sanderson, the lofty dignity of Wyndham, and thestern and terrific declamation of Pitt, were all appliedto ridicule, or execrate the conduct of the minister.It was a mighty occasion which demanded all theirTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 263energies, and the consciousness of their popularity CHAP.seemed to multiply their powers. The governmentA. D. 1738put forth its whole force in reply ; but the honour, to 1739.although not the success of the day remained withthe opposition. Walpole dared not to state in thehouse of commons the true reasons of his conduct.It had been almost as dangerous and quite as uselessto declare in that assembly, that the Spaniards had aright to put down our illicit trade with their colonies,as it would have been, about sixty years before, tohave declared within the same walls that Titus Gateswas a perjurer, and his plot a fable. Another nationalintoxication had passed over the island. Mr.Jenkins, who always carried in his pocket the earswhich, as he asserted, the Spaniards had cut off, andexhibited them wrapped up in cotton,* was almost asconsiderable a character in the present day as Gateshad been in his.The ministerial speakers were superior in numberto those of the opposition. Fox, Pelham, Sir CharlesIt is a curious fact that no note at Sir W. Wyndham's. Lord M.of the examination of this man ap was expatiating upon the crueltypears in the journals, although he of the act, when Shippen inter-wascertainly examined at the bar rusted him, declaring, that Jenkinsof the house of commons, and pro had both his ears on his head, " theduce the ears as stated in the text, truth of which," says Mr. Rose,Lord Marchmont told Mr. Rose " was afterwards ascertained.that the subject became the topic Marchmont Papers, vol. ii., p. 196.of conversation that same evening,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, Wager, Selwyn, Liddell, and the two Walpole,were the most prominent of the fourteen speakersA.D. 1738to 1739. who supported the minister. Upon the division, theaddress was carried by a majority of twenty-eight.The debate was renewed upon the bringing up ofthe report, and the opposition seem to have beeninspired, by their defeat, with additional virulence.Pulteney had reserved himself for this occasion, andopened the debate with all his usual force of oratory.This second debate was chiefly remarkable from Mr.Fazakerly, a lawyer, and a constant member of opposition,hinting that it was the intention of his party,if this question should be again carried against them,to* abandon the house to the minister, and to ceasefrom all further efforts in parliament.The majority was against them ; the report wasreceived by a majority of thirty,* and the threat wasimmediately fulfilled. Sir W. Wyndham, when theIn this division, chance gave Rev. H. Etough. Coxe's Walpolethe opposition two votes. The Correspondence. The question ofnoes remained in the house, the the convention was also marked byminister and his friends went forth the secession of the Duke of Argyle,into the lobby. After the doors who, upon this occasion, abandonedwere closed, the opposition tellers the ministers, and openly declaredfound a stray member asleep upon against them ; a circumstance whichthe ministerial benches ; he was induced the Duchess of Marlowaroused, and, in spite of his rough to prophesy the approachingremonstrances, numbered among dissolution of the ministry. "Whenthe minority. Mr. Orlebar to the a house is to fall," says the duchess,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 265numbers were declared, rose and said, " Sir, I have CHAP,seen with the utmost concern this shameful thisA.D. 1738fatal measure approved of; and I now rise up to pay to 1739.my last duty to my country as a member of thishouse.I was in hopes, sir, that the many unanswerablearguments urged in the debate against the convention,might have prevailed upon gentlemen to have,for once, listened to the dictates of reason ; for once,to have distinguished themselves from being a factionagainst the liberties and properties of their fellow-subjects.I was the more in hopes of this, sir, since,in all the companies I have been in from the timethis convention has been spoken of, I have not foundone single person without-doors pretend to justify it.Is it not strange, that the eloquence of one manshould have so great an effect within these walls, andthe unanimous voice of a brave, suffering people without,should have so little ? I am surprised, that Ishould be so blind as not to discover one argumentthat has the least appearance of reason among allthat has been offered to our agreeing to this address.This, sir, must proceed, either from the majority ofthis house being determined by arguments that wethe rats go away." His brother, carried with him to the oppositionthe Earl of Islay, was equally con four votes in the house of com-specious on the other side. Argyle mons. Coxe\ Correspondence,266 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, have not heard, or from my wanting common senseto comprehend the force of those we have heard. InA. D. 1738to 1739. the first place, sir, I think I cannot, with honour, sitin an assembly which is determined by motives,which I am not at liberty to mention ; and if the lastis the case, I look upon myself to be a very unfitperson to act as a senator. I here, sir, bid a finaladieu to this parliament. Perhaps, when anotherparliament shall succeed, I may be again at libertyto serve my country in the same capacity. I thereforeappeal, sir, to a future free, uninfluenced houseof commons. Let it be the judge of my conduct andthat of my friends upon this occasion. Meantime Ishall conclude, with doing that duty to my countrywhich I am still at liberty to perform, which is, topray for its preservation. May, therefore, that Powerwhich has so often and so visibly interposed in behalfof the rights and liberties of this nation continue itscare over us at this worst and most dangerous juncture,whilst the insolence of enemies without, and theinfluence of corruption within threaten the ruin ofher constitution"*There is another report of this in ideas. That this is the more faith-speechwhich is more moderate, ful, however, appears from a letterbut far less eloquent, in the Long from Mr. John Selwyn to the Hon.don Magazine ; the coincidence of Thos. Townshend, (Comes Corvettetwo reports is very remarkable ; spondee, vol. iii., p. 519) inthey differ rather in language than which an account of the debate isTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 267It is probable that this speech was intended to CHAP.draw down the indignation of the majority and toA. D. 1739.provoke a committal to the tower. It is said thatPelham had already risen to propose such a measure,when Walpole, who had before disappointed a similarsystem of tactics, interfered. That sagacious politicianknew that it was much easier to answer thansafe to punish such an harangue. " The measures,"he said, " which the gentleman who spoke last, andhis friends may pursue, give me no uneasiness. Thefriends of the nation and the house are obliged tothem for pulling off the mask, by making this publicdeclaration. We can be upon our guard againstopen rebellion, but it is difficult to guard againstsecret treason. The faction I speak of, sir, neversat in this fcouse, they never joined in any publicmeasure of the government but with a view to distressit and to serve a popish interest. The gentlemanwho is now the mouth of this faction was lookedupon as the head of those traitors who, twenty-fiveyears ago, conspired the destruction of their countryand of the royal family, to put a popish pretenderupon the throne. He was seized by the vigilance ofthe then government, and pardoned by its clemency ;given, and several expressions re- version given in the text, butcorded, which are retained in the omitted in the other.268 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, but all the use he has ungratefully made of that clemmercy has been to qualify himself, according to law,A. D. 1739. .-,., . , ,that he and his party may, some time or other, havean opportunity to overthrow all law. I am onlyafraid, sir, that they will not be so good as their word,and that they will return to this house ; for I rememberthat, in the case of their favourite bishop [ Canterbury],who was impeached of high treason, the samegentleman and his faction made the same resolution.They then went off like traitors, as they were, sir,but their retreat had not the detestable effect theyexpected and wished, and therefore they returned.Ever since, sir, they have persevered in the sametreasonable intention of serving that interest, by distressingthe government. But I hope their behaviourwill unite all the true friends of the present happy establishmentof the crown in his majesty's person and familymore firmly than ever, and that the gentlemen who,with good intentions, have been deluded into the likemeasures will awaken from their delusion, since thetrumpet of rebellion is now in a manner sounded."It is said that this measure was recommended byBolingbroke, and that the plan was, that Wyndhamshould be sent to the tower for the violence of hisspeech, and that., his friends should all allow themselvesto be committed for absence from a call of thehouse, which was fixed for the ensuing Monday.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.Had this scheme succeeded, the spectacle of nearly CHAP.half the house of commons lying in prison would,A. D. 1739.doubtless, have caused all the wished-for excitement.But its success was impossible; the plan betrays anignorance of the temper of the minister which could never have displayed. Wyndhamwas allowed to walk out of the house at the head ofhis party ; and so far from taking advantage of theapproaching call of the house, Walpole obtained anadjournment over that day. The nation was not excited; moderate men, even of their own party,blamed the measure ; and a respectable section,among whom were Sir John Barnard and Lord Corn-bury,refused to join the seceders. A few days'reflection served to convince Wyndham and hisfriends that they had placed themselves in a very unhappyposition ; they applied to Bolingbroke forcounsel, and the reply of their ancient leader sufficientlyindicates that it was not by his advice thatthe secession was made. " What has happened,he says, " in the course of opposition to Walpole'sadministration puts me in mind of what happened inthe beginning of the late king's reign, when the Toriessuffered themselves to be pushed into rebellion, andundertook passionately and rashly an enterprise thatof all others requires the coolest counsels and mostdeliberate measures." He advises them to get backto their seats as quickly as possible, and proposes, as270 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, an excuse to cover their return, that requisitions toXVthis effect should be obtained by the several membersA. D. 1739. r,from their constituents.*Meanwhile Walpole in the house of commons wasabsolute and unopposed : from the 9th of March, theday of the secession, until the prorogation of parliament,on the 1 6th of June, no debate of the slightestinterest occurred in the lower house. In the lordsthe cry was kept up, but the people have neverregarded the proceedings of that house with theinterest which they attach to those of their ownrepresentatives. Perhaps the most important circumstanceconnected with these debates was, thatArgyle stood forward in them the loudest to arraignthe conduct of the government, and yet retained hisappointments. The minister suffered himself to betold publicly in the house of commons that " hedared not take these away."A signal proof was, however, given in the houseof commons that the Whigs had not yet thoroughlylearnt, or had not acquired courage to avow the trueprinciple of toleration. After the secession Walpolewas again called upon by the dissenters to repeal theTest act. It would be supposed that he could nowfind no excuse for delay ; but, to the surprise of adeputation which waited upon him, he returned theBolingbroke to Polwarth. Marchmont Papers, vol. ii., p. 190.THE HISTORY OF PARTY, 271answer they had so often heard before : " Whatever CHAP.XVwere his private inclinations the attempt was A. D. 1739.proper, and the time was not yet arrived. Dr.Chandler, the principal of the deputation, replied,"You have so often, Sir Robert, returned this answer,that I trust you will give me leave to ask youwhen the time will come ?" The minister appears tohave been taken off his guard. " If you require aspecific answer, I will give it you in a word Never."The question was then brought into the house, andWalpole, having in vain implored the Tories to comeand throw it out, was obliged to undertake the wholetask himself. He made a speech, without one wordto the merits of the question, upon the unfitness ofthe time, and attempted to be witty upon the Tories,who did not now come down to defend the church.His followers took up the strain, and the speakersaffected to wonder that gentlemen who had formerlybeen so zealous in persecuting the damnable sin ofschism should now be missing from the house.* InaWhig house of commons, whence every Torymember had been weeded, this question was lost bya majority of one hundred and eighty-eight againsteighty-finest a greater majority than had appearedJohn Selwyn to the Hon. f Coxe's Life of Walpole, vol.Thomas Townshend, April 7, 1739. i., p. 608.Coxe.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, when the Tories sat in the house.* This is an in-XVstance of disgraceful and indefensible abandonment ofA. D. 1739.principle.In October of this year Walpole, although persuadedthat such a step was unjustifiable and impolitic,declared war against Spain. The cabinet wasdivided upon this question, Walpole was supportedonly by Sir Charles Wager, the Earl of Godolphin,now lord privy seal, and the Duke of Devonshire.The Duke of Newcastle was for wart and Harrington,who looked upon the duke as his patron, was ofcourse upon the same side. The king was also forwar, and the Earl of Wilmington, who thought he hadnow learned to govern, and had begun to wish for therenewal of the offer which he had once refused, wasinfluenced by the king. The Duke of Newcastleprevailed, and Walpole succumbed to the will of hismaster. A great man would have retired at thisconjuncture, but Walpole was only a shrewd man,and he retained his power. The reverses which attendedthe commencement of this war increased theBut, although the Tories had-f- " The war is yours," saidvoted against the repeal, Pulteney Walpole to the duke during oneand his friends, now also among of their discussions ; " you havethe seceders, had voted for it ; the had the conduct of it I wish youabsence of the opposition, there joy of it." Coxe, from the Hard-fore,had no very decided influence wicked Papers.either way.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.XV.unpopularity of the government ; dissensions arosewithin, Walpole and Newcastle were in open opposite.D. 1739.tion, and the minister vented his spleen in testyremarks at the council-board, and unequivocally expressedhis intention to rid himself of his rival.*Upon one occasion, when thedestination of a ship of war was thesubject of debate, and Walpole andNewcastle, as usual, differed, theformer exclaimed, "I oppose nothing,I give in to every thing, amsaid to do every thing, am to answerfor every thing and yet, Godknows, I dare not do what I thinkright ; but I dare not, I will not,make any alteration." When theArchbishop of Canterbury proposedthat the matter should betakeninto consideration anotherday, he opposed it, and said, " Letthem go, let them go," alluding, ofcourse, to the Pelhamss. The dukedid not let this observation passunmarked, for he related it to LordHardwicke, in a letter yet extantamong the Hardwicke Papers.VOL. II,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAPTER XVI.Death of Wyndham and Marchmont Motion to remove Walpolefrom the king's presence and councils review of the debate TheTories again forsake the Whig opposition Fate of the motion, andits consequences.CHAP. THIS year was marked by the deaths of Sir Wily17 THam Wyndham and the Earl of Marchmont. TheA.D. 1740. Jlatter was only important as it removed Lord Pol-earthfrom the house of commons, where his eloquenceand activity were much dreaded by the ministers,and placed him in a position where he must be farless useful. With Wyndham, however, died all appearanceof unity between the two factions whichmade up the opposition. Wyndham had bowed hisstubborn creed in deference to the genius of BoilingHISTORY OF PARTY.broke he had become a conforming Tory. His CHAP,extensive influence and great eloquence had enabled -A. JD. 1 740him to induce the Tories to accommodate their tacticsto the necessity of the time ; and, as the head ofa compact party, he could demand from his Whigallies the forbearance he himself observed. Thesedeaths were a great loss to the opposition ; " Whata star has our minister!" exclaimed Bolingbroke,*Wyndham dead, Marchmont disabled ! The lossof Wyndham and Marchmont to our country I"The king, having returned from his usual visit toHanover, met his parliament in November of thisyear, and the opposition came to the contest flushedwith the expectation that the ill-success which hadattended the war must shake the minister from hisseat. The usual opposition to the address was made,and defeated ; but the approach of the real strugglewas intimated by Sandys, a man whom his contemporarieslikened to Pym, and whose readiness ofspeech, intensity of application, and indomitable perseverance,seemed to warrant the comparison. On 1741.the lath of February, this motion-maker to the opposition,as he has been often called, left his seat,and, crossing the floor to Walpole, said that hethought it an act of common justice to inform himMarchmont Papers, vol. ii., p. 224.T 2276 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, that he should, on Friday next, bring an accusationof several articles against him. The minister ina.D. 1741.mediately rose, and receiving the intimation withgreat composure and dignity, thanked him for hisnotice, and, after requesting a candid and impartialhearing, declared that he would not fail to attendthe house, as he was not conscious of any crime todeserve accusation. He concluded by laying hishand to his breast and saying, with some emotionNil conspire sibi, nulli* pallescere cup."Pulteney rose and observed, that the right honourablegentleman's logic and Latin were alike inaccurate,and that Horace, whom he had just misquoted,had written " nulla pallescere culpa." Walpole defendedhis quotation, and offered to bet a guineathat he was right. Pulteney accepted the bet, andreferred it to Nicholas Hardingee, clerk of the house,a gentleman distinguished for classical erudition.Hardingee decided against Walpole, who immediatelytaking a guinea out of his pocket, threw it across thehouse to Pulteney. The latter caught it, and holdingit up to the house, exclaimed, " It is the onlymoney which I have received from the treasury formany years, and it shall be the last !"*Such is the version given of Nicholas Hardingee. This guineathis curious anecdote by Mr. Coxe, was carefully preserved, and received it from the son of scended into the hands of Sir JohnTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.This was but a light commencement to an attack CHAPwhich Pulteney and his friends intended should end Xviwith the impeachment, perhaps with the death of theminister.On the 13th of February, the threatened motionwas made.* The public expectation had been raisedMurray, who, in 1828, presented Latin, and encourage them in theirit to the British Museum. In the learning."medal-room of that establishment * There are two full reports ofthe coin may, of course, still be this debate. One, which appearedseen. It is authenticated by a at intervals in the London Maga-memorandum in the handwriting sine, a few months after it occursPulteney, too curious to be red ; and another, published elevenomitted. "This guinea I desire may months after the former, in thebe kept as an heirloom. It was Gentleman's Magazine. The latterwon of Sir Robert Walpole, in the is by far the more complete, and cor-houseof commons, he asserting responds with the journals of thethe verse in Horace to be tutti house ; but the speeches are frompallescere culpce, whereas I laid the pen of Johnson. Sir Johnthe wager of a guinea that it was Hawkins, in his Life of Johnson,null pallescere culpa. He sent states, that the debates written byfor the book, and being convinced this author are pure invention,that he had lost, gave me this written upon no more ample dataguinea. I told him I could take than the knowledge of the names ofthe money without any blush on the speakers and the side on whichmy side, but believed it was the they spoke. Mr. Cobbett, in theonly money he ever gave in the prefaces to vols. x. and xi. of hishouse where the giver and the re- Parliamentary History, notwith-receiver ought not equally to blush, standing the numerous anecdotesThis guinea, I hope, will prove to confirmatory of Sir John Hawkins'smy posterity the use of knowing assertion, combats this proposition,THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP.XVI.A.D. 1741.to the utmost pitch ; the passages to the gallerywere crowded at a very early hour; and the concoursewas prodigious. Several of the commonssecured their seats at six in the morning ; and no lessthan four hundred and fifty members were in thehouse at one o'clock, when the debate was opened.Sandys, in a speech of considerable length, recapitulatedall the charges which had been, from timeto time, brought against the minister. After someand produces some letters thatpassed between Cave, the proprietorand editor of the Gentleman'sMagazine, and Dr. Birch, to provethat the members themselves occasionallycontributed their ownspeeches to his periodical ; but Ithink he is far from successful inhis endeavours to establish the authenticityof Johnson's reports. Itmay be admitted that the doctorwas generally supplied with theheads of argument used by thespeakers ; but this by no meansrenders his debates authorities asto what really passed in the house ;nor does it enable us to judge fromthem the style of oratory in whichthe speaker excelled, nor the degreeof force with which he supportedhis position. Yet of whatuse are such reports unless for thesepurposes? It is so evident to everyreader that the sentiment and languageare those of Johnson thatin reading the modulated sentencesand sonorous substantives, we forgetto notice the name of thespeaker, and think only of the author.Every orator is raised ordepressed to the same level. Allpeculiarity of expression all distinctivemarks, disappear at onceunder the hands of this literaryProcrustes.Gordon, the translator of Tacitus,who reported for the LondonMagazine, sat nightly in the gallery,arid his reports, although nodoubt very unfavourable portraits,are, to the extent they go, far morefaithful.THE HISTORY OF PARTY*. 279general remarks, he divided his accusations into three CHAP.XVIheads as they related to foreign policy, domesticpolicy, and the conduct of the war. Under the firsthead, the orator discussed the merits of the treatiesmade during the present administration from that of1721 down to the recent convention, on which heexpatiated with all his power of censure. He concludedthat the honour and interests of the countryhad been sacrificed, and that the foreign policy of theminister was made up of expedients by which heseemed to live from year to year. The domestic policywas still more fruitful in topics of accusation. Uponthis head he proceeded to say ; " The making andunmaking the famous bank contract ; the screeningfrom condign punishment those who, by their wickedand avaricious execution of the trust reposed in themby the South Sea scheme, had ruined many thousands,were the steps by which the minister was supposed tohave risen to power. As he began, so he has goneon, oppressing the innocent; imposing upon thecredulous ; screening the guilty ; wasting the publictreasure ; and endangering the liberties of thepeople. A much greater army has all along been keptup than was necessary for the support of our government,or consistent with our constitution : every methodproposed for securing our constitution against itsmost dangerous enemy, corruption, has been rejected ;280 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, while penal laws have been increased until a great- '- number of his majesty's subjects are reduced underthe arbitrary power of a minister and his creatures.Every department of the public expense has beenincreased by the creation of new and useless offices ;all inquiry has been prevented or defeated ; andalmost every session has been disgraced by a compliancewith the unconstitutional demand of votes ofcredit. Meanwhile the civil list has been increasedbeyond all precedent ; commerce has been neglectedand languishing; and our expenditure is augmented asour revenues decrease. To such unaccountable conductthe present melancholy situation of the affairsof Europe is principally to be ascribed."Every material step, it will be said, has beenauthorized or approved by parliament. This, sir, becomesthe most heavy and evident charge against theminister. He has monopolized all the favours of thecrown, and engrossed the sole disposal of all places,pensions, titles, and ribbons, as well as all preferments,civil, military, or ecclesiastical. Havingeffected this, he has made a blind submission to hisdirection at elections and in parliament, the onlyground to hope for preferments, and the only tenureby which any gentleman could preserve what he had.This, sir, requires no proof. Has not the ministerhimself said, and in this house, too, that he would beTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 281a pitiful fellow of a minister, who did not displace any CHAP,officer that opposed his measures in parliament ? IsA. D. 1741.it not, then, an aggravation of his misconduct that heobtained the approval of parliament, from his havingoverawed a majority by means of that crime he hashere openly avowed ?Having thus obviated such an objection, I maypursue my catalogue of accusations. His power dependsupon the continuation of the heaviest imposts ;for these supply him with patronage. Accordinglyhe has employed all his art to prevent our paying offour old debt. It is now rather more than it was in1725. Sir John Barnard, a few years since, introducedinto this house a scheme for reducing the interestspayable upon the national debt, and for putting thewhole upon a certain footing of being discharged in acourse of years. It is well known by whom, and bywhose influence this scheme was defeated. One stepof misconduct did not meet the approbation of parliament.I mean the excise scheme ; one of the weakestor one of the wickedest projects that was ever setonfoot or countenanced by any minister in the kingdom.If its author was sensible of the great powerthat scheme would have placed in the hands of aminister, and had really formed a design to overturn,by that means, the liberty of the people, he ought tobe not only removed, but punished for his wicked-theHISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. ness. If his object was merely the making an uncertain,and at best but a trifling addition to theA. D. 1741public or civil list revenue, his weakness is no lessevident, in that for such an object he advised hismajesty to forfeit the affections of the whole people.Whether this were crime or oversight, for this projectalone he deserves, at least, to be removed fromhis majesty's counsels.In the conduct of the war our minister has actedmore weakly or more wickedly than he did in thetime of peace. He has made us an object of scornto our enemies, and an object of pity to our friends,by the vastness of his preparations and the pusillanimityof his actions. Our trade has been neglectedfor the sake of fitting out mighty squadrons ;those squadrons have gone forth, and, consultingeither their orders or their means, have done nothing.Shall we sit in this house and see the counsels of oursovereign directed by a minister who has thus, bothin peace and war, exposed our country to scorn andderision ?But the proof of crime, or even of misconduct isunnecessary to this motion. If all the charges againstthis minister were false, the occasion for his removalwould not be less urgent. He is unpopular ; and noman who has been so unfortunate as to incur thepublic hatred, ought to have any share in his majesty'sTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 283confidence or counsels. Were this not the case CHAP.XVI.were his public conduct pure, and his administrationA. D. 1741.uniformly popular, yet the very length of it is, in afree country, sufficient cause for removing him.Remove him from the king's counsels and presence ;remove him from those high offices and power he ispossessed of. If he were conscious of being entirelyinnocent, and had a due regard to the security andglory of his sovereign, he would have chose to haveput himself in this condition long before this time :since he has not thought fit to do so, it is our duty toendeavour to do it for him."Such was the line of argument adopted by Sandys,whose speech comprehended all the points urged byhis party. The motion was seconded by LordLimerick ; but the debate was interrupted by a proposalthat Walpole should withdraw. This propositionwas shown to be quite unprecedented, sincethere was no specific and criminal charge against him ;and it was decided that the minister should remainduring the debate, and conclude it with his reply.The main question was then proceeded in.Sandys was answered by Stephen Fox, who characterizedhis speech as a complication of forgottenpamphlets, and a recollection of forgotten debates.He rightly observed, that the reply to such a speechcould contain little novelty or interest ; he followed284 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the speaker through all his charges; gave the replieswhich had been before given ; and concluded withA.D. 1741.strong animadversion upon the motives of the promotersof the measure, and high eulogy of theaccused minister.Pitt rose next in the debate. He declared, in hisemphatic manner, that "during the administrationthat was the object of censure, at home, debts wereincreased, taxes multiplied, and the sinking-fundalienated ; abroad, the system of Europe was totallysubverted ; and at this awful moment, when the greatestscene was opening to Europe that had ever beforeoccurred, he, who had lost the confidence of all mankindshould not be permitted to continue at the headof the king's government"* " The minister," hecontinued, "who neglects any just opportunity ofpromoting the power or increasing the wealth of hiscountry, is to be considered an enemy to his fellow-subjects; but what censure is to be passed upon himwho betrays that army to a defeat, by which victorymight be obtained ; impoverishes the nation whoseaffairs he is intrusted to transact by those expeditionswhich might enrich it ; who levies armies onlyPitt's speech has been most the Parliamentary Memorandums,unaccountably omitted from the cited by Mr. Coxe, from the Fairportgiven in the London Ma pole Papers the rest is Johnson's,gazing. This first sentence is fromTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 285to be exposed to pestilence, and compels them to CHAP.perish in sight of their enemies without molestingA.D. 1741.them ? It cannot, surely, be denied, that such conductmay justly produce a censure more severe thanthat which is intended by this motion ; and that hewho has doomed thousands to the grave who hasco-operated with foreign powers against his countrywho has protected its enemies and dishonoured itsarms, should be deprived not only of his honours, butof his life; that he should be, at least, stripped ofthose riches which he has amassed during a longseries of prosperous wickedness, and not barely behindered from making new acquisitions and increasinghis wealth by multiplying his crimes."Henry Pelham undertook to reply to Pitt ; and hewas in his turn attacked by Lyttelton. But the housewas far more excited by the speech of Lord Corn-bury,who followed. This young nobleman, the friendof Wyndham, the pupil of Bolingbroke, whom Popeloved as the realization of all his dreams of patriotism,stood forward and denounced the motion as an attemptto make mere accusation a proof of guilt andsuspicion the ground of punishment. " Instead ofevidence produced to prove the particular articles ofthis complicated accusation, we have heard, hitherto,only florid declamations which may amuse, but cannotconvince ; and violent invectives, which may fire theTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, passions for a moment, but which can have no lastingx. > i.~ p effect upon the judgment. These have been answeredby rhetoric equally engaging, and assertionsequally consistent ; but to which the laws have giventhis advantage, that we are obliged to admit themtill they are confuted, and by consequence to rejectthose of the accusers until they are proved. I shall,therefore, continue to suppose every man innocent,till he appears from legal evidence to be guilty; andto reject any charge of accumulative guilt upon thesame principles of regard to liberty, to virtue, totruth, and to our constitution, by which I have hithertoregulated my conduct ; and for the same reasonsfor which I have condemned the measures ofthe administration, I shall now oppose the presentmotion."This was ominous of disunion in the ranks of theopposition ; but the suspicion became certainty, whenShippen, who had succeeded to the power of Wynd-ham,rose, and declared that he looked upon themotion as only a scheme for turning out one ministerand bringing in another ; and as his conduct in parliamenthad always been regulated with a view to thegood of his country, without regard to his own privateinterest, it was quite indifferent to him who werein or who were out. He would give himself no concernin the question. Having made this declaration, heTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 287left the house, and was followed by thirty-four of his CHAP,friends ; twenty-five more remained in the house to -vote with the minister.*This open desertion destroyed the confidence ofthe opposition. It was in vain that Barnard putforth all his powers of invective in an attempt to rallytheir force, and that Pulteney came forward to recapitulateand enforce all the criminatory harangues ofhis friends.Before Walpole was called upon to reply, he hadreceived another token of success ; Lord Carteret hadmade a similar motion in the lords, to that whichSandys had brought forward in the commons. Thedebate in that house was now ended, and its resultwas, that the motion was rejected by a majority ofone hundred and eight to fifty-nine.Walpole now rose to reply. It would be tediousto follow the minister through an harangue whichconsumed four hours in delivery : it contained littlemore of novelty in defence, than those on the otherside had in accusation. But there are some passageswhich, as they give us Walpole's view of the state ofthe parties which made up the opposition are toonecessary to our purpose to be omitted. " This attack,"he said " proceeds from the passions andWalpole's Parliamentary Memorandums. Coxe. Correspondence,vol. iii.288 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, prejudices of the parties combined against me, whomay be divided into three classes the boys, the riperA. D. 1741patriots, and the Tories. The Tories I can easilyforgive, they have unwillingly come into the measure,and they do me honour in thinking it necessary to removeme as their only obstacle. This is the heinousoffence which exceeds all others, I keep from themthe possession of that power, those honours, and thoseemoluments, to which they so ardently and pertinaciouslyaspire. But can it be fitting in them, whohave divided the public opinion of the nation, to shareit with those who now appear as their competitors?with the men of yesterday, the boys in politics whowould be absolutely contemptible, did not theiraudacity render them detestable ! with the mockpatriots, whose practices and professions prove theirselfishness and malignity ; who threatened to pursueme to destruction, and who have never for a moment,lost sight of their object ? These men, under thename of the separatists, presume to call themselvesexclusively the nation and the people, and underthat character assume all power. In their estimation,the king, lords, and commons, are a faction, and theyare the government. Upon these principles theythreaten the destruction of all authority, they withdrawfrom parliament because they succeed in nothing,and then attribute their want of success, not to itsTHE HISTORY OF PARTY* 289true cause, their own want of integrity and import CHAP.once, but to the effect of places, pensions, and cor ^5eruption. May it not be asked, are the people on thecourt side more united than on the other? Are notthe Tories, Jacobites, and Patriots, equally determined?What makes this strict union? What cementsthis heterogeneous mass? Party engagements andpersonal attachments. However different their viewsand principles, they all agree in opposition. TheJacobites distress the government they would subvert:the Tories contend for party prevalence and power.The Patriots, from discontent and disappointment,would change the ministry that themselves mightexclusively succeed. Patriotism, sir, is a venerableword when duly practised, but of late it has been somuch hackneyed about, that it is in danger of fallinginto disgrace ; the very idea of true patriotism is lost,and the term has been prostituted to the worst ofpurposes. A patriot, sir ! Why patriots spring uplike mushrooms, I could raise fifty of them within thetwenty-four hours, I have raised many of them in onenight. It is but refusing to gratify an unreasonable oraninsolent demand, and up starts a patriot. I havenever been afraid of making patriots ; but I disdainand despise all their efforts. Their pretended virtueproceeds from personal malice, and from disappointedambition. There is not a man among them whoseparticular aim I am not able to ascertain, and fromVOL. II. U290 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, what motive he has entered into the lists of oppo-XVI.sition. *A. D. 1741.After thus characterizing his accusers, he enteredupon his defence. The debate had commenced ateleven in the morning, he closed it at four on thefollowing morning, when the motion was negativedby the decisive majority of two hundred and ninetyto one hundred and six.When this result became known, all voices wereraised against Shippen and his party. It is indeeddifficult to assign any plausible reason for his conduct.The Duchess of Marlborough inclined tothink, that Shippen had taken money ; but she, uponthis occasion, echoed the sentiments of the mere mob.Tindal supposes that the Tories wished to show theirallies how contemptible they were without their assistancea less absurd, . but equally unsatisfactoryhypothesis ; while Mr. Coxe professes to solve theproblem by relating an anecdote. Shippen had oncebegged the life of a friend, who was deeply implicatedin some Jacobite plot, Walpole readily granted hisrequest, adding, " I do not ask you to support themeasures of my administration, but should a questionever be pending affecting me personally, I expectyou will then remember this favour." Mr. Coxesupposes that Shippen upon this occasion cancelledthe debt ; but he forgets to inform us by what meanshe prevailed upon his whole party to support him inFor remainder of this speech see Appendix E.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.frustrating the most decisive effort that had yet been CHAPXVI.made to unseat the minister. The Duchess ofA.D. 1741.Marlborough asserts, that the opposition Whigs, oras they called themselves, the separatists, had apromise from the Tories that they would join them ;nor, indeed, is it probable that they would haveengaged in such an undertaking without that assurance.The duchess also says, that had they beenfaithful to their promise, they would certainly havebeen as near carrying what they desired, as in theExcise bill. If the prospect of success was so near,I think it the most probable supposition, that theimpossibility of forming an united administrationfrom the parties of Pulteney and Shippen againpresented itself, that ulterior measures were againdiscussed, and that a temporary division was againthe consequence.That Walpole did not consider the secession ofShippen as an isolated act is very evident. He drewfrom it an inference, that the opposition was toomuch divided to be dangerous, and he was lulledinto a fatal security. The session closed uponthe 25th of April, and this parliament then expired.*This supposition is in some currency. " The conduct of theslight degree corroborated, by Bo Tories is silly, infamous, and voidling broke's comment upon this oc of any colour of excuse ; and yet,U 2THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. the truth is, that the behaviour andXV . language of some of those whoA. D. 1741. complain, I dare say very loudlyon this occasion, has prepared itand given Shippen, who dislikedthe coalition from the first, as muchas Walpole, a pretence to makehis fools break it. The reflectionyou make concerning our departedfriend (Wyndham) renews all thebitterness of sorrow that I feltwhen we lost him. He did notexpect any more than I have longdone to render this generation ofTories of much good use to theircountry ; and though he came toitlate, he came at last to have asbad opinions of Shippen as yousee the man deserves." Boling-broketo Marchmont. MarchmontPapers, vol. ii., p. 245.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 293CHAPTER XVII.A new parliament State of the elections The Westminster electionMeeting of parliament Strength of the opposition Contestin the election committees Motion upon the conduct of the warDecisive defeat of Walpole on the Chippenham election Resignationof Walpole.Now commenced the struggle which was either to CHAP.XVII.renew for seven years Walpole's lease of power, orA. D. 1741,to determine it for ever. His situation was by nomeans that which it had been at the time of the lastelection. An unsuccessful war was raging, thenation was discontented, the king was absent inHanover, and those whom his presence might havecontrolled, were disputing among themselves : ofthose who had at the last election supported theminister, some, like Argyle and Dodington, hadopenly gone over to the opposition, some, likeTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.Newcastle and Wilmington, faintly supported a causeD 174] they had ceased to love. No sooner had the electionscommenced, than the spirit of the electorsbecame apparent. Westminster had hitherto beena government borough, and the nominees of the ministerhad been returned as a matter of course. SirCharles Wager, first lord of the admiralty, and LordWanton, a lord of the treasury, were proposed to bere-elected, but some of the electors were resolved torecover their representation, and Admiral Vernonand Mr. Edwin were put in nomination. The contest,although severe, seemed likely to terminate infavour of the ministerial candidates, since, on thefifth day of polling they had a considerable majority;but, on that day the high bailiff, through cowardiceor folly, put an end to the poll seeing a mob advancingto the hustings, bearing banners, inscribed withthe watchwords of the opposition, he became alarmed,either for his own safety, or for the success of thegovernment candidates. He mounted upon a formwithin the hustings, called out that he apprehendeda riot was intended, and ordering his clerksto shut their poll-books, ran into the vestry withthem. The crowd, enraged at this interference,attacked Lord Wanton, who narrowly escaped withhis life. The guards were called out, and, say theopposition scribes, " on a sudden, a body of foot-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 295guards, to the number of sixty or seventy, marched CHAP,to Covent-garden churchyard, with their drumsbeating and their bayonets fixed upon the muzzlesof their muskets ; they then drew up, and their sergeantsdeclared that they came to murder every manthere if they got orders"* It was under the protectionof this body of soldiery that the poll was closed,and the ministerial candidates declared duly elected.This outrage was immediately revenged ; the affairwas bruited throughout the country, and its consequenceswere seen in every subsequent electionsThe minister heard only of defeats or hardly gainedvictories, and when the returns were so far completedthat he could estimate the strength of the parties, hefound, to his dismay, that a majority of sixteen wasthe utmost upon which he could rely. The oppositionwere not ignorant of their advantage ; Dodington,the Duke of Argyle, and the Earls of Stairand Chesterfield, formed among themselves a well-arrangedscheme of operations for the ensuing session.Review of the Westminster the Prince of Wales, who con-election,p. 43. This account of traced great debts upon this oc.affairs is of course grossly exaggeration Lord Falmouth, in Corn-ratedfor party purposes. wall, and the Duke of Argyle, inf The exertions of the oppo- Scotland, were particularly sue"sition were seasonably sustained by restful in their electioneering cam-largecontributions from Pulteney, pains.the Duchess of Marlborough, and296 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. These men now formed the opposition council, forXVII.Pulteney refused to join their consultation. lieA, D. 1741. Jsaid he was willing to act, but he would not lead,he was weary of being at the head of a party, andwould rather row in the galleys." Dodington drewup a list of the members, and came to the conclusionthat it was the most equally balanced parliamentever returned in England ; meetings were held,preliminaries were arranged, and the meeting of thehouses was then patiently awaited.*The new parliament was convened on the 4th ofDecember. To oppose the re-election of Onslow asspeaker would have been dangerous ;t this ordinaryoccasion for a trial of strength was therefore neglected.But in the debate upon the address theminister appeared no longer confident of a majorityand exulting in his strength ; he was reduced toapologize and defend, and he at last weakly agreedto the chief amendment of the opposition. Thiswavering was more fatal than defeat. The waitersupon providence saw that his fall was approaching,See the Correspondence, be but weak, he having by a reprintedfrom the Walpole, Hard tain decency of behaviour madewicked, and Melcombe Papers, by himself many personal friends inMr. Coxe. the minority. Chesterfield to DosAs for opposition to their dungeon.speaker. If it be Onslow we shallTHE HISTORY OF PARTY-andshrunk from his side ; his opponents openly ex CHAP.ulted, and Pulteney received the concession as anevidence of his fear of the contest ; he added, thatwith regard to the balance of power, not being insecrets, he did not know how it was abroad, but hecould congratulate the house that he had not, formany years, known it to be so near an equilibriumas it was there. Walpole feebly replied, offering toappoint a day for inquiring into the state of the nation,an offer which was at once accepted. Pulteney,satisfied with his present success, allowed the address,as amended, to pass, observing, that dividingwas not the way to multiply.*The decisive battle was to be fought in the electioncommittees. Both parties came prepared towave all scruples upon this occasion. The ministerhad declared that no quarter should be given inelections, and Dodington had laid it down in his planof proceedings, that it should be esteemed infamousto desert an election committee. Such was then thecode of party honour. The first division was uponthe Rossini election ; the minister succeeded by amajority of six. Satisfied that he still retained amajority, he proceeded to increase it by proposing acreature of his own as chairman of the committee ofOrlebar to Etough. Co.vc's Correspondence.298 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, elections. His candidate, Giles Earle, had filled thesame situation in the two last parliaments, and hadmade himself highly unpopular. The opposition hadbeen prepared for this conjuncture, and proposedDr. Lee, who was beloved and respected by all parties.Upon the division Walpole was left in aminority of four. The discussion of the Westminsterelection had been looked forward to with great expectations; Walpole was here confident of success,but he was again disappointed. The election wasdeclared void, by a majority of four ; the high bailiffwas ordered into custody by a majority of two ; anda resolution, protesting against the presence of soldieryat elections, passed without a division. Anadjournment now took place until the 18th of January.No one doubted that it was for the purpose ofallowing time for the arrangement of a new ministry.But Walpole had held power too long to quit itreadily ; he employed the interval in futile negotiationsand vain attempts to divide his enemies, and hebrought his sovereign to share in his humiliation, bypersuading him to offer the Prince of Wales terms ofreconciliation, which were rejected with contempt.To the surprise of the nation, upon the reassemblingof the house, he again appeared as minister, resolvedto cling to his office to the last.On the 21st the government members were startledTHE HISTORY OF PARTY* 299upon entering the house of commons to find the oppo- CHAP,sition benches crowded with the whole strength of theparty. It was evident that no effort had been sparedto bring up every vote at their command ; cripples hadbeen brought in upon their crutches, and sick men,enveloped in bandages and nightcaps, proclaimed theimportance of an occasion which had drawn themfrom their beds. Meanwhile so well had the secretbeen kept that the government benches were empty,and no business of importance had been expected.The appearance of the house was explained, whenPulteney rose and in a speech of great power arraignedthe conduct of the minister in the prosecutionof the war. He concluded with a motion, to referthose papers relating to the subject which had beenproduced to a secret committee. Upon this demonstrationmessengers were, of course, despatched in alldirections. As the debate was industriously drawnout, the ministerial retainers gradually arrived, and,although so completely outmanoeuvred in the firstinstance, Walpole compensated by his diligence forhis want of preparation.In the less material contest of argument the falling-ministerwas thought by his friends to evince morethan his ordinary power. Sir Robert Wilmot, writingan account of the debate to the Duke of Devonshire,says, " Sir Robert exceeded himself, he300 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, particularly entered into foreign affairs, and convinced- even his enemies that he was thoroughly master ofA. D. 1742.them. Mr. Pelham, with the greatest decency, cutPulteney* into a thousand pieces ; Sir Robert ablydissected him, and laid his heart open to the view ofthe house. Mr. Winnington, Sir W. Yonge, andH. Fox, spoke incomparably well. I must not forgetMr. Coke, who, I am told, spoke in a most agreeablemanner, and with great spirit' tWhen each party had ready every vote they couldhope to muster the debate was concluded, and themost extraordinary artifices were adopted to influencethe division. The Prince of Wales, who was present,astonished at the number of invalids who were beingcarried into the house, exclaimed to General Churchill,who sat near him, " They have got together thelame, the halt, and the blind." "Yes, the lame onour side, the blind on yours," was the reply. Twoof these invalids and a gentleman who had recentlylost a relation, and could not appear with decency forwant of a suit of mourning, had been impressed byLord Walpole, and kept in a room opening into thehouse, which he held as auditor of the exchequer ;some opposition members getting information of thisSee Appendix F.f Sir Robert Wilmot to the Duke of Devonshire, Cave's Correspondence.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 301stuffed the keyhole of the door with sand. At the CHAP.XVIIcritical moment the key was found useless, and threeA.D. 1742.votes were thus lost. Upon the division the defectionof two Tory members turned the scale, givingWalpole the majority of two, which would otherwisehave been against him.The friends of the minister now flattered themselvesthat the danger was passed. On the contrary,every hour increased it. The opposition, enraged attheir unexpected defeat, but animated by the closenessof the division, redoubled their efforts. Dodingtonwrote to the Earl of Wilmington,* pressing himto declare openly against Walpole in the cabinet,and ambiguously promising that he should be hissuccessor. The advice was unnecessary, for bothWilmington and Dorset had already done so, butwith little success, and with objects which Dodingtonhad not been permitted to know. The retainers ofthe minister appear to have been worse disciplined,or more conscientious, than those of the opposition.We find Walpole and his friends complaining thatmany of his usual supporters refuse to vote uponelections, while not a man of their opponents wasever absent ; close divisions, sometimes won or lostby one vote, were the consequence, until at length asudden panic seized the government members, andDodington to Wilmington, Jan. 25, 1742.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Walpole was left in the decisive majority of sixteen.A. VII.A p This was upon the Chippenham election.On the 3d of February the king adjourned theparliament, to allow time for the formation of a newministry. On the 9th Sir Robert Walpole wascreated Earl of Orford, and on the lath he resigned.*Parl. Hist., vol. xii. Coxe's Life of Walpole, and Correspondence.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 303CHAPTER XVIII.Situation, power, and conduct of Pulteney Intrigues of WalpoleNegotiations for the formation of a new ministry Their eventThe new administration Indignation of the opposition Meetingat the Fountain Meeting of parliament Place bill Inquiry intothe conduct of Walpole Its termination.THE chase was now ended, the game was fairly CHAP,hunted down, and the pack which had been hallooedA.D. 1742.on by Pulteney expected their spoil at the handsof their master. Seldom has one man held the politicalpower which Pulteney now possessed. Theking awaited his decision without power of resistance; the ministers held their places at his pleasure ;and Walpole, fallen from his high station, felt thathis life was at the mercy of his triumphant rival.The man who had so long been followed by theshouts of the populace now had it in his power toeffect the measures he had before proposed, and topunish the conduct he had so often condemned.Whichever way he turned he was certain to be THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, lowed by that class of members who had lost ax v in.A D 1742 master by the fall of Walpole, and were eager to secureanother. Surrounded by Pitt, Marchmont,Lyttelton, and others, men whose minds were notyet hackneyed to the petty artifices of political intrigue,he might have formed a ministry which,although it would have met with powerful opposition,would have been formidable from its talent, andstrong from its popularity. At the head of such menhe might have tried to put down the corruptionwhich he had been so long denouncing ; he mighthave exhibited to the nation the unwonted spectacleof a government trusting for success to no unseeninfluence to no secret arrangements, but advancing,trusting in its integrity alone for support, and in itsefficiency alone for success. One week of power likethis had been well worth the prolonged dominion ofhis predecessor to fall in such an attempt had beenfar more glorious than any honours which the crownor even the people could bestow.But Pulteney did not think so. No sooner did hefind himself in the position to which he had aspired,than he clearly showed that the quarrel in which hehad engaged was not between Walpole and hiscountry, but between Walpole and Mr. Pulteney.In the words of Bolingbroke, " he had looked uponopposition only as his scaffolding, and he now dis-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 305covered the greatest readiness to demolish it"* He CHAP.XVIIIeagerly made terms for himself and a few of his particularfriends, bartered his popularity and consistencyfor a peerage, and assented to an arrangementwhich offered little prospect of any change ofmeasures. The conduct of the negotiations whichterminated to this effect may be thus stated. Walpole,when he became reluctantly convinced that hecould no longer retain his power, turned his attentionto the preservation of his safety. This could only beeffected by dividing his enemies, for many importantmembers of the opposition insisted upon his impeachmentas a necessary condition to their support of anysucceeding government. With this object it appearsthat he made some fallacious overtures to Argyleand Dodington, and the Tory party to which theywere just now considered as allied. Nor were theseadvances without their effect, since the pretensionsof that party were evidently increased ; and theDuchess of Marlborough says it was thought theywould be contented with nothing less than a Toryprime ministers But Walpole's real design wasMarchmont Papers. of our acquaintance we never metf It was not difficult to arouse with a set of gentlemen of morethe mutual hostility of the parties, extensive honour and benevolence,Dodington, writing to the Duke of truer lovers of their country, orArgyle, says, " Your grace and I more zealous to serve it, than thehave often agreed that in the course principal of the Tories. SeveralVOL. II. X306 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, upon Pulteney. In this affair he had to overcomethe king's strong personal animosity ; an obstaclewhich required no little labour to remove. Theminister appears to have thoroughly understood thecharacter of his opponent ; it was the obstinacy ofthe king he feared, not the constancy of thestatesman. As George's opposition relaxed Walpoleexclaimed in triumph to his brother " I have setthe king on him !" and when he received permissionto make the offer he considered the affair as accomplished.With a gesture, as if he were locking a door,he said, " I have turned the key of the cabinet uponhim"* The proposal was now to be laid beforePulteney, through the Duke of Newcastle. Pul-tenetrefused to give this nobleman a private meeting,who therefore waited upon him openly, accompaniedby Lord Hardwicke, and held a conferenceat which Lord Carteret was present as the friend ofPulteney. The duke began by saying, that theycame deputed by his majesty ; that the king wassensible that Sir Robert Walpole could no longercarry on the business of the house, and, therefore,of them have the same good qua tended and their mouths open incities, but if the name of Whig the very attitude to act and speakcomes across them it locks up all for the man, when the charm com-their faculties, and they cannot pretended in that syllable seizesexert them. They stand like them, and they can do neither forknight-errants of old under sudden a Whig. Melcombe Papers.enchantment, with their arms ex * Coxe.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 307was willing to place the government in Mr. Pul CHAP,tenet's hands ; that this offer was, however, madeupon the condition that Walpole should not be prosecuted,since the king could not consistently withhonour abandon his servant. Pulteney here interruptedthe duke, saying, that this was a condition hecould not comply with ; and even if such might be hisinclination, it might not be in his power, for theheads of parties were often, like the heads of snakes,urged onwards by the tail. He neither could norwould accept of such a condition.The meeting thus ended without effect, but beforethey parted some wine was brought in: the Duke ofNewcastle took a glass, and drank " To a happiermeeting." Pulteney replied from ShakspeareIf we do meet again why we shall smile ;If not, why then this parting was well made."A similar meeting took place a few days after, andthe duke then made an unconditional surrender, appealingonly to Pulteney' s generosity in favour of Walpole,and hoping that he would not require too manyalterations, but would be content with the removal ofSir Robert Walpole and a few others. Pulteneyreplied that he was by no means a man of blood ; hewould be guided in this respect by the opinion andadvice of his friends ; but he hinted that the ex-ministermust, at least, expect some parliamentaryTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, censure of his conduct. He then propounded hisXVIII.- - list of appointments. Between the first and secondmeeting it appears that some private messages hadpassed between Pulteney and the king ; and Georgehad entreated that, if he would not take the treasuryhimself, he would allow his personal friend, the Earlof Wilmington, to slide into it. The appointmentsnow announced were, doubtless, in accordance withthese private arrangements.* Pulteney declaredthat as the disposition of places was put into hishands he would accept none for himself; he had oftendeclared against accepting any place and would beconstant to himself. He therefore only claimed apeerage and a seat in the cabinet. He then namedthe Earl of Wilmington first commissioner of thetreasury ; Sandys, chancellor of the exchequer ; Carteret,who coveted Wilmington's post and was withdifficulty pacified, secretary of state, instead of Harrington,who was to be removed. t A new board ofadmiralty was named, including Sir J. Hyde Cotton ;An accident which happened went to him, took him into hisat this juncture was probably not coach, and showed such concernwithout some effect. As Pulteney for him as could not but gratify hiswas riding in Hyde Park he had a vanity and excite his gratitude.fall from his horse, which gave Chesterfield's Characters Reviewed.him a slight bruise ; the king hap f He was created an earl, andopened to come up at the instant, made president of the council, va-andbeing informed of Mr. Pulses cant by the promotion of Wil-ney'smisfortune, he immediately milton.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 309some lords of the treasury, chosen from the opposing CHAP,tion, completed the proposed list of alterations.No sooner was it known that this arrangementhad taken place, than Pulteney was assailed with allthe virulent indignation of a party who conceivedthemselves betrayed, Carteret, whom alone Pul-tenethad admitted to his confidence, was not afavourite with Argyle and his followers ; the termswere by no means such as they could approve ; thedistribution of offices was not at all to their satisfaction,and had these things been different they wouldhave refused to be bound by Pulteney, from the sameprinciple of pride which had induced Pulteney, someyears before, to refuse to ratify an agreement madeby Walpole. Complaint was immediately borne tothe Prince of Wales ; and Pulteney, accompanied byScarborough, met his accusers, Argyle, Chesterfield,Cobham, Gower, and Bathurst, in the presence ofthe prince. After hearing the accusation and reply,the prince sided with Pulteney, and supported thenew arrangements. He soon after granted an audienceto Walpole, and assured him of his protection;and a reconciliation immediately took place betweenthe prince and his father.Foiled in this attempt, the dissatisfied partyconvened a meeting of the late opposition atthe Fountain Tavern, in the Strand. About threehundred of the members of both houses attended,310 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, and Pulteney was present to confront his ac-argylewas the chief complainant, hewas very severe in his reflections, remarking uponPulteney's conduct, that a grain of honesty is worth acart-load of gold. Pulteney replied, defending himselfupon the ground of expediency, and showing howunreasonable it was that such accusations should bemade by a man who had held places and pensions foryears, against one who had been continually labouringin the work which had just been completestSir Charles Hanbury Wil Statesman," he alludes to thishams, so formidable as a penned of meeting at the Fountain. He ispolitical pasquinades, now turned invoking his muse to sing ofhis satire upon Pulteney. In one Pulteney :of the best of his odes, called " TheLeave a blank here and there in each page,To enroll the fair deeds of his youth ;When you mention the acts of his age,Leave a blank for his honour and truth.Say, he made a great monarch change hands,He spake, and the minister fell ;Say he made a great statesman of Sandys,(O that he had learnt him to spell).Then enlarge on his cunning and wit,Say how he harangued at the Fountain,Say how the old patriot's were bit,And a mouse was produced by a mountain."t The account of these arrange of Bath, and appears to have writingshas been chiefly taken from ten this account from the earl'sBishop Newton's Autobiography, dictation. The bishop afterwardsNewton was chaplain to the Earl read it over to Sandys, who saidTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 311This debate was, as Percival remarks, in his pamphlet CH AP.Xviicalled " Faction Detected," the death of the opposition.The avowed Tories were thoroughly disgusted;they had, in fact, sufficient reason, since Pulteneyhad abandoned them without ceremony. Pitt and hisfriends, who expected that every abuse was to fallwith Sir Robert Walpole, and a political millenniumto succeed, were no less disappointed ; and Argyle,with his roving band of party borderers, although heresumed his places for a short time, soon threwthem up, and recommenced his hostility. "As itwas too soon," says Percival, "for these discontentedpeople to style themselves a new opposition, becausethe parliament had not yet met, and they knew notwhat measures would be pursued ; they formed themselves,for the present, under the title of the Broad-bottom,a cant word, which, corresponding equallywith the personal figure of some of the leaders andthe nature of their pretensions, was understood toimply a party united to force the Tories into the administrations"*On the 18th of February both houses met, pursuantto adjournment, and writs were issued for thevacancies occasioned by the recent appointments.that it contained some facts which very unblessed authorities for did not know before ; but that, tory, but the narrative is circuitsfar as he could judge, it was statical and uncontradicted.perfectly true. These are not * Faction Detected.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Meanwhile the court having obtained their object noXVIIIlonger kept faith with Pulteney ; the new board ofadmiralty was declared, and Sir John Hynde Cotton,whose name had been inserted by Pulteney, forthe sake of preserving some little decency towardshis Tory allies, was omitted. Pulteney complainedin vain ; he was coolly told by Newcastle, that theking had now another shop to go to ; and he wasright. Pulteney had now no other alternative than toput himself at the head of the Tory party andrevenge the insult, or to retire from public life. Theformer his party honour, which he had always preserved,forbade him to do, the latter he had longlooked forward to. " When I have turned out SirRobert Walpole I will retire into that hospital ofinvalids the house of peers," was his frequent expression.The sickness and death of his daughteraverted, for a short time, his attention from thesethings ; but he had formed his determination.The elections were unfavourable to the new ministry;few of those who had taken office were re-elected,and some were so certain of defeat that they appliedfor reversions instead of immediate employments.Lord Limerick's fear of facing his constituents allowedSir William Yonge, the friend of Walpole, toretain his office of secretary at war.The Tories in the commons were furious intheir disappointment. Phillips, a speaker, who nowTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 313assumed a prominent part in their debates, proposed CHAP,to postpone the supplies ; and Sir Watkin WilliamsA. D. 1742.Wynn supported his motion at great length ; but theTories were weak, the discontented members hadnot yet fixed upon a point of union, and they couldnot venture to go to a division.The new ministry, anxious to preserve someshadow of consistency, or dreading to increase theirpresent unpopularity, suffered a Place bill to pass thecommons ; a concession perhaps more readily grantedsince the measure was sure of rejection by the lords.This piece of policy brought them little advantage ;the public voice still declared that they had guaranteedthe safety of Walpole as the price of theiradmission to the cabinet, and the opposition was nowdetermined to test the truth of the accusation. LordLimerick brought forward a motion for a secret committeeto inquire into the conduct of the late ministerduring the last twenty years. The debate was, ofcourse, a repetition of the topics which had been wornout by ten years of constant use, but the eventwas decided by the absence of Pulteney, who was athis daughter's bedside, and of Sandys, who was atWorcester, procuring his re-election. Winchesterand Carteret intimated to Pulteney's friends that itwould be agreeable to him if they voted against themotion. They did so, and it was lost by a majority314 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. of two. The account of the division was receivedXvii. . . . . . .with considerable surprise, since a different resultA. D. 1742.had been anticipated with so much confidence thatulterior proceedings had been arranged. It wasupon this occasion that Argyle retired, and the outcrywas as great against Pulteney as it had beenagainst Walpole when he stood forward to screenSunderland from prosecution, on account of his sharein the South Sea scheme. Pulteney, unaccustomedto find himself the object of popular indignation, andenraged at the imputations cast upon him, insistedthat the motion should be renewed. Lord Limerickagain brought it forward, in another form, Pulteneyand Sandys were present, and it was carried bya majority of seven.The committee thus appointed met, with the samezeal to procure evidence against the fallen ministeras had animated Walpole himself, twenty-eight yearsbefore, in his scrutiny of the documents by which hehoped to criminate Bolingbroke and Oxford. Butthe failure in the present instance was far moredecisive. The charge against Walpole was not thatof leaguing with a foreign enemy against the libertiesof his country and the throne of his sovereign ; thecause of his accusation was a mere suspicion thathe had misappropriated a portion of the secretservice money with which parliament had intrustedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 315him. The Whigs had sought against the Tories CHAP,proofs of treasons known to have been committed,they found only proofs of corruption ; the Toriescould not affect to accuse the Whigs of more thanhad been proved against themselves, and they failedeven in this. The witnesses called before the committeerefused to be examined as to their transactionswith the treasury for ten years, unless they wereindemnified against the consequences of the evidencethey might give. The commons readily met the objection,and passed a bill of indemnity. In thelords, however, the influence of Orford was stillpowerful ; that of the king yet more potent : the billwas thrown out. This result was, doubtless, producedby party feeling and crown influence, but theconduct of the lords was by no means indefensible.Where specific charges are brought against an individualsuch indemnities are not uncommon, norcapable of very great abuse ; but where there are nosuch charges where the object is merely to substantiatevague suspicions, by vague inquiries, extendingover a number of years, such an offer isa direct invitation to every speculator to come forwardand purge his crimes, by making the minister apartner in his guilt. Against such accusations nodefence could avail ; the accuser can choose his owntime and place, he can produce genuine proofs offraud, he has only to forge the link which must316 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, connect the minister with his turpitude. With com-XVIIImon ingenuity he may defy detection.*Deprived of this great necessary for obtainingevidence, the committee laboured in vain. Theresult of all their inquiries was charges so few, sotrivial, and so ridiculous, when compared with thoseput forward at the commencement of the investigation,that the promoters of the prosecution becamethemselves ashamed of their work. Success wasfound impracticable, and Orford enjoyed his honoursunmolested.The presentation of this report, which did not evenreceive the usual compliment of being printed, closeda session devoid of any other event of the slightestimportance. Pulteney, ennobled by the creations ofBaron of Leyden, Viscount Warrington, and Earl ofBath, took his seat in the house of peers on the lastday of the session.Lord Hervey, in the debate at such an election ?" " Yes, foron the bill, urged this argument, I saw the man take it, and I mur-andput a somewhat extreme case : tered him."y-Par/. Hist., vol. xii.,Did Lord Orford give five guineas p. 646.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 317CHAPTER XIX.Increase of the influence of Carteret Carteret becomes ministerAttacked by the Pitt section of the Whig party Debate upontaking the Hanoverian troops into British pay Comparison betweenthe eloquence of Pitt and Murray Death of Wilmington Contestbetween Pelham and the Earl of Bath for the vacant office Formationof the Pelham administration Intrigues in the cabinetThe influence of Carteret still continues.CARTERET quickly engrossed all the favour of the CHAP.sovereign and all the power of the cabinet. TheA D 1742.same qualifications which had formerly endeared himto George I., now rendered him the favourite companionof his son ; but the same arrogant ambitionwhich had drawn upon him the hostility of Walpole,rendered him the dangerous rival of Newcastle.318 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Carteret was energetic and enthusiastic in whateverXIXhe undertook, and having espoused the foreign policyA. D. 1742.of George II., as he had done that of his father, hecarried this German policy further than any ministerhad yet dared to do. Newcastle feebly opposed him,but his power was now gone. Carteret was upon alloccasions treated as the minister, and he was themark of popular indignation. Those who had solong exclaimed against Walpole looked back to hisadministration as perfection when compared withthat of Carteret ; his allies, in the opposition, hadnever implicitly trusted him ; they now attacked himwith the most virulent hostility.The most prominent debate in the ensuing sessionwas that upon taking the Hanoverian troops intoBritish pay. This subject called forth all the indignationof the opposition. Sir William Yonge movedthe grant, and he was supported by Fox, Lord Percival,Horace Walpole, and, above all, by Murray,who is better known to posterity as the Earl ofMansfield. It was carried by a large majority; butnot until Pitt and Grenville, and other members ofthe opposition, had vehemently protested against apolicy which " rendered this great, this mightynation, a province to a despicable electorate"*Pitt's Speech. Par. Hist., vol. xii., p. 1035.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 31 9This debate is interesting, since it is the occasion CHAP,upon which we receive, from an eyewitness, a com-A.D. 1742.parison between the eloquence of Pitt and Murray.Pitt," says Mr. Oswald, " turned every argumentMurray had employed against himself. The onespoke like a pleader, and could not divest himself ofa certain appearance of having been employed byothers. The other spoke like a gentleman like astatesman who felt what he said, and possessed thestrongest desire of conveying that feeling to othersfor their own interest and that of their country.Murray gains your attention by the perspicuity ofhis arguments and the elegance of his diction ; Pittcommands your attention and respect by the noblenessand greatness of his sentiments, the strengthand energy of his expressions, and the certainty youare in of his always rising to a greater elevation bothof thought and style. For this talent he possessesbeyond any speaker I ever heard, of never falling,from the beginning to the end of his speech, eitherin thought or in expression. And as in this sessionhe has begun to speak like a man of business as-wellas an orator, he will, in all probability be, or ratherat present is, allowed to make as great an appearanceas ever man did in that house. Murrayhas not spoken since on the other two debates,where his rival carried all before him, being very320 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, unequally matched with Pelham, Young, and Win-xix..nmffton. 'A. D. 1743.This administration expired with its nominal butpowerless chief. Wilmington's state of health hadlong been precarious, and his death had been lookedforward to, by both parties in the cabinet, as the signalfor a struggle for the ascendancy. Carteret, securein his influence with the king, had fixed upon theEarl of Bath as his successor ; and the retired statesmandiscovered no unwillingness to undertake theoffice. But Orford, who seemed fated to destroy allCarteret' s schemes of ambition, had foreseen, anddetermined to traverse this. He proposed, as therival to the Earl of Bath, Henry Pelham, his oldand faithful coadjutor in the house of commons, andhe trusted to the regard which George still entertainedfor him for success. Wilmington died in July,when the king, attended by Carteret, was abroadwith the army. As had been previously concerted,the Earl of Bath immediately made application,Mr. Oswald to Mr. Home the names of the speakers are, ex-memoirsof the Right Hon. Jas. kept in a few instances, at variance.Oswald." This account of the de This discrepancy affords additionalbate is so entirely at variance with proof how little valuable are John-thatgiven in the Parliamentary son's debates for historical pur-history,that we have difficulty in poses,conceiving it to be the same. EvenTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 321through Carteret, for the office. Pelham despatched CHAP.Y T Ya similar application to the king in person, and hisA.D. 1743.claims were supported by his brother, the Duke ofNewcastle, and Lord Chancellor Hardwicke. Thesecommunications reached the king reposing at Hanauafter the battle of Dettingen. A formal acknowledgmentof the despatch was the only answer returned,and the parties in England remained in thegreatest suspense. Whether the king was inflexiblein his preference of Pelham, or whether Carteret,terrified at the contentions and divisions which followedthe battle, shrunk from the unpopularity hehad acquired, it is now vain to speculate ; but on the23d of August, when the hopes of his friends werenearly abandoned, Pelham received a despatch conferringupon him the vacant post.This official announcement was accompanied by aparticular communication from Carteret to his colleagues.He avowed that he had exerted himself infavour of Pulteney, and admitted that he had beendefeated ; but he promised fidelity for the future, andcalled upon the new minister to renounce all jealousyof his intentions as the sure and only means to securehis support. This profession of friendship was estimatedby Pelham at its proper value. His privateletters and those of his friends are replete with ironicalallusions to their good friend over the water; butCarteret was answered in a strain of cordiality whichVOL. II. YTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, equalled his own another instance of a contest inXIXduplicity, in which both parties were insincere, andneither were deceived.Orford tendered to the new minister advice for hisfuture guidance. "You must," he said, " form yourgovernment from your old friends, the old corps, andrecruits from the Cobham squadron. Pitt is thoughtable and formidable, try him or show him. Fox, youcan't do without. Winnington must be had in the waythat he can or will be had. Your solicitor is yourown and surely will be useful. Hold up the actorshe is very able and very honest.* Thereare other members of the law noways contemptible,in party considerable, that may be had. It is yourbusiness now to forgive and gain. Broad-bottomcannot be made for any thing that has a zest forHanover. Whig it with all opponents that willparley ; but 'ware Tory ! I never mean to a personor so ; but what they can bring with them will provea broken reed."tPelham was not deficient in allies ; for each sectionof the opposition offered to coalesce with him,and all approved of his promotion ; but upon examiningtheir conditions-he found them so incongruous,that it was impossible to accept one without disgust-thesolicitor was Murray ; the f Coxe's Memoirs of the Pelhamattorney-general, Sir Dudley Administrationder.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.ing the rest. He could not conciliate the Cobham CHAP.'V T"Ysquadron as Orford called that section, without de 'charing openly against Carteret and Bath, and the Ha " ' 17iioverran system of politics. This would probablyhave proved fatal ; but had he succeeded, the allieshe would have joined were far from consentient, sinceLord Cobham disliked the war altogether, while Pittand Lyttelton, although they reprobated the objects towhich it was perverted, recommended that it shouldbe vigorously prosecuted by the employment ofBritish troops in Flanders. Chesterfield at presentbelonged to the Pitt section. Dodington, like hispatron, Argyle, was ambitious, brilliant, and unstable.While the king was yet abroad, and the cabinetstill unsettled, the Duke of Argyle died. He is aninstance of a man inheriting great political power,and gifted with shining abilities, yet failing to obtainrespect in life or reputation after death. An ablecontemporary, speaking of his career, says, " To stylehim inconsistent, is by much too gentle an appellation ;for though from the time he first had a regiment,being under twenty years of age, through the wholecourse of his great employments he was never knownto sell a place or even to make those advantageswhich were universally esteemed allowable and blameless,yet he was in his own person a most shamelessprostitute to power, and extremely avaricious. Hewould, indeed, sell nothing but himself, which heTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, continually did with every circumstance of levity,weakness, and even treachery"* The duke's recentA.D. 1743.object had been to obtain the undivided control ofthe army a desire in which he could never succeed." There are two men," said Lord Orford,who want the sole management of the army theking, and Argyle ; but, by ! neither of themshall have it." The king entertained a personal disliketo Argyle, and the duke reciprocated the sentiment: he had been latterly engaged in restlessattempts at opposition, and it is said, had even openeda correspondence with the pretender, tGeorge returned to England on the 15th ofNovember, and the cabinet became immediately ascene of conflict. Carteret, who had been omnipotentwith the king abroad, and had never deigned to askthe advice of his colleagues, or inform them of hisacts, now found it necessary to defend his conduct.At the first cabinet council, when he submitted thesupplementary convention with Austria for approval,debates rose so high, that the lord chancellor refusedto put the seal to the convention ; and LordCarteret declared that the king would do so himself.After several meetings, the council came to a formalGlover's (the author of " Leo Pelham in the Memoirs of themidas") Posthumous Memoirs. Pelham Administration, vol. i., p.f See a letter from Orford to 105.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.division ; but Carteret was supported only by three CHAP.XIXvotes, while the lord chancellor was supported byA.D. 1743.eight.*The victory was not, however, yet secure. WhileCarteret, backed by the Tories, offered a continuanceof Hanoverian policy, Pelham, heading a partywhich was always endeavouring to thwart the royalpredilections in favour of the electorate, could notfeel secure in his seat. Orford, however, again cameto his aid. The king's deference to his old ministerappears to have become habitual. Orford counteractedthe prejudices against the Whigs which Carterethad endeavoured to infuse into the mind of theking, and obtained that Pelham should be madechancellor of the exchequer, with power to makewhat changes he pleased in that department.Pelham used his power with moderation. He removedthe Earl of Bath's clients, Sandys and Rush-out,but he conferred upon the former a peerage,with the office of offered of the household, and uponthe latter the treasurership of the navy. In theIntroduction to Mr. Yorke's doubtful), and Grafton, and Mr,Parliamentary Journal. According Pelham. With Lord Carteretto this authority, the cabinet di the Duke of Bolton, and Lordsvide as follow: With the chang Winchester and Tweeddale. Thecellar the lord president, the Earl of Islay had succeeded hisDuke of Newcastle, Dorset, Rich brother in the dukedom of Argyle.mont, Montague, Argyle (rather326 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, posts thus vacated he placed Mr. Fox and LordXIXMiddlesex, a friend of the Prince of Wales. Mr.A.D. 1743.Winnington, one of the veteran adherents of Walpole,became paymaster of the forces, a post vacatedby Pelham's own promotion.Carteret, however, still remained, and with himremained the odium and unpopularity of anti-nationalpolitics. The king had become so generally dislikedupon this account that " No Hanoverian king" wasnow a popular toast ; and the army had become sodisaffected that, upon the Earl of Stair resigning hiscommand in disgust, he had been followed by theDuke of Marlborough and a great number of inferiorofficers, and now by Lord Cobham, who sent in hisresignation to the Duke of Newcastle, with a protestagainst engaging this country in making conquestsupon the continent.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 327CHAPTER XX.Meeting of parliament Opposition to the Pelham administrationAttacks upon Carteret Disunion among the opposition Expectationsof Invasion Conduct of the parties Intrigues in the cabinetExpulsion of Carteret Formation of the Broad-bottom administration.SUCH was the situation of the cabinet at the CHAP.XXopening of the parliament on the 1st of December. - -In the lords, Chesterfield and Carteret were theonly speakers upon the address ; but in the commonsthe opposition took the unusual course ofmoving a negative to it. The attack was uponCarteret, not upon the Pelhamss. Pitt exclaimedagainst him as " an execrable, a sole minister, whohad renounced the British nation, and seemed tohave drunk of the potion described in poetic fictions,which made men forget their country"* CarteretYorke's Parliamentary Journal. Parl. Hist.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, found defenders in Wilmington and Sandys;* andthe latter, in answer to Pitt, said that Lord Car-ad.1743.tenet's love to his country was equal to his abilities,which were acknowledged by the whole world." Theaddress was carried by a majority of nearly two toone.The opposition now, for the sake of secrecy, intrustedthe direction of their conduct in parliamentto a committee of six, and in the names of thesemen we read the party shades of which the wholebody was made up ; Pitt, Lyttelton, and Wallerwere Whigs, Dodington also was generally of thatparty. The other two, Sir J. Cotton and Sir WatkinsW. Wynn, were Tories.The next attempt was for an address to disband theHanoverian troops, and Pitt again led on the attack.His majesty," said the orator, " yet stands on thefirm ground of the people's affections, though on thebrink of a precipice ; it is the duty of parliament tosnatch him from the gulf where an infamous ministerhas placed him, and not throw paltry flowers on theedge of it to conceal the danger. It may be a roughbut it is a friendly hand which is stretched out toremove him." He ridiculed the testimony of thoseof the military ministers who had spoken in favour ofthese troops. " What they have said is truth, butSandys's patent was not made out until the 22d of December.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.they have suppressed a large part of it. Very wise CHAP.are they to speak with caution the hand of powerA. D. 1743.is over them." He concluded with a description ofthe situation of the king " hemmed in by Germanofficers and one English minister, without an Englishheart."Murray was again opposed to Pitt, and the debatecalled up all the principal speakers of the house.The argument appears to have gone in favour of theministers, since Pitt's elder brother, who, at thecommencement of the debate, described himself asjust come up out of the country, very ill informed ;at the end of it declared that, after what he hadheard, he should vote against the motion.* Theministry succeeded the motion was rejected by amajority of fifty.A similar motion was made in the lords, whereChesterfield now almost singly maintained the causeof the opposition ; but in that assembly it met withstill less encouragement than it did in the commons.Domestic occurrences and domestic legislationwere now entirely neglected, it was foreign policyalone which engaged the attention of the nation.The contests between the parties were always uponpoints connected with this subject, and so variouswere the opinions held that the opposition membersK Yorke's Parliamentary Journal.330 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, often differed as completely among themselves asthey did from the ministers. They were unanimousin resisting the demand for the payment of the Hanoveriantroops ; but when it was proposed to resista similar vote for the British troops in Flanders,Pitt declared against the opposition. He said thatthe ministers had found the country involved in awar, and they should not be disarmed, and he canvassedhis friends to support the minister. But thespirit of faction was too strong ; the Tories declaredagainst him, and Dodington, who envied him histalents and his influence, deserted him. A meetingwas held at the Fountain, the members were nearlyunanimous for the opposition, and Pitt so far bowedhis high spirit to the idol party, that he promised togive a silent vote against his conviction, contentinghimself with declaring that he would not speak uponthe question.*This attempt, like all the others yet made by thesame party, signally failed, and the opposition wasbeginning to sink under repeated disappointmentswhen an event occurred which, although it increasedthe disunion of the body, strengthened the sinews ofone section of it. This was the report of the intendedinvasion of France. Hitherto the Tories,reduced (in parliament) as that party was by a longGlover's Memoirs.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.course of adversity to a few determined ' partisans, CHAP.Xzv.-had laboured without hope or object. Their continual A D 17 447and blind opposition had been prompted only by thedesire to injure their opponents, for they could nothope to spoil them. Their situation was as hopelessin this advanced period of the reign of George II. asit had been at the accession of George L, and theywere again become almost as ready as they had thenbeen to welcome a Stuart king.This disposition showed itself in the house ofcommons. Upon the message from the king announcingthe danger, contrary to all ordinary precedent,a debate arose. Sir Francis Dashwood, in theexuberance of his joy, made a speech which welljustified the remark in the message, that the invasionwas undertaken in concert with disaffected personsat home. He descanted upon the conjunctures whichwere favourable to revolutions. " That of 1688," hesaid, " occurred when a weak, avaricious, narrow-mindedprince was on the throne, a great part of thenation proscribed and forced into disaffection, anddaily encroachments made upon the constitution.The expedition of the Prince of Orange was thencalled the invasion of the usurper ; yet the personwho was thus called saved this country"*The inference intended by this speech was tooParliamentary History.33 C 2 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, undisguised. Sir William Yonge answered thespeaker with great effect, and all the moderateA.D. 1744. . .I ones joined the minister.Pitt and his friends continued to oppose theaddress upon different grounds. He denied the proprietyof the declaration in the message, that therewere disaffected persons in the kingdom. " If thereare grounds for asserting this," he said, " what canbe more impolitic than to animate the French withsuch an encouragement to prosecute their design ?If there are none, how monstrous a thing is it in anyminister to poison the fountain of truth, and fill thenation with mutual jealousies and distrusts !"Mr. Coke answered him, and destroyed his dilemma." If the concert with the disaffected isimaginary, I agree that those who advised this messagedeserve animadversion ; if real, it surely ishighly proper that parliament should be acquaintedwith every part of the danger. Nor can it animatethe enemy to be told from the king's mouth what,from their own correspondences, they knew too wellbefore." The ministerial address was carried.Pitt began now to recede from his confederates.Lord Barrington made a factious motion for theintelligence received respecting the sailing of theFrench fleet ; Waller and Dodington supported themotion, but Pitt and his friends stood aloof. Again,when papers were laid before the house explanatoryTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 333of the nature and urgency of the danger, a violent CHAP.Tory member, Sir J. Phillips, again objected to the raddress ; but Pitt said, " If ever confidence shouldbe reposed in ministers, it should be now ; and theyare accountable to parliament for the use they makeof it." He voted in favour of the motion.It is observable," remarks Mr. Yorke, " that noneof the leaders among the Tories, either on this occasionor that of the king's first message, showed the leastsign of zeal and affection to the government ; on thecontrary, they treated the whole affair from beginningto end with the utmost indifference and ridicule"*The difference between the Whig and Tory portionsof the opposition was still clearer in the debateupon Lord Barrymore's arrest. He had been discoveredcorresponding with the agents of thepretender, and being a member of the house of commons,it was necessary that the consent of the houseshould be obtained for his confinement. The Toryleaders, Sir Watkin Wynn, Sir John Cotton, andSir J. Phillips, loudly exclaimed that the privilegesof the house had been violated, since Lord Barrymorehad been secured before the house had notice of thecharge. It was in vain that Pelham answered thatsuch a privilege must amount to an immunity forcrime, since the giving such a notice would be theParliamentary Journal Parl. Hist., vol. xiii., p. 568.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, signal for the accused member to escape, while hisX.AA D 1744 were prolonging the debate. Pitt, however,supported the ministers ; and his speech probably preventeda division.The Tories also opposed the suspension of theHabeas Corpus act ; but their Whig allies desertedthem. Pitt and Lyttelton walked down the houseand went away, while Lord Barrington was speaking.The whole conduct of the Tories showed that thetaint of Jacobitism had not been so thoroughly purgedfrom them as their allies supposed; that of the Whigsshowed that although they quarrelled among themselveswhen danger was distant, they were alwaysready to unite against a Tory or a Jacobite enemy.It soon became known that a storm had dissipatedthe hopes of the Tories and removed the fears of theWhigs. The opposition became reunited and returnedto their ordinary topics.The disunion in the ministry increased ; the declarationof war, now made by France, called forth newdenunciations of Carteret from the opposition ; thesewere more secretly echoed in the cabinet; and thedisagreement between that minister and Newcastlewas so undisguised, that they each refused to dine inthe company of the other.* Meanwhile the Frenchwere every where successful, and the session closedin disgrace and discontent.Parliamentary Journal. Parl. Hist, vol. xiii., p. 685.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 335The vacation was passed in party intrigues and CHAP.ministerial arrangements. The Pelhamss were de - r- -termined to rid themselves of their rival, and to thispurpose they opened a negotiation with the opposition.The Pelhamss had never been the object ofattack, and as the chief wish of both parties was thedismissal of Carteret, the terms were soon agreedupon. The nine chiefs of the opposition were theDuke of Bedford, the Earl of Chesterfield, LordsGower and Cobham, Sir John Cotton, Lyttelton,Waller, Dodington, and Pitt. It was agreed amongthem that the question should be put, and that theminority should be bound by the majority. It wasso ; and Pelham's proposals were accepted by Bedford,Chesterfield, Gower, Pitt, and Lyttelton, againstCobham, Waller, Dodington, and Cotton.*Being thus sure of the opposition, the Pelhamssnow attacked Carteret, who at this time became, bythe death of his mother, Earl Granville. Thatminister's grasp of power was exceedingly tenacious ;he was conscious of the royal support ; and he rathersought to dismiss the Pelhamss than contemplatedobedience to their command to resign. Granvilleturned himself in vain to the Tories, the oppositionGlover's Memoirs. I have this author. He writes in therejected many of the charges of spirit of a misanthrope,wholesale corruption brought byTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Whigs, and lastly, to the Walpole party ; he foundAx.A D 1744 ^ e g round d on all sides occupied by his rivals. Amemorial was now presented by Lord Hardwicke, andsupported by the rest of the ministers, requiring hisremoval. The king resisted, hesitated, temporized,and, at last, submitted.*The consequence of this victory was the formationof the administration which has been called the Broad-bottomedadministration, from the circumstance of itsbeing formed upon the basis of an union of the twofactions. Lord Cobham was restored to his regimentof horse ; Lyttelton, Fox, and Middlesex were madelords of the treasury ; the Duke of Bedford becamefirst lord of the admiralty ; the Earl of Sandwichand George Grenville received places at the sameboard, and Pitt was promised the office of paymasterof the forces so soon as the king's personal prejudicecould be overcome. The Duke of Dorset wasmade president of the council, and the Duke ofDevonshire succeeded him as steward of the household.Chesterfield was sent ambassador to theHague, with the lieutenancy of Ireland; and Dodingtonwas made treasurer of the navy. Among thepreferments of avowed and consistent Tories wasCarteret's ministry (for the drunken administration. Drunk-oppositioninsisted that he was the openness was a vice which Carteretminister) was generally called the inordinately indulged.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 337that of Earl Gower to the office of privy seal Sir ( 'HAP.AxJohn Hynde Cotton also accepted the place of treats psurer of the chamber ; and Sir John Phillips, a seatat the board of trade. Granville was succeeded in thesecretaryship by the Earl of Harrington, of whomthe Duke of Newcastle entertained no jealousy.*Glover's Memoirs. Coxe's moors of the Pelham Administra-lifeof Lord Walpole, and Me tion. Yorke's Parl. Journal.VOL. II.338 THE HISTORY OF PARTY,CHAPTER XXI.Conduct of the Broad-bottomed administration Secession of theTories The short administration of the Earl of Bath Issue of theintrigue against the Pelhamss Their restoration to office Changesin the cabinet Biographical anecdotes of Henry Fox Death ofBolingbroke.CHAP. THE career of the Broad-bottomed administration,XXIfrom its formation in 1744 to its dissolution by theto 1753. death of Pelham in 17^4, offers much to delay thegeneral historian, but little that is material to ourpresent object. Contested points of domestic legislationwere abandoned for the more exciting topic offoreign policy ; the debates in parliament were notupon principles of government, but upon the prudenceof certain alliances, or the cause of some recentreverses. An examination of these matters wouldTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 339tend to a judgment of the ability of the man not CHAP.of the principles of his party.A.D 1744Although the name by which this administration to 1753.is distinguished was intended to designate it asfounded upon a perfect coalition of all parties : yetsuch is not the fact. Pelham's was essentially aWhig cabinet. At the commencement, a few Torieswere admitted into subordinate stations, and theparty was flattered by hopes that an entrance beingonce gained their influence would increase. Theywere disappointed the object of the Pelhamss hadbeen to gain Pitt and his friends : the Tories hadbeen included only for the sake of their allies, andnow that the end was accomplished, they were treatedwith little respect. Phillips soon resigned his place,and put himself at the head of the opposition ; andSir John Cotton, although he did not think it necessaryto resign, manifested a no less unequivocal hostilityhe was at last turned out. With these mendeparted the Toryism of the Pelham administration.The Whigs were once again united, and the house ofcommons again presented the appearance of treasurybenches filled with Whigs, and opposition benchesfilled with Tories. Nor was this opposition withoutpower: although shorn of its glory by the withdrawal ofthe Whig talent which had given it popularity, it stillpossessed numbers ; and upon one division in 1746,voted one hundred and thirty-two against one huns2340 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, dred and fifty-five* a powerful minority to be formedby Tories in the reign of George II.to 1753. This ministry was by no means strong in its ownunion, or in the favour of the king. The employmentof Chesterfield had been obtained from George withgreat difficulty; that of Pitt had been absolutelyrefused. Lords Granville and Bath still exercised aprivate influence, and several of the adherents of theformer were still present in the cabinet. Amongthese, conspicuous for his power to harm and zeal inits exercise, was the Marquis of Tweeddale, who, assecretary of Scotland, had the charge of the suppressionof the rebellion, which was now raging in Scotlandand rolling onwards towards England. Actingunder the control of Granville, this nobleman affectedan unconquerable scepticism ; and while the king'stroops were flying before the impetuous assaults of theHighland swordsmen, doubted in London whetherthe pretender had yet landed.To withstand the influence of such men, and tostrengthen himself, Pelham found it now necessaryto perform his promise to Pitt, and bring him intothe cabinet. The application was made and refused ;but it was repeated, and the king, indignant atbeing thus importuned, applied for assistance toThey divided also 113 to 145, the advocates of this foolish pro-uponthe subject of annual predisposition the Whigs opposed it.ments in 1745. The Tories were Part. Hist., vol. xiii.THP: HISTORY OF PARTY. 341Granville and Bath. They readily gave their advice. CHAP.XXIThe Earl of Bath, coming from the closet, met theEarl of Harrington, whom he thought likely to render to 1753.him assistance, and remarked, " I have advised theking to negative the appointment of Mr. Pitt, andto pursue proper measures upon the continent."Harrington, however, was not to be seduced ; hereceived the information with the sarcastic remark,that, " those who dictate in private should be employedin public."This was what Bath intended : together with theking and Granville he had projected the expulsionof the Pelhamss, and the formation of a new cabinet.He reckoned upon retaining many of the presentmembers. The king answered for Harrington. SirJohn Barnard was to be chancellor of the exchequer,and Winnington would manage the commons.When Pitt observed that his friends were embarrassedby the promise he had received from them ;acting in his own high and disinterested spirit, he atonce released them from its performance.* Butwhen Pelham conceded this point, he saw that somethingmore was intended ; the intrigues of Bath andGranville were suspected, and soon afterwardsknown : a meeting was held at the house of the lordchancellor, and a resolution was taken for a generaland immediate resignation.Newcastle to Chesterfield. Memoirs of the Pelham Administration.342 THE HISTORY OF PARTY,CHAP. This decisive conduct astonished, but did notXXIalarm the king ; he received the resignations withA.D. 1744to 1753. civility;* and immediately intrusted the treasury tothe Earl of Bath. That nobleman now attempted torealize his project; he went from one section of theministry to another, proffering the highest offices topersons who would not even parley with him. Notone of those upon whom he had counted joined him ;and Harrington, having been closeted with the king,was dismissed with loud accusations of ingratitude,and became ever afterwards a particular object of theroyal aversion. The Earl of Bath was now in aposition of great distress. While his enemies stoodaloof, silently enjoying his embarrassment, he wasmaking every endeavour to obtain a colleague for LordGranville, who had already kissed hands as secretary ofstate. The retired ministers laughed at his ineffectualendeavours; and one of their adherents sarcasticallyobserved that it was unsafe to walk the streets at nightfor fear of being pressed for a cabinet counsellorsThe earl returned to the king, reported his ill success,and resigned the affair; but Granville, who wasa bolder politician, advised the king to call his palliategot alarmed at last, but keys, and commissions that camenot until the Earl of Bath's favouring in upon him.lure. He then shut himself up, f Grey to Robinson, March 26,and declared he would receive no 1746. Memoirs of the Pelhammore of the white staves, gold Administration.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 343ment together, and lay before them an account of the CHAP.grievances he had suffered from his ministers.* Forthis the king was not prepared ; he was obliged, ' to 1753.therefore, to confess himself at the mercy of thePelhamss, and to surrender at discretion.Bennington was the channel of communication.George attempted at first to gratify his privatemalignity, and the abandonment of Harrington wasrequired as a condition. But this his colleagues ofcourse refused, and they were allowed to dictatetheir own terms.Such is the history of what was at the timegenerally called, in irony, " The long administration."It existed just forty-eight hoursUpon the Pelhamss resuming their appointments,they dismissed the Marquis of Tweeddale and abolishedhis office. Several minor placemen, creatures eitherof Granville or Bath, shared his fate. Pitt receivedthe lucrative situation of joint treasurer of Ireland.This purgation was absolutely necessary ; for Granville'sspirit of intrigue was indomitable. " LordGlover's Memoirs. Wilmington, for a long time chairsWinnington, when pressed by man of committees and a workingthe king to join the Earl of Bath, member of the house, was wellsaid, " Sire, the new ministry can able to calculate upon this sub-neithersupport your majesty nor sect.themselves ; they cannot depend Horace Walpole's Memoirs,on more than thirty-one lords Coxe. Glover,and eighty commoners' Glover.34*4 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Granville," writes an eyewitness, "is as jolly asever ; he laughs and drinks, owns it was mad, butA. D. 1744to 1753. says he would do it again tomorrow." 4 The ministersthus obtained a considerable accession ofstrength from the attempt to overthrow them, andconsolidated their power by the imprudence of theirenemies.Pitt's disappointment at not obtaining a seat inthe cabinet did not prevent his supporting theministry with the whole of his commanding influence.He is represented by a contemporary as, at thistime, swaying the house of commons, and uniting inhimself the dignity of Wyndham, the wit of Pulsesand the knowledge and judgment of Walpole.He was right for the king, kind and respectful tothe old corps, and resolute and contemptuous to theTory opposition"* Even the hostility of the sovereigncould not permanently exclude such a manfrom the cabinet. Within a year after the latearrangements the death of Winnington left the officeof paymaster of the forces vacant ; the petty enmityof the king had changed into awe of Pitt's giganticpowers. Pitt received the appointment and becamea cabinet minster. Fox was, at the same time, madesecretary at war.Differences, with respect to foreign policy, stillSee the Correspondence in the Memoirs of the Pelham Administration.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 34-5continued in the ministry ; even the two brothers, CHAP.XXIwho held the chief posts in it, were opposed uponA. D. 1744this subject. The Duke of Newcastle was anxious to 1753.to carry on the war with vigour, to extend our continentalalliances and to subsidize Austria and Holland.His brother, more wisely, considered that thepolicy of this country was peace, and he objected todrain England of her treasure for the defence oftemporary allies, and to squander her resources inquarrels in which she had no interest. Harringtoncoincided with Pelham; and losing the confidence ofthe duke, was left exposed to the enmity of the king.Gratitude should have reminded Newcastle that thatenmity had been provoked by fidelity to him ; butgratitude is not commonly among the weaknesses ofstatesmen. Harrington was removed from the officeof secretary, and it was only the persevering friendshipof Pelham which obtained for him the lieutenancyof Ireland.Chesterfield's views of foreign policy were preciselythose of Pelham and Harrington, yet henevertheless seized upon the vacant office. Hehoped to sustain himself by intrigue, and relied uponthe king's mistress, the Countess, of Yarmouth, ashis great ally. The earl was successful with themistress, but not so with the sovereign. The king'spersonal antipathies were often mere caprices ; buthis dislike of Chesterfield is easily accounted for,346 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, when we find him and the earl at issue upon the con-xxidestruction of George I.'s will, and litigating theto 1753. point. Chesterfield had been sent to the Hague inconsequenceof the triumph of the Pelhamss ; and atthe audience which preceded his departure the onlywords addressed to him by the king were, " Youhave received your instructions, my lord"* Georgehad strenuously opposed his appointment then, andhe was no less averse to it now.Such an aversion was not to be easily overcome.Favoured by the introduction of the countess, Chesterfieldwas received with civility, and even withfamiliarity ; the king was pleased with his adulation,and perhaps admired his wit, but there his successended ; George would never converse with him uponaffairs of state, tMates Life of Chester letter itself before him ; but withfield. what success I will, according tof Fox to Hanbury Williams, my custom, tell you very franklyMemoirs of the Pelham Admired truly. His majesty read yourdistraction. Coxe's Life of Lord letter with attention, and returnedWalpole. Chesterfield's want of it without saying any thing uponinfluence is amusingly described it. I asked him what answer heina letter to his friend, Sir Han commanded me to give you ; hebury Williams, printed by Mr. said, whatever I pleased. I askedCoxe. " I laid your application whether that meant that he wasfor a removal to Aix-la-chapelle pleased to grant your request, asbefore the king, in the best man I hoped it did ; he answered,ner and the best words that I ' Nothing like it!' I urged that,possibly could, for I laid your in case the conference at Aix-la-THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 347But the Duke of Newcastle, who was, as one of CHAP.X X This contemporaries* remarks, as jealous of his col :leagues as if they had each been favourite mistresses, to 1753.dreaded lest Chesterfield should at last acquire theinfluence he coveted ; he knew that his ideas offoreign policy closely resembled those of the discardedHarrington, and he somewhat improbablyimagined that the frequent conferences with LadyYarmouth had some reference to a design to supplanthim upon this point. The duke, therefore, encroachedupon Chesterfield's province, and establisheda private correspondence with Lord Sandwich.The earl could not long remain ignorant ofthis correspondence ; he found himself a mere cipherin the cabinet, and only tolerated in the closet. Ashetold a foreign minister, he had much to do andvery little to say he therefore resigned. Thisevent occurred in February, 1748. Chesterfield'sretirement was in accordance with his character ; hesought no open rupture, nor did he pour forth hiscomplaints in parliament. To the public he saidChapelle took the shape of a con Chapelle, where, if you did notdress, it would be impossible for go, somebody else must, would beLord Sandwich, alone, to go a clear saving of your present ap-throughthe business and the ointments ; to all which I hadforms ; that I did not see that he no other answer but that bowcould have so good a colleague as which is the signal for us to goyourself, and, moreover, that your out of the closet."removal from Dresden to Aix-la- * Lord Waldegrave.348 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, that his declining health compelled him to withdraw"Y- Y Tfrom public affairs ; to his intimates he said, that, asto 1753. he could neither serve the public nor his privatefriends, he thought his official employment useless,both to himself and his country ; to both he declaredthat he nevertheless would never again submit to theslavery of opposition. He kept his resolution.Chesterfield's retirement created little sensation.Lord Chesterfield," says Mr. Rugby, in a letter toSir Hanbury Williams, " retired very quietly byhimself, and the Duke of Bedford took the seals withas little noise or bustle as if two box-keepers at theplayhouse had changed places"* The Duke ofBedford carried this prize from several competitors ;among these was Henry Fox, of whom we must nolonger delay a more particular notice.Henry Fox, the rival of the Earl of Chatham, wasthe second son of Sir Stephen Fox, a name whichhas already appeared in these pages. A man ofvery considerable parliamentary abilities, not onlyin open debate, but also in secret management ; hewas implicated in the secret doings of the pensionedparliament. He is, however, spoken of as one whowould not sacrifice his conscience to acquire a fortune; and, in the reign of James II., he opposedthat monarch in parliament, although his conduct wasCoxe's Life of Lord Walpole.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 349followed bv a banishment from court, and the loss CHAP.XXIof a post, valued at 10,000 a year.* Stephen, theA. D. 1744eldest son of this manager of parliaments, was created to 1753.Earl of Rochester by the Walpole administration. ToHenry descended his father's talents, and somethinglike his father's career.Pitt and Fox were nearly the same age, and were,like Bolingbroke and Walpole, schoolfellows andrivals at Eton ; both were younger brothers, bothwere distinguished for classical knowledge, and bothcommenced their parliamentary career at the sameperiod. Here, however, the similitude ends. Foxhad passed his early youth in extravagance and dissipation,and his pecuniary embarrassments drove himabroad ; where he remained until a prospect of a seatin parliament recalled him home.Upon entering the house of commons, Fox attachedhimself at once to Sir Robert Walpole. Norcan we assert that this attachment was directed anotherby interest, since it continued firm, when thefortune and the friends of the minister were togetherdeserting him. The importance of his new allysoon became manifest to Walpole in parliament ;he saw him, although not a complete orator, yetan able debater; his delivery was hesitating andInelegant ; his speeches were, generally, neither longHereby's Memoirs.350 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, nor premeditated, but there was a peculiar excellencein his prompt and concise reply. Walpole foundto 1753. that he was frank, agreeable, and winning in society,and clear and communicative in business ; he gavehim the office of surveyor-general of the board ofworks; and, upon his fall, recommended him, as wehave already seen, to his successor. Under theBroad-bottomed administration he held office as alord of the treasury; and, after the momentary usurpationof Bath and Granville, he was made secretaryat war the post which he now held.Since the death of Lord Orford, Fox had attachedhimself to the Duke of Cumberland, and had securedhis patronage and support. His warm and impetuoustemper betrayed Fox into many imprudences,and drew upon him some enmities. It is the misfortuneof the public men of this time that several oftheir contemporaries have transmitted to posteritymemoirs of their lives ; and that they have depictedmen and things as they were seen through the refractingmedium of party spirit. As all these writerswere neither perfectly consistent themselves, nor founda perfect consistency in others, the traits of characterthus hastily noted down, are often inconsistentsometimes contradictory. Thus Fox descends to us,darkened by the misanthropy of Glover and the spitefulmalevolence of Horace Walpole; and also bright inthe encomium of the latter writer, who, after labour-theHISTORY OF PARTY,CHAP.XXI.ing upon a posthumous work, which should makeposterity look upon Fox as infamous and corrupt,rises from his labour to pen a contemporary panegyric,*in which he is described as possessing theto 1753.An attack had been madeupon Fox in 1756, in the papercalled The World." HoraceWalpole, the principal contributor,was so indignant that, althoughthe paper had expired,he prevailed upon Dudley, theprinter, to put forth a "WorldExtraordinary," containing an eulogiumupon Fox, under the formof a letter to Lady Fox. The extractsI subjoin are rather long,and some of the expressions invery bad taste ; but the inconsistenciesof Horace Walpole, uponthis subject, deserve exposure.He has that true characteristicof a great man, that he is superiorto others in his private, social, intendedhours. I am far frommeaning by this superiority, thathe exerts the force of his geniusunnecessarily : on the contrary,you only perceive his pre-eminencein those moments, by his beingmore agreeably good-natured, andidle with more ease, than otherpeople. He seems inquisitive, asif his only business were to learn,and is unreserved, as if he wereonly to inform ; and is equally incapableof mystery in pretendingto know what he does not, or inconcealing what he does.For the house of commons hewas, for some time, an ungracefularid unpopular speaker, the abundanceof his matter overflowing hiselocution : but the force of his reasoninghas prevailed both over hisown defects and those of his audience.He speaks with a strengthand perspicuity of argument, thatcommands the admiration of anage apt to be more cheaply pleased.But his vanity cannot satisfy itselfon the terms it could satisfy others ;nor would he thank any man forhis approbation, unless he wereconscious of deserving it. But hecarries this delicacy still further,and has been at the idle labour ofmaking himself fame and honours,by pursuing a regular and steadyplan, when art and eloquence wouldhave carried him to an equal height,and made those fear him, who nowonly love him if a party can loveTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, most unsullied honour, and the most disinterestedXXI.patriotism.to 1753. The character of Fox, which is drawn by the Earla man who they see is only connectedwith them by principles,not by prejudices.In another light one may discoveranother littleness in his conduct; in the affairs of his office heis as minute and as full of applicationas if he were always to remainin the same post ; and as exact andknowing as if he always had beenin it. He is as attentive to the solicitationand interests of others inhis province as if he were makingtheir fortune, riot his own ; and, tothe great detriment of the ministry,has turned one of the best sinecuresunder the government intoone of the most laborious employments,at the same time imaginingthat the ease with which he executesit, will prevent a discoveryof the innovation. He receives allofficers who address to him with aslittle pride as if he were secure ofinnate nobility ; yet this defect ofillustrious birth is a blemish whichsome of the greatest men havewanted to make them completelygreat. Tully had it ; had the happinessand glory of raising himselffrom a private condition, but boastingof it, might as well have beennoble : he degraded himself byusurping that prerogative of nobility,pride of what one can neithercause nor prevent.I say nothing of his integrity,because I know nothing of it ; butthat it has never been breathedupon even by suspicion ; it will betime enough to vindicate it whenit has been impeached. He is aswell bred as those who colour overtimidity with gentleness of manners,and as bravely sincere, asthose who take, or would havebrutality taken for honesty ; butthough his greatest freedom is polite,his greatest condescension isdignified with spirit; and he canno more court his enemies thanrelax in kindness to his friends.Yet though he has more spirit thanalmost any man living, it is neverlooked upon as flowing from hispassions, by the intimate connexionthat it always preserves with hisunderstanding. Yet his passionsare very strong, he loves play, womenmore, and one woman moreTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.of Waldegrave, as it is the most moderate, is pro CHAP.XXIbably the most faithful. " Few men," writes theearl, "have been more unpopular; yet, when I have to 1753.asked his bitterest enemies what crimes they couldallege against him, they always confined themselvesto general accusation that he was avaricious, encouragedjobs, had profligate friends, and dangerousconnexions, but never could produce a particular factof any weight or consequence.""Upon the whole, he has some faults, but moregood qualities ; is a man of sense and judgment, notwithstandingsome indiscretion, and with small allowancesfor ambition, party, and politics, is a warmfriend, a man of veracity, and a man of honour"*Fox had many friends in the house of commons.He was there looked upon as a rising minister ; andthose who knew the king's aversion to Pitt, saw inFox a successor to Pelham. The support of theDuke of Cumberland gave him, moreover, the powerof rewarding his followers by the distribution ofarmy patronage ; but perhaps this advantage wasthan all. The amiableness of his might lead you even into an un-behaviourto her is only equalled certainty about the portrait of theby hers to him ; but as your lady gentleman, I shall lay down myship would not know a picture of pencil.this charming woman, when drawn * The Earl of Waldegrave'swith all her proper graceful vir Diary, pp. 24 and 25.tues, and as that engaging ignoranceVOL. II. 2 A354 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, more than counterpoised by the unpopularity ofthat duke, which of course involved his principalA.D. 1744to 1753. adherents. The Duke of Cumberland was particularlyobnoxious to the young Prince of Wales,and hence all who now turned to salute the rising sun,railed at Fox as a man of arbitrary principles, andspoke of him as educated in the school of corruption,a proper minister to overturn the constitution, and,alluding to his attachment to the duke, to introducea military government.Fox had not the genius of Pitt, but he had muchof the shrewdness of Walpole ; his was a mind tolove power rather than glory ; and we may add, sincehis contemporaries agree upon this point, money ratherthan. power; he studied men rather than principles; and he agreed with his master, that moneywas the most copious source of influence.*Upon the present occasion, Fox, recalling thelength and importance of his services, expected tosucceed to the secretary ship, t The public voicenamed him as Chesterfield's successor ; all those whoCollins' Peerage. Coxe's Life f Fox to Williams, Feb. 1 7,of Lord Walpole. Glover's Me Ois , 1748. Life of Lord Walpolemoors. Horace Walpole's History and Memoirs of the Pelham Adothe last ten Years of the Reign ministration. In this letter, Foxof George II., and Letters, passim, affects an indifference upon theMemoirs of the Earl of Walden subject of the secretaryship, whichgrave, &c. it is plain he did not feel.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 355disliked the warlike system and they were many CHAP,and powerful wished his success ; the house ofA.D. 1748commons, where he was known and respected, was to 1754.in his favour, and none were louder than Pitt andLyttelton in supporting his claims. But the Dukeof Newcastle had no intention of raising to anequality a man who was able to be a rival. He intriguedto obtain the appointment of Lord Sandwich,a creature of his own ; and with that viewrecommended the Duke of Bedford, who he hopedwould refuse the office. He was disappointed ; therefusal of an appointment, from a consciousness ofincapacity to fulfil its duties, appears to have beenunknown at this period, when all fear of the Torieshaving vanished, the history of the Whig party is aseries of personal struggles for promotion. The Dukeof Bedford at once accepted the seals,* and both Foxand Sandwich were disappointed.This ministry, although so divided among themselvesby personal jealousies, and so involved in intricatecontinental alliances, continued, notwithstanding theoccasional reverses which our arms sustained, to behighly popular with the nation. In 1747 a generalelection took place ; and one of the ministers couldThe duke said that he ac the two secretaries prophesied thatrested the seals only for six months, they would not agree for six weeks-thosewho knew the characters of356 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, write, " We have a new parliament and a good one."XXISatisfied with seeing their idol, William Pitt, in theA. D. 1748to 175 1. cabinet, the people forgot to inquire the extent of hisinfluence. They confided all to him, and received,as indisputably good, every measure which he approved.Thus the affairs of government proceededsmoothly. The peace of Aix-la-chapelle, * concludedin this year, was welcomed with acclamations; theministers' only apprehensions arose from each other.Meanwhile the Tory party became almost extinct.It dwindled to a mere nucleus surrounded by thoseof the Whigs who, disgusted by defeat in someof the personal intrigues which were continually exploding,sought only an opportunity to indulge theirspleen. Bolingbroke, who having returned to Englandupon the death of his father, had establishedhimself in the seat of his ancestors at Battersea, stilldirected the remains of his once omnipotent faction,and laboured to link their fortunes with those of theheir to the crown. In his efforts he was, as usual,successful; in their event, as usual, unfortunate. InThis treaty has been furiously my. Bolingbroke thought differ-assailedby several Tory historians gently. " If," he wrote, " the mi-whocompare it to that of Utrecht, sisters had any hand in it, they areThese writers seem to suppose wiser than I thought them ; if not,that the same terms can be ob they are much luckier than theytained from a victorious as ought deserve to be." Memoirs of Boilingbe forced from an humbled ene broke, vol. ii., p. 231.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 357February, 1748, Mr. Fox wrote to Sir Hanbury CHAP.Williams, " The prince's court is little talked of andA.D. 1748less regarded than ever ;" but under the management to 1754.of Bolingbroke his party soon regained its importance.Dodington was seduced by the prince fromthe lucrative office of treasurer of the navy by thepromise, of a peerage, the management of the houseof lords, and the seals for the southern department,upon his accession to the throne. Fortified by thealliance of this skilful adventurer, Bolingbroke extendedhis negotiations, and organized his plans.The ministerial phalanx was now impregnable fromwithout ; the hopes of the new opposition were againplaced upon the death of the king. For this eventall things had been prepared ; at the commencementof 1751, the opposition appeared likely to be strengthenedby the alliance of Pitt and his friends, who weredisgusted at the subsidiary treaties in Germany,*and were unwilling to bear the unpopularity of measuresthey had no power to influence. But in March,The system of subsiding a of Newcastle were both the con-crowdof petty German potentates rivers and executors of this abortivewith English gold, in order to raise scheme. Pelham was so irritated,tie Archduke Joseph to the dig that he, at one time, threatened tocity of king of the Romans, was as join the elder Horace Walpole anddistasteful to Pelham as it was to oppose the grant of the subsidies.Pitt The king and the Duke Comes Life of Lord Walpole.358 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, those who were waiting for the death of the kingXXIwere startled by the sudden death of their own patron.to 1754. This stroke of fortune again demolished the schemewhich Bolingbroke had laboured so assiduously to perfect.The opposition Whigs shrunk back to theirown faction, and the Tories were left naked andpowerless. Fox spoke of this event as the annihilationof all opposition ; he said he did not foresee adebate during that session, and thought the only difficultythe minister had to encounter was that ofgetting forty members together every day to make ahouse.*The immediate effect of the death of the prince wasthe independence of the king. Newcastle, at theroyal command, now formed a coalition with Granville.The earl became president of the council uponthe condition that he was to give up all further intrigueto obtain a higher post, and be content to actasubordinate part. He complied ; and what is farmore extraordinary, performed his promise.At the same time, the Duke of Bedford retired indisgust. Bedford and Sandwich had been favouredby the Duke of Cumberland, and therefore becamehateful to Newcastle ; the king refused to interfere,except against the first aggressor: a trial of enduranceFox to Williams, 1751. Coxe's Life of Walpole.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 359ensued, which was terminated by Bedford's resiff- CHAP.XXInation at a time when his opposition was of little con-ad.1748sequence.* to 1754.The principal event in the party history of 1751,was the death of Bolingbroke, who died on the 1,5thof December, in his seventy-sixth year. The deathof Lord Orford, in 1745, had been rather a loss toMr. Pelham than to the Whig party ; but the loss ofBolingbroke was felt by his faction.Bolingbroke's life had been a life of slavery to hisparty. He had joined it when recovering from itsprostration under William, and reviving under thewarming smile of a Tory queen ; he had assisted torevive its spirit, and bore part in the rapid assault bywhich it had recovered the power and emolument ofministerial rule ; he took the lead in the bold counsels,the dark machinations, the unscrupulous deeds by whichit attempted to perpetuate its dominion : he sharedits prosperity he was crushed by its fall. Still, whiletrembling for his life and meditating flight, the grief ofhis soul was, "that he saw the Tory party was honest"He had risked and lost his honours and his fortunein its service he was ready to stake his life. Atits command he joined the pretender ; and if hissword was not drawn in the rebellion of 1715, it wasFox to Williams. Feb. 18, f Vide ante, vol. i., p. 612.1751.360 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, only because the weight of his influence, at the Frenchcourt, was more valuable than the service of anyto 1754. single arm. As he espoused, so he quitted the causeof the Stuartss, when he found that success was hopeless,and that the alliance of the pretender was aburden, not a benefit, to his party. England wasnow the only field in which his faction could beserved. Scorning the loud accusations of treacherywith which he was assailed, but, at the same time,delicately careful of his private honour, he negotiatedfor a restoration, and obtained it against all the effortsof his powerful rival. His party approved his conduct; for Wyndham received him with cordiality,and placed himself under his guidance. Againamong his friends, he directed the attack he could notlead. His dazzling eloquence was now useless, forhis seat in the house of peers was vacant ; and eloquencehad not yet learned to appeal to the people.But the power of his intellect remained, by that hecontrived what others should execute : his magicpower over the pen was not taken from him, for thespirit of Whiggism forbad that the press should befettered with this weapon he laboured for six-and-twentyyears in the cause of his party. He scrupledat no disguise ; he left untried no stratagem to gainfor it popularity. He proclaimed it dead, and reproducedit with the mask of patriotism. He allied itwith its rival, and declared that all distinctions hadTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 36lceased: he gained for it a powerful patron, and hoped CHAP.that he had at last succeeded. But in vain themask was torn off, the alliance was repudiated the to 1754.patron died. The veteran Tory was disappointed,but not dismayed. Under the weight of accumulatedsorrows, bowed down by family bereavements, andracked by excruciating diseases, he continued hisservice. The hand of death alone arrested the penof the political pamphleteer.*Bolingbroke's career is an exception to the ruleby which we judge a man's ability, by his fortunes.In two memorable instances, in which he had himselfwrought out the pathway to success, an uncontrollablefortune interposed to disappoint his hopes.The sudden death of Queen Anne prevented hisheading the Tory party, as lord high treasurer ofEngland ; the death of the Prince of Wales disappointedprojects less brilliant, but more able,because more difficult. A mightier genius than thatof Bolingbroke might have commanded success, butmany, incalculably inferior, have achieved ittSee his unfinished work, " Re- The Tories will never forgive himelections upon the present State of for the testimony he has left, thatthe Nation." the established church maybe madef No man served his faction the subject of beautiful eulogium,more faithfully than Bolingbroke ; indignant defence, and deep outdoman has been more ungratefully ward reverence, while the hearttreated by it. One sin against his feels only scorn for its priests andparty outweighs all his services, derision of its doctrines. THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. The transactions of the years 1752 and 1753 offerlittle temptation for comment. The domestic policy ofA. D. 1748to 1754. the government was wise and liberal, and so destitutewere the Tories of topics for opposition that theywere reduced to exclaim against the bill introducedto abolish the scandalous system of Fleet marriages,as an attempt to widen the distinction between therich and the poor. So unavoidably does the state ofopposition produce the language of democracy.broke has disclosed the secret of should condemn the tendency ofpolitical religion. Were it not for these, but we should have littlethis reason Bolingbroke's public fear of their effects ; but the frag-lifewould not be blackened by his ments of the sword which shiversparty on account of his posthu- upon the shield of Christianitymous works. As Christians, we pierce the side of Toryism.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 363CHAPTER XXII.Death of Pelham Is succeeded by the Duke of Newcastle Ministerialnegotiations Opposition of Pitt and Fox Biographicalanecdotes of William Murray Difficulties and dissolution of the Newcastleadministration Appointment of Pitt as secretary of state Joyof the nation Prospects of his government Is suddenly dismissedby the king Difficulty of the king in an attempt to form a ministry.IN March, 1754, the Pelham administration was CHAP."YY TTdissolved, by the death of its chief, and the Whigparty was again divided by the struggles of various ' to 1757.competitors for the vacant dignity. Pelham was aminister of excellent intentions and moderate abilities; he was a strict disciple of the Walpole school.He hated continental wars and continental alliances ;he was liberal in his views of government, and attentiveto the resources of the country. One of themost beneficial acts of his administration was hisreduction of the interest on the national debt to threeper cent. In questions of foreign policy he was not,in effect, the minister. Upon these points, to use364 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, the words of Mr. Fox, " he was always drawn, andXXIIgenerally dragged by the Duke of Newcastle ; and,A.D. 1754to 1757. though constantly disagreeing with his brother, yet,from his love of peace and his aversion to disunitethe Whig party, he finally yielded, and continued tosupport his projects"*Upon the death of his brother, all Newcastle'scharacteristic jealousy was aroused ; nor was it appeasedby his appointment to the vacant post. Pittand Fox, conscious of their superiority, naturallyexpected shares in the administration correspondingin importance to their powers. Fox had originallyapplied for Pelham's appointment, but finding thathe was anticipated in his application for the treasury,by Newcastle, he altered his demand to the secretaryship,which the duke had just vacated, and themanagement of the house of commons. The secretsays of Pelham, " He tends the charge to Fox. Howwas originally an officer in the groundlessly I have already shown,army, and a professed gamester, of by quotations from the lettersa narrow mind, low parts, of an which passed between Orford andaffable dissimulation and a plausible Pelham, and the recommendationcunning, false to Sir Robert Waif Fox which these contain. Gloverpole, who raised him, and ungrateful be cited against any one offul to the Earl of Bath who pro his contemporaries. He had notested him." The character given confidence in Pitt, and he speaksof him by Horace Walpole is nearly of George II. as a man "who,as severe, and quite as false. He seated by fortune on a throne,repeats the charge of ingratitude was calculated by nature for ato Sir Robert Walpole, and ex pawnbroker's shop."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 365ladyship was readily granted, and Fox, thinking that CHAP.his other request was also conceded, prepared toenter upon its duties. Pitt, although he disdained to to 1757.solicit the seals, had no less expected the offer ofthem ; and when Fox's appointment was notified tohim, he observed that he was informed of, not consultedupon the subject. Newcastle offered Pitt theready excuse of the king's personal antipathy as thereason for passing over him. But the slighted statesmanwas not to be thus easily satisfied. There is noreason to suppose that any personal hostility existed atthis time between Pitt and Fox : during the Walpoleadministration they had indeed had frequent and violentcontests in parliament, but under Pelham theyhad acted in concert ; and when Fox was proposed asChesterfield's successor in the secretaryship, Pitt hadmade a voluntary offer of his support. Fox receivedthe overture with pleasure, and spoke of Pitt toHanbury Williams as a man whom he liked and admired.Had Pitt been consulted upon this occasionit is probable that he would have acted a part as disinterestedas he did upon the former occasion ; but,although he could despise the loss of the preferment,he could not be expected to brook the insult.Fox had, however, now discovered that the secretaryshipproffered to him was to be a merevacant dignity, imposing abundance of responsibilitybut giving no real influence ; directly he understood366 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, that the management of the house of commons wasXXIIto be intrusted to another, he returned the seals,A D 1754to' 1757. declaring that he would never submit to such adegradation. They were given to Sir ThomasRobinson.*Neither Pitt nor Fox chose to betray their resentmentby a formal resignation. They retained theirplaces, but they were silent upon all governmentquestions. Upon indifferent subjects they generallyopposed their colleagues, and visited them, singly,with the full power of their satire.Sir Thomas Robinson, the newly-made secretary,was, from his experience abroad and his habits ofbusiness, well able to discharge the duties of hisoffice ; but he was utterly incompetent to take partin a debate. This deficiency he was not himselfaware of, and his frequent attempts at oratory overcamethe gravity of even the humblest of his dependents.Fox diligently assisted this person tomake himself ridiculous.Pitt had prescribed to himself a more difficulttask ; this was to silence William Murray, the ,an opponent worthy of his might.The Honourable William Murray, afterwards Earlof Mansfield, was the eleventh child of the fifthViscount Torment. Born in Scotland, in the year1704. Murray was early removed to London, whereDodington. The Earl of Waldegrave.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 367he received his education: in 1719, he became a CHAP.V V TTking's scholar at Westminster school, where he '.A D 1754evinced his talent, or his perseverance, by placing ' to 1757.himself at the head of those who were sent from thatschool to Christ Church, Oxford, in 17^3. Here hestill more egregiously distinguished himself by carryingoff the first prize offered for the best Latin versesupon the death of George L, a contest in whichWilliam Pitt was a competitor. After obtaining hisdegree at Oxford, his taste led him to undertake theusual routine of travel ; but the slender pittance of ayounger son was soon exhausted, and his poverty andhis ambition at once pointed out the necessity of aprofession. In 1730 he was called to the bar. Hispreparation for his profession had been rather thoseof an orator than a lawyer; he disdained the drudgeryof a pleader's office, but he assiduously cultivated thegraces of elocution, and has even been surprisedstudying attitudes in a mirror while Pope sat by tocorrect or approve. We read in the poetry of this,his warmest and most influential friend, that Murray'shours were not monopolized by the severe studies ofhis profession.* He was one of the select few who" His house, embosomed in the grove,Sacred to social life and social love,Shall glitter o'er the pendent greenWhere Thames reflects the visionary scene ;Thither the silver-sounding lyresShall call the smiling loves and young desires ;368 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, were admitted to the society of Bolingbroke, and heranked among the youthful patriots who exclaimedA. D. 1754to 1757. against Sir Robert Walpole and corruption.But Murray had good fortune* as well as talent ;he was sought out by the success he would not woo.In the second year after he was called to the bar wefind him engaged in appeals before the house oflords of a most important nature. His success wasever after certain. Abilities, even such as Murray's,may fail, but they can only fail through the absenceof an opportunity for their development. In 1737 afortunate accident, the illness of the senior counselwho was engaged with him for the defence in anaction of crim. con., enabled him to signalize himselfin the Nisi Prius Courts. He was so successful thathe was accustomed to recur to this incident as thecommencement of his fortune. " From this timeThere every grace and muse shall throng,Exalt the dance or animate the song.There youths and nymphs, in consort gay,Shall hail the rising, close the parting, day."Imitations of Horace.A curious description of a lawyer's domicile.It is said, however, that Mur 500 a year which was allowedray was, at one time, reduced to him by his father. It is added,,great extremities, and had resolved that the offer was accepted, andto abandon his profession. When the obligation remembered. SeeLord Foley, hearing of his dis Parke's edition of Walpole's Royaltress, offered him 200 out of the and Noble Authors.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 369business poured in upon me on all sides, and from a CHAP.X X TTfew hundred pounds a year I fortunately found myself,A. D. 1754in every subsequent year, in possession of thou to 1757.sands."Although Murray was thus successful, and althoughhe was in habits of strict intimacy withBolingbroke, he confined his disapprobation of Walpoleto private conversation. While that ministerwas in power he would never enter parliament, replyingto all exhortations to that purpose, "Whyshould I be hasty in forming my attachment to oneparty while I enjoy the patronage of all parties."An answer which certainly savours more of prudencethan patriotism.Upon the formation of the Broad-bottomed administration,Murray was made solicitor-general ;and, as it then became necessary that he should bein parliament, he obtained his election for Borough-bridge.At this time it was not uncommon for youngstatesmen who had discovered great talent, but whowere destitute of patrimony, to be enriched by themunificence of private persons. Thus, the Duchessof Marlborough left Pitt a legacy of 10,000 for hisexertions in the cause of liberty. Murray was much suspectedby the Whigs, and had been generally thoughtto belong to the Tory section of the opposition : theprudence of the lawyer rendered the fact difficult toVOL. II. 2 B370 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, discover ;* but the suspicion lost none of its forceXXIIwhen Mr. Vernon, a reputed Jacobite, and althoughto 1757. an intimate friend, yet in no degree related to Murray,left him at his death a valuable estate, in Chesterand Derby.Murray and Pitt were now opposed, and I have alreadyquoted the comparison, made by a contemporary,of their powers. Murray continued to hold his office,cautiously abstained from hurting the jealousy of theDuke of Newcastle, sought for no voice in thecouncil, and diligently supported all the measures ofadministration. In 17^4 Sir Dudley Ryder, theattorney-general, was appointed chief justice of theKing's Bench, and Murray, of course, succeededhim in the attorney-generalship. Pitt had a greatrespect for Murray's talents, although they were sodissimilar from his own. Long afterwards, whenthey were both members of the upper house, he said,No man is better acquainted with his abilities and"Legge got up after Pitt ; gave looked pale and miserable, mosthis assent and consent to the main remarkably so ; but neither hepenance of the dignity of the house nor any body else said a word."of commons, which he hoped they Fox to Harrington. Waldegrave'swould think best maintained by a Memoirs, App. p. 148. Horacesteady adherence to Whig principles Walpole, certainly a very inferioron which, whether sooner or later, authority, describes him as " a manwhatever is to be my fate, I am deter to serve the cause of power withoutmined to stand or fall. This, I sup sharing it." Memoirs. This purpose,was meant for Murray, who vainly is not Whiggism.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.learning, nor has a greater respect for them than CHAP.I have. I have had the pleasure of sitting with himA.D. 1754in the other house, and always listened to him with to 1757.attention. I have not now lost a word of what hesaid, nor did I ever."In person, Murray was handsome. " His countenance,"says Mr. Bully, "was an assemblage ofgenius, dignity, and good-nature, which none couldbehold without reverence and regard. His voice, tillit was affected by the years which passed over him,was perhaps unrivalled in its sweetness, and the mellifluousvariety of its tones. He spoke slowly, soundingdistinctly every letter of every word. In some instances,he had a great peculiarity of pronunciation;6 authority' and * attachment,' two words of frequentuse in the law, he always pronounced, 'awtawrity' and'attachment;' his expressions were sometimes low, hedid not always observe the rules of grammar ; there wasgreat confusion in his periods, very often beginningwithout ending them, and involving his sentences inendless parentheses : yet such was the charm of hisvoice and action, and such the general beauty, propriety,and force of his expressions, that while hespoke, all these defects passed unnoticed"*Such was the man whom Pitt now undertook tosilence, not by vehement invectives upon grand ques-butler'sReminiscences. Holliday's Life of Lord Mansfield.372 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, tons of national importance and absorbing interest,XXIIbut by opposition upon secondary and indifferentto 1757. subjects by teaching him, upon these little occasions,to feel his inferiority, and dread his opponent'spower. The great master of declamation was notlong unsuccessful. In 1755 the Duke of Newcastleand Lord Hardwicke found it necessary to apply tothe king for leave to strengthen themselves by newalliances. The permission was reluctantly granted,and negotiations were accordingly opened with Pittand Fox. Pitt demanded the seals, but added, thatit was not his intention to be a secretary merely towrite letters according to order, or to talk in parliamentlike a lawyer from a brief; but to be really aminister conditions which the Duke of Newcastlethought presumptuous and preposterous, and at onceapplied to Fox. The secretary at war repeated thedemands he had before made, and which were ineffect the same as those made by Pitt : but Fox wassupported by the influence of the Duke of Cumberland; he had never drawn upon him the hatred ofthe king ; and he was less obnoxious to Newcastle,because less able. Fox received the seals; and Pittand his friends, with the exception of Lyttelton, whowas made chancellor of the exchequer,* went intoopen opposition." A desertion," says Lord with the greatest acrimony by theWaldegrave, " which was resented whole cousinhood."THE HISTORY OF PARTY, 373Now it was that the eloquence of Pitt, so long fete CHAP.XXII.tered by the bonds of office, again burst forth ; now re-A. D. 1754commenced the gladiatorial exhibitions which divided to 1757 -the applause of the nation between the skill of thedebater and the thunder of the orator. The peopleseceded with Pitt; and the Newcastle administration,hitherto so popular, became suddenly the object ofpopular hatred and derision. Accidental circumstances,also, gave Pitt a superiority in the merits aswell as in the management of the debates. " Duringthe whole session of 1755-6," says an eyewitness,Mr. Pitt found occasion, in every debate, to confoundthe ministerial orators. His vehement invectiveswere awful to Murray, * terrible to HumeCampbell ; and no malefactor under the stripes of anexecutioner was ever more forlorn and helpless thanFox appeared under the lash of Pitt's eloquence :shrewd and able in parliament as he confessedly is.Dodington sheltered himself in silencesThe effects of this storm of eloquence were soonbible in the ministerial ranks. Murray shrunkfrom the contest, and upon a vacancy occurring inthe chief justiceship, insisted upon retiring with thatappointment, and a seat in the house of lords. NewsI sat next to Murray, who in a letter printed in the Appendixi offered for an hour," writes Fox to Waldegrave's Diary.f Glover.374 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, castle in vain entreated and tempted him to stay. Thecautious lawyer saw the ruin that was approaching ;A.D. 1754to 1757. Pitt had read him a lesson he could not forget. Theevent justified his foresight. It will be rememberedthat at this time the encroachments of the French inAmerica had provoked reprisals which had produced awar. The loss of Minorca, and the failure of AdmiralByng appeared to give promise that it would be conductedwith the same imbecility which had renderedthe history of the last a chronicle of disasters.These events threw the new ministry into the utmostconsternation. Fox felt that he was not treated withthe confidence for which he had stipulated;* hefeared that some personal attack would be made uponhim ; and he knew that in such a case he should bebut faintly supported. He therefore intimated hisintention to resign. The Duke of Newcastle, terrifiedat this desertion, and unwilling to contemplate theresignation of the power to which he had been so longaccustomed, applied in every quarter for assistance ;but without success. Pitt would listen to no terms,and absolutely refused to treat ; and Granville, whohad received the office of president of the council uponHe suffered also many annoy in the house of commons, though,dances from the king, who was ac in every other respect, a very in-customer to throw out ungracious different secretary. Lord Washings,how a man might be a talker degrade's Diary.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 375condition that he would aspire no higher, kept his CHAP.XXIIword, and refused to exchange posts with him. Atlast, Newcastle reluctantly resigned ; and the king to 1757.called upon Fox to form an administration. Foxwas still less successful in his application to Pitt. Itis said that he waited personally on the autocrat ofthe opposition, and stated his majesty's anxiety thathe should come into his service. "You, sir!" wasPitt's reply, " Are you come from the king ? Whenhis majesty shall condescend to signify his pleasureto me, by any one entitled to my confidence andesteem, I shall not be wanting in expressions of dutyto his majesty and devotion to his service. I haveno answer to return by you"*All hope being thus extinguished, Newcastle andhis party resigned themselves to their fate ; and theking, with undisguised reluctance, intrusted theformation of a ministry to Pitt. No step could bemore popular. In the words of one who did not sharethe general enthusiasm, t " The eyes of an afflicted,despairing nation were now lifted up to a privateGlover, p. 95. I have trans at this time, I have attempted toscribed this anecdote, because it is reconcile the accounts of Glover,given upon respectable authority ; Waldegrave, and Dodington. Thebut is quite at variance with what two first agree in opposition towe know of the intercourse of Pitt Dodington, that it was Fox's re*and Fox from the letters of Fox situation which broke up the mi-andthe Diary of Lord Melcombe. ministry.In my account of Fox's conduct-f- Glover.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, gentleman, of a slender fortune ; wanting the paradeof birth or title, of no family influence, except byA.D. 1754to 1757. marriage with Lord Temple's sister, and even confinedto a narrow circle of friends and acquaintances.Yet, under these circumstances, Pitt was consideredas the only saviour of England."Pitt was, at this time, confined to his bed by thegout ; but he instantly made his arrangements. TheDuke of Devonshire, although well qualified byhereditary title to make to himself a party, had beencontent to forward the principles instead of graspingat the honours of his faction ; he was placed at thehead of the treasury. The Earl of Temple, who, asRichard Grenville, had been Pitt's earliest ally, wasfirst lord of the admiralty. Pitt was secretary ofstate, and Wilderness, at the urgent instance of theking, remained his colleague. George Grenvillereceived the office of treasurer of the navy, andLegge returned to his post of chancellor of the exchequer.The resignation of the Earl of Hardwicke wasregretted by the nation in general. He had beenlord chancellor nearly twenty years ; he had executedhis high office with integrity and diligence ;and as a judge, he was esteemed second to none whohad preceded him on the bench. As a statesman,he was moderate in his counsels, consistent in hisconduct, and faithful in his alliances : if he was dis-theHISTORY OF PARTY. 377liked, it was only by those who saw in him the chief CHAP.pillar of the ministry they wished to destroy.*- A. D. 1754As Pitt had no eminent lawyer among his peculiarparty, the great seal was put in commission.The treasury* was settled on the 16th of November1756); the admiralty, on the 20th; and Mr. Pittreceived the seals on the 4th of December, two daysafter the parliament had met.The formation of this ministry was welcomed with ashout of approbation ; the joy throughout the count try-wasuniversal; the most rigid prognosticates of ill reversedtheir prophecies, and promised future prosperity*which should efface the recollection of past misfortunes.Old patriots, who had long retired from thestage of public life, came forward to hail the promisedmillennium, and foremost amongst these was the Earlof Westmoreland, a veteran Whig, slow, but solid; onewho would pursue his principles though they led to aprecipice, and scorned to listen for a moment to theThe Earl of Hardwicke had the title, merely replied by hisbeen so long known and spoken usual cold question, " How longof as lord chancellor, that many of has his lordship been in town ? "his friends had even forgotten his When he advanced, the alterationhereditary title. Upon his first in his appearance (caused by theappearance at the royal levy after absence of the wig and robes)his resignation, he was announced completed the delusion. The earlas the Earl of Hardwicke ; but the left the presence-chamber withoutking, with whom he had been having been recognised by themuch in favour, not recognising master he had served so long.378 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, language of expediency. Thus he had voted againstthe Septennial bill, he had supported every place bill,A.D. 1754to 1757. and he had been constant in his opposition to themaintenance of a standing army. Unchanged inprinciples, this nobleman now came forward to givehis sanction to Pitt's elevation.* The country gentlemendeserted their hounds and their horses torange themselves around the popular idol ; thePrince of Wales and his friends strengthened himwith their support ;t the metropolis hailed his elevation,and the whole populace participated in histriumph.But all this popularity could not obtain for the newministry a decisive and tractable majority in parliament; nor could it remove the dislike of the king.Pitt was confined nearly the whole of the winter bythe gout ; and during this time the business both ofthe parliament and the closet, was to be transacted byhis colleagues. When Pitt could himself attend theHorace Walpole accuses this tion of Lord Bute, who had ob-noblemanof being a Jacobite, be tained the confidence (and scandalcause he had the confidence of the falsely said the favours) of theUniversity of Oxford ; but Horace Princess of Wales. Lord AlienatedWestmoreland for his oppo- grave, whom he supplanted atsition to his father. I therefore Leicester House, describes him (infollow Glover. effect) as a fine showy man, whof Pitt had obtained the unlooked habitually wise, affectedpenance of the Prince of Wales great erudition, pretended to greatthrough the favour and introduce depth, and was very shallow.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 379king, he had no great cause of complaint. Awed by CHAP.his spirit, the king did not break the forms of civilityA.D. 1754to him ; but when the Earl of Temple was his regret 1757.tentative, the earl complained that he met with nothingbut insults and ill manners. The counsels ofthe new minister were slighted ; his measures wereopposed ; and all his endeavours thwarted : in threemonths it became manifest, that he was only a nominalminister, without a grain of power. Now camethe trial of Byng. This unhappy man, memorableonly in his death, had been made by the late administrationthe scape-goat which should bear away alltheir sins. To him, therefore, they had attributedthe loss of Minorca ; and the people, stung with thenational disgrace, hanged him in effigy in every villagein the empire, and clamoured for his blood.Byng was tried and condemned. The question ofthe justice of his sentence has been too often discussedto require particular notice here. Few willnow deny that the punishment of an error in judgment,as a capital crime, was as palpably absurd asit was unjust ; or that George II., by insisting uponcarrying into effect a sentence which the tribunal bywhich it was passed never supposed would be executedand that contrary to the advice of his responsibleministers was morally guilty of a murder.Pitt's conduct, on this occasion, was independentand humane ; he applied to the king to remit the380 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, sentence, but in vain ; he persisted, urging that theXX IThouse of commons expected it. The king made ato 1757. cold, but a shrewd reply, " Sir, you have taught meto look for the sense of my subjects in another placethan in the house of commons"*Disappointed in the closet, Pitt did not hesitate toexpress his sentiments in the house of commons whenthe subject came incidentally before that assembly.Upon this occasion, he spoke without his accustomedwarmth, but in terms of moderation ; declaring hisdesire that mere justice might be done, which hethought would suffer, if so inconsistent and preposterousa sentence should take place without any furtherexamination.This modest exercise of the power of independentjudgment at once destroyed the minister's popularity.The multitudes which waited for their victim wereready to include in his fate all who should attempthis rescue. Pitt became as hated as he had beenloved, and Byng was executed. Pitt, after recurringto his conduct upon this occasion, and the loss ofpopularity he had suffered, repeated the words hehad then used in the house of commons : "I thankGod, I felt more than popularity I felt justice."The loss of Pitt's popularity, however, includedthe loss of his power ; for the king, who had toleratedHorace Walpole's Memoirs.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 381him only because he feared him, thought that he might CHAP,now venture to manifest his dislike. In February theA. D. 1754Earl of Waldegrave, a respectable nobleman, who to 1757.had held the office of governor to the young Princeof Wales, who was esteemed for his integrity, whowas not destitute of talent, for his memoirs may beproposed as a model for that style of composition,but who knew nothing of public business, and hadnever discovered any parliamentary ability, waitedupon the king to return thanks for an office to whichhe had succeeded by the death of Lord Walpole.The king seized this occasion to relate his grievances.He expressed his dislike to Pitt and Temple invery strong terms. The secretary, he said, madehim long speeches which possibly might be very fine,but were greatly beyond his comprehension, andhis letters were affected, formal, and pedanticno very cogent reasons for discarding a ministerwho had been recommended by the national voice.As to Temple, he said he was so disagreeablea fellow there was no bearing him ; when he attemptedto argue he was pert, and sometimes insolent; when he meant to be civil he was exceedinglytroublesome, and in the business of the office he wastotally ignorant. He added, that he did not lookupon himself as king while he was in the hands ofthese scoundrels, and sent Waldegrave to Newcastleto beg him to come to his rescue. A long nessTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, rotation with Newcastle ensued, in which the dukeXXIIdiscovered all his characteristic jealousy, timidity,to 1757. irresolution, and cunning. Unwilling to admit apartner to his power, yet afraid to incur an undividedresponsibility, he recalled to-day the propositions hemade but yesterday ; and at length by his vacillatingconduct so disgusted the king, that he in a fit ofdespair offered the seals to Waldegrave. Thisnobleman had too much good sense to accept the offer;but the circumstance shows into what difficulties theking's capricious personal antipathies had betrayedhim. A prolonged negotiation followed ; Fox at lengthundertook to form a cabinet, and upon this assuranceTemple was at once dismissed. Pitt did not immediatelyresign, he was resolved not to save hisenemies the credit of his dismissal, and continued theduties of his office and his attendance at court, waiting,in calm dignity, until the king made known hispleasure. He was not kept long in suspense : whenthe king found he would not resign he dismissed him,and called upon Fox to fulfil his engagement.But this was a task more difficult than had beenforeseen. Pitt's dismissal suddenly restored him tothe fulness of his former popularity ; his conductwith regard to Byng was either forgotten, or, the momentaryfury having passed away, was rememberedonly to be praised. He was now looked upon as avictim to the courtier arts of those who surroundedTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 383the throne ; as a man suffering for his fidelity to the CHAP.XXIIpeople. Pitt was flattered by addresses from allA. D. 1754parts of the kingdom, and there was scarcely a con to 1757.miserable town which did not vote him its freedom.Under such circumstances persons were found veryunwilling to engage themselves as his opponents ;and, among all those to whom Fox applied, Dodingtonalone was induced, by the offer of a profitableplace, to face the danger.The design of making Fox the prime ministerwas therefore necessarily abandoned, and the inquiryinto the loss of Minorca having been decentlygone through, the Duke of Newcastle recoveredcourage, and offered to take the treasury, excludingPitt and Temple. He also failed in the attempt.The king now insisted that Waldegrave should makethe attempt, nor was he convinced of the impracticabilityof this design until Wilderness, his owncreature, who had been promoted and sustained entirelyby the royal influence, resigned the seals heheld. Lord Mansfield was next tried, but with thesame success. Nor could the king succeed in obtaininga cabinet until he abandoned his oppositionto Pitt and Temple, sacrificed his friends, and committedthe negotiations to Lord Hardwicke, the oldand faithful friend of the Duke of Newcastle.384 THE HISTORY OF Party.CHAPTER XXIII.The Pitt administration Energy and supremacy of Pitt The presenta Whig administration State of the AVhig principle Biographicalanecdotes of Charles Pratt Habeas Corpus bill Foreign policy ofPitt Death of George II.xxm ^ HE king's ignorance of the state of parties in theA. D. 1757 kingdom and of the constitution of our government isto 1760. strongly shown by this pertinacious intriguing, inorder to exclude from his service the only able meninparliament. It ended in a coalition taking placebetween Newcastle and Pitt. Newcastle returnedto the treasury, Pitt received back the seals, Templewas privy seal, and Legge returned to his officeof chancellor of the exchequer. Fox compromisedhis dignity, by accepting the pay office.It was the management of Newcastle which had soentirely defeated the efforts of Fox, Waldegrave, andMansfield. So strong a party had that nobleman in bothTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 385houses, that the king was accustomed to speak of all CHAP.the subordinate officials as Newcastle's footmen.* Xxii.The duke had, at first, fled from office in terror; but ' to 1757.when he looked back, and found he was safe frompursuit and surrounded by friends, he recovered hisassurance. He knew that without any apparent exertionhe could, by covertly deranging the schemesof others, reduce affairs to such a state that he wouldbe called back upon his own terms. He fullysucceeded.Now really commenced the Pitt administration,for Pitt, like Pelham, had enjoyed no power until hehad stormed the cabinet, and bound the king. Inthe former year he had told the Duke of Devonshirethat " he was sure he could save the country, andhe was equally sure no man else could ;" he now enjoyedthe opportunity of making good his vaunt. Itbelongs not to our subject to tell how well he fulfilledit. From the moment that he assumed the reins ofgovernment the panic which had paralyzed our effortsdisappeared ; instead of mourning over former disgraces,and dreading future defeats, the nation assumed,in a moment, an air of confidence, and awaitedwith impatience for tidings of victory. The narratorof party-struggles has nothing to do with this era ;party was extinct ; the mastery of Pitt's genius wasWalpole's Memoirs.VOL. II. 2 C386 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP fe * n ever y bosom ; dazzled by his genius, borneXxii onward by a tide of success, the nation followed hisA.D. 1757. course } s as the dictates of a superior being, and rose,as one man, to do his bidding. France, lately so insolent,felt his power and bled from every limb ; thatpeople, who lately revelled in the anticipation of invadingand plundering Britain, now fled the seas atourapproach, and trembled, even upon their ownshores. In each of the four quarters of the globewere our arms at the same time triumphant ; ineach our alliance was deemed the best assurance ofsafety.It was not the Whig or the Tory party which didall this it was William Pitt. The plan of operationswas his, his colleagues heard and obeyed. " It willbe impossible to have so many ships prepared sosoon," objected Lord Anson, when Pitt had projectedthe expedition to Rochford. " If," was the reply,these ships are not ready at the time specified Ishall impeach your lordship in the house of commons."The ships were ready.*An anecdote is preserved side to consult upon any importantwhich strongly illustrates the su point which arose. Upon one supremacythat Pitt had now ob casion the Duke of Newcastle wastained over Newcastle. During thus summoned. The duke was,his constantly recurring attacks of proverbially careful of his health,gout the secretary could bear no so much so that it was a subjectfire in his chamber, and he often sometimes of merriment, but notsent for his colleagues to his bed unfrequently of considerable in-THE HISTORY OF PARTY.Pitt was one of those few men who have been ableto serve their country without submitting to thebondage of a party. He was a Whig in the-best andpurest sense of that term. He was such as Russellwould have been had nature bestowed upon himgenius, and fortune the government of an empire.When was the voice of the first Pitt ever raisedagainst the rights of the people ? who has ever beenso constant and so eloquent in their defence ? He wasforemost among those who sought to promote thehappiness of the many, by recovering the usurpationsof the few ; and whenever the all-engrossing subjectof the war allowed him a moment for domestic legis-chap.XXIII.A. D. 1757.convenience to his friends. Walpolementions that he frequentlyordered all the windows in thehouse of lords to be closed duringthe hottest weather, and the restof the peers sat gasping with heat,in order that the duke might nottake cold. This testy valetudinarianwas horror-stricken at findinghimself in a fireless room, on achilly wintry day, but Pitt wouldallow no fire, and he was obligedto submit. The subject of deliberationwas the expedition underAdmiral Hawke, which had} event in the annihilation of theTrench navy. Newcastle opposedii, on account of the advancedstate of the season, and the debatewas prolonged until he was shiveringwith cold. Casting his eyesround the room, he discoveredanother bed in the opposite corner,he drew his cloak closely roundhim, and got into it, pulling thebedclothes over him. Thus thesetwo statesmen lay, engaged in ananimated argument, upon the issueof which depended the fortune oftwo nations, when Sir CharlesFrederick came in and discoveredtheir ludicrous situation. Thisanecdote is told in the Walpoliana,and also by Mr. Thackeray, whocopies it from the " Memoiresd'un Voyageur qui se repose."388 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, nation, his measures testified the colour of the prin-xxiii- ' cipher whence they sprung. Let his militia bill showthat he was not afraid to trust even the power of thesword in the hands of the people.It is highly necessary, at this period of our history,to look at principles and not at names. The termWhig was popular with the nation and patronized bythe king ; the man who sought popularity, therefore,would call himself a Whig, and the most abjectcourtier would not admit that he was a Tory. Themost distinctive character of Whiggism, its progressiveprinciple, was stayed by foreign wars, and a stateof war has always proved favourable to domesticabuses. Among the men who styled themselves theWhig party were numbers who were Tories in heart,and who only postponed their principles to their immediateinterest. But at present these could not bedistinguished ; the different seed were sown together,it required an interval of peace and a few stormsof kingly displeasure before we could know them bytheir fruits.We are not, therefore, to look upon William Pittas one who vacillated between Whigs and Tories, andcan be claimed by neither ; or doubt his title to beesteemed a Whig because the retainers of the Dukeof Newcastle, the majority of whom were Tories indisguise, sometimes upbraided him as a deserter.Pitt may be regarded as the best specimen whichTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 389can be given of the Whig principle at this time. It CHAP."Y Y TIThas been said that Pitt was what Russell would havebeen ; but it is not to be inferred that Russell andPitt, therefore, held precisely the same sentimentsupon the principles of government. Russell soughtonly for the people an exemption from tyranny, Pittdemanded for them a large share of political power.During the interval between these two men Whiggism*had made considerable advances. In thehistory of the science of government Pitt was toRussell what Galileo was to Aristotle there wasstill room for a Newton.Among the men who were honoured by the friendshipof Pitt, and who were brought forward by hispatronage, was Charles Pratt, afterwards Earl Camden,a man well worthy of the friendship he inspired.Charles was the eighth son of Sir John Pratt, who hadbeen lord chief justice of the King's Bench, but diedwhen this son was yet an infant. In common withnearly all the distinguished characters of this age, Prattreceived the rudiments of education at Eton, and wasassisted into life by the endowments of that college.On the election, in 1731, being then eighteen yearsThe frequent occurrence of our language they are especiallythese words, Whiggism and Tory so to me. It is highly inconvenientism, will be censured by purists, to an author to be compelled toI can only reply that the words, convey the constantly recurring ideathough barbarous, are necessary to of his subject by a circumlocution.390 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, old, he obtained one of the fellowships at King'sXXIIICollege, Cambridge, took his degree in the unit.D. 1757. .verity, and chose the law as a profession. In duetime he was called to the bar, and was assiduous inhis attendance at Westminster Hall. But he wasembarked in a profession in which fortune as well asability is requisite to success. For many years hewas unnoticed, his resources became nearly exhausted,and his spirit sunk under continual disappointment: despairing of success, he resolved torelinquish his profession and abandon his country ;*but the advice of his friends restrained him. Hisperseverance was at length rewarded by a small shareof practice, and in 1752 he was well known in hisprofession. In that year he became conspicuous asan advocate of popular rights, being retained for thedefendant upon the prosecution of Owen for publishingthe case of Alexander Murray. Pratt distinguishedhimself upon this occasion by a bold andOne of his brothers was in was probably at this time that hethe East Indies, and thither he wrote the epistle to Pratt, whichhad some idea of following him. appears in Dudley's Collection,Among others of his friends, Dr. vol. vi., p. 266. After enumeratedDavies, his school and col acting the great sages of the law,lege friend, dissuaded him ; and it he adds,Let not these great namesDamp but excite ; nor Murray's praise obscureThy younger merit. Know these lights, ere yetTo noonday lustre kindled, had their dawn."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 391constitutional argument, worthy of the sturdier and CHAP.5CX Ttless courtly days of Whiggism. Lord Mansfield hadscarcely taken his seat upon the bench when hethrew aside the disguise under which he had risen,and discovered a spirit which rendered him worthyto be a Jacobite. To him and to his discretionaryjudgments, which bid fair to destroy the landmarks ofour laws, Pratt became a determined opponent ; andhe afterwards, in a case well remembered by lawyers,pronounced from the bench an eloquent condemnationof his system. " The discretion of a judge isthe law of tyrants ; it is always unknown, it is differentin different men ; it is casual, and depends uponconstitution, temper, and passion. In the best it isoftentimes caprice, in the worst it is every vice,folly, and passion to which human nature is liable"*Pratt now increased in popularity and practice ;in 1754 he became member of parliament for theborough of Down ton ; in 17 59 the friendship of Pitthad recommended him to the recordership of Bath.He was now a very popular advocate at the bar of thehouse of commons and Pitt insisted upon raisinghim to the attorney-generalship without having undergonethe customary probation as solicitor-general.In this office his conduct was irreproachable, " and,"L. C. J. Pratt's judgment in Doe dem. Hudson v. Kersey, Ito.London, 1764. f Horace Walpole's Memoirs.392 THE HISTORY OF PARTY,CHAP, says a contemporary, who may always be believedwhere he praises, " it reflected no small honour onhim that the first advocate of the crown should appearthe firmest advocate against prerogative"*To this lawyer, in 1758, Pitt intrusted the task ofobtaining a bill to explain and extend the operationof the writ of habeas corpus. Certain importantdoubts had recently arisen upon this subject, andLord Mansfield's decisions upon these points hadbeen such, that an Englishman could no longer considerhimself possessed of that security against theuncertain detention of his person which had so longbeen thought his birthright. The bill now introducedserved as a touchstone to discover the Whigsin principle from the Whigs in name. The kingopenly declared against it ; Mansfield put forth all hisinfluence to destroy it ; and even Hardwicke, led astrayby professional prejudices, joined his old enemy inits opposition. Supported by Pitt and the speaker,the bill passed easily through the commons, very fewvoices, among which, however, was that of Fox, beingraised against it. The debate in the lords shows theinfluence of the crown in that assembly, and howlightly many of those who called themselves WhigsHorace Walpole's Memoirs. Camden, that has been followedSee also, European Magazine, vol. by Parke and others : and vol.xiii., which contains a memoir of Xiv. of the Gentleman's Magazine.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 393held the principles of their party. Lord Temple was CHAP,the only orator who appeared heartily in favour ofA. D. 1758.the bill.* Against it, we find arrayed the representativesof the houses of Cavendish and Russell, followedby a long list of illustrious names, all headedby two law lords, who, having gained an ascendancyover them by their ready prophecies of danger, nowled them at their will. It was in vain that LordTemple taunted his brother peers with their subserviencyin vain, that he attempted to arouse theslumbering patriotism of the Duke of Devonshireby reading the speech delivered by his great ancestorthe Earl of Devonshire, in the conference betweenthe houses on the former bill : after a fruitless referenceto the judges, Mansfield opposed the measurein a speech which excited the admiration of the mosthostile of his auditors. The Tory opposition proposeda compromise, and promised to introduce ameasure in the next session which should pass withunanimity. The terms were accepted, but neverfulfilled.The only topic upon which the opposition couldpromise themselves an advantage was that of continentalpolitics. They loudly complained of theinconsistency of the minister, who, after inveighingGranville spoke for it ; but in what bad repute it was held atattended no more, when he found St. James's. Walpole's Memoirs.394 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, so long against German alliances and HanoverianXXIIIpolicy, had agreed to subsidize the King of PrussiaA. D. 1758to 1760. with the annual sum of 670,000, and to take intopay the army which had been dispersed by the conventionof Closter-seven. The answer was, that thepolicy he had condemned was pursued solely for thesake of Hanover; that the policy he had adoptedwas pursued for the sake of Britain ; that the presentquarrel was essentially English, in whichHanover was concerned no otherwise than as anallyan ally upon whom England had drawn hostility,and whom England was bound in honour todefend. A weaker argument, but a more powerfulconsideration was, that the present policy was highlypopular. The energy and heroism of the King ofPrussia had thrown an air of chivalry over the contest; and moreover it was recommended by success.The people contemplated with pride the high positionwhich England now held among nations : they sawthat the stern resolution of their minister was respectedthroughout Europe ; and they had seen theDutch, who knew that he never threatened in vain,humble themselves at once before his menace. Theywere still more satisfied that the minister relied uponthem for support, and scorned to rule them by corruptingtheir representatives.In October, 1760, George II. died suddenly.The character of this monarch, so far as it in-THE HISTORY OF PARTY.influenced the state of parties, needs no review. He CHAP.Xxiiwas attached to the name, not to the principles of A D I758the Whigs ; he knew that the party so called were to 176 *the stanch supporters of his house ; but he knewlittle of and cared less for the principles they professed.His other motives of conduct were personalpreferences and antipathies, and a particular affectionfor his electorate.396 THE HISTORY OF PARTY,CHAPTER XXIV.Character of George III. upon his accession Rise of the Earl of ButeAlterations in the cabinet Resignation of Pitt Of the Duke ofNewcastle Overthrow of the Whigs, and commencement of thesupremacy of the Tories.CHAP GEORGE III. was in his twenty-third year when heascended the throne. His education had not beenthat which is calculated to form a wise or a popularmonarch. His tutors, the Bishop of Salisbury,Mr. Stone, and Mr. Scott were men of sense, learning,and good intentions; but they had little to dowith the moulding of the mind of their pupil. Thisprince's early youth had been passed in the nursery,amid the adulation of weak women and ignorantpages ; and he emerged from this tutelage only tobecome an instrument in the hands of his mother toTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 397work a petty opposition to his grandfather. Being CHAP.thus continually in the hands of persons whose in- -terest it was to flatter and deceive, we cannot expectto find him possessed of any knowledge of mankind,or evincing any powers of self-control. Hischaracter is, nevertheless, a most singular consequenceof such an education ; and we are rather inclinedto wonder at finding him what he was, thandisappointed at not finding him what we could wishhim to have been. We expect to see in a youthaccustomed from infancy to unvaried indulgence,never subjected to control, and living at a periodwhen morality was so little esteemed that vice dispensedwith a disguise, strong passions which discoverthemselves in headlong vices and glitteringvirtues. But George was destitute of both. TheEarl of Waldegrave, who enjoyed such peculiar opportunitiesof knowing him, has sketched his characterwhen he was entering on his twenty-first year,and his sketch bears internal evidence of faithful resemblance.According to this authority, he possessedabilities which, although not excellent, wanted onlya proper cultivation to be tolerable : he was honest,but not generous ; religious, but not charitable ;willing to act justly, but not active to discover whatwas just ; indifferent to pleasure, but averse to business; not violent in his resentments, but moody,398 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, sullen, and unforgiving towards those who provokedXXIVor incurred his displeasure.*Such was the character of the new monarch as itappeared to his contemporaries. During the courseof a long reign we shall, of course, see it vary as heripens into experienced manhood, or droops into oldage ; but we shall never find the lineaments of hisyouth altogether effaced.George III. was highly fortunate in the period atwhich he ascended the throne ; he found the Englisharms every where triumphant, and the councils of thenation directed by a ministry which scarcely knewthe voice of opposition. But the formation of thisministry was by no means so agreeable to the monarchas it was to the people. The influence of the Earlof Bute at Leicester House had long been an objectof derision to the people derision which was expressedin popular songs and broad caricatures ;tOther accounts of the prince that ever lived." Lady Hervey'sat this age agree in the main with Letters, This is a singular instancethis which I have condensed from of a child in which a mother, andWaldegrave's Diary. His mother's a prince in which a courtier, couldchief praise of him, when speaking discover no promise of brilliancy,to Dodington, was, that he was f In these the princess and earlvery honest but childish for his are represented as enclosed toge-age(Dodington's Diary. Lady ther in a boot, or seated togetherHervey spoke of him as having on a bank, while Scotch pipers arebeen in the nursery, " the honest playing, "Thro' the Wood Laddie."est, truest, most good nate red childTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 399but now, when his patron became a king, the earl, CHAP.XXIVwho was laughed at as the prince's friend, succeededto adulation and hatred as the king's favourite. Twodays after his accession, George III. held a councilat St. James's, when his eldest brother, the Duke ofYork, and the Earl of Bute were sworn in as members.The writers upon this reign, reasoning from theevent, attribute this act of George to a well-maturedresolution to overthrow the Whig phalanx, whichhad become no longer useful to guard the throneagainst the Jacobites, and was highly inconvenientto a king who wished to exercise at his own pleasurethe prerogative of his crown. But such a design appearstoo deep to have been conceived by the youngking; and surely the simple act of exalting a favouritedoes not require to be explained by the suppositionof a hidden motive. The Earl of Bute wasa Scotchman, unconnected either by blood or intimatefriendship with the influential nobility of England ;his manners were cold, methodical, and pedantic ; hepossessed neither influence to guide nor eloquence tocommand in either house of parliament : he was unversedin the forms of office, and was a Tory in hisideas of government. Such a man introduced amongthe Whigs, and supported by the power of theking, could not fail to create confusion ; the spirit ofPitt, which chafed at the opposition of a king, wouldnever tolerate the dominion of a favourite ; and400 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. Newcastle, although awed and overthrown by hisgreat subduer, would feel all his jealousy reviveA. D. 1760.against an inferior rival.The struggle did not, however, immediately commence: for some months all was popularity andequanimity. The king's proclamations against viceand immorality were pleasing to those of the sober partof the community who confided in their efficacy ; andthe security of the entire independence of the judgescalled forth general acclamations. This latter trapfor popularity, whether the invention of the king, or,as is far more probable, of the minister, was highlysuccessful y it is still cited as an eminent instance ofthe disinterestedness and patriotism of the newmonarch. The independence of our judges is certainlyan element as necessary to our freedom as theair to our existence : but this had, for all practicalpurposes, been secured long before the birth ofGeorge III. The revolution had destroyed thepower which the Stuartss had exercised over ourcourts, and William never thought of granting anyother commissions than " quamdiu se bene gesserint."The act of succession made this compulsory upon allsovereigns who should succeed, in consequence of itslimitations, and provided that a judge could only beremoved in compliance with an address from bothhouses of parliament. On the death of King William,however, it was decided by themselves thatTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 401their commissions determined upon a demise of the CHAP.XXIVcrown, and in the appointments two of the old judgesA. D. 1761.were superseded. This was a rag of the old prerogativewhich had legalized the murders committed byCharles; but as it was a remnant of tyranny whichcould never be made to cover another act of despotism,it required no great self-denial in the sovereignto submit to its destruction.* It was in factby no means dangerous, since it required only to beonce exercised to be abolished.The influence of the Earl of Bute was soonapparent ; a very few months had elapsed beforeMr. Legge, the steady friend and able supporterof Pitt, was dismissed from his office of chancellorof the exchequer, on account, as the publicvoice affirmed, of his having, seven years before,refused to resign the representation of Hampshireto one of Lord Bute's relations Lord Wildernessretired, in order to make room for the favourite.A large breach had already been made in theministry : still, however, Pitt remained chief secretoryHardwicke's speech upon History of the Minority'* If thesethe address. Parl. Hist. Black letters are authentic, and they hearstone's Commentaries, vol. i. See internal evidence of authenticity,also the statute 13 Will. III., they discover one of the most ar-cap.2. arrogant interpositions of power tof- See the whole correspondence, be found since the revolution,printed in a tract called " TheVOL. II. 2 DTHE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, try his eyes were too intently fixed upon theD 176] object for which he was contending to mark whowere his comrades in the race. He had thoroughlyhumbled France, a feat which the Whigs had oncebefore accomplished he was now treating for peace ;but in a manner very different from that which hadbeen adopted by the negotiators of the peace ofUtrecht. The negotiations had proceeded to someextent, and England appeared likely to be able toplace among her archives one treaty bearing termscommensurate with her successes. But the diplomacyof France was not yet exhausted : the Frenchagent now delivered a private memorial proposingthat Spain should be invited to accede to thetreaty, and specifying certain points demanded bythat power. Pitt, enraged at the presumption of acrushed enemy in attempting to interfere betweenEngland and another nation, rejected the propositionwith scorn ; and, in reply to the modifications proposedby France, declared that he would not relaxone syllable from his terms until the Tower ofLondon was taken sword in hand. To Spain hemade a requisition that that court should disavow thememorial of the French agent : this disavowal wasrefused, and the treaty, so well known as the familycompact, was immediately concluded between theBourbons of France and Spain. Pitt obtained almostimmediate intelligence of its signature, and, of course,THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 403knew that all further hope of peace with Spain was CHAP.. . , xxiv.chimerical.A.D. 1761This treaty was as much an act of hostility on thepart of Spain as if the Spanish fleet had sailed up theThames and attacked Tilbury Fort. Pitt resolved tochastise it as it deserved, and proposed to intercepther galleons, and thus strike at once a blow whichshould disable her for the contest. But the Earl ofBute had now acquired power in the council, and hethought this was a favourable opportunity for its exercise; he had often before opposed Pitt's propositions,*he now outvoted him. The golden opportunitywas lost, Spain waited until her galleons weresafe in harbour and then declared war.The king supported the Earl of Bute ; and Pitt,thwarted in his great design, and finding that hisfriends were being gradually removed, and that he wasretained only that he might shield by his popularitythe counsels of others, resigned. He thanked theministers of the late king for their support; said hewas himself called to the ministry by the voice of thepeople, to whom he considered himself as account-thepublic opinion was seen the British Museum, and they arein the caricatures, which repent without use. At a period,seated Pitt carrying the Earl of when there was no artist of suffupon his back, and sinking ancient celebrity to be worth se-underthe burden. There is a curing by either of the parties,good collection of the caricatures these publications index the poofthis time in the print-room of polar feeling.404 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, able for his conduct; and that he would no longerXXIVremain in a situation which made him responsible formeasures he was no longer allowed to guide. LordGranville, who was still president of the council, repliedto this declaration. " I find the gentleman isdetermined to leave us ; nor can I say I am sorryfor it, since he would otherwise have certainly compelledus to leave him ; but if he be resolved toassume the right of advising his majesty, and directingthe operations of the war, to what purpose arewe called to this council ? When he talks of beingresponsible to the people, he talks the language ofthe house of commons, and forgets that at this boardhe is only responsible to the king"*What can be more conclusive, as evidence that theTory spirit had gained an ascendancy in the cabinet,than the contrast between these two speeches. Pittavows himself a minister created by, and dependentupon, the people ; Granville boasts that he is responsibleonly to his king : the Whig is driven from thecouncil the Tory remains in power.Pitt received, upon his retirement, a pension of3000 a year for three lives, and a title for his lady.Had he been an affluent man, the reception of this pensionmight have been a valid cause of reproach ; butwhen we know that he was destitute of patrimony, andAnnual Register for 1761, rare memoirs, establish the sub.44. Many passages in Substantial correctness of the accountpole's Letters, and in contempt given in the Annual Register.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.compelled to regard his profession as a statesman as a CHAP.source of pecuniary profit, we look at the national serviceshe rendered, and admit at once that no man wasever more absolutely entitled to the wages of his labourthan Pitt was to the recompence he now received.We do not wonder to find the hireling scribes of therising favourite unable to draw a distinction betweenthe bribe to prostitution and the recompence ofhonourable services ; but we are unprepared to findLord Chesterfield* so far misled by envy as to joinin their cry, and catching at the contemptible opportunityafforded by his want of fortune, to asperse aman whom he could not hope to equal.Earl Temple followed Pitt in his retirement; hisoffice of privy seal was for some time vacant; butPitt was immediately succeeded by the Tory Earl ofEgmont. Many of the Whigs, who still remainedin the cabinet, thought that the dismissal of Pitt hadbeen in a great degree their work, and consideredthat it had been provoked by his assumption of toogreat authority. They soon, however, discoveredtheir error. The Earl of Bute became as absolute asPitt had been ; invaded their departments, corruptedtheir secretaries, and established secret correspondences.!He acted on the principle that theywere only responsible to the king, and he was theking's agent to declare his pleasure.Chesterfield's Characters. t History of the Minority.406 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. In May, 1762, the Duke of Newcastle resigned ;XXIV.and the favourite immediately became in appearancewhat he had long been in reality prime minister.Still, however, many of the Whig families continuedto support the administration: they could not evenyet believe that it was determined to proscribe thewhole Whig party; and it appeared to them almostunnatural to enter, as a party, into opposition to thegovernment of a king of the house of Brunswick.The new premier soon terminated their doubts.Every Whig, who would not desert his principles,was removed, and their places filled with Tories, aknot of reformed Jacobites who had banded togetherunder the name of the Cocoa-tree Club, and, whenthese failed, with unknown Scotchmen, who possessedan advantage over their colleagues, inasmuch as theyhad their principles and party yet to choose. TheDuke of Devonshire was at last removed from all hisemployments in England which depended on thecrown; and this attack upon a nobleman who wasundistinguished by ambition or party violence, onlyto be accounted for by the circumstance of his beingthe representative of an illustrious Whig family,denoted the sweeping policy of the new premier.The year 1762 forms an era in the history of thetwo factions, since it witnessed the destruction ofthat monopoly of honours and emoluments which theWhigs had held for forty-five years.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 407CHAPTER XXV.Review of the conduct of the Whig party during the long period oftheir possession of the government.IT now becomes necessary to look back for a mo CHAP.XXV.ment on the period over which we have travelled,and to review the conduct of the Whig faction duringtheir long course of prosperity.Regarding only the state of the country as it stoodamong the nations of Europe, we must admit at oncethat their conduct has been unexceptionable. Theyfound England indeed at peace, and they left her atwar, but it was a peace which was neither honourablenor advantageous ; it was a war which was gloriousand triumphant it was a peace for which afew ambitious men had bartered the laurels purchasedwith their country's blood it was a war which hadredeemed this dishonour, and placed France again atourfeet. Hostility to that nation might almost becalled an ingredient in the principle of Whiggism ;408 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, favour towards it had always distinguished the Tories."Y V \TThe former looked upon its abasement as a sacrificeto the spirit of liberty; the latter raised it as anefficient and a grateful ally. In breaking the powerof the patron of the Stuartss the armed apostle ofdespotism, the Whig faction wrought good servicefor the cause it had espoused ; by humbling a commercialrival, despoiling her of her colonies, andplacing England in a situation to recover every advantageshe had lost, it had conferred benefits stillmore appreciated because they were more obvious.True, this had not been effected without somenational sacrifice. The public debt, which, at theaccession of George I., was fifty-four millions, wasnow grown to a hundred and forty-six millions, a sumwhich was certainly the cause of some real and moresimulated alarm, but which appears trivial in comparisonwith the monstrous amount which we have sincegrown accustomed to contemplate with indifference.*But this debt was by no means the encumbrancewhich the Tory alarmists were accustomed to describeit. Limited, as it at this time was, to a sum,the annual interest upon which the nation paid within1714 the public debt was terence in the rates of interest54, 145,363, bearing an interest shows how rapid was the improves.3,351,358. Upon the close ment in the public credit. Seeof the war in 1762, it amounted the " History of the Nationalto 146,683,844, bearing an in- Debt," and Sir John Sinclair'sterest of 4,840,821. The diff History of the Revenue."THE HISTORY OF PARTY.out an effort, it was, in fact, the strongest safeguard CHAP,of liberty which the Whigs had yet established. - -The funds had become the receptacle for the savingsof the middle classes, as well as for the wealth of theretired merchant. The mass of property thus investeddepended upon the breath of the house ofcommons ; any attack upon the privileges of thatbody would place it in jeopardy. What could bemore advantageous to public liberty than a systemwhich thus enlisted private interest in the cause ofpatriotism ?At the close, therefore, of this long Whig administration,we find the nation increased in power, andstill more increased in territorial possessions ; cherishedby her friends, feared by her enemies, andrespected by all. Turn we now to the more immediatesubject of our investigation the internal stateof the kingdom, and the progress of the Whig principlein our state government.Here we are at first surprised to find that we haveno grand and salient constitutional reforms to record.The Townshend administration employed itselffirst in exposing and punishing the designs of itsTory predecessors, and afterwards in preventing theireffects. The necessity of defending what had alreadybeen obtained, forbad all pursuit after furtheracquisitions nay, it compelled the Whigs even torecede from a portion of the ground already gained,410 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, in order that they might not be driven from theXXVwhole. Thus we find them sacrificing the TriennialA.D. 1762.act to a danger which threatened the existence ofparliaments, doing, themselves, a friendly violence tothe constitution, in order to preserve it from a deadlyblow. That this violence exceeded the necessityhas been already remarked. The frequency of generalelections in more recent times, when the durationof a parliament does not certainly, upon an average,exceed three years, has long since answered the onlygeneral argument which was advanced in favour ofthe Septennial bill ; and this frequency has diminishedthe practical importance of the question, which is onlynow to be looked upon with suspicion as an instrumentby which a bold minister, with a corrupted parliament,may work incalculable evil before the nationcould interpose to destroy his power.The administrations of Stanhope and Sunderlandmade one step in progression. The true principle oftoleration was now heard in the cabinet. The occasionalConformity and Schism acts, the last bondswhich the Tories had placed upon the conscience,were struck away ; the Test act was, to the astonishmentof all high churchmen, denounced as unjust;and even Roman Catholics were proposed to be indulgedwith liberty and security for their religion.But the Whig leaders were far in advance of theirfollowers. Even the middle classes were too ignorantTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 411not to be intolerant: and when they observed the CHAP.XXVviolent alarm of the clergy, they were not likely toPI 1111- AD. 1762.infer that learning would alter their own conviction.The Whig leaders saw that the time was not yetripe they could not venture to provoke a cry of " thechurch is in danger" the Test act was left unmolested,and the Catholics continued legitimate objectsof persecution.The project of the Peerage bill will be a perpetualblot upon the memory of this administration ; but itwill not be forgotten that it was a Whig who defeatedthe attempt, and that, when its noxious tendencywas exposed, the party deserted the leader by whomit had been originated. It was an indefensible design,conceived in the worst spirit of faction.The administration of Walpole is, in point of time,the most prominent feature in this period of Whigrule ; but the Journals of the houses of parliamentafford no evidence during this period of the progressof popular government. Quieta ne movete was thegreat motive of conduct which Walpole adhered tohimself, and inculcated to others. He trembled toexcite the slightest dissension within the camp, whilean enemy was threatening it from without. Thedesigns of the pretender formed his ready objectionto any proposal of a reform likely to be contested ;and a wish to abet those designs was the charge withwhich he invariably met his opponents. To consoleHISTORY OF PARTY.CHAR locate the throne of the house of Brunswick was hisXXV'- first aim : and he was eminently successful. JohnA. D. 1762. JLocke, being asked by King William how long thoserevolutionary principles which had placed him on thethrone would last, replied, " Until this generationpass away, and the universities have time to breed anew one." This danger Walpole saw had arrived ;it was his object to keep the country in repose ; toeradicate, either by force or conciliation, all the seedsof Jacobitism ; and to gather those tendrils of loyaltywhich had been torn away from the venerable trunkto which they had been wont to cling, and train themaround the newly-planted stem of Brunswick.To effect this purpose, he certainly did not hesitateto use corruption a means of government which hadnever entered into the theory of our Whig constitution,nor was desirable to be known in its practice.But when Walpole assumed the direction of the state,the theory of a perfectly free constitution was impracticablein England. At that time, the peopleand by this term I would be understood to mean, notthe mere mob, but the whole of the middle class thegreat mass of the community, as distinguished fromthe landed aristocracy the people took little interestin the ordinary course of public affairs. If trade wasinjured or bread was scarce they murmured; if anyimminent danger threatened their liberties, they rosein indignation; but when no urgent occasion calledTHE HISTORY OF PARTY. 413forth their energy, they seldom came forward to op CHAP,pose their superiors. Thus, in periods of tranquil.D. 1762.city and an ill-informed people had little foresightfor distant dangers the house of commons, if theinfluence of the landlords over the electors was leftunopposed, would be an assembly of Tories. Walpoleknew that such an assembly would restore theStuartss ; and since it was vain to appeal to the electorsto resist a danger they could not see ; he rousedthem from their torpor by a prospect of immediateinterest, and had recourse to the means which thepreviously-existing corruption of the age renderedthe most efficacious.Walpole, doubtless, thought only of present success ;but a statesman of more comprehensive views wouldprobably have pursued the same course, not to perpetuatecorruption, as the weapon of his party, butto use it as the surgeon often imitates by galvanismthe functions of life to establish a real vitality. If theattention of the people could be once habitually fixedupon political affairs, they might be safely trusted togive them a direction which would destroy the supremacyof an agricultural aristocracy over a commercialpeople. The means the temporary means werecontrary to the principles of the Whig party, and,although not more base than the agrarian tyrannyto which they were opposed, were base, and thereforeindefensible : the effect was invaluable.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.C XXT > ^ e ex ^ went f corruption, established by Walpole,A. D 1762 ^ as > h never been much exaggerated;* the Toriesregarded it as an invasion of their rights of property ;for, although they had been accustomed to use it asan ally, they had never before met it as an enemy.They were careful to record every instance. Pulteneyand his band of discontented Whigs, seized upon itas an efficient instrument of factious opposition ;and Pitt and his little knot of patriots viewed it withreal disgust, and exclaimed against it with indignantA very large portion of thesecret service money which formedso large an item in the accusationagainst Walpole, was expended ingaining accurate intelligence ofJacobite intrigues, and in corruptingthe agents of the pretender.Lord Orrery found among his father'spapers a memorandum ofthe receipt of 2000.Walpole was much abused by theSir Robert Walpole's Rewards.An English peerage after hisservices.Richmond park.The garter.Ample provision for his brotherand immediate dependants.There was some little differencein the brothers ; Sir Robert's brotherhaving been employed in publicservice from his earliest years ;Tories for having, during his longadministration, enriched himselfand his relatives. So far as a tuquoque can be an answer to the accusation,it may be given in anextract from " The History of theMinority" (p. 134), contrastingthe rewards received by Walpolewith those bestowed upon theEarl of Bute.The Earl of Bute s Rewards.An English peerage before hisservices.Richmond park.The garter.Ample provision for his brotherand immediate dependants.and Lord Bute's brother havingbeen wholly unknown until withinvery few years past."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 415violence. The two first of these sections, however, CHAP.XXVshowed by their after-conduct that they felt nothingA. D.I 762.of the horror they expressed ; and Pitt, who wasreally in earnest, afterwards declared by a publiceulogium upon Walpole, that he was mistaken in theopinion he had formed of his conduct, and regrettedthat he had so pertinaciously opposed him.*The cautious and timorous character of both thePelhamss prevented their originating or promoting anynew application of the Whig principle to our institution.The wars in which the country was engaged,also, diverted attention from internal affairs. We find,however, in the Whigs of this administration oneessential quality of their party they never affecteda scorn for popularity ; they could never rely upontheir majority in the commons if the voice of thepeople was unequivocally against them ; they werecareful of popular favour while they remained in office.When they could no longer retain it they retired.The ministerial career of Pitt was, throughout, a triumphof Whiggism, and an evidence of its prevalenceand power. He had started forwards far before thoseWhigs who looked upon the Duke of Newcastle astheir leader; many of whom thought themselves Whigsonly because they were not Jacobites. Yet, withouttheir aid, scarcely connected with the aristocracy,Glover's Memoirs.416 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, destitute of parliamentary influence, and hated by theXXVking; supported only by his popularity, he stormedA.D. 1762. .the cabinet, and kept it until those who had lookedupon him so coldly were glad to avail themselves ofhis good fortune, and enlist under his leadership.War too completely monopolized the attention ofthis minister, to allow him to give much attention todomestic reforms.We find, therefore, upon a review of this longperiod of Whig rule no legislative enactment bearingthe character of a sacrifice to democracy. We find,also, that many of those reforms which the Whigprinciples approved and many of the Whig leadershad attempted, remained unaccomplished. Stanhopehad wished to emancipate the Catholics from theirthraldom. Walpole thought the Test act unjust.Yet the penal laws against the Catholics, and the disabilitiesof the Dissenters, remained. But the reasonof this stationary policy has also been assigned.The constitution, as it then existed, had not grownby slow degrees, and strengthened as it grew ; it hadbeen established by a revolution from which thecountry had not yet recovered. The tree of libertyhad been but lately planted ; it was the duty of itsguardians not to force it into a premature blossom,but to shield it from the wind, until its roots hadstruck deep into the earth, and it could defy thestorm.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 447If we turn from our quest for theoretical experiments CHAP.XXVin favour of popular government, we shall, however, findA. D. 1762.abundant fruits of the spirit of liberty which, duringthis period, directed our councils. We shall find commerce,which breathes only the atmosphere of liberty,starting suddenly into life and health, and flourishingto a degree which England had not before witnessed.We shall find the people generally contented andhappy ; and if we inquire the era when the labourer receivedthe largest amount of remuneration for his labour,we shall find it under these Whig administrations. *In this period," says our contemporary historian,the seeds of our commercial greatness were graduallyripened. It was evidently the most prosperousseason that England had ever experienced ; andthe progression though slow, being uniform, theMr. Malthus, in a review of the 1 755 corn fell, and continued lowquantity of subsistence which the while the wages of labour seem tolabourer's wages have commanded have been about 1*. During thesein different ages, awards the prefer thirty-five years the price of wheatonce to the period between 1720 was about 33*, the quarter, or aand 1755. " The average price of little above 1*. the peck ; and thewheat for the first twenty years of labourer, therefore, on an averagethe century (the 18th), was rather of thirty-five years together wouldless than 2/., and if the wages of be able to earn about a peck oflabour were only lOd. or W%d. the wheat. From this time, corn be-labourerwould earn considerably gan gradually to rise, while wagesless than three-fourths of a peck, If do not appear to have risen in thethe wages were 1*. he would earn same proportion.' ' ^/fl/MMSi'/Vw-four-fifths of a peck. From 1720 to cipks of Political Economy, p. 279.VOL. II. 2 E418 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, reign perhaps of George II. might not disadvantageouslybe compared for the real happiness of thecommunity with that more brilliant, but uncertainand oscillatory condition which has ensued"*Religious toleration, although not honestlyavowed, was, in a great degree, acted upon ; theinfluence of government was uniformly in its favour.Walpole saw, by the fate of his Quakers' bill, howdangerous a subject this was for discussion ; but heconstantly opposed every proposition for severity, andfortified his own opinion by the authority of the queen.The Earl of Islay could never prevail upon him toallow him to put down the Jacobite meeting-housesin Edinburgh. He always replied, that the queenwould not permit itt This gentle, but continuedcurrent in their favour gave a moral force to rightthoughts upon liberty of conscience which they didnot before possess it prepared the channel for apurer stream.Under the government of the two first Georgeseducation became somewhat more generally diffused ;not that the universities sent forth more profoundscholars than had before issued from their cloisters ;for England has never been deficient in richly endowedinstitutions, which, by offering facilities forthe higher orders of scholarship, enlisted the geniusConstitutional History, vol. iii., p. 401. f Coxe.THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 419of the middle classes in the cause of the aristocracy : CHAP.XXVbut the total ignorance which precluded inquiry hadf , A. D. 1762.been in a great measure dispelled, and now reignedonly over the labouring population ; a mass whichneither party had yet made any effort to awaken, andwhich, contented by their present state of comfortand in the enjoyment of high wages, cared little bywhich party or under what principles they wereruled. It is only want (a tolerably certain evidenceof misgovernment) which makes the labourer a politician.The wider dissemination of the rudiments of learningof course produced a more extended taste forreading : the same influence which created satisfiedthe want.During this period the liberty of the press washeld sacred. Bolingbroke had been accustomed tosilence a hostile pamphleteer by imprisoning hispublisher, and Swift thought this method so fair andeffective that it could not be too vigorously pursued.State warrants, newspaper taxes, and legislativeprojects, had been the arms which the Tories hadbeen accustomed to add to the ordinary weapons ofliterary warfare. But Walpole would have none ofthese ; and, except in cases of gross personal libels,he was content to carry on the conflict with thepen ; even although he was thus compelled to match420 THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP, such unknown writers as Osborne and Walsingham*XXVagainst the veteran powers of Atterbury, Swift, andA.D. 1762.Bolingbroke. Every paper of the Craftsman showsthe extent to which the opposition writers calculatedupon the minister's forbearance : and Walpole made ithis honourable boast in the house of commons thathe had never attempted to fetter the press. Thisunusual licence, although often embarrassing to theminister, was highly favourable to the disseminationof Whig doctrines. The Examiner had appealedchiefly to the aristocracy ; the Craftsman was written,as its very name implies, for the people. In orderto gain readers, therefore, it was obliged to inculcatethe doctrines of the Whigs, or to disguise Toryismin a form which could answer but a temporarypurpose.Under these favouring circumstances the power ofthe press rapidly rose, and in 1738 a member complainedin the house of commons, that "the stuffwhich the weekly newspapers were filled with wasreceived with greater reverence than acts of parliament; and the sentiments of one of those scribblershad more weight with the multitude than the opinionof the best politician in the kingdoms The quantityThe writers of the London f Parl. Hist., vol. x., p. 448.Journal and the True Briton.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.of political papers started to meet the demand for CHAP.political knowledge, was so great that a person musthave devoted his life to the task in order to readthem all.* Magazines were therefore established,containing selections from the most popular paperson either side, and seasoning their contents withoriginal essays, and a compendium of the news of themonth. The Gentleman's Magazine, that invaluablerepertory of facts, was established in 1731, andthe London Magazine came forth in April ofthe following year. The extensive circulation ofthese, and similar periodicals, produced anotherand still more important step. Upon great questions,a member had occasionally committed hisspeech in parliament to the press, or, as was equallycommon, a political pamphlet had been writtenunder that title. Occasional reports were also preservedin Boyer's Political State, and other similarworks, which had no great circulation, and wererather placed in libraries of reference than read.Now, however, public curiosity was excited to knowwhat passed within the walls of St. Stephen's ;readers required from those who catered for theiramusement continued reports of the proceedings inparliament. The newly-established magazines undertookto supply the requisition ; and in August,See preface to vol. i. of the Gentleman's Magazine.THE HISTORY OF PARTY.CHAP. 1732, the London Magazine commenced a series ofXXV.these reports, which were soon after copied by itsA.D. 1762.elder rival.This was a step of immense importance in ourparty and political history. The reports thus givenmay bear no similitude to the style of the orator, andmay, therefore, be of little use to posterity ; but theywere of infinite value to contemporaries, since they,at least, made known to the constituencies the votesof their representatives, and accustomed the membersto feel that the public eye was upon them. We nowfind them accusing each other of speaking to thegalleries.This popular innovation was but feebly opposedby the house. As it was, undoubtedly, a breach ofone of their privileges they could not avoid to takenotice of any complaint made by a member uponthe subject; but these complaints were generally,although not always, occasioned by the abuse ratherthan the use of the practice ; and the art of reportingbeing yet in its infancy the errors, even whereaccuracy was intended, were very numerous. It is acurious fact that in a debate upon this subject wefind Pulteney alone objecting to the practice because," to print or publish the speeches of gentlemenin that house, even though they might not bemisrepresented, looked very like making them accountablewithout doors for what they said within."THE HISTORY OF PARTY. 423The violent democratic Whiff was the only man in the CHAP.xxvhouse of commons who openly denied the responsibilityA. D.I 762.ot the representatives to those whom they represented.Walpole, upon this occasion, merely observed uponthe general inaccuracy of these accounts, adding,I have read some debates in which I have beenmade to speak the very reverse of what I meant tosay." Wyndham, with the boldness of a man whofelt he held his seat in parliament by the same titleas he held his estates, declared that no gentleman,when his speech was fairly and accurately taken,ought to be ashamed that the world should knowevery word he spoke in that house. " For my ownpart," he added, " I never shall, for I hope never toact or speak in this house any thing that I shall beashamed to own to all the world. But of late, sir,I have seen such monstrous mistakes in somegentlemen's speeches as they have been printed inour newspapers, that it is no wonder if gentlementhink it high time to have a stop put to such apractice"*Thus we have testimony from all sides to theinaccuracy of the early reports. The resolutions ofthe house of commons, which were never intended tobe rigorously enforced, did not tend to correct them.The reporters, in decent deference to the house, eitherdisguised the names of the speakers by an anagram,Parl, Hist., vol. x., p. 800.THE HISTORY OF PARTY,CHAP, or designated them by a Roman title, and as the house^ '- did not choose to penetrate this disguise they werereleased from all responsibility, and frequently gavethe reins to their invention. In this they proceededwithout interruption. Pelham met a complaint oftheir misrepresentations with the advice, " Let themalone, they make much better speeches for us thanwe can make ourselves ;" and his counsel was followed.It is important to trace the origin of thatpractice of parliamentary reporting which has sincearrived at such marvellous perfection, and has beenproductive of such momentous results ; it marks thedawning of an age in which political power was nolonger to be monopolized by a few of either faction.The review we have taken of the period duringwhich our councils were filled with Whigs has shown usacourse of great national prosperity. But this was notwrought by the superior virtue, purity, or patriotismof the Whig leaders. There is no reason to supposethat the individuals of one party were superior to thoseof the other (we will except Pitt). But the ambitionor avarice of the Whigs were restrained by the principleof their party. Many men who have little realpiety assume its semblance, in order to conform totheir particular sect, Whiggism imposes a similar obligation; and a man who enrols himself among thatfaction must at least speak and act as if he were apatriot.APPENDIX A.Mr. Shippers Speech against the SeptennialBillMr. Speaker, I know my duty to this house, and the consequenceof any unguarded expressions better than to say, that byany bills we have already passed, we have made so wide a gapin the constitution, that the force of the law is in a manner destroyed; or that, by any thing we have done, we have pavedthe way to a despotic and military government, the greatestcalamity that can befal a freeborn people. Such reflectionsmay come from persons without doors, who, though they maywith justice complain when their liberties are invaded, yet cannotalways enter into the depth and wisdom of our counsels,and are too apt to censure what they do not understand. Nomember can regularly arraign any bills the same session theyhave obtained the force and sanction of laws. But this bill,though it hath already got through the most difficult part of itspassage, and though it will in all probability be the next lawthat shall be made, is yet passed, is yet before us for ourconsideration, and we have a right to treat it with freedom.Freedom of speech, I presume, will not only be allowed, but isexpected on this occasion. I hope, therefore, as the businessof this day hath raised an universal expectation throughout thekingdom, so gentlemen who are more able (none is more willingthan myself) will appear with resolution and spirit in this im-appendix.portant debate ; in this, perhaps, our last struggle for the libertiesof those we represent.I think, then, all the arguments which have been used for thisbill are grounded on mere surmises and imaginations only ; areeither trifling in themselves, or dangerous in their consequence.One main reason urged, both in the preamble of the bill, and inthe debates of the gentlemen who are for it, is this : that the disaffectionsof the people are so great, and the enemies of thegovernment both at home and abroad so watchful, that newelections will occasion new riots, rekindle the rebellion, and bedestructive to the peace and security of the government, whichwill all be prevented by continuing this good parliament, andmaking the time of its dissolution uncertain.If this argument be applied to the ministry, I can onlyanswer, that it is no concern of ours whether they have renderedthemselves odious to the people or not. They are more properlythe object of our jealousy than of our care. They may bedestroyed, and the government subsist. But if it be applied tohis majesty, as it must be to make it any inducement to passthis bill, I will venture to say, that none of those, who are calledenemies to the government and abettors of the rebellion, couldhave offered an argument so injurious to his majesty's honour.For with what face can any good subject insinuate, that in theinfancy of his reign he hath deprived himself of the love andaffection of a people who so lately received him with the utmostexpressions of joy ? What an unjust idea must this give of hismost mild and gracious government? But the assertion is themore injurious because it is entirely groundless. For whenthese pretended disaffection s were at the highest, it appearedhow impotent they were, how far from being universal, by theeasy and sudden suppression of the rebellion ; and by cone 7quench how absolutely his majesty reigned in the hearts of hissubjects. Now the rebellion is suppressed, if there should beany remains of those who are ill-disposed, the fate of theirfriends, whilst the terror of it is yet fresh in their minds, willrestrain them from any future attempt. Besides, the hands ofthe government are strengthened. The Habeas Corpus act is notonly now, but may be again suspended. You have a numerousAPPENDIX.standing army distributed through the kingdom, to control andawe unruly spirits. But suppose the disaffections of the peopleto be as great, suppose the faction, spoken of in the preamble,to be as restless and designing as is affirmed, is this the way toextinguish animosities, to heal divisions, and to reconcile parties?No, sir, it will rather create discontents, where there are nonealready : it will rather give occasion to those that are disaffectedto rail at your proceedings ; to say, that your actions are suchthat you dare not venture on new elections : and who knowswhat such suggestions may produce ! It is possible when thethree years for which you are now chosen shall expire, they mayinsist that they are unrepresented in parliament ; and this willbe a better handle, a more plausible foundation for the factionto work upon, than they could have at the time of a regularelection. Now, if the continuance of this parliament be intendedonly to calm men's minds, and that it is hoped this stormmay by degrees subside, gentlemen will be pleased to considerthat we are but a little above a year old, though we have done somany great and glorious things, and that there will be no necessity,as the law stands,. of a dissolution this year and half;and that nobody can imagine discontents will last so long underso wise, so unerring, so pacific an administration, as we nowenjoy.Another reason insisted on is, that as the continuance of thisparliament may prevent commotions at home, so it may hinderany invasion from abroad, by encouraging our ancient allies toenter into new treaties with us, which they will not otherwise do.This is a secret which, in my humble opinion, ought not to havebeen revealed ; this is an argument highly improper to be urgedin a British parliament, for it supposes that our allies prescribeto our counsels, and that they expect we should alter thepresent frame of our constitution before they will favour us withtheir friendships ; which is a thought not to be endured in thisplace, where so many millions have been raised for their service,and must move the indignation of every Englishman, especiallyif it comes from any state that first received its being, and afterwardsits protection, from England. I hope never to see thisnation brought so low that the crown shall be directed, as was428 APPENDIX.once attempted, when to remove or keep its ministers, when todissolve or continue its parliaments. Sir, his majesty, as kingof Great Britain, is the arbiter of Europe, and may dictate toother nations. They will, for their own sakes, court his friendship; they have always found their account in being allies tothe crown he wears. The British treasure and the British armieshave made them triumph over their enemies, and establish thebalance they wanted. It is further said, that by this bill youwill restore the prerogative to part of its power, which is crampedby the Triennial act. Now, if this bill is to be understood torelate to alliances, it weakens and not strengthens the prerogative.For it is an insinuation that the people have something todoin making treaties, which must ever be denied by the friendsof the crown, where the sole undisputed right is lodged by theconstitution of this kingdom. Besides, if that was any considerationhere, this argument is also a reflection on the presentministry, who are to have the honour to advise his majesty inany alliances he shall think fit to make; for it hath an appearanceas if they durst not look a new parliament in the face ; or,as if by some demerit or other, they should not continue intheir posts, without the help of this bill, long enough to assistin supporting those alliances when made. It is true, we havehad of late a sort of Triennial ministers, as well as parliaments.But we are to hope that the present set of ministers, who so farsurpassed all their predecessors in wisdom and virtue, will behaveso well as to deserve the continuance of his majesty'sfavour and the kingdom's approbation. Their friends ought,therefore, rather to reject than to enforce this argument, asreflecting on them, and groundless in itself.There is another reason, drawn from the great and continuedexpenses occasioned by frequent elections, which is so weak thatit scarce deserves to be taken notice of. For every gentleman isa judge of his own circumstances, whether he will or can be atthe necessary expenses of an election : corrupt ones are not tobe supposed, especially in this house, which, all the worldknows, was chosen without the least corruption, without theleast violence, without the least improper influence whatsoever.As to what is said, that frequent parliaments are the cause ofAPPENDIX. 429obstructing justice, and hinder candidates from being impartialin the distribution of it, it is equally trifling with the reason lastmentioned ; and, if any, is an argument only for making parliamentsperpetual. For he who will be a great deal biassed byhis hopes of securing his seat in a Triennial parliament will, bythe same principle, be a little warped by his expectation ofsitting in a Septennial one ; and he ought in neither case to beamember of this house ; for nothing can effectually cure such adisposition ; it will never be able to resist greater temptationsand court preferments.These are the chief arguments for passing this bill, and Ihumbly conceive they now appear to be of no great weight ; butthe reasons for letting the law stand as it does are such as, in myopinion, cannot receive an answer.First, if there were not abundance of other arguments againstthis bill, the manner of its coming hither is a sufficient objectionto it. Jt is sent from the lords, and as it chiefly relates to ourselves,I shall apprehend it inconsistent with our honour to receiveit. We ought to imitate the spirit which our predecessors evershowed in resisting all attempts of this kind, all appearances ofinnovation by the lords. Our predecessors were so very jealousof their privileges that they never failed to exert themselves, evenon the smallest and most minute occasions. Shall we then ?shall this glorious house of commons be so far from doing that,as humbly to take a new model of our constitution from them ?Surely we shall not sit tame, and acquiesce meanly, when theythink fit to strike at the foundations of this house.But if any here could be inclinable to receive the dictates ofthe lords, or to speak out the dictates of the ministry, I humblyapprehend it is not in our power to consent to this bill. For Icannot conceive by any rule of reason or law, that we, who areonly representatives, can enlarge to our own advantage theauthority delegated to us ; or that, by virtue of that authority,we can destroy the fundamental rights of our constituents. Iknow, indeed, that the notion of the radical power of thepeople hath been extended to a degree of extravagance andabsurdity which I would never be supposed to contend for. Butit is self-evident that this power, with relation to the part we430 APPENDIX.bear in the legislature, is absolutely, is solely in the electors.You have no legislative capacity but what you derive from them.You were chosen under the Triennial act, and could only bechosen for three years, unless they could convey more to othersthan they had in themselves ; unless they could give us a longerterm to represent them than they could claim at the time of theirchoice to be represented. Our trust, therefore, is a Triennialtrust; and if we endeavour to continue it beyond its legalduration, from that instant we cease to be the trustees of thepeople, and are our own electors ; from that instant we act byan assumed power, and elect a new constitution. If we coulddissolve or alter the form of any one part of the legislature, whynot of the whole ? And that is a doctrine I presume will not beadvanced here ; I am sure it will never be allowed in any otherplace. But I know it is a very unacceptable way of speaking,to dispute the power of those to whom one speaks ; and it maybethought a presumption if I should affirm in this present parliament,which hath given so many proofs of its omnipotence,that even the whole legislature cannot do every thing. I must,however, always be of opinion that, though it is a receivedmaxim in civil science, that the supreme legislature cannot bebound ; yet an implied exception must be understood, viz.,that it is restrained from subverting the foundations on which itstands ; and that it ought not, on any pretence whatsoever, totouch or alter those laws which are so far admitted into the constitutionas to become essential parts of it. I am also of opinionthat we cannot pass this bill because it would be an infractionof the act of union, which I hear, almost every day, in this placecalled an irrepealaWe and fundamental law. But, since the representativesof North Britain are satisfied in that point, it wouldbe highly impertinent in me to insist upon it.But if nothing stood in your way, if it was never so much inyour power, I think you ought not to repeal the Triennial act,except in the last extremity, and in the most imminent dangerof the state. This law was one of the fruits of the revolution :this law restored the freedom and frequency of parliaments, sofaras was consistent with the circumstances of that reign, whichwas involved in a war, and had occasion for constant and heavyAPPENDIX. 431taxes : this law was a concession made to the people by KingWilliam, in the midst of his difficulties, and I own the policy ofthose ministers who shall advise his majesty to give his royalassent to the repealing of it, is of too refined and delicate anature for my understanding. For, since his majesty has beenpleased to propose that prince as a pattern to himself, andis pursuing his steps with so much glory, it will be a matter ofastonishment to those who are not in the secret of affairs, to see,that in the reign of the one king every thing should be done toenlarge the liberties of the people, and to restrain his successorsfrom being capable of relapsing into the errors and abuses offormer princes ; and that, in the reign of the other, there shouldbe the least appearance of doing any thing which might butseem to stretch the prerogative, to invade and shock the rightsand privileges of the subject, when both shall be found to ruleby the same principles of liberty, and by the same maxims ofgovernment.The Triennial act is grounded on the ancient usage and constitutionof parliaments ; as it is intended to oblige the crown tocall them frequently. For, that parliaments were held frequently,half yearly, or annually at least, appears not only fromthe best accounts we have of the first institution of them, andby the two acts of Edward III., but by the writs of summonsstill extant, and several authentic instruments and records.However satisfactory it might be on any other occasion, I amsensible that a deduction of the history of ancient parliaments,as they were successively called, would be very tedious and unentertainingin this debate, and I will therefore only mentiontwo records. One is that famous instrument of Edward I., concerningthe Annus Census, then claimed by the popes from thecrown of England ; wherein he takes notice that some arrears,incurred on that head, had not been raised, as they ought tohave been, " in Parliamentoo, quod circa Octaves ResurrectionDominican celebrate in Anglia con sue vit :" but he promises thathe would recommend the payment of the money due, " in alioParliamentoo nostri, quod ad fine Sancti Michaelis proximefuture intentions, dante Domino, celebrate." The other recordis a representation from the parliament to Richard IT., some pas-appendix.sages of which are these : " Quod ex antique Statute habet,et Consuetudine laudable et approbata, cujus contrariety dieinon volet." That the king is to call " Dominos et ProcuresRegni atque Communes semel in Anno ad Parliament suum,tanquam ad summa Curiam toties Regni." That if the kinga Parliamentoo suo se alienaverit sua sponte, non aliqua in-imitate aut aliqua alia de causa necessitates, sed per immoderatevoluntary preserve se subtraxerit per absenting temporisQuadraginta Dierum, tanquam de vexation Populi sui et graciousexpenses forum non curans, ex tune libitum omnibus etsingular forum absque Domigenio Regis redire ad propria, etunicuique forum in Patria sum remark."From the former of these records, it is obvious to observethat Edward I., who was one of our best princes, and so great apreserver of the laws of his kingdom, that he is justly called bythe historians the English Justinian, chose, rather than to prolongthe sitting of his parliament beyond their usual time, todissolve one, though it had not finished its necessary business,and to summon another within the space of a few months.From the other it is very remarkable that Richard II., who issaid to be one of the worst kings that ever sat on the throne ofEngland, by absenting himself from the business of parliaments,and by that means continuing their sessions beyond their properand accustomed time, drew upon himself a sharp remonstrancefrom both houses, and was at last for such practices, amongstother things, deposed.Many reigns after this, Henry VIII. accomplished whatRichard II. only attempted, and he continued his last parliamentad libitum without reproof. But it is well known what exorbitantpowers they vested him with ; and God forbid we shouldhave any resemblance of those times ; for that parliament actedlike slaves, and that king acted like a tyrant.But if the Triennial law had not been grounded on the reasonsof antiquity, and the original usage of parliaments, it was nomore than a reasonable indulgence from the throne to thepeople, who had struggled for a revolution, on account of theabuses of parliaments, and the endeavours to render them insignificant.It is true that prince once denied his royal assent toAPPENDIX. 433it; but afterwards he considered that it could be no diminutionof his prerogative, no blemish to his regal powers, to retrieve thehonour and dignity of parliaments, as they were his support, asthey were the essential part of that constitution he came tosave ; and this he found he could only do by the frequent callingof them.Besides, this law was not only a reasonable indulgence to thepeople, as hath been said, in that it gave them frequent opportunitiesof changing their members, when they did not approvetheir behaviour, and was of advantage to the public, in makingthem act with more than ordinary caution and circumspection ;but it proved of great service to the crown : for by frequentparliaments the crown could only know the immediate sense ofthe nation, which is absolutely necessary for a prince to knowon all emergencies. However inconvenient this law may nowbe thought to the crown, and however opposite to some projectsand schemes an active ministry may have in view, I appeal toexperienced members whether they think, or can imagine, thatthe crown could have got half the money it hath been suppliedwith since the revolution, but by new and fresh elections. Suchgrievous and perpetual taxes would never have been enduredfrom a stale and continued parliament. There is no injury ordishonour therefore to the crown, to be obliged by a law to dowhat, in justice to the subject and convenience to itself, itought to do without a law.But if you had a power to repeal this law, and exercise thatpower, the people would be in a much worse condition than if ithad never been granted to them. They would be bound up foreverin a legislative way, the only way effectually and irrecoverablyto lose their liberties. They would by us, their representatives,condemn short and frequent parliaments, andestablish long and pensioned ones, which is a new doctrine, andsuch as was never before advanced by the commons of GreatBritain.Surely there must be some secret cause, some latent reasonfor hurrying on this bill in so precipitate a manner. The truereason, I believe, is not declared ; and for my part I cannot butVOL. II. 2 F434 APPENDIX.suspect that the ministry have something to do which they apprehendwill not be acceptable to a new parliament, and whichwill not stand the test of the nation. I say it must be somethingthey have to do ; for I am confident they do not self-condemnthemselves for what they have already done. They have noremorse of conscience for apprehending so many hundred gentlemen,and confining them in prison so many months without examination.For such confinements were not only necessary tosuppress the rebellion, but we have been told were intended as afavour and kindness to the persons who were so confined. Itmust therefore be some new work they have upon their hands ;what that work is I will not presume to guess. But I will presumeto say what it cannot be. It cannot be a design to abolishthe limitations of the act of Settlement, with relation to foreigners,because that is no less than an open violation of our newMagna Charta, and an entire infraction of our original contract,as the government now stands.I fear I have quite wearied your patience, but the importanceof the subject will in some measure excuse me, and I have butavery few words now to add. I hope you will reject and notcommit this bill ; for there is nothing more certain than,that it will be to your dishonour and disservice to pass it,if we may reason of what will be by what hath been. Longparliaments then will naturally grow either formidable or contemptible.We have an instance of the one in the long parliament ofKing Charles I., which to its eternal infamy overturned the bestconstitution in the world, the church and monarchy of this nation.We have a proof of the other in the long parliament ofKing Charles II. I ask pardon if I am heard by any thatwere members of it, but I only repeat what others have said.There was a famous simile applied by (Julian) Johnson to thatparliament, which I the rather mention, because it was muchapplauded by the patrons of liberty and lovers of parliaments ;and because 1 know the author is esteemed above his deserts bysome gentlemen, who are now debating for long parliaments : itis this, " that a standing parliament will always stagnate, andAPPENDIX.be like a country pond, which is overgrown with ducks' meat."I make no application ; no man will, or can, with any colour oftruth or reason, apply it to this parliament. This parliament isso far from being a stagnating pool, that it might rather becompared to a rapid stream, or an irresistible torrent, which,if continued, will bear down all before it.APPENDIX B.Mr. Walpole's Speech against the Peerage Bill.This speech was reckoned by his contemporariesas one of Walpole's best efforts ; and the report hasthe rare merit of being authenticated by memorandumsin the speaker's own handwriting, and byMr. Onslow's remarks.Among the Romans, the wisest people upon earth, theTemple of Fame was placed behind the Temple of Virtue, todenote that there was no coming to the Temple of Fame, butthrough that of Virtue. But if this bill is passed into alaw, one of the most powerful incentives to virtue would betakenaway, since there would be no arriving at honour, butthrough the winding-sheet of an old decrepit lord, or the graveof an extinct noble family ; a policy very different from thatglorious and enlightened nation, who made it their pride tohold out to the world illustrious examples of merited elevation,Pater honor? silent ut cuncta via."It is very far from my thoughts to depreciate the advantages,or detract from the respect due to illustrious birth ; forthough the philosopher may say with the poet,Et genus et proves, et qua non facies ipse,Vix ea nostra voce ;"yet the claim derived from that advantage, though fortuitous,is so generally and so justly conceded ; that every endeavour toAPPENDIX. 437subvert the principle, would merit contempt and abhorrence.But though illustrious birth forms one undisputed title to preeminence,and superior consideration, yet surely it ought not tobe the only one. The origin of high titles was derived fromthe will of the sovereign to reward signal services, or conspicuousmerit, by a recompence which, surviving to posterity,should display in all ages the virtues of the receiver, and thegratitude of the donor. Is merit, then, so rarely discernible,or is gratitude so small a virtue in our days, that the one mustbe supposed to be its own reward, and the other limited to abarren display of impotent goodwill ? Had this bill originatedwith some noble peer of distinguished ancestry, it would haveexcited less surprise ; a desire to exclude others from a participationof honours, is no novelty in persons of that class :Quod ex alterum merits sibi arrogant, id mihi ex mens ascribenolunt."But it is matter of just surprise, that a bill of this natureshould either have been projected, or at least promoted by agentleman, who was, not long ago, seated amongst us, andwho, having got into the house of peers, is now desirous toshut the door after him.When great alterations in the constitution are to be made,the experiment should be tried for a short time before theproposed chance is finally carried into execution, lest it shouldproduce evil instead of good ; but in this case, when the bill isonce sanctioned by parliament, there can be no future hopes ofredress, because the upper house will always oppose the repealof an act, which has so considerably increased their power.The great unanimity with which this bill has passed the lords,ought to inspire some jealousy in the commons ; for it must beobvious, that whatever the lords gain, must be acquired at theloss of the commons, and the diminution of the regal prerogative; and that in all disputes between the lords and commons ;when the house of lords is immutable, the commons must,sooner or later, be obliged to recede.The view of the ministry in framing this bill, is plainlynothing but to secure their power in the house of lords. Theprincipal argument on which the necessity of it is founded, is438 APPENDIX.drawn from the mischief occasioned by the creation of twelvepeers, during the reign of queen Anne, for the purpose ofcarrying an infamous peace through the house of lords ; thatwas only a temporary measure, whereas, the mischief to beoccasioned by this bill, will be perpetual. It creates 31 peersby authority of parliament : so extraordinary a step cannot besupposed to be taken without some sinister design in future.The ministry want no additional strength in the house of lords,for conducting the common affairs of government, as is sufficientlyproved by the unanimity with which they have carriedthrough this bill. If, therefore, they think it necessary toacquire additional strength, it must be done with views andintentions more extravagant and hostile to the constitution,than any which have yet been attempted. The bill itself is ofa most insidious and artful nature. The immediate creation ofnine Scotch peers, and the reservation of six English peers foranecessary occasion, is of double use ; to be ready for thehouse of lords if wanted, and to engage three times the numberin the house of commons by hopes and promises.To sanction this attempt, the king is induced to affect towave some part of his prerogative ; but this is merely an ostensiblerenunciation, unfounded in fact or reason. I am desirousto treat of all points relating to the private affairs of his majesty,with the utmost tenderness and caution, but I should wish toask the house, and I think I can anticipate the answer, has anysuch question been upon the tapis, as no man would forgive theauthors, that should put them under the necessity of votingagainst either side ? Are there any misfortunes, which everyhonest man secretly laments and bewails, and would think thelast of mischiefs, should they ever become the subject of publicand parliamentary conversations ? Cannot numbers that hearme testify, from the solicitations and whispers they have metwith, that there are men ready and determined to attempt thesethings if they had a prospect of success ? If they have thought,but I hope they are mistaken in their opinion of the house, thatthe chief obstacle would arise in the house of lords, where theyhave always been tender upon personal points, especially toany of their own body, does not this project enable them toAPPENDIX. 439carry any question through the house of lords ? Must not thetwenty-five Scotch peers accept, upon any terms, or be for everexcluded ? Or will not twenty-five be found in all Scotlandthat will ? How great will the temptation be likewise to sixEnglish, to fill the present vacancies? And shall we then,with our eyes open, take this step, which I cannot but lookupon as the beginning of woe and confusion ; and shall we,under these apprehensions, break through the union, and shutup the door of honour ? It certainly will have that effect ; nay,the very argument advanced in its support, that it will add.weight to the commons, by keeping the rich men there, admitsthat it will be an exclusion.But we are told that his majesty has voluntarily consentedto this limitation of his prerogative. It may be true ; but maynot the king have been deceived ? which, if it is ever to be supposed,must be admitted in this case. It is incontrovertible,that kings have been overruled by the importunity of theirministers to remove, or to take into administration, persons whoare disagreeable to them. The character of the king furnishesus also with a strong proof that he has been deceived ; foralthough it is a fact, that in Hanover, where he possessesabsolute power, he never tyrannised over his subjects, or despoticallyexercised his authority, yet, can one instance be producedwhen he ever gave up a prerogative ?If the constitution is to be amended in the house of lords,the greatest abuses ought to be first corrected. But what isthe abuse, against which this bill so vehemently inveighs, andwhich it is intended to correct? The abuse of the prerogativein creating an occasional number of peers, is a prejudice onlyto the lords, it can rarely be a prejudice to the commons, butmust generally be exercised in their favour ; and should it beargued, that in case of a difference between the two houses, theking may exercise that branch of his prerogative, with a viewto force the commons to recede, we may reply, that upon adifference with the commons, the king possesses his negative,and the exercise of that negative would be less culpable thanmaking peers to screen himself.But the strongest argument against the bill is, that it will440 APPENDIX.not only be a discouragement to virtue and merit, but wouldendanger our excellent constitution ; for as there is a duebalance between the three branches of the legislature, it willdestroy that balance, and consequently subvert the whole constitution,by causing one of the three powers which are nowdependent on each other, to preponderate in the scale. Thecrown is dependent upon the commons by the power of grantingmoney ; the commons are dependent on the crown by thepower of dissolution ; the lords will now be made independentof both.The sixteen elective Scotch peers already admit themselvesto be a dead court weight, yet the same sixteen are now to bemade hereditary, and nine added to their number. Thesetwenty-five, under the influence of corrupt ministers, may findtheir account in betraying their trust ; the majority of thelords may also find their account in supporting such ministers ;but the commons, and the commons only, must suffer for all,and be deprived of every advantage. If the proposed measuredestroys two negatives in the crown, it gives a negative to thesetwenty-five united, and confers a power, superior to that of theking himself, on the head of a clan, who will have the powerof recommending many. The Scotch commoners can have noother view in supporting this measure, but the expected aggrandizementof their own chiefs. It will dissolve the allegianceof the Scotch peers who are not amongst the twenty-five, andwho can never hope for the benefit of an election to be peers ofparliament, and almost enact obedience from the sovereign tothe betrayers of the constitution.The present view of the bill is dangerous ; the view to posterity,personal and unpardonable; it will make the lordsmasters of the king, according to their own confession, whenthey admit that a change of administration renders a new creationof peers necessary ; for by precluding the king from makingpeers in future, it at the same time precludes him from changingthe present administration, who will naturally fill thevacancies with their own creatures; and the new peers willadhere to the first minister, with the same zeal and unanimityas those created by Oxford adhered to him.APPENDIX. 441If, when the parliament was made septennial, the power ofdissolving it before the end of seven years had been wrestedfrom the crown, would not such an alteration have added immenseauthority to the commons ? And yet, the prerogative ofthe crown in dissolving parliaments, may be, and has beenoftener abused, than the power of creating peers.But it may be observed, that the king, for his own sake, willrarely make a great number of peers ; for they, being usuallycreated by the influence of the first minister, soon become,upon a change of administration, a weight against the crown;and had queen Anne lived, the truth of this observation wouldhave been verified in the case of most of the twelve peers madeby Oxford. Let me ask, however, is the abuse of any prerogativea sufficient reason for totally annihilating that prerogative?Under that consideration, the power of dissolving parliamentsought to be taken away, because that power has been moreexercised and more abused, than any of the other prerogatives;yet, in 1641, when the king had assented to a law that disabledhim from proroguing or dissolving parliament, without the consentof both houses, he was from that time under subjection tothe parliament, and from thence followed all the subsequentmischiefs, and his own destruction. It may also be asked,whether the prerogative of making peace and war has neverbeen abused ? I might here call to your recollection thepeace of Utrecht, and the present war with Spain. Yet whowill presume to advise that the power of making war and peaceshould be taken from the crown ?How can the lords expect the commons to give their concurrenceto a bill, by which they and their posterity are to be foreverexcluded from the peerage ? How would they themselvesreceive a bill which should prevent a baron from being made aviscount, a viscount an earl, an earl a marquis, and a marquis aa duke ? Would they consent to limit the number of any rankof peerage? Certainly none ; unless, perhaps, the dukes. Ifthe pretence for this measure is, that it will tend to secure thefreedom of parliament, I say that there are many other stepsmore important and less equivocal, such as the discontinuanceof bribes and pensions.442 APPENDIX.That this bill will secure the liberty of parliament, I totallydeny ; it will secure a great preponderance to the peers ; it willform them into a compact impenetrable phalanx, by givingthem the power to exclude, in all cases of extinction and creation,all such persons from their body who may be obnoxiousto them. In the instances we have seen of their judgment insome late cases, sufficient marks of partiality may be found toput us on our guard against the committing to them the powerthey would derive from this bill, of judging the right of latentor dormant titles, when their verdict would be of such immenseimportance. If gentlemen will not be convinced by argument,at least, let them not shut their ears to the dreadful exampleof former times ; let them recollect that the overweening dispositionof the great barons to aggrandize their own dignity,occasioned them to exclude the lesser barons, and to that circumstancemay be fairly attributed the sanguinary wars whichso long desolated the country.APPENDIX C.Sir John Barnard 9 s Speech against the Excise Bill.Sir, I find that the honourable gentleman who opened thisscheme to the committee (Sir R. Wai pole), and the learnedgentleman who spoke since (Sir Philip Yorke), make great complaintsof some people's having grossly and maliciously misrepresentedtheir scheme, before those malicious persons knewwhat it was. For my part, I happen to be of a very differentway of thinking ; for though I am far from thinking that thescheme, as now opened to us, is the very same with what it waswhen first formed ; yet, even as it is now opened, it is such ascheme, in my opinion, as cannot even by malice itself, be representedto be worse than it really is.Now that I know it ; now that I see what it is, it appears tometo be a scheme that will be attended with all those bad consequences,that ever were apprehended from it before it wasknown ; and I plainly foresee, that it will produce none of thosegood effects, which gentlemen have been pleased to entertain uswith the hopes of: they have, indeed, gilded the pill a little, butthe composition within is still the same ; and if the people ofEngland be obliged to swallow it, they will find it as bitter a pillas ever was swallowed by them since they were a people.The learned gentleman was pleased to say that he was ofopinion, that the opposition to this wicked scheme, for so I mustcall it, proceeded from other motives than gentlemen are willingto own. I do not know what motives he can mean : but I ampersuaded, that those gentlemen who propose this scheme, havesome secret views, which it would neither be convenient or safefor them to own in this place ; for as to any reasons or views.444 APPENDIX.which may be openly avowed for the proposing of this scheme,I know of none, but that of preventing the frauds that may becommitted in that branch of the revenue now under our consideration: and that it will not answer that purpose, has beenmade plainly appear by my worthy brother near me (Mr. Perry);but granting that this scheme should answer such a purpose, ifthe laws now in being, duly executed, are sufficient to answerthat purpose, what necessity is there for applying this new, thisdesperate remedy, a remedy which is certainly much worse thanthe disease ? But before I proceed any further, I shall desirethat the commissioners of the customs, who are attending at thedoor, may be called in.[The commissioners were accordingly called in, and beingasked by Sir John Barnard, What they thought the value of thefrauds committed in the tobacco trade might amount to one yearwith another ? Their answer was, That they had never madeany computation : but one of them said, that by a computationhe had made only to satisfy his own private curiosity, he believedthe frauds come to their knowledge might amount to 30,000/. or40,000/. per annum, one year with another. Then Sir JohnBarnard asked them whether it was their opinion, that if theofficers of the customs performed their duty diligently and faithfully,it would not effectually prevent all, or most of the fraudsthat could be committed in the tobacco trade ? To which theyanswered, that it was their opinion it would. Then he askedthem further, whether it was their opinion, that if the commissionersof the customs had the same power over their officers, asthe commissioners of the excise have over theirs, it would notcontribute a great deal towards making them more faithful inthe discharge of their duty than they now are ? To this theiranswer was. that they believed it would. After this, the commissionersbeing withdrawn, Sir John Barnard proceeded thus :]Sir, I now leave it to every gentleman in this house to consider,what real pretence can be formed for introducing such adangerous scheme, as what has been proposed to us ; the only pretenceI have yet heard made use of is, the preventing of frauds,by which, say they, the fair trader will be encouraged, and therevenue increased : but now you see, that is the opinion, even ofAPPENDIX. 44,5the commissioners of customs, that, by a due execution of thelaws now in being, all or most of those frauds may be effectuallyprevented : and I am sure, if they can be prevented by the lawsin being, the preventing of them by that method will contributemuch more to the increase of the public revenue, and to the encouragementof the fair trader, than the preventing of them bymeans of the dangerous scheme now proposed to us. I nowleave it to the whole world to judge, who are they that havesecret motives which they are not willing to own ; which theydare not own ; Whether it be those who are the proposers andpromoters of this scheme, or those who are the opposers of it ?The learned gentleman seemed to be surprised how our constitution,or the liberties of the country came to be brought intothe present debate : he said, " he thought they had no mannerof concern in the present question." I am sorry to differ froma gentleman who, by his profession, ought, who certainly doesunderstand the nature of our constitution, as well as any manin England ; but I am of opinion, that the constitution of ourgovernment, and the liberty of the subject, was never morenearly or more immediately concerned in any question, thanthey are in the present ; they are both so deeply concerned, thattheir preservation or their total overthrow depends entirely uponthe success of the scheme now under our consideration : if thescheme succeeds they must tumble of course ; if the scheme isdefeated, they may be preserved : I hope they will be preservedtill time shall be no more. But I must say, that the learnedgentleman, and every gentleman who appears as an advocate forthe scheme now proposed to us, is much in the right to keep, ifthey can, the constitution and the liberties of their country outof the debate ; it is from thence that the principal arguments areto be formed against their scheme ; it is from thence that sucharguments may be formed against it, as must appear unanswerableto every man who has a regard for either.The gentleman tells us, 'that there are but 120 or 150excise officers, besides warehouse keepers, to be added by thescheme now before us ;" and this additional number they seemto make a ridicule of; but considering the swarms of tax-gathererswe have already established, this small number, as they call it,446 APPENDIX.is no trivial matter ; and I would be glad to know from thosegentlemen, what they call warehouse keepers, and what numberof them may be necessary ? I hope they will allow, that a warehousekeeper appointed by the treasury, and paid by the treasury,is an officer of the revenue, as much as any other officerwhatsoever ; and if the number that there must be of these beadded to the other, I believe we may find that the number ofrevenue officers to be added by this scheme must be very considerable.As for the new method of appeal proposed, I can see no advantagethat it will be of to any unfortunate man that may haveoccasion for it : in all cases, the charge and trouble of attendingmust be very great, and the event very precarious ; but in mostcases, where poor retailers may have occasion to be concerned,the charge and trouble of attendance must be greater than thesubject can bear, so that all such people must succumb ; theymust submit to the determination of the commissioners of theexcise, and can expect no other redress, but what they meetwith from the mercy of those commissioners. The judges ofWestminster Hall are, it is true, for life, but they are all namedby the crown; I shall say nothing of the present judges, who soworthily fill the several benches of Westminster Hall; but ifthey should die, and if the crown should be resolved to usethat power, which the parliament had put into their hands, inorder to oppress the subject, they will always find judges fit fortheir purpose : judges are but men, they are subject to the samefrailties that other men are, and the crown has always plenty ofbaits wherewithal to tempt them. A judge may be made alord chief justice, a lord chief justice may be made a lordchancellor, and every one may have a son, a brother, or acousin to be provided for ; and the crown has many other ways,by which they may win over a judge to administer justice accordingto the directions he shall receive from court; moreespecially when he is to administer justice in a summary way,and without the usual forms of proceeding in courts of lawequity. For by this new method of appeal, and which has beenso much bragged of, care has been taken that the subject shallnot be restored to his ancient birthright, that is, to a trial by jury.APPENDIX.No, this I find is most carefully avoided, and yet I think it mustbe allowed, that it is the inherent right of every Englishman tobe tried by his peers ; I am not so much acquainted with law,as to give an account of the several cases in which this methodof trial has been set aside, or the reasons for so doing ; but I willventure to say, that wherever that method has been set aside,whether the same was done by the wisdom of the nation orotherwise, such an alteration was an innovation, and was a dangerousencroachment upon the original charter of our constitution.As to the pretended partiality of juries, so much complainedof by the learned gentleman, it is of no weight with me ; Icannot see how that honourable gentleman, or any gentleman,can pretend to know what reasons a jury may have for givingtheir verdict ; no gentleman has a right to be believed upon hissingle say-so, against a verdict given by twelve honest men uponoath. If there have been so many verdicts given against thecrown, as that learned gentleman seems to insinuate, it is to meastrong proof that prosecutions have been set on foot againstthe subject, upon the evidence of witnesses, whose credibility orveracity have not been very much to be depended on ; which isso far from being an argument for altering the method of trialby jury, that it is a very strong argument for the continuanceof that method in all time to come. But as it is now very late,and as I shall probably have another opportunity of giving mysentiments more fully upon the affair now before us, I shalltrouble you no further at present, but only to declare, that now,after hearing this scheme opened to us, I dislike it as much asever I did any representation of it that ever I heard of, and thereforeshall give my negative to the question proposed.APPENDIX D.The Earl of Chesterfield's Speech against the Conventionwith Spain.My Lords, I very little mind the Address proposed, or anyaddress that can be proposed upon this occasion: nor am Iunder the least concern, whether you amend it or no ; for I shallbe against it, however amended. I think this convention themost inglorious, the most pernicious that this nation ever made ;and therefore I shall be against any thing that may seem to insinuatethe approbation of this house. We are sworn to befaithful counsellors to his majesty, and I think it would be deceivinghim, it would be a breach of our honour, a breach of ouroath, to present to his majesty an Address that may bear themost distant resemblance of an approbation of such a treaty. Ido not know who were the authors of it ; and therefore I cannotcondemn the convention because of the authors ; be they whothey will, because of the convention. But, my lords, thoughI do not know who were the authors, I know who were not : Iknow his majesty was not : I know he would never have approvedof it, if matters had not been egregiously misrepresentedto him. It is not, my lords, to the king, we are to show ourrespect by an address upon this occasion : it is to his ministers ;for 1 must always look upon addresses that seem to insinuate anapprobation of public measures, as addresses made to the ministerswho advised and conducted those measures. It is nottherefore to the king, but to his ministers, that we are to showour respect upon this occasion ; and the only method by whichAPPENDIX. 449we can regain from foreign nations, that respect which is due tothis, and that which we have forfeited by our late conduct,especially by our agreeing to this convention, would be to showno respect to those that made it, but to censure it, and then addresshis majesty, to know who had advised it. This would beshowing a due respect to our sovereign, and a due respect toour own honour. As for our success, with regard to the solemnand definitive treaty, that is to be concluded in pursuance ofthis preliminary convention, I hope we shall have none ; I woulddisappoint it if possible ; for I am sure it is impossible to obtainan honourable treaty, in pursuance of such a dishonourablepreliminary.Last session of parliament, my lords, we strengthened thehands of the crown in a most extraordinary manner : we put itin the power of the crown to obtain satisfaction, reparation andsecurity, by force of arms, if they could not be obtained bypeaceable means ; but no proper use has been made of the extraordinarypowers we then granted. Great fleets have, indeed,been fitted out : the nation has been put to great expense, ourseamen harassed, and our trade interrupted : from these mightypreparations the nation expected great things ; but the Spaniardsknew better : they knew the instructions given to our formidablesquadrons ; or at least they judged of them from former experience.They knew our fleets were directed by the same counselsthey have been for several years past, and therefore they concluded,they were furnished with the same harmless instructions.We had before sent a fleet to Cartagena, where it lay peaceablyfor several months, an overmatch for Spain, but anunequal match for the worms and climate. We had before senta fleet to Gibraltar, when it was actually besieged by theSpaniards ; but that fleet was not to attack or annoy them : no,it was so civil as to open to right and left, and let provisionspass through for the enemy's besieging army : nay, it seems,they had instructions not even to protect our trade ; for someof our merchant-ships were taken under their very nose.Our fleets sent out last summer, my lords, now appear tohave had the same sort of instructions. We may judge of theinstructions given to that sent to the West Indies, from an acci-VOL. II. 2 G450 APPENDIX.dent that happened. One blunt English captain that was sentout upon a cruise, imagining that his country was not put to theexpense of sending out fleets to do nothing, happened to meetwith a Spanish register-ship, which he took and brought intoJamaica, as a lawful prize ; but the commodore knew thesecret: he knew we were not to take, but in the most humblemanner to sue for satisfaction and justice ; and therefore heordered the captain not only to set his prize at liberty, but toconvoy her back, with great respect, to the latitude in which hetook her. Our squadron sent to the Mediterranean could haveno warlike instructions ; because they could do no harm toSpain, unless it had been to make prize of some of their fishing-boats,or coasting-barks : they had no land-forces on board, norwere provided with any thing proper for annoying any Spanishtown or village upon the sea coast. None of our fleets thereforecould give the least weight to our negotiations : they couldserve for nothing, but to confirm the Spaniards in the contemptibleopinion they have long entertained of us ; and the consequencewe find is agreeable. We have obtained no satisfactionfor the many indignities that have been put upon us ; it doesnot appear that we ever asked for it. We have obtained no reparationfor our losses, but what was before agreed to by Spain,or what one part of our own people must make to the other.And we have obtained no security for our trade or navigation :that we have left entirely to our plenipotentiaries ; and they aresuch plenipotentiaries, as, I believe, no nation in the worldwould have trusted with an affair of such consequence ; for I donot know that either of them has one shilling's worth estate inany part of his majesty's dominions, to answer for any malversationsor breaches of faith they may be guilty of.I am surprised any lord should imagine, we have got as amplesatisfaction as we could insist on. My lords, the word ( satisfaction'ought not to be mentioned by any one that talks infavour of this convention : we have got none. Has Spainagreed to punish or deliver up any one of its governors or captains,that have so cruelly used our seamen ? This alone can becalled satisfaction ; and this we were afraid to ask. We havenot so much as got, by this convention, any reparation for ourAPPENDIX.losses ; and yet we have by this convention given the Spaniardsa general release. My lords, I shall show that we have got noreparation, but what Spain had before agreed to give, or whatone part of our own people must make to the other ; and inorder to do this, 1 must examine the just demands which, it issaid, Spain had upon us. The only demands I ever heard ofare, that which relates to the ships we took from them in theMediterranean in 1718 ; and that which relates to the ship theycall the Santa Theresa, which was seized at Dublin in 1735.If there are any other, I wish the noble lords who talk so muchin favour of the convention, would mention and explain them.Now, my lords, with regard to the ships we took from themin 1718, I must insist upon it, that they were justly taken, andwere lawful prize. But as we, by the treaty of 1721, agreed torestore them, let us examine the words of that treaty, in orderto see whether we have not long since complied, as far as wewere obliged, with the terms of that treaty. The words of the5th article of that treaty are, " That his Britannic majestyshall cause to be restored to his Catholic majesty, all the shipsof the Spanish fleet which were taken by that of England, inthe naval battle fought in the seas of Sicily in 1718, with theguns and other equipage, in the condition they are at present,or else the value of those that may have been sold, at the sameprice that the purchasers shall have given." These are thewords of the treaty ; and in pursuance of this, his Catholicmajesty sent commissioners to Port Mahon, where all these shipswere, except one, for I never heard that any more of them weresold: and the ships were accordingly, by his majesty's orders,offered to be delivered to these commissioners, with their gunsand other equipage, in the condition they were then in, whichwas all we were obliged to ; but the commissaries refused toaccept of them, because they were in a decayed condition, andunfit for service. Therefore, if these ships were not restored, itwas the king of Spain's own fault ; for we performed all thatwas incumbent upon us, by the treaty of 1721 ; except as towhat related to the ship that had been sold, and that ship havingbeen sent to Spain by those that purchased her, after they hadfitted her up for service, at a very great expense, the SpaniardsAPPENDIX.thought fit to seize her, by which they gave us a claim uponthem, instead of their having any upon us, on account of thatship ; for we were obliged to account for her only at the priceat which she was sold, whereas, when they seized her, she wasworth a great deal more.From hence it appears, my lords, that they could have nojust demand upon us, on account of any obligations we laidourselves under by the treaty of 1721. And with respect to theship they called the Santa Theresa, it is well known, that shewas one of those many British ships that have been of late mostunjustly seized and confiscated by the Spaniards ; and as shehappened to be sent upon a voyage to Dublin by some Spanishmerchants, the former owner being there at the time, immediatelydiscovered her to be his ship ; and he having applied tothe government there, and fully proved his property, we couldnot refuse to do justice to our own people in our own ports ;though we have for many years neglected to obtain justice forthem from the Spaniards ; but if we consider the convention,we shall find, that the value of this ship is not to be included inthe 60,0002. demand, which they make upon us ; for by thesecond separate article, this ship is to be referred to the plenipotentiaries,and if they should give it against us, the value ofher is still to be accounted for, or to be allowed in whole, or inpart, as a compensation for the British ship called the Success,the restitution of which is stipulated by the same article.I hope I have now shown that the Spaniards had no just demandsupon us ; and therefore, I cannot comprehend how anylord can talk of the mutual demands that were between the twonations. My lords, there were no mutual demands : the demandswere all of our side : we had taken great care they shouldhave no demands upon us ; for to our Christian patience andlong suffering, we added a Christian sort of revenge. Weheaped coals of fire upon their heads, by returning them manygood offices for many injuries received ; but whatever Christianitymay teach with regard to private life, I am sure it inculcatesno such doctrines with regard to the behaviour of nationsor governments towards one another ; and I have good reasonto believe, that those who have been the chief authors of ourAPPENDIX. 453political lameness and submission, were no way influenced byany Christian motives.I shall now, my lords, consider the demands we had uponSpain ; and here I must observe, that the demands of our merchantsfor ships plundered or seized by the Spaniards, beforeour commissaries returned from Spain, which is three or fouryears since, amounted to above 400, OOO/. which sum wasreckoned as the value of what was taken or plundered at primecost ; for if our merchants had valued it at what they mighthave sold the cargoes for at market, it would have amounted toabove 500, OOO/. besides the damages they suffered by the interruptionof their trfcde, raising the premiums upon insurance,and loss of ships, two of which we had an account of from thegentlemen that were examined at our bar, besides many othersthat were never heard of; some of which there is great reasonto suspect were taken by Spanish Guard Costs, and the ships,with every living soul on board, sent to the bottom of the sea,after those pirates had gutted them of all they thought fit fortheir purpose. Therefore, the amount of our real damages, andconsequently our real demands upon Spain, at the time ourcommissaries left that kingdom, was at least 500,OOOZ. sterling;and as the Spaniards have taken and plundered a great manyof our ships since that time, our demands upon them for damages,without reckoning costs, must have amounted to a greatdeal above 500, OOO/. at the time we began to negotiate thisconvention ; for if to this we should add our costs, I mean theextraordinary expense the nation has been put to by their obstinaterefusal of justice, our demands upon them at that time,would amount, I believe, to at least a million sterling, withoutone shilling's worth of a just demand upon their side ; and thiswhole demand we have, by this convention, released, for thesum of 27,000/. which is less than the King of Spain himselfhad allowed (before this convention was thought of) to be justlydue to us, as I shall presently make appear.My lords, the value put by our commissaries on the demandsof our merchants, is what I have not the least regard to. Theyseem to have been Spanish, and not English commissaries. Itis true they reduced the demands of our merchants to 200, OOO/.,APPENDIX.but they had not the least reason for what they did. One ofthem that was examined at our bar, could not give the leastshadow of reason for making any reduction, and much less formaking such an extraordinary reduction. From what he said,we may judge how they lumped things in favour of Spain. Hetold us, that for about twenty sloops, that even they allowed tohave been unjustly seized, they lumped them at 100J. apiece,though every one knows, that no sloop, proper for sailing onseas where tornados, tempests, and hurricanes are frequent, canbe built and fitted out for 100/. without reckoning the seamen'sclothes, provisions, and other things that must be on board.From hence we may see, they were resolved to reduce the demandsof their countrymen as low as possible. From whomthey could have instructions for this, I cannot imagine : I amsure it was not from his majesty ; and if they received such instructionsfrom any of his ministers, they ought not to havecomplied with them : it was betraying his majesty, and sacrificingthe interest of his people, to the selfish views of some ofhis ministers.But even this sum of 200,000/. the court of Spain was resolved,it seems, not to make good ; and as our ministers were,it seems, resolved to have a treaty at any rate, it became necessaryfor them to reduce this sum. For this purpose, we haveallowed of a demand of 60,000/. which the Spaniards madeupon us, though they had not, as I have shown, the least pretencefor making such a demand. This reduced the 200, OOO/.to 140,000/. Well, but even this sum of 140,0002. the courtof Spain refused to pay ; therefore we allowed them to deduct45,0002. for prompt payment. Whatever other lords may think,I must think, an allowance of near one third of the sum due, isa pretty extraordinary allowance for prompt payment ; especially,when that which is called prompt payment, is only apromise to pay in four months. I have often, my lords, heardof an allowance made for prompt payment, when money is paidbefore it is due by law or custom ; but I never heard that thecreditor made an allowance for prompt payment when he gavehis debtor four months forbearance : the allowance is then generallyof the other side. This was the case between Spain andAPPENDIX. 455us. The money was due, and immediately payable both bylawand custom : therefore they should have made us an allowancefor forbearance, instead of our making them an allowancefor prompt payment. What necessity, what obligation, couldwe lie under to accept of assignments upon his Catholic majesty'srevenues in New Spain ? It would have been ridiculous toaccept of any such ; because we knew, by experience, they weregood for nothing.However, my lords, every pretence was to be admitted, thatcould be made, for diminishing the sum due to us from Spain :therefore this allowance for prompt payment was admitted of,and this reduced the 140,OOOJ. to 95,000/. But still this sumwas too large : the court of Spain would not so much as promiseto pay even this sum : therefore, what our negotiators hadalready allowed, for what I know, prompted them to set up amost unjust claim of 68,000/. against our South Sea Company ;and though the Spaniards are, by their own acknowledgment,indebted to our South Sea Company in a much larger sum, yetit was agreed, that this 68,000/. should be immediately paidby the company to the King of Spain; and this immediate paymentwas made the fundamental article of the convention ; forthe King of Spain's protestation or declaration, I must, and I amconvinced the court of Spain will consider as a condition sinequa non ; and our agreeing to accept of any treaty under sucha condition is the more extraordinary, for that it was done byone who was the company's servant, and at that very time intrustedwith the management of their affairs at that court.We may now see, my lords, what reparation the King of Spainhas, by this convention, agreed to make us. He has agreedto make a stipulated payment of 95,000/. to us in four months,provided our South Sea Company make an immediate presentto him of 68,000/. so that he is to pay to us but 27,OOOZ. out ofhis own pocket, which is a less sum than he had acknowledgedto be due to us, before this convention was thought of; because,before this convention was thought of, he had acknowledged,that the five ships, mentioned in the 4th article, were unjustlyseized, and had actually sent orders to New Spain for their restitution;and the value of these five ships will, I am sure, amount456 APPENDIX.to more than 27,000/. Nay, if in pursuance of these ordersthey have been restored, which, indeed, I believe, we have noreason to apprehend, I do not know but we may be brought 4or 5,OOOZ. in debt ; for by that article, the whole, or any partof them, that shall appear to have been restored, is to be repaidby us.Let us now see, my lords, what reparation we have obtainedby this convention. Our plundered merchants are, indeed, tohave 155,000/. divided among them, the salaries, fees, and perquisitesof those who are to make the division, being first deducted: and this they are to have as a full satisfaction for theirdamages, which amount to more than 500, OOO/. But how isthis 155,OOOZ. to be raised ? Why 60.000/. of it must be raisedby a tax upon our own people, or by making a new encroachmentupon our sinking fund ; 68,OOOZ. another part of it, is tobe raised by, or rather taken by violence from our own SouthSea Company ; and the remaining 27,000/. is to be paid to usby the King of Spain, which is a less sum than he had acknowledgedto be due to us, before this convention was thought of.I beg pardon, my lords, for detaining you so long upon thishead ; but as this treaty seems to have been artfully calculatedfor palming a sham reparation upon the nation, I was obligedto examine it to the bottom, in order to detect the artifices thathave been made use of for covering the deceit.Now, my lords, with regard to our future security, we havebeen so negligent of it in this preliminary treaty, that we havenot so much as obtained from the Spaniards a suspension oftheir wonted depredations. Where Spain is to be a gainer bya suspension, there it is expressly stipulated ; but where we areto be gainers, it is entirely neglected. We have promised tosuspend all fortifications and improvements in Georgia andCarolina ; but Spain has not promised to suspend searching ourships, and confiscating them upon frivolous pretences. For thisneglect, a learned lord has found out a most ingenious excuse ;he has told us, that if we had stipulated any such suspension, itwould have imported an acknowledgment of their right to searchand confiscate. How this may be in law, I do not know ; butI do not think it agreeable to common sense. I cannot thinkAPPENDIX. 457that my exacting a promise from a man to suspend doing me aninjury, is the least acknowledgment, that he has a right to domean injury. But if a suspension could be any way understoodto be an acknowledgment of their right to search andconfiscate our ships, the allowing them to continue the practice,must be a more direct, and, I am sure, a more hurtful sort ofacknowledgment. Therefore, I must look upon this neglect inthe preliminary convention as a bad omen, with respect to thedefinitive treaty. The time, it is true, in which this definitivetreaty is to be settled, is but eight months: they cannot, perhaps,do us any great injury in that time ; but that term mayberenewed, may be often renewed, I believe it will be renewedfrom time to time, as long as some people have any influencein our councils ; for I do not believe it will ever be in theirpower to make the Spaniards give up any right they pretend to ;and no British minister will ever dare to grant them, by a solemntreaty, a right to search British ships on the open seas, or aright to prescribe to his majesty's subjects what sort of goodsthey shall be allowed to carry in their ships from one part ofhis majesty's dominions to another. For this reason, I do notknow, but that our negotiations for a definitive treaty may lastas long as our negotiations for this preliminary have continued,which I must look on to be at least ten years ; for these renewalsor continuations may be safely agreed to, because they willnot be much taken notice of, or resented by the people ; andduring that whole time, the Spaniards are to continue to exercisea most unjust encroachment upon us, while we must continueto suspend the natural right we have to fortify and improveour own dominions.As for the pretence, my lords, that the Spaniards have givenup their right to search or confiscate our ships, and have acknowledgedthemselves in the wrong, by agreeing to pay usdamages and costs, T have already shown that they have notagreed, by this treaty, to pay us any damages, but what theyhad before acknowledged to be due ; and I was surprised tohear a learned lord, who certainly understands what is meant bydamages and costs, so far mistake the matter, as to say, theSpaniards have agreed to pay costs. Our costs are the expenses458 APPENDIX.the nation was put to in warlike preparations last summer, whichthe Spaniards have not agreed to pay one shilling of; for whetherthose preparations are to be called warlike measures or not, theycertainly cost us a great deal of money; and in all nations butthis, they look mighty like war : even in this, till within thesetwenty years, they have generally been the certain harbinger ofwar ; and will be so again, as soon as we begin to have a regardto our character abroad, or our economy at home.My lords, I have this day, and upon this occasion, heard adistinction made by a learned lord, between a right, and the enjoymentof a right. What the noble lord meant by this distinction,I cannot comprehend : for it is a distinction which, Iconfess, I do not understand. I am sure no right is good forany thing unless it be enjoyed, nor further than it is enjoyed ;and I must think, that whilst a man prevents me enjoying myright, he, for that time at least, takes from me the right itself.But after the noble lord had made this incomprehensible distinction,I was amazed to hear him say, there is no matter ofright now in dispute between Spain and us. Do not they say,they have a right to search our ships on the open seas ? It doesnot signify to us what frivolous pretence they found that rightupon : they do pretend to it, they have enjoyed it, by ourtameness, for too many years. Do not they say, they have aright to seize and confiscate our ships, if they find any gold,silver, logwood, cocoa, or other goods on board, which they arepleased to call the produce of their settlements in America? Itsignifies nothing to us, what reason they give for setting up sucha claim : they do pretend to it, and have actually exercised thisright, even since this treaty was first set on foot ; for they seizedCaptain Vaughan's ship on the 29th of June last, and have sincecondemned her, for no other reason, but because of her havingsome goods on board, which, they said, was the produce of theirsettlements, though it appeared that he had taken them in atJamaica. These, my lords, are matters of right, which, I hope,our ministers dispute with them : I hope no British ministerwill ever dare to yield to them in either of these respects. And,on the other hand, do not we say, we have a right to a freenavigation in the American seas? Do not the Spaniards denyAPPENDIX. 459we have any such right ? Do not they expressly say, we haveno right to any navigation in those seas, but such as they havegranted us by treaty ? And that, they say is only to and fromour own colonies, whilst our ships steer a direct course ; whichthey, as sovereigns of the American seas, are to be the onlyjudges of. This is the meaning they put on the 8th article ofthe treaty of 1670, which every man must be convinced of, thathas read M. de la Quatre's letter to Mr. Keene, of the 10th ofFebruary was a twelvemonth : his words are, after having givenan abstract of that article, " That these words plainly showthe little grounds of the proposition you have advanced, that hisBritannic majesty's subjects have a right to a free commerceand navigation in the West Indies, the only navigation that canbe claimed by them, being that to their islands and plantations,whilst they steer a due course ; and their ships are liable toseizure and confiscation, if it be proved that they have alteredtheir route, without necessity, in order to draw near to theSpanish coasts." This, it is true, my lords, is a most false andridiculous interpretation of that article ; but this they have beenprompted to insist on by our tameness, and by our puzzling thecase with our negotiations.From hence we must see, my lords, that there are rights ofgreat importance in dispute between Spain and us. They pretendto rights which we can never admit of, as long as wepossess a foot of ground, or have any trade in the West Indies ;and they deny us a right that every free state in the world hasajust title to by the laws of nature and nations ; and I will ventureto prophesy, that, without a war, they will never give upthe former, nor acknowledge the latter. We may negotiate aslong as we please : we may conclude sham treaties and conventions,as temporary expedients for amusing our own people;but, from our late conduct, they have conceived such a contemptibleopinion of us, that we must now fight them before wecan expect any justice or satisfaction from them. This must atlast be the case ; but when this happens, it will not be thosewho then advise a war ; but those, who by their pusillanimousconduct have made it necessary, that ought to be blamed forhaving led the nation into a war. If we had properly resented460 APPENDIX.the first insult, and had peremptorily insisted upon full satisfaction,we might have obtained it by peaceable means; but nowI am afraid it is become impossible : we must go to war beforewe can expect either satisfaction or quiet ; and when we do, Ihope it will be conducted with wisdom and vigour ; for if weshow the same irresolute conduct in war, we have lately donein peace, if we seem afraid of hurting the enemy too much, likea senseless and spiritless animal fallen into a mire, the longerwe struggle, the deeper we shall sink, and may, at last, come tobe suffocated in the mud : whereas, by a bold and vigorouspush at first we might have got through the quagmire, andthrown ourselves safe upon the opposite shore.Having now shown, that our right to a free navigation in theAmerican seas, is one of those rights that is disputed by Spain,we must from thence conclude, it is one of those rights, that isby this convention to be regulated by plenipotentiaries. Thatis to say, my lords, it is to be given up by our plenipotentiaries ;for if it be regulated, it must be destroyed : every regulationmust be a restraint, and that which is put under a restraint, canin no sense be said to be free. The right Spain pretends to, ofsearching our ships in the open seas ; and the right they pretendto, of prescribing to us what sort of goods we may carry in ourships, from one part of the British dominions to another, arerights which, I hope, are now in dispute between Spain and us ;and are therefore rights that are referred to be regulated by ourplenipotentiaries. My lords, if we agree to regulate them, wegrant them ; and if we grant them under any regulations, wecan no longer pretend to a free navigation or commerce in theAmerican seas : therefore, my lords, I must look upon thisarticle as an artful, or indirect surrender (I shall not give itthe name it deserves) of the most undoubted, and the mostvaluable rights of the people of Great Britain. The learnedprelate who spoke some time ago, and the learned lord whospoke since, have, indeed, upon this subject, shown themselvesexcellent advocates for Spain : I hope the Spanish plenipotentiarieswill neither have so much eloquence, nor so many arguments; for, if they have, as I have no very great opinion of thecapacity or qualifications of our own, I am afraid we shall comeAPPENDIX.off with the worst. But their arguments in favour of Spainhave been so fully answered by the noble duke that spoke afterthe reverend prelate, and the noble lord that spoke last but one,that I need not, if I could, add any thing to the answers theyhave made ; therefore, I shall only wish, that our plenipotentiarieshad been here to have heard them, in order that theymight have learned how to defend the cause of their countryagainst the most artful arguments that can be made use of byits enemies.The only other right now in dispute between Spain and us,that seems to have been taken the least notice of in our late negotiations,is our right to Georgia and Carolina. This, the noblelord who spoke last but two, has represented as a dispute aboutlimits only ; though every one knows, the Spaniards have latelybegun to dispute our right to Georgia, and even to a great partof Carolina, particularly our right to the former, which they soperemptorily deny, that they would not allow the name to be somuch as mentioned in this convention ; and as we have latelygiven that country the name of Georgia, not only by charter,but by authority of parliament, our accepting of an article aboutthe regulation of limits, without mentioning our frontier province,will, I am afraid, be considered by the Spaniards as asurrender of that province. We may, if we will, give upGeorgia; we may give up South Carolina, and yet say, thatthe only dispute between Spain and us was about limits; becausethe Spaniards insisted, that the river Hodie, upon theborders of North Carolina, was the proper limit between Floridaand Carolina; whereas we insisted, that the river Alatamahawas the proper limit. This, I say, might be called a disputeonly about limits ; but, if we should give up all the countrylying between these two rivers, if we do not give up a right, Iwill say, we give up a very valuable possession.I have now shown, my lords, that by this convention we haveobtained no reparation ; and that, so far from obtaining futuresecurity, we seem to have, in some measure, given up everything,upon which our future security can be founded. What,then, could induce us to accept of such an unsatisfactory, such4>62 APPENDIX.a dishonourable preliminary ? Which is a question that leadsme of course to consider the present circumstances of Europein general, and of this nation in particular. This, my lords, Iconfess, is a subject which I touch on with reluctance ; becauseI am sure it can afford no great comfort, either to the speakeror to the hearer. The state of our affairs, both at home andabroad, I shall grant is dismal enough ; but I am sorry to hearit made more dismal than it really is, for the sake of justifyingan inglorious treaty, or a dastardly submission to the most provokinginsults. The affairs of Europe are, indeed, at present,in a situation not very favourable for this kingdom ; but what isthis owing to ? It is owing, my lords, to a ridiculous notionwe took up about fifteen years ago, of the overgrown power ofthe house of Austria: a notion that could have been instilledinto us by nothing but French counsels ; and who were thechief propagators of this pernicious notion, we may well remember.This notion produced the treaty of Hanover ; a treatycalculated for dissolving an alliance, which we ought to havecultivated and strengthened with all our art ; because it couldbe prejudicial to no state in Europe but France alone. Andthis treaty of Hanover drove us into that long chain of negotiations,treaties, and expense, by which we not only reunitedthe two branches of the house of Bourbon, but contributed, atourown expense, to aggrandize them. Our fleets were employedto give principalities to one of the branches of thathouse ; and now we are told, you must not vindicate yourrights, or your honour, against one of these branches, becauseit may be assisted by the other.My lords, if this argument proves any thing, it proves toomuch ; if we dare not revenge the affronts that are put upon us,nor repel the most unjust encroachments, for fear of France, wehave nothing to do but lie down and die. It signifies nothingto put it off by patchwork, and expedients, for eight monthslonger. But this, my lords, has been our method for severalyears. Like builders, that build a house to last only for theterm of their lease, they build of rotten materials ; and if theycan, by patchwork, keep it up while they are in it, they do notAPPENDIX. 4?63care if it tumbles upon, and crushes the landlord under its ruins.A minister that has no credit or character abroad, nor anyauthority or affection among the people at home, must haverecourse to patchwork and expedients. He can have no materials,but the rotten hearts of sycophants and preservers ;and these must be kept together, at a great expense, by temporaryexpedients : he neither can, nor will, think of building asolid and lasting fabric ; but, I hope the nation will never allowhim to build for them ; or if they should be so unwise, as toallow him to erect a deceitful fabric, that they will pull it abouthis ears, before he has time to enclose them ; for if they shouldallow him to go on, he may so environ them with ruins, that itwill hardly be possible for them to find their way out.I cannot easily believe, my lords, that France will assistSpain in putting a yoke upon us, that may afterwards serve asaprecedent for putting the same yoke upon themselves. Thecourt of France is seldom so short in its politics. I am ratherinclined to think, that the court of France will either endeavourto prevail on us to accept of sham treaties, and a precarioussecurity, or, in case of a war, that they will endeavour to preventour bringing it to a speedy issue, by a vigorous prosecution.I hope we shall take care not to be directed or duped by Frenchcounsels in either of these cases ; for both will be destructive tothis nation, both will serve the ends of France : a precariouspeace, or a languid war, will keep up a contention betweenSpain and us ; and such a contention will contribute greatly toestablish the trade of France upon the ruins of the trade of thisnation. But suppose these two nations should unite against us,and that we have negotiated ourselves out of every alliance thatcan give us any assistance; yet still we must do the best wecan. By a wise and vigorous conduct we might make both ofthem repent of their undertaking. They both depend greatlyupon their trade and territories in the West Indies, where wemay be masters if we will ; and though they have both of lategot great additions of power by our blunders, yet they must notpretend to prescribe to all the powers of Europe. Such an attemptwould bring back to us those allies, whom we have APPENDIX.tacked by our late conduct ; and in that case, a confederacymight soon be formed, that would be able to prescribe laws bothto France and Spain, instead of receiving laws from them. Thepresent aspect of affairs in Europe is, it is true, dismal enough ;but yet it is not yet so dismal as it was in the beginning of theyear 1702; and every one knows the glorious success of theconfederacy that was then formed against France and Spain.But before we can expect any success either in war, or in formingconfederacies, we must take care to unite our people amongstthemselves, and to establish among them a confidence in theconduct of those that govern them ; which, I am afraid, cannotbe done by those who have spread disunion and distrust, notonly amongst our allies abroad, but amongst our people athome.Our trade with Spain, my lords, was once a profitable tradeto this nation : but, as France has lately got much into thattrade, it is not near so profitable to us as it was. If it were notfor our plantations, I believe we should be no great gainers uponthe balance. We shall manage the war but ill, if we do notmake more by a war with Spain, than we can do by a precariousand interrupted trade. But if it were otherwise, we cannotpreserve our trade with that nation, or with any nation, but bypreserving their esteem and their friendship ; and these wemust lose, if we submit tamely to their insults. These walls,my lords, ought to put us in mind of the methods by which ourancestors preserved the trade, and vindicated the honour of thenation. These show it was not by negotiation, nor by lumpingaway the just demands of their country. I do not know, ifthere are any historical looms now at work, but I am afraid ourSpithead and Cartagena expeditions would make as bad afigure in a piece of tapestry, as they will hereafter do in ourhistories.But I hope, my lords, we have no such looms at work : itwould be for the honour of the nation, if no memorandum couldbe preserved of some of our past transactions ; for we must alterour measures, before we can transmit to posterity what they canreflect on with satisfaction or emulation. If we had taken deAPPENDIX. 4*65ample from the conduct of a minister in a neighbouring country,our affairs, both at home and abroad, would have been in a verydifferent situation : by encouraging trade and manufactures, byparsimony in public expense, by not engaging needlessly in anybroils, and by vindicating the honour of his country with resolution,when there was occasion, he has rendered his countryhappy, and himself glorious. But we have followed contrarymeasures, and by so doing, have brought ourselves into thatdistress, which is now made the chief argument for our agreeingto this inglorious convention.However, my lords, I think the state of our affairs not yetso desperate as that it ought to be a prevailing argument upon-thisoccasion. I hope I have shown, that the state of affairs inEurope, is not so bad as it has been represented ; and as to ourdomestic affairs, can they improve by submitting to daily insults,and to usurpations that must destroy our trade? In suchcircumstances, can we pay off our debts, can we preserve oursinking fund ? No, my lords, by the decay of our trade, ourpeople must every day become poorer, and less numerous : thiswill diminish our consumption ; and this again will of coursediminish the annual produce of our taxes : we may, by a morerigorous collection, keep it up to its old value for some years ; butit will soon begin to sink considerably every year ; and this willat last annihilate our sinking fund. We cannot therefore proposeto pay off our debt, unless we preserve our trade : nor canwe pay any debt, if in time of peace we must be at the expenseof war, which was our case last summer, and may probably beso for many summers to come ; for if great armaments andmilitary preparations were necessary to procure a preliminaryinvention, surely they will be as necessary for procuring adefinitive treaty ; therefore we must have a numerous army atland, and formidable squadrons, I mean in show, my lords, attill this treaty be concluded and ratified, which I am convincedwill not be very speedily. In the mean time, as we havestipulated no suspension, our merchants will be plundered, andour seamen cruelly used by the Spanish guard costs ; whichwill of course render our people more and more discontented,VOL. II. 2 H466 APPENDIX.and at last disaffected. Our people, it is true, may becomemore united ; but it will be against our established government ;and in that case, I hope, it will be allowed, that our domesticaffairs would be in a worse condition than they are at present,and our government less able to carry on a foreign war, than ourpresent government can be supposed to be.Our domestic affairs may therefore, my lords, grow worse,but they cannot grow better, by our continuing in such a warlikepeace as we have continued in for almost these twenty years ;and we can expect no other sort of peace, till we retrieve ourcharacter, and establish our security, which, I think, can nowbe done no other way but by a vigorous and well-conductedwar. But suppose, my lords, the state of affairs, both at homeand abroad, were as dismal as it has been represented by thosewho have spoke in favour of this convention ; could this be anyreason for our suing for, or agreeing to such a treaty ? We werein no danger of being attacked by Spain ; we were not so muchas threatened by any such attack ; we wanted only satisfactionand reparation for past injuries, and security against future ;therefore we had no shadow of reason for agreeing to any treaty,that did not give us either the one or the other. By this wehave obtained neither : we have absolutely released and givenup the former ; and we have rendered the latter more precariousthan it was before. If we had made no treaty, no preliminary,Spain could only have continued to seize and confiscate suchof our merchant-ships as they could meet with and overcome ;and this they may still do, notwithstanding this treaty. Whatwould have been the consequence? Suppose the nation atpresent absolutely unable to vindicate its rights or its honour byforce of arms, yet we might have waited with patience till anopportunity offered, without being exposed to suffer, in themean time, more than we are now exposed to, notwithstandingthis treaty; and when an opportunity offered for vindicatingour rights and our honour by force of arms, we could then haveinsisted upon full reparation for all losses, all damage, allexpense, which we cannot now do ; because, by this treaty, wehave given a general release.APPENDIX. 4,67I shall agree, my lords, that this nation can never long wantan opportunity for revenge against any nation in Europe. Thisis our happiness ; but this ought to have been an argumentagainst our granting such a generous release as we have grantedby this preliminary. Besides, my lords, it is an argumentsome people ought to be ashamed to mention, if they could beashamed of any thing. It is almost twenty years since Spainset up every claim against us they now pretend to ; it is almosttwenty years since they have been in a continued and uninterruptedcourse of insulting the nation, plundering our merchants,and maltreating our seamen ; and it is strange, that in so longa time, we could find no opportunity for revenge, against anation, which no man will say is by itself an equal match forthis. My lords, we have had many opportunities ; but we haveneglected them all, or have been prevailed on by French counsels,or worse, to make use of none of them. We had oneabout seven years since, which it is amazing we neglected ; andthe fatal consequences of that neglect now begin to appear ;but I am afraid they do not yet all appear : if they are notprevented by a change of measures in this kingdom, they mayprove fatal to Europe as well as to England ; and they cannotbe prevented without an infinite expense to this nation, forwhich those who gave rise to them, ought, I hope they will, bemade to answer.This shows, my lords, that we ought not to have been soready, I shall not say rash, in approving of treaties or negotiations,as we have been for several years past. We ought toapprove of no treaty, without maturely considering its terms andits consequences, as also the necessity there was for agreeing toit;for as every treaty is a new national obligation, no treatyought to be agreed to, without some necessity for so doing.And I am convinced that no man who maturely considers thetreaty now before us, either in its terms, its consequences, orthe necessity there was for our agreeing to it, will approve of itin any shape. An immediate war is not the necessary consequenceof our refusing to approve of it, by putting a negativeupon this motion. His majesty may, nevertheless, wait for a2 H 2468 APPENDIX.more proper opportunity of declaring war. But if we should,in any shape, approve of this treaty, the demands which wemay justly make, and fully obtain, in case of a successful war,will thereby be greatly diminished ; therefore, the motion whichthe noble lord has been pleased to make, will, I hope, be disagreedto.APPENDIX E.Sir Robert Walpole's Speech in answer to Mr.Sandy's motion for his removal.[The former part of this Speech is given in the text, p. 290 ; theremainder is subjoined here.]"I SHALL now consider the articles of accusation which theyhave brought against me, and which they have not thought fit toreduce to specific charges ; and I shall consider these in the sameorder as that in which they were placed by the honourable memberwho made the motion. First, in regard to foreign affairs ;secondly, to domestic affairs ; and, thirdly, to the conduct of thewar.As to foreign affairs, I must take notice of the uncandid mannerin which the gentlemen on the other side have managed thequestion, by blending numerous treaties and complicated negotiationsinto one general mass.To form a fair and candid judgment of the subject, it becomesnecessary not to consider the treaties merely insulated ; but toadvert to the time in which they were made, to the circumstancesand situation of Europe when they were made, to the peculiarsituation in which I stand, and to the power which I possessed.I am called repeatedly and insidiously prime and sole minister.470 APPENDIX.Admitting, however, for the sake of argument, that I am primeand sole minister in this country ; am I therefore prime and soleminister of all Europe ? Am I answerable for the conduct of othercountries as well as for that of my own? Many words are notwanting to show, that the particular views of each court occasionedthe dangers which affected the public tranquillity ; yetthe whole is charged to my account. Nor is this sufficient ;whatever was the conduct of England, I am equally arraigned.If we maintained ourselves in peace, and took no share in foreigntransactions, we are reproached for tameness and pusillanimity.If, on the contrary, we interfered in the disputes, we are calledDon Quixote, and dupes to all the world. If we contractedguarantees, it was asked, why is the nation wantonly burdened ?If guarantees were declined, we were reproached with having noallies."After making these preliminary observations, on the necessityof considering the relative situation of Europe, when these engagementswere contracted, and proving that the treaties wereright at the time they were made, though they might not havehad the desired effect, he entered into a luminous recapitulationof the principal compacts, which had been adverted to in thecourse of the debate. They formed a connective series, embracingpast events, present advantages, and future contingencies, ofwhich the various parts had such a necessary dependance oneach other, that any separation must be fatal to the comprehensionof the whole.He took up the subject from the peace of Utrecht, which, bysuffering a prince of the house of Bourbon to remain on thethrone of Spain, had materially altered the balance of power inEurope, had produced new interests, and involved this country inaseries of delicate and complicated negotiations. The quadruplealliance was the consequence of that treaty : but as he was notthen in administration, he was not accountable either for itsarticles or effects, though he was unfortunately minister, and unwillinglyaccessory to the execution of it.He should, therefore, begin with the first act of that administrationto which he had the honour to belong ; a refusal toaccept of the sole mediation offered by Spain, on the breach be-appendix.471tween Spain and France, occasioned by the dismission of theinfanta. " I hope it will not be said," he observed, " we hadany reason to quarrel with France upon that account ; andtherefore, if our accepting of that mediation might have produceda rupture with France, it was not our duty to interfere,unless we had something very beneficial to expect from the acceptance.A reconciliation between the courts of Vienna andMadrid, it is true, was desirable to all Europe, as well as to us,provided it had been brought about without any design to disturbour tranquillity, or the tranquillity of Europe ; but bothparties were then so high in their demands, that we could hopefor no success ; and if the negotiation had ended without effect,we might have expected the common fate of arbitrators, the disobligingof both. Therefore, as it was our interest to keep wellwith both, I must still think it was the most prudent part wecould act, to refuse the offered mediation."The next step of our foreign conduct, exposed to reprehension,is the treaty of Hanover. Sir, if I were to give the true historyof that treaty, which no gentleman can desire I should, I amsure I could fully justify my own conduct ; but as I do not desireto justify my own, without justifying his late majesty's conduct,I must observe, that his late majesty had such information, asconvinced not only him, but those of his council, both at homeand abroad, that some dangerous designs had been formed betweenthe emperor and Spain, at the time of their concludingthe treaty at Vienna, in May, 1725. Designs, sir, which weredangerous not only to the liberties of this nation, but to theliberties of Europe. They were not only to wrest Gibraltar andPort Mahon from this nation, and force the pretender on us, butthey were to have Don Carlos married to the emperor's eldest -daughter, who would thereby have had a probability of unitingin his person, or in the person of some of his successors, thecrowns of France and Spain, with the imperial dignity, and theAustrian dominions. It was therefore highly reasonable, bothin France and us, to take the alarm at such designs, and to thinkbetimes of preventing their being carried into execution. Butwith regard to us, it was more particularly our business totake the alarm, because we were to have been immediatelyAPPENDIX.attacked. I shall grant, sir, it would have been very difficult, ifnot impossible, for Spain and the emperor joined together tohave invaded, or made themselves masters of any of the Britishdominions ; but will it be said, they might not have invaded theking's dominions in Germany, in order to force him to a compliancewith what they desired of him, as king of Great Britain?And if those dominions had been invaded on account of a quarrelwith this nation, should we not have been obliged, both in honourand interest, to defend them? When we were thus threatened,it was therefore absolutely necessary for us to make an alliancewith France ; and that we might not trust too much to theirassistance, it was likewise necessary to form alliances with thenorthern powers, and with some of the princes in Germany,which we never did, nor ever could do, without granting themimmediate subsidies. These measures were therefore, I stillthink, not only prudent but necessary, and by these measureswe made it much more dangerous for the emperor and Spain toattack us, than it would otherwise have been.But still, sir, though by these alliances we put ourselves uponan equal footing with our enemies, in case of an attack, yet, inorder to preserve the tranquillity of Europe, as well as our own,there was something else to be done. We knew that war couldnot be begun and carried on without money : we knew that theemperor had no money for that purpose, without receiving largeremittances from Spain ; and we knew that Spain could make nosuch remittances without receiving large returns of treasure fromthe West Indies. The only way, therefore, to render these twopowers incapable of disturbing the tranquillity of Europe, wasby sending a squadron to the West Indies, to stop the return ofthe Spanish galleons ; and this made it necessary, at the sametime, to send a squadron to the Mediterranean, for the securityof our valuable possessions in that part of the world. By thesemeasures the emperor saw the impossibility of attacking us in anypart of the world, because Spain could give him no assistance,either in money or troops ; and the attack made by the Spaniardsupon Gibraltar was so feeble, that we had no occasion to callupon our allies for assistance : a small squadron of our own preventedtheir attacking it by sea, and from their attack by landAPPENDIX. 473we had nothing to fear ; they might have knocked their brainsout against inaccessible rocks, to this very day, without bringingthat fortress into any danger.I do not pretend, sir, to be a great master of foreign affairs.In that post in which I have the honour to serve his majesty, it isnot my business to interfere ; and as one of his majesty's council,I have but one voice ; but if I had been the sole adviser ofthe treaty of Hanover, and of all the measures which were takenin pursuance of it, from what I have said, I hope it will appear,that I do not deserve to be censured, either as a weak or awicked minister, on that account."The next measures which incurred censure were the guaranteeof the pragmatic sanction by the second treaty of Vienna, andthe refusal of the cabinet to assist the house of Austria, in conformitywith the articles of that guarantee.As to the guarantee of the pragmatic sanction," he said, " Iam really surprised to find that measure objected to ; it wasso universally approved of, both within doors and without,that till this very day I think no fault was ever found with it,unless it was that of being too long delayed. If it was so necessaryfor supporting the balance of power in Europe, as hasbeen insisted on in this debate, to preserve entire the dominionsof the house of Austria, surely it was not our business to insistupon a partition of them in favour of any of the princes of theempire. But if we had, could we have expected that the houseof Austria would have agreed to any such partition, even for theacquisition of our guarantee ? The King of Prussia had, it istrue, a claim upon some lordships in Silesia ; but that claim wasabsolutely denied by the court of Vienna, and was not at thattime so much insisted on by the late king of Prussia. Nay, ifhe had lived till this time, I believe it would not now have beeninsisted on ; for he acceded to that guarantee without any reservationof that claim ; therefore, I must look upon this as anobjection, which has since arisen from an accident, that couldnot then be foreseen, or provided against.I must therefore think, sir, that our guarantee of the pragmaticsanction, or our manner of doing it, cannot now be APPENDIX.jested to, nor any person censured by parliament for advisingthat measure. In regard to the refusal of the cabinet to assistthe house of Austria, though it was prudent and right in us toenter into that guarantee, we were not, therefore, obliged toenter into every broil the house of Austria might afterwards leadthemselves into ; and therefore, we were not in honour obligedto take any share in the war which the emperor brought uponhimself in the year 1733, nor were we in interest obliged to takea share in that war, as long as neither sides attempted to pushtheir conquests further than was consistent with the balance ofpower in Europe, which was a case that did not happen. Forthe power of the house of Austria was not diminished by the eventof that war, because they got Tuscany, Parma, and Placentia,in lieu of Naples and Sicily ; nor was the power of France muchincreased, because Lorraine was a province she had taken andkept possession of, during every war in which she had beenengaged.As to the disputes with Spain, they had not then reachedsui a height, as to make it necessary for us to come to an openrupture. We had then reason to hope, that all differenceswould be accommodated in an amicable manner ; and whilst wehave any such hopes, it can never be prudent for us to engageourselves in war, especially with Spain, where we have alwayshad a very beneficial commerce. These hopes, it is true, sir, atlast proved abortive, but I never heard it was a crime to hopefor the best. This sort of hope was the cause of the late convention; if Spain had performed her part of that preliminary treaty,I am sure it would not have been wrong in us, to have hoped forafriendly accommodation, and for that end to have waited nineor ten months longer, in which time the plenipotentiaries were,by the treaty, to have adjusted all the differences subsisting betweenthe two nations. But the failure of Spain in performingwhat had been agreed to by this preliminary, put an end to allour hope, and then, and not till then, it became prudent to enterinto hostilities, which were commenced as soon as possibleafter the expiration of the term limited for the payment of the95,000/.APPENDIX. 475Strong and virulent censures have been cast on me, for havingcommenced the war without a single ally ; and this deficiencyhas been ascribed to the multifarious treaties in which I have bewilderedmyself. But although the authors of this imputationare well apprized that all these treaties have been submitted toand approved by parliament, yet they are now brought forwardas crimes, without appealing to the judgment of parliament, andwithout proving or declaring that all or any of them were advisedby me. A supposed sole minister is to be condemned andpunished as the author of all ; and what adds to the enormity is,that an attempt was made to convict him uncharged and unheard,without taking into consideration the most arduous crisiswhich ever occurred in the annals of Europe. Sweden corruptedby France ; Denmark tempted and wavering ; the Landgrave ofHesse Cassel almost gained ; the King of Prussia, the emperor,and the czarina, with whom alliances had been negotiating,dead ; the Austrian dominions claimed by Spain and Bavaria ;the Elector of Saxony hesitating whether he should accede to thegeneral confederacy planned by France ; the court of Viennairresolute and indecisive. In this critical juncture, if Franceenters into engagements with Prussia, and if the Queen of Hungaryhesitates and listens to France, are all or any of these eventsto be imputed to English counsels? and if to English counsels,why are they to be attributed to one man?"I now come, sir, to the second head, the conduct of domesticaffairs ; and here a most heinous charge is made, that the nationhas been burdened with unnecessary expenses, for the sole purposeof preventing the discharge of our debts, and the abolitionof taxes. But this attack is more to the dishonour of the wholecabinet council than to me. If there is any ground for this imputation,it is a charge upon king, lords, and commons, as corrupted,or imposed upon. And they have no proof of theseallegations, but affect to substantiate them by common fame andpublic notoriety.No expense has been incurred but what has been approvedof, and provided for by parliament. The public treasure has beenduly applied to the uses to which it was appropriated by partialAPPENDIX.ment, and regular accounts have been annually laid before parliament,of every article of expense. If by foreign accidents, bythe disputes of foreign states amongst themselves, or by theirdesigns against us, the nation has often been put to an extraordinaryexpense, that expense cannot be said to have been unnecessary,because, if by saving it we had exposed the balance ofpower to danger, or ourselves to an attack, it would have cost,perhaps, a hundred times that sum, before we could recover fromthat danger, or repel that attack.In all such cases there will be a variety of opinions. I happenedto be one of those who thought all these expenses necessary,and I had the good fortune to have the majority of bothhouses of parliament on my side ; but this, it seems, proceededfrom bribery and corruption. Sir, if any one instance had beenmentioned, if it had been shown, that I ever offered a reward toany member of either house, or ever threatened to deprive anymember of his office or employment, in order to influence his votein parliament, there might have been some ground for thischarge ; but when it is so generally laid, I do not know what Ican say to it, unless it be to deny it as generally and as positivelyas it has been asserted ; and, thank God ! till some proofbe offered, I have the laws of the land, as well as the laws ofcharity, in my favour.Some members of both houses have, it is true, been removedfrom their employments under the crown ; but were they evertold, either by me, or by any other of his majesty's servants, thatit was for opposing the measures of the administration in parliament?They were removed, because his majesty did not thinkfit to continue them longer in his service. His majesty hada right so to do, and I know no one that has a right to ask him,What dost thou ? If his majesty had a mind that the favours ofthe crown should circulate, would not this of itself be a goodreason for removing any of his servants ? Would not this reasonbe approved of by the whole nation, except those who happen tobe the present possessors ? I cannot, therefore, see how thiscan be imputed as a crime, or how any of the king's ministerscan be blamed for his doing what the public has no concern in :APPENDIX. 477for if the public be well and faithfully served, it has no businessto ask by whom.As to the particular charge urged against me, I mean that ofthe army debentures, I am surprised, sir to hear any thing relatingto this affair charged upon me. Whatever blame mayattach to this affair, it must be placed to the account of thosethat were in power, when I was, as they call it, the country gentleman: it was by them this affair was introduced and conducted,and I came in only to pay off those public securities, which theirmanagement had reduced to a great discount, and consequentlyto redeem our public credit from that reproach, which they hadbrought upon it. The discount at which these army debentureswere negotiated, was a strong and prevalent reason with parliament,to apply the sinking fund first to the payment of those debentures,but the sinking fund could not be applied to thatpurpose, till it began to produce something considerable, whichwas not till the year 1727. That the sinking fund was then toreceive a great addition, was a fact publicly known in 1726;and if some people were sufficiently quick sighted to foresee, thatthe parliament would probably make this use of it, and cunningenough to make the most of their own foresight, could I help it,or could they be blamed for doing so ? But I defy my most inveterateenemy to prove, that I had any hand in bringing thesedebentures to a discount, or that I had any share in the profits bybuying them up.In reply to those who confidently assert, that the nationaldebt is not decreased since 1727, and that the sinking fund hasnot been applied to the discharge of the public burdens, Ican with truth declare, that a part of the debt has been paid off,and the landed interest has been very much eased, with respectto that most unequal and grievous burden, the land tax. I sayso, sir, because upon examination it will appear, that withinthese sixteen or seventeen years, no less than 8,000,000/. of ourdebt has been actually discharged, by the due application of thesinking fund, and at least 7,000,000/. has been taken from thatfund, and applied to the ease of the land tax. For if it hadnot been applied to the current service, we must have supplied478 APPENDIX.that service by increasing the land tax ; and as the sinking-fundwas originally designed for paying off our debts, and easing usof our taxes, the application of it in ease of the land tax, was certainlyas proper and as necessary an use as could be made.And I little thought that giving relief to landed gentlemen,would have been brought against me as a crime."I shall now advert to .the third topic of accusation, theconduct of the war. I have already stated in what manner, andunder what circumstances hostilities commenced; and as I amneither general nor admiral, as I have nothing to do either withour navy or army, I am sure I am not answerable for theprosecution of it. But were I to answer for every thing, no faultcould, I think, be found with my conduct in the prosecution ofthe war. It has from the beginning been carried on with as muchvigour, and as great care of our trade, as was consistent withour safety at home, and with the circumstances we were in at thebeginning of the war. If our attacks upon the enemy were toolong delayed, or if they have not been so vigorous or so frequentas they ought to have been, those only are to blame who havefor many years been haranguing against standing armies ; forwithout a sufficient number of regular troops in proportion tothe numbers kept up by our neighbours, I am sure we canneither defend ourselves, nor offend our enemies. On the supposedmiscarriages of the war, so unfairly stated, and so unjustlyimputed to me, I could, with great ease, frame an incontrovertibledefence ; but as I have trespassed so long on the time of thehouse, I shall not weaken the effect of that forcible exculpationso generously and disinterestedly advanced by the right honourablegentleman who so meritoriously presides at the admiralty.If my whole administration is to be scrutinised and arraigned,why are the most favourable parts to be omitted ? If facts areto be accumulated on one side, why not on the other ? Andwhy may I not be permitted to speak in my own favour? WasI not called by the voice of the king and the nation to remedythe fatal effects of the South Sea project, and so support decliningcredit? Was I not placed at the head of the treasury,APPENDIX. 479when the revenues were in the greatest confusion ? Is creditrevived, and does it now flourish? Is it not at an incredible height,and if so, to whom must that circumstance be attributed ? Hasnot tranquillity been preserved both at home and abroad, notwithstandinga most unreasonable and violent opposition ? Hasthe true interest of the nation been pursued, or has tradeflourished ? Have gentlemen produced one instance of this exorbitantpower, of the influence which I extend to all parts ofthe nation, of the tyranny with which I oppress those who oppose,and the liberality with which I reward those who supportme ? But having first invested me with a kind of mock dignity,and styled me a prime minister, they impute to me an unpardonableabuse of that chimerical authority which they only havecreated and conferred. If they are really persuaded that the armyis annually established by me, that I have the sole disposal ofposts and honours, that I employ this power in the destructionof liberty, and the diminution of commerce, let me awaken themfrom their delusion. Let me expose to their view the real conditionof the public weal; let me show them that the crown hasmade no encroachments, that all supplies have been granted byparliament, that all questions have been debated with the samefreedom as before the fatal period, in which my counsels aresaid to have gained the ascendancy : an ascendancy from whichthey deduce the loss of trade, the approach of slavery, the preponderanceof prerogative, and the extension of influence. ButI am far from believing that they feel those apprehensions whichthey so earnestly labour to communicate to others, and I havetoo high an opinion of their sagacity not to conclude that, evenin their own judgment, they are complaining of grievances thatthey do not suffer, and promoting rather their private interestthan that of the public.'* What is this unbounded sole power which is imputed to me?How has it discovered itself, or how has it been proved ?What have been the effects of the corruption, ambition, andavarice, with which I am so abundantly charged ?Have I ever been suspected of being corrupted ? A strange480 APPENDIX.phenomenon, a corruptor himself not corrupt! Is ambition imputedto me? Why then do I still continue a commoner? I,who refused a white staff and a peerage. I had, indeed, like tohave forgotten the little ornament about my shoulders, whichgentlemen have so repeatedly mentioned in terms of sarcasticobloquy. But surely, though this may be regarded with envyor indignation in another place, it cannot be supposed to raiseany resentment in this house, where many may be pleased to seethose honours which their ancestors have worn, restored againto the commons.Have I given any symptoms of an avaricious dispositionHave I obtained any grants from the crown since I have beenplaced at the head of the treasury ? Has my conduct been differentfrom that which others in the same station would havefollowed ? Have I acted wrong in giving the place of auditor tomy son, and in providing for my own family ? I trust that theiradvancement will not be imputed to me as a crime, unless itshall be proved that I placed them in offices of trust and responsibilityfor which they were unfit.But while I unequivocally deny that I am sole and primeminister, and that to my influence and direction all the measuresof government must be attributed, yet I will not shrinkfrom the responsibility which attaches to the post I have thehonour to hold ; and should, during the long period in which Ihave sat upon this bench, any one step taken by government beproved to be either disgraceful or disadvantageous to the nation,I am ready to hold myself accountable."To conclude, sir, though I shall always be proud of thehonour of any trust or confidence from his majesty, yet I shallalways be ready to remove from his counsels and presence, whenhe thinks fit ; and therefore I should think myself very littleconcerned in the event of the present question, if it were not forthe encroachment that will thereby be made upon the prerogativesof the crown. But I must think, that an address to hismajesty to remove one of his servants, without so much as allegingany particular crime against him, is one of the greatest en-appendix.481encroachments that was ever made upon the prerogatives of thecrown ; and therefore, for the sake of my master, without anyregard for my own, I hope all those who have a due regard for ourconstitution, and for the rights and prerogatives of the crown,without which our constitution cannot be preserved, will be againstthis motion."VOL. TI.APPENDIX F.Mr. Pultenetfs Speech upon the Conduct of theWar with Spain.Sir, I have always thought, that when papers of state arecalled for by this house, as well as when such papers are laidbefore us without being called for, it should be with some sortof view or design. We know very well that when treaties, estimates,or accounts are laid before us without being called for, itis generally with a design to demand a sum of money, or vote ofcredit ; and such demands have of late years usually beencomplied with, I believe, by most members of this house, withoutso much as looking at any one of the papers or estimateswhich were laid before us as the foundation of that demand.This practice, sir, must be allowed to be a little extraordinary ;but our late practice, with regard to those papers that areexpressly called for, has been much more surprising ; for afterthe papers called for have been laid before us, they have beenordered to lie upon the table, and there they have generally lain,without the least examination, as if we had had no view in callingfor them, but that of increasing the bulk of our votes by longlists of letters, instructions, and memorials. Experience hasshown, that when such papers are ordered to lie upon the tablefor the perusal of the members, they are seldom perused with attentionby any, and, when they are perused separately and distinctlyby a few particular members, none of them have authorityenough to prevail with the house to enter into a strict inquiry,or to take into consideration the errors, mistakes, or blunders,they may from such papers have discovered.APPENDIX. 483For this reason, sir, and that the nation may see we do notput the administration to the trouble and expense of layingpiles of state papers before us, without any view or design,either for the service or satisfaction of the public, I think, whenwe call for any papers of importance, and they are accordinglylaid before us, they ought of course to be referred to a selectcommittee, that they may examine them strictly, and reporttheir remarks, observations, or objections, to the house ; for theexamination of such a committee must always be more exactand full, and their report will have more weight than the examinationor report of any single member who peruses thepapers upon our table, without any direction or authority fromthe house.When I argue in this manner, sir, I hope no gentleman willthink that I am arguing against this or any other administration ;for a wise and just administration will always be glad to haveits conduct inquired into in the most strict, regular, andauthentic method ; and if the administration be weak or wicked,it is then the duty of parliament to take that method which isthe most regular and the most proper for rescuing the nation outof the hands of such an administration ; therefore every gentlemanmust, with me, suppose one of these two things : either,that the doctrine I have advanced will be approved by thosewho have the honour of being our present ministers, or, thattheir opposing it ought to be a prevailing argument with everyindependent member of this house for agreeing to it ; and, consequently,I must look upon it as an established maxim, thatall the papers which are laid before this house, and deemed tobe of great importance, ought to be referred to the considerationof a select committee.This, sir, is a maxim which will hold good at all times, and inall circumstances ; but when the nation finds itself involved ingreat difficulties, when our affairs both abroad and at home are apparentlyin great distress, and when a general suspicion prevailsagainst the conduct of our administration, this maxim ought notonly to be approved, but in every instance, without hesitation,pursued ; and that this is our case at present I shall endeavourto demonstrate. With regard to our trade and manufactures,484 APPENDIX.they have been upon the decay for several years ; every man isnow sensible of this decay, and every man is now convincedthat it is owing to the taxes we have upon the necessaries andconveniences of life. By these taxes the subsistence of poorlabourers and manufacturers is rendered more expensive in thisthan in any foreign country, which of course renders it impossiblefor them to work so cheap, and this must necessarilymake our manufactures come dearer to foreign markets than themanufactures of any other country. This has gradually diminishedthe quantity of our exports to all parts of the world,except to our own plantations, and must, at last, put an entirestop to our exporting any one sort of manufacture ; for othernations will by degrees fall into the method of rivalling us inevery sort, and as fast as they do, our exports of that sort ofmanufacture must cease.We may talk, sir, against the exportation of our wool, andbusy ourselves in forming schemes for preventing it ; but unlesswe can, by abolishing many of our taxes, enable our poor towork as cheap as the poor in other countries do, it will be impossiblefor us to prevent it, any other way than by diminishingour produce; for if we can work up none of our wool, butbarely what is necessary for home consumption ; and if a greaterquantity be produced than what is necessary for this demand,the surplus must be exported, or it must rot upon the hands ofthe owners, which would render it impossible for many of ourfarmers to pay their rents ; and this might, in a little time,make the cry as loud for the exportation of our wool as it is nowagainst it.The bad effects of our taxes, and the great decrease in theexport of our manufactures were most sensibly felt, sir, beforethe breaking out of our present war with Spain ; but they thenbegan to be more sensibly felt than ever, because that war putan entire stop to our exportation of any manufactures to Spain,and made it more dangerous to export them any where else,which of course enhanced the price, and, consequently, diminishedthe sale at every other foreign market. This at oncethrew numbers of our poor labourers and manufacturers out oftheir usual way of subsisting, and brought them and theirAPPENDIX.families upon their respective parishes, which has, in manyparishes, raised the poor rates to a height never known before inthis, nor, I believe, in any other kingdom.This, sir, is the present desperate state of our trade, and Godonly knows when, or if ever, we shall recover ; but this is farfrom being the only dire effect of the long continuance of ourmany heavy taxes. Our people bore with patience the loadsthey groan under, so long as they had any hopes of seeing ourdebts paid off, and our taxes abolished ; but they have now lostall hopes, and this creates a general uneasiness, which, if notspeedily removed, must end in the subversion of our liberties,and, perhaps, the overthrow of our present happy establishment.If this unhappy state had been the necessary consequence of along and unavoidable war : if by the extraordinary expense wehave put ourselves to for twenty years past, the balance ofpower in Europe had been settled upon a solid foundation ; if-we had established such a confidence among our allies, andsuch a respect at all the courts of Europe, as to prevent any oneof them from daring to insult or injure us, the people would havehad some consolation, and would still have had reason to hope,that, at last, we might have been able to have paid off our debts,and abolished most of our taxes. But can this be said to be thecase ? We have been engaged in no war : we have had no occasionto put ourselves to any extraordinary expense ; for I willventure to say, that if we had not for these twenty years pastsent one minister or courier abroad, nor kept one marchingregiment of foot at home, the balance of power would have beenmore secure than it is at present, and we should have beenmore confided in by our friends, and more dreaded by our enemies,than we are at this time, or have been at any time withinthat period.It is something surprising, sir, but it is what the wholenation is now convinced of, that every extraordinary article ofexpense we have put ourselves to for twenty years past, everynegotiation we have entered into, and every treaty we have concluded,has contributed to embroil more and more our affairs,both at home and abroad, and to render the balance of power inEurope more precarious than it was before. By this conduct,486 APPENDIX.sir, we at last found ourselves involved in an open war withSpain, and threatened and dictated to by France, without oneally to assist us, and without one fund for carrying on thewar, except an additional two shillings upon land ; for we canno more call the sinking fund a fund for carrying on a war, thanwe can call the funds appropriated to the payment of the interestgrowing due to Our public creditors a fund for that purpose;because the sinking fund was as solemnly, as legally, and asauthentically appropriated to the payment of their principal, asever the other was to the payment of their interest.In these circumstances we were, sir, nay, I may say in worse,when the late emperor died ; for France, by sending her squadronsto the West Indies, and the manifesto she published uponthat occasion, had in some measure openly declared against us;and considering what little success we have had against Spainalone, what success could we have expected against France andSpain united together against us ? From this immediate dangerwe were set free by the accident of the emperor's death ; forFrance then foresaw she might have a better game to play, andwas therefore willing to keep fair with this nation for a time ;but how were we set free, sir, from this immediate danger? Sir,by the balance of power's being brought into the most imminent,and, in all human probability, the most unavoidable danger ;for, in my opinion, nothing less than a miracle has hitherto preventedthe utter ruin of the house of Austria, considering themany powers which France has found means to unite againstit, and the little assistance it has received from those who wereboth in honour and interest obliged to support it, This, sir, Isay, has for a time prevented our having France avowedlyunited with Spain in the present war against us. If the emperorhad lived, we should probably, before now, have been obligedto submit to such terms of peace with Spain, as France pleasedto prescribe, or we should have been now standing single andalone, against the joint force of the two powerful monarchies ofFrance and Spain ; for considering how we had deserted theemperor in the year 1733, he would probably have rejoiced atourdistress ; considering how we have treated the King ofPrussia for several years past, he would certainly have refusedAPPENDIX. 487to give us any assistance ; and the Dutch durst not have venturedto have joined us, without a powerful confederacy in Germany.By good conduct, and the assistance of Providence, wemight, perhaps, by ourselves, have been able to have supportedsuch a war, especially if we had by our former economy paid offour debts, and freed our public revenue from mortgage. Wemight have carried it on with glory, and ended it with honour;but considering what a powerful navy France might have fittedout, if she had no way been obliged to divert her strength by aland war, and considering how we should have been obliged todivide our naval force, for the protection of our trade in everypart of the world, and for the defence of our dominions in theMediterranean and in America, as well as at home, it must beallowed that such a war, supposing the best conduct on ourside, would have been extremely heavy and dangerous ; and ifit had been left to the management of those, who have hithertomanaged with so little success our war against Spain alone, weshould certainly, before this time, have been undone.From hence we may see, sir, that though the emperor's death,at the time it happened, was unlucky for Europe, and may atlast prove unlucky for this nation, yet it suspended, or put offfor a time, the imminent danger we were then exposed to ; butare we now free from this danger ? Does not every man of commonpenetration foresee, that if France be allowed to settle theaffairs of Germany to her own liking, this danger will recurupon us with redoubled force ? She may then dictate to mostof the other states of Europe ; she may compel those that formerlywould have remained neuter, to join with Spain and heragainst us; and thus, unless we submit to whatever France shallplease to prescribe, we shall have not only France but most ofthe states of Europe united with Spain in a war against us.Such a war it would be impossible for us to support. Weshould then have no alternative ; we must submit ; and in sucha case who can tell what sort of a submission France mightrequire?This, sir, is a most disagreeable, a most melancholy prospect,and it becomes the more so when we consider, that in the presentdistressed condition of this nation, and confused state488 APPENDIX.of Europe, it is hardly possible to prevent the danger, or to dispersethe cloud that hangs over us; for unless we can break thatconfederacy which France has, by our blunders, found meansto form against the Queen of Hungary, I am afraid it will beimpossible for us conform any counter confederacy ; and consideringthe present load of debt we groan under, and the generaluneasiness thereby occasioned, it will be impossible for us toafford such a powerful assistance to the Queen of Hungary asmay enable her to make head against such a mighty confederacy.Thus, sir, I hope I have demonstrated, that at present welabour under great difficulties, and that our affairs are in theutmost distress both abroad and at home. This of itself is sufficientfor raising a general suspicion against the conduct of ourministers. From the many expensive negotiations we have oflate years carried on: from the many expensive and unprofitabletreaties we have concluded ; from the vast expense we have putourselves to, for giving weight to those negotiations, or for enforcingthe observance of those treaties, the people of this nationexpected that the liberties of Europe would have been by thistime secured, beyond a possibility of being attacked, and thetrade and navigation of this kingdom secured beyond a possibilityof being interrupted ; and, consequently, that from thistime we might have disbanded our armies, laid up our squadrons,dismissed our foreign auxiliaries, and applied ourselvessincerely and effectually to the paying off our debts, andabolishing our taxes. This, I say, the people expected : thisthey had reason to expect ; and now ; when they find themselvesdisappointed in every one of these particulars, they cannotbut suspect, they do most generally, and most violently suspect,both the wisdom and integrity of those who, for so many years,have had the direction of our public affairs, and who have neverbeen refused any sum they thought necessary for securing thesuccess of their measures.The difficulties we labour under, the distresses we are droveto, and the danger to which the liberties of Europe, and consequentlythe liberties of this nation, now lie exposed, may beowing to causes of different nature. They may be owing, sir,to the folly or ambition of foreign courts, or to events that couldAPPENDIX. 489not be foreseen or provided against. It may appear that ourministers have done all that human wisdom could direct for preventingthese fatal effects ; but the present face of affairs, bothat home and abroad, affords such a strong presumption againstthem, that it is become the duty of parliament to make an inquiryinto their conduct. If they are conscious of no neglect,weakness, or crime, they will promote that inquiry, they willassist us in every step that is necessary for making that inquirysatisfactory to the nation. If they behave otherwise, it will addstrength to the presumption against them, and consequentlyought to make us more zealous in performing our duty to ourcountry.Thus, sir, if at all times it ought to be looked on as a maximthat all such papers of moment as are laid before this house,ought to be referred to a select committee, this maxim ought, inour present circumstances, to be most religiously observed, and,therefore, I shall conclude with moving, " That the severalpapers presented to this house on Monday last, and likewise theseveral papers presented to the house yesterday, by Mr. Comptroller,be referred to a select committee ; and that they doexamine the same, and report to the house what they findmaterial in them."APPENDIX G.Mr. Henri Pelham's Answer to the precedingSpeech.Sir, If a parliamentary inquiry into our past conduct couldbe carried on without any interruption or prejudice to ourfuture, no man should be more ready than I to agree to it ; noman should be more zealous in promoting it ; because I amconvinced it would terminate in a full justification of thoselately concerned in our administration, against all the aspersionsand calumnies that have been cast upon their conduct.But a parliamentary inquiry into the conduct of ministersalways has been, and always must be attended with greatwarmth ; for the most innocent minister will always have aparty in parliament zealous to condemn, and the most guiltywill generally have a party zealous to acquit. This of courseraises a warmth within doors ; and this warmth within doorswill always occasion heats and animosities without, which mayrise to such a height as to break out in a civil war. Of this wehad such a late instance, that it can escape the notice of nogentleman in this house. I believe few gentlemen will nowpretend to justify the conduct of those who were our ministersduring the last four years of Queen Anne : I believe most gentlemenare now convinced, they were guilty of very high crimesand misdemeanors ; and yet, we all know, a parliamentaryinquiry into their conduct was the occasion of a civil war in thekingdom, which might have been fatal to us, if we had at that.APPENDIX. 491time been engaged in a foreign war, or if Europe had beenin such a situation as it is in at present.I had then, sir, the honour to be a member of this house,and I was zealous for the inquiry then set on foot, because Ithought the ministers guilty, and because I thought we hadthen an opportunity to inquire into their conduct, withoutexposing the nation to any foreign danger. But forasmuchas I was convinced of the misconduct of those ministers, if thenation had been at that time involved in a dangerous foreignwar, or if the liberties of Europe had been as much in dangeras they are at present, I should have been for suspending ourresentment against the guilty, till we had fully provided for thesafety of the innocent ; and the event showed that this sort ofconduct would have been the most prudent.This ought always, in my opinion, to be a rule for our conduct,even when we are convinced that ministers are criminal,or have been guilty of some piece of misconduct. How muchmore ought it to be a rule for our conduct, when we are convincedof their innocence, or have but a bare suspicion of theirguilt? When a parliamentary inquiry is set up, innocence maybea safeguard, but it is far from being a safeguard in which aminister can securely and quietly put his trust. He must notsit with his arms across, and trust to the honesty of his prosecutors,and impartiality of his judges. He must be watchfulthat no false evidence shall be brought or given against him,and diligent and expeditious in detecting and exposing it whenit is. He must take care to make his innocence appear inevery instance where it is attacked, and for this purpose he mayvery probably be obliged to discover secrets, which may be ofgreat prejudice to the nation. At the same time, he must inevery step be watchful, lest any point should be carried againsthim by a factious cabal ; and for this purpose he must diligentlyand earnestly solicit the attendance of all his friends. Theseconsiderations, sir, must show, that, during such an inquiry, noadministration can have leisure to mind the public business asthey ought ; and besides, the necessity ministers are in suchcases reduced to, of divulging the secrets of government, inorder to justify their conduct, may be of infinite and irreparable492 APPENDIX.prejudice to the public ; therefore, I think, we ought to lay itdown as a rule for our conduct, never to consent to a parliamentaryinquiry into the conduct of an administration, unlesswe be convinced, that some of those concerned have beenguilty of very great crimes or misdemeanors.A common rumour, or a bare suspicion, however general, canbe no sufficient ground for setting up such an inquiry ; becausesuch rumours and suspicions are spread against the best, aswell as against the worst ministers : nay, a good minister ismore liable than a bad one to such rumours and suspicions.If he be frugal of the public treasure, and cautious in grantingpublic favours ; if he prefers meritorious modesty to clamorousimpudence, he must raise to himself a great number of enemies;for every man who is refused any suit, however justly, becomesa secret or declared enemy to the minister, and of course endeavoursto propagate calumnies against him ; and the misfortuneis, that the most impudent and clamorous are generally mostlistened to by the unthinking part of mankind. Though thisbeby far the most numerous part of mankind, yet, I hopethere are none of them in this house, and therefore, whateverrumours or suspicions may be spread without doors, I hopethey will not be listened to here, unless they appear to befounded upon indisputable facts, or very strong presumptions.As to facts, sir, notwithstanding the many rumours that arespread without doors, I have never yet heard a proof offered ofany one criminal fact against those concerned in our administration; and as to the presumptions that have been suggested,I do not think there is the least foundation for any one of them.That this nation labours under great difficulties, and that thepresent posture-of affairs, both at home or abroad, is far frombeing agreeable, I shall readily grant ; but to every one who,with candour, examines the history of this nation, and ofEurope, for twenty years past, it must appear evident, thatneither of these misfortunes can justly be imputed to any designor misconduct in our ministers. Our debts were all contractedlong before the present administration had a being. At least,if any new debt has been contracted, a much greater old onehas been paid off; for when our present ministers first cameAPPENDIX. 493into power, the national debt was larger than it is at present ;and what was worse, our public credit, by an ill-managed project,was almost entirely sunk. They, by their wisdom andgood management, soon restored the public credit, of the nation ;and they have since paid off as much of the public debt asit was possible, without loading the people with some new oradditional taxes.If we had kept up no army, if we had kept up no navy,if we had been put to no expense by the ambitious projects offoreign princes, I shall admit, sir, that a much larger share ofour public debt might have been paid off, and, perhaps, manyof our heavy taxes abolished But will any one say, that at anytimefor these twenty years past, it would have been prudent orsafe to disband our army ? Will any one say, that we ought tohave left our navy to rot and fall to decay ? Will any one say,now that we so sensibly feel a want of seamen, that we oughtnot always to keep a large number of seamen in pay ? Willany one say, that when we were threatened with an attack, weought not to have provided for our defence ? By so doing, sir,we have always prevented the attack, and thereby preservedour domestic tranquillity for these twenty years past ; andsurely it will be allowed, that it is both safer and cheaper toprevent than to repel an invasion.Therefore, sir, if a greater share of our public debt has notbeen paid off; if none of our heavy taxes have been abolished,it is not owing to any mismanagement in our ministers, but tothe public necessities, which annually required a larger expensethan had been foreseen. If our ministers had taken upon themto be sole judges of those necessities, there might have beensome pretence for finding fault with their conduct ; but theyhave regularly laid these necessities before the parliament, andhave never put the nation to one shilling expense, but whathas been previously authorized, or afterwards approved of bya majority in both houses ; therefore an inquiry into their conductupon this head, may properly be called an inquiry intothe conduct of parliament ; and if you should give sentenceagainst the former, it will be a condemnation of the latter,APPENDIX.which, with regard to the respect due to parliament, may havea very bad effect upon all degrees of men in this kingdom.Now, sir, with regard to the present posture of affairs athome and abroad, 1 shall grant it is a misfortune to this nation,to be involved in a war with Spain : I shall grant it is a misfortuneto Europe, to have so many of its princes united fordestroying that balance of power upon which their own independency,at least the independency of all of them but one,most absolutely depends. But can either of these misfortunesbe imputed to any misconduct in our ministers ? Our beinginvolved in a war with Spain, is owing to nothing but the pride,haughtiness, and obstinacy of that nation. Did our ministersadvise his majesty to declare war against Spain without acause ? Did they precipitate the nation into that war, withouthaving first tried every method for obtaining satisfaction bypeaceable means? We all know that their backwardness incommencing hostilities was exclaimed against by many in thisnation, and even by those who now endeavour to load themwith the misfortune of our being involved in war. Thus, sir,if ministers pursue pacific measures, their conduct is foundfault with ; and if they pursue warlike measures, their conductis found fault with ; if they provide for our defence at home,and thereby prevent an attack, their conduct is found faultwith, on account of the expense ; and if, by their neglecting toprovide for our defence, the nation should be invaded, theirconduct would certainly, and, I am sure, with more reason, befound fault with. This, sir, makes me think, it is not so muchtheir conduct, as their continuing to be our ministers, that isthe real ground of complaint: and this will be a ground ofcomplaint against all future, as well as against our presentministers ; for no man that serves the crown will give up hisemployment, as long as the king inclines he should keep it,and desires nothing of him inconsistent with his honour or thegood of his country, which, it is well known, his presentmajesty will never desire of any man that serves him ; and this,perhaps, makes gentlemen so fond of getting into employment ;but it is, in my opinion, an ungrateful return in gentlemen, toAPPENDIX. 495endeavour to distress his majesty's affairs, in order to forcethemselves into his service.Thus, sir, I think, it must appear, that no one who has thehonour of having a share in his majesty's councils, can beblamed for the misfortune of our being involved in a war withSpain, and as little can they be blamed for the present unhappystate of affairs in Europe, which is entirely owing to one ofthese two causes : either to a fatal, I may say, frantic ambition,in some of the princes of Germany, who, rather than not extendtheir dominions, seem resolved to render themselves dependentupon the crown of France ; or it is owing to an unaccountableobstinacy in the court of Vienna, who, rather than dojustice to their neighbouring princes in Germany, seem resolvedto bring themselves, and the whole German empire, into a sortof subjection to his most Christian majesty. Which of thesetwo causes the present misfortune of Europe is owing to, Ishall not pretend to determine ; but let it be which it will, ourministers cannot be blamed. It was not, it cannot be supposedto have been in their power to govern the ambition of theprinces of Germany, or to overcome the obstinacy of the courtof Vienna.I hope I have now shown, sir-that neither the difficulties welabour under, nor the present dangerous situation of affairs,can afford any presumption of misconduct in those, who forsome time past, have had the honour of being in his majesty'scouncils; and as no particular crime has yet been chargedagainst them, nor the least proof offered of any fact, if thereare any suspicions without doors, those suspicions can have nosolid foundation, and ought not therefore to have such weightwithin doors, as to lead us into a parliamentary inquiry, whichis always troublesome, and, at this juncture, would be extremelydangerous. If this nation be in distress, if the affairsof Europe be in distress, as they certainly are, it should be anargument with us to avoid all personal altercations and animosities,and to unite heartily among ourselves, both in counciland action, for retrieving affairs both abroad and at home.The case of this nation, the case of Europe, is not yet, thankGod ! so desperate, but that both may be restored, if proper4f)6 APPENDIX.remedies be speedily applied. Our public credit is yet in aflourishing condition ; we may yet raise large sums for the supportof a necessary war ; and if the tranquillity of Europe berestored, and established upon a solid foundation, we may soonpay off old arrears, as well as what we may be obliged tocontract for that salutary purpose. The confederacy formedagainst the Queen of Hungary is so unnatural, that it must ofitself be dissolved, unless the princes of Germany be kept firmto France, by seeing it impossible or dangerous to break fromher. This may be prevented, if we immediately unite amongstourselves, and interpose with the whole strength of the Britishnation ; but if, like ignorant and contentious physicians, we sitaccusing one another of malpractice, the patient may expirein the interim.I must, therefore, conjure gentlemen to give over all personalanimosities, and think of nothing but giving his majestythat advice, and those aids, which may be thought proper andnecessary for providing against the calamity that threatens us.If any thing has been done amiss, we may soon find a propertime for inquiring into it, but the present is far from being so ;and if no immediate inquiry be designed, we have no occasionfor referring any papers to the consideration of a select committee; for I cannot agree with my honourable friend in thinking,that every important paper, or parcel of papers, that are, ormay be laid before the house, should be referred to a selectcommittee. If this were laid down as a rule for our conduct,we should have time to do nothing, but to hear and considerthe reports from such committees. It would therefore be impossibleto observe the rule, and it has never been the practice.When gentlemen's curiosity prompts them to desire a sight ofany papers of state, they move for having them laid before thehouse, and their motion is always complied with, when consistentwith the public safety. When the papers thus calledfer are laid upon the table, they examine them : if they findnothing material, their whole design is answered ; but if theyfind any thing they think worth the notice of the house, theyacquaint the house with what they have observed, and if amajority be of the same opinion, the house either enters intoAPPENDIX. 1-97the immediate consideration thereof, which they may easily do,because the papers are upon the table ; or refer the whole tothe consideration of a committee, perhaps a select committee.This, sir, is the usual method of proceeding in such cases ;and as no observations have been made upon any of the papersreferred to in this motion, nor any one fact mentioned fromthem for inducing us to take any of them into our consideration,I must suppose, that those gentlemen who have perusedthem, for I confess I have not, have found nothing in themthey think worth the notice of the house ; and if they have not,I can see no reason why we should give any committee thetrouble to peruse and examine them.But, besides seeing no reason for referring these papers to aselect committee, there are, I think, strong reasons against it.If this motion should be complied with, it will immediatelyspread an opinion abroad, that instead of taking proper measuresfor the time to come, we are going to enter upon aninquiry into past measures ; this will certainly raise divisionsamongst us, and may produce a civil war in the kingdom, or atleast a breach between his majesty and his parliament, whichwill of course disable us from giving our friends abroad anyassistance, or interposing any manner of way* in the affairs ofEurope ; and the consequence of such an opinion being spreadabroad, may be most fatal. The princes now united in analliance with France, will then see it impossible to break offfrom that alliance ; the other princes and states of Europe willsee it impossible to form any confederacy, capable of giving acheck to the designs of France : the Queen of Hungary, despairingof any relief or assistance, will immediately submit tosuch terms as France shall please to prescribe ; and the courtof France, being free from the fear of control, will set nobounds to their ambition. Suppose their present chief ministershould be moderate in his views; suppose he has no otherintention than to reduce the power of the house of Austria,without adding to the power of the house of Bourbon, yet insuch a case, it would be impossible for him to stem the torrentof French ambition, or to govern a court where that passionhas always so much prevailed.VOL. II. # K498 APPENDIX.The spreading such an opinion abroad is, therefore, sir, whatwe ought most carefully to prevent ; but if this motion shouldbe agreed to, it would be impossible to prevent a most strictinquiry, and a most violent prosecution being set on foot.There are many gentlemen, I hope, both within doors and without,of a moderate disposition, and such as have a greaterregard for the safety of the public than for any personal resentment.Those gentlemen may, as yet, be able to govern andmoderate the temper of the nation, or, at least, of this house ;but if a select committee were once named, I am afraid it wouldbe out of their power. That committee would think it incumbentupon them to do something. The papers now proposedto be referred to them, would give them an inclination to seeothers, and those again would make them think it necessary tosee more, till they had got all the state papers, even the mostsecret, before them ; and in order to succeed in all their motionsfor this purpose, and to have their report approved of,they would endeavour to raise, and would probably succeed inraising, a most violent and revengeful spirit, both withoutdoors and within, which might fall heavy upon some innocentmen, as well as upon the guilty. The former, his majestywould certainly, "from his known justice and resolution, endeavourto protect ; and what might be the consequence of such acontest, God only knows.Thus, sir, as I can see no reason for this motion ; as I thinkit would be attended with the most dangerous, the most fatalconsequences, I must therefore be against it, and hope thehonourable gentlemen will not insist upon their motion ; foreven their insisting upon it may have a very bad effect uponhis majesty's negotiations abroad.END OF VOL. II.WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STRAND.