THE HISTORYOFMARITIME AND INLAND DISCOVERYVOL. III.LONDON:PRINTED FOBHangman, Trees, ORME, BROWN, AND GREEN,Paternoster-row ;AND JOHN TAYLOR,UPPER GOWER STREET.1831.L7CONTENTS.BOOK V.chap. i.PROGRESS OF GEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE.Geographical Science in the Middle Ages. — Errors of Antiquity adoptedby t lie Learned. — Supposed Longitudes of Nuremberg and Home; ofFerrara and Cadizz. — Improvements in Maps. — Doubtfulness respectingthe Distance and Separation of Asia and America. — Galileo. — Eclipsesof Jupiter's Satellites employed to find the Longitude. — Observations ofPicard. — The Map of France reformed. — Labours of Cassini. — Chapellerectifies the Map of the Mediterranean. — Geography reformed byDelisle. — Peter the Great visits him. — D'Anville. — Influence ofNewton. — Halley. — His Voyage to St. Helena. — He invites the Attentionof the Learned to the Transit of Venus. — Studies physical Geography.— Improves the Theory of Lunar Motions. — Belief in the Existenceof a Southern Continent. — Dalrymple. — His Plans of Colonisation,and Code of Laws. - Page 1CHAP. II.VOYAGES OK BYRON, WAIXIS, CARTERET, ETC.Motives of the French to make geographical Discoveries. — The FalklandIslands. — Appearance of Forests. — lameness of Game. — Settlementmade by Bougainville. — Voyage of Commodore Byron. — His Instructions.— Search for Pepys Island. — Intercourse with the Patagonians.Port Egmont. — Islands of Disappointment. — King George's Islands.Tinian. — Wallis and Carteret. — Their Separation. — Wallis arrivesat Otaheite. — Conduct of the Natives. — Carteret discovers Pitcairn'sIsland. — The Salomon Islands. — New Ireland. — The Falkland Islandssurrendered to Spain. — Voyage of Bougainville round the World. —Anecdote of Bare — The New Cyclades. — Louisiade . IjCHAP. III.cook's first voyage.Early Life of Cook. — His first Promotion in the Navy. — Surveys the St.Lawrence. — Appointed to survey Newfoundland. — His Proficiency inMathematics. — Transit of Venus. — Intractability of Dalrymple. — Cookchosen in his Stead. — Portuguese Ignorance. — Attempt to exploreTierra del Fucgo. — Arrival at Otaheite. — The Transit observed. —Character of the People. — Tupia sails with Cook. — The Society Islands.A 4Vlll CONTENTS.Traditions respecting European Ships. — Geography of the Natives.Oheteroa. — The Eastern Shores of New Zealand discovered. — SomeNatives captured. — Found to be Cannibals. — Their Arts. — A largeRiver explored. — Queen Charlotte's Sound. — Cook's Straits discovered.New Zealand circumnavigated. — The East Coast of New Holland. —Botany Bay. — Narrow Escape from Shipwreck. — Endeavour Straitsdiscovered. — Possession taken of New South Wales. — Death of Tupia.Return of Cook. Page 2SCHAP. IV.COOK'S SECOND VOYAGE.Question of a Southern Continent still unsettled. — Second Expeditionunder the Command of Cook. — Cape Circumcision. — Ice found towardsthe South. — Aurora Australis. — Arrival at New Zealand. — Course ofthe Adventure — Van Diemen's Land. — Useful Animals left in NewZealand. — Voyage across the Southern Pacific. — Dramatic Performancesin Otaheite. — Omar and Oedidee embark in the Ships. — Amsterdamand Middleburg Islands. — Their Cultivation Proofs of Cannibalismat New Zealand. — Voyage across the Antarctic Seas. — Land of JuanFernandez. — Easter Island. — Description of the Images. — The Marquesas.— Beauty of the People. — Otaheite — Trade in red Feathers. —Great naval Review. — Friendly Islands revisited. — Extent of theGroup. — The New Hebrides examined. — New Caledonia discovered. —Norfolk Island. — Voyage from New Zealand to Cape Horn. — TheSouthern Thule or Sandwich Land Arrival of Cook in England. —Lamentable Occurrence in Queen Charlotte's Sound. . 45CHAP. V.cook's third voyage.Voyage of Surville. — He discovers the Land of the Arsacides. — He visitsNew Zealand. — Discoveries of Lieutenant Shortland. — Voyage ofMarion du Fresne — He touches at New Zealand. — His lamentableDeath. — Kerguelen discovers Land in the Southern Atlantic. — HisReception at Court — He sails a second Time. .— His Disgrace. — Honourspaid to Cook on his Return. — Hopes of a North-west Passage revived.Expedition of Phipps to the North Pole. — Cook appointed a thirdTime to command an Expedition. — His Instructions. — Regret of Omaron leaving England. — The Land of Desolation. — Van Diemen's Land.Error of Captain Furneaux. — Live Stock left in Queen Charlotte'sSound. — Mangeea discovered. — Wateeo. — Omar's Exaggerations. —Shipwrecked Islanders. — Visit to the Friendly Islands. — Generosity ofthe King. Extent of his Dominion. — Accounts of the neighbouringIslands. — Horses landed at Otaheite. — Wonder of the Natives. — Omarsettled at Huaheine — Further Accounts of him. 62CHAP. VI.cook's third voyage continued.The Sandwich Islands discovered by Cook. — His Arrival at Nootka Sound.Manners of the People — Examination of the American Coast. —CONTENTS. IXCook's River. — Distance between Asia and America determined. —TheShips stopped by Ice in the Polar Sea. — The Russian Fur Traders. —Enterprise of Edward. — Return to the Sandwich islands. — Owhyheesurveyed. — Friendliness of the Natives. — The Ships leave the Island,but are obliged to return. — Altered Conduct of the Natives. — Boatstolen. — Fatal Affray. — Death of Cook. — Second Attempt to navigatethe Polar Sea. — Death of Captain Clerke and of Anderson. — Arrival atMacao. — Generous Conduct of the French Government. — Sale of Fursin Canton. — Effect of sudden Riches on the Seamen. — Return of theExpedition. — Merits of Cook. — His Discoveries. — His Surveys andObservations. — Care of his Seamen's Health. — Results of his Voyages. —New Holland colonised. — Trade in the Pacific. - - - Page 78•" "" r. r ~"CHAP. VII.VOYAGE OF LA Peruse, ETC.Emulation of the French. — La Perouse appointed to command an Expedition.— His Instructions. — Visit to Easter Island. — Account of theStatues. — Arts of the People. — Sandwich Islands. — American Coast.Port des Francois. — An Island purchased by the French. — CalamitousOccurrence there. — Voyage to Macao. — Japanese Seas. — Coast ofTatary. — Baie de Ternai Sagaleen. — Information derived from thePeople. — Straits of La Perouse. — Arrival at Kamtschatka. — Monumentto Captain Clerke. — M. Lesseps despatched overland to Europe. — Navigators'Islands. — Massacre of the French by the Natives. — Voyage toBotany. — Letter of La Perouse. — Mystery respecting his Fate. — HisMerits. — Decree of the National Assembly. — D'Entrecasteaux sails inSearch of him. — Fate of his Expedition. — Adventure at the FeejeeIslands. — Information obtained by Captain Dillon at Tucopia. — Hereturns to seek Vestiges of the French. — Visits Malcolm. — Account ofthe Shipwreck given by the Natives. — Relics^collected. — Results. 93CHAP. VIII.EUROPEAN'S IN THE SOUTH SEA.Arrival of the Penrhyn at Otaheite. — Captain Watts pretends that Cookstill lives. — Voyage of Captain Bligh. — His Stay at Otaheite. — Mutineersseize the Bounty. — Surprising Voyage of Bligh in an open Boat.The Mutineers sail to Otaheite. — Carry off the live Stock. — Proceedto Toobooai. — Obliged to return. — The Bounty sails from Ota-heite by Night. — Is heard of no more. — The Mutineers seized. — ThePandora wrecked. — Bligh's second Voyage. — Hete-Hete accompanieshim to the West Indies. — The Posterity of the Mutineers found on Pitcairn'sIsland. — Description of the People. — History of their Settlement.— The Antelope wrecked at the Pelew Islands. — Prince Lee Boovisits England. — Changes effected in the South Sea Islands. — IncreasedValue of Iron Old Arts forgotten. —Influence of European Traders. —Revolution in the Sandwich Islands. — The Missionaries. — The Art ofPrinting introduced into Otaheite. — Industry of the New Zealanders.Christianity embraced by the Friendly Islanders. . 112X CONTENTS.CHAP. IX.'THE COASTS OF AUSTRALIA.Unknown Coasts of New Holland. — Establishment of a Colony at PortJackson. — Coal discovered on the Coast — Voyages of Bass and Flindersin a small Boat. — Bass proceeds to the South. — Discovers Port Western.— Flinders visits the Furneaux Islands. — Flinders and Bass discoverPort Dalrymple. — Circumnavigate Van Diemen's Land. — Bass's Straits.Flinders appointed to survey the Coast of New Holland. — He examinesthe Southern Coast. — Spencer's Gulf. — Port Philip. — Examinationof the Eastern Coast. — Flinders passes Torres' Straits. — Surveysthe Gulf of Carpentaria. — Meets a Fleet of Malays. — Repairs to Timor.Returns to Port Jackson. — Sails in the Lady Nelson. — The Cato andLady Nelson wrecked. — The Crew saved. — Flinders goes to PortJackson in an open Boat Returns and rescues the Crews. — Sets sailfor England in a small Schooner. — Touches at the Mauritius, and is detainedas a Prisoner. — Expedition of Baudin. — The French meet Flinders.— Explore the Swan River. — Sharks' Bay. —Their Encomiums onthe Colony at Port Jackson. . Page 12oCHAP. X.INTERIOR OF New HOLLAND.Captain King's Surveys. — Port Essington discovered. — The Malays. —The Alligator Rivers. — Melville and Bathurst Islands. — Apsley Straitexamined. — The North west Coast. — York Sound. — Regent River. —Cunningham Inlet. — Mouth Gulf. — Archipelago. — UnexploredPoints. — Early Attempts to cross the Blue Mountains. — Failure of Bassand others. — Routes into the Interior discovered. — Oxley's Expeditiondown the Lachlan. — He reaches a great Morass — Second Journey toexplore the Macquarie. — The Country inundated. — Returns through afine unexplored Country. — Discoveries of Captain Sturt. — The MurrayRiver found to reach the Sea. — Discoveries of Hovell and Hume. —Progress of Colonisation. — Settlement on Melville Island. — Colony atSwan River. — King George's Sound. — Port Western. — Van Diemen'sLand. - - 141CHAP. XI.Vancouver's voyage.Commencement of the Fur Trade. — Voyages of Meares. — Of Forelockand Dixon. — Of Grey. — Their Discoveries. — Fuca's Strait. — Jealousyof the Spaniards awakened by the Russians. — Settlement made atMonterey. — Expedition to the North. — Port Bucarelii discovered. —Second Expedition. — ItsResults. — Voyages of Around Martinez. — TheSpaniards take Possession of Nootka. — They seize an English Vessel. —The Dispute accommodated. — Vancouver proceeds to receive Restitutionof Nootka. — He is instructed to survey the North-west Coast ofAmerica. — Voyage along New Holland. — Chatham Island discovered.Vancouver enters Fuca's Strait. — It conducts him northwards to theSea. — He meets with the Spanish Surveyors. — Arrival at Nootka. —Columbia River explored. — Character of the Natives. — Their Architecture.— The Ships winter at the Sandwich Islands. — Owhyhce volensXItartly ceded to the King of Great Britain. — Vancouver returns to theAmerican Coast. — Completes the Survey. — His great Merits. — Death.English Possessions on the North-west Coast. — Voyage of Kotzebue. —His Inlet Page 162CHAP. XII.INTERIOR OF NORTH AMERICA.Eagerness of the Americans to engage in the Fur Trade. — Emigrationtowards the West. — Daniel Boon. — Louisiana purchased by the UnitedStates. — Expedition of Lewis and Clarke. — They proceed to ascendthe Missouri. — The Sioux Indians. — The Falls of the Missouri. — ItsSources in the Rocky Mountains. — The Party descend the Columbia. —Dangers of the Voyage. — They reach the Sea. — Winter on the Coast.Journey of PiLe to the Sources of the Mississippi. — He proceeds to explorethe Sources of the Arkansas and Red River. — Abundance Game.Pike reaches the Rocky Mountains. — Sufferings of his Party. — Heenters by Mistake the Spanish Territory. — Taken Prisoner. — His Liberationand Return. — Expedition of Major Long. — He ascends thePlatte. — The sandy Deserts. — James's Peak. — Returns by the Arkansasand Canadian Rivers. — The Kaskaia Indians. — Journey of Cass andSchoolcraft. — Of Long and Keating. — Journey of Hereto the Copper-mineRiver. — His unsuccessful Attempts. — He at length reaches theSea. — Progress of the Fur Traders in the Interior. — Journey of Mckenzie.He descends the Mackenzie River to its Mouth. — His Expeditionacross the Rocky Mountains. — He reaches the Pacific. - - 178CHAP. XIII.ROSS AND PARRY.Voyage of Captain Ross to Baffin's Bay. — Icebergs — Errors in the Charts.Northern Esquimaux. — They possess Iron. — Red Snow. — NorthernShore of Baffin's Bay. — Clear Sea West of the lee. — Sir James Lancaster'sSound. — Ross does not explore it. — Returns Home. — GeneralDisappointment at the Result of his Voyage. — Expedition of CaptainParry. — He proceeds up Lancaster's Sound. — Prince Regent's Inlet. —The Magnetic Needle singularly affected. — The Ships proceed westwardin Barrow's Strait. — They reach the Meridian of 110°. — WinterHarbour in Melville Island. — Intensity of the Cold. — Phenomena resultingfrom it. — Winter A amusements — North Georgian Gazette. —Excursion across Melville Island. — Breaking up of the Ice. — IneffectualAttempts to proceed farther westward. — The Aurora Borealis. — SupposedSituation of the Magnetic Pole. — Return of the Expedition. 195CHAP. XIV.parry's voyages.Preparations for a second Voyage. — Its Objects. — The Ships enter FrozenStrait. — Discover Duke of York's Bay. — Reach the Welcome. — RepulseBay examined. — Inlets explored. — The Ships frozen in at Winter. Island.— Village of Esquimaux. — Their Character. — Talents of Iligliuk.She draws a Map of the Coast. — The Ice breaks, and the Ships proceed.— Difficulties of the Navigation. — Fox's Channel. — Strait of theXU CONTENTS.Hecla and Fury. — Impossible to pass to the Westward. — Winter Quartersat Igloolik. — Snow Houses of the Esquimaux. — Geographical Informationobtained from them. — Excursions over Land. — Length of theWinter. — Return of the Ships. — Third Voyage of Parry. — He wintersin Regent's Inlet. — Endeavours to proceed in the Spring. — The Furycrushed by the Ice, and abandoned. — Attempt of Parry to reachthe! North Pole over the Ice. — Sails to Spitsbergen — Journey of TwoMonths on ;the Ice. — Is drifted southwards. — Failure of the Attempt. Page 208CHAP. XV.40Ua.NET OP CAPTAIN FRANKLIN.Expedition of Captain Franklin to the Mouth of the Peppermint River. —Arrival at York Fort — Journey to Fort Chepeweyan. — Mode of travellingin Winter. — Its Dangers. — Decrease of the Indian Tribes. —Journey from Chepeweyan commenced. — Difficulties experienced. —Great Exertion of Mr. Back. — Winter Residence at Fort Enterprise. —Intense Cold. — The Trees frozen. — Esquimaux Snow House. — AnIndian Beauty. — The Journey recommenced. — Stratagem of theWolves. — The Mouth of the Peppermint. — The Party embark. — Proceedto the Eastward. — Point Turnagain. — They commence theirReturn over Land. — The Canoes broken. — Means devised to cross thePeppermint — Dreadful Sufferings of the Party. — Mr. Back sent forwardto the Fort — Dr. Richardson remains with the disabled, whileCaptain Franklin goes on. — Mr. Hood murdered by an Indian of theParty. — Resolute Conduct of Dr. Richardson. — He reaches Fort Enterprise.— State in which he found Captain Franklin. — Continuation oftheir Sufferings. — Relief arrives. 223CHAP. XVI.Second JOURNEY OF CAPTAIN FRANKLIN.Expedition to survey the Coast westward from the Peppermint River. —Preparations and Instructions. — Voyage down Mackenzie's River. —Winter Quarters in Great Bear Lake. — Captain Franklin proceeds tothe Mouth of the Mackenzie. — Coal Cliffs on fire. — The LoucheuxIndians. — View of the Sea. — Return up the River. — Great Heat —The Bear River. — Amusements in Winter Quarters. — The Thaw begins.— The exploring Parties commence their Labours. — CaptainFranklin proceeds eastward from the Mackenzie. — Struggle with theEsquimaux. — Ice met with. — Information obtained from the Esquimaux.— Herschel Island. — Clarence River. — Point Demarcation. —Intelligence respecting the Russians. — Foggy Weather. — Franklinobliged to return. —Discovers Peel River. — Progress of Dr. Richardsonto the Eastward from Mackenzie River. — Intercourse with Esquimaux.— Their Character. — Account of Esquimaux Lake. — WollastonIsland. — Arrival at the Peppermint. — Return to the Great BearLake. — Results of these Surveys. 235CONTENTS. XU1CHAP. XVII.HUMBOLDT'S TRAVELS.Geography associated with the physical Sciences. — Humboldt's Education.— He projects visiting Egypt and the East — Proceeds to Spain. —Encouraged to visit the Spanish American Colonies. — He ascends thePeak of Teneriff'e. — He arrives at Cumana. — The Earthquakes. — Caraccas.— The Sharks. — He climbs the Silla of Caraccas. — Visit to theLake of Valencia. — Vigour of Vegetation. — The Milk Tree. — Journeyacross the Llanos. — The Gymnotus or Electrical Eel ; Mode of takingthem ; their Power. — Remarks on the Crocodile. — Humboldt ascendsthe Oroonoko. — The mingled Clamour of wild Beasts. — The Caribito.Voyage through inundated Forests. — Dolphins among the Trees.—Voyage down the Rio Negro. — Humboldt determines the Position ofthe Junction of the Amazon and Oroonoko. — Navigates the Cassiquiare,which connects them. — Descends the Oroonoko. — Catacombs of Ata-ruipo. — Arrives at Angostura. — Returns to Cumana. — Proceeds tothe Savannah. — His Occupations in that Place. - - Page 248CHAP. XVIII.HUMBOLDT'S TRAVELS CONTINUED.Arrival of Humboldt at Cartagena. — Volcanitos of Turbaco. — SantaFe de Bogota. — The Falls of Tequendama. — Native Traditions. —View from the Table Land. — Natural Bridges of Icononzo. — Pass ofQuindiu. — Mode of travelling on Men's Backs. — Visit to the VolcanoPurace. — Arrival at Quito. — Volcano of Pichincha. — Humboldt'sAscent of Chimborazo. — He passes by Riobamba. — Destruction ofEarthquakes. — Causeway of Vega. — Humboldt descends the River ofAmazons. — Observes the Magnetic Equator. — Repress the Andes. —Truxillo. — Arrives at Lima. — Observes the Transit of Mercury. —Proceeds to Guayaquil. — Sails to Acapulco. — Mexico. — Mines ofMoran and Real del Monte. — Guanaxuato. — Account of Jorullo. —The Volcanoes of Puebla. — The Coffer of Perte. — Vera Cruz. — Philadelphia.— Return to Europe. — Bonpland goes to Buenos Ayres.—Is captured and detained by the Dictator of Paraguay. - . 282CHAP. XIX.SOUTHERN EXTREMITY OF AMERICA. 1Paraguay. — Azara surveys the Frontiers The Pampas of BuenosAyres. — Journey of Captain Head. — Description of the Plains. —Formidable Growth of Thistles. — Projected Colony of the Spaniards. —Falkner's Account of Patagonia and the Pampas. — Sandy Deserts. —The native Inhabitants. — Their roving Habits. — Their Stature. —The Coasts of Patagonia surveyed by the Spaniards. — The Survey ofCaptain King. — Its Results. — The New South Shetlands discovered. —Voyage of Mr. Weddell. — He examines the New South Shetlands. —Reaches a high Latitude. — The New Orkneys. — New Georgia — ItsAppearance. — The Seal Fishery. . . - 275CONTENTS.CHAP. XX.EASTERN SHORES OF ASIA.Progress of the Russians. — Voyage of Billings from the Kolyma. — Hemeets with Edward. — He visits the Aleutian Islands. — Journeythrough the Country of the Tshuktski. — Baron Wrangel.— The JapaneseSeas unknown. — Labours of Broughton — Russian Embassy toJapan. — Voyage of Krusenstern. — 111 Success of the Mission. —TheSurvey continued. — Sag.-ileen. — Golownin proceeds to examine theKurile Islands. — Taken Prisoner by the Japanese. — His Description ofMatsmai. — He effects his Escape. — Retaken, and confined in a Cage. —Kindness of the Japanese. — Golownin obtains his Freedom. — GeographicalLabours of the Missionaries in China. — British Embassies. —Voyage of the Alceste and Lyra in the Chinese Seas. — The great Wall.—The Coran Archipelago. — Errors of the Maps. — The Loo ChopIslands. — Amiable Character of the People.— Their IntelligenceWreck of the Alceste. Page 288CHAP. XXI.TRAVELS IX THE IIIMALYEH.Journey of Webb and Raper in the Himalyeh. — Great Height of theseMountains — Measurements of Colebrooke. — Dewalagiri. — Cbumu-lure. — Journey of Mr. Moorcroft. — Pundit's Mode of measuring. —Pass of the Niti Ghaut. — Daba. — Appearance of Gortope. — The SacredLake of Manasarowara. — General Character of the Mountains. —Villages — Return of Moorcroft. — Doubts as to the Height of the .— Second Journey of Mr. Webb. — Height of perpetual Snow.Elevated Plains of the Indes. — Their Produce. — Journey of Mr.Fraser. — Supposed poisonous Wind. — Gangoutri. — Peculiar Appearanceof the Himalyeh. - - - - 303CHAP. XXII.BRUCE'S TRAVELS.Bruce appointed Consul at Algiers. — His Travels on the Barbary Coast.Lion's Flesh used as Food. — Petrified City of Ras Sem. — Baalbecand Palmyra. — Reception of Bruce at Cairo. — He proceeds up theNile. — Journey across the Desert. — Jidda. — The Mountain of Emeralds.— Commerce. — Journey from Masach. — Mountain of Tyrant.Ruins of Axum. — Steaks from a living Cow. — He arrives at Gondar.Received at Court. — Ras Michael. — Visits the Cataracts of Plata.—Internal Dissensions. — Interview of Mr. Bruce with Fazil. — Made Governorof Geesh. — Proceeds to the Sources of the Nile. — Lake Sana.Superstitions of the People. — Description of the Fountains Exultationof Mr. Bruce. — His Merits. — He disingenuously endeavours, toenhance the Value of his Discoveries. . ^315CONTENTS.CHAP. XXIII.park's travels.The African Association. — Edward. — Lucas. — Houghton. — MungoPark engaged to travel to the Niger — His Reception from the King ofBondou. — Obliged to present his Coat. — Interview with the King'sWives — Kindness and Gaiety of the Negroes — Account of the Lotus.Mr. Park taken by the Moors. — His Sufferings and Escape. — HisJourney through the Desert — First View of the Niger. — Sego. — Songof the Negro Women. — Bambara. — Vegetable Putter. — Mr. Parkobliged to travel on foot. — His Arrival at Silla. — Information respectingthe Geography of the Interior. — He is obliged to return. — His Distress.— Joins a Katila. — Returns to the Coast. — His Speculations respectingthe Outlet of the Niger. — Proceeds on his second Journey.The Expedition nearly routed by Bees. — Gold Pits. — Sickness attendingthe rainy Season. — The Expedition embarks on the Niger. —Reception in Bambara. — Park builds a Boat at Sansanding. — State ofthe Expedition. — They proceed down the River. — Their Late. Page 332CHAP. XXIV.nEXHAM AND Clipperton's TRAVELS.Horncmann. — His Late. — Adams visits Tombuctoo. — Doubts as to hisJourney. — Expedition of Captain Tuckey. — Arrival at the Congo. —The Cataract of Yellala. — Appearance of the River. — Fatal Terminationof the Expedition. — Journeys of Major Peddie ; Captain Campbell;Mr. Ritchie. — Their unhappy Results. — Denham and Clapper-toncross the Great Desert. — Lake Tshad. — Arrival at Kouka. —The Sheikh el Enemy. — Expedition to Mandara. — Angornou. — Deathof Lieutenant Toole. — Clapperton goes to Kano. — Appearance of theCountry. — Arrival at Sockatoo. — The Sultan Bello. — His Suspicionsof the English — His Promises. — His Map of the Niger. — Informationrespecting Park. — Return of Denham and Clapperton. — Death ofMr. 'I'm whit. — Clapperton's second Journey. — He reaches Sockatoofrom Bei in — 111 received. — His Death. — Results of his Travels.—Major Laing reaches Tombuctoo. — Assassinated. — Travels of Caille.—His Account of Tombuctoo. - 348THE HISTORYOFMARITIME AND INLANDDISCOVERY.BOOK V.CHAP. I.PROGRESS OF GEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE.GEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE IN THE MIDDLE AGES. ERRORS OF AntiquityADOPTED BY THE LEARNED. SUPPOSED LONGITUDESOF NUREMBERG AND ROME ; OF FERRARA AND Cadi. —ImprovementsIN MAPS. DOUBTFULNESS RESPECTING THE DistanceAND SEPARATION OF ASIA AND AMERICA. GALILEO.ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES EMPLOYED TO FIND THELONGITUDE. OBSERVATIONS OF PICARD. THE MAP OFFRANCE REFORMED. LABOURS OF CASSINI. CHAZEI.LESRECTIFIES THE MAP OF THE MEDITERRANEAN. GEOGRAPHYREFORMED BY Delvile. PETER THE GREAT VISITS HIM.danville. INFLUENCE OF NEWTON. HALLEY. HIS VoyageTO ST. HELENA. HE INVITES THE ATTENTION OF THELEARNED TO THE TRANSIT OF VENUS. STUDIES PHYSICALGEOGRAPHY. IMPROVES THE THEORY OF LUNAR MOTIONS.BELIEF IN THE EXISTENCE OF A SOUTHERN CONTINENT. Dalrymple.HIS PLANS OF COLONISATION, AND CODE OF LAWS.The various branches of human knowledge are so intimatelyinterwoven, that it is hard to conceive an improvementin one which does not conduce to the advantageof the others. The modes of connection which existbetween the numerous objects of mental research, are,like the membranes that embrace the humours of theeye, so minute and transparent, that while they giveVOL. III. b2 PROGRESS OPunion and solidity to the whole, they themselves remainunperceived, or wholly invisible. The general advancementin knowledge which followed the discovery ofthe art of printing, and the increased activity and spiritof mercantile enterprise resulting from the discoveriesof Columbus and Vasco de Gama, all seemed to conspireto the improvement of geography ; and one might havesupposed that this study would have been the first toarrive at perfection : but notwithstanding the zeal withwhich geographical enquiries were prosecuted during thesixteenth century, this science grew up with so manyoriginal imperfections, that its rudeness and deformity,compared with its sister sciences, became continuallymore conspicuous.No errors are so difficult to correct as those which areadopted by the people. Opinions received implicitly areseldom overturned by the arguments of reason ; thusgeography laboured under a disadvantage from the verypopularity of its nature. A system was in vogue, and,though manifestly incorrect, still maintained its grounduntil the scientific principles against which it offendedbecame as generally known and recognised. The mosteminent geographers of the loth and 17th centurieswere men of learning, who, in the spirit of that age,adopted with zeal and obstinacy all the mistakes committedby the writers of antiquity. The authority oftheir names, added to that of the ancient writers onwhom they rested, offered an inert resistance whichscientific geographers were long unable to overcome.The first requisite in a correct system of geographyis, to determine accurately the relative position of places;but in this the ancients were guilty of gross errors. Themethod which they employed to determine the latitudeof places admitted of but little precision, and their determinationof longitude was still more erroneous.The countries with which the Greek and Romanwriters were best acquainted were those situated on theshores of the Mediterranean Sea; and here, of course, weshould expect to find their geographical accuracy exhi-GEOGRAPHICAL, SCIENCE. 3bited to advantage : yet Constantinople or Byzantium,the capital of the eastern empire, is placed by Ptolemytwo degrees to the north of its true position. The Arabwriters, who seem to have learned that there was an errorof two degrees, without knowing in which direction, insteadof lessening the latitude of Constantinople from 43to 41, which would have been near the truth, increased itto 45, thus placing that city in their maps 276 Englishmiles to the north of its true place. When AmaranthIII., about 1580, caused observations to be made, whichreduced the latitude of that city to 41° 30', the learnedwere indignant that barbarians should think of correctingHipparchus.As the northern shore of the Mediterranean was placedby Ptolemy in general too far to the north, so the southernshore was removed too far to the south ; the breadth ofthat sea being thus increased far beyond the truth. Thelatitude assigned to Carthage was 32° 20', which is 4° 32'or 313 English miles to the south of its true place. Thisgross error was not taken notice of till 1625.But these errors of the ancients in calculating latitudeswere far exceeded by those which they committedin measuring the longitude, even at the places withwhich they were best acquainted. The length of theMediterranean from Calpe or Gibraltar to the bottom ofthe bay of Issus, where Sanderson stands at present,which is really a distance of 41° 28', is increased in themap of Ptolemy to 62 degrees. Thus the error in thelength of the Mediterranean alone amounts to 20° 32',or nearly 1400 English miles; and this enormous errorcontinued in the maps of Europe with little change tillthe beginning of the last century.The difficulties of ascertaining the longitudes ofplaces while astronomical observations were still deficientin precision, and the extent to which those errors werecarried during the middle ages in fixing the relativepositions of even the best known places of Europe, maybeestimated from the following list, formed by Kepler,who, feeling that his own observations would overturnb 2PROGRESS OFthose of antiquity, pleaded by way of excuse table uncertainty of these calculations : —The difference in longitude between Romehe inviteNurembergin the time ofRegiomontanus was reckoned alWerner -I -9°From an eclipse in 1497Apianus --30'Muslin --Stiffer --Apianus againMagini -Schooner --Stade --Jansen --Kepler - •-Thus the difference in longitude between two of thebest known towns in Europe varied above 500 miles fromthe fifteenth to the seventeenth centuries. But this uncertaintywill appear more remarkable when found toexist in the longitudes of places which are nearly in thesame latitude. For this purpose Ferrara and Cadizz maybeconveniently compared. The difference of the longitudebetween these two places as stated byPtolemy in the editionAlphonse tablesAuro the FlorentineApianusGemma Crisis -Ridolfine tablesArgoliRiccioliSchottDe Balance -Hence it appears, that in the maps of the sixteenthcentury Cadizz and Ferrara were placed 6'00 miles too farasunder, and that this egregious error still maintained itsground till the close of the seventeenth century. *See a dissertation on the fluctuation of longitudes in the middle ages,by Canova, in the ilemoric dell' Accident di Cotton, vol. ix.was27°20'-------GEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE. 5Errors of a wilder kind, originating rather in credulitythan in positive inaccurate observation, found aplace in the maps of the middle ages, and were tardilybanished from them, at a comparatively recent date, bythe improvements of astronomy and navigation. Wewill here glean a few of those errors from the best ofthe early maps.From a map of the world published in Venice in1546, by Giacomo, Ave find Asia and America united inlat. 38°. Tibet is placed at the junction of the twocontinents, and Zangar is the name given to the remoteregion on their frontiers. California, it is remarkable,is here described as a peninsula. China, conformably tothe map of Ptolemy, stretches to the 1 seth degree. Inthe South Sea the Isle de los Tuburones, discovered bythe Spaniards, is marked in 10° S. lat.In another Venetian map by Tramezini, dated 1554,the distance from Quintain in China to the gulf of Californiain America is only 31°. These two continentsbeing unduly stretched some thousand miles respectivelyto the east and west. In this map is marked theIsland of Pupuas, or New Guinea, and the Ladroness ;but it is remarkable that Asia and America are hereseparated by a wide strait, the author observing in anote, " In this place we have followed the latest authoritiesin separating this coast of Tartary from thecontinent of America." He thus insinuates that, hisdelineation of the shores round the Pacific was foundedon something better than mere caprice. Yet in theVenetian maps which immediately followed, the twocontinents are again united. In all these maps we findthe Terra Australis adhuc inexplorata, or southernland as yet unexplored ; and the first printed map inwhich more positive indications occur in this quarterappears to be that executed by Fernando Bartoli in1571- In this we find the Terra incognita discussdi Nuovo, or lately discovered, situated to thesouth of New Guinea and the Spice Islands, or correspondingwith the general situation of New Holland.b 3O PROGRESS OFIn this, as in other early maps, the Terra Australis isrepresented as one great continent, filling the antarcticregions ; but Bartoli has named some portions of it asif he had received information of land in those directions.Thus, to the south of the Cape of Good Hope is a promontorynamed Terra de Vista.Notwithstanding the great increase of geographical information,even the best maps were long deficient in correctdistances, particularly in longitude. South Americais represented by Fischer as 62 degrees, or near 4500miles across ; while North America, in the same map, extendsfrom the mouth of the St. Laurence on the east, toNew Albion on the west, through a space of 1 50 degrees,or above 9000 miles. Here also we find California againrepresented as an island, an error which is repeated inmany maps executed at the commencement of theeighteenth century ; and in some of them the northwestcoast of America is represented as running westwardin the parallel of 42°, till it nearly meets Yedzo;it is then marked as doubtful. It is remarkable thatin some of these maps we find the south coast of NewGuinea delineated, though at a later period that islandwas supposed to be connected with New Holland. TheTerra Australis, or antarctic continent, which De Wittbanished from his maps, was restored by Sanson in thebeginning of the last century ; so slow and fluctuatingwas the progress of accurate geography. Pontius, in1630, ventured to abridge Asia of the undue dimensionsgiven to it by Ptolemy, and to reduce its extension towardsthe east to 165°. But his example was not followed,and many instances might be adduced in whichthe authority of Ptolemy, who was but slightly acquaintedwith one half of the globe, was blindly submittedto in an age when Europeans wandered over itsentire surface.As scientific knowledge advanced, hopes were entertainedthat the longitudes of places might be fixed byobserving the eclipses of the sun and moon ; but thismethod proved, on experience, to be so pregnant withGEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE. 7error that astronomers were again reduced to despair.A grand step, however, was made towards the attainmentof their wishes, when in 1 6 10 Galileo discovered theeclipses of Jupiter's satellites. In 1631 that great manproposed to the king of Spain to apply his discoveriesfor the purposes of navigation and geography. The supinenessof the Spanish court was not calculated to fosterhis zeal ; but the Dutch embraced his offer, andsent Hortensius and Blew to. study under him at Florence.Yet the defects of telescopes, and the mistakesof his followers, long stood in the way of that improvementwhich must otherwise have been the immediateconsciences of Galileo's discoveries. At a time whensome astronomers imagined that they saw no fewer thantwelve satellites round Jupiter, no satisfactory conclusionscould be drawn from the observation of that planet.Until Cassini published his tables in 1668 nothing accuratewas known respecting the eclipses and revolutionsof Jupiter's satellites. Shortly afterwards, however, (in1671,) Picard went to Uraniburg in Denmark, to theobservatory of Tycho Brahe, to observe according to theadvice of Cassini. He was thus able to calculate, withan accuracy hitherto unknown, the difference between thelongitudes of the observatories at Uraniburg and Paris.In consequence of this successful experiment, MM.Picard and Delamere, both academicians, were immediatelyemployed to examine and to correct the map ofFrance by astronomical observations. In executing thistask, they were obliged to contract France within muchnarrower boundaries than it was supposed, according tothe maps of that time, to occupy. They reduced itabove 1° of longitude along the western coast from Britanyto the Bay of Biscay, and in the same manner theycut away about half a degree from the shores of Languedocand Provence. These changes gave rise to a jest ofLouis XIV., who, when complimenting the academicianson their return, told them " he was sorry to observethat their journey had cost him a large portion ofhis kingdom."b 4o PROGRESS OFCassini, in the mean time, laboured indefatigably inendeavouring to improve geography, by allying it strictlywith astronomy. He chew, in 16Q6, a planisphere onthe floor of the observatory at Paris, on which he markedthirty-nine positions determined by recent observations.He vehemently reproached the learned world with the defectsof geography, which in the march of science stilllingered considerably in the rear. Map-makers paid noattention to the astronomical observations which weremultiplied round them every day, and which, thoughfar from exact, never deviated into such errors as thosewhich were handed down traditionally from the antients.By his desire Chapelle was sent to the Levant, to correctthe map of the Mediterranean : his observationsascertained the difference in longitude between theshores of Palestine and the meridian of Paris. Themap of the portion of the Mediterranean which lies tothe west of this meridian was not corrected till 1720.It is remarkable that Heiress, in 1G35, had reduced thedistance from Aleppo to Marseilles from 45° to 30°.But the learned did not universally accede to those improvementsproposed by individuals of eminent abilities.While Newton taught the laws which regulate themovements of the earth among heavenly bodies, littlecare was taken to delineate its surface. Geography continuallyrelapsed to the errors of antiquity, and needed,as Cassini loudly complained, a total reform.William Delisle, the friend of Cassini, was the firstwho seriously set about the task of reconstructing thegeographical edifice. He conceived his grand designwhen young, and applied himself to it with such uncommonardour that he had finished the task at the age oftwenty-five. In the year 1700 he published his mapof the world, as well as separate maps of Europe, Asia,and Africa. In these he boldly departed from the examplesof his predecessors, and made free use of thematerials which the improvements in astronomy hadplaced within his reach. The defects of geography inhis age belonged to the original vice of its system, andGEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE. 9not to any deficiency of materials : it had been alreadyenriched, and in every way improved, by the industryof Sanson, the learning of Cornelius, and the clevernessof Mercator. But Sanson, though the first geographerof the seventeenth century, still remained far behindthe astronomical discoveries of the time. He followedblindly the longitudes of Ptolemy, and his sons andgrandsons after his death continued to reproduce hismaps, without paying any attention to the observationsthat were daily increasing. The maps of Cornelland others, notwithstanding their reputation, wereinferior to those of Sanson. In order to improve geographyit was necessary to combine the narratives oftravellers with the results of astronomical observations.This had been partially and ineffectually attempted beforeby Riccioli, Pontius, and others. But these previousrevolts of reason against authority do not diminishthe glory redounding to Delisle, from the revolutionwhich he effected in geography : for he proved himselfto accord with both ancient and modern measures ; hecombined a greater mass of materials, and instead ofconfining his corrections to one quarter of the globe, heproceeded through the whole ; hence he has a good rightto be considered the creator of modern geography. Peterthe Great, when in Paris, condescended to visit him,and to give him what information he possessed respectingthe geography of Muscovy.Delisle died in 1726, but he lived to see his discipleJ. B. danville attain such eminence in his favouritestudy, as promised to bring geography to a speedy perfection.The talents of D'Anville procured him, at theearly age of twenty-two, the honour of being appointedthe king's geographer. He was remarkable for a singularcorrectness of judgment, and fineness of penetration,which appeared almost instinctive. He proceeded muchon conjecture, and yet he rarely erred. The researchesof the learned, and the increased acquaintance made withthe globe within the last century, both bear witness to thesagacity of his spirit. Italy, before his time, was PROGRESS OPlarge in the maps far beyond its true dimensions, andextended from west to east, according to the ideas ofthe ancients. But he ventured to reduce it, having previouslydiscovered the true measures of the ancients ; andthe geological operations of Benedict XIV. showed himto be correct. His boldness completed what the resolutionof Delisle had begun.If the glory of reforming the inveterate errors of geographybelongs in a peculiar manner to the Frenchnation, the English at least had the merit of affordingthe most important elements to the laborious task. Thediscoveries of Newton did not terminate merely in theimprovement of astronomy ; they communicated, ofcourse, an impulse to every branch of knowledge at allconnected with that science. But his disciple Halleyexerted a more immediate influence on geography. Thisextraordinary man, like D'Anville, distinguished himselfat a very early age by his remarkable proficiency in hisfavourite study. At the age of nineteen, he published adirect method of finding the aphelia and eccentricity ofthe planets. He was aware that astronomy depended onan extensive knowledge of the position of the stars, andexpressed his zealous desire to observe the stars in thesouthern hemisphere. Charles II. favoured his zealandin I676, when Halley was only twenty years ofage, he embarked for St. Helena, on this important mission.He remained there a year; and, during thattime, from the fault of the climate, he had fixed theplaces of only 350 stars. Had he chosen the Cape ofGood Hope he would have found a clearer sky, as wellas a more southern position.While Halley was at St. Helena he observed a transitof Mercury across the sun's disc. This kind of phenomenonhad already attracted the notice of Gassendi,Horror, and other great astronomers ; but Halley wasthe first to see all the important consequences that mightbe derived from it. He perceived that it might serveto determine the parallax of the sun, whence againmight be calculated the dimensions of the solar system.GEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE. 1 1The passage of Venus across the sun, which is of morerare occurrence, seemed to him at the same time to offersuperior advantages. He weighed attentively and arrangedthe methods and consequences of these observations; and, in a memoir published in 17l6> he announcedto the learned world that the transit of Venuswould afford the means of calculating the distance ofthe earth from the sun with greater precision than hadbeen yet expected. The last time this phenomenon hadtaken place was in l63<), and it was not to recur till170'7; a time to which Halley, who was born in l6'56,could not hope to have his life prolonged ; he thereforeexhorted other astronomers to attend to his admonitions.His counsel has been obeyed, and his expectations fulfilled.Besides the advantages directly accruing togeography from the perfection of astronomical science,the observation of the transit of Venus, so warmly andprophetically urged by Halley, has a peculiar interest,inasmuch as it gave rise to the first voyage of Cook,which contributed so much to dispel the obscurity whichhung over our knowledge of the globe.But it is not merely by his remote influence on geographicalexertions that Halley is entitled to our respectfulnotice; he figured prominently also as a navigatorand hydrographer, and was among the first to lay thefoundations of physical geography. His " Theory ofMagnetic Variations," with his " History of the Monsoons,or the Periodical Trade Winds," having attractedthe attention of the learned, the king gave him a vesselto examine the Atlantic, and to try how far his theorywas conformable with experience. He embarked on thisexpedition in 1()"98, with a captain's commission ; butas he had not been educated in the navy, he was viewedby his officers with jealousy and dislike, and the mutinyof his lieutenant compelled him to return soon after hehad passed the line. He again put to sea, however, in1699, and proceeded to the south till he met ice, inlat. 52°. In September, 1700, he returned, not havinglost a man in the course of his voyage ; a circumstance12 PROGRESS OFat that time of rare occurrence, and which can be attributedonly to the care and humanity of the commander.His observations during both his voyages were found tobe favourable to his theory of magnetic variations. CaptainHalley was employed on his return to survey theChannel, and was soon after sent on a mission to theAdriatic and to Vienna. This extraordinary man diedin 1742, at the age of eighty-six, retaining his facultiesunclouded till the last. His long life was throughoutdevoted to the advancement of science : his habitual industrywas equal to the activity of his mind. He wasat once a strict reasoner and a bold speculator ; he hadno morbid fear of theories, nor was he ever weaned byhis attachment to them from his love of truth. Heknew from experience how much navigation dependedon astronomy, and laboured hard to make the lattersubservient to the purposes of the former. He attemptedto improve the theory of lunar motions ; and, thoughnot perfectly successful, he did as much as could beexpected from one man. What he commenced LaPlace has completed. These are the exertions for whichnavigation and geography are indebted to the genius ofHalley ; but his fame as an astronomer rests chieflyperhaps on his application of the Newtonian laws to themotions of comets, and on his calculations respecting theprecession of the equinoxes.Having thus briefly sketched the progress of geographytowards mathematical correctness, and its alliancewith the kindred science of astronomy, it may, perhaps,illustrate still farther the gradual dissipation of error, ifwe cast a passing glance at the last advocate for a greatsouthern continent. Although there is nothing intrinsicallyabsurd in the supposition that land extends for agreat distance round the South Pole, yet the belief inthe necessity of an antarctic continent, in order to establishthe equilibrium of the earth, and the credulousand even disingenuous attempts to support this hypothesisby fragments of authors of imperfect authenticity,may safely be reckoned among positive errors. Alex-geographicalSCIENCE. 13ruler Dalrymple sailed to India, 1737, in the serviceof the company : he afterwards visited the eastern archipelago; and, while studying the history of those interestingcountries, the trade or the possession of whichwas eagerly coveted by his employers, he contracted astrong partiality for geographical researches ; but, withthe information which he obtained from the earliestSpanish navigators, he also imbibed their credulity, andat length firmly believed in the existence of a southerncontinent teeming with wealth and abundance. Incompensation for his services in the East, he was appointed,on his return home, hydrographer to the EastIndia Company; and was afterwards named hydrographerto the Admiralty, when that office was first created, in1795.But previous to that period, in 1772, Dalrymple wroteto lord North, who was then prime minister, to informhim that he was about to embark on an expedition athis own expense to discover a southern continent, andhoped that government would allow him to retain forfive years all the countries which he should discover inthe southern Atlantic between the longitudes 0° and 60°west of Greenwich, on condition that this grant shouldcomprehend only those lands or islands examined withinfive years, and of which plans should be delivered in.Lord North took no notice of this application until urgedby repeated letters ; but at length he gave Dalrymple anaudience, in which, however, the latter complained thatthe conversation turned more on the politics of the Eastthan on geographical discoveries : the minister eludedthe demands of Dalrymple by urging the necessity ofconsulting his colleagues.It is probable that, in the course of conversation, lordNorth was led to form an unfavourable estimate of Dalrymple'sunderstanding, and was unwilling to risk thereputation of government by patronising the schemes ofa flighty enthusiastic projector. Dalrymple, however,was so sanguine in his hopes of finding a southern continentadapted for colonisation, that he went to the14 PROGRESS OP GEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE.trouble of composing a code of laws for his embryo republic: the general character of these is such as tojustify the coldness he experienced from lord North.According to his scheme women were not to be debarredfrom public offices; but, in the exercise of public dutiesand political rights, were to be on an equal footing withthe men. No one in his republic was to exercise theprofession of the law for hire or fee, en pain of forfeitureof all his property and perpetual imprisonment.The public accounts were to be exposed to general inspectionon every Sunday in all the churches. To preventluxury, no coin was to be used but copper money.Bachelors and maidens were to be heavily taxed ; thesums thus raised being to go to the support of orphans.Finally, no one was to be admitted into the colony whodid not subscribe to this code of laws, and on his dissentingfrom any of them he was to forfeit all his property.Thus a republic devised expressly as a model ofa free state was to be debarred from the power of legislation,and to be supported by that grand pillar of barbarism,an unalterable code* Well might a friend ofDalrymple's pronounce upon his scheme, that it was thebest possible model of the worst possible commonwealth.From these observations it is evident that the talents ofDalrymple would have but ill supplied the place of thesound sense and correct judgment of Cook, whose posthe had nearly occupied in the expedition undertaken toobserve the transit of Venus.VOYAGES OF BYRON, ETC. 15CHAP. II.VOYAGES OF BYRON, Wallis, CARTERET, ETC.motives of the french to make geographical discoveries.the falkland islands. appearance of forests.tameness of game. settlement made by bougainville.voyage of commodore byron. his instructions.search for pepys island. intercourse with the patagonians.pout egmont. islands of disappointment.- king george's islands. — titian. — wallis and carteret.their separation. wallis arrives at ota-heite. conduct of the natives. carteret discoverspitcairn's island. the solomon islands. new ireland.the falkland islands surrendered to spain. voyageof bougainville round the world. anecdote of bare.the new cyclades. louisiana.When George III. ascended the throne of England,civilisation and knowledge had made so great a progressas to give the interests of science some weight even inthe calculations of politicians. The young monarchhimself had conceived a strong partiality for geographicalstudies, and his desire to distinguish his reign bythe glory of important discoveries was encouraged by hisministers from motives of a less disinterested nature.During the wars which had lately agitated Europe,the privateers of the hostile nations cruising in the southseas had woeful experience of the hazardous characterof that distant navigation. Tbe French, having sufferedmuch from the maritime superiority of the English, andhaving been totally expelled from their settlements inCanada, began to look about them for some mode ofcounterbalancing these losses, and of securing their mercantileinterests in case of a future war. The establishmentof a colony, at the Falkland Islands, which mightserve as a resting place for ships destined to the PacificOcean, was some time in contemplation. The cruisers16 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY.from St. Malo having named those islands Malouines,from their native town, seemed to have thereby establisheda vague kind of right to the possession of them.In 1763, M. de Bougainville, an officer who hadserved with distinction in the wars of Canada, undertookto make a settlement on these islands at his own expense.The French government accepted his proposal, and, accordingly,on the 15th of September in that year, hesailed from St. Malo, carrying out with him as settlerssome of those unfortunate persons who, by the success ofthe British arms in North America, had been drivenfrom their possessions in Nova Scotia, or Acadia as itwas named by the French. On the 3d of February,1764, he entered a great bay, at the eastern extremityof the Falkland Islands, to which he gave the name ofBate des Francois. He found that the appearance ofwood, which had imposed on both sir Richard Hawkinsand Woods Rogers was qiute delusive. Tufts of highreeds, separated by narrow intervals, covered the lowlands.The stalks of these reeds had the colour of dryleaves, to the height of about six feet, and were coveredabove that with shoots of a fresh green colour, so thatthe whole, at a little distance, had the appearance of acoppice wood. Fish and game were in abundance ; andfrom the absence of timidity in the animal creation itwas obvious that they had not been before disturbed bythe visits of man. The birds allowed themselves to betakenwith the hand ; the hares and foxes were equallydevoid of fear. On the 17th of March, the colony wasfounded; and three weeks afterwards Bougainville set sailfor France, leaving behind him in his new settlementtwenty-seven persons, of whom five were women. Returningto the infant colony in the beginning of the followingyear, he found all well, and then sailed to theStraits of Magellan for a supply of wood ; thus commencingthe commercial intercourse with those southernregions which it was the chief object of the colony tomaintain. At the close of the year, the colonists, whonow amounted to 150, sent home to France a cargo ofVOYAGES OP Byron, ETC. 17oil and seal-skins, as a presage of the advantages likelyto result from their prosperity.These enterprises of the French may naturally be supposedto have excited jealous feelings in the Englishgovernment ; and a desire to undertake some countervailingproject is manifest in the plans of discoveryencouraged by the court. In 17^4, commodore Byronwas commissioned to sail on a voyage of discovery, theobjects of which are briefly and distinctly stated in hisinstructions, as follows : —Whereas nothing can redound more to the honourof this nation as a maritime power, to the dignity ofthe crown of Great Britain, and to the advancement ofthe trade and navigation thereof, than to make discoveriesof countries hitherto unknown ; and whereas thereis reason to believe that lands and islands of great extent,hitherto unvisited by any European power, may befound in the Atlantic Ocean, between the Cape of GoodHope and the Magellanic Strait, within the latitudes convenientfor navigation, and in the climates adapted tothe produce of commodities useful in commerce ; andwhereas his majesty's islands, called Pepys Island andFalkland's Islands, lying within the said track, notwithstandingtheir having been first discovered and visited byBritish navigators, have never yet been sufficiently surveyed,as that an accurate judgment may be formed oftheir coasts and products : his majesty, taking the premisesinto consideration, and conceiving no conjunctureso proper for an enterprise of this nature as a time ofprofound peace which his kingdoms at present happilyenjoy, has thought fit that it should now be undertaken."The ships fitted out for this voyage were the Tamar,a sloop, mounting 16, and the Dolphin, a small man-of-war,mounting 24 guns. The latter vessel was sheathedwith copper ; a circumstance which deserves to be remarked,as this was one of the first and most importantexperiments made by the English admiralty to determinethe efficacy of that mode of preserving ships' bottomsVOL. III. c18 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.from the attacks of worms. Copper sheathing had beenrecommended to the admiralty so early as 1 708 ; but sodifficult is it to alter the routine of practice, and sosurely does prejudice rise in opposition to every thingthat is new, that in admiral Keppel's fleet, in 1768,there was but one ship coppered.The ships arrived at Rio Janeiro about the middle ofSeptember, and, after remaining there about a month,again put to sea. Their destination had been hithertoa secret, but, on leaving the coast of Brazil, the commodorecalled all hands upon deck, and informed the menthat they were not bound to the East Indies, but upon avoyage of discovery ; and that, in case of their good conduct,they were entitled to double pay. This announcementwas received by the crew with acclamations of joy ;nevertheless they soon had a foretaste of the hardshipswhich they were destined to encounter. At Rio themen had been greatly incommoded by the heat, and supposingthat their voyage was to be through hot climates,they had sold all their warm clothing ; but, after holdingtheir course to the south for one week, they experienced aninclemency of weather which rarely occurs in the severestEnglish winter : yet they hail not advanced beyond 36°south, and it was now the summer season in those latitudes.Their first shelter was in Port Desire, which was foundto have been but confusedly described by sir John Marlborough.The country round was a bleak desert, resemblingin appearance the downs in the south of England.Some hares were caught, the flesh of which wasas white as snow.On leaving Port Desire, Byron sailed in search ofPepys Island, laid down by Cowley in 47° south latitude; but after cruising four days to no purpose, beingnow certain that there was no such island, he returnedto the main land to take in wood and water. Duringthis part of the voyage the weather was, in general, fine,but very cold; and it was agreed by all on board, thatthe only difference between the middle of summer thereand the middle of winter in England lay in the lengthVOYAGES OF BYRON, ETC. 19of the days. The ships now entered the Straits of Magellan,and had hardly come to an anchor when theysaw a number of horsemen on the shore waving somethingwhite, as if inviting them to a conference. Byronimmediately proceeded to land, with a well armed party.Leaving his people upon the beach, in readiness to act asoccasion might require, he advanced alone towards thenatives, who, though above 500 in number, seemedalarmed at his approach. At length, by signs and expressionsof friendship, he induced one of them, whoappeared to be a chief, to venture towards him. " Thisman," says the commodore, " was of a gigantic stature,and seemed to realise the tales of monsters in humanshape. He had the skin of some wild beast thrown overhis shoulders as a Scotch highlander wears his plaid, andwas painted so as to make the most hideous appearanceI ever beheld. Round one eye was a large circle ofwhite, a circle of black surrounded the other, and therest of his face was streaked with paint of different colours.I did not measure him ; but if I may judge ofhis height by the proportion of his stature to my own,it could not be much less than seven feet." The Patagonians,however formidable their appearance might be,were found remarkably tractable and civil. They acceptedsuch presents as were offered to them with thankfulness,betraying neither indifference nor importunity ;and Byron, having looked round upon these " enormousgoblins" with no small astonishment, left them wellsatisfied with his visit, and willing, as he judged bytheir signs, to show him the full extent of their hospitality.The ships now advanced up the straits as far as PortFamine, where our voyagers found the country decoratedwith a luxuriance that seemed foreign to the climate.The ground was covered with flowers, not inferior tothose cultivated in the gardens of Europe either inbeauty or fragrance. The favourable language in whichcommodore Byron speaks of the Magellanic regionsseems intended to flatter some scheme of settlement; forc 220 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.he adds, " and if it were not for the severity of thecold and winter, this country might, in my opinion, bemade by cultivation one of the finest in the world."Having completed the wood and water of both ships, hesteered back again from the straits in search of Falkland'sIslands.Soon after his arrival at these islands, he discovered aharbour on the western coast, to which he gave the nameof Port Egmont, and which appeared to him one of thefinest harbours in the world. The whole navy of Englandmight ride within it in perfect security from allwinds. Here the country was taken possession of bythe name of Falkland's Islands ; a precaution which thelanguage of his instructions appears to have renderedunnecessary.Having thus completed his instructions, so far as relatedto those islands, he proceeded on his voyage to theSouth Sea, which he determined to reach by the Straitsof Magellan. Having accompanied lord Anson in hisvoyage round the world, Byron appears to have regardedwith unbounded dread the passage by Cape Horn. Inthe straits, nevertheless, he had to contend with the usualdifficulties : his voyage through them occupied aboutseven weeks, during which time his crews enjoyed littlerest, and the uncertainty of the climate threatened continualdanger. His intercourse with the wretched inhabitantsof this forlorn country was not productive of anyinteresting results. They were found, however, to derivemuch pleasure from music; and when amused in thisway by some of the crew, testified their gratitude bypainting the fiddler's face after the fashion of their country.At length, on the 9th of April, the ships clearedthe strait, and entered the South Sea. " It is pro-table,"observes commodore Byron, "that whoever shallread this account of the difficulties and dangers whichattended our passage through the Straits of Magellan willconclude that it ought never to be attempted again ; butI, who have been twice round Cape Horn, am of a differentopinion. I think that, at a proper season of theVoyages OF BYRON*, ETC. 21year, not only a single vessel but a large squadron mightpass the straits in less than three weeks." The voyageof sir Francis Drake is the only one which can be adducedin support of this opinion. Byron ascribed thehardships which he had to endure from the tempestuousweather to the circumstance of attempting a passageduring the vernal equinox. But from the experience ofnumerous navigators, it may be questioned whether thisregion of the globe ever enjoys a tolerable respite fromstorms and hurricanes.The crews of both vessels being completely wornout by their sufferings in the straits, it was deemed advisableto steer for Juan Fernandez, as the nearest restingplace, and to postpone the prosecution of discoveriestill the health of the men should be restored. But thisisland was missed from the haziness of the weather, andit was therefore necessary to sail to Masafuero, somedegrees farther to the west ; but here again the weariedmariners were disappointed in their hopes of finding aresting place. The sea ran high, and broke upon theshore in such a dreadful surf, that it was found extremelydifficult to effect a landing. A little water,however, was procured, and the ships were obliged tocontinue their voyage. Byron attempted also to findDavis's or Easter Island, but without success. Thescurvy was now making its ravages among the crews,and heightened the natural impatience of a protractedvoyage. At length a small island was discovered, of amost beautiful appearance. It was covered with talltrees, and upon the shore were seen the shells of turtle,scattered in profusion. The inhabitants ranged themselvesalong the beach to survey the ships, and lightednumerous fires as if for signals. But so many pleasingobjects thus presented to the eyes of the seamen onlyincreased their misery, and prompted the imagination toexercise the power which it possesses of aggravating thecalamities of life. No anchorage could be found near theisland, which was surrounded by coral rocks ; it wastherefore impossible to remain here. On the followingc 822 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.day another small island was discovered, similarly situated.Cocoa nut trees were seen in abundance, but noanchorage could be found. The sick, who were now inadeplorable situation, were still further depressed onfinding that the land presented to their view was inaccessible.These islands were therefore left, having receivedthe name of the Islands of Disappointment.On the next day, however, other islands were discovered,from which, notwithstanding the equivocal conductof the natives, the boats were able to carry off"several loads of cocoa nuts, and a great quantity ofscurvy grass, the most valuable refreshments whichcould have been procured. The natives, though at firstdisposed to view the strangers as enemies, were notwithout sentiments of kindness and generosity. A midshipman,who testified his confidence in them by swimmingwith his clothes on through the surf to the shore,was minutely examined, and indeed stripped of somearticles of apparel by the inquisitive Indians, but noviolence of any kind was offered to him. Some remnantsof a Dutch long-boat, with fragments of brass andiron implements, were found here in a hut. To thissmall group Byron gave the name of King George's Islands.In the remainder of the voyage to Tinian, commodoreByron was prevented by the sickly state of hiscrew from examining the islands which he descried, withthe patience and attention that would be expected froma navigator under more fortunate circumstances. Thedifficulty of finding good anchorage, and the necessityof avoiding any unnecessary delay, compelled him topass by Prince of Wales's Island, and the Archipelago,which he named the Islands of Danger, with little or noexamination. At length, in the beginning of August,he arrived at Tinian, and anchored in the same harbourwhich had formerly afforded shelter to lord Anson.To Byron and his company, however, this island did notpresent that enchanting appearance which had won fromtheir predecessors such rapturous descriptions. Afterremaining here nine weeks, during which time the sickVOYAGES OF BY110N, ETC. 23were pretty well recovered, and having laid in a stock of2000 cocoa nuts, the ships again put to sea, and inabout six weeks arrived at Batavia. Having again refreshedhere, they set sail for England, where the commodorearrived in the beginning of May, having beensomewhat more than two and twenty months on thevoyage.Commodore Byron returned in May, 1 7^6 ; and inthe month of August following, the Dolphin was againsent out, under the command of captain Wallis, togetherwith the Swallow, captain Carteret, in the prosecutionof the same general design of making discoveries in thesouthern hemisphere. On his arrival in the Straits ofMagellan, captain Wallis despatched a store-ship, whichhad accompanied him so far, with some thousand youngtrees, taken to be transplanted to the Falkland Islands,where a British colony had been just established, so thatthis expedition does not appear to have been whollywithout some views of settlement, any more than thepreceding. Though captain Wallis arrived in the straitsat the season recommended by Byron, he was neverthelessfour months endeavouring to effect his passagethrough them : so little reliance can be placed on theconstancy of the seasons in such a tempestuous climate.He at length effected his entrance into the South Sea,on the 1 th of April, 176*7. But the Swallow, being aheavy sailer, was unable to clear the straits at the sametime, and returned to Europe by a different route, as thetwo ships never afterwards joined company. CaptainWallis, in his voyage across the Pacific, ranged throughthe archipelago of the Georgian Islands, and namedseveral, as Queen Charlotte's, Egmont, Gloucester, andOsnaburgh, Islands, of which he considered himself thefirst discoverer. At length he arrived at an island ofconsiderable size, to which he gave the name of KingGeorge the Third' s Island, but which is now better knownby the native name of Otaheite. The crew being sickly,he deemed it expedient to remain here some time to procurerefreshments ; but although the natives were hose424> MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.pitiable and friendly, it was difficult to establish a cordialcorrespondence between parties so unequal in power andintelligence. It was impossible to do away with allsymptoms of fear and mistrust on the one side, and thedisposition to behave tyrannically on the other. In thecombats which took place, the natives experienced thedreadful effects of fire arms, and the dangerous superiorityof their European visitors. Captain Wallis,prompted by a wanton desire to exhibit his powers of destruction,directed some balls to the woods, to which thewomen and those incapable of bearing arms had retired ;and, in order to disable the natives from giving himany further disturbance, he destroyed above fifty of theirlarge or war canoes. But these quarrels did not whollyalienate the affections of the natives. They still regardedthe strangers, in the intervals of peace, with the warmthof affection, which spoke abundantly the simplicity oftheir hearts. A female of rank, named Oberea, whomour navigators considered as the queen of the island,was unremitting in her attentions to captain Wallis, towhom she was personally attached, and seemed inconsolableat his departure.From Otaheite captain Wallis sailed to Tinian, wherehe repaired the ship, and refreshed his crew ; and havingtouched at Batavia and the Cape of Good Hope,arrived at Hastings, the 19th of May, 1?68, having beenabout one year and nine months on the voyage.In the mean time captain Carteret, in the Swallow,having lost sight of the Dolphin at the western entranceof Magellan's Straits, had to encounter numberless dangersand distresses when left to perform a long and difficultnavigation in a ship inadequately provided, andnot at all fitted for such an expedition. He cleared thestraits four days later than captain Wallis, and crossedthe Pacific by a route a little farther to the south.After leaving Masafuero, in lat. 25° 2' S., a lofty islandwas seen, which, from the name of the young officerwho discovered it, was named Pitcairn's Island. Carterethoped to fall in with the Salomon Islands, and inVOYAGES OF BYRON, ETC. 25reality he must have approached them very closely ; buthaving failed to verify the discoveries of Spanish navigators,he incautiously ventured to doubt their veracity.The island to which he gave the name of EgmontInland was probably the Santa Cruz of the Spaniards;and his Gower Island is at no great distance from theprincipal of the Salomon group. On arriving at NewBritain, in the inlet to which Dampier had given thename of St. George's Sound, he was tempted to believethat it conducted into an open sea, and, venturingthrough it, discovered that Nova Britannia, whichDampier had first demonstrated to be separated fromNew Guinea, was itself divided by a channel, which henamed St. George's Channel. To the northernmost islandCarteret gave the name of New Ireland. The island tothe south remained in possession of the title under whichthe whole had before been vaguely comprehended.Leaving St. George's Channel, he determined the positionsof many of the islands with which these seasabound. The distressed situation of his crew compelledhim to remain some time at Macassar, the Swallow beingthe first English ship of war that ever touched at Celebes.The preceding expeditions were all more or lessconnected with the project of forming establishments inthe Falkland Islands. But these colonies were soonfound to be not worth the trouble and expense whichthey incurred. The English, we have before observed,made a settlement at Port Egmont in I766*. But thiscolony appears to have met with no further attention,and soon disappeared. Captain Macbride, in the Jasonfrigate, who surveyed those islands in the same year,threatened the existence of the French colony in Baiedes Francois, on the eastern coast. But Spain now interposed,and claimed the Falkland Islands by virtue ofthe old papal grant, the authority of which had longsince fallen into contempt. France, however, choserather to relinquish a worthless possession than to engagein war on its account. The king of Spain agreed topay 500,000 crowns as an indemnification for the ex-modernVOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.pence already incurred in settling the country. Partof this sum was to go to Bougainville, the first projectorand chief proprietor of the colony. He was accordinglydespatched in 1766 with the Boudeuse, of 26 guns, andthe Etoile storeship, to make formal restitution of theseislands to the Spanish crown, and with instructions toreturn home through the Pacific Ocean with the view ofmaking geographical discoveries. As the French hadbeen recently deprived of their colonies in North America,they were anxious to find some new channels inwhich their enterprising spirit might be advantageouslyemployed. Bougainville, who had personally witnessedthose political reverses, was as well qualified by theactivity of his mind as by his knowledge and experienceto guide the French merchants to those remote seaswhere they might hope to remain undisturbed by politicalrivalry.In November, 1767, having resigned the FalklandIslands, and repaired his ships in the La Plata, he commencedhis voyage towards the Pacific. His great reputation,and the interest excited by the object of hisvoyage, procured him the company of the Prince ofNassau and of the naturalist Commercon. His passagethrough the Straits of Magellan was effected in 52 days ;and though he had to struggle with continual storms, heseems to prefer the passage by the straits to that roundCape Horn. He failed, like Byron and Carteret, in hisattempt to find Easter Island, but at length arrived at agroup with which those navigators were not wholly unacquainted,and to which he gave the name, of ArehipetDangereux. These are the Paumotu or Pearl Islandsof the English charts. But his first resting place wasthe island to which Wallis gave the name of KingGeorge the Third's Island, and of which the Frenchnavigator correctly ascertained the native name, Tahiti.Here he experienced the same kind treatment as theEnglish who had preceded him ; and, health being restoredamong his crew, he again proceeded on hisVOYAGES OF Byron, ETC. 27voyage. An intelligent native, named Aootooroo, wasinduced to accompany him to Europe.Commercon the naturalist had a young servant, remarkablefor his mild and patient disposition ; but thediscriminating Tahitians, as soon as they set their eyesupon him, exclaimed that he was a woman : suspicionswere thus directed towards Bare, as the young servantwas named ; and the ship was not long at sea afterleaving Tahiti, when, being teased continually by thecrew, she was obliged to avow her sex. The female whohad thus engaged in an enterprise, of the hardships ofwhich she could form no conception, and who embarkedin disguise to circumnavigate the globe, with hardly anyother motive than the gratification of curiosity, wasabout 27 years of age, and not ill looking. Her fortunewould have been truly singular, as M. Bougainville remarks,if the ship in winch she sailed had been thrownaway on some desolate island.Bougainville next arrived at a group of islands, towhich he gave the name of Les Grandes Cyclades, andwhich seem to have formed the Terra Australis of Quires.But the French were unable to establish any intercoursewith the natives, whose dispositions were as hostile as theirappearance was forbidding. They were almost all affectedwith the leprosy, from which circumstance one of theislands received its name. Continuing his course to thewest, and afterwards to the north, he discovered a greatisland or archipelago, which he named Louisiade. Stillfarther to the north he sailed along the eastern coast ofanother island, to which he gave his own name. Heshortly after anchored near the southern extremity ofNew Ireland, at the mouth of King George's Harbour ;but instead of investigating this inlet, which Carteretdiscovered to be a strait, he followed the land to the eastand north ; and after being at sea for ten months and ahalf, arrived at Batavia on the 28th of September. Ontouching at the Cape of Good Hope he learned thatcaptain Carteret was only eleven days before him. Butthe Swallow, being in a wretched condition, was soon28 ' Modern VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.overtaken ; the two navigators corresponded with somuch jealousy and reserve, that each endeavoured toconceal from the other the fact of his having circumnavigatedthe earth. Bougainville arrived at St. Maloon the leith of March, 176'9, after a voyage of twoyears and four months.CHAP. III.COOK'S FIRST VOYAGE.EARLY LIFE OF COOK. HIS FIRST PROMOTION IK THE NAVY.SURVEYS THE ST. LAWRENCE. APPOINTED TO SURVEY Newfoundland.HIS PROFICIENCY IN MATHEMATICS. TRANSITOF VENUS. INTRACTABILITY OF DALRYMPLE. COOK CHOSENIN HIS STEAD. PORTUGUESE IGNORANCE. ATTEMPT TO exploreTIERRA DEL Lego. ARRIVAL AT OTAHEITE. THETRANSIT OBSERVED. CHARACTER OF THE PEOPLE. TopsailsWITH COOK. THE SOCIETY ISLANDS. TRADITIONSRESPECTING EUROPEAN SHIPS. GEOGRAPHY OF THE NATIVES.OHETEROA. THE EASTERN SHORES OF NEW ZEALAND Discovered.SOME NATIVES CAPTURED. FOUND TO BE Cannibals.THEIR ARTS. A LARGE RIVER EXPLORED. QUEENCHARLOTTE'S SOUND. COOK'S STRAITS DISCOVERED. NEWZEALAND CIRCUMNAVIGATED. THE EAST COAST OF NEW Holland.BOTANY BAY. NARROW ESCAPE FROM SHIPWRECK.ENDEAVOUR STRAITS DISCOVERED. POSSESSION TAKEN OFNEW SOUTH WALES. DEATH OF TUPIA. — RETURN OF COOK.The interests of science and the acquisition of geographicalknowledge entered largely into the motives ofthe circumvallation above related. But the first expeditionof importance, fitted out wholly for scientificobjects, was that intrusted to the command of the celebratedcaptain James Cook. This great navigator wasborn of humble parents : his father was an agriculturallabourer, whose steady conduct was at length rewardedby his employer with the situation of hind or understeward. As he had nine children, and his means werecook's First VOYAGE. 29slender, he was unable to assist materially their individualexertions to procure a livelihood. James, whenthirteen years of age, was apprenticed to a shopkeeperat Straits, a fishing town not far from Whitby ; butthe predilection of young Cook for the sea was soonmanifested with that strength of inclination which issure to accompany peculiar talents. He engaged himselffor seven years with the owners of some ships employedin the coal trade ; and, when the period of his engagementwas expired, he was promoted by his employers tothe rank of mate of one of their vessels. The coal tradeof England, being chiefly carried on near a singularlydangerous coast, where unceasing vigilance is requiredon the part of the seamen, constitutes the best school ofpractical mariners in the world. Cook, who obeyed hisown inclinations when he turned sailor, profited, nodoubt, in the highest degree, from the opportunitieswhich his coasting voyages afforded him of becomingacquainted with the practical part of navigation. Atlength, being in the Thames in 1755, when impressmentswere carried on to a great extent, he resolved toanticipate the impending necessity, and offered himselfto serve on board the Eagle, a man-of-war of 6'0 guns.Shortly after, the friends and patrons of his family inYorkshire having warmly recommended his interests tothe care of Air. Osbaldiston, the member for Scarborough,and captain (afterwards sir Hugh) Palliser, who commandedthe Eagle, reporting well of his conduct andcapacity, he was appointed master of the Mercury, asmall vessel which soon afterwards joined the fleet ofsir Charles Saunders in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. Herethe talents and resolution of Cook soon became conspicuous.It was found necessary, in order that the fleet mightco-operate with the army under general Wolfe, that itshould take up a position along the shore in front ofthe French encampments ; but before this manoeuvrecould be put in execution, the channel of the river wasto be sounded. This difficult task required the union of30 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.more than ordinary intelligence and intrepidity, andCook was the person selected for the purpose. Forseveral nights he carried on his operations unperceived ;hut at length the enemy discovered his movements, and,sending out a great number of boats after it grew dark,attempted to surround and cut him off. Cook pushedfor the Isle of Orleans ; and so narrowly did he escapebeing captured, that as he stepped on shore from thebow of his boat, the Indians in pursuit of him enteredat the stern ; and the boat itself, which was a pinnacebelonging to a man-of-war, was carried off by the enemy.Cook, however, had accomplished his task, and laidbefore the admiral of the fleet a survey of the channel,which was found to be both fill and accurate. Afterthe conquest of Quebec he was appointed to examinethe more difficult portions of the river St. Lawrence, withthe navigation of which the English had but little acquaintance.His zeal and abilities soon after procuredhim an appointment as master to the Northumberland,which bore the commodore's flag at Halifax. Here hefound leisure to apply himself to the study of elementarymathematics, and to improve those talents as a practicalhydrographer of which he had given such ample proofsin his first rude essays. An opportunity also soon occurredof displaying his improvement by surveying apart of the coast of Newfoundland. This island hadlately fallen into the power of the English ; and its importanceas a fishing station being fully appreciated bysir Hugh Palliser, who was appointed governor in theyear 1764, he strongly represented to government thenecessity of making an accurate survey of its coasts ;and, accordingly, by his recommendation, Cook was appointedmarine surveyor of Newfoundland and Labrador,and the Grenville schooner was placed under his commandfor this purpose. The manner in which Cookexecuted this task confirmed the high opinion alreadyentertained of his zeal and ability. A short paper whichhe communicated to the Royal Society on an eclipse ofthe sun observed in Newfoundland, and the longitude ofcook's first voyage. 31the place as calculated from it, procured him the characterof a respectable mathematician.But still higher honours awaited him. The transitof the planet Venus over the sun's disc, calculated totake place in 176.9, was looked forward to by the scientificworld with much anxious interest ; and it was earnestlydesired that all the advantage which could bederived to science from so rare a phenomenon might besecured by observing it in distant quarters of the globe.In accordance with this view, the Royal Society presentedan address to the king, setting forth the advantage ofobserving the transit in the opposite hemisphere, theirinability to fit out an expedition for the purpose, andpraying his majesty to equip a vessel to be despatchedto the South Sea under their direction. This petitionwas at once complied with. The person at first designedto command the expedition was Mr. Dairy male, chiefhydrographer to the Admiralty, and no less celebratedfor his geographical knowledge than for his zeal inmaintaining the existence of an Australian continent.Dalrymple had never held a commission in his majesty'snavy ; and the experience of Dr. Halley had proved thatone so circumstanced cannot expect obedience from acrew subjected to the discipline of the navy. The prideof the profession scorns to submit to those who have notacquired their authority by passing through the ordinaryroutine of promotion. Dalrymple, however, refused toengage in the expedition unless with the amplest powersof a commander. The admiralty, on the other hand,were unwilling to intrust him with powers which mightembroil him with his officers. Neither party wouldyield ; and, while the affair thus remained in suspense,Cook was proposed. Enquiries were then made as tohis abilities ; and, as all who knew him spoke favourablyof him, and great confidence is usually felt in the steadyand concentrated talents of the self-taught, he was chosento command the expedition, being first promoted to therank of lieutenant.It is a proof of Cook's natural strength of underMODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY.standing, that his mind was not enslaved by habits, butthat he was always ready to introduce innovations intohis practice whenever they were recommended by commonsense and experience. Instead of selecting a frigate,or vessel of that description, for his voyage, he chose avessel built for the coal trade, with the sailing qualitiesof which he was well acquainted. He justly represented,that a ship of this kind was more capable of carryingthe stores requisite for a long voyage ; was exposed toless hazard in running near coasts — an object of greatimportance in a voyage of discovery ; was less affectedby currents ; and, in case of any accident, might, withoutmuch difficulty or danger, be laid on shore to undergorepairs. The ship which he chose was of 360tons burden, and named the Endeavour. No painswere spared by the Admiralty in fitting her out for thevoyage; and, as the improvement of science was its mainobject, persons qualified to attain the desired end wereappointed to accompany the expedition. Mr. Greenwas named by the Royal Society as the astronomer;Dr. Solander, a learned Swede and pupil of Linnaeus,went as naturalist ; Mr. (afterwards sir Joseph) Banks,a gentleman of large fortune, and at that time veryyoung, who afterwards reflected so much lustre on hiscountry by devoting a long life and ample means to theinterests of learning, renounced the ease to which hisaffluence entitled him, and commenced his active andhonourable career by a voyage round the world. Beingaccompanied by able draftsmen, and being himself zealouslyattached to the study of natural history, andamply provided with every thing conducive to the gratificationof his favourite pursuit ; being at the sametime of a lively, open, liberal, and courageous temper,his company was no less agreeable than it was advantageous.Before the preparations were completed, captain"Wallis returned from his voyage round the world ;and having been advised to fix on some spot in the SouthSea conveniently situated for the erection of an observefirst voyage. S3More, he named Port Royal in King George the Third'sIsland as a place well adapted for that purpose.Every thing being now prepared, lieutenant Cooksailed from Plymouth on the 26'th of August, 176*8.He touched at Rio Janeiro, where the Portuguese governor,no less ignorant than suspicious, was much at aloss to comprehend the object of the expedition ; nor,after much trouble, was he able to form a juster idea ofit, than that it was intended to observe the north-starpassing through the south pole. It was only by stealththat Mr. Banks could go ashore, though nature seemedhere to teem with the objects of his research, and brilliantbutterflies flew round the ship to the height of themast. In leaving this port, Cook, after the example ofByron, sailed over the position which had been assignedby Cowley to Pepys' Island, and finally dispelled allbelief in its existence. He then directed his coursethrough the Straits of Le Maire, to pass round CapeHorn.The naturalists of the expedition landed on Tierra delFuego, and, crossing a morass and some low woods,ascended the highest eminence they could descry. Itwas now midsummer in this region, and the temperatureduring the day was moderately warm, but as nightapproached snow fell in great quantities, and the coldbecame excessive. The exploring party, who had incautiouslyadvanced too far, were unable to effect their returnto the shore before sunset, and were obliged to spendthe night exposed to all the inclemency of the weather,in a singularly desolate and unsheltered region. Dr.Solander, who, having travelled in the north of Europe,was well acquainted with the fatal effects of cold on theconstitution, repeatedly admonished his companions toresist the first approach of drowsiness, as the sleep superinducedby cold is sure to prove fatal ; but he was thefirst to feel the dangerous torpor he predicted, andentreated his companions to allow him to lie down andtake his rest ; but they, fortunately instructed by hislessons, persisted in dragging him along, and thus savedVOL. III. D34 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.his life. On reaching the woods in their descent, theykindled a fire, round which they spent the night, andwhen the sun rose they made their way to the ships ;but two of the party, servants of Mr. Banks, who laydown to rest in the snow, were found dead the nextmorning.The voyage round Cape Horn into the Pacific occupiedthirty-four days; and Cook, who was rather fortunatein his weather, seems to think it preferable to thepassage through the Straits of Magellan. In his voyagethrough the ocean, he descried some small islands, of thegroup which had been previously visited by "Wallis andBougainville. He proceeded, however, direct to theplace of his destination, not allowing himself to be detainedby unimportant discoveries. At length he arrivedat King George the Third's Island, to which he foundthat the natives gave the name of Otaheite, and anchoredin Matavai, or Port Royal Bay. From the inhabitantshe met with the most friendly reception, and beinginstructed by the errors of his predecessors, he drew upa set of regulations to guide his people in their intercoursewith the natives, which reflect the highest honouron his good sense and humanity. He changednames with the chief of the island ; thus solemnly professingfriendship according to the custom of the SouthSea islanders. Permission was easily obtained to erecttents on shore for the sick ; a small fort was constructed,and the observatory set up. As the time approached forthe observation of the transit, the greatest anxiety existedamong the officers respecting the result, as a temporarycloudiness or unfavourable change of weather mighttotally frustrate the grand object of the expedition. Aparty, however, was prudently sent to Eimeo, a smallisland about twenty leagues distant, and another wasstationed in Otaheite, considerably to the west of MatavaiBay, in order to lessen, by the number of observers, thechances of a total failure. At length the important day,the 3d of June, arrived, and the sun rose without acloud. The observation was made successfully by allcook's First VOYAGE. 35the parties, and the minds of our voyagers were relieved,the chief object of their mission being thus happily fulfilled.The mild and judicious conduct of Cook completelywon the confidence of the Otaheitans, and enabled himto form a more accurate opinion of their character thanthe voyagers who had previously visited their island.They were remarkably friendly and affectionate, andindeed their attachments alone seemed exempted fromthe characteristic levity which prevented them from fixingtheir attention on the same object for any length oftime. They are a handsome people, finely made, andwith open vivacious countenances : their ingenuity wasin nothing more conspicuous than in the fine cloth, orrather paper, which they made of the inner bark of atree. The garments of this material, which they wore,were becoming, and even elegant, and were arranged bythe women so as to produce an effect little short of theclassic draperies of antiquity. Their houses were littlemore than sheds, erected in the neighbourhood of thetrees under which they reclined and took their mealsduring the day. These habitations stood very thick inthe groves which cover the low margin of the island.High mountains rose behind, and a number of smallstreams stole down the declivities to the sea-shore ; thewhole presenting, from a distance, a most enchantingpicture.It was conjectured by M. de Bougainville that theinhabitants of Otaheite were composed of two differentraces, and that one of these was in a servile condition :Cook also notices the superiority of the chiefs in figureand appearance, but does not venture to ascribe this differenceto any circumstances of origin or descent. Hedoes not seem to have observed the power which thechiefs usually exercised over their retainers, and whichthe French navigator, with perhaps too little reason,seems to have considered as absolutely despotic. Butthe king, it was evident, though treated with respect byall, possessed no power but what was derived from thed 236 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.voluntary attachment of the chiefs, whose obedience orsupport in every enterprise could be secured only byconsulting them. The rule of succession among theseislanders is singular in the extreme. The son, as soonas he is born, succeeds to the authority of his father,who at once becomes only a regent instead of king, if hebefitted for that office. Associations of a licentious characterexisted among the chief persons in these islands ;and, among other bad effects, tended to encourage thecrime of infanticide ; a crime to which the law of inheritancejust mentioned may have held out someinducement, as the ambition of the parent was at onceblighted by the birth of a son.At the time of Cook's visit, the sovereignty had devolvedon a boy only seven years old, the son of Homaiand Oberea, the latter of whom had figured so conspicuouslyin captain Wallis's narrative as queen of theisland. She lived separate from her husband, and thoughstill treated as a noble, no longer enjoyed the same degreeof power and consideration which had rendered herfriendship so valuable to the commander of the Dolphin.As a further proof of the progress made by these islanderstowards civilisation, it deserves to be remarked, thattheir women were not condemned to labour, as is usuallythe case amongst rude nations. They had, indeed,abundance of domestic occupation, in making and dyeingtheir cloth, preparing the meals, and similar offices ; butthough they were not permitted to eat with the men,they were in general treated with respect and attention.When M. de Bougainville arrived here, he found theislanders already acquainted with the use of iron, whichthey called aonri, a name which he supposed them tohave learned from the English, who had preceded him ;but captain Wallis observed that they were not whollyignorant of that metal in his time, though he does notmention by what name they called it ; for as soon asthey were presented with iron nails, they began to sharpenthem, while they took no such pains with pieces of brassand copper. Cook circumnavigated and surveyed thecook's first voyage. 37coasts of Otaheite, which he found to have a circumferenceof about thirty leagues ; and after a stay of aboutthree months he prepared to depart. In leaving theaffectionate islanders, he remarks, " that, allowing fortheir theft, they need not fear a comparison with anypeople on earth." A native named Tupia, one of Oberea'sministers, and well instructed in all the learning of hiscountrymen, offered to accompany the English, and theproposal was readily accepted. The Otaheitans, it appeared,sometimes ventured two or three hundred milesthrough the ocean in their open canoes ; and Tupia hada vague knowledge of above eighty islands, the positionof many of which he attempted to describe. He waswell acquainted with the heavens ; and, in every part ofthe subsequent voyage in the Endeavour, he was enabledto point out the direction of his native island.On leaving Otaheite, lieutenant Cook visited the neighbouringislands of Ulietea, Borabora, Otahah, Huaheine,and Raiataia. Tupia related, that in the time of hisgrandfather a friendly ship had called at the last namedisland, and he also stated that a ship had been wrecked ona low island called Canna. These ships were, probably,those of admiral Roggewein's squadron, and Canna mayhave been the Schadelyk, or Pernicious Island of that navigator.At Huaheine, Cook contracted a friendship withOree, the old chief of the island, from whom he experiencedunreal ting kindness, and to whom, at hisdeparture,he gave, along with some valuable presents, a small bagcontaining coins and medals, and a pewter plate with aninscription, as a memorial of his visit to this part of theworld. These gifts the old chief promised to keep insafety. The people of Borabora had invaded some ofthe islands in the neighbourhood, and with such successthat they were looked upon as invincible, and werebecome objects of dread to the simple islanders. Tupiawas anxious that the English should terrify those haughtyconquerors, and exhibit their superiority by firing greatguns at Borabora ; and at length, to calm his importunity,a ball was fired towards the island when the shipd 338 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERT.Was at least seven leagues distant from shore. To thegroup of islands, which lieutenant Cook now quitted, hegave the collective name of the Society Islands.After sailing four days to the west and south-west, anisland was discovered to which Tupia gave the name ofOheteroa. The natives crowded on the shore to resistthe landing of the strangers: they were a handsomevigorous people, and seemed far to excel the natives ofthe Society Islands in the beauty of their dress. Thecloth was dyed in various patterns, and of several colours,though bright yellow seemed to predominate. Theirrobes being collected round their waist by a belt of redcloth, gave them a gay and warlike appearance. Somehad caps made of the feathers of the tropic bird, whileothers wore small turbans of a very elegant appearance.Their canoes were well constructed ; and, as well as thejavelins, were carved in a manner highly creditable totheir taste and ingenuity. But no anchorage could befound near the island ; and as the natives seemed bent onhostility, our navigators gave up all thoughts of cultivatingan acquaintance with them, and pursued theirvoyage.On the 15th of August they sailed from Oheteroa,and in the beginning of October perceived, in the colourof the sea, in the weeds with which it was covered, andthe birds which flew around them, unequivocal signs ofthe proximity of land. At length, on the 6th of thatmonth, land was distinctly seen stretching to a greatextent in the horizon ; several ranges of hills were distinguishedrising one above another, and a chain ofmountains of an enormous height terminated the picturein the rear. The general opinion was, that they haddiscovered the Terra Australis Incognita, but it wassoon perceived that this must be a part of New Zealandor Staaten Land, discovered by Abel Tasman in 1642.A party who went on shore in order to open an intercoursewith the natives met with no success. Theywere fierce, and obstinately hostile ; but it was discovered,to the surprise and pleasure of our navigators,cook's first voyage. 39that when Tupia spoke to them in his native language,he was perfectly understood. In a quarrel which ensued,one of them was killed, and his dress appeared,on examination, to correspond exactly with the drawingappended to Tasman's voyage. As it was found impossibleto commence an amicable correspondence with themby gentle means, it was determined to resort to force,and, according to the method followed by the first Spanishnavigators, to capture the Indians first, in order tohave an opportunity of treating them with kindness.This plan of proceeding can hardly be justified uponprinciples of reason or morality, and it has never beenattended with such unequivocal success as to palliate itsdemerits. Two canoes were seen entering the bay, andthe ship's boats proceeded immediately to interceptthem : m one, the natives escaped by paddling ; butthose in the other, which was a sailing canoe, finding itimpossible to get off, boldly prepared for battle. Ofseven Indians who were in the canoe, four were killedon the first discharge of musketry, and the other three,who were all young, immediately jumped overboard,and attempted to save themselves by swimming : theywere, however, overtaken and picked up by the boat,though not without some difficulty. They expected tobe put to death at once ; but as the studious kindnesswith which they were treated soon convinced them oftheir error, their consternation gave way to transports ofjoy. They conversed freely with Tupia; and afterhaving been kept a day on board the ship, were againsent ashore.The account which the boys gave to their countrymenof their treatment on board the ship led to a correspondence,which did not, however, bear the appearance ofconfirmed friendship. The New Zealanders still maintaineda fierce and independent carriage, and acted solittle in concert, that the behaviour of different individualswas often of a totally opposite character : buttheir distrust could not be generally overcome, nor anintercourse established which was likely to prove safed 440 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERT.and advantageous. An attempt was made by them tocarry off Tayeto, Tupia's boy, and they nearly succeeded; but guns being fired at the canoe as it paddledoff, the natives, in a moment of fear, let go their hold,and the boy leaped into the water. The New Zealandersmade great exertions to secure their prize, but theships' boats finally succeeded in picking up the youth,whose terror at the violent conduct of these savages wasincreased by the conviction which our navigators hadobtained, that they were cannibals, and even that theyregarded human flesh as a dainty.This bay, in which no provisions could be procured,was named Poverty Bay; and our voyagers, on leavingit, proceeded along the coast towards the north. Theygave the name of Mercury Bay to the inlet in whichthey anchored while observing a transit of that planetover the sun. They were surprised to find that thenatives, notwithstanding their ferocity, were not unacquaintedwith the art of cultivating the ground. Theyhad gardens, in which they reared gourds and severalkinds of fruits. A decked canoe also was found on thisshore, which indicated their proficiency in maritimeaffairs. Their heppahs or hamlets were forts neatlyconstructed on elevated situations, defended by lines andtrenches, and accessible only by a steep and narrow entrance.They had no knowledge of iron when ourvoyagers first touched here, although iron sand wasfound in the beds of several streams. The women werethickly painted with oil and red ochre, and the menwere tattooed after the usual fashion of the South Seas.They were strong and active, not deficient in intelligence,or in sentiments of generosity, notwithstanding thecruelty of disposition engendered by their habits of continualwarfare. Tupia conversed much with theirpriests ; and from the superiority of his knowledge andthe variety of his superstitious lore, he was regarded bythem with peculiar respect and veneration.In prosecuting his examination of the coast towardsthe north, Cook entered a deep inlet terminating in a-cook's first voyage. 41large river, which he explored to the distance of fourteenmiles : from the magnitude of this river, and the generalappearance of the country round it, he named it theThames. The timber which grew here was of enormoussize, trees being seen nearly twenty feet in girth six feetfrom the ground, and above eighty feet in height to thebranches. 'Having finished the examination of the north-westernshore of New Zealand, Cook experienced such r severegales, though it was now midsummer in these latitudes,that in five weeks he did not advance above fifty leaguesin his course along the western shore. He at lengthreached a secure and capacious harbour, which henamed Queen Charlotte's Sound. The country was heretaken possession of, and the sound carefully surveyed.Wood, water, and fish, were in the greatest abundance,the natives friendly, and plants of an antiscorbuticquality were gathered on the shore, which soon restoredthe crew to perfect health. Here our voyagers were particularlystruck with the exquisite warbling of the birds,which, like our nightingales, sing only during the night.On ascending a height in the neighbourhood of thesound, Cook was surprised on descrying the sea to thesouth-east, and thus found that the land, the continuityof which he had not before suspected, was divided by astrait. Passing through this strait, to which geographershave unanimously given the name of its discoverer,he directed his course towards the north till he arrivednear the point where his examination of this countryhad commenced. He then resumed his course to thesouth-east, and followed the coast of the southernmost ofthe two islands comprised under the name of New Zealand,returning again from the south to Queen Charlotte'sSound. The southern island, or, as the natives call it,Tavai Poenammoo, is a rugged country, with mountainsof prodigious height, and covered with snow the greaterpart of the year. The inhabitants also, though not morefierce, are ruder than their northern neighbours. Theydiffer likewise in dialect from the inhabitants of Eahei*42 MODERN Voyages OF DISCOVERY.nomadic, as the northern island is called, where, as theclimate is more genial and the soil more luxuriant, thepopulation is considerably greater, and the arts as well asthe institutions of rude society much more advanced.Of the natives of New Zealand, Cook entertained ahighly favourable opinion, notwithstanding their cannibalism,of which he saw numerous incontestible proofs.He could not collect from them any tradition respectingthe arrival of Tasman on their shores ; but they heardof a country called Ulimaroa, situated N. W. by W. }where the people eat hogs, and whence some canoesseemed to have accidentally arrived in their country.The circumnavigation of New Zealand was the firstgrand discovery of Cook. When Tasman touched Onthat country, he imagined it to be a part of the greatTerra Australis, or continent supposed to extend to thesouth pole. Our navigator was satisfied with havingdisproved this supposition ; and as the lateness of theseason would not permit him to continue his researchesin higher latitudes, he determined to direct his course tothe eastern coast of New Holland, respecting which thelearned world was still in total ignorance.He took leave of New Zealand on the 31st of March,1770, and in twenty days discovered the coast of NewHolland at no great distance from the point where thesurvey of Tasman had terminated. In proceeding tothe north, an inlet was entered, in which the ship rodesecurely for some days. Inhabitants were seen, but, fromtheir shyness and timidity, they could not be inducedto approach the strangers : they seemed to be sunk inthat brutal condition which is insensible even to thepromptings of curiosity. From the variety of new plantscollected here by the naturalists of the expedition, thisinlet received the name of Botany Bay. No rivers werediscovered by Cook in his voyage along this coast, whichhas since been found abundantly supplied with finestreams. The natives, wherever they were seen, manifestedthe same repugnance to the strangers, and thecame indifference to the trinkets presented to them.cook's first voyage. 43Towards the north, the country grew more hilly, andthe navigation of the coast became more dangerous andintricate.No accident had yet occurred in a voyage of 2000miles along a coast hitherto unexplored ; but in lat.16° S. a high headland being in sight, which from thecircumstance was afterwards named Cape Tribulation,the ship during the night struck on some coral rockswith so much force that there seemed imminent dangerof her going to pieces. The planks which formed hersheathing were seen floating off", and the water rushed inwith such impetuosity, that, though all the pumps weremanned, the leak could hardly be kept under. As daybroke, land was descried eight leagues distant, withoutan island between, to which the boats might convey thecrew in case of the ship's foundering. The guns andall the stores that could be spared were thrown overboard,and preparations were made to heave the ship off therocks, although it was thought probable that she wouldsink soon after. On the following night, however, shewas got afloat, and, to the surprise of all, it was foundthat the leakage did not increase. By constant exertionand cool perseverance, the ship was navigated to a smallharbour opportunely discovered on the coast, and theonly harbour, indeed, seen by our people during the wholevoyage, which could have afforded them the same relief.On examining the injury done to the vessel, it was foundthat a large piece of the coral rock, having forced its waythrough the timbers, had remained fixed in the aperture;and but for this providential circumstance the ship musthave sunk the moment she was got off the reef.The cove in which our navigators found shelter issituated at the mouth of a small stream, to which wasgiven the name of the Endeavour River. Here the nativesappeared rather more familiar ; but they set littlevalue on any thing offered to them, except food. "Whensome turtle, which they coveted, was refused them,they avenged the affront by setting fire to the long grassnear the tents j an action which had nearly been attended44 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY.with disagreeable consequences. Mr. Banks and Dr.Solander found here abundance of employment ; almostevery thing connected with the animal and vegetablekingdoms being absolutely new. Our naturalists wereparticularly pleased with the animal called by the nativeskangaroo; they saw several at a distance, but a longtimeelapsed before they could succeed in shooting one.The ship being repaired, our voyagers left the harbour,and, after much patient labour and anxiety, at lengthgained the deep sea, having been three months entangledwithin the reefs. They now prosecuted theirvoyage to the north, nattering themselves that the dangerwas gone by, when the wind abated, and the ship wasfound to be drifting fast towards the reefs which linedthis coast nearly in its whole extent, and on which thegreat waves of the Southern Ocean break with a tremendoussurf. Her destruction seemed inevitable, when anarrow channel through the reefs was descried at no greatdistance; and although the attempt was attended withgreat risk, yet the ship was steered to run through it.Having thus entered from necessity a second timewithin the reef, Cook resolved to persevere through alldifficulties in following the coast, lest he might lose thestrait that separates New Holland from New Guinea;if," as he doubtfully expresses it, " such a strait therebe." He at length reached a point of land from whichhe could discern an open sea to the south-west, and wasthus convinced that he had found the strait in question.He then landed, and in the name of his sovereign tookpossession of the immense line of coast that he had discovered,and to which he gave the name of New SouthWales. The little island on which the ceremony wasperformed received the name of Possession IslandThe crew of the Endeavour had suffered so muchfrom sickness and fatigue, that it was not deemed advisableto prolong the voyage by an examination of thecoasts of New Guinea. Our navigator, therefore, heldhis course for Batavia, where he wished to refit hisvessel : but the noxious climate of this place proved morecook's second voyage. 45fatal to the men than all their preceding hardships;scarcely ten remained in a condition to do duty. Tupiaand his poor boy Tayeto, who had been afflicted withthe scurvy during the whole voyage, were among thefirst victims to the pestilential air of Batavia. The seedsof illness lingered in the ship long after she had left theplace; and before her arrival at the Cape she had lost noless than thirty persons, among whom were Mr. Greenthe astronomer, Dr. Solander, and the surgeon ; the lifeof Mr. Banks also was for some time despaired of. Onthe 10th of June, land, which proved to be the Lizard,was discovered by the same boy who had first seen NewZealand; and on the 12th, Cook came to an anchor inthe Downs, having been employed two years and elevenmonths in his voyage round the earth.CHAP. IV.cook's second voyage.QUESTION" OF A SOUTHERN CONTINENT STILL UNSETTLED. SECONDEXPEDITION UNDER THE COMMAND OF COOK. CAPE Circumcision.ICE FOUND TOWARDS THE SOUTH. AURORAAUSTRALIS. ARRIVAL AT NEW ZEALAND. COURSE OF THEADVENTURE. VAN DIEMEN's LAND. USEFUL ANIMALS LEFTIN NEW ZEALAND. VOYAGE ACROSS THE SOUTHERN PACIFIC.DRAMATIC PERFORMANCES IN OTAHEITE. OMAI AND OEDI-DEE EMBARK IN THE SHIPS. AMSTERDAM AND MagdeburgISLANDS. THEIR CULTIVATION. PROOFS OF CANNIBALISMAT NEW ZEALAND. VOYAGE ACROSS THE ANTARCTIC SEAS.LAND OF JUAN Hernandez. EASTER ISLAND. DESCRIPTIONOF THE IMAGES. THE MARQUESAS. BEAUTY OF THE PEOPLE.OTAHEITE. TRADE IN RED FEATHERS. GREAT NAVALREVIEW. FRIENDLY ISLANDS REVISITED. EXTENT OF THEGROUP. THE NEW HEBRIDES EXAMINED. NEW CALEDONIADISCOVERED. NORFOLK ISLAND. VOYAGE FROM NEW ZealandTO CAPE HORN. THE SOUTHERN THULE OR SANDWICHLAND. ARRIVAL OF COOK IN ENGLAND. LAMENTABLEOCCURRENCE IN QUEEN CHARLOTTE'S SOUND.The first important discovery made by Cook waseffected by the circumnavigation of New Zealand.46 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY.When Tasman described that country, he supposed itto be a part of the great Terra Australis Incognita,extending probably across the southern Pacific Ocean ;but Cook's voyage at once overturned this theory. Anopinion, however, which has long existed, cannot be atonce dispelled, although utterly groundless, and manystill continued to believe in the existence of a southerncontinent, although Cook's discoveries had cut off theconnection between their theory and the facts whichhitherto had been adduced in its support : but to set thequestion of a southern continent completely at rest,another expedition was necessary, and the English government,having now made the advancement of sciencethe object of national exertions, resolved to continue theirlaudable researches. The king was partial to the scheme;and the earl of Sandwich, who was at the head of theadmiralty, possessed a mind sufficiently liberal and comprehensiveto second effectively the wishes of his sovereign.Captain Cook was named at once as the fittest personto command the new expedition. Two ships, the Resolutionand the Adventure, the former of 462 the latterof 336 tons burden, were fitted out for the voyage ; and,that no opportunities might be lost to science from thewant of persons capable of observing nature under everyaspect, astronomers and naturalists of eminent abilitywere engaged to accompany the expedition; Messrs.Wales and Bailey proceeding in the former, ReinholdForster and his son in the latter capacity. The shipswere amply stored and provided for a long and difficultVoyage, particularly with antiscorbutics, and whateverwas thought likely to preserve the health of the crews.Cook sailed from Plymouth on the 13th of July,1 772, on his second voyage of discovery. On his arrivalat the Cape of Good Hope, he was induced, by theentreaties of Mr.Forster, to allow the celebrated naturalistSpartan to join the expedition. He now directedhis course to the south, in search of the land said tohave been discovered by the French navigator Bouvet,cook's second voyage. 47but violent gales drove him far to the east of the meridianin which it was supposed to lie. After long strugglingwith adverse winds, he at length reached the samemeridian, some leagues to the south of the latitude assignedto Cape Circumcision. Having thus proved thatthe land said to have been seen by Bouvet, if it existedat all, was certainly no part of a southern continent, hecontinued his course to the south and east.On the 10th of December our navigators first metwith islands of ice, and on the following days theseoccurred in greater numbers and of larger size : someof them were nearly two miles in circuit, and sixty feethigh ; yet such was the force of the waves, that the seabroke quite over them. This was at first view a gratifyingspectacle, but the sentiment of pleasure was soonswallowed up in the horror which seized on the mindfrom the contemplation of danger; for a ship approachingthese islands on the weather side would be dashed topieces in a moment. Amidst the obstructions to whichour navigators were exposed from the ice islands continuallysucceeding one another, they derived the advantageof having an abundant supply of fresh water ; largemasses of ice were carried off, and stowed on deck, andthe water produced from its melting was found perfectlysweet and well tasted.On the 17th of January, 1773, our navigators hadreached the latitude of 67° 15' S., and they saw the iceextending from east to west south-west, without theleast appearance of an opening. It was vain, therefore,to persist any longer in a southerly course ; and as therewas some danger of being surrounded by the ice, prudencedictated a retreat to the north. On the 8th ofFebruary, the weather being extremely thick and hazy,it was found that the Adventure had parted company :the rendezvous appointed in case of this accident wasQueen Charlotte's Sound, in New Zealand; and thitherCook directed his course. In the latitude of 62° S., onthe 17th of the same month, between midnight and48 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.three o'clock in the morning, lights were seen in theheavens, similar to those that are known in the northernhemisphere by the name of the Aurora Borealis. CaptainCook had never heard that the Aurora Australis hadbeen seen before, but the same phenomenon was witnessedrepeatedly in the sequel of this voyage. Duringhis run to the eastward in this high latitude, he hadample reason to conclude that no land lay to the south,unless at a very great distance. At length, after havingbeen 117 days at sea, during which time he had sailed36*60 leagues without having come once within sight ofland, he saw the shores of New Zealand on the 25thof March, and on the following day came to an anchorin Dusky Bay. Notwithstanding the length and hardshipsof his voyage, there was no sickness in the ship ;the attention which he paid to the health of the men,by enforcing cleanliness, by keeping the vessel dry andwell ventilated, and by the judicious use of antiscorbuticdiet, being^attended with complete success. Having surveyedDusky Bay, he proceeded to Queen Charlotte'sSound, where captain Furneaux had arrived before him.The Adventure, after parting company with the Resolution,had followed a more northerly course, andtraced the coasts of Van Diemen's Land along thesouthern and eastern shores. Captain Furneaux reported," that in his opinion there are no straits betweenthis land and New Holland, but a very deep bay."Cook had intended to investigate this point, but, consideringit to be now settled by the judgment of hiscolleague, he resolved to prosecute his researches to theeast, between the latitudes of 41° and 46°. But before heleft Queen Charlotte's Sound he succeeded in establishinga friendly and mutually advantageous intercoursewith the natives. He endeavoured to give them substantialproofs of his kind intentions, by making anaddition to their stock of useful animals. He put onshore a ewe and ram, and also two goats, a male andfemale. A garden also was dug, and a variety of seedscook's second voyage. 49of culinary vegetables, adapted to the climate, were sownin it.Although it was the winter season, Cook determinednot to lose his time in utter inactivity. His ships beingsound, and his crews healthy, he thought that he mightsafely proceed to examine the Southern Ocean within thelatitude of 46° ; and then, refreshing at some of the islandsbetween the tropics, return in the summer seasonto carry his researches to a higher latitude. His voyagefrom New Zealand towards the east was not productiveof any interesting discoveries, nor diversified by any butthe ordinary details of navigation. He felt convinced,from the great sea that rolled from the south, that noland of any extent could lie near him in that direction.When he had advanced so far as to find himself to thenorth of Carteret's track, he could no longer entertainany hope of finding a continent ; and this circumstance,with the' sickly state of the Adventure's crew, inducedhim to direct his course to the Society Islands. Duringthis part of his voyage, he saw a number of those smalllow islands which compose the Dangerous Archipelagoof Bougainville.The ships narrowly escaped destruction by drifting onthe coral reefs at Otaheite : they were saved only by thepromptness of their commander and the unremittingexertions of the crew. On the 24th of August theyanchored in their old station in Matavai Bay. The menonboard the Resolution were at this time in perfecthealth ; but the crew of the Adventure, on the otherhand, suffered dreadfully from the scurvy, though thetwo ships were equipped alike, and the same precautionarysystem to preserve the health of the men wasprescribed to both ; but zeal on the part of the officerswas requisite to give efficacy to the orders, andtheir example was necessary to encourage the men tosacrifice old habits in order to preserve their constitutions.During this visit to Otaheite, our navigators obtained amore intimate acquaintance with the manners and chasMODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.ranter of the natives. Of their religious doctrines theywere unable to acquire a distinct knowledge : but theyascertained that human victims were often sacrificed totheir gods. They also witnessed the Heaves or dramaticrepresentations of the people, and found them notdevoid of archness and ingenuity. The performancewas generally extemporaneous, founded upon some incidentspresented at the moment, and in which our navigatorsusually made a prominent figure. Otoo, thepresent king of Otaheite, a man of fine figure but ofremarkably timid disposition, contracted an intimatefriendship with captain Cook. Oberea, who, when theisland was first visited by captain Wallis, was so conspicuousa character, was now reduced to an humblestation, and had declined as much in personal appearanceas in rank. It is remarkable that few enquirieswere made after Tupia, who had accompanied Cook inhis former voyage, or after Aootooroo, the native ofOtaheite who had accompanied Bougainville to Europe ;but, though the islanders were neglectful of their owncountrymen, they were uniformly solicitous in enquiringafter Mr. Banks.On leaving Otaheite, Cook visited the other islands ofthe group, where he found provisions in greater abundance.Oree, the chief of Huaheine, evinced towardshim the most affectionate regard. Omar, a native ofUlietea, being desirous to accompany the English, wasadmitted by captain Furneaux on board the Adventure :he was not of the higher class, and, consequently, not afavourable specimen of these islanders as far as regardedperson and deportment ; but his docility and generalpropriety of conduct eventually justified the choice ofcaptain Furneaux. A young native of Borabora, namedHete-Hete or Oedidee (as our great navigator namedhim), was at the same time allowed by captain Cook toembark in the Resolution.On quitting the Society Islands, Cook directed hiscourse to the west, where he had reason to believe, fromthe accounts of the natives, that much yet remained toCHAP. IV. COOK'S SECOND VOYAGE. 51be explored. At the island named Middleburg byItoggewein, be was well treated by a chief called Thorny:at Amsterdam Island his reception was equally favourable.The language of these islanders differed but littlefrom that of Otaheite, and they were evidently of thesame race. Some of our navigators thought them muchhandsomer ; but others, and among these Cook himself,were of a different opinion. The men were grave andstately ; but the women, on the contrary, were remarkablyvivacious, and prattled unceasingly to the strangers,regardless of the mortifying fact that the latter couldnot understand them. But these people were chieflydistinguished from the natives of the Society Islands bytheir superior industry. On the Island of Amsterdamcaptain Cook was struck with admiration; when he surveyedthe cultivation and the beauty of the scene, hethought himself transported into the most fertile plainsof Europe: there was not an inch of waste ground. Theroads or paths occupied no more since than was absolutelynecessary, and the fences did not take up abovefour inches each ; nor was this small portion of groundwholly lost, for the fences themselves contained ingeneral useful trees or plants. The scene was everywherethe same ; and nature, assisted by a little art,no where assumed a more splendid appearance than inthese islands.Cook now directed his course again to New Zealand ;but, on approaching that country, the ships had to encountera succession of severe gales and continued badweather, during which the Adventure was again lostsight of and never afterwards rejoined. On the 3d ofNovember the Resolution anchored in Queen Charlotte'sSound. The winter had been spent not unprofitably inrevictualling the ships, restoring the health of the crews,and obtaining a more accurate knowledge of the islandsbetween the tropics. And now, as summer approached,it was Cook's intention to run from New Zealand, wherewood and water were to be procured in abundance, andto explore the high southern latitudes from west to east,e 252 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.in which course he might reckon upon having the windsand currents in his favour. While the Resolution layin Queen Charlotte's Sound, indubitable proofs presentedthemselves that cannibalism was common among thenatives : one of them who carried some human flesh inhis canoe, was allowed to broil and eat it on board theResolution, in order to satisfy the doubts of some of theofficers. Oedidee, who witnessed all this, was shockedbeyond measure at the spectacle : at first he stood motionlessas a statue, but his horror at length gave wayto rage, which vented itself not only on the New Zealander,but on the officers who had encouraged him ;and he could not be induced even to touch the knifewhich had been employed to cut the human flesh.On the 26th of November, Cook sailed to prosecutehis examination of the antarctic seas. His crew werein good health and high spirits, not at all dejected bythe arduous task which was before them. In a few daysthey crossed the antipodes of London, and were thus onthe point of the globe which was most distant from theirhome. The first ice island was seen on the 12th ofDecember ; and, on the 30th of that month, our navigatorshad reached the 71st degree of southern latitude:but here the ice was so compact that it was impossibleto proceed any farther towards the south ; and it wasalso obvious that no continent existed in that directionbut what must be inaccessible from the ice. It wasCook's intention to winter again within the tropic ; butinproceeding thither, he wished to satisfy himself as tothe southern land said to have been discovered by JuanFernandez. He sailed sufficiently near the position assignedto that supposed continent to assure himself thatit could not have been any thing more than an island ofmoderate size. He now directed his course in search ofDavis's Land or Easter Island, which had been soughtin vain by Byron, Carteret, and Bougainville : Cook,however, succeeded better, and made the island on the11th of March, 1774. The natives were found to speaka language radically the same with that of Otaheite, andCHAP. IV. COOK'S SECOND VOYAGE. 53which thus reaches across the Pacific Ocean from NewZealand to the sequestered islands in the East. EasterIsland was found to be remarkably barren, ill suppliedwith water, and wholly without wood. But the attentionof the English was forcibly attracted by the greatstatues seen on the island by Roggewein. About fifteenyards from the landing place was found a perpendicularwall of square hewn stones, about eight feet in height,and nearly sixty in length ; another wall parallel to thefirst, and about forty feet distant from it, was raised tothe same height ; the whole area between the walls wasfilled up and paved with square stones of blackish lava.The stones of the walls were so carefully fitted as tomake a durable piece of architecture. In the midst ofthe area was a pillar consisting of a single stone, abouttwenty feet high and about five feet wide, representingthe human figure down to the waist. The workmanshipwas rude but not bad ; nor were the features of the faceill formed, but the ears were long beyond proportion.On the top of the head was placed upright a huge roundcylinder of stone, above five feet in height and in diameter; this cap, which resembled the head-dress of anEgyptian divinity, was formed of a kind of stone differentfrom that which composed the rest of the pillar,and had a hole on each side, as if it had been maderound by turning. It appeared as difficult to explainhow the natives of this island, who were but few innumber, could carve such huge statues with no bettertools than those made of bones or shells, or how theyraised them on their pedestals when finished, as to divinefor what purpose they undertook such giganticlabours ; for it did not appear that the statues were objectsof worship ; yet on the eastern side of the islandthey were numerous enough to employ the male populationof the island for many centuries in their construction.The skill of this people in carving was still moremanifest in the ornaments of their canoes, and in smallwooden figures, of which the English brought homemany curious specimens.e 3 !5-t MODERN' VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. ROOK V.From Easter Island Cook directed his course to theMarquesas, discovered by Mendana in 1595; and on the6th of April he got sight of one island of the groupwhich was, however, a new discovery, and received, fromthe gentleman who first descried it, the name of Hood'sIsland. The other islands seen by Mendana, St. Pedro,Dominica, and St. Christiana, were afterwards discoveredin succession. The ship with much difficulty anchoredin Mendana's Port in the last mentioned island. Magdalena,the fifth island of the group, was seen only at adistance. Of the inhabitants of these islands captainCook tells us, that collectively they are without exceptionthe finest race of people in this sea ; for fine shape andregular features they perhaps surpass all other nations.Nevertheless the affinity of their language to that spokenin Otaheite and the Society Islands shows that they areoriginally of the same nation. Oedidee could conversewith them tolerably well, though the English could not,and it was obvious that their languages were nearly thesame. In their manners and arts the people resembledthe natives of Otaheite, but appeared to be rather less ingeniousand refined. Forts, or strong holds, were seenon the summits of the highest hills; but they were notvisited by the English, who had not become sufficientlyacquainted with the natives to venture into the interior.Cook, having rediscovered the Marquesas of Mendana,proceeded to Otaheite, and passing by a group, to whichhe gave the name of Palliser's Islands, and some otherswhich had been seen by Byron, he anchored in MatavaiBay on the 22d of April. At this time there wereno sick on board ; but as the island seemed to aboundwith provisions, our navigator was willing to prolong hisstay here. His original stock in trade was, indeed, nowexhausted ; but he found that the people of Otaheite setagreat value on the red parrot feathers, of which hehad brought a considerable supply from Amsterdam andMiddleburg Islands. He thus accidentally learned an advantageousand easy course of traffic in the South Sea.Among other entertainments with which our navigateIV. COOK'S SECOND VOYAGE. 55tors were treated during this visit to Otaheite was a grandnaval review. The vessels of war consisted of 160 greatcanoes, from fifty to ninety feet in length ; they weredecorated with flags and streamers ; and the chiefs, togetherwith all those who were on the fighting stages,were dressed in their war habits. The whole fleet madea noble appearance, such as our voyagers had neverbefore seen, and could not have expected in this part ofthe world. Besides the vessels of war, there were 170sail of smaller double canoes, which seemed to be designedfor transports and victuallers. Upon each ofthem was a small house or shed ; and they were riggedwith a mast and sail, which was not the case with thewar canoes. Captain Cook estimated, at a moderatecomputation, that there could not be less than 7,7^0men in the fleet ; but the immense number of nativesassembled as spectators astonished the English more thanthe splendour of the armament, and they were still farthersurprised to learn that this fleet was the naval force ofonly one of the twenty districts into which the island isdivided. On these equivocal grounds they were led toform an extremely exaggerated calculation of the populationof Otaheite, which they estimated to be at least200,000 souls; a number exceeding the truth, perhaps,in the proportion of ten to one.From Otaheite our navigators proceeded to visit theSociety Islands, at Huaheine. Cook was affectionatelyreceived by the old chief Oree, who still carefully preservedthe medals, coins, and pewter plate with an inscriptioncommemorating the voyage, which our commanderhad given him on his former visit. Oedidee,who for seven months had been the faithful companionof our voyagers, and had made with them the tour ofthe Pacific, was put on shore at Ulietea. He left theEnglish with regret demonstrative of a strong attachmentto them ; and nothing could have torn him from thembut the fear of never returning to his native country.He was a fine young man, of a docile and humane disposition,and of the better class of natives, being nearlye 4&6 MODERN VOYAGES OF Discovery BOOK V.related to Opoony, the formidable chief of Borabora.But from his inexperience and imperfect acquaintancewith the traditionary knowledge of his countrymen, butlittle could be learned from him respecting their history.Cook again directed his course to the west, and repeatedhis visit to the Friendly Islands. This name hegave to a group extending through about 3 degrees of latitudeand 2 degrees of longitude, and comprising Ana-moola,which Tasman, who first discovered it, namedRotterdam, Tonga-taboo or Amsterdam, Eaoowee or Middleburg,and Pylstart Islands. But this appellation, towhich these islands were entitled by the firm alliance andfriendship which seemed to exist among their inhabitants,and their courteous behaviour to strangers, mightperhaps be extended much farther, so as to include theBoscawen and Keppel Isles discovered by Captain Wallis,and inhabited by people of the same friendly manners.Pursuing their course to the west, our navigatorsdiscovered, on the l6'th of July, land, which was justlyconjectured to be the Terra Australis del Spirit Santoof Quiros. After exploring the coast for a few days,Cook came to an anchor in a harbour in the island ofMallicolo. The inhabitants of this island were themost ugly and deformed race which our navigators hadyet seen, and differed in every respect from the other inhabitantsof the Southern Ocean : they were dark coloured,of small stature, with long heads, flat faces, andcountenances resembling that of a monkey. Their language,also, was found not to have any discoverableaffinity with that prevailing through the islands withwhich the English had any acquaintance. This peoplediffered, likewise, from the great Polynesian race notmore by their language and figure than by their scrupuloushonesty. As our navigators proceeded towards thesouth from Mallicolo, they passed by a group whichCook named Shepherd's Isles. Farther to the south wasdiscovered a large island agreeably diversified with woodsand lawns over the whole surface, and exhibiting a mostbeautiful and delightful prospect. This our navigatorchap. iv. cook's second voyage. 57named Sandwich Island in compliment to his friend andpatron the earl of Sandwich. Still farther to the southwas seen another large island, called by the natives Er-romano,which he coasted for three days, and thencame to an anchor in the intention of procuring asupply of wood and water. This, however, could notbe effected without a violent conflict with the natives,who were both fierce and treacherous. It was observedthat they differed from the inhabitants of Mallicolo bothin language and physical conformation ; they were wellshaped and had tolerable features, but dark coloured,and with hair crisp and somewhat woolly. From thisplace Cook sailed for an island which had been descriedsome time before at a distance. He found that it wascalled Tanna by the inhabitants, from whom also helearned the names of three other islands in its neighbourhood,Simmer, Erronan, and Anton. Two languageswere found to be spoken in Tanna ; one of them,which was said to have been introduced from Erronan,was nearly the same with that of the Friendly Islands.The other, which our navigators considered peculiar toTanna, Erromango, and Anton, was different from anythey had hitherto met with in the course of their researches.The people at Tanna were well proportioned,but not robust. They had good features and agreeablecountenances. Though active, and fond of martial ex-<excises, they seemed incapable of patient labour. Itappeared that they practised circumcision, and that theywere eaters of human flesh ; though, as their islandabounded with hogs and fowls, and a variety of fruits,they could not be driven by necessity to adopt thishorrid practice.Captain Cook devoted above a month to the surveyof this archipelago, with which previous navigators hadmade but a superficial acquaintance. The northernislands were discovered, in l606", by Quiros, who supposedthem to be portions of the great southern continent.Bougainville, in 17 68, dispelled this idea,though he did not proceed to examine the islands near-58 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.which he sailed ; but captain Cook, besides ascertainingthe extent and situation of the islands already known,explored the whole group; and, conceiving that in consequencehe had a right to name them, bestowed onthem the appellation of the New Hebrides.The season was now approaching, when it would benecessary to resume his researches in a high southernlatitude, and he hastened therefore to New Zealand, wherehe intended to refresh his people and prepare for a navigationof considerable length. He sailed from the NewHebrides on the 1st of September, and on the 4th discoveredland, near which the Resolution came to anchorthe next day. The inhabitants were a strong, active,and handsome race, bearing some resemblance to thepeople of Tanna, and those of the Friendly Isles. Thesame mixed character was observed in their language :they had never seen Europeans before, but were friendlyand obliging in their behaviour; and, what is still moreremarkable in the South Seas, strictly honest in all theirdealings. To this island captain Cook gave the nameof New Caledonia : and though compelled by necessityto leave it before it was fully surveyed, he had neverthelessexamined it sufficiently to prove, that, exceptingNew Zealand, it is perhaps the largest island in the SouthPacific Ocean. As the Resolution pursued her coursefrom New Caledonia, land was discovered, which, on anearer approach, was found to be an island of goodheight, and about five leagues in circuit. It was uninhabited,and probably our English navigators were thefirst persons who had ever set foot on it. In its vegetableproductions it bore a close resemblance to NewZealand : the flax plant of that country was here particularlyluxuriant ; but the chief produce of the islandwas a majestic species of pine, of such a size that, breasthigh, two men could scarcely clasp the trunk. This littlespot was named Norfolk Island. Its fine woods andfertile soil allured, some years later, a party of Britishsettlers ; who finally abandoned it, however, from the inaccessiblenature of its coast.CHAP. IV. COOk's SECOND VOYAGE. 5QOn the 1 8th of October the Resolution came to anchorin Queen Charlotte's Sound. This was the third timeof touching at New Zealand during this voyage. Onsearching for the bottle which Cook had left behind onhis last visit containing the particulars of his arrival,it was found to have been taken away ; and from othercircumstances it was evident that the Adventure hadvisited the harbour after the Resolution had left it.While the Resolution remained here, the intercoursemaintained with the natives was of the most friendlydescription; captain Cook continued his efforts to stockthe island with useful animals, and for that purposeordered a boar and sow to be put on shore.On the 10th of November he left New Zealand topursue his voyage to the east. Towards the close ofthat month, he had reached the latitude of 55° 48' S.,when, deeming it useless to search any longer for a continentin that direction, he bore away for Cape Horn ;and, on the 17th of December, had sight of Tierra delFuego. This is the first instance of a run quite across theSouthern Pacific. It now only remained for our navigatorto cross also the Southern Atlantic to the pointwhence he had commenced his explorations. Havingcompleted his examination of Tierra del Fuego andStaaten Land, he proceeded towards the east ; and, aftera voyage of ten days, land was seen at a distance, nearlycovered with snow. On approaching the shore, it wasfound to be terminated in many places by perpendicularice cliffs of considerable height. Pieces continually brokeoff with a noise like the report of cannon, and floatedout to sea. The general aspect of the country was savageand horrid in the extreme. The wild rocks raised theirlofty summits till they were lost in the clouds, and thevalleys lay covered with everlasting snow. Our navigator,who at first view of this land supposed that itmight be a continent, confesses that he was not muchdisappointed on discovering his error ; " for to judge ofthe bulk by the sample it would not be worth discovering."In latitude 5Q°, and about 8° to the east of New Georgia,as this inhospitable shore was named, land was again60 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. ROOK V.seen, presenting an elevated coast, whose lofty snow-cladsummits reached above the clouds. To this bleak regionCook gave the name of the Southern Thule, as it wasthe most southern land which had yet been discovered ;but on leaving the coast he gave to the whole countrythe general appellation of Sandwich Land, which heconcluded to be either a group of islands or a point ofthe southern continent. But the great quantities of icewhich he met with led him to infer the existence of alarge tract of land near the south pole. He now sailedas far as the latitude assigned to Bouvet's supposed discovery; but no indications of land occurred, nor was itpossible to believe any longer in the existence of CapeCircumcision.Cook had now made a circuit of the Southern Oceanin a high latitude, and traversed it in such a manner asto demonstrate that no southern continent existed unlessnear the pole, and beyond the reach of navigation.During this circumnavigation of the globe, from thetime of his leaving the Cape of Good Hope, to his returnto it again, he had sailed no less than 20,000leagues. On the 13th of July, 1775, he landed atPortsmouth, having been absent from Great Britain threeyears and eighteen days; during which time, and underall changes of climate, he had lost but four men, andonly one of them by sickness.It has been related above, that captain Cook, on approachingNew Zealand for the second time in the courseof this voyage, lost sight of the Adventure, and neverjoined company with that ship again. Captain Fur-beauxwas long baffled by adverse winds in his attemptto reach Queen Charlotte's Sound, which was appointedthe rendezvous for the ships in case of separation. Atlength, on the 30th of November, the Adventure gotsafe into the desired port. The Resolution not beingthere, captain Furneaux and his company began to entertaindoubts of her safety ; but, on going ashore, theyobserved on an old stump of a tree these words cut out —Look underneath." They dug accordingly, and soonfound a bottle corked and waxed down, with a letter inCHAP. IV. COOK'S SECOND VOYAGE. 6lit from captain Cook, signifying his arrival on the 3d,and departure on the 24th. Great exertions were nowmade to get the Adventure ready for sea, and on the17th of December, the preparations being completed,Mr. Rowe, a midshipman, with nine men, were sent inthe large cutter to gather a stock of wild greens for theship's company. As the boat did not return the sameevening nor the next morning, and the ship was nowready for sea, Mr. Burney, the second lieutenant, proceededin search of her, in the launch, manned with theboat's crew and ten marines. The launch proceeded,firing guns into all the coves by way of signals, but notraces of the cutter were found till they reached GrassCove : here a great many baskets were seen lying onthe beach tied up ; when cut open, some of them werefound to be full of roasted flesh, and some of fernroot, which served the natives for bread. On furthersearch, some shoes were picked up, and a hand, whichwas immediately known to have belonged to ThomasHill, one of the forecastle men, the initials of his namebeing marked on it with an Otaheitan tattooing instrument.The natives were collected in considerable numbersround Grass Cove, shouting and inviting the Englishto land, but evidently with no friendly intentions.From their numbers, and the suspicion which their conductexcited in our people, Lieutenant Burney did notdeem it prudent to trust himself among them, but hepursued his examination far enough to obtain a melancholycertainty as to the fate of his unfortunate companions." On the beach," he says, " were two bundlesof celery, which had been gathered for loading the cutter;a broken oar was stuck upright in the ground, to whichthe natives had tied their canoes, a proof that the attackhad been made here. I then searched all along at theback of the beach to see if the cutter was there. Wefound no boat, but instead of her such a shocking sceneof carnage and barbarity as can never be mentioned northought of but with horror ; for the heads, hearts, andlungs of several of our people were seen lying on thebeach ; and, at a little distance, the dogs gnawing their6'2 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.entrails." The men who had thus fallen victims to thebarbarity of the natives were among the healthiest andbest of the ship's crew.The Adventure was "detained in the sound four daysafter this lamentable occurrence ; during which time nonatives were seen. On the 23d of December, however,she got to sea, and in lite more than a month reachedCape Horn, being favoured by a strong current runningto the east, and by westerly winds which blow continuallyin the summer season in the great ocean. Captain Fur-beauxcontinued his course eastward to the Cape of GoodHope, where he refitted his ship and refreshed his people.He then sailed for England, and anchored at Spitheadon the 14th of July, 1774.CHAP. V.cook's third voyage.VOYAGE OF Servile. HE DISCOVERS THE LAND OF THE AR-sides.HE VISITS NEW ZEALAND. DISCOVERIES OF LieutenantShorthand. VOYAGE OF MARION DU FRESNE.HE TOUCHES AT NEW ZEALAND. HIS LAMENTABLE DEATH.KERGUELEN DISCOVERS LAND IN THE SOUTHERN ATLANTIC.HIS RECEPTION AT COURT. HE SAILS A SECOND TIME. HISDISGRACE. HONOURS PAID TO COOK ON HIS RETURN. HOPESOF A NORTH-WEST PASSAGE REVIVED. EXPEDITION OF PHIPPSTO THE NORTH POLE. COOK APPOINTED A THIRD TIME TOCOMMAND AN EXPEDITION. HIS INSTRUCTIONS. REGRETOF OMAI ON LEAVING ENGLAND. THE LAND OF DESOLATION.VAN DIEMEN's LAND ERROR OF CAPTAIN FURNEAUX.LIVE STOCK LEFT IN QUEEN CHARLOTTE'S SOUND. MangerDISCOVERED. WATEEO. Oral's EXAGGERATIONS. ShipwreckedISLANDERS. VISIT TO THE FRIENDLY ISLANDS.GENEROSITY OF THE KING. EXTENT OF HIS DOMINION.ACCOUNTS OF THE NEIGHBOURING ISLANDS. HORSESLANDED AT OTAHEITE. — WONDER OF THE NATIVES. OMAISETTLED AT HUAHEINE. FURTHER ACCOUNTS OF HIM.In 1 7C9 some discoveries of importance were made inthe South Seas by a French mercantile adventurer.CHAP. V. COOK'S TniBD VOYAGE. 63Two ships were fitted out in Bengal by MM. Law andChevalier, for a trading voyage to Peru, and were placedunder the command of M. de Surville. While he waspreparing to embark, news arrived in India that theEnglish had discovered in the South Sea, 700 leaguesfrom Peru, and in lat. 27° S., an island exceedingly rich,and inhabited by JeWs. This story gained credit, beingcongenial to the avaricious cravings of mankind; andeven those who suspected fiction in the mention of Jewswere still willing to believe that the newly discoveredcountry was eminently rich. Surville, touching at theBashee Islands, carried off three of the natives to supplythe deficiencies of his crew ; thus furnishing a conspicuousexample of that overbearing violence which hasalmost universally forced weak and uncivilised nationsto regard Europeans as their natural enemies. In runningto the south-east from New Guinea he discoveredland, to which he gave the name of the Land of theArsacides, and which was, in fact, a part of that longchain of islands that had already been seen by Bougainville,who gave the name of Louisiade to the portionwhich he had examined. Surville, in his intercoursewith the natives, found them to be of a fierce, intractable,and treacherous disposition, and chose to designatethem Arsacides, a name which he supposed to be equivalentto the word assassins. Surville afterwards visitedNew Zealand, and anchored in a bay, to which he gavethe name of Lauriston. Captain Cook, who named itDouble Bay, was at the same time employed in surveyingits shores, yet these two navigators did not meetnor descry each other. The French commander, havinglost his boat while anchoring here, went on shore withan armed party to punish the natives, whom he supposedto have stolen it. In a short time he burned severalvillages, and carried off a native chief. This outrage,perpetrated by some of the first Europeans who visitedthem, was soon afterwards repaid with cruel reprisals bythe New Zealanders. The chief died at Juan FernandoMODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.des, and Surville was drowned while going on shore atValparaiso.The Land of theArsacides, which Surville had coastedon the north-eastern side, was again discovered in 1 789,by lieutenant Shortland of the British navy, on his voyagefrom Port Jackson to the East Indies : he followedits southern shores, to which he gave the name of NewGeorgia, and passed through the straits of Bougainville,which "he named from himself, being apparently ignorantof the discoveries of the French navigators. The chainof large islands thus seen successively and partially byBougainville, Surville, and Shortland, and which stretchfrom north-west to south-east, between New Guineaand the New Hebrides, are unquestionably the SalomonIslands of the early Spanish navigators. The EgmontIsland of Carteret, who sought the Salomon Islands, andwho approached them very closely without being awareof it, may be considered as belonging to the archipelago.It has been already mentioned that Bougainvillebrought home with him to France a native of Otaheitenamed Aootooroo. "When the fame of Cook's discoveriesbegan to excite a general interest in Europe, captainMarion du Fresne, animated with a desire to emulatethe glory of the English navigator, offered to takeback the Otaheitean to his native land from the Isle ofFrance at his own expense: the offer was accepted; andKerguelen, a navigator of some note, was commissionedto carry Aootooroo to the Isle of France, and then toproceed to examine more carefully the southern part ofthe Atlantic Ocean. The Otaheitan died at Madagascar;but Marion did not on that account relinquish his plans,but proceeded, in the ardent hope of making some importantdiscoveries. He arrived at New Zealand withoutany accident, and anchored in the Bay of Islands,where his people lived on terms of familiarity, and apparentlyof cordial friendship with the natives ; butsome offence was given unawares to the passionate andcapricious savages : Marion was murdered, with sixteenofficers and men who had accompanied him on shore.chap. v. cook's third voyage. 65Another party of eleven men, who were employed cuttingwood in a different quarter, were at the same time setupon suddenly, and 'only one escaped to the ships torelate the dismal fate of his companions. When theFrench landed to seek the remains of their unfortunatecommander, the natives insultingly cried to them fromtheir fastnesses, " Tacowry (the chief of the district)has killed and eaten Marion." After this melancholyaccident the ships returned to the Isle of France underthe command of M. Duclesmeur, all plans of discoverybeing abandoned.Kerguelen in the mean time sailed from the Isle ofFrance in January, 1772 ; and, on the 12th of February,discovered, in lat. 50° 5' S., high land, near thecoast of which he remained six days ; during this timehe was separated from the corvette which accompaniedhim. To the bleak and sterile shores which he haddiscovered he gave his own name; took formal possessionof them for his sovereign ; and, on his return to France,described their appearance in such glowing terms, thatLouis XV., deceived by his representations, hung to hisbutton-hole, with his own hand, the cross of St. Louis.Kerguelen's enemies, however, insisted that he had seenice at a distance, and mistaken it for land ; they calledon him to show some of the productions of the countryas a proof of his discovery, and insinuated that he hadpurposely got rid of his comrade that he might be atliberty to indulge in gross fictions. The king, however,afforded him the means of refuting these aspersions :Kerguelen sailed again to the Southern Atlantic ; and,in December, 1773; again discovered land: by the 6'thof January following he had traced its coasts aboveeighty leagues. It was, however, a barren, inhospitable,and, in general, an unapproachable shore, affording nothingthat could satisfy the French nation of the importanceof his discoveries. On his return he wasaccused of culpable indifference to the safety of his menand officers, or rather of purposely exposing those whomhe disliked to dangers which eventually proved fatal.VOL. III. F66 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Being unable to exculpate himself, he was deprived ofhis rank and thrown into prison.No expedition, fitted out for the purpose of maritimediscovery, had ever equalled that from which captainCook had now returned, in the magnitude and arduousnature of its peculiar object; and none had ever so completelyanswered its intentions, and performed its taskwith so little loss of life or injury to the ships. Thesuccess of Cook's voyage was gratifying in the highestdegree to those who had patronised the undertaking.The earl of Sandwich was still at the head of the admiralty,and felt naturally disposed to reward liberallyone whose courage and skill had so well justified hisexpectations. Cook was immediately raised to the rankof post captain, and obtained a more substantial mark offavour, being appointed one of the captains of Greenwichhospital, which afforded him a liberal maintenance andrepose from his professional labours. In February, 1776,only a few months after his return, he was elected a fellowof the Royal Society; and on the evening of his firstappearance there, a paper was read containing an accountof the method he had taken to preserve the health of thecrew of his majesty's ship the Resolution during hervoyage round the world. The humane and successfulattention which Cook bestowed on his ship's companywas soon after rewarded by the Copley medal, a prizeannually bestowed by the Royal Society on the authorof the best experimental paper of the year. In the discoursewhich the president, sir John Prince, deliveredon the occasion of bestowing the medal, he uses the followingemphatic expressions : —What enquiry can be so useful as that which hasfor its object the saving the lives of men ? and whereshall we find one more successful than that before us ?Here are no vain boastings of the empiric, nor ingeniousand delusive theories of the dogmatist ; but a conciseand artless, and an uncontested, relation of the means bywhich, under divine favour, captain Cook with a companyof 1 1 S men performed a voyage of three years andCHAP. V. COOk's THIRD VOYAGE. 67eighteen days throughout all the climates from fifty-twodegrees north to seventy-one degrees south latitude, withthe loss of only one man by sickness. I would nowenquire of the most conversant with the bills of mortality,whether, in the most healthy climate, and the best conditionof life, they have ever found so small a numberof deaths within that space of time ? How great andagreeable, then, must our surprise be, after perusing thehistories of long navigations in former days, when somany perished by marine diseases, to find the air of thesea acquitted of all malignity ; and, in fine, that a voyageround the world may be undertaken with less danger,perhaps, to health than a common tour in Europe ! "The great question, as to the existence of a southerncontinent, was finally set at rest by the result of thisvoyage ; not but that immense tracks of land might existin the neighbourhood of the south pole. But Cook'sresearches reduced the limits of the southern continent,if it exist at all, within such high latitudes, as completelyto dispel all those hopes of unbounded wealthand fertility with which imagination had hitherto gracedthat undiscovered country. One grand problem stilldivided the opinions of speculative geographers, andeluded every attempt made at a practical solution. TheEnglish nation had always felt a peculiar interest in thequestion of a north-west passage. Their earliest andmost constant efforts in the career of discovery were directedtowards Hudson's and Baffin's Bays in search ofa communication with the Pacific Ocean, so that theymight sail by a shorter navigation to China and Japan.In consequence of the disputes between Mr. Dobbs andcaptain Middleton, respecting the feasibility of the scheme,the agitation of the question was tolerably recent in thepublic mind, and government adopting the views of theformer gentleman, a reward of 20,000/. was offered byact of parliament to those who should discover the desiredpassage.The British government, captivated with the glorythat might result from expeditions destined for the iv2G8 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.provement of science, resolved now to direct its exertionstowards the north-west ; and, as a preliminary measure,captain Phipps (afterwards lord Margrave) was despatchedtowards the north pole, to ascertain how farnavigation was practicable in that quarter. After strugglingobstinately with innumerable difficulties and dangers,arising from the quantity of ice that beset him, hewas obliged to return, after having penetrated to the latitudeof 80° 30', or within 9£° of the terrestrial pole.The hope of finding a passage between the Atlanticand Pacific Oceans was not, however, abandoned ; andconsultations were held by lord Sandwich with sir HughPalliser, and other experienced officers, relative to theplan which should be adopted in the expedition, and tothe choice of a commander. Captain Cook had earned,by his eminent services, the privilege of honourable repose; and no one thought of imposing on him, for thethird time, the dangers and hardships of a voyage ofdiscovery round the world : but being invited to dinewith lord Sandwich, in order that he might lend thelight of his valuable experience to the various particularsunder discussion, he was so fired with the observationsthat were made on the benefits likely to redound toscience, to navigation, and the intercourse of mankind,from the projected expedition, that he voluntarily offeredto take the command of it himself. This proposal wastoo much in accordance with the wishes of lord Sandwichto be rejected through motives of mere delicacy ;and captain Cook was appointed accordingly to the commandof the expedition in February, 1776. The act ofparliament, passed in 1745, which secured a reward of20,000 pounds to ships belonging to any of his majesty'ssubjects, which should make the proposed discovery, wasnow also amended so as to include ships belonging tohis majesty, and proceeding in any direction, for the oldact referred only to ships which should find a passagethrough Hudson's Bay ; whereas Cook was directed byhis instructions to proceed into the Pacific Ocean, andto commence his researches on the north-west coast ofcigar. v. cook's third voyage. 69America, in the latitude of 65° ; and not to lose time inexploring rivers or inlets until he had reached that latitude.The vessels fitted out for this voyage were the Resolutionand Discovery, the latter under the command ofcaptain Edward Clerke. Messrs. Bailey and Anderson,who had both accompanied captain Cook in his precedingvoyage, now embarked with him a second time, theformer in the capacity of astronomer, the latter in thatof naturalist. Omar, who, during his residence in England,had been treated with great kindness, and loadedwith presents from all quarters, now prepared to returnto his native country ; but the joy which he felt at theidea of returning to his relations in possession of inestimableriches (for such the gifts with which he wasloaded appeared to him to be,) scarcely equalled hisregret at quitting shores where he experienced so muchkindness and attention, and where the multiplicity ofstrange objects presented to his view awakened him asit were to a new existence.On the 12th of July, 1776, captain Cook sailed fromPlymouth Sound on his third voyage of discovery. InTable Bay, near the Cape of Good Hope, he was joinedby captain Clerke, whose departure had been unavoidablyretarded. Here both the ships increased their freightof live stock, consisting of cows, horses, sheep, andgoats, which were destined for the supply of the islandsin the South Seas. On the 30th of November our navigatorsleft the Cape of Good Hope; and, on the 12thof the following month, two small islands were descried :they had been previously discovered by Marion andCloset; but not having received any name from them,captain Cook called them Prince Edward's Islands.They appeared to be bleak and desolate, with bold rockyshores, and mountains in the rear, the sides and summitsof which were covered with snow. Though it wasnow summer in the southern hemisphere, the weatherwas as severe as it usually is in England in the depth ofwinter.f 370 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.On the 24th high land was again seen, which provedto be that discovered not long before by the French navigator,Kerguelen. A bottle was found on shore containinga piece of parchment, with an inscription writtenby him, intimating that he had visited this country in1772 and 1773. Cook wrote the names of his shipsand the date of his voyage on the other side of theparchment, which he then replaced in the bottle. Thiscountry appeared, as far as the eye could reach, to belittlebetter than a huge assemblage of bare rocks ; it hada little herbage, but not a single shrub or tree. Someverdure, which from the sea had an enticing appearance,was found, on nearer approach, to be occasioned by asmall plant resembling saxifrage, which, with a fewspecies of mosses and lichens, constituted the whole vegetableproductions of this inhospitable shore. Freshwater,however, was abundant, and the rocks were coveredwith penguins and with seals : the latter so unusedto be disturbed, that they evinced no timidity ; and asmany as were wanted for their oil or skins were killedwithout difficulty. Cook found that Kerguelen's Land,instead of being a continent, as its first discoverer hadsupposed, was only an island, extending in breadth fromnorth to south not more than 100 miles. He did notwish to change the name which it had received from itsfirst discoverer, but that which he suggested as extremelyapplicable to it — The Island of Desolation, — has sincebeen generally adopted in English maps. Soon afterleaving this desolate coast, our navigators fell in withwinds from the north, which brought on so dense a fogthat the ships ran above 300 leagues in the dark : theycould rarely descry each other, and it was necessary tofire guns continually to prevent the inconvenience of aseparation. At length, on the 26th of January, 1777 ,the ships anchored in Adventure Bay, on the southerncoast of Van Diemen's Land. Here their first care wasto collect grass for the cattle, which had suffered muchfrom the severity of the weather and the distresses of along sea passage. Two young bulls, one heifer, twochap. v. cook's third voyage. 71rams, and several of the goats, had died while the shipswere employed in the survey of Kerguelen's Land.While the English remained here they were agreeablysurprised by a visit from some of the natives, whoin their abject misery, rooted indolence, and stupidity,appeared to be on an equality with the wretched inhabitantsof Tierra del Fuego. Their most comfortabledwellings were the trunks of large trees hollowed out byfire. They appeared to be ignorant of the art of fishing; not a single canoe was seen on their whole coast.Their chief subsistence was derived from small birds andshell-fish, which they collected along the shore.A sufficient supply of fodder being procured for thecattle, captain Cook left Van Diemen's Land, of which.,relying on the erroneous conclusions v of captain Fur-beaux,he observes, " It is well known to be the southernpart of New Holland."The ships anchored on the 12th of February in theirold station in Queen Charlotte's Sound. On their arrivalin New Zealand there were but two invalids in both thecrews. Captain Cook was not a little surprised at theshyness and mistrust of the natives, most of whom wereknown to him, and had experienced his kindness on hisformer voyages ; but he soon discovered the cause of theirtimidity. Omar was on board the Adventure with captainFurneaux on the former voyage, when ten of thecrew of that vessel, as above related, fell victims to the ferocityof the natives. Seeing Omar now on beard the Resolution,they judged that captain Cook could not be ignorantof the affair, and dreaded his vengeance in consequence ;but as soon as he understood the cause of their mistrusthe laboured to convince them of his friendly intentions,assuring them that he had no design of retaliating onthem for the consequences of an affray to which he wasa stranger ; and that so long as they conducted themselvespeaceably they might consider him as their friend.A chief named Kahoora frankly avowed that he hadacted a principal part in cutting off captain Furneaux'speople, and that he had himself killed Mr. Rowe theirF 472 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.commander. The attack was not, it appears, premeditated,but had its origin in a theft committed by one partyand resented with hasty violence by the other ; but whencaptain Cook declared his willingness to forgive, he soonregained the confidence of the natives. To one chief hegave'two goats, a male and a female, with a kid ; and toanother, two pigs. It was his intention at first to haveleft here some sheep also, along with a bull and twoheifers; but fearing that the chiefs whom he found onthis part of the coast were not powerful enough to protectthe cattle from those who might ignorantly aim atdestroying them, he changed his plan. He learnedfrom the natives that the poultry which on former occasionshe had left on the island had increased, the gardenvegetables, though neglected, yet multiplied naturally,and some of them, as the potato, were greatly improvedby the richness of the soil. At the request of Omar heconsented to take with him two youths from New Zealand,who seemed at first delighted with the change ;but when they completely lost sight of their native country,they were overwhelmed with violent grief, whichcontinued for many days.On the 25 th of February the ships sailed from QueenCharlotte's Sound, and nothing remarkable occurred tillthe 29th of the following month, when land was discovered,which proved to be an inhabited island, calledby the natives Mangeea. It was found impossible tolandupon it for the surf. The natives spoke a languagediffering but little from that of the Society Islands, andwere a handsome vigorous people, resembling Spaniardsin complexion. They wore white turbans on theirheads, made of cloth like that of Otaheite; they also woresandals, woven apparently with a strong grassy substance.One of them who ventured on board the shiphappened to stumble over one of the goats, and immediatelyasked Omar what bird it was. This apparentblunder of the simple islander will appear less surprisingwhen we reflect, that the name of a bird was perhaps theonly general term for animals in his language ; and there-chap.v. cook's third voyage. 73fore the only one applicable to a creature like the goat,not belonging to any of the species with which he wasalready acquainted.Some leagues to the north of Mangeea another islandwas discovered, which the natives called Wateeo. Hereour navigators went on shore, and were conducted bycrowds of admiring natives to the chief, who hospitablyentertained them. Some plan, however, seemed to beconcerted to separate the English, and to cut them offfrom their retreat to the ships ; and perhaps the Indianswere chiefly deterred from the execution of this plot bythe exaggerations of Omar, who relating the wonders hehad seen in England, described guns or instruments ofwar so large, that many men could sit within them, andwhich at one discharge could sink the island in theocean. When questioned respecting the guns on boardthe ship, he said that they were capable of destroyingimmediately all the people on the island, though the shipswere at that time a considerable distance from the shore.His story was not at first implicitly believed ; but ashetook delight in exciting the wonder of those who weresimpler than himself, he heaped together a few cartridges,which he carried in his pocket, and then throwing onthem some red hot embers, the conflagration and reportthat ensued appeared to the natives so astonishing, assufficiently to confirm all that he had related. Theywere consequently more cautious of giving offence to theEnglish, who on the approach of evening were allowedto return to the ships.On this island Omar met with three of his countrymen,whose surprising adventure most happily illustratesthe manner in which the scattered islands of thegreat ocean might have been originally peopled. Abouttwenty persons of both sexes had embarked in a canoeat Otaheite, to cross over to the neighbouring island ofUlietea. For this short passage they had taken but amoderate stock of provisions. A violent tempest arose,which drove them they knew not whither for many days.They had nothing to eat or drink, and their numbers74" MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.daily diminished, worn out by hunger and fatigue. Atlength the canoe overset, when four only remained alive,and the destruction of this small remnant seemed nowinevitable. They clung, however, to the sides of theirvessel for some days, and providentially drifted towardsthis island, when the natives immediately sent out canoesand brought them ashore. Of the four who were thussaved one had since died ; the remaining three were sowell satisfied with the kind treatment they had received,that they rejected the offer made to them at Omar'srequest of a passage to their native island. As the inhabitantsof the archipelagoes in the great ocean arefrequently at sea, crossing from one island to anotherwith their wives and families, accidents like this, whichtransported four individuals a distance of 200 leagues,are likely to be of frequent occurrence. At all the islandswhich our navigators had discovered since their departurefrom New Zealand, they had been disappointed fromthe want of good anchorage and other circumstances, intheir hope of finding water and provisions. The seasonwas now far advanced, and large supplies of provisionswould be necessary before proceeding into high northernlatitudes. The prosecution of discoveries, therefore, inthat direction was unavoidably postponed till the followingyear, as it was now much too late to venture intounknown seas with the prospect of achieving any thingimportant. Captain Cook determined to employ theintervening time in examining more minutely the seasbetween the tropics.He accordingly directed his course to the FriendlyIslands, and on the 1st of May arrived at Anamooka.Here he experienced the kindest treatment from a chiefnamed Fenou, by whose persuasions he was induced togo to Hepaee, a large island, or rather a cluster ofislands, connected together by reefs passable at lowwater, and situated towards the north of this archipelago.The abundance of provisions which he found at Hepaeejustified the representations of his friend Fenou. Herealso he met with Poulaho, the king of the FriendlyCHAP. V. COOK'S THIRD VOYAGE. 75Islands, who treated our navigators with a lavish generosityworthy of a sovereign. Tongataboo, or AmsterdamIsland, is the centre of his insular dominions,which extends, according to the natives, over 150islands. Several of these, indeed, are low rocky islets,without any inhabitants. About thirty-five of them aresaid to be larger, and must consequently be of muchgreater extent than Anamooka, which is ranked amongthe smaller isles. It is probable that the Prince William'sIslands of Tasman, and the Keppel's and Bos-caen'sIslands of captain Wallis, are comprehended inthis list of islands subject to Tongataboo.When Poulaho was asked in what manner the inhabitantsof this latter island had acquired the knowledgeof iron, he replied that they had at first receivedit from a neighbouring island called Neeootabootaboo.A ship had touched at that island a few years before,and had purchased a club from one of the natives forfive nails which were afterwards sent to Tongataboo.This was the first iron known among them, and therecan be little doubt that the ship from which it was procuredwas the Dolphin. If Poulaho's description ofthis island be compared with captain Wallis's narrativeit will appear evident that Neeootabootaboo is the sameas Keppel's Island.But the most considerable islands within the knowledgeof these people are Samoa, Vavaoo, and Feejee.The two former are the largest islands under the dominionof Tongataboo ; and from the information whichcaptain Cook received, it would appear that the inhabitantsof Samoa had outstripped the other islanders inarts and refinement. Feejee was hostile to Tongataboo,and its inhabitants were regarded with dread by thenatives of the Friendly Islands for their fierceness inbattle, and their savage practice of devouring their enemies.The men of Feejee, while they retain this barbarouscustom, are not inferior to their neighbours inart and ingenuity. Before captain Cook left the FriendlyIslands he repaid the kindness of Poulaho by a gift of76 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. *BOOK V.inestimable value, consisting of live stock, horses, cows,sheep, and goats. The islanders seemed gratified withthe gift, and promised not to kill any of the animals untilthey had multiplied to a considerable number. Ontouching at Eooa our navigators were supplied with turnips,the produce of some seed scattered by them hereona former voyage.After remaining at the Friendly Islands between twoand three months, during which time he became minutelyacquainted with their geography, and the characterof their inhabitants, Captain Cook at length tookhis departure from them, and on the 12th of Augustarrived at Otaheite. He found that a Spanish ship hadtouched here in the mean time, and had put on shoresome cattle, of which a bull alone remained alive. Hefelt great pleasure, therefore, in augmenting the stock ofthe island with three or four heifers, besides a horse andmare, which were intended as a present to the king, Otoo.Two days after their arrival here captains Cook andClerke mounted on horseback, and took a ride round theplain of Matavai ; to the great surprise of a multitudeof the natives who attended upon the occasion, andgazed on the horsemen with as much astonishment as ifthey had been centaurs. What the two captains had begunwas afterwards repeated every clay by the other ship'sofficers, notwithstanding which the curiosity of the Ota-heiteans still continued unabated. They were exceedinglydelighted with these animals when they saw the use thatwas made of them. Not all the novelties put togetherwhich European visitors had carried among the inhabitants,had inspired them with so high an idea of thegreatness of distant nations. Otoo was by no meansungrateful for the benefits conferred on him ; he offereda small double canoe, very elegantly finished, as a presentto king George ; and he manifested his sense of respectstill more strongly in expressing a wish that the Englishwould establish a permanent settlement on the island.During this visit to Otaheite captain Cook had an opportunityof witnessing the fearful excesses to which theseCHAP. V. COOK'S Thin VOYAGE. 77social islanders are hurried by superstition, and of observingthe number of human sacrifices offered to theiridols, on every occasion of war or other general excitement.It only remained now to settle Omar in the island ofIluaheine, which had been chosen as his residence. Apiece of ground was allotted to him by the chiefs of theisland ; a comfortable wooden house was erected for himby the carpenters of the ships. All the treasures whichhe had brought from England were landed, and the twoyoung men from New Zealand, though reluctant, wereprevailed on to remain with him, so that his family consistedaltogether of twelve or thirteen persons. In orderto deter the natives from treating him with injustice orviolence, captain Cook spoke of returning at no greatdistance of time. Omar did not live long to enjoy hisgood fortune ; it does not appear that he had any reasonto complain of the rapacity or covetousness of his neighbours.The numerous articles of European manufacturewhich were in his possession, rendered his house asplendid museum of curiosities in the eyes of a South Seaislander ; and it is possible that his pride felt gratified inbeing thus able to minister to their wonder and admiration.He conducted himself prudently, and gained theesteem of his neighbours by the affability with which herecounted his voyages and adventures. About two yearsand a half after captain Cook's departure, Omar died anatural death; nor did the New Zealanders survive himlong enough to furnish European navigators with anampler account of the influence which his experienceand observations abroad may have exerted on his countrymen.78 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY.CHAP. VI.cook's third voyage continued.THE SANDWICH ISLANDS DISCOVERED BY COOK. HIS ARRIVAL ATNOOTKA SOUND. MANNERS OF THE PEOPLE. EXAMINATIONOF THE AMERICAN COAST. COOk's RIVER. DISTANCE BetweenASIA AND AMERICA DETERMINED. THE SHIPS STOPPEDBY ICE IN THE POLAR SEA. THE RUSSIAN FUR TRADERS.ENTERPRISE OF LEDYARD. RETURN TO THE SANDWICHISLANDS. OWHYHEE SURVEYED. FRIENDLINESS OF THE Natives.THE SHIPS LEAVE THE ISLAND, BUT ARE OBLIGED TORETURN. ALTERED CONDUCT OF THE NATIVES. BOATSTOLEN. FATAL AFFRAY. DEATH OF COOK. SECOND AttemptTO NAVIGATE THE POLAR SEA. DEATH OF CAPTAINCLARK AND OF ANDERSON. ARRIVAL AT MACAO. GenerousCONDUCT OF THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT. SALE OF FURSIN CANTON. EFFECT OF SUDDEN RICHES ON THE SEAMEN.RETURN OF THE EXPEDITION. MERITS OF COOK. HIS Discoveries.HIS SURVEYS AND OBSERVATIONS. CARE OF HISSEAMEN'S HEALTH. RESULTS OF HIS VOYAGES. NEW HollandCOLONISED. TRADE IN THE PACIFIC.On the 8 th of December our voyagers left Borabora,and lost sight of the Society Islands ; their course wastowards the north, and, on the 18th of January, inlat. 21° N., land was discovered, which proved to be anisland of considerable size, and beyond it two otherssuccessively became visible. As the ships approachedthe second island, a number of canoes came off from theshore, and the English were no less pleased than surprisedto hear the natives speaking the language of Ota-heite. When they came on board, they expressed theirastonishment at the numerous strange objects that mettheir eyes with more lively emotions than captain Cookhad ever yet witnessed among savage nations. Theydid not appear to be quite ignorant of iron, yet thewonder and surprise they displayed at every thing theysaw left little room to doubt that they were whollychap. vi. cook's third voyage. 79unacquainted with Europeans. When captain Cookwent on shore, the people fell flat on their faces beforehim, as if rendering homage to a superior being. Theisland was amply provided with the necessaries of life ;pigs, fowls, and fruits were purchased advantageously ;and captain Cook made an important addition to thenatural wealth of the island, by putting on shore someof his live stock. Among other articles brought by thenatives for trade were cloaks and helmets, beautifullymade with red and yellow feathers. These islanderswere not inferior to the inhabitants of the more southerlygroups in ingenuity or friendliness of disposition. Theyseemed to captain Cook to be less fickle and voluptuousthan the natives of Otaheite, and less sullenly grave thanthose of Tongataboo ; but his growing partiality to themwas checked on discovering that they occasionally banquetedon human flesh. Of the group now for the firsttime visited, only five islands were seen by captain Cook,and to these, in compliment to his noble patron, the firstlord of the admiralty, he gave collectively the name ofthe Sandwich Islands.It only remained now to accomplish the specific objectof the voyage, by examining the north-west coast ofAmerica, and particularly by trying to effect a passageinto the Atlantic Ocean, round the northern extremityof that continent. On the 7th of March our navigatorsmade the coast of New Albion in lat. 44° 33'. Theinhabitants of this country were clad in furs which theyoffered for sale ; they conducted themselves civilly towardsthe English, but were remarkably tenacious ofthe rights of property, and expected payment for everything,even the wood and water which the strangerstook from the shore. They displayed considerableingenuity, and were acquainted with iron, although inall their dealings they gave the preference to brass, inconsequenceof which the sailors, in bartering for furs,parted with all their buttons. Among other articlesprocured from these people by exchange were two silverspoons, which, as well the iron, were supposed by captain80 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Cook to have been obtained by a circuitous inland trade,either from the Spaniards in Mexico, or the English factoriesin Hudson's Bay. He was not aware that thiscoast had been surveyed by the Spaniards four yearspreviously; and that while the Spanish vessels lay here,the natives had exercised with great success their thievingpropensities : to this part of the coast he gave thename of King George's Sound, but the native name ofNootka has since prevailed.On leaving Nootka Sound, the violence of the windcompelled him to keep at a distance from the shore, sothat for some degrees he was foiled in his intention ofsurveying it; but, in lat. 59°, he entered another wideinlet, to which he gave the name of Prince William'sSound, and here was surprised to find that the natives, indress, language, and physical peculiarities, were exactlylike the Esquimaux of Hudson's Bay. Beautiful skinswere obtained in plenty from these people for a verymoderate price. On proceeding to the north-west, awide inlet was discovered, which some conjectured mightbe a strait communicating with the Northern Ocean. Itwas deemed, therefore, advisable to explore it ; but whenthe boats had proceeded as high as lat. 6*1° 34' or about70 leagues from the entrance, the inlet appeared to terminatein a small river. The ships now proceeded tothe west, and doubled the great promontory of Alaska ;and, on the 9th of August, they reached the most westerlypoint of the American continent, distant only 13leagues from the opposite shores of Asia. To this headlandCook gave the name of Cape Prince of Wales.Crossing the strait to the western shores, he anchorednear the coast of the Tshuktzki, which he found toextend many degrees farther to the east than the positionassigned to them in the maps of that day. He thusascertained distinctly the width of the strait that separatesAsia from America ; for though Behring hadsailed through it before, he had not descried the shoresof the latter continent, and, consequently, remained ignorantof the importance of his discoveries. Our navisVI. COOK'S THIRD VOYAGE. 81gators now pushed forward into the Northern Ocean, whenthey soon fell in with ice, which gave them reason tosuspect the impossibility of continuing their voyage muchfarther. At length, on the 18th of August, when afterrepeated struggles they had attained the lat. of 70° 44Z,they saw the ice before them, extending as far as the eyecould reach, forming a compact wall about six feet high :it was covered with a multitude of walruses or sea-horses,winch, though coarse food, were preferred by the seamento salt provisions.It was now obviously impossible to advance, andCook therefore resolved to employ the winter in completinghis survey of the Sandwich Islands, and torenew his attempts in the Northern Ocean in the courseof the following summer. On his arrival at Oona-lashka he received, through the hands of the natives, apresent of a salmon pie, and a note which, thoughunintelligible, was known to be Russian. CorporalEdward, of the marines, who afterwards became so distinguishedas an enterprising traveller, now for the firsttime figured on the scene, and volunteered to . go insearch of the hospitable Russians. He was accordinglypacked between the legs of two Esquimaux in a jackor covered canoe, and in this uncomfortable state wasrowed a distance of fourteen miles. In' two days hereturned with three Russian furriers; and shortly after, aRussian merchant, named IsmilofF, arrived, who showedcaptain Cook two charts, which satisfied our great navigatoras to the limited acquaintance which the Russianshad with the north-west coast of America, and the undisputedmerit of his own discoveries.On the 2()th of November, in lat. 20° 55', our navigatorsdiscovered Mowee, one of the Sandwich Islandswhich they had not visited ; and on the last day of themonth another great island, called Owhyhee, was discovered,which, as it appeared to exceed very far inmagnitude and importance the other islands of the group,engaged a proportionate share of attention, and captainCook employed seven weeks in sailing round and survey-vol.III. G82 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.ing its coasts. At length the ships came to an anchorin Karakakooa Bay, on the south side of the island.The natives came off to the vessels in canoes laden withprovisions, and in such multitudes, that captain Cook inthe whole course of his voyages had never seen so numerousa body of people assembled in one place. Manyhundreds of them were swimming round the ships likeshoals of fishes. The interesting novelty of this scenecompensated our voyagers, in some degree, for the disappointmentthey had experienced in their expedition tothe north. " To this disappointment," says captainCook, " we owed our having it in our power to revisitthe Sandwich Islands, and to enrich our voyage with adiscovery, which, though the last, seemed in many respectsto be the most important that had hitherto beenmade by Europeans throughout the extent of the PacificOcean." Such is the concluding sentence of our greatnavigator's journal.The intercourse of our people with the islanders wasan uninterrupted series of acts of kindness on both sides,the mutual harmony being only momentarily disturbedby the thieving propensities of the natives. Provisionswere procured in the greatest abundance, and captainCook made the experiment of salting a quantity of porkfor sea stores ; and he succeeded so completely, that whenthe ships returned to Europe, some of the pork cured inthe Sandwich Islands was found to be still in goodorder. A society of priests on the island were particularlyactive in forwarding the views of the English, andprocuring them the sort of provisions they required.They even sent a large quantity to the ships as a present.The king of Owhyhee, Tereeoboo, was actuated by thesame friendly zeal as his subjects ; and in his dealingswith captain Cook evinced sincere attachment, as wellas the liberality befitting a prince. The islanders hadconceived a particular liking for lieutenant King, andwarmly solicited him to remain among them. Ashenthe day of departure arrived, they seemed inconsolable atchap. vi. cook's third voyage. 83their loss, and heaped whatever presents their islandafforded on Cook and his companions.Such were the friendly sentiments of the natives whenthe ships sailed out of Karakakooa Bay, on the 4th ofSeptember. It was captain Cook's intention to make acomplete survey of the islands ; but before he had proceededfar a gale of wind came on, in the course ofwhich the Resolution sprung her foremast in so dangerousa manner, that it was deemed necessary to return toKarakakooa Bay in order to repair it.When the ships arrived at their old anchorage, thebay was found to be nearly deserted. The crowds whohad been drawn together by the traffic opened with theships, had now returned to their habitations through thecountry ; and it was, perhaps, owing to the absence ofthe chiefs, that the natives, who now came on board,carried on their depredations with much greater boldnessthan formerly. The punishment of the thieves gaverise to quarrels ; and the intercourse with the islanders,though it had not altogether lost an amicable character,was embittered by constant jarring and complaint. Aboat was sent in pursuit of a native who had stolen thetongs from the smith's forge ; but the crew, and theofficer who commanded them, were disarmed androughly handled by the islanders. Soon after, a partyof the natives took away in the night the Discovery'slarge cutter, which lay swamped at the buoy of one ofher anchors. This was a matter of too much importanceto be overlooked, and Captain Cook was resolvedto have recourse to decisive measures to recover theboat. He had often found the advantage in the SouthSea Islands of seizing some of the principal people ashostages on such occasions, and he determined in thisinstance to make Tereeoboo himself answerable for therecovery of the cutter. Armed boats were stationed ateach end of the bay to intercept all canoes that might attemptto get out, while captain Cook himself proceeded tolandwith a party of marines, his crew being also armed.When he went on shore, the natives nocked around84 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.him as usual, prostrating themselves, and showing thecustomary marks of respect. He proceeded to thehabitation of the king, whom, after some trouble, hepersuaded to go on board. To this movement, however,the natives were generally averse ; yet they offered noviolence to captain Cook as he led the king, with his twosons, through the crowd to the water side, where themarines were drawn up in case of attack. The oldking followed with submission and apparent indifference;but when he came near the water's edge, his wives andrelations became so importunate to prevent his enteringthe boat, that he sat down on the ground, and captainCook was obliged to relinquish the idea of making himselfmaster of his person. There was now a great fermentamong the natives, who were gathered in immensemultitudes along the shore. Their alarm at the attemptmade to entrap their king was heightened by an unfortunateoccurrence that took place at a little distance ;the boat stationed at the west end of the bay, seeing alarge canoe put off from shore, fired a gun ahead of itto stay its progress, and the shot accidentally killedKareemoo, a chief of distinction. When this intelligencereached them, the agitation of the crowds at thelanding-place rose into fury. They put on their warmth,gathered large stones, brandished their knives, andexhibited in every way an insulting and menacing attitude.Notwithstanding the imminence of the danger,-captain Cook would not allow the marines to fire, stillhoping that the affair might terminate without sheddingof blood. He discharged his musket, indeed, leadedwith small shot, at a chief who approached him withthreatening gestures ; but the shot rattling harmlesslyoff the thick matting, served only to embolden the infuriatedsavage. The marines as well as the crew of thepinnace now fired upon the crowd ; but the multitudeof the islanders was so great, that they could not easilyretreat when daunted by the firing ; and, rushing uponthe marines, forced them into the water, where four ofthem were killed. The pinnace was so crowded bychap. vi. cook's third voyage. 85those who had been saved from the shore, that her crewwere in a great measure prevented from using their firearms,and thus afforded little protection to captain Cook,who now remained alone upon the rock. " He was observedmaking for the pinnace, holding his left handagainst the back of his head to guard it from the stones,and carrying his musket under the other arm ; an Indianwas seen following him, but with caution and timidity,as if undetermined to proceed; at last he advanced uponhim unawares, gave him a blow on the back of the headwith a large club, and then precipitately retreated. Thestroke seemed to stun captain Cook ; he staggered a fewpaces, then fell on his hand and one knee, and droppedhis musket. As he was rising, and before he could recoverhis feet, another Indian stabbed him in the backof the neck with an iron dagger. He then fell into thewater, about knee deep, where others crowded upon himand endeavoured to keep him under ; but strugglingvery strongly with them, he got his head up, and castinghis eyes towards the pinnace, seemed to solicit assistance.Though the boat was not above five or six yards distantfrom him, yet, from the crowded and confused state ofthe crew, it seems, it was not in their power to save him.The Indians got him under again, but in deeper water :he was, however, able to get his head up once more; andbeing almost spent in the struggle, he naturally turnedto the rock, and was endeavouring to support himself byit, when a savage gave him a blow with a club, and hewas seen alive no more. They hauled him up lifelesson the rocks, where they took a savage pleasure in usingevery barbarity to his dead body; snatching the daggersout of each other's hands, to have the horrid satisfactionof piercing the fallen victim of their barbarous rage."The lieutenant who commanded in the launch was atno great distance during the whole of this affray, ofwhich he remained an unconcerned spectator. To hiswant of intelligence or of courage the fatal events of theday may, in a great measure, be attributed. But whatseems more remarkable, although the fire from the boatsg 386 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.at length succeeded in putting the Indians to flight, andthe remains of captain Cook lay for some time desertedon the beach, yet the lieutenant returned to the shipswithout making any attempt to recover the dead bodyof his unfortunate commander. It was not without extremedifficulty, and until after repeated negotiations andthreatening, that captain Gierke could succeed in recoveringthe principal part of captain Cook's bones, whichwere committed to the deep with the usual naval honoursamidst the sincere lamentations of the afflicted crews.As soon as the Resolution had undergone the necessaryrepairs, the ships hastened to leave a scene which recalledto the recollection of every one on board a calamityoutweighing all the satisfaction that could result fromthe success of the expedition. Captain Gierke now tookthe place of the lamented Cook, and was succeeded bylieutenant Gore in the command of the Discovery. Afterleaving Owhyhee, the ships touched at the island of Atone,which was found desolated by a war originating in theclaims of different chiefs to the goats which captain Cookhad put on shore. These animals had increased to sixwhen the war broke out on their account, in the courseof which they were all destroyed. The history of theintroduction of useful animals into the South Sea Islandsaffords many parallel instances of human blindness, andof that barbarous degree of envy and rapacity whichdestroys a treasure rather than leave it in the possessionof a rival.Captain Gierke proceeded now to execute the intentionsof his late commander, by repeating the attempt to finda passage through the Northern Ocean. He touched atthe harbour of St. Peter and St. Paul in Alaska Bay,where he was treated by the Russians with unboundedhospitality ; and then passing Behring's Strait a secondtime, penetrated as far as 70° S3' N., where the sameobstacle which had prevented the progress of the shipsthe preceding year forbade him to advance any further.He met here with a firm barrier of ice, seven leaguesfarther to the south than that which had stopped theCHAP. VI. COOK'S THIRD VOYAGE. 87progress of captain Cook. The impossibility of a passageby the north was now thought to be sufficientlyproved, and it was resolved to proceed homewards ; thechief purpose of the expedition having been thus answered.This resolution of the officers diffused amongthe crews, who were now heartily tired of the lengthof the voyage, as lively a joy as if the ships, insteadof having nearly the whole earth to compass, were alreadyarrived in the British Channel. When the ships hadjust reached Kamtschatka, captain Gierke died of a decline: he had already circumnavigated the globe threetimes, having sailed first with commodore Byron, andafterwards with captain Cook. Mr. Anderson, the talentedphysician and naturalist of the expedition, hadexpired at Oonalashka, the preceding year, of the samecomplaint. Captain Gore now succeeded to the commandof the expedition, and lieutenant King took thecommand of the Discovery. Their voyage to China wasnot productive of any important geographical results.In navigating those stormy seas they found it necessaryto keep at a distance from land, and were thus baffled,by constant tempestuous weather, in their attempt tosurvey the coasts of Japan.On the 3d of December our navigators arrived atMacao, where they first became acquainted with theevents which had taken place in Europe since their departure,and of the war which had broken out betweenGreat Britain and France. A rumour of the generousconduct of the latter government at the same time reachedthem : an order had been issued in March, 1779* by theminister of the marine at Paris, to all the commandersof French ships, acquainting them with the expeditionand destination of captain Cook, and instructing themto treat that celebrated navigator, wherever they shouldmeet him, as a commander of a neutral and allied power.This measure, so honourable to the nation which adoptedit, is said to have originated in the enlightened mind ofthe celebrated Turgot. Dr. Franklin, who at that timeresided at Paris as ambassador from the United States,g 488 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.had, a short time before, issued a requisition, in whichhe earnestly recommended the commanders of Americanarmed vessels not to consider captain Cook as an enemy ;but he had no authority to enforce his recommendation;and the government of the United States had not themagnanimity to adopt it.While the ships lay in the river of Canton, the sailorscarried on a brisk trade with the Chinese for thesea otter skins which they had brought with them fromthe north-west coast of America, and which were everydayrising in their value. " One of our seamen," sayslieutenant King, " sold his stock alone for 800 dollars ;and a few prime skins, which were clean and had beenwell preserved, were sold for 120 each. The wholeamount of the value, in specie and goods, that was gotfor the furs in both ships, I am confident did not fallshort of 2000A sterling ; and it was generally supposedthat at least two thirds of the quantity we had originallygot from the Americans were spoiled and worn out, orhad been given away, or otherwise disposed of in Kamt-schatka. When, in addition to these facts, it is rememberedthat the furs were at first collected without ourhaving any idea of their real value; that the greatestpart had been worn by the Indians from whom we purchasedthem ; that they were afterwards preserved withlittle care, and frequently used for bedclothes and otherpurposes ; and that probably we had not got the fullvalue for them in China ; the advantages that mightbe derived from a voyage to that part of the Americancoast, undertaken with commercial views, appeared tomeof a degree of importance sufficient to call for theattention of the public." These observations of lieutenantKing point to that which eventually proved tobe the most important result of this expedition. A greatbranch of trade in the Pacific Ocean, which had hithertoescaped the notice of the nations most interested in itsdevelopment, and possessing establishments most convenientlysituated for carrying it on, was suddenly discovered,and soon after vigorously prosecuted by a .vi. cook's third voyage. 89time people from the opposite side of the globe. Thecrews of both ships were astonished, as well as overjoyed,at the price paid them for their furs by the Chinese; and their rage to return to Cook's River, in orderto procure a cargo of skins, proceeded at one time almostto mutiny. A few, indeed, contrived to desert, andwere among the first adventurers who crossed the PacificOcean in the newly discovered fur trade. Theseamen thus unexpectedly enriched soon underwent atotal metamorphosis : they arrived at Macao in rags,many of them having inconsiderately sold their clothingin the South Sea Islands ; but, before they left thatharbour, they were decked out in gaudy silks and otherChinese finery. Nothing of importance occurred duringthe remainder of their voyage home ; and, on the 4thof October, the ships arrived safe at the More, afteran absence of four years two months and twenty-twodays. In the whole course of the voyage the Resolutionlost but five men by sickness, of whom three were in aprecarious state of health when the expedition left England: the Discovery did not lose a man.In order to estimate the merits of captain Cook, it willbe only necessary to survey generally the extent andnature of his discoveries, and to examine what influencethey exerted immediately on the commercial enterpriseof nations. In the extent of the coasts which he surveyedor discovered, he far surpasses every other navigator.The eastern coast of New Holland, 2000 milesin extent, was totally unknown till he traced it ; escapingfrom the dangers of that intricate navigation solely byhis cool intrepidity and the resources of his skill. Healso circumnavigated New Zealand, the eastern andsouthern parts of which were quite unknown, and supposedby many to be united to the Terra Australis Incognita.New Caledonia and Norfolk Island were bothdiscovered by him ; and the New Hebrides, from hislabours, first assumed a definite shape in our maps. Herendered an essential service to geography also by his circumnavigatingthe globe in a high southern latitude ; for,90 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.though the exertions and dangers of that difficult navigationwere not repaid by any brilliant discoveries, it setat rest a question which had for ages divided the opinionsof speculative geographers. Sandwich Land, or SouthernThule, may be numbered among his discoveries, althoughit is probably the land which Gerritz had descried acentury before.His discoveries on the north-west coast of Americawere still more important and more extensive. In onevoyage he effected more than the Spanish navigators hadbeen able to accomplish in the course of two centuries.In sailing through Behring's Strait, he determined theproximity of Asia and America, which Behring himselfhad failed to perceive ; and he assigned the coast of theTshuktzki to its true place ; which, in many maps of histime, was placed some degrees too far to the westward.It is needless to recapitulate here the large additionswhich he made to our knowledge of the groups of islandsscattered through the Pacific Ocean. Some of the Societyand Friendly Islands were known before his time ;but he carefully surveyed those archipelagoes, and fixedthe positions of the chief islands, such as Otaheite andTongataboo, with an accuracy equal to that of a Europeanobservatory. He prided himself especially onhaving discovered the Sandwich Islands ; and there is nogood reason to refuse him that honour ; for, even if itbe true that a Spanish navigator, named Gale, discoveredthose islands in 1 576 ; and that he gave to Owhyheethe name of Mesa or Table Mountain, which is markedin old Spanish charts twenty-two degrees to the westof the Sandwich Islands, but in the same latitude withthem ; yet no stress can be laid on a discovery fromwhich mankind derived no knowledge. The Spaniardsseem soon to have totally forgotten the Sandwich Islands,if they ever knew them, notwithstanding the advantageswhich they might have derived from those islands in theirfrequent voyages from New Spain to Manilla. Ansonand many other navigators might have been spared infinitedistress and suffering in their voyages across thechap. vi. cook's third voyage. 91Pacific, had any thing certain been known of the existenceand situation of the Sandwich Islands.But Cook's merit is not more conspicuous in theextent of his discoveries, than in the correctness withwhich he laid down the position of every coast of whichhe caught a glimpse. His surveys afford the materials ofaccurate geography. He adopted in practice every improvementsuggested by the progress of science ; and, insteadof committing errors amounting to two or threedegrees of longitude, like most of his predecessors, his determinationswere such as to be considered accurate evenat the present day ; nor was this the merit of the astronomerswho accompanied him on his expeditions. Hewas himself a skilful observer, and at the same time sovigilant and indefatigable, that no opportunity ever escapedhim of ascertaining his true place. He possessedin an eminent degree the sagacity peculiar to seamen ;and in his conjectures respecting the configurations ofcoasts he very rarely erred. La Perouse, who was ahighly accomplished seaman, always mentions the nameof Cook with the warmest admiration, and frequentlyalludes to the remarkable correctness of his surveys.Closet, also, who wrote the narrative of Marion's voyage,speaking of Cook's survey of the shores of New Zealand,says — " That its exactness and minuteness of detailastonished him beyond expression ;" but Cook's skill asamarine surveyor may be still better estimated from thechart which, at the commencement of his career, he constructedof the coasts of Newfoundland ; and of thatchart, captain Frederick Bullock, the able officer whohas recently completed the survey of Newfoundland,speaks in those terms of warm commendation which aman of ability naturally bestows on whatever is excellent.From the second expedition of Cook may be dated theart of preserving the health of the seamen in long voyages: before that time, navigators who crossed the Pacific,hurried precipitately by the shortest course to theLadroness, or the Philippine Islands ; and yet they rarelyreached home without the loss of a large proportion of92 5I0DERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.their crew. Cook, on the other hand, felt himself perfectlyat home on the ocean ; he did not care to limit hisvoyages, either in space of time or of distance ; he sailedthrough every climate, Crossing both the arctic and antarcticcircles ; and proved that a voyage of four yearsduration does not necessarily affect the health of seamen.This was a discovery of far greater importance than thatof a new continent could have been : by his banishingthe terror that arose from the frightful mortality thatpreviously attended on long voyages, he has mainly contributedto the boldness of navigation which distinguishesthe present day.Among the immediate effects of captain Cook's voyages,the most important was the establishment of acolony at Botany Bay. That great navigator seems tohave contracted a partiality towards the New Zealanders;he admired their generosity, their manly carriage, andtheir intelligence. Their country appeared to him fertile; abounding in commodities which might becomevaluable in commerce ; and he hints, though with diffidence,to the possibility of a trade being carried on betweenEurope and New Zealand. His observations onthis subject had influence, no doubt, on the minds of theEnglish ministers, and they resolved on establishing acolony at New Holland ; and the result has justifiedCook's sanguine anticipations. The fur trade also, whichsoon caused such a concourse of European shipping in thePacific Ocean, originated with his third voyage ; but hisfamiliarity with the South Sea islanders, the trade whichhe established with them, and the practice which he commencedof purchasing sea stores from them, have had, perhaps,a still stronger influence on navigation in the Pacific.Finally, to complete the eulogium on this great navigator,it will be sufficient to enumerate some of the distinguishedseamen who served under him, such asVancouver, Broughton, Bligh, Burney, Colnett, Port-lock,Dixon, &c. : these men learned under Cook thearduous duties of their profession, and they always spokeof him with unqualified admiration and respect.CHAP. VII. VOYAGE OF LA Peruse, ETC. Q3CHAP. VII.VOYAGE OF LA Peruse, ETC.EMULATION OF THE FRENCH. LA Peruse APPOINTED TO COM-Man AN EXPEDITION. HIS INSTRUCTIONS. VISIT TOEASTER ISLAND. ACCOUNT OF THE STATUES. ARTS OF THEPeople. SANDWICH ISLANDS. AMERICAN COAST. PORTDLS FRANCOIS. AN ISLAND PURCHASED BY THE FRENCH. —CALAMITOUS OCCURRENCE THERE. VOYAGE TO MACAO.JAPANESE SEAS. COAST OF Tatar. — BAIE DE TERNAI.SAGALEEN. INFORMATION DERIVED FROM THE PEOPLE.STRAITS OF LA Peruse. ARRIVAL AT KAMTSCHATKA. MonumentTO CAPTAIN CLERKE. M. LESSEPS DESPATCHEDOVERLAND TO EUROPE. NAVIGATORS' ISLANDS. MASSACREOF THE FRENCH BY THE NATIVES. VOYAGE TO BOTANY.LETTER OF LA Peruse. MYSTERY RESPECTING HIS FATE.HIS MERITS. DECREE OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. d'eN-TRECASTEAUX SAILS IN SEARCH OF HIM. FATE OF HIS Expedition.ADVENTURE AT THE FEEJEE ISLANDS. InformationOBTAINED BY CAPTAIN DILLON AT Utopia. HERETURNS TO SEEK VESTIGES OF THE FRENCH. VISITS MALICOLO. ACCOUNT OF THE SHIPWRECK GIVEN BY THE NATIVES.RELICS COLLECTED. RESULTS.Great Britain now stood pre-eminently distinguished,and was looked up to with gratitude by all civilised nations,for the bold and successful expeditions which shehad fitted out in pursuit of geographical discoveries.As soon as the war, commencing in 1778, was broughtto a close, in 1783, France, emulous of the glory of arival nation, hastened to equip a squadron destined tosolve those geographical difficulties which Cook had leftuntouched. The officer chosen to command this expeditionwas Francis Galaup de la Perouse, an officer ofgreat experience and talents, and who had shown himselfparticularly fitted to conduct an enterprise of thisnature, by his skill in combating the difficulties whichthwart navigation in Hudson's Bay, whither in thelate war he had been despatched with a squadron to MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.stroy the British settlements. In this affair he had alsodisplayed a generosity in his treatment of the unfortunatecolonists, which won him the applause and esteemof the English nation.The directions given to La Perouse for his voyagewere remarkably luminous and instructive ; but the planwas too comprehensive to fall within the capabilities ofa single expedition. It aimed at little less than the fillingup of every chasm, and dispelling every obscurity, thatstill remained in maritime geography. He was ordered,in his passage to Cape Horn, to examine the southerncoasts of Sandwich Land and New Georgia, so as to completethe survey made of these desolate countries bycaptain Cook. He was then to run in a high latitude tothe west, in search of Drake's Land. On approachingthe tropics, he was instructed to ascertain correctly theposition of Pitcairn's Island, by which means the trackof Carteret across the Pacific Ocean, and his various discoveries,might be more accurately fixed. After visitingQuiros's Island of the Handsome Nation, the Santa Cruzof Mendana, and the Salomon Islands, of which Bougainvillehad visited a portion; after completing thesurvey of New Caledonia, which Cook had traced onlyon the eastern side ; Perouse was to explore the greatGulf of Carpentaria, on the north of New Holland, andthen to return to the Marquesas to rest after his firstcampaign. The complete execution of what is hereprescribed would alone have conferred honour upon anyexpedition.The French ships were next to proceed to examinenarrowly the north-western coast of America, particularlywith a view to discover whether there was anycommunication with the east. The Aleutian Isles werenext to be surveyed ; and then the ships, having touchedat Kamtschatka, were to proceed by way of the Furiesand Japan to Manilla and China. Here they wereto refresh, and prepare themselves for the most difficultand novel part of their task : this was to explore theeastern coast of Tatary, with which European geogVII. VOYAGE OP LA Peruse, ETC. 9^graziers had as yet but little acquaintance. The islandof Yedzo being surveyed, the expedition was to toucha second time at Kamtschatka, and then to return homewardthrough the Ladroness, the New Carolinas, and theMoluccas, surveying accurately and fixing the positionof every coast at which they arrived. Nor were they toabandon, on their homeward voyage, all further searchfor the Cape Circumcision of Bouvet, though the fruitlessefforts of Cook to find that apocryphal land mighthave been deemed sufficient proof that it had no existence.The preparations for this expedition were as completeas its plan was extensive. Two fine frigates, the Bouseand the Astrolabe, were selected for it, and severalmen of the first eminence in every department ofscience were prevailed on to accompany it. In thenumber of these was Songe, who has since risen todistinction as one of the great triumvirate of Frenchmathematicians. But his health was so seriously derangedby sea-sickness, that he quitted the expedition atTeneriffe, and thus saved a life which was destined tocontribute so much to the advancement of science. Theboldness of design and the extensive geographical knowledgewhich marked the plan of this expedition, theliberality and care with which it was equipped, and theundoubted ability of all who were engaged in it, mighthave been deemed sufficient guarantees of its success,and gave rise to the most sanguine expectations ; yet itwas pursued throughout by a train of bitter misfortunes,and terminated in a lamentable catastrophe, hardly paralleledin the annals of navigation.The commencement of the voyage w r as fortunate.The ships having taken refreshment at the island of St.Catharine, on the coast of Brazil, doubled Cape Hornwith comparative ease; but nevertheless the voyage roundthe southern point of the American continent, evenunder favourable circumstances, was found so tediousand distressing, as to render it inexpedient to launch atonce across the Pacific Ocean in pursuit of discoveries.96 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.La Perouse steered, therefore, for Easter Island, ofwhose inhabitants the French naturalists were enabledto form a juster idea than those who had accompaniedcaptain Cook. The colossal statues which chiefly attractthe attention of visitors to this singular island, andwhich were supposed by the English to be moulded of acomposition, were found to be formed of that light volcanicsubstance called apollo. The ground, in someplaces, was cultivated with great care and skill ; andthe islanders, though fully as ingenious as described bythe English, seemed to the French neither so miserablenor so few in number. They lived in villages, and insome instances the inhabitants of a whole district werelodged under the same roof. The great houses whichwere thus occupied in common were above 300 feet inlength, constructed with great care, and resembled inappearance an inverted canoe. If the arts and socialimprovement of these islanders, rude as they are, becompared with the scanty means with which nature hasprovided them, they may, perhaps, be reckoned amongstthe most extraordinary people in the world.From Easter Island the French proceeded to theSandwich Islands to obtain a stock of fresh provisions,and stayed a short time at Mowee, an island which Cookhad not surveyed. But nothing occurred of any interestwhile they remained here, nor were they able to add anythingof importance to the ample information respectingthose islands which had already been published by theEnglish navigators.Perouse now entered on the arduous portion of hislabours, in the examination of the north-west coast ofAmerica, which he reached in June, 1786, in lat. 59°. Onlytwo or three months now remained to him to examinethis coast, as he was bound by his instructions to reachChina by February, that he might commence the examinationof the Tatarian coast in the ensuing spring.He arrived on the coast of America near Mount St.Elias, from which point, towards the north, the coasthad been carefully examined by captain Cook, for whoseCHAP. VII. VOYAGE OP LA Peruse, ETC. 97memory Perouse had an unbounded veneration ; and ashejudged that it would be productive of greater benefitto science and more honour to himself, if he were todirect his attention to what that great navigator had leftuntouched, rather than aim at correcting him, he resolvedto run along the coast towards the south, from St.Elias to the Spanish settlement at Monterey.Not long after the French ships approached the shore,a harbour was discovered, with a narrow entrance, butseductive in its appearance from the smoothness of thewater within. After some hesitation the French navigatorsventured to enter it, and succeeded in reachinga safe anchorage ; but such was the violence of thecurrent at the entrance, that they were in imminentperil of being thrown upon the rocks. " During thethirty years, says Perouse, of my nautical experience, Ihave never seen two ships so near being lost." TheFrench now proceeded to examine the head of the bay,which appeared to them to be one of the most extraordinaryplaces in the world. To form an idea of it, itis necessary to conceive a basin of water of unfathomabledepth, bordered by peaked mountains, elevated andabrupt, covered with snow, and without one blade ofgrass to decorate this vast heap of rocks, condemned bynature to eternal sterility. The surface of the water ishardly ever ruffled by a breath of wind. Nothing disturbsit but the fall of the enormous masses of ice,which frequently separate from five different glaciers,while the sound is re-echoed by the distant mountains.The air is so calm, and the silence so profound, that thevoice of a man may be heard for half a league, as wellas the cries of a few sea-fowl, who lay their eggs in thehollows of the rocks.The French erected their observatory on a small island,of which they took formal possession, having purchasedit from the natives. They deemed this harbour an excellentstation for carrying on the fur trade, and sufficientlydistant from the factories of the Russians, English,and Spaniards, to remove any complaints of envoysIII. H■Q8 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.coachmen on the part of these nations. In the crewsof the two ships there was not a single invalid, and theexpedition seemed hitherto crowned with success, whena misfortune occurred which threw a gloom over theminds of them all, and alloyed the confidence of hopewith melancholy boding. Three boats were sent tosound the entrance of the harbour, which was rendereddifficult of access by the violence of the tides. M.descartes, who commanded the surveying party, wascounselled by Perouse to proceed with extreme caution.But he, thinking it a display of courage to encounterdangers, the magnitude of which he did not comprehend,approached the rocks, where two of the boats wereoverwhelmed with the surf, and the third escaped withextreme difficulty. By this melancholy accident twenty-onepersons lost their lives. It was afterwards observedthat the Indians, in passing the entrance of the harbour,always offered up a prayer to the sun ; experience havingtaught them the danger of being involved in those rapidand eddying currents. Port des Francois, as this harbourwas called, was found to be situated in lat. 58° 37', andwest long. 139° 50'.The ships now proceeded southwards to the Spanishsettlement at Monterey. During this part of his coursePerouse observed the broken character of the coast, andconjectured the existence of that archipelago which hassince been named Queen Charlotte's Islands. The shipshaving undergone repairs at Monterey, where theyarrived in the middle of September, crossed the PacificOcean without making any discoveries of importance,fixed the positions of the Ladroness and Bashee Islands,and anchored at Macao on the 2d of January, 1787-As soon as the necessary arrangements had been madefor his second year's voyage, Perouse proceeded to Manilla,whence he sailed in the beginning of April for theexpress purpose of surveying the east coast of Tatary.In his way he touched at the Pectore and LoochooIslands, but without having any intercourse with theInhabitants. He afterwards made the island of Quel-chap.VII. VOYAGE OF LA Peruse, ETC. 99part, and ran along the coast of Core. Cape Not,on the western side of Japan, was soon afterwards discovered.As Perouse explored these seas, which werebut little known to European navigators, with all theadvantages resulting from the growth of astronomicalscience and the improvement of instruments ; and as hehad before him the example of the indefatigable Cook,to whose vigilance and activity he does ample justice,the observations made by him on the points which fellwithin his route, were calculated to serve as the basis ofa juster geographical delineation.At length, in the middle of June, the French shipsmade the coast of Tatary, in lat. 42°, and ran along ata little distance from the shore without perceiving anywherethe least indication of inhabitants. A harbourwas discovered, in lat. 45° 13', where the ship came toan anchor, and which received the name of Bale deTernai. On going ashore, the French were astonishedto find that a country apparently fertile, and loaded withthe best gifts of nature, was yet without inhabitants.The vegetation resembled that of France, but was rathermore vigorous and luxuriant. Roses and lilies of variouskinds covered the ground. The summits of the mountainswere clothed with tall pine trees ; lower downbegan the oak forests, which extended, gradually diminishingin loftiness, to the sea shore. Maple, birch, andother trees overhung the borders of the brooks and rivers.Natural orchards of apples, medlars, and hazel skirtedthe woods. The French, in endeavouring to explorethe country, were unable to proceed, from the height ofthe grass; and the appearance of some formidable snakes,added to the difficulties of impassable meadows, confinedthem to the shore. Traces of man were found here, butnot of his permanent habitation. Trees were seen whichhad been cut with edge tools, and burial places containinga variety of relics.On proceeding again to sea, land was discovered to theeast; and the French now found that they were sailingin a channel, or deep gulf. They anchored in a bay ofh 2100 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.this eastern land, which proved to be the land of Saga-been,where they had the good fortune to meet with inhabitants— an intelligent, peaceable, and hospitable race — fromwhom some valuable information was obtained respectingthe coast which they were exploring. A native being desiredby signs to draw a map of the countries with whichhe was acquainted, began by drawing on the west a lineto represent the sea-coast of Tatary or the country ofthe Mandchoos, which name he pronounced exactly asthe French did. On the west he described an island ofgreat length, which he called Choke, and, by pointing tohimself, signified that it was his own country. He lefta narrow channel between this island and the coast ofTatary, and where it was narrowest, near its northernextremity, he placed the mouth of the river Sagaleen, aname which he also pronounced in such a way as to beeasily recognised by the French. The mouth of this riverhe intimated was distant from his village a voyage of sevendays in a canoe. The French were anxious to ascertainthe correctness of this information by examining thewhole channel to the north ; but finding that the seashoaled uniformly as they advanced in that direction,while, at the same time, the prevalence of the south windscaused a heavy swell, and covered them with perpetualfogs, making it dangerous to proceed and difficult to return,they deemed it imprudent to investigate it any farther.After a tedious navigation to the south, the shipsreached the strait which separates the land of Sagaleenor Choke from that of Yesso : to this strait geographershave given the name of La Perouse. The fresh intercoursewhich our navigators had here with the natives,seemed to confirm the accounts which they had alreadyreceived respecting the channel in which they had beensailing. They arrived at the conclusion, that Sagaleenis separated from the continent of Asia by a channel,reduced near the mouth of the river Sagaleen to a verynarrow width, and too shallow to be navigated by largevessels. In leaving the straits to which he has givenhis name, Perouse recognised the coasts described in theCHAP. VII. VOYAGE OF LA Peruse, ETC. 101voyage of the Castrum, though hitherto the account ofthe ancient Dutch navigator had been considered as ofno authority.The discoveries made by Perouse in this part of hisvoyage were of the utmost importance to geography.The island of Sagaleen (if it be really an island and notapeninsula) is one of the largest on the surface of theglobe ; and yet so obscurely was it known to Europeans,that the Russians, who pretended to a more accurateacquaintance with those seas, even ventured to deny itsexistence. The land of Yesso, or Yedzo, also, which hadhitherto been magnified and coloured through the mediumof fable, now began to assume an aspect of reality.At Kamtschatka Perouse experienced the same cordialhospitality as the English navigators ; to the memory ofone of whom he had an opportunity of showing a generousattention. A brother of the celebrated French geographerDe Lisle had accompanied the expedition of Behring inTshiricof 's ship, in the quality of astronomer ; but sickness,which made so many victims among his companions,did not spare him, and his life terminated withthe expedition. Captain Gierke, when he arrived atKamtschatka, sought and discovered the place of intermentof a stranger, whom the love of science had carriedto the eastern extremity of Asia ; and he distinguishedthe tomb of De Lisle de la Croire by an honourableinscription. Captain Clerke himself, whenhe visited Kamtschatka again, after a second run to thenorthward, closed here his laborious career, and was interredon shore. But time and the climate had effacedthe inscription on his tomb: this Perouse took pains tore-establish, and, to prolong its duration, ordered it tobe engraved on copper. There is something peculiarlyinteresting in these mutual attentions of navigators,strangers to each other, but inspired with fraternalfeelings by common danger and distance from home ;where perhaps the dissociating spirit of national animositymight have forced them to regard each other withthe bitterest hatred.h 3102 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.When the ships were refitted and about to proceed tosea, Perouse obtained permission from the governor ofKamtschatka to allow M. Lesseps, who had accompaniedthe expedition as Russian interpreter, to proceed toEurope over land. By him were sent to France thejournals and surveys of the voyage as far as it had hithertoproceeded. Lesseps accomplished the journey with success,and, being an intelligent young man, was able toconvey to Europe much information respecting countrieshitherto but little known. He was the first to perform ajourney completely across the old world.Perouse having again put to sea, sailed for some timein the parallel of 37°, seeking in vain for lands markedin the ancient Spanish charts. He then crossed the linefor the third time, and arrived at the Navigators' Isles.He anchored at the island of Maouna, where, as the crewsnow began to feel the want of fresh water and provisions,he hoped to be able to establish a friendly intercoursewith the natives. The multitude of canoes seenhere, and the familiarity of the island population with thesea, justly entitled the inhabitants of this archipelago, inthe opinion of La Perouse, to the title of navigators.The natives of Maouna, with whom the French unfortunatelybecame more intimately acquainted, were ahandsome vigorous race, well proportioned, and of greatstature ; the men being commonly about six feet twoinches in height, and at the same time remarkably robust.They looked on the French as pygmies; and the sense oftheir physical superiority incited them to an insolenceand audacity which led at length to fatal results.The French, observing the utmost forbearance andcaution in their dealings with these people, succeeded inobtaining a stock of provisions and water from theisland, and Perouse, whose mind seems to have beenfilled with some presentiment of danger, was anxious toquit the place ; but M. de Angle, the commander ofthe Astrolabe, having discovered, as he thought, a securelittle harbour, with a stream of fresh water running intoit, was desirous of increasing his stock of this necessaryCHAP. VII. VOYAGE OF LA Peruse, ETC. 103article, and succeeded in obtaining an assent to his proposition.The boats from both the ships, containing inall sixty-three persons well armed, proceeded to theshore under his command. But the harbour which hadso much fixed his admiration was found to be so filledwith coral rocks, as to be accessible only by a narrowchannel, and it was so shallow within that the boatscould hardly approach the beach. Notwithstandingthese difficulties, the French commenced their operationsof watering.The natives, at first few in number, lent their assistance; but, as they became more numerous they grewalso more insolent, and at length the retirement of thewomen and children from the crowd gave signs of approachinghostility. The French retreated to the smallboats, which alone could approach the shore, and beingthus crammed together were less capable of using theirfire-arms with effect. The natives now commenced theirattack, throwing stones of two or three pounds' weightwith uncommon force and precision. The small boatswere quickly destroyed, and all those who did not throwthemselves into the water on the side remote from theshore, and swim to the cutters, were cruelly massacred,the natives drawing the dead bodies ashore, and manglingthem with barbarous exultation. Captain de Anglehimself was the first who fell. M. Lebanon, the naturalistof the expedition, and nineteen more, perished inthis melancholy affray. When those who escapedreached the ships with an account of the catastrophe,the grief and indignation of the crews rose to a pitch offury which Perouse found it difficult to restrain. Theydesired ardently to avenge on the barbarous islandersthe deaths of their murdered comrades ; but he succeededin appeasing them in some measure, and averted theevils that must have resulted from giving way to a sallyof passion, at best unavailing, and perhaps unjust.This second misfortune which befel the expeditionmust have thrown a great gloom over the minds of allh 4104 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.who were engaged in it, and rendered them more suspiciousin their intercourse with uncivilised tribes. Itmight have been owing, in some degree, to this circumstancethat Perouse, in sailing by Vavaoo, and someother islands, of which Cook had heard glowing accountsfrom the Friendly islanders, did not endeavour toestablish any communication with the natives. He madelittle delay in passing through this interesting archipelago,and continued his course to the southward, till hecame in sight of Norfolk Island. His naturalists, however,were less fortunate than those who accompaniedCook, and were unable to effect a landing on this sequesteredspot.When the French ships arrived in Botany Bay, wherethey designed to refit themselves completely for theirthird campaign, they were overjoyed to see some Englishmen of war lying at anchor there. The meetingof Europeans in the remotest quarter of the globe is likethe meeting of old friends and relations. Perouse foundthat the English, who had come here for the purpose ofestablishing a colony, were removing their settlement toPort Jackson, a fine harbour situated a few miles to thenorth. He acknowledges that he received every attentionfrom the setters and governor of the new colony, withwhich, as it was distant from them only ten miles overland,he was able to maintain a constant intercourse. By theEnglish ships he sent to Europe the remainder of hisjournal and charts since his departure from Kamtschatka.In a letter also written from Botany Bay, and datedFebruary 7- 1 787, he gives the following intimation ofthe plan he intended to pursue during the remainder ofhis voyage: — " I shall proceed," he says, " to theFriendly Islands, and do every thing enjoined in myinstructions relative to the southern part of New Caledonia,to the island of Santa Cruz of Mendana, thesouthern coast of the Land of the Arsacides of Surville,and the Land of Louisiade of Bougainville, and shallendeavour to ascertain whether the latter constitutes apart of New Guinea, or is separated from it by a strait.CHAP. VII. VOYAGE OF LA Peruse, ETC. 105Towards the end of July, 1788, I shall pass betweenNew Guinea and New Holland by another channel thanEndeavour Strait, if any such exist ; and during themonth of September and part of October I shall visit theGulf of Carpentaria, and all the coast of New Holland,as far as Van Diemen's Land ; but in such a mannerthat it may be possible for me to stretch northward timeenough to arrive at the Isle of France in the beginningof December, 1788." Such was the tenour of the lastcommunication received from this unfortunate navigator.He sailed from Botany Bay soon after the date of thisletter, and nothing was known of his fate till our owndays.La Perouse appears to have been an enthusiastic admirerof captain Cook ; and, among the immediate followersof that great man, there was no other whoimitated him more successfully in his endeavours topreserve the health of his men. There was but littlesickness on board the French ships ; and the fatal accidentswhich took place at Port des Francois and theNavigators' Isles, are rather to be ascribed to the heedlessimpetuosity of the French than to the imprudenceof their commander. Cook had ascertained with precisionthe position of so many places in the South Sea,as greatly to facilitate its navigation to those who cameafter him. In this also La Perouse laudably emulatedthe fame of our great navigator ; and, being accompaniedby men of abilities, and provided with the instrumentswhich the advanced state of science rendered desirable,his observations formed a valuable accession to geography.He defined with truth, though not with minuteness, thatpart of the north-west coast of America which Cook hadbeen prevented from examining ; and uniting his surveywith those of the English and Spanish navigators, hecompleted the general outline of that continent. Hisdiscoveries on the coast of Tatary were still more important; and, considering the difficulties he had to contendwith, reflect the highest credit on his skill andperseverance.106 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Above two years had now elapsed from the time whichLa Perouse had fixed on for his return home, and nointelligence whatever could be met with respecting hisfate : there could be no doubt, therefore, that he hadsuffered shipwreck, and had either been swallowed upin the ocean, or, perhaps, still survived with the remnantof his companions on some sequestered island inthe South Sea, tormented by the capricious enmity ofthe barbarous natives, and by the agonising reflectionthat he was exiled for ever from his native country.These considerations induced the National Assembly topass a decree in February, 1791; in which they entreatedthe king of France to communicate with the sovereignsof European nations, and implore them, in the name ofhumanity, to enjoin their subjects navigating in everypart of the world, and particularly in the South Sea, tocollect what tidings they could respecting the unfortunateFrench expedition ; and if they met with any ofits survivors, to render them all the assistance in theirpower. The king was at the same time entreated toequip two ships, for the double purpose of investigatingthe fate of La Perouse and of completing the plans ofgeographical discovery which he had left unfinished.The command of this expedition was given to admirald'Entrecasteaux. On his arrival at the Cape of GoodHope he received an express from India, informing himthat among the Admiralty Isles, to the west of NewBritain, the commander of a Dutch ship had seen thenatives dressed in the uniform of the French navy; whencehe concluded that the French ships had been thrownaway there. Notwithstanding the intrinsic improbabilityand imperfect authenticity of this report, which placedthe wreck of the expedition so far from its intendedcourse, D'Entrecasteaux found himself obliged to disproveits correctness by ocular examination. Before hesailed from France, a report had been spread there by anEnglish captain, a prisoner of war, that the wreck of aFrench ship had been seen by him on the south side ofNew Georgia, a portion of the Salomon Islands.CHAP. VII. VOYAGE OF LA rEROUSE, ETC. 107When D'Entrecasteaux reached the Admiralty Isleshe was unable to discover any thing that could countenancethe belief that French ships had at any timebeen lost there : he accordingly resumed his originalplan of operations, sailed round New Holland on thewest and south, and then proceeded from Botany Bayto examine the route which La Perouse, in his last letter,had intimated his intention to pursue. In order to accomplishsatisfactorily the main object of his voyage,and to discover the traces, if any existed, of his shipwreckedcountrymen, he made it a rule to sail as nearthe shore as could be done with safety; and this circumstance,added to the minuteness of his surveys and theaccuracy of his observations, rendered this voyage productiveof much geographical information ; not, indeed,in discoveries of magnitude or importance, but in theexact delineation of long lines of coast. The observationsof the naturalist La Billardiere, who accompaniedthe expedition, have also contributed much to improveour knowledge of the productions of the globe. D'En-trecasteaux, however, could find no vestiges, nor collectany tidings, of La Perouse : he was satisfied, from hisexamination of the natives, that that unfortunate commanderhad never visited the Friendly Islands. On hisreturn home the French admiral saw at a distance oneof the Queen Charlotte group, which he named Islede Recherche, and which, by a strange fatality, heomitted to examine as narrowly as he was accustomed.He died soon after, as well as the officer second in command.Sickness made such ravages among the crews,that nearly one third of the men was carried off beforethe arrival of the expedition at Java; where, to completethe train of misfortunes, the ships were seized by theDutch as prizes, and the officers learned the fatal eventsof the French revolution, by which they were deprivedof their commissions.Thus terminated the expedition of D'Entrecasteaux,hardly less unfortunate than that which it went in searchof. The confusion in which France was plunged pressMODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.vented any further undertaking in search of La Perouse;and nearly forty years elapsed before a single ray oflight appeared to dispel the cloud of mystery that hungover his fate.In September, 1813, the Bengal ship Hunter, commandedby captain Robson, touched at the Feejee Islandsto procure a cargo of sandal wood. The natives arenow accustomed to trade with Europeans, sometimesassisting in furnishing the cargo, and are repaid for theirtrouble chiefly by fire-arms and ammunition. TheEuropean traders, also, uninfluenced by any sentimentsbut those of gain, not unfrequently assist them in theirbarbarous warfare, and help them, if not to devour theirenemies, at least to provide the banquet. Hence deadlyanimosities naturally arise between the Europeans andsome tribes of the natives ; and while the Hunter lay atoneof these islands, all the Europeans on shore, themajority of whom were profligate characters who haddeserted from trading ships and settled there, were massacredand eaten by the Indians, with the exception ofthree: Martin Bushart, a Prussian, with his wife, aFeejee woman, and Scholia, a Lascar, took refuge onboardthe Hunter, and begged to be put on shore at thefirst habitable island that should be met with. Theywere accordingly landed, with their consent, at Tucopiaor Farewell Island, in lat. 12° 15' S., long. 169°, at thesouth-eastern extremity of the Queen Charlotte Islands,where they were kindly received by the natives.In May, 1826, captain Dillon, who had been an officeron board the Hunter during the voyage of that ship tothe Feejee Islands, and who was one of the three Europeansthat escaped from the hands of the islanders,returning from Valparaiso to Pondicherry in the St. Patrick,came in sight of the island of Tucopia : curiosityprompted him to enquire after his old acquaintances whohad been put ashore there. As he approached the land,canoes came off to him with the Lascar and MartinBushart. The gunner of the ship bought from theLascar a silver sword guard ; and, in answer to the en-chap.VII. VOYAGE OF LA Peruse, ETC. 109queries made respecting the mode in which the islandershad procured it, Martin Bushart related that on his firstarrival on the island he found there several iron bolts,axes, knives, tea cups, one silver spoon, and some otherarticles, all of French manufacture. When, in the courseof a couple of years, he had acquired the language of thenatives, he learned that no ship had been seen at theisland previous to the Hunter, but that all those articleshad been brought from Manicolo, a group of islandssituated two days' sail in a canoe to the westward. CaptainDillon thought he could discern on the silver swordguard the initials of La Perouse's name; and prosecutinghis enquiries among the natives, many of whom hadvisited the islands to windward, he heard from themthat, many years before, two ships had been thrown awayon the shores of Manicolo ; that the crew of one hadbeen all killed, while the people on the other got safe toshore, where they remained some time, until they builta small vessel with two masts from the wreck of thelarge one : the strangers then went away, leaving behindthem, however, a few of their number, who proved veryserviceable in warfare to the tribes with whom they wereallied. The Lascar, who had visited Manicolo, had seentwo of these Europeans, but he could not be induced toreturn again to that island. Martin Bushart, however,being weary of a savage life, was willing to accompanycaptain Dillon, and to assist him in his researches amongthe islands to windward ; but when the ship had comewithin sight of Manicolo (the Recherche Island of D'En-trecasteaux,) the winds fell calm, provisions also beganto fail; and, delay being particularly prejudicial to tradingvoyages, the captain was obliged to abandon his researchesfor the present, and to hasten his return toPondicherry.On his arrival in India, he lost no time in presentinga memorial to government, stating the clue which hethought he had discovered respecting the fate of La Peruse,and his own fitness, from long habits of intercoursewith the islanders of the South Seas, to prosecute the MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.query ; the result of which was not only interesting tomankind in general, but might redound also not a littleto the honour of the government by whose liberality itwas undertaken. This application immediately met withthe attention it deserved. A ship, named the Research,was placed under the command of captain Dillon, whosailed on his voyage of investigation in January, 1827.He first touched at Tucopia, where he provided himselfwith a native pilot and interpreter, and then proceeded toManicolo, which, after an accurate survey, he found to bealmost entirely surrounded at a little distance by a reefof coral rocks, passable only at a few narrow openings.From the natives, with whom he was able to establish afriendly correspondence, he learned that one of the shipshad struck at a place called Shannon, and sunk in deepwater, the other ran on the rocks near Paiou, and fromher the strangers landed, and remained on the island fivemonths, during which time they built themselves a smallvessel. They pointed out the place where these operationshad been carried on, and it seemed well adapted tothe purpose. The natives denied that they had attackedand killed the crew of one of the ships ; nor was captainDillon able to find any confirmation of the report, whichhe had heard from the Tucopians, that the skulls of theshipwrecked strangers were preserved in a public buildingcalled the spirit-house : he is of opinion that thehostility of the islanders to the French, who it appearswere obliged, while they remained on the island, to entrenchthemselves with wooden palisades, arose not fromwanton barbarity, but from the belief that the strangerswere preternatural beings, or spirits of the sea. Thattheir habitual ferocity was irritated by superstition isrendered likely from the accounts which they give ofthe French, whom they describe as conversing with thesun and the stars by means of a long stick, thus obviouslyalluding to the business of the observatory. Thecocked hats of the French perhaps misled them into thebelief that their noses .were a yard long. Their descriptionof the sentinels was not less ludicrous ; for theyCHAP. VII. VOYAGE OF LA Peruse, ETC. Illrepresented them as men standing on one leg, and holdinga bar of iron in their hands.Captain Dillon applied himself with assiduity andsuccess to collect the relics of the French. On examiningthe coral reef where the ship had struck, he discoveredand raised several brass guns. From the natives he purchasedsome fragments of a theodolite, the blackboard ofa ship, ornamented with a fleur-de-lis ; a ship's bell withthe inscription Basin m'afait; a great quantity of ironin bars and bolts; some fragments of china; fragmentsof barometer tubes, and other articles. In April he returnedto Calcutta.When captain Dillon arrived in Paris, in February1828, with the relics of the French expedition, he wasgraciously received by Charles X., who liberally recompensedhis toils with a pension of 4000 francs. CountLesseps, who had quitted the expedition of La Perouseat Ivamtschatka, recognised the guns and the millstonesas resembling those which were on board the Frenchfrigates ; the carved blackboard also he believed to havebelonged to the Boussole ; the armorial bearings, engravedon the bottom of a silver candlestick includedamong the relics, were at the same time recognised bythe expert genealogist, sir William Bentham, to be thoseof Chignon, who was botanist on board the same frigate.Thus it appears likely that the Boussole, with La Perusehimself, was thrown upon the ridge, while theAstrolabe and all her people sank in deep water : whatbecame of the unfortunate commander, after he left Manicolo,it is impossible to conjecture. Of the two Frenchmenwho had been seen on that island by the Lascar, onehad died at an advanced age, about three years beforecaptain Dillon's arrival there ; the other had followedthe fortunes of a chief with whom he was allied, andwho, being worsted by his enemies, had retired to someof the neighbouring islands.112 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.CHAP. VIII.EUROPEANS IN THE SOUTH SEA.ARRIVAL OF THE PENRHYN AT OTAHEITE. CAPTAIN WATTS PretendsTHAT COOK STILL LIVES. VOYAGE OF CAPTAIN BLIGH.HIS STAY AT OTAHEITE. MUTINEERS SEIZE THE BOUNTY.SURPRISING VOYAGE OF Bligh IN AN OPEN BOAT.THE MUTINEERS SAIL TO OTAHEITE. CARRY OFF THE LIVESTOCK. PROCEED TO TOOBOOAI. OBLIGED TO RETURN. —THE BOUNTY SAILS FROM OTAHEITE BY NIGHT. IS HEARDOF NO MORE. THE MUTINEERS SEIZED. THE PANDORAWRECKED. BLIGH'S SECOND VOYAGE. Hee-hee AccompaniesHIM TO THE WEST INDIES. THE POSTERITY OF THEmutineers FOUND ON PITCAIRN's ISLAND. DESCRIPTION OFTHE PEOPLE. HISTORY OF THEIR SETTLEMENT. —THE AntelopeWRECKED AT THE PELEW ISLANDS. PRINCE LEE BOOVISITS ENGLAND. CHANGES EFFECTED IN THE SOUTH SEAISLANDS. INCREASED VALUE OF IRON. OLD ARTS Forgotten.INFLUENCE OF EUROPEAN TRADERS. REVOLUTION INTHE SANDWICH ISLANDS. THE MISSIONARIES. —THE ART OFPRINTING INTRODUCED INTO OTAHEITE. INDUSTRY OF THENEW ZEALANDERS. — CHRISTIANITY EMBRACED BY THEFRIENDLY ISLANDERS.Though Cook was not the first navigator who visitedthe South Sea, yet, by the combined merit of his discoveries,and of his skill in preserving the health of hiscrew in long voyages, he may be said to have been thefirst who traced a permanent path across the great ocean,and laid it completely open to the enterprise of Europeans.The fur trade on the north-west coast ofAmerica, to which he guided the hardy enterprise ofBritish merchants ; the colony in New South Wales,which also originated in his discoveries ; and the successwith which he wintered and provisioned his ships amongthe numerous islands of the great ocean; were all somany causes which led to a frequent and active intercoursebetween Europeans and the islanders of the SouthSea. The fur trade started up with vigour immediatelyCHAP. VIII. EUROPEANS IN THE SOUTH SEA. 113on the return of his ships from the last expedition ; butthe active tide of commerce originating in this impulseran at first to the northward of the line, so as to embraceonly the Sandwich Islands in its scope.It was not till eleven years had elapsed after Cook'slast visit to Otaheite, that a European ship again touchedat that island. In 1788, the Penrhyn, commanded bylieutenant Watts, on her voyage from Port Jackson toChina, being in great want of water and provisions, ranfar to the east and made the island of Otaheite. Thenatives were so earnest in their enquiries respecting captainCook, that lieutenant Watts, fearful lest he shouldlose his influence with them if he revealed the truth,pretended that Cook was still alive and returning to visithis Indian friends. A portrait of himself, which thatgreat navigator had left with the king of the island as atoken of his esteem, was brought on board the Penrhynto be repaired. Notwithstanding the charge of levitybrought against the islanders of the South Sea, and particularlythe inhabitants of Otaheite, their attachment tothose who first made them acquainted with the arts ofcivilisation appears to have been unalterably sincere.Not long after the departure of the Penrhyn fromOtaheite, captain Bligh arrived there in the Bounty. Hehad been sent to the South Sea for the purpose of collectingplants of the bread-fruit tree, and other valuablevegetable productions, to be afterwards transplanted toour colonies in the West Indies. He helped to confirmthe natives in the delusive belief that captain Cook wasstill living. He experienced from them all the kindtreatment that the dissensions of the island would allow :Pomare the king, and his queen Idea, entreated himto carry them to Britain. Having remained eight monthsin Matavai Bay, and taken on board above 1000 plantsof the artocarpus, or bread-fruit tree, captain Bligh leftthe island to return home : but his crew were becomecorrupted by the life of indolence and enjoyment whichthey had led here. The superiority which they possessedover the islanders, and the homage they receivedVOL. III. I114 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.from them, intoxicated their minds, and allowed them tosee only the alluring side of a semi-barbarous life. Theyformed a plan of mutiny, which they put in executionwhen the ship was leaving the Friendly Islands ; andcaptain Bligh, being seized by the mutineers, was forcedinto an open boat with his officers and a few of his meninall sixteen persons ; and, with a compass and smallstock of provisions, was turned adrift, and left to makehis way homewards. The mutineers in the Bounty,under the command of Fletcher Christian, then put theship about, and giving three cheers for Otaheite, soondisappeared. This occurred not far from the island ofToofooa, on which Bligh landed, in hopes of obtaining astock of water ; but the islanders, perceiving his weakness,were disposed to detain him and his companions,and with difficulty he effected his escape. After a mostsurprising voyage, he reached the Dutch settlement atTimor, having passed Torres's Strait by a channel differentfrom that explored by Cook, and having madesuch observations in his passage, notwithstanding hiswant of instruments, as to render considerable service togeography.In the mean time the mutineers in the Bounty, underthe command of Fletcher Christian, one of the mates,directed their course to Otaheite; but not thinking itprudent to remain on an island where detection andpunishment would be so likely to follow their offence,Christian steered for Toobooai, an island discovered byCook in his second voyage, about 100 leagues to thesouth of Otaheite; but the want of animals on that islandforming a great objection to their residing on it, themutineers returned to Otaheite, where Christian told thenatives that he had met captain Cook, who commandedhim to get all the five stock possible, to make a settlementon an island not far to the west. The islanders,overjoyed at this intelligence, and anxious to evince theirzeal for the great man whose presence they shortly expected,vied with each other in executing the commandsof Christian ; and in a few days he was able to set sailCHAP. VIII. EUROPEANS IN THE SOUTH SEA. 115for Toobooai, having on board <l60 hogs and 50 goats,besides a plentiful supply of dogs, cats, and poultry.The bull and cow left on the island by captain Blighwere also taken away, but the former soon after died ofthe injuries he received. Several Otaheitean women, anda still greater number of men, who had concealed themselvesin the ship, accompanied the mutineers. Amongthese emigrants was Oedidee, or more properly Hete-here, the native of Borabora, who had accompanied captainCook during a part of his second voyage. But atToobooai the mutineers could not agree with the nativeinhabitants, whose continual hostilities rendered theirabode there so uncomfortable, that in 1789 they quittedit for the third and last time. As soon as the Bountyanchored in Matavai Bay, some of the natives, and sixteenof the mutineers, went on shore. Those who remainedon board cut their cable in the night and put tosea, and no account was heard of them for many years :thirty-five islanders, men, women, and children, wentwith them.The Englishmen who remained at Otaheite, and whohad been seduced into crimes by the hope of a life ofease and pleasure, were now obliged to exert themselves,to avert the consequences of their helpless situation.They succeeded in building a schooner of forty tons ;and astonished the natives not so much by their skill asby their industry and perseverance. The example oftheir boldness and vigour must have excited an importantinfluence on the simple natives ; and their intrinsic superioritywould probably in a short time have renderedthem practically masters of the island. One of them,named Churchill, actually became sovereign of Wahea-door, the smaller peninsula, by right of succession to histito, or friend, the former king. The natives seemed tohave been proud of their foreign chief ; for when he wasmurdered by an envious comrade, they avenged his deathby burying the assassin under a shower of stones.In 1791, the Pandora frigate, captain Edwards, art2116 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.rived at Otaheite, having been sent by the British governmentto apprehend the mutineers. All of these whoremained on the island, fourteen in number, were takenon board, to the inexpressible grief of the islanders. ThePandora was wrecked on her passage home, in EndeavourStraits, and four of the mutineers were among the numberof those who perished on that occasion. Of the tenwho arrived in England, only three suffered sentence ofdeath.No tidings, in the mean time, could be met with respectingChristian and the seven mutineers who hadsailed with him in the Bounty ; and twenty years passedover before any clue was found to the mystery of hisfate. At length, in 1808, captain Folgar, commandingan American trader, touched at Pitcairn's Island to completehis cargo of seal skins. He supposed that theisland was uninhabited, but, to his surprise, three youngmen, who spoke English well, came off to the ship in adouble canoe, with a present of fruit and a hog. Theysaid that their father was an Englishman, who hadsailed with captain Bligh ; and captain Folgar, onlanding, saw an Englishman, named Alexander Smith,who had been one of the crew. He was the only oneof the mutineers who remained alive, the rest havingbeen murdered by the Otaheitean men, who were immediatelyafter sacrificed to the vengeance of the widows.Smith appears to have been uneasy at the discoverymade of his retreat, for in all subsequent accounts heappears under a changed name. In 1 8 1 4, captain Stainesfell in with Pitcairn's Island, and found, to his astonishment,that all the inhabitants, forty-six in number, spokegood English. A venerable old man, named John Adams,was the patriarch of the community, or rather family, inwhich no germs of discord or vice had yet found place.The eldest born on the island was the son of Christian,and was baptized Thursday October Christian. OldSmith, or Adams, was at first much alarmed lest theEnglish were coming to apprehend him ; but this fearonce dispelled, he and his people expressed the mostCnAP.VIII. EUROPEANS IN THE SOUTII SEA. 117extravagant joy at the sight of those whom they werepleased to call countrymen.The young natives of Pitcairn's or Christian's Islandare beautifully formed, uniting the vigour so commonamong the islanders of the South Seas with featuresdecidedly English. The women, in particular, are remarkablefor their majestic carriage and matchless symmetry: they are, at the same time, modest, innocent,and cheerful. The houses on the island are well built,and neatly furnished with beds and bedsteads. A supplyof instruments, such as spades, hatchets, &c. was madefrom the iron in the Bounty, which was broke up forthat purpose. The ground was cultivated by both sexes ;the first colonists availing themselves of European seeds,as well as of the native productions of the South Sea.Old Adams kept a journal, in which he entered minutelythe quantity of work done by each individual : and besidesprivate property, there seemed to be a general stock;or, perhaps, it may rather be concluded, that in the infancyof society the whole community feels a nearerinterest in the industry and welfare of each of itsmembers.Some further particulars relating to this interestingcommunity were learned in 1819, from an Otaheiteanwoman, who visited New South Wales. She was thewife of Isaac Madden, one of the mutineers, but had atfirst fallen to the lot of Smith, by whom she was marked,or tattooed, on the left arm, with the initials of his nameand date, "A. S. 1789-" According to her account,Neddy Young, another mutineer, discovered the art ofdistilling spirits from the tee root ; hence the jealousyand quarrels, which terminated in the death of all theEuropeans except Smith, who saved his life by crawlinginto a wood when desperately wounded. The very nightafter this massacre took place, the Otaheitean widowsavenged the murder of their husbands by putting all theircountrymen to death. Thus Smith remained the onlymale on the island, with the exception of some youngchildren. There was, however, no child of unmixed1 3118 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Otaheitean race after this calamity. The still was givento the first American ship that touched at the island, inexchange for a boat, which proved a very valuable acquisition.In 1822, a whaler which touched at Pitcairn'sIsland, found that its population had increased to sevenfamilies, consisting of fifty-three persons. Adams andsix Otaheitean women were all that remained of the originalsettlers. There were eleven active, vigorous youngmen, able and willing to assist a ship in obtaining asupply of wood and water. They were observed to bevery exact in their religious observances, and to fastrigidly on Friday. The children also wore crosses ontheir necks ; but though resembling the other South Seaislanders in the simplicity of their lives, the natives ofPitcairn's Island are quite exempt from the vices of thebarbarous state, and are perhaps destined to exert oneday an influence on the scattered inhabitants of Polynesiaproportioned to their physical perfection and theiraptitude to learn.Bligh returned to the South Seas in 1792, and succeededin effecting the object of his mission ; he carrieda large stock of plants of the bread-fruit tree to the WestIndian Islands, and persuaded Hee-hee, tentative of theSociety Islands who had accompanied Cook during partof his second voyage, to go with him to the West Indiesto take care of the young plants.The Pelew Islands, which are situated between theCarolines and Philippine Islands, were long known to theSpanish navigators, who in their voyages to Americafrom Manilla could distinguish them from a distance;but owing to the supineness or reserve of the Spaniards,very little information was possessed respecting theseislands until 1783, when the East India ship, the Antelope,captain Wilson, was wrecked on a reef of coralrocks on the western side of the group. The shipwreckedmariners were treated with cordial hospitalityby Abba Thulle, the king of the island, and having builta small vessel, returned to England, accompanied byprince Lee Boo, the son of their hospitable entertainer.CHAP. VIII. EUROPEANS IN THE SOUTH SEA. 1 ] 9The prince died five months after his arrival in London,having become an object of general affection by his docilityand the nobleness of his disposition. In 1790* theEast India company sent two ships from Bombay toconvey to Abba Thulle the melancholy tidings of hisson's death. The English were received by the kindheartedpeople and their venerable chief with the sincerestaffection. This intercourse between the Pelew islandersand the British was productive of a great increase ofnatural wealth to the former. The East India companysent them as a present, kine, sheep, fowls of various kinds,corn, and seeds of culinary vegetables; and in 1798, whenthese islands were visited by another English vessel, tamecattle were found to have multiplied exceedingly, andthe newly introduced vegetables w r ere in abundance.No discoveries of striking importance have been madein the South Sea since the days of Cook : many islands,indeed, have been visited which were before unknown,but these form unimportant additions to the great membersof the Polynesian family with which we are alreadyfamiliar. There are probably many islands in the greatocean which have hitherto escaped our researches ; butthe interest of discovery in that quarter is greatly diminishedby the multitude of islands with which we arealready acquainted.The circumstances of the South Sea Islands, social,moral, and political, have undergone important changeswithin the last half century. The visits of Europeanshave effected a greater revolution in the mannersof those children of nature than could have been expectedin so short a time. When Vancouver visitedOtaheite (1791), he found that iron, notwithstandingthe quantity gradually accumulating in the island fromthe repeated visits of English shipping, had risen considerablyin value ; and, in consequence, that provisionspurchased with that useful metal were 200 per cent,cheaper than in the time of Cook. This he justly attributedto the increased estimation of iron, and not toany superabundance of the articles necessary for the MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.port of life. Tools made of bone and of coral, withwhich the islanders used formerly to build their canoes,and execute workmanship that exhibited surprisingpatience and ingenuity, had fallen into total disuse, sothat if the supply of iron were withdrawn, the islanderswould necessarily retrograde in arts and civilisation.Their canoes had also declined, the people having becomeaware of their imperfection, without being capable ofbuilding any thing better. The cattle left on the islandby Cook and others had not multiplied as might havebeen expected. The natives preferred the milk of thecocoa nut to that of the cow, and these useful animalswere consequently neglected. Goats were too lean fortheir taste, and fell equally into contempt. Thus thewants of the islanders were seriously increased, whilelittle was added to their resources ; but a still more melancholychange was visible in the physical degeneracyof the people, resulting from diseases introduced byEuropeans, and in the consequent depopulation of theisland.This dismal picture, however, was taken in one ofthose turbulent periods of transition which usually precedethe revolutions by which human society makes astriking and permanent progress. Want and afflictionamong a people are the ordinary precursors of exertionand improvement. Within a very few years after Cockexplored the Pacific Ocean, the Society and FriendlyIslands were annually visited by Europeans, actuated ingeneral by no other views but the sordid motives ofgain. As often as the ships touching at the islandswere deficient in their crews, they kidnapped and carriedoff" the natives to complete their complement of men.These acts of violence led to retaliations, which weremore easily provoked, as victory on the side of theislanders was accompanied with much more striking advantages.In many instances they succeeded in seizingsmall vessels, and in making themselves masters of Europeanartillery. On Europeans themselves they set ahigh value ; and although those who lingered in theCHAP. VIII. EUROPEANS IN THE SOUTH SEA. 121South Sea Islands, contented in some measure to relapseto savage life, were generally men of bad character, yetthe natives regarded them with favour and indulgence,and allowed them all the privileges due to their practicalsuperiority.The European shipping in the South Sea is chieflyengaged in the whale fishery, in the fur trade, and inthe trade for sandal wood and other tropical productions.The spermaceti whales have been already pursuedround the globe, but there is no part of the oceanso remote as to afford them a shelter from the perseveranceand cupidity of man. The visits of the whalersare chiefly confined to the islands of the Southern Pacific.The trade in sandal wood, which is carried on inthe Feejee and Friendly Islands, is, from the nature ofthe shipping employed in it, perhaps, the most demoralisingof all. Small colonial vessels, fitted out by needyadventurers, carry on a large portion of this commerce,unrestrained by any national or moral considerations.The fur trade, carried on with the north-west coastof America, has effected a wonderful revolution in theSandwich Islands, which from their situation offered anadvantageous shelter for ships engaged in it. Amongthese islands the fur traders wintered, refitted their vessels,and repaired their stock of fresh provisions ; and, assummer approached, returned to complete their cargo onthe coast of America. Iron tools and, above all, gunswere eagerly sought for by the islanders in exchange fortheir provisions; and the mercenary traders, regardlessof consequences, readily gratified their desires. Fire-armsand ammunition being the most profitable stock to trafficwith, were supplied them in abundance. Hence, theSandwich islanders soon became formidable to theirvisitors ; they seized on several small vessels, and displayedan energy tinctured at first with barbarity, butindicating great capabilities of social improvement. Atthis period, one of those extraordinary characters whichseldom fail to come forth when fate is charged withgreat events, completed the revolution which had its122 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.origin in the impulse of Europeans. Tame-tame-hah,a chief who had made himself conspicuous during the lastand unfortunate visit of Cook to those islands, usurpedthe authority of king, subdued the neighbouring islandswith an army of 1 6,000 men, and made his conquestssubservient to his grand schemes of improvement. Heknew the superiority of Europeans, and was proud toimitate them. Already, in 1796, when captain Brough-tonvisited those islands, the usurper sent to ask himwhether he should salute him with great guns. Healways kept Englishmen about him as ministers andadvisers. In 1817 he is said to have had an army of7000 men, armed with muskets, among whom were atleast fifty Europeans. Tame-tame-hah, who began hiscareer in blood and usurpation, lived to gain the sincerelove and admiration of his subjects, who regarded himas more than human, and mourned his death with tearsof warmer affection than often bedew the ashes of royalty.In the Sandwich and Society Islands, British influencemay be considered as predominant, and indeed themaritime superiority of England has raised her to importancein every part of the Pacific Ocean. The Englishdo not, however, claim a right to any of the islandswhich they frequent. The sovereignty of the SandwichIslands, formally ceded to Vancouver for the king ofGreat Britain, being justly regarded as an honorary title,the literal interpretation of which it would be impossibleto enforce.Still greater revolutions are likely to be effected bythe introduction of Christianity among the South Seaislanders. Missionaries took up their residence in Ota-heite in 1799, and remained there for ten years, without,however, making any converts, and unhappily withoutgaining even the estimation of the people. In thecommotions which then took place in the island, theywere obliged to seek an asylum in Eimeo and the otherSociety Islands, where their efforts were attended withrather more success. At length, in 1817, Pomare, theking of Otaheite, being disposed to embrace Christianity,CHAP. VIII. EUROPEANS IN THE SOUTH SEA. 123the missionaries were invited to return to that island.A piece of ground, or small domain, was ceded to themin Matavai Bay, and they were treated with the generalrespect which might be expected to follow royal protection.The missionaries, on this occasion, brought ahorse as a present to the king ; most of the natives hadheard of a horse which Cook had formerly landed on theisland, but few were old enough to recollect it. Nothingcould exceed their delight on this occasion, when theysaw the animal galloping on the beach, with the captainon his back. They called him Buaa-horo-fenua, andBuaa-afai-taata. or land-running pig, and man-carryingpig.*The missionaries had brought with them a printing-press,and having prepared immediately on their arrivalto print the Gospel of St. Luke in the native language,the first sheets of the work were struck off by the kinghimself, on the 1 eth of June, .1817. When the king enteredthe dwelling of the missionaries for this purpose,the door was closed, and the window darkened, that hemight not be overlooked by the crowds of natives on theoutside, who were assembled as if in expectation of somegreat event. He examined the preparation with greatcare before he proceeded to work. As soon as the paperwas removed from beneath the press, and the coveringlifted up, the chiefs and attendants rushed towards it,to see what effect the king's pressure had produced ;when they beheld the letters black, large, and welldefined, there was a simultaneous expression of delightand wonder. In like manner, when the first sheet wasshown to the crowd without, they raised a general shoutof astonishment and joy. From the docility cf thepeople of Otaheite, and their anxiety to learn, it is probablethat the art of printing, now introduced amongthem, will produce all the effects that the most sanguineexpectations can anticipate. Native teachers are nowrapidly dispersing themselves among the other islands ofthe South Sea ; and, from their superior eloquence inEllis's Polynesian Researches, vol. i.124 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.their own tongue, it is reasonable to expect more decisiveresults from their efforts than from those of Europeanmissionaries.In 1814, a mission was established at Wangeroa, inNew Zealand. The dissensions of the native chiefs, theviolence and fearful barbarity of the people, seem to opposeinsuperable obstacles to the propagation of Christiandoctrines. The missionaries had to endure and to witnessthe most revolting atrocities, and were even compelledto retire for a short time from the island ; butthey have since returned in greater numbers, and theirefforts are beginning to be flattered with the dawn ofsuccess. The New Zealanders, who are a people ofgreat natural energy, and of generous but of fierce dispositions,will probably make their first progress towardssocial improvement, by mixing with civilised people intheir active occupations. They maintain a brisk intercoursewith the British settlements in New South Wales,and the colonial shipping is in a great measure mannedby them. The colonists, on the other hand, resortmuch to New Zealand for naval timber and the flaxplant, and large vessels of 300 tons have been alreadybuilt by them on that island.Christianity has been a long time established in theSandwich Islands, and has been mainly conducive to therapid strides of civilisation made by the inhabitants ofthat group. In the island of Hevaee, also, one of themost important of the Friendly Islands, it was adopted,in 1830, by the king, under whose protection a body ofmissionaries established themselves on the island. Thusit is probable, that ere long the propagation of a purerreligion will wholly extirpate the frivolous and cruel superstitionswhich contribute not a little to impede theprogress of civilisation among the South Sea islanders ;and will serve as a new tie to connect them to the mostactive and enlightened portion of mankind.THE COASTS OF AUSTRALIA. 125CHAP. IX.THE COASTS OF AUSTRALIA.UNKNOWN COASTS OF NEW HOLLAND. ESTABLISHMENT OF ACOLONY AT TORT JACKSON. COAL DISCOVERED ON THE COAST.VOYAGES OF BASS AND FLINDERS IN A SMALL BOAT. BASSPROCEEDS TO THE SOUTH. DISCOVERS TORT WESTERN. —FLINDERS VISITS THE FURNEAUX ISLANDS. FLINDERS ANDBASS DISCOVER PORT DALRYMPLE. CIRCUMNAVIGATE VANDIEMEN's LAND. BASS'S STRAITS. FLINDERS APPOINTEDTO SURVEY THE COASTS OF NEW HOLLAND. HE EXAMINESTHE SOUTHERN COAST. SPENCER'S GULF. PORT Philip. —EXAMINATION OF THE EASTERN COAST. FLINDERS PASSESTORRES STRAITS. SURVEYS THE GULF OF CARPENTARIA.MEETS A FLEET OF MALAYS. REPAIRS TO TIMOR. — RETURNSTO PORT JACKSON. SAILS IN THE LADY NELSON. THE CATOAND LADY NELSON WRECKED. THE CREWS SAVED. FLINDERSGOES TO PORT JACKSON IN AN OPEN BOAT. RETURNS ANDRESCUES THE CREWS. SETS SAIL FOR ENGLAND IN A SMALLSCHOONER. TOUCHES AT MAURITIUS, AND IS DETAINED A3A PRISONER. EXPEDITION OF Baldwin. THE FRENCH MEETFLINDERS. EXPLORE THE SWAN RIVER. SHARKS' BAY.THEIR ENCOMIUMS ON THE COLONY AT PORT JACKSON.The first voyage of Cook had completed the general surveyof the Australian continent, and fixed a limit to its extensiontowards the east ; but still its coasts remained tobe accurately examined, and many parts were still whollyunknown. It was traditionally recollected that theSpanish navigator, Torres, had sailed to the south ofNew Guinea ; but his voyage met with little attentionor credit till 1762, when, on the taking of Manilla, amanuscript journal of his voyage was discovered, whichgave authenticity to the almost forgotten rumours of hisdiscoveries. Still Cook seems to have doubted the existenceof a strait between New Guinea and Terra Australis;and when he sailed between them in 1770, hisachievement had the brilliancy of a new discovery. ,MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY.The Dutch navigators had coasted the northern shoresat a very early period, and Tasman is supposed to havecompleted the survey of that part of the continent ; butas the jealous policy of the Dutch government suppressedthe publication of these voyages, other nationsremained incredulous as to the reality of discoveries whichwere in some measure concealed from them. The Dutchthemselves, it appears, had never solved to their own satisfactionthe most important questions respecting the greatAustralian land, as they still remained ignorant of a greatportion of the eastern and western coasts. They thoughtit probable that the lands discovered on the north andon the south were separated from each other by a greatstrait running from east to west. The first voyage ofCook, by establishing the continuity of the eastern coast,overturned this hypothesis. The vagueness and uncertainty,however, which hung over the ancient surveysof the Gulf of Carpentaria, and the total ignorance of alarge portion of the southern coast, still left ample spacefor the indulgence of theories. It was now, therefore,assumed, that Terra Australis was divided into twogreat islands by a strait running from north to south. Thetime, however, was arrived, when the activity and intelligenceof Europeans were about to be transplanted tothose distant shores, and when the civilised world wasto become accurately acquainted with a fifth quarter ofthe globe.The favourable report which captain Cook had madeof the harbour and country in the neighbourhood ofBotany Bay, with the commercial advantages likely tobe developed from the proximity of New Zealand, hadmade a due impression on the British government; and,in 1 788, captain Philip sailed with a large convoy toestablish a colony in Botany Bay. It was soon foundthat Port Jackson, a few miles to the north, offered afar more advantageous situation for the new settlement,which was accordingly removed thither. The colony,although composed in a great measure of convicts, roseatonce into prosperity ; and the knowledge of the ex-chap.IX. THE COASTS OF AUSTRALIA. 127tensive country in which they were settled graduallyextended, by a succession of those accidents which musttake place wherever there exists the spirit of mercantileenterprise.Seven years after the establishment of the colony, captainHunter was appointed its governor ; and in one ofthe ships which accompanied him to New South Waleswere two young men, Messrs. Flinders and Bass, theformer a midshipman, the latter a surgeon in the navy,both enthusiastically bent on exploring unknown countries.In preparing an expedition, however, for thispurpose, they were left wholly to their own resources,and were unable to provide themselves with any bettervessel than a little boat eight feet long, to which theygave the name of Tom Thumb. In this our bold adventurersembarked, with only a boy to assist them.Directing their course to the south, they examined minutelyevery little cove along the shore, and exploredGeorge's River about twenty miles beyond the extensionof the government survey : the report which they madeof the country led to the establishment of a colony onthe banks of this river. In the following year, 1796,they again put to sea in Tom Thumb ; and after encounteringnumberless difficulties and dangers, arisingfrom the slenderness of their means and the frailness oftheir vessel, they returned with no result of their voyagebut a minute practical acquaintance with a long line ofcoast. They had also given such proofs of courage,skill, and perseverance, as recommended them to bechosen as the instruments of important discoveries.On the return from this second excursion they foundat the colony Mr. Clark, the supercargo of an East In-diana, which, having sprung a leak, was run on shoreat Furneaux Islands. Mr. Clark and some of the crewput to sea in the long boat, in order to reach the Englishcolony, and to procure assistance for their shipwreckedcomrades ; but the boat was thrown on shoreand stove to pieces at Cape Howe, 300 miles from PortJackson. Mr. Clark and Its companions were thus128 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.obliged to travel overland along the coast. In this perilousand fatiguing journey some of them perished offamine, others were cut off by the natives ; so that ofthe whole number only three reached Port Jackson.They reported, that in the course of their march theyhad passed a great number of small rivers, fording someat their mouths, while they were obliged to ascend otherssome miles to gain a passage. In one place, while lightinga fire upon the beach, they accidentally discoveredthat the black stones strewed around them were coal.About the same time lieutenant Shortland, having gonenorthward in pursuit of some convicts that had escaped,discovered, in lat. 33°, a harbour, which he named PortHunter, round which the cliffs displayed a stratum offine coal, so close to the water that vessels could loadfrom it without difficulty. A settlement called Newcastlewas soon after formed here. In the same yearMr. Flinders made an excursion to Furneaux Islands,and brought back such an account of the number of sealsthat frequented that group, as rendered them at once anobject of commercial speculation. All these accidentaldiscoveries were so many incitements to awaken theenergy and call forth the exertions of the young colony.Messrs. Flinders and Bass had now become distinguishedfor their zeal and enterprise ; and, as the prospectsof the colony began to enlarge, the government felta greater interest in the prosecution of distant researches,and gladly availed itself of the zeal which lay within itsreach. In December, 1797, while Mr. Flinders wasemployed on a voyage to Norfolk Island, Mr. Bass wasprovided with a fine whale-boat and a crew of six mento proceed on a voyage of discovery to the south. Onapproaching one of the small islands which he at thesouth-eastern angle of New South Wales, he was surprisedto find on it signs of inhabitants ; and still greaterwas his surprise, to find that its occupants were sevenconvicts, who, having escaped from Port Jackson in aboat, had run ashore here, and had for some time supporteda miserable existence on seals, shell-fish, andCHAP. IX. THE COASTS OF AUSTRALIA. 129petrels. Thus we find that Europeans no sooner reachedthe South Seas and the Australian countries, than theyfound means by their ingenuity and audacity to penetrateinto the most sequestered portions of them. Thechief object of Mr. Bass's voyage was to ascertain whetherthere did not exist an open strait between New Hollandand Van Diemen's Land. Cook and other navigatorshad given it as their opinions that these countries were,connected ; and the popular voice was supposed of courseto assent to these eminent authorities : yet the questionwas by no means decided ; and Mr. Bass experiencednot a little joy on finding that the coast of New Hollandbegan to turn towards the north and west, andoffered evidence of being exposed to the billows of thegreat ocean. He continued this new course till he arrivedat a capacious harbour, which, from its relativesituation, he named Port Western : his provisions werenow consumed, and, notwithstanding his strong desireto make an accurate survey of his new discoveries, hefelt himself obliged to return. He had taken out provisionsfor only six weeks, yet, by replenishing his stockwith fish and sea fowls which he found in great abundance,he contrived to protract his voyage to the eleventhweek, besides bringing home with him two of the convictswhom he had discovered. This voyage of 6'00miles in an open boat is one of the most remarkable onrecord : it was undertaken not through necessity, butwith the deliberate intention of exploring unknown anddangerous shores ; it enriched geography with a knowledgeof 300 miles of coast, and ascertained that theshores of New Holland, instead of running towards VanDiemen's Land, took an opposite direction, and had allthe appearance of being exposed to an open sea. Sohighly did the colonists appreciate the merit of Mr. Bass'sdiscoveries, that the boat in which he made this voyagewas long preserved as a curiosity ; and snuff-boxes, orother toys, made of its keel, were considered as peculiarlyvaluable.In order to prove that Van Diemen's Land was se-vol.III. K1 30 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.parted from the Australian continent by the strait, nothingnow remained but to circumnavigate the former :all conjectures were in favour of the supposition.Mr. Bass returned from his voyage in February, 1 798,and, in October of the same year, he accompanied Mr.Flinders in a small schooner of twenty-five tons tocomplete this important discovery. As they proceededalong the northern shore of Van Diemen's Land, theydiscovered a wide inlet, which appeared to branch off intoseveral great rivers ; one of these branches was exploredto a considerable distance, and found to bear a resemblanceto a chain of lakes, into which descended severalstreams from the distant mountains. The shores werefertile and well wooded, and our hardy voyagers foundan abundant supply in the multitude of black swans thatcovered the stream. This opening was named Port Dalrymple; and, five years later, when a colony was establishedhere by colonel Patterson, the great western branchwas called the Tamar, and its chief auxiliary streamsreceived the names of the North and South Asks.After devoting some time to this interesting discovery,our voyagers proceeded to the west ; and at length, witha mixture of joy and alarm, doubled the north-west capeof Van Diemen's Land, and discerned the coast trendingto the south. They were gratified in thus solving ageographical problem which had baffled so many eminentnavigators, while at the same time they felt not a littletrepidation when their little bark became at once exposedto the great swell of the Southern Ocean : they had thegood fortune, however, to escape the dangers which continuallythreatened them in their voyage to the south.On reaching the south-eastern shore they proceeded toascend the River Derwent, which had been discoveredby D'Entrecasteaux, who named it River du Nord.The country around this fine river was found to begenerally fertile, and abounding with good timber. Thedescription which Mr. Bass gave of it on his return wasso flattering, as to give rise to the establishment of acolony there in 1803. Our voyagers soon after returnedCHAP. IX. THE COASTS OF AUSTRALIA. 131triumphantly to Port Jackson, having now establishedthe insularity of Van Diemen's Land, and made suchdiscoveries, as to its harbours and rivers, as were of theutmost importance to schemes of colonisation. Thestrait through which they effected their passage wasnamed from the person who had first ventured to exploreit, Baas' s Strait.In the following year Mr. Flinders was employed tosurvey Harvey and Glass-House Bays to the north ofPort Jackson ; and, on his return to England immediatelyafter, he met with the reward due to his zeal andability : he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, andappointed to command the Investigator, a ship fitted outfor discoveries on the Australian shores. He was instructedto examine the southern coast, a large portionof which had not yet been seen by any European ; hewas then to proceed to the north-west coast, where, accordingto Dampier's description, the great height of thetides rendered it likely that deep inlets and good harboursmight be found. The Gulf of Carpentaria wasnext to be surveyed, with the important but nearly inaccessiblechannels of Torres' Strait.He arrived at Point Leuwin, the south-western extremityof Australia, in the beginning of December, 1801,and reposed a little after his voyage in King George theThird's Harbour, discovered by Vancouver. The plan ofthe sound, constructed by that skilful navigator, was foundto be perfectly correct. Mr. Flinders, and the gentlemenwith him, attempted to explore the country inland, but werestopped in their progress by a chain of marshes extendingfrom east to west. Few interesting objects presentedthemselves during their voyage to the westward, alongwftat is called Nuts' or Nuit' Land. This coast hadbeen previously surveyed by admiral d'Entrecasteaux, andit only remained to fill up the occasional omissions of hischarts. From King George the Third's Sound to CapeParley, a distance of 300 miles, the shore is low, sandy,and monotonous ; but, beyond Cape Parley, cliffs risefrom the height of from 400 to 600 feet, and extend,k 2132 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.with little variety of appearance, for a length of nearly450 miles. This uniform barrier, of such extraordinarylength, gave rise to some ingenious theories on the partof our navigators : it was conjectured by them to be theouter edge of a reef of coral, raised, by some grandconvulsion of nature, to its present elevation. Theywere unable to approach it near enough to ascertain itsnature, but it appeared to be calcareous. The countrybehind it was completely concealed from view.At length Mr. Flinders, in his progress eastward,arrived at that part of the coast which was still whollyunknown, and doubled a great headland beyond whichthe shores inclined towards the north. This was an interestingdiscovery, and for some time our navigatorsindulged in the hope that they had found the greatstrait which communicated with the Gulf of Carpentaria.This headland was named Cape Catastrophe, from amelancholy accident which occurred near it : — a boatbeing upset in the rippling current at its base, andMr. Thistle, the master, with some of the men, beingdrowned. As the ship proceeded northward our voyagerssoon discerned that they were entering a deep gulf,the termination of which was visible in the lofty mountainstowards the north. One of the highest of thesemountains received the name of Mount Brown from thenaturalist of the expedition, who, notwithstanding allthe difficulties that beset his path, had the perseveranceto ascend it. The view from the top of Mount Brownwas very extensive, its elevation being not less than3000 feet ; but neither rivers or lakes could be perceived,nor any thing of the sea to the south-eastward.In almost every direction the eye traversed over an uninteresting,flat, and woody country ; the only exceptionsbeing the ridge of mountains running to the north, andthe water of the gulf to the south-westward. This greatinlet, which was named, from the first lord of the admiralty,Spencer's Gulf, was found to be about fortyeight miles wide at its mouth, and about 183 miles indepth, measuring from Gam bier's Island, which standsCHAP. IX. THE COASTS OP AUSTRALIA. 133near the entrance. In sailing out of it toward thesouth east, our voyagers held their course between themain land and a large island which received the nameof Kangaroo Island, from the great number of thoseanimals which was seen sporting in every open spot.The soil seemed rich, and the aspect of the country wasinviting. Opposite to Kangaroo Island was another gulf,about ninety miles in depth, which was named Stringent'sGulf.Shortly after he had made these interesting discoveries,Mr. Flinders met the Geography, a Frenchship, commanded by captain Baudin, despatched for thepurpose of exploring the coasts of Australia. Themeeting took place in Encounter Bay, in long. 138° 58'east, and lat. 35° 40' south, which is consequently thelimit of discoveries on this coast made by the respectivecommanders. The next object which attractedthe attention of Mr. Flinders was a fine harbourwhich he discovered near the western entrance of Bass'sStrait, capacious enough for the largest fleet, and surroundedby a beautiful and apparently fertile country.He at first supposed it to be Port Western, discoveredby Mr. Bass ; but on detecting his mistake, (for PortWestern was visible to the south east from the hillsround the shore,) he gave it the name of Port Philip. Anattempt was made to fix a colony here in 1803; butfrom the difficulty of obtaining a sufficient supply offresh water, or from other causes, the project was abandoned,and the settlers removed to Van Diemen's Land.From Port Philip Mr. Flinders proceeded to Port Jacksonto rest his crew and prepare for a second voyage.In July, 1802, our indefatigable navigator again putto sea, and proceeded towards the north ; having escapedthe dangers of the eastern shore, he passed throughTorres' Strait in three days. Bligh and Portlock, whoexplored the strait in 1792, had made the passage innineteen days, while the Chesterfield and another ship,in 1798., had employed ten weeks in the same route.Though Mr. Flinders was purposely hasty, and omittedk 31 34 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.all examinations which might retard his course, yet it isobvious that he ascertained a channel by which vesselsfollowing his guidance might pass expeditiously throughthat intricate strait. His voyage along the eastern shoresof the great Gulf of Carpentaria offers little to interest.For 190 leagues the land is so low that the highest hillscarcely attained the elevation of the ship's topmast :among the Wellesley Islands, at the bottom of the gulf,was found a good road for shipping, and abundance ofprovisions. The western shores displayed greater varietyof surface and luxuriance of vegetation ; the cabbagepalm was abundant; a tree resembling the true sandalwoodwas found there; and nutmegs, probably of inferiorquality, were also met with. Traces of strangers wereseen, which excited still greater attention ; such as theremains of houses, with bamboo partitions ; remnantsof blue cotton cloth, &c; and it was evident that the treesalong the shore had been felled with axes : from allthese circumstances it was conjectured the visitors to thispart of the Australian continent were Asiatics. Thenatives also, who attacked our navigators with greatanimosity and courage, were evidently in the habit ofwaging hostilities with strangers, whom they regardedwith more hatred than fear.No less than 105 days were employed in exploringthe Gulf of Carpentaria, the circuit of which, includingthe windings of the shore, is little less than 400leagues. The form given to it in old maps is not veryerroneous, and it is therefore evidently the result of realexaminations ; but as the authenticity of the Dutchvoyagers was unsupported by the appearance of originaldocuments, they fell into disrepute ; and the Gulf ofCarpentaria began to be considered a sort of fairy land,the product of fancy or imagination.The Investigator had hardly left Melville Bay, a goodharbour in the north-western extremity of the gulf,when those Asiatics were discovered whose traces hadbeen seen for so many miles. They were Malays, to thenumber of 200, in six pross, from Macassar ; and wereCHAP. IX. THE COASTS OP AUSTRALIA. 135part of a fleet of sixty vessels employed on this coast infishing for the trepang or sea-slug, which is considereda great luxury, and bought at a high price by theChinese.In this voyage, about 600 leagues of coast had beenexamined, but the crew of the Investigator being unhealthy,and the ship so unsound as to be hardly seaworthy,Mr. Flinders was obliged to abandon his surveyat Vessels Islands and to proceed for provisions to Timor,whence he returned to Port Jackson in June 1 803.His ship being examined, was found to be so much decayedas to be not worth repairing, and he was consequentlyobliged to return to England to solicit anothership. Embarking therefore in the Porpoise, a small colonialbrig, he sailed in company with the Cato andBridgewater, two large vessels which he engaged to pilotthrough Torres' Strait. It was his intention to completehis survey of the northern coast in the Porpoise, andthen to proceed to England ; but, mortified as he was atthe unsoundness of the Investigator, and consequent lossof the ship, severer trials now awaited him. The wholeeastern coast of New Holland is lined, as has been beforeobserved, by a barrier of coral reefs, on which the seabreaks with dreadful violence ; within them the water issmooth, but the navigation is rendered so difficult by thenumber of islands and shoals, of which the situation isnot ascertained, that seamen generally prefer the visibledangers of the open ocean to those which lie concealednear the land. Mr. Flinders sailed without the reefs,not suspecting any danger, when suddenly, towardsthe close of day, the Porpoise struck on a shoal. Signalswere immediately made to the Cato and Bridgewaterto avoid the danger ; the latter escaped, but theCato struck on a rock, and immediately fell over ; thePorpoise in the mean time filled with water, and it wasfeared, that if she were heaved across the reef she mightsink at once. Mr. Flinders manned a boat, with theintention of reaching the Bridgewater, and concertingmeasures with the commander of that vessel to save thek 41 36 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.sufferers from the wrecks ; but the night was so dark,and the sea so boisterous that he found it utterly impossibleto effect his purpose : it was with some difficultyeven he returned to the wreck where his companions hadgiven him up for lost. As day broke, they were madefully acquainted with the miseries of their situation ; thebows of the Cato were above water, the rest completelysunk. The Porpoise was firmly fixed on the coralrocks, from which it would have been fatal to disengageher. The Bridgewater was out of sight ; the commanderof that ship manifesting the most culpable and heartlessindifference to the sufferings of his companions. Fortunately,a dry sand-bank was visible at the distance ofhalf a mile, large enough to contain the crews of the twoships with their provisions, which were luckily saved ;tents were erected on it, their flags hoisted, the carpentersset to work to build boats, and this dreary little spotin the midst of the ocean witnessed the order and industryof a civilised community. It was now resolvedthat Mr. Flinders should go in the cutter to port Jacksonto procure assistance for the shipwrecked people ;and that if he did not return before the expiration ofthree months that they should embark in boats constructedfrom the timbers of the wrecks. He embarkedaccordingly on his perilous expedition, for such, unquestionably,must be deemed a voyage of 250 leagues in anopen boat, along a coast inhabited by ferocious savages.In thirteen days he arrived at Port Jackson, where hewas hardly recognised by governor King, so much hadfatigue and anxiety altered his appearance. No timewas lost in preparing to relieve the sufferers from thereef. He departed in a few days in the ship Holla andtwo schooners ; in one of which, named the Cumberland,of 20 tons, he determined to proceed himself to England,from Torres' Strait, preferring to encounter the dangersof such a voyage to the mortification of leaving unfinishedthe survey on which he had set his heart. Onlysix weeks had elapsed from the time when he left the bankto that of his return. Nothing could equal the exult-chap.IX. THE COASTS OF AUSTRALIA. 137action of those who remained so long in this forlornsituation, when they perceived on the horizon the mastsof ships advancing to their relief : their commander wasgreeted on his arrival by a salute of eleven guns andthree cheers.Flinders, always intent on the prosecution of hissurvey,and consequently on his voyage to England, soon put tosea in a little schooner, the Cumberland, with a crew oftenmen ; passing through Torres' Strait he reached Companyin Timor in forty-eight days, being less than halfthe time employed by the Bridgewater in sailing toBatavia by the old passage, round New Guinea : but hisschooner was found to be a bad sea vessel ; she leakedmuch, and the pumps were out of order, so that itseemed impossible for her to reach the Cape of GoodHope without undergoing repairs. No alternative remainedtherefore but to touch at the Mauritius. Thisnecessity was the prelude to the greatest misfortunewhich had as yet befallen our adventurous commander.He had left England during the war, but had obtained apassport from the French government, in which hisvessel, the Investigator, was described, and the object ofhis voyage were distinctly stated as the grounds of hisprotection ; but he now arrived at a French colony inanother ship, and it was, unfortunately, discovered fromhis papers, that he had been instructed by governorKing to make himself acquainted with the tides, winds,produce, and circumstances of the island. The passportwas thus infringed in spirit as well as letter. Theseirregularities might be excused, but could not be overlooked; and Mr. Flinders, in pleading his cause withgeneral De Caen, the governor of the island, assumed atone too lofty for one whose conduct stood in need ofa gracious construction. The general himself appearsto have been of an arrogant and tyrannical disposition ;and, for some time, he treated the English commanderwith a needless severity. It was in 1803 that he wasseized as prisoner of war, and he was not allowed todepart until 1810: an order for his liberation had138 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.indeed arrived in the colony at the close of 1 806 ; butgeneral De Caen, under various pretences, delayed its execution.Mr. Flinders is said in the mean time to haverefused an opportunity to escape, which was held out tohim by an East Indiamen on the coast. He was at thetime at large on his parole ; but, though he consideredhimself ill-treated, he would not violate the ties ofhonour.No single navigator has hitherto contributed so largelyto our knowledge of the Australian countries as captainFlinders : besides circumnavigating Van Diemen's Land,the coasts of some of which he minutely surveyed, heexplored the whole southern coast of New Holland, muchof the eastern coast, Torres' Strait, and the great Gulf ofCarpentaria. His observations were lively and accurate,and he seldom failed to establish an intercourse with thetimid and suspicious natives of Australia. Nor wereextensive hydrographical surveys the only fruits of hisvoyages ; he was accompanied in the Investigator byMr. Robert Brown, who, as a philosophical botanist, iswithout an equal, and whose volume on the botany ofNew Holland is among the most valuable contributionsto physical geography.By the detention of captain Flinders in Mauritius,whereby he was prevented from publishing the narrativeof his expedition, the French obtained the short-livedhonour of anticipating him in a display of Australiandiscoveries. In 1801 two ships, the Geography andNaturaliste, commanded by captains Baudin and Hamelin,were despatched by the first consul to complete thediscovery of Terra Australis. No measures were neglectedwhich could add brilliancy and ensure success tothis expedition. Men eminent in every branch of sciencewere attached to it ; but its success was by no meansproportioned to the care bestowed on its equipment, andthe French officers effected much less than Flinders,notwithstanding the superiority of their vessels. They sawbut little of the land. The ships often parted company,and lost their time in seeking the rendezvous appointed inCHAP. IX. THE COASTS OF AUSTRALIA. 139case of these accidents, or in struggling with the adversecurrents, in which they had imprudently engaged themselves.Their difficulties and disappointments have beenascribed to the obstinacy of the commander Baudin, who,as he died before the conclusion of the voyage, had noopportunity of vindicating his character from the chargesbrought against him. Peron, the naturalist, has writtena narrative of the expedition, in which the name of thecommander does not once occur. This writer did notunder-estimate the difficulties of the undertaking :Never had any navigator," he says, " Vancouver aloneexcepted, a more difficult undertaking. In fact, it isnot voyages in the open ocean, however long they maybe,that have in their train such misfortunes and shipwrecks; it is those which, confined to unknown shoresand savage coasts, have continually nev difficulties toencounter and new dangers to experience." Theseobservations reflect much credit on Flinders, who executedso arduous a task with such inadequate means,rather than on the French, who, without encounteringany of the difficulties here enumerated, gained but littleknowledge of the coast. Peron, speaking of captainFlinders, who, it has been seen, had been zealously pursuingAustralian discoveries since 179^, conceitedlyaffirms, " That he was sent by the English governmentto rival our endeavours." The French ship the Geography,passing westward through Bass's Strait, met withFlinders, as we have seen, in Encounter Bay ; and inhis voyage on the southern coast from that point, didlittle more than change all the names hitherto imposed.To the extensive line of coast from Nuit'Land to Bass's Strait he gave the designation of TerreNapoleon : Spencer's and St. Vincent's Gulfs were namedrespectively Golfe Bonaparte and Josephine. In thesame manner every island and cape received a Frenchdenomination.On the western coast the French naturalist examinedthe Swan River, which had been discovered in l6'97 byFlaming, and was thus named by him from the great140 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.number of black swans which he saw there. It was notwithout difficulty that the French officers passed the barof rocks which obstructs the mouth of the river; within,the depth of the stream rapidly increased : when theyascended a considerable way, the river expanded into agreat basin, nearly a league wide, and almost every whereextremely shallow. On climbing a hill near this partof the river, the French officers were charmed with thebeauty of the prospect ; on one side was discovered theupper course of the river, which descended from arange of flat mountains, in the distance, since calledDarling's Range ; and on the other were seen its windingsdown to the sea shore. The banks of the riverappeared almost every where covered with beautifulforests, which extended a considerable way into the interiorof the country ; the soil was calcareous, composedof sand and shells, mingled in abundance with the remainsof decayed vegetation.The French officers, having passed several shoals,ascended the river about sixty miles, and found it todecrease rapidly in breadth, but to have still a depth ofabout eight feet, without any sensible variation. AVantof provisions compelled them to return ; in descendingthe stream they suffered much from exhaustion and thefrequency of the shoals ; their vexation was increasedtoo by an inexplicable and rather ludicrous alarm. " Inthe midst of these increasing distresses and dangers,"says M. Bailly, " night came upon us suddenly, and wewere preparing to land and dry ourselves, and to recruitour exhausted strength by a little rest, when all at oncewe heard a terrible noise that filled us with terror ; itwas something like the roaring of a bull, but muchlouder, and seemed to proceed from the reeds, whichwere very near us. At this formidable sound we lost alldesire to go on shore; and, though benumbed with cold,we preferred passing the night on the water withoutfood or being able to close our eyes, and suffering thewhole time from the rain and the weather." No indicationhas yet been discovered of any large or formidableCHAP. X. INTERIOR OF NEW HOLLAND. 141animal on the Australian continent beyond what isafforded by this strange story.Sharks' Bay and the islands in its neighbourhood werediligently examined by the French, and in the archipelagoto the north many points were laid down by themwith accuracy ; but they were in general at too great adistance from land to form a continuous survey of thecoast. The ravages of disease among their crews compelledthe French ships to return before they effectedany thing of importance. Of twenty three men ofscience who embarked in the expedition only three returnedto their native country, after performing theentire voyage. The kind and hospitable reception whichthe French navigators experienced from the Englishcolonists at Port Jackson is gratefully acknowledged byM. Peron, who expresses, in terms of enthusiastic admiration,his surprise at the prosperous appearance of thenew settlement. " The population of the colony," hesays, " was to us a subject of astonishment and contemplation."CHAP. X.INTERIOR OF NEW HOLLAND.captain king's surveys. — port essincton discovered.the malays. the alligator rivers. melville andbathurst islands. apsley strait examined. thenorth-west coast. york sound. regent river. —cunningham inlet. mouth gulf. archipelago.unexplored points. early attempts to cross the bluemountains. failure of bass and others. routes intothe interior discovered. oxley's expedition down thelachlan. he reaches a great morass. secondjourney to explore the macquarie. the countryinundated. returns through a fine unexploredcountry. discoveries of captain sturt. the murrayriver found to reach the sea. discoveries of lovelland hume. progress of colonisation. settlementon melville island. colony at swan river. kingGeorge's sound. — port western. —van diemen's land.The discoveries hitherto made on the coasts of Australiaonly served to increase the mysterious interest142 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.that invested the interior of the country; no great river,in short, had yet been discovered. During the continuanceof the war little could be done to complete the taskwhich Flinders had left unfinished ; but among thenumerous expeditions despatched from the shores ofGreat Britain on the restoration of peace, for the purposeof geographical discoveries, one was directed to surveythe coasts of Australia. In four voyages, made between1817 and 1822, captain Philip Parker King has mademost important additions to our knowledge of the intertropicalcoasts of Australia.If we review the results of his expeditions in continuationof the discoveries of Flinders, the first objectworthy of attention which presents itself, is a river ofconsiderable size on the northern coast, which was namedthe Liverpool River. The discovery of Port Essingtonin the peninsula to the north of Van Diemen's Gulf,promises still greater advantages. " As a harbour, PortEssington is equal, if not superior, to any I ever saw ;and, from its proximity to the Moluccas and New Guinea,and its being in the direct line of communication betweenPort Jackson and India, as well as from its commandingsituation with respect to the passage through TorresStrait, it must, at no very distant period, become a placeof great trade, and of very considerable importance."On the shores of Van Diemen's Gulf, captain Kingdiscovered several rivers of the same general character,and all named alike, from the alligators which swarmedwithin them. One of these rivers was examined by theboats to the distance of about thirty-six miles from themouth, where the water was still two and a half fathomsdeep. The banks were low, and thickly lined with mangroves,the country around being a level plain, occasionallydiversified by some wooded hills, on which thepalm tree was conspicuous. The physical character ofthese rivers, the sources of which must be distant, asthey flow through a level plain apparently of great extent,seems to favour the conjecture that they are only themouths of one large river, which divides itself, andreaches the sea through a sort of delta.CHAP. X. INTERIOR OF NEW HOLLAND. 1 43The gulf of the great bay of Van Diemen was discoveredby three Dutch vessels, that sailed from Timor in1705. They entered, but did not explore, it; and, upto1818, its shores remained unknown. When captainKing sailed out of it, he coasted the eastern shores ofthe northern Van Diemen 's Land, which had hithertobeen considered as a peninsula. He examined minutelythe northern shores of this land ; and on doubling CapeVan Diemen, its most northern point, he was surprisedand delighted on discovering an inlet opening to thesouth, which appeared to be the mouth of a greatriver. Our voyagers entered it with the flood tide, andhaving advanced sixteen or seventeen miles, anchored ineleven fathoms. The banks being overrun with mangroveswere nearly inaccessible. The country on bothsides was low, and thickly wooded. The sago palm, thefan palm, and pandanus, were distinguishable among theordinary trees of the Australian forests. Captain Kingand his companions entertained no doubt that they haddiscovered what had been long the object of anxious researchon the Australian continent, — a river of considerablemagnitude, — when, on advancing a few miles,the open sea suddenly appeared, and dispelled all theirhopes, demonstrating that what they took to be a riverwas but a strait. From further examination, it appearedthat the Van Diemen's Land of old maps is in realitycomposed of two islands, separated by the narrow channelwhich had so cruelly deceived our navigators, and towhich captain King gave the name of Apsley Strait.This strait is forty miles in length, and from one tothree broad ; the depth is generally from ten to thirteenfathoms ; but at the southern extremity there are manyshoals, and the channels are very intricate. Of the twoislands, the largest, which is to the eastern strait, and isperhaps 200 miles in circumference, was named MelvilleIsland; that to the west, which is not perhapsabove half the size of the former, was named from LordBathurst.Proceeding to the south-west from Clarence Strait, as144 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.the broad channel is called which separates MelvilleIsland from the continent, the coast is generally low anduninviting in appearance. In lat. 15° captain King exploreda deep inlet, to which he gave the name of CambridgeGulf. Though at first it had the appearance ofa great river, it was found to terminate at a distance ofseventy miles from its mouth, in a few small streams ofno importance.The examination of the northern half of De Witt'sLand was repaid by results of a more interesting nature.Here the country assumed a more bold and mountainouscharacter, and the shore was indented with numerousdeep bays and inlets. Some of these, such as AdmiraltyGulf, York Sound, and Brunswick Bay, were carefullyexamined, and found to contain many excellent harbours.Brunswick Bay is an extensive sound, running abouttwenty miles inland, with good anchorage all over it.At the head of the sound was discovered Prince Regent'sRiver, which, to use the language of captain King, " is,without exception, the most remarkable feature of thenorth-west coast. In general the inlets of this coastform extensive ports at their entrance ; and when theybegin to assume the character of a river, their course becomestortuous and very irregular. But Prince Regent'sRiver trends into the interior in a S.E.E. direction forfifty-four miles, with scarcely a point to intercept theview, after being thirteen miles within it." At thefiftieth mile, a ridge of rocks, crossing this river, formsa rapid, above which the tide does not reach ; but abovethe rapid the stream formed a beautiful fresh water river,of limpid clearness, and 300 yards in width. About amile below the rapid it was joined by an inferior stream,which fell from a height of 140 feet; and though ourvoyagers visited this coast at the dry season, this cascadenevertheless made an imposing appearance. The marksof great floods were noticed upon the shores of the inlet ;and the trunks of very large trees were seen thrown uptothe height of twelve feet above high water mark. Asthe surrounding country was comparatively bare andCHAP. X. INTERIOR OF NEW HOLLAND. 145sterile, these trees afford some evidence of the fertilityof the interior.As the circumstances of a long navigation, whichmust be completed within a certain season, render it impossibleto explore deep inlets in a satisfactory manner,and thus to form such a minute survey of the coast asmight throw a light on the interior geography of thecountry ; captain King, notwithstanding his zeal andintrepidity, did not venture to contend with the difficultieswhich were here thrown in his way ; and, having lostnearly all his anchors, was cautious of engaging in theperilous navigation of the north-west coast. He doesnot, however, disingenuously attempt to underrate theimportance of the omissions in his chart, or to suggestthat no interest attaches to those portions of the coastwhich he was unable to explore. On the contrary, expressinghis regret at his inability to examine a deepinlet near Point Cunningham, he observes, " From allthat is at present known of this remarkable opening,there is enough to excite the greatest interest; since fromthe extent of the opening, the rapidity of the stream, andthe great rise and fall of the tides, there must be a veryextensive gulf, or water, totally different from every thingwhich has been before seen." About 100 miles fartherto the south is another wide opening, near Point Gan*theme, which has been supposed to communicate withthe former, so as to form a great island. On the remainderof the north-western coast there is little doubtthat the main land has been rarely seen, and that thecoast line hitherto laid down in the maps is but an imperfectdelineation of the exterior limit of a dense archipelago.Mouth Gulf also, another deep inlet, boundedon the west by the great peninsula, or perhaps island, ofwhich North West Cape forms the termination, was leftimperfectly explored ; so that the survey of captainKing, though productive of much positive and valuableinformation, was yet not so complete as to reduce toabsolute despair the advocates of a great Australian riverdischarging itself into the ocean. The prominent poreIII. L146 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.tons of the Australian continent, the deep bays andinlets which might prove to be the mouths of greatrivers, but in which a ship is in danger of being in-gulfed, still remained to be examined.Our acquaintance with the interior of this vast countryadvanced for a long time much more slowly than ouracquaintance with its coasts. That range of mountainswhich runs parallel to the eastern shore, at an averagedistance of about forty miles from the sea, and whichare generally called the Blue Mountains by the colonists,continued long to be an insuperable barrier against theexamination of the interior. The summits of this rangeto the west of Sydney do not much exceed 3000 feet inheight, but farther to the north they frequently attaindouble that elevation. The whole range, however, hasso precipitous a face towards the east, and is so rarelyintersected by transverse valleys, that for many yearsafter the establishment of the colony they were lookedupon as absolutely impassable.In December, 1789> the year after the establishmentof the colony at Port Jackson, lieutenant Daws proceededto reconnoitre the mountains, with a large detachmentof troops, and provisions for six days; but, afterenduring the fatigues of nine days' march, he returnedto Port Jackson, without being able to penetrate morethan nine miles through the first range of hills. Eightmonths afterwards, captain Tench made a similar attempt,and experienced a similar disappointment. Inconsequenceof these failures, no further attempt wasmade to ascend the Blue Mountains for the space of threeyears, when the celebrated colonel Paterson, who hadbecome inured, in the deserts of Africa, to the fatiguesof travelling, undertook a new expedition with sanguinehopes of success. His plan was to ascend theHawkesbury River as far as it was navigable, and thusto arrive at the base of the mountains over which he wasto pass. He chose for his companions some hardy ScotchHighlanders, inured, like himself, from early life toclimb the most difficult mountains; and took with himCHAP. X. INTERIOR OF NEW norland. 147also some natives of Port Jackson, to serve as guides andinterpreters. But all these preparations proved fruitless :one of the canoes was sunk, the other irreparably injuredby the rapids of the river. In vain did the travellersattempt to continue their route towards the interiorof the mountains ; their difficulties increased at everystep. One of these mountains was not less than 400feet in perpendicular height. Frightful precipices everywherepresented themselves; and no sooner had onesummit been escaladed than others appeared, still morebarren and difficult of access, till at length they found itnecessary to retrace their steps.About a year afterwards, Mr. Hacking, quarter-masterof the Sirius, a bold and spirited man, rather stimulatedthan daunted by the failure of colonel Paterson, salliedforth with a few intrepid companions to pass those impregnablebarriers. Their efforts were not altogetheruseless : they penetrated about twenty miles farther thantheir predecessors ; but, after having cleared several veryhigh summits, Hacking himself was forced to return.Beyond the peaks which he succeeded in ascending, themountains presented a new ridge of summits, which heconceived less accessible than those he had attained.Among the early discoverers in Australia, Mr. Bassholds the foremost rank for skill, boldness, and perseverance.In June, 1796", this adventurous man made anattempt to penetrate the Blue Mountains. Never washardihood more displayed than on this occasion. Bymeans of iron hooks, fastened to his arms, he succeededin ascending several dangerous precipices, and when stoppedin his route by deep chasms, he caused himself to belet down with ropes into the abysses. But even hisresolution was of no avail ; and, after fifteen days offatigue and unparalleled danger, he returned to Sydney,confirming by his own failure all that had been assertedof the impossibility of crossing those extraordinary ramparts.From the summit of one very elevated peak, Mr.Bass saw, at the distance of about forty miles, a secondchain of mountains, much higher than any of these hel2148 "modern voyages of discovery, book v.had passed ; and the intermediate space presented obstaclesneither fewer nor less formidable than what hehad already encountered.The next attempt to explore a passage across thewestern mountains was made by M. Bareillier, a Frenchemigrant, who was engineer to the colony. In additionto the precautions which had been taken on the previousenterprises, the prudent measure was adopted of establishinga chain of posts at moderate distances, so as tomaintain an active line of communication between theexploring party and the nearest of the English settlements; but, notwithstanding the sagacity with whichthis expedition was planned, M. Bareillier was not morefortunate than those who had preceeded him, and indeeddid not even penetrate so far as Mr. Bass and someothers.In addition to these numerous failures, other circumstancescontributed to inspire the colonists with the beliefthat the Blue Mountains formed an impassable barrier.The natives of the country were as little acquaintedwith them as the Europeans. They even regarded themwith religious awe, as the residence of malignant spirits,whence thunder, inundations, and burning winds issuedto lay waste their territories. They asserted, moreover,that beyond those mountains there was an immense lake,on the banks of which lived white people, like the English,who dressed in the same manner, and had largetowns, with houses built of stone. Such fables, relatingto a country not very distant, seemed to argue that itwas wholly inaccessible.Thus the transalpine regions remained wholly unknowntill 1 81 3, when a route across the mountains wasdiscovered, leading due west from Sydney, from EmuPlains over the hills, to an open, fertile, and well wateredcountry. As soon as this important route was discovered,a road was constructed; and on the 2 5th of April, 1815,governor Macquarie, with his lady, and a numerousretinue, went over the Blue Mountains, so long deemedimpassable. The highest point of this road is on a plainCHAP. X. INTERIOR OF NEW HOLLAND. 14$of considerable extent, whence an unbounded and diversifiedprospect presents itself to the eye on all sides.The town of Windsor, the river Hawkesbury, and otherinteresting objects within the inhabited portion of thecolony, are distinctly visible. The road from this tablelanddescends gradually for some miles towards the west,when the slope suddenly terminates in a precipice of6'70 feet in height, and nearly perpendicular. Thewinding road constructed down this rugged and tremendousdescent has received, in order to commemoratethe services of the engineer, the name of Cox's Pass.The governor, having reached the open country to thewest of the Blue Mountains, fixed immediately on a sitesuitable for the erection of a town at some future period,to which he gave the name of Bathurst. He chosean elevated spot on the south bank of a fine river flowingto the north-west, which was named from himselfthe Macquarie River. Within a distance of ten milesround this spot, there were estimated to be not less than50,000 acres of land, clear of timber and well suitedfor the purposes of grazing or agriculture. The countryat the same time abounded in game, and the river inexcellent fish. The site of Bathurst was observed to bein lat. 33° 24' 30" south, and in long. 149° 20' SO"east. The distance on the road from Sydney is 140miles. Another pass across the mountains was discoveredin 1819, by Mr. Throbs, considerably to the southof the former; and as the population of the colonypresses towards the hills, it is probable that many morewill be brought to light.The discovery of a boundless range of fertile land inBathurst Plains was of the utmost importance to thecolony, and was made, at a time indeed when it waspeculiarly acceptable, when the increase of population,in a narrow strip of territory not remarkable for fertility,had nearly outrun the prosperity of agriculture. A roadbeing once opened to the western country, it was naturalto suppose that such an interesting discovery would beprosecuted with extreme ardour. Mr. Oxley, the sure3150 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.veyor of the colony, was despatched to explore the countrybetween Bathurst and the Lachlan, a considerable riverabout eighty miles to the west, the sources of which hadbeen some time before discovered. Mr. Oxley found thecountry in the beginning of his journey, like that in thevicinity of Bathurst, agreeably diversified with hill anddale, covered with luxuriant herbage, but producinglittle timber, and that of a diminutive description. Itwas well intersected with rivulets ; and, finally, itabounded with limestone of the very best quality. Apeculiar importance was attached to this last discovery,from the circumstance that it was the first limestonerock discovered in New South Wales.On the 25th of April, Mr. Oxley and his party arrivedat the depot which had been previously establishedon the Lachlan for the service of the expedition. Thecountry here was found, by barometrical measurement, tohave an elevation of only 600 feet above the level of thesea ; while Bathurst Plains were ascertained, by the samemeans, to be 1970 feet above the sea. This sudden depressionof the country augured ill for the length of theriver. From the 27th of April to the 12th of May,Mr. Oxley descended the river in the boats ; until, findingthe country all inundated to the west and northwest,and the river itself, which for some time hadborne the appearance of a stagnant canal, being lost inthe marshes, he deemed it inexpedient to pursue itschannels any farther. He then proceeded for severaldays Towards the south-west ; when, having lost somehorses through fatigue and want of water, he was obligedto change his course to the north, towards some lowhills, which were perceived running in that direction.He had not persevered long in this course when he fellin with a stream : it was soon recognised to be the Lachlan,which here emerged from the marshes. The banksof the stream were again followed till the 8th of July,when further progress westward appeared useless, if notimpossible. The river received no tributary streams;but, on the other hand, wasted itself in numerous la-chap.X. INTERIOR OF NEW HOLLAND. 151goons. The country was a dead level, bounded by thehorizon in every quarter, devoid of timber, and was evidentlyliable to inundations whenever the river was flooded.The place where the river Lachlan terminates in thissingular manner is full 500 miles west of Sydney, andnearly in the same latitude. It had required six weeks ofunlimited exertion to proceed so far. The length of theriver, including its windings, is upwards of 1200 miles,during the greater part of which this singular stream receivesno tributaries, until it finally wastes itself in adesert plain.The provisions of the travellers being now nearly exhausted,they hastened to direct their steps to the Mac-quare,to ascertain what became of that river, which itwas evident did not join the Lachlan. At first thejourney lay through a desert country; but, on gainingthe hills, the prospect suddenly changed ; and, after afortnight's march, they encamped on a considerablestream, running from the south, and watering a rich andromantic valley, which received the name of WellingtonValley. This stream was at first conceived to be theMacquarie ; but Mr. Oxley, impatient to explore thecountry to the north, descended the stream to a littledistance, when he was no less astonished than delightedto discover that it joined a very fine river, coming fromthe Esse., from among the chain of low grassy hillsthat bounded the valley to the east. This was evidentlythe long-sought Macquarie, the sight of which amplyrepaid our travellers for their former disappointments.This short excursion down the river confirmed the highopinion our travellers had already formed of the fertilityof the country. On their journey towards Bathurst theyfound the country hilly, but rich, and of a beautiful appearance; butjthe timber degenerated as they approachedBathurst Plains. The most important characteristic ofthis tract is the infinite number of streams with whichit is intersected. Speaking of these, Mr. Oxley observes :Had not the appearance of the country round theMacquarie, where we first reached it, fully accountedl 4152 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.for its magnitude, the course which we have since followedwould have satisfactorily explained the cause. Itis, in point of fact, a country of running waters : onevery hill we found a spring, and in every valley arivulet, either flowing directly north-east of the river,or taking a course westerly, to join the river in WellingtonVale. Of the waters which may fall into it fromthe north-east, the appearances of the country indicatethat they were at least as numerous as from the southwest."A settlement has since been made in WellingtonValley, at the junction of Bell's River and the Mac-quare; and this remote spot, above 200 miles west ofSydney, appears destined, from its fertility and the beautyof its situation, to become one of the most flourishing ofthe western country.The glowing description which Mr. Oxley and hiscompanions gave of the Macquarie and the sceneryaround it, its numerous rivulets, limestone quarries, andfine timber, disposed as if in a park, inflamed the enthusiasmof the colonists, and encouraged the hope thatthis noble stream would be found to discharge itself intothe ocean. Such a navigable communication betweenthe western country and the sea was alone wanting tocomplete the charms of the new discoveries, and to givethem an inestimable value. A new expedition was immediatelyresolved on, to explore, if possible, the riverto its mouth, and a depot for the use of the travellerswas formed in Wellington Valley.In the month of May, 1818, Mr. Oxley quitted Sydneyto proceed on a second excursion into the interior.For several days after our travellers descended belowWellington Valley, the river continued to flow in a majesticstream through a country with as fine an appearanceas any which has been hitherto described. Aconsiderable river, named the Erskine, falling into itfrom the eastward, seemed to be an omen of ultimatesuccess, as it proved the Macquarie to be the grandreceptacle of the waters of the interior. After descendingthe river for the distance of 125 miles from Wei-chap.X. INTERIOR OF NEW HOLLAND. 153langton Valley, the hills disappeared, and the countrybecame perfectly level ; but the soil was excellent, and farabove the reach of any flood. From this place two menwere sent back to the governor, to acquaint him with theproceedings of the expedition. When they departed,high expectations were entertained of ultimate success.On the 28th of June," says Mr. Oxley, " havingtraced the course of the river, without the smallest diminutionor addition, about seventy miles farther to theN.N.W., there being a slight fresh in the river, it overflowedits banks ; and although we were at the distanceof near three miles from it, the country was so perfectlylevel that the waters soon spread over the ground onwhich we were, we being for some days before travellingover such very low ground that the people in the boats,finding the country flooded, proceeded slowly ; a circumstancewhich enabled me to send them directions toreturn to the station we had quitted in the morning,where the ground was a little more elevated. This spotbeing by no means secure, it was arranged that thehorses with the provisions should return to the last highlandwe had quitted, — a distance of sixteen miles; whileI determined to take the large boat, and in her to endeavourto discover the point where the waters dischargedthemselves.On the 2d of July, I proceeded in the boat downthe river, and in the course of the day went near thirtymiles towards the N.N.W., for ten of which there hadbeen, strictly speaking, no land, as the flood made thesurrounding country a perfect sea. The banks of theriver were heavily timbered, and many large spaceswithin our view, covered with a common reed, were alsoencircled with large trees. On the 3d, the main channelof the river was much contracted, but very deep, thebanks being under water from a foot to eighteen inches.The stream continued for about twenty miles on thesame course as yesterday, when we totally lost sight ofland and trees, the channel of the river winding throughreeds, among which the water was about three feet154 Modern VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.deep, the current having the same direction as the river.It continued in this manner for nearly four miles more,when, without any previous change in the breadth,depth, and rapidity of the stream, and when I was sanguinein the expectations of soon entering the long soughtfor lake, it all at once eluded our further pursuit, byspreading at all points from north-west to north-east,over the plain of reeds that surrounded us ; the riverdecreasing in depth from upwards of twenty feet to lessthan five feet, and flowing over a bottom of tenacious bluemud, and the current still running with nearly the samerapidity as when the water was confined within thebanks of the river. This point of junction with interiorwaters, or where the Macquarie ceased to have theform of a river, is in lat. 30° 45' S., and long. 147°10' E."Thus it was found that the river diffused itself intoa shallow morass of unbounded extent, which concealedthe limits of the deep lake which formed the receptacleof its waters, if such a lake exist. Mr. Oxley beingunable to prosecute his researches towards the New.,bent his course eastward in a direct line to the coast.In his march towards the Blue Mountains, he crossed noless than twelve fine streams, running generally in thedirection of west and north, nearly parallel to the Mac-quare.One of these, named the Castlereagh, at nogreat distance from the last named river, was thought tobe superior to it in magnitude ; another, named Peel'sRiver, was nearly equal to the Macquarie, and watereda country of the most beautiful appearance. As soon asour travellers quitted the level which terminated in themorass, and reached the hills, the view presented to theireyes on all sides was of the most varied and luxuriantdescription. They crossed plains, of many miles in extent,of dry and fertile soil, with trees scattered on themas in a park. Chains and ridges of low forest hills,clothed with woods of cypress, eucalyptus, and acacias,in full flower, were scattered over these plains, detachedlike islands, and varied the scenery in the most pic-chap.X. INTERIOR OF NEW HOLLAND. 155burlesque manner. Two hills were ascended, the onenamed Mount Tether, the other Loadstone Hill ; bothwhich affected the magnetic needle in a remarkable manner,its poles being reversed while placed on the rock.When Mr. Oxley and his party reached the summitof the Blue Mountains, they were for some time at aloss how to descend them towards the east. , The soil ofthis mountain range was poor, but the timber seemedunaffected by the circumstance. The trees were of themost stately dimensions, and these mountain forestsequalled in size and quality the finest woods of theeastern colony. Our travellers had been checked, in theirprogress eastward, by many perpendicular rocky ridges,running from north to south, and divided longitudinallyby deep and apparently impassable glens. These,however, they contrived to cross ; but their march was atlength arrested by a deep chasm, far exceeding in sublimityany they had seen before. " This tremendousravine," says Mr. Oxley, " runs nearly north and south:its breadth at the bottom does not apparently exceed100 or 200 feet, while the separation of the outer edgesis from two to three miles. I am certain that in perpendiculardepth it exceeds 3000 feet." Our travellersmarched for some days to the south, having on theirleft hand a wild and broken country, similar to thatdescribed. They found several cascades of unequalledmagnificence, and at length fortunately discovered aglen, by which a descent was practicable. They followedfor some time the course of a bold stream descendingfrom the mountains, which turned out to be tributary tothe Hastings, which falls into the sea at MacquarieHarbour. Their journey from the Blue Mountains towardsthe sea was impeded by a succession of abruptand lofty hills, the descent of which would have beenoften impracticable, had it not been for the immense profusionof vines and creeping plants, with which the travellerswere enabled to support their steps. At length, onthe 23d of September, Mr. Oxley and his party caughtthe first glimpse of the ocean from the summit of a hill,156 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.to which he gave the name of Sea View Mount. Hethen travelled towards the shore, along the banks of theHastings, of which he gave such an account on his returnas encouraged the plan of forming a settlementthere. Thus Mr. Oxley crossed the country near 300miles in a straight line ; and for the greater part ofthat distance his route lay through a well watered andfertile country. He had not found, indeed, any communicationbetween the internal waters and the sea ; buthe had, in compensation, discovered an indefinite extentof fine land, fitted for all the purposes of grazing andagriculture, and at no great distance from the coast.In the mean time the spirit of enquiry was activelyemployed in another direction. Two gentlemen of thecolony, Messrs. Hovell and Hume, examined, with signalsuccess, the south-eastern part of the country. Commencingtheir examination at Twofold Bay, they proceededto the south-west, and travelled through an open,dry, and luxuriant country, thinly clothed with largetimber, till they arrived at the banks of a considerableriver ; following the course of this stream, they weredelighted to find that it discharged itself into Port Western,round which the country had the most invitingappearance. Thus, whatever exaggeration may be suspectedin colonial travellers, whose spirits are elated byhope and the love of adventure, it is obvious that NewSouth Wales is not that arid and sterile desert whichsome have represented it. It has abundance of rivers,though they are not always navigable ; and an ampleextent of productive soil, though not equalling in richnessthe prairies of America.In 1829, a new attempt was made to trace the courseof the internal waters. Captain Sturt proceeded with aparty to explore the outlets of the Macquarie and Castlereagh: having crossed the great morass into whichthese rivers discharge themselves, he entered on a flatdesert country, totally destitute of vegetation ; and atlength discovered, in long. 145°, lat. 30°, a considerableriver running towards the south-west. After followingCHAP. X. INTERIOR OF NEW HOLLAND. 157its course for a little way, he was obliged to desist fromhis researches and to return homeward, being then about6*00 miles north-west of Sydney. The newly-discoveredriver was named the Darling, from the governor of thecolony.A discovery of more importance, because more completein its results, has been recently made by the sameofficer. On the 7th of January, 1830, captain Sturtproceeded with a party down the Morrumbidgee, aconsiderable stream, about 200 miles to the south-westof Sydney, and which was supposed to form a junctionwith the Lachlan. The depot formed for the purposeof the expedition, and from which it departed, was inlong. 143° 57 , lat. 34° 15'; being thus at a considerabledistance to the south-west of the extreme point reachedby Mr. Oxley when exploring the Lachlan. Abouttwelve miles below the depot a creek entered the riverfrom the north-east, and was supposed to form a communicationwith the Lachlan. On the seventh day ofthe voyage the channel of the river contracted, and thecurrent became so impetuous as to fill our people withalarm : they almost despaired of being able to prosecutetheir voyage any farther, when the channel opened, andthey found themselves at once launched into a broadand noble river running from east to west, and from300 to 400 feet in width. On the 23d a body of natives,about 100 in number, appeared on the right bankof the river, evidently meditating an attack on the boat :this was the more vexatious, as the attention of our voyagerswas nearly engrossed by the sand-banks whichobstructed their progress : but here again their alarmwas suddenly changed into joy. The natives had evincedsuch a determination to act on the offensive as even towade into the water to seize the boat, but, with theunaccountable caprice of savages, they suddenly desisted,and allowed the strangers to proceed in quiet. The boathad no sooner cleared the sand-banks than a great riverwas discovered joining the Morrumbidgee from theeast at a very acute angle : the narrow tongue of land158 MODERN Voyages OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.which separated the two rivers was that on which theIndians made their appearance. The great river, resultingfrom the union of the Morrumbidgee and theDarling, as the other river was supposed to be, wasnamed by our travellers the Murray : the country onits banks had a fine appearance, being well clothed withverdure and with trees. Their course was generallywest, so that they reached the longitude of 149° 40'without descending below lat. 34°. Limestone was theprevailing mineral. The channel of the river had foralong way the appearance of a deep picturesque glen ;but it afterwards changed its direction to the eastwardof south, flowing in long reaches, being about 400 yardswide, with twenty feet of water close to the shore. Thischange of appearance raised the expectations of our travellers,who were soon gratified by entering a great lake,extending fifty or sixty miles in length, and from thirtyto forty in breadth. The country was by no' meansbarren, but the timber was less luxuriant than up theriver. At the distance of seven miles from the mouthof the Murray the water of the lake was brackish, andat a distance of twenty-one miles it was quite salt : itwas natural to infer, therefore, that it had a communicationwith the sea : this was soon proved to be the case.Frequent shoals impeding the navigation of the boat onthe south side of the lake, captain Sturt landed, andfound that he had reached the sea at Encounter Bay,with which the lake communicated by an outlet half amile in width, and navigable for boats. It was conjecturedthat other communications might be found, butthe exhausted state of the exploring party did not allowof their making an exact survey of their discoveries. LakeAlexandrine, as this great sheet of water was named bycaptain Sturt, is situated directly to the east of St. Vincent'sGulf, and appears itself like a great gulf, themouth of which has been stopped up by sand-banks.The provisions of the party, of which a portion had beenlost by the upsetting of the boat, were now nearly consumed; and so great was the labour required to stemCHAP. X. INTERIOR OP NEW HOLLAND. 1 5Q.the current of the river, that the men were nearly wornout by fatigue when they reached the depot : they hadbeen absent from it eighty-eight days, and in that timehad travelled about 2000 miles. A river named theLindsay flowed into the Murray from the south-east.If captain Sturt be correct in his conjectures that theMorrumbidgee communicates with the Lachlan, andthat the great river which joins it from the east isthe Darling, discovered in his former expedition, it followsthat an immense extent of water communicationexists in the interior, and that the Murray is probablythe channel by which all the rivers, hitherto discoveredrunning westward from the Blue Mountains, join the sea.While the enterprise and perseverance of Mr. Oxley,Mr. Sturt, and others, have thus opened such an unboundedfield to the speculations of colonial agriculturists,government has not been inattentive to thecommercial advantages likely to arise from numberlesssettlements, at considerable distances from each other,and in different climates. On the eastern coast colonisationhas extended as far as Moreton Bay, 450 miles tothe north of Sydney : at an equal distance to the southand west a colony has been recently established in PortWestern, in the hope of turning to account the fine tractof country explored by Messrs. Hovell and Hume. vsBut of all the coasts of this great continent, the northernhave the strongest claims to the regards of a speculativecommercial nation. The great fisheries carriedon there by the Malays support an advantageous tradewith the Chinese : the general comparative fertility alsoof that portion of the coast ; the warmth of its climate,which, lying within the tropics, enables it to producemany articles that are wanting in the southern colonies ;its proximity to the Indian archipelago, inhabited by anactive commercial people rapidly advancing in civilisation,— all these circumstances combine to point out theadvantages likely to result, at no great distance of time,from a colony established on the northern shores. Thesurvey made by captain King was a preliminary step to160 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.the accomplishment of this purpose ; and, in the beginningof 1824, the Tamar, captain Brewer, was despatchedto take possession of Arnhem's Land, and to form anestablishment on whatever spot was deemed most eligiblefor a mercantile depot. The Tamar left Sydney inAugust ; and, having cleared Torres Strait, came to ananchor in Port Essington : where the union jack washoisted on shore, and formal possession was taken of thewhole northern coast between the meridians of 1 39° and136°. No fresh water, however, was found there, andthe ship proceeded to Apsley Strait, where a small riverwas discovered on Melville Island, running into the straitnear Harris Island : this was immediately pitched uponas a convenient site for the colony. On the 2d of Octoberthey commenced the erection of Fort Duncan :the little promontory on which it stood received thename of Barlow Point, and the anchorage in the strait,Port Cockburn. The soil near the new settlement wasfound to be extremely rich, but the woods were thick. Nonatives made their appearance till November ; but afterwardstheir frequent thefts gave rise to hostilities, whichkept the infant colony in perpetual alarm. The settlersamounted in all to 126 individuals, of whom three orfour were women, and forty-five convicts; the rest weresoldiers of the 3d regiment. This important colonylanguished for some time, and was even on the point ofbeing abandoned, nor are we sure that it has yet reacheda state of confirmed prosperity ; but it is to be hopedthat government will not be deterred by ordinary difficultiesfrom establishing a colony in so favourable asituation. How can presages of success be expected froma settlement composed in the first instance of unwillingresidents, such as soldiers and convicts, without the sanguinespirit, the resignation, and the perseverance inspiredby the presence of their families, and the prospectof permanent occupation ?The colony on the Swan River, established in thebeginning of 1829, nas already assumed the appearanceof strength and stability ; owing to the good materialsCHAP. X. INTERIOR OF NEW HOLLAND. 161with which it was constructed. Emigrants, possessingenergy, intelligence, and capital, are sure of overcomingthe difficulties that await every settler in a new country.The Swan River has been explored to the distance ofabout eighty miles from its mouth. The country in theinterior is found fit for pasture, and capable of tillage ;but the soil is by no means remarkably fertile; towards thesea it is sandy and barren in the extreme. The CanningRiver, flowing into the Swan River from the south,has as yet been examined but a little way. The greatobjection to this colony is the want of a secure harbourin its vicinity. The mouth of the Swan River is barredby a ledge of rocks, over which there is hardly six feetwater ; and Gage's Roads, between the river and theisland of Hottest, are exposed to the weather from thesouth and south west ; but, in the close of 1829, a fineriver, with a spacious port at its mouth, was said tohave been discovered at some distance to the south,falling into the sea near Cape Bouvard ; and a party wasthen sent to explore it. The difficulties and embarrassmentswhich the settlers at the Swan River have beenobliged to endure, have been industriously exaggeratedby the colonial press ; the strong desire which exists inNew South Wales to attract emigrants to that countrybeing naturally allied with a disposition to disparage everyother settlement.The same indefatigable spirit of colonisation led tothe formation of a settlement in 1826', in King Georgethe Third's Sound. This, it is well known, is the firstgood harbour which ships sailing from Europe to NewSouth Wales arrive at, and the place is likely to becomea depot for cattle and a resting-place for shipping, so asto lessen the risks of the tedious navigation round thesouthern coast. In Van Diemen's Land colonisationextends through the middle of the island, from the Derwenton the south to the Tamar and Port Dalrymple,opening on the northern coast. Port Macquarie on thewestern shore, where the fine Huon pines are found inabundance, is much frequented by colonial shipping ;1 62 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. HOOK V.and will, probably, at no distant day, become an importantsettlement. Thus there is scarcely a good harbourround all the shores of Australia, of which the Englishhave not taken possession : Sharks' Bay, 400 miles tothe north of the Swan River, is the only eligible spotwhich has escaped them. It was supposed that theFrench entertained the design of making a settlementupon that coast ; but, if they abandon that intention, itis to be hoped that the colonial government will notoverlook the advantages of a spot, which affords the onlysecure anchorage hitherto found on the western shoresof New Holland.CHAP. XI.Vancouver's voyage.COMMENCEMENT OF THE FUR TRADE. VOYAGES OF Mares.OF Forelock AND DIXON. OF GREY. THEIR Discoveries.Fusca's STRAIT. JEALOUSY OF THE SPANIARDSAWAKENED BY THE RUSSIANS. SETTLEMENT MADE ATMONTEREY. — EXPEDITION TO THE NORTH. PORT BUCA-Belli DISCOVERED. SECOND EXPEDITION ITS RESULTS.VOYAGE OF HARO AND MARTINEZ. THE SPANIARDS TAKEPOSSESSION OF NOOTKA THEY SEIZE AN ENGLISH VESSEL.THE DISPUTE ACCOMMODATED. VANCOUVER PROCEEDSTO RECEIVE RESTITUTION OF NOOTKA HE IS INSTRUCTEDTO SURVEY THE NORTH-WEST COAST OF AMERICA. VOYAGEALONG NEW HOLLAND. CHATHAM ISLAND DISCOVERED.VANCOUVER ENTERS Fusca's STRAIT. IT CONDUCTS HIMNORTHWARDS TO THE SEA. HE MEETS WITH THE SPANISHSURVEYORS. ARRIVAL AT NOOTKA. COLUMBIA RIVER Explored.CHARACTER OF THE NATIVES. THEIR Architecture.THE SHIPS WINTER AT THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.OWHYHEE VOLUNTARILY CEDED TO THE KING OF GREATBRITAIN. —VANCOUVER RETURNS TO THE AMERICAN COAST.COMPLETES THE SURVEY HIS GREAT MERITS — DEATH.ENGLISH POSSESSIONS ON THE NORTH-WEST COAST. VOYAGEOF KOTZEBUE. HIS INLET.The sensation created in Europe by Cook's geographicaldiscoveries, was much exceeded in its immediate effectschap. xi. Vancouver's voyage. l63by the excitement occasioned when it was known what alucrative trade remained to be developed between Chinaand the north-west coast of America. The furs collectedby the Russians in the Fox Islands, sent by them toKamtschatka, and thence to Kiachta, arrive in China,after passing through many hands, and performing acircuitous journey of many thousand miles, with aprice enormously enhanced by the clumsy and complicatedsystem by which they are forwarded to theirdestination. The Russians not yet acquainted with therefinements of commerce, and the Spaniards renderedtorpid and inactive by the vices of a despotic government,had both remained in ignorance of the advantagesthat might be derived from a fur trade carried ondirectly between the coast of America and China,though the dominions of both adjoin the countries whichsupport the trade. It remained for the English to makethe circuit of the globe, in order to carry on a trade,which the nations more conveniently situated were toobarbarous or too inert to engage in. «The last volume of Cook's voyages, in which captainKing explains the profits that might be made by the furtrade, was published in 1784 : and in the following yearcaptain Hanna sailed from Canton, in a small brig of sixtytons, across the seas of Japan ; and in the month ofAugust arrived at Nootka Sound, which the experienceof Cook had taught to be considered as the great martof the furs of America. Proceeding to the northwardhe discovered some fine harbours, and returned to Chinaat the end of the year with a rich cargo of furs. Thiswas the commencement of a trade which afterwardsrose to such great importance, and which has given agreater impulse to navigation than any other, except,perhaps, the whale fishery. In the following year captainPI anna returned to the fur coast, and again procureda valuable cargo. A rival ship, despatched from Macaoabout the same time, proceeded by the route of Kamt-schatka, and was lost on Copper Island. At first thistrade was carried on by ships from the river of Canton,m 2164 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.which had obvious advantages in its situation; but, in1786, two ships, commanded by captains Lowrie andGuise, sailed from Bombay to Nootka Sound ; and, advancingnorthwards, are said to have discovered thearchipelago, to which Dixon afterwards gave the nameof Queen Charlotte's Islands. Expeditions from Bengalfollowed close on those from the coast of Malabar. CaptainTipping, in the Sea Otter, was lost; but captainMeares, in the Nootka, arrived in Prince \ William's Sound,where he was forced to spend the winter. Twenty-threeof his people died from the severity of the climate andthe want of provision ; but Meares returned to Macao inthe following year. His wintering on the coast ofAmerica, which was an act of necessity, was a decidedstep towards establishing a more intimate intercourse withthe people.If the English merchants established at Macao andIndia were the first to engage actively in the fur trade, theyowed this temporary advantage merely to their position ;although shipping from the Thames should have to passround Cape Horn, and perform a voyage equal to halfthe circumference of the globe before it arrived at thescene of action, yet spirit and enterprise were not wantingto engage in an undertaking which marks the utmostextent to which the spirit of trade can urge the boldnessof navigation. In 1785 a number of merchants formedan association under the name of the King George'sSound Company ; they entered into negotiations withthe South Sea and East India Companies, and purchasedfrom both a suspension of those baneful privileges bywhich monopoly, however indolent itself, may fetter theactive industry of others. In the same year the newlyformed company despatched two ships, under the commandof captains Portlock and Dixon, who had bothvoyaged with Cook, and obtained under that distinguishedcommander a competent share of nautical experience.They arrived on the north-west coast of Americain 1786, and then proceeded to winter in the SandwichIslands, justly deeming it preferable to employ the sea-chap.xi. Vancouver's voyage. 165men in temperate climates, than to expose them to themaladies and privations of a North American winter.In the spring of 1787 they returned to the Americancoast, separating so that they might not interfere witheach other in their traffic with the natives. Portlockexamined a number of inlets and harbours along thecoast, to which he gave names, some of which are stillretained, and the repetition of which would afford butlittle instruction. Dixon, in like manner, gained aminute knowledge of the portion of the coast alongwhich he traded : directing his course to the southward,he discovered, in lat. 54< J 24', the commencement of achain of islands; and, following along its westernshore to its southern extremity, he doubled it to thesouthward, and stood again to the northward, rangingalong the eastern shore as far as 53° 10'. In thislatitude he perceived to the eastward, in the distance, acape of the continent, on which he imposed the name ofCape Dalrymple; a homage deservedly paid to a learnednavigator, whose hydrographical labours and writings,by improving the description of the globe, have facilitatedthe communications between the old and newworlds. To the group of islands which Dixon hadnearly circumnavigated, he gave the name of QueenCharlotte's Islands. The honour, indeed, of having discoveredthese islands is claimed by the French for LaPerouse, who, in the preceding year (1786), had surveyedtheir western shores ; but it must be observed,that captains Lowrie and Guise made the same discoveryabout the same time as the French navigator. Dixonthen visited Nootka Sound, where he met some Englishvessels belonging to his employers, and, as they informedhim that the trade for the year was quite exhausted inthat quarter, he sailed for the Sandwich Islands, wherehe rejoined captain Portlock,The vessels which had hitherto engaged in the furtrade in general confined their visits to Nootka, PrinceWilliam's Sound, and other places pointed out by Cook;but Portlock and Dixon, who took a more extensivem 3166 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.range, had the good fortune to find shores more productiveof the commodities they sought; and where thenatives, unused to commercial visits, disposed of theirmerchandise on more reasonable terms. Their cargoesin consequence were unusually rich, and their successministered new fuel to the ardour of trading with thenorth west coast of America.The ships which captain Dixon had met coming outof Nootka Sound were the Prince of Wales and the PrincessRoyal, commanded respectively by captains Colnettand Duncan. They left England in September, 1786,and had begun by establishing, on Staaten Land nearTierra del Fuego, a factory for the purpose of collectingseal skins, and for preparing seal oil. They thenproceeded to Nootka ; and, wintering at the SandwichIslands, returned to the American coast in 1788. CaptainDuncan anchored and traded in several harbours onthe eastern coast of Queen Charlotte's Islands; he thencrossed the channel which separates these islands fromthe continent, and proceeded to another group situatedto the eastward, which he named Princess Royal's Islandsand which occupy collectively the space comprised betweenthe parallels of fifty-four and fifty-one. This archipelagoaffords, among the numerous islands of which itis composed, bays, harbours, and inlets without number,a part of which captain Duncan examined. In nineteenof them he cast anchor, not without being frequently exposedto the danger of losing his vessel ; but an abundanttrade indemnified him for his fatigues, and madehim forget the risk that he ran. He pushed his examinationof the coast as far as 47°, having noticed in 48°30' an opening which he calls Fuca's Strait, and thendirected his course to the Sandwich Islands.In 1788 Meares undertook a second voyage to thenorth-west coast of America, in the Felice, accompaniedby captain Douglas, in the Iphigenia. By his activityand perseverance he succeeded in building a small vesselin Nootka Sound ; he then proceeded southward toexamine the Strait of Fuca, in which his long boat sailed,chap. xi. Vancouver's voyage. lC7he says, near thirty leagues ; and at that distance fromthe sea the strait was about fifteen leagues broad, with aclear horizon stretching to the east for fifteen leagues more.Meares appears to have always doubted whether the landin which Nootka Sound was situated, was on the continentof America or not ; indeed he observes, that the coastabounds with islands, and that it remains to be determinedwhether any land yet seen by the traders is reallycontinent. His comrade, captain Douglas, beginning hisvoyage round the coast at Cook's River, lat. 6l°, proceededsouthward, and was the first to sail through allthe channel that separates Queen Charlotte's Islands fromthe Princess Royal's Islands and the Main.The lucrative trade thus carried on by the English onthe north-west coast of America, and the declarations ofDixon and others that it was quite inexhaustible, attractedthe attention and roused the energy of every statethat possessed a commercial marine. The United Statesof America, which had just obtained their political independence,were peculiarly interested in securing to themselvesa portion of the newly discovered trade. Theywere as yet too poor to carry on an intercourse withChina, unless they entered the markets of that nation withfurs, the only merchandise which the Chinese admit. In1788 captain Grey, with two small ships, the Washingtonand Columbia, arrived on the north-west coast ofAmerica, after a tedious voyage from Boston round CapeHorn of more than a year. Grey received from Mearesan account of the Straits of Fuca; and, according to thelatter, having entered for the purpose of exploring them,he sailed through a sea extending upwards of eight degreesof latitude, and nearly four degrees to the east of Nootka.This exaggerated statement caused a strong sensationamong those who believed in the discoveries of the Greekpilot ; but it was not sufficiently distinct or authenticto cause any alteration in the best maps. Thus it appearsthat, by the year 1789, English vessels had examinedthe whole north-west coast of America from 47° to 60°,and the charts and surveys of these trading navigators,M 4MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.being compared and combined, formed a tolerably correctoutline of a very intricate line of coast. The ships ofother nations had engaged in the trade, but the Englishwere by far the most numerous and most successful. Thecargoes procured by Portlock and Dixon were valued atnearly 55,000 dollars. The courage and energy of theEnglish gave them great advantage in their dealings witha rude people. Meares wintered, and built a vessel onthe coast; and as early as 1786, two ships from Bengalhad left at Nootka Sound a gentleman named JohnM'Kay, who adopted the manners of the people, learnedtheir language, and obtained much useful information.The torpid indolence of the Spanish government wasfirst disturbed, and its fears awakened, by the approach ofthe Russians to the Spanish American territories in1769 ; they then recollected, that above 160 years before(in 1602), Viscaino had discovered an excellent harbourin 36° 40' north latitude. As that position was intermediatebetween the strong holds of Mexico and thelimit of the discoveries of the Russians, it appearedadvisable to establish themselves there, as on a point ofconcentration, before they though of pushing their surveysfarther to the north. It was resolved, accordingly, toestablish a settlement at Monterey, formerly discoveredby Viscaino. Vessels were despatched from the port ofSan Bias under the command of Vincent Vile ; but theexpedition was productive of no discoveries. It wasnot till after the most laborious researches, that theSpaniards succeeded in finding again the harbour ofMonterey, where, as well as at San Diego, they fixed acolony and returned. But the repeated voyages of theEnglish into the great ocean soon after, caused freshalarm to the jealous cabinet of Madrid. It appearedthat there was no time to be lost in prosecuting discoveriesto the north of California, and in making settlementson the coast, or, at least, in formally takingpossession of it. In 1775, two ships despatched fromSan Bias, under the command of Don Juan de Ayala andAntonio Maurelle, contributed in a small degree to thechap. xi. Vancouver's voyage. 169improvement of geography, by superficially surveyingthe coast between 47 and 57°. The expedition was instructedto push its survey as far as the parallel of 6'5° ;but Spanish navigators had not advanced so rapidly asthose of other nations in the art of maritime surveying,and their examination of the coast extended no furtherthan 57°. A spacious harbour, or sound, in latitude 55°17', was named, from the viceroy of Mexico, PuertoBucarelli. Here Don Juan De Ayala, in the name ofhis Catholic Majesty, took possession of the country toan indefinite distance.The result of this voyage appears to have been satisfactoryto the viceroy; for, in 1779, he ordered a secondexpedition to be despatched to continue the examinationof the coast from latitude 58° to 70°. As the ignoranceof the Spaniards at that time was equal to their silenceand reserve, it is possible that the viceroy was not awarethat an English navigator, named James Cook, had madethis survey the preceding year, with the intention ofpublishing it to all the world. This expedition, commandedby Don Ignacio Arteaga, accompanied by thepilot Maurelle, made no additions to geography; insteadof advancing from the parallel of 58° to 70°, Arteagaterminated his examination of the north-west coast at59°. He obtained, however, the alarming certainty, thatthe Russians had fixed themselves permanently at severalpoints in high latitudes. Maurelle, on his return, pretendedto construct an accurate chart of the coast, thoughit is known that, in 1779? the Spaniards still calculatedtheir longitudes from the dead reckoning, while theFrench and English had, for some years, used chronometersand lunar observations. The Spaniards were somuch embarrassed in this last voyage, owing to theirignorance and miscalculations, that when in PrinceWilliam's Sound, they imagined themselves on the coastof Kamtschatka, and were in constant fear of beingattacked by the Russians.These impotent attempts of the Spaniards to obtaina knowledge of a coast that was soon after annually170 Modest VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.visited by small vessels from Europe, performing thevoyage round Cape Horn, sufficiently illustrates thewant of all improvement and the relative decline of theSpaniards in the arts of navigation ; but when the furtrade began to attract a quantity of English shipping tothe north-west coast, the sovereigns of Mexico wereurged by new motives to exertion. Two nations, placedat the extremities of Europe and Asia, threatened tocontend with them for the treasures of the new world,exerted themselves to dissipate the geographical ignorancewhich Spain had voluntarily submitted to lest knowledgeshould create rivals, and seemed gradually to acquire aproperty on an immense line of coast conterminous withthe Spanish possessions. Don Esteban Martinez, madea voyage along the north-west coast in 1788, and discoveredno fewer than eight settlements of Russians ; helearned also that the governor of Kamtschatka intendedto give orders for immediately occupying, in the nameof the empress of Russia, Nootka Sound, or, as theSpaniards name it, Puerto de San Lorenzo. The viceroyof Mexico was determined to frustrate this project; and,in 1 789, Don Martinez was despatched with two frigatesto take formal possession of Nootka Sound. When hearrived there, four vessels were riding in the harbour ;two American, one Portuguese, and the fourth an Englishvessel : the last alone was seized and declared a prize,the other three were released. After this first act ofauthority, he proceeded without delay to accomplish theobject of his mission, by building dwelling-houses andmagazines, and by erecting at the mouth of the harboura battery of cannon. While the Spaniards were thusardently engaged in laying the foundation of a newdominion, a vessel appeared at the mouth of the harbour.She was suffered to enter it ; but her anchor wasscarcely let go, when she was boarded and taken possessionof by the Spaniards : she proved to be theArgonaut, a trading vessel from London, commanded bycaptain Colnett, who was duly authorised to form afixed settlement at Nootka, and was the bearer of anchap. xr. Vancouver's voyage. 171order for preparing habitations for the English colonists,who were to be conveyed thither in the course of a year,in ships which he left fitting out in the Thames. Thisviolent proceeding on the part of Spain gave rise towarm political discussions between the cabinets ofLondon and Madrid ; and two European nations, pretendingto civilisation, had nearly engaged in a destructivewar for the possession of a small portion ofuncultivated coast, at the distance, by sea, of 6',000leagues from Europe. This succinct history of the furtrade, and of the political disputes to which it conducted,will serve to explain how Europeans became so rapidlyacquainted with an intricate and uninviting coast, thathalf a century before was utterly unknown, and explainsthe origin of the noblest hydrographical survey ever made.The British government, amply recompensed for itsexertions in the cause of geographical discoveries, by theenergy communicated in consequence to commercialenterprise, was preparing to send out an expeditionin 1790, to complete the examination of the ocean insouthern latitudes, when intelligence reached Englandof the-seizure of the Argonaut. The equipment of theexpedition was immediately stopped, and a warlike armamentfitted out, to give force to the remonstrances thatwere about to be made. The sudden appearance of awell armed fleet had its due influence with the court ofSpain. Restitution of the property seized was promised,and the right of Great Britain to the possession ofNootka Sound was also acknowledged. From the greatimportance attached to that post, on account of thefisheries and the fur trade, it was deemed expedient toreceive a formal cession of it from the Spaniards; and forthis purpose captain Vancouver, who had been appointedsecond in command in the projected voyage to theantarctic seas, was ordered to proceed to Nootka Sound;and, having received from the Spanish government therestitution of that territory, to survey the whole northwestcoast, from lat. 30°, to Cook's river in 6l°. Hesailed in the Discovery in 1791j accompanied by captain172 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Broughton, in the Chatham, a small vessel of 135 tonsburden.Vancouver was directed by his instructions to fix his attentionchiefly on two objects: — first, on the water communicationsthat might facilitate the commerce betweenthe north-western and north-eastern coasts of America ;and, secondly, he was to ascertain the number of settlementsmade by Europeans on the former of these coasts,and the date of their establishment. He was directedto examine narrowly every inlet, but not to pursue hisexamination of rivers farther than he found them navigablefor ships, that might safely frequent the PacificOcean. His attention was particularly called to theStraits of Fuca, and to the opening discovered by theWashington, in 17 SQ. " The discovery," his instructionsproceed to say, "of a near communication betweenany such sea or strait, and any river running into or fromthe Lake of the Woods, would be particularly useful."Vancouver was enjoined strict courtesy towards tradersof foreign nations, whom he might meet with on thenorth-west coast, and particularly to the Spaniards; andhe was desired, if he met with any Spanish navigators,engaged in a service similar to his own, to offer them afree and unreserved communication of all his charts anddiscoveries. He was instructed to survey on his returnthe western coast of South America, from lat. 44° toCape Horn. On his voyage out, Vancouver surveyed aconsiderable portion of the southern coast of New Holland,where he discovered King George the Third'sSound ; at New Zealand, also, he was actively and usefullyemployed in completing the surveys which Cookhad left unfinished. In leaving New Zealand, theChatham and Discovery were separated by a gale. Vancouver,in the latter ship, .discovered some rocky islets,which he named the Snares, and afterwards visited aconsiderable island, which he called Opera; but the truename of which is now discovered to be Papa. In MatavaiBay he rejoined his comrade, captain Broughton, whochap. xi. Vancouver's voyage. 173had discovered Chatham Island, not far to the east ofNew Zealand.In April 1792, Vancouver arrived on the coast of NewAlbion. On approaching Nootka Sound, he fell in with aship commanded by captain Grey, the same person whowas said to have passed through the Straits of Fuca to anextensive sea in 178.9; but the American captain disavowedthe reports of his navigation which had reachedEurope. He penetrated, he said, only fifty miles to theeast-south-east, where the strait was still five leagues•'•ide ; and the natives told him that it afterwards turnedto the northward. Vancouver soon after entered the inlet,and anchored on the first night farther within it thancaptain Grey, or any other European, had as yet penetrated.In his voyage thus far, he had examined 215leagues of coast so closely, that he had seen throughoutthe surf breaking on the shore. On ascending an islandin the middle of the inlet, he was enchanted with theprospect that met his eye. In every direction, nobletrees were distributed as if in a park ; and rose trees infull bloom predominated amongst the brushwood. Thecountry around appeared fertile, opening in some placesinto large meadows, while in others, especially on themain land, it was a wilderness of lofty trees, amongwhich the oak was most conspicuous. A deer was boughtfrom the natives for a small piece of copper, about a footsquare, for they prize this metal above iron. They expressedmuch horror and disgust at the sight of a venisonpasty, and some pains were requisite to convince themthat it was not made of human flesh. The promptitudeof their suspicion, and the strength of their feelings inthis instance, prove that cannibalism, though not practisedby themselves, was known by them to exist among someneighbouring tribes. In proceeding to the northwardthrough this inlet, every branch of which he explored,Vancouver met with two small Spanish ships, employedlike himself in making a minute survey of the coast.The two commanders immediately united their labours,and even their names, in this part of the survey. The174 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.island which forms the western boundary of the inlet,and on which Nootka is situated, is named Vancouver andQuatre Island. The English navigator, however, imposedon the whole archipelago the collective name ofNew Georgia ; and to the wide inlet, which ramifies intoa number of inferior harbours, he gave the name of theGulf of Georgia.On his arrival at Nootka Sound, difficulties werestarted by the Spanish commander with respect to theterms of the intended restitution ; and Vancouver,sending captain Broughton home in consequence, toacquaint government with the evasive conduct of theSpaniards, proceeded to complete his survey to the southward.The Columbia River was explored, as far as itwas navigable for a small vessel. The natives werefound, in general, to resemble those of Nootka in dressand manners, though not in language ; they have manytraits of civilisation; and, in some places, evince a decidedtaste for architecture. Their houses are well builtwooden edifices, the timbers being well mortified andcovered with planks twenty feet long, two feet wide,and perfectly smooth ; so that when these edifices areconsidered in relation to the imperfect implements employedto frame them, they must appear wonderful monumentsof ingenuity and labour. On the front ofthese houses is generally painted a human face of greatsize and hideous features ; the mouth, which is representedas open, and forming an oval three feet in heightand two in width, being in the door of the habitation.In January 1793, Vancouver proceeded to winterin the Sandwich Islands, bringing with him a stock oflive cattle, which he had collected in the Spanish settlements.In the spring of the same year he resumed hissurvey of the American coast, and returned again to theSandwich Islands in the winter of 1794- His presencehere may have exerted an important influence on thedestiny of those Islands, as he was looked up to withpeculiar respect by the great Tame-Tame-hah, the extraordinaryman who was the immediate instrument ofchap. xi. Vancouver's voyage. 175effecting a great and salutary revolution in the politicaland social condition of those islands. The islandershad already become acquainted with four European nations; they had learned that there were many othersnearly equal to those in power and intelligence; andthey perceived, perhaps, that, at no great distance oftime, they would become the despised subjects of one ofthose foreign nations : they preferred, therefore, to placethemselves voluntarily under the protection of England.For this purpose, a convocation of chiefs was called, andthe cession of Owhyhee to the sovereign of Great Britainwas solemnly made, on the 25th of February, 1794.This important event was preceded by long deliberatediscussion and was concluded with great formality. Thecourt appeared on the occasion in all its splendour, anddramatic entertainments were exhibited on a great scale.In the spring of the same year, Vancouver directedhis course to the American coast, intending to completehis survey, beginning at the remotest point. On enteringCook's River, he found that it was but an inlet,no stream falling into it which could entitle it to thename it had received. In passing to the south, he metwith a fleet of skin canoes, such as he could not haveexpected to encounter in those seas : there were above200 of these frail vessels, each carrying two men. Theintercourse with Europeans seemed to produce disastrouseffects, in the first instance, here as well as in the SouthSea islands : the natives were clad in skins of birdsand beasts of no value, their comfortable fur garmentsbeing all disposed of in trade. At length, on the 22dof August, 1~9^> the survey of the north-west coast ofAmerica was brought to a conclusion ; and, in Octoberof the following year, the ships arrived in the Thames,the bad weather and other circumstances having preventedthe survey of the western shores of Patagonia.During the four years that the ships were employed inthis laborious service, only two men died in both thecrews. A circumstance which, if the mortality that attendedlong voyages while the arts of navigation were176 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.imperfect be considered, reflects the highest credit onthe care and skill of the commander. The unceasingexertions which Vancouver himself made to complete thegigantic task of surveying 9*000 miles of unknown andintricate coasts — a labour chiefly performed in openboats — made an inroad on his constitution from whichhe never recovered ; and, declining gradually, he died inMay, 1798, before the last volume of his narrative wascompletely finished for the press. But he may proudlytake his place with Drake, Cook, Baffin, Parry, andother British navigators, to whom England looks withpride and geographers with gratitude.No further knowledge was obtained of the northwestcoast of America until 1816. A Russian noblemanof large fortune, count IlomanzofF, fitted out the Rick,a small vessel of 180 tons, for a voyage of discovery,with a crew of twenty men, besides the officers andnaturalists. He entrusted her to the command of lieutenantKotzebue, the son of the celebrated German writerof that name. Kotzebue sailed from Plymouth in October,1815; and, in March following, touched at EasterIsland, where the natives, exasperated by the injuries committedon them by the American traders, resisted his landing.On the 1 st of August, 1 8 1 6, he discovered, on theAmerican shore to the north of Behring's Strait, a wideopening commencing in latitude 66° 42' 30", longitude164° 14' 50". He entered this inlet; and, in the courseof a fortnight, made a rapid and rather unsatisfactory surveyof its shores. He suspected the existence of a passageout of it on the south east, communicating, perhaps,with Norton Sound : another channel seemed to conductto the west. The naturalists who accompanied himwere surprised to find here on the shore an ice-berg,one hundred feet in height, and covered on the summitwith a layer of soil and luxuriant vegetation. From adistance it had the appearance of a chalk cliff; at its baselay an accumulation of bones and mammoths' teeth, asKotzebue calls them ; though, from his description, naturalistshave concluded them to be the teeth of theCHAP. XI. Vancouver's VOYAGE. 177elephant. The inhabitants seemed pretty numerous, andwere well clad in furs and skins : they were acquainted,it appears, with tobacco, which they obtained from theTshuktski. Kotzebue quitted the inlet to which he hasgiven his name, on the 15th of August, and crossed overto visit the coast of Asia : by this imprudent step, helost the opportunity of making some important discoverieson the northern coast of America. The sea, asfar as he could descry, was quite free from ice, and asteady current set to the eastward. He wintered in thatarchipelago of the Pacific that includes the Nautilus,Chatham, and Calvert Islands. To all these he gave newnames, and seems to have regarded them as new discoveries.In the following year, he again sailed to thenorth, to resume the track which he had so unwiselydiscontinued the preceding season. In his voyage northwardhe was met by dreadful gales, and, being thrown,by the pitching of the ship, against a beam with suchviolence as to break his breast-bone, his health was soseriously affected as to render him incapable of bearingthe vicissitudes of a northern climate. His spirit beingonce sunk, difficulties were not wanting to justify himin abandoning an enterprise to which he felt no longerinclined, and he returned to Europe without makingany further attempt to penetrate the polar sea. As noharbour was previously known on the shores of Behring'sStrait, the discovery of Kotzebue's Inlet, in which goodshelter may be easily found, was of great importance,and the whale fishers were not slow to take advantageof it.The immense line of coast which Vancouver surveyed,and which Spain was so anxious to appropriate,is now, for the most part, divided between Russia,England, and the United States. The British portionis separated from the American by the river Caledonia,which flows from the Rocky Mountains into AdmiraltyInlet, in lat. 48°. Nine degrees farther north commencethe Russian territories in America No colonieshave been planted on these shores ; but the BritishVOL. III. N178 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.traders from Canada and Hudson's Bay, braving allthe hardships of the journey across the continent, havedescended into the country from the Rocky Mountains.The natives are a cheerful active race, and friendly tothe whites, who supply them with the comforts of life,and give their industry an object. They have encouragedthe traders to settle among them. The latter have giventhe British dominion on this coast the name of NewCaledonia. They describe it as a fruitful country, wellwatered with mountain streams, and so abounding inlakes that above one sixth of the surface is under water.The natives call themselves la' Gullies, or Water Travellers,being accustomed to pass from one village toanother in their canoes. The British traders have establishedin the country a regular chain of forts or postsfor carrying on their traffic.CHAP. XII.INTERIOR OP NORTH AMERICA.EAGERNESS OF THE AMERICANS TO ENGAGE IN THE FUR TRADE.EMIGRATION TOWARDS THE WEST. DANIEL BOON.LOUISIANA PURCHASED BY THE UNITED STATES. EXPEDITION*OF LEWIS AND CLARKE. THEY PROCEED TO ASCEND THE Missouri.THE SIOUX INDIANS THE FALLS OF THE MISSOURI.• ITS SOURCES IN THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. THE PARTY DescendTHE COLUMBIA. DANGERS OF THE VOYAGE. THEYREACH THE SEA. WINTER ON THE COAST. JOURNEY OFPIKE TO THE SOURCES OF THE MISSISSIPPI. HE PROCEEDS TOEXPLORE THE SOURCES OF THE ARKANSAS AND RED RIVER. —ABUNDANCE OF GAME. PIKE REACHES THE ROCKY Mountains.— SUFFERINGS OF HIS PARTY. HE ENTERS BY MistakeTHE SPANISH TERRITORY TAKEN PRISONER. HISUlceration AND RETURN. EXPEDITION OF MAJOR LONG.HE ASCENDS THE PLATTE THE SANDY DESERTS JAMEs'sPEAK RETURNS RY THE ARKANSAS AND CANADIAN RIVERS.TME KASKAIA INDIANS. JOURNEY OF Case AND SCHOOL-craftOF LONG AND Beating JOURNEY OF Hearse TOCHAP. XII. INTERIOR OF NORTH AMERICA. 179THE COPPERMINE RIVER. HIS UNSUCCESSFUL ATTEMPTS. HEAT LENGTH REACHES THE SEA. PROGRESS OF THE FURTRADERS IN THE INTERIOR. JOURNEY OF Mckenzie.HE DESCENDS THE Mckenzie RIVER TO ITS MOUTH. HISEXPEDITION ACROSS THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. HE REACHESTHE PACIFIC.Soon after the British colonies in America had won,by a hard struggle, their political independence, theirattention was strongly invited to the lucrative tradecarried on for furs on the opposite shores of the continent.Ships from Boston, we have seen, arrived atNootka Sound, after a perilous voyage of a whole year,to procure a cargo of furs. The infant republic wasat first too much engrossed in making those arrangementsrequired by the novelty of its political existence,and had a population too feeble in proportion tothe vast extent of territory which it claimed, to thinkof stretching its dominion as far as the Pacific Ocean ;but the course of political events suggested and fosteredthis ambition. The vast and fertile country of Louisiana,on the western bank of the Mississippi, had beenceded by Spain to the crown of France in 1?63, andbeing deemed perhaps, by Napoleon, a useless possession,was sold by him to the United States, in 1804, forthe sum of 6,000,000 francs. The Americans lostno time in surveying their new acquisitions, and in examiningtheir productions, their capabilities, and theirboundaries.A tide of emigration had long before flowed to thewestward : a predilection for the roving life of a hunter,and for the solitude of the woods, had induced manyin the remote settlements of America, to retire as civilisationadvanced, and thus to pilot the way, as itwere, for those who explored the country with motivesof a less unsocial character. The celebrated Daniel Boon,who led the first colony into Kentucky, having livedsome time with the Indians, by whom he was taken captive,imbibed a strong partiality for their mode of life ;and as colonisation advanced to the westward, he conn2180 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.finally shifted his residence, so as to be always 100miles ahead of the white population ; the hut in whichhe was found dead, a few years ago, was removed somedistance from the farthest settlements of the Missouri.The first great national expedition undertaken by thecitizens of the United States was planned by presidentJefferson, a zealous promoter of interior discovery.Captain Meriwether Lewis and lieut. William Clarkewere appointed to command the exploring party, whichconsisted in all of about thirty persons. They were instructedto ascend the Missouri to its source, and then,seeking a passage through the western mountains, to endeavourto descend by the Columbia, or great river ofthe west, to the Pacific Ocean. On the 14th of May,1804, they embarked on the Wood River, a smallstream which falls into the Mississippi, nearly opposite tothe mouth of the Missouri, and began the longest rivervoyage that has ever been undertaken since the time ofOrellana. Nor had the fictions of an ignorant age yetfallen into such discredit, as to relieve them from thefear of meeting with powerful savage nations, of giganticstature, and particularly hostile to white men.Nearly 100 miles up the Missouri, they passed a littlevillage named La Cigarette, the highest white settlementon this river. Among all the Indian tribes in thiscountry, the Osages, the Sioux, and the Mahas, theyobserved unequivocal proofs of decline and increasingmisery. A tribe of the last named nation were workedinto such a state of frenzy by the ravages of the smallpox,that they burned their villages, destroyed theirwives and children, and sallied forth to seek an abode insome distant country.On the banks of the Missouri a rock was pointed outto our travellers which was an object of peculiar regardin the eyes of the natives. They procure from it thered stone of which they make their pipes ; and theneighbourhood of this rock is a sort of neutral or sacredground, where, in the midst of the most furious wars,every one may seek unmolested the material for hispipe. When the party had advanced about GO or 100CHAP. XII. INTERIOR OF NORTH AMERICA. 181miles up the Missouri, the cold winds from the northwest,and the formation of new ice on the river, warnedthem of the necessity of speedily selecting their winterquarters ; they accordingly built a fort, which theycalled Fort Mandan, from the Indian people in whosecountry they were. These Indians may be said toworship the healing power ; they believe in the existenceof a great spirit, whom they call the Great Medicine;and the genius or guardian angel of each individualis called his Medicine. The tradition which thesepeople have respecting their origin is singular enough :they believe that their whole nation resided originally inalarge village under ground, near a subterranean lake ;the roots of a vine grew down to this village, andafforded them a glimpse of ethereal light. Some adventurersclimbed up by the roots, and brought back sogood a report of buffaloes and fruit, and so tempting asample of grapes, that the whole nation resolved to emigrateto the upper and more agreeable region. Men,women, and children accordingly began to ascend, butwhen only half their number had reached the surface, thevine broke under the weight of a corpulent woman,and the ascent was closed upon her and the rest of thenation. They expect to return, after death, to thistheir original seat under ground; but a great lake is tobe crossed before they reach the village of their fathers,and the wicked, because of the burden of their sins,will be unable to effect their passage. They pay anannual visit to a fragment of rock or medicine stone,which they regard as an oracle. Their chiefs smokebefore it with much solemn gravity, and then retire tosleep in a neighbouring wood; in the morning the decreesof fate are seen written on the rock in mysterious whitemarks.On the 7th of April the party left the encampmentat Fort Mandan, and proceeded to ascend the Missouri.They soon after passed the mouth of the Yellow StoneRiver, little inferior in magnitude to the great river intowhich it falls : here the quantity of game is prodigious.n 3182 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Buffaloes were seen in herds of from 3000 to 10,000.They were soon after embarrassed on finding the riverseparate into two branches of nearly equal size. Adetachment, lightly equipped, was sent forward to seekthose great cataracts which were known to distinguishthe main branch of the Missouri. Captain Lewis himself,on ascending the southern branch, obtained adistant view of the Rocky Mountains, now completelycovered with snow ; and, guided by the tremendoussound, arrived at the spot where the whole Missouridescends down a shelving rock, and continues to formfor some miles a succession of rapids and foaming cascades.The whole party accordingly proceeded up thisbranch, and, embarking in canoes above the grand cataract,continued their course to the Rocky Mountains.Here the river winds through a defile three or fourmiles long, the rocks rising perpendicularly from thewater's edge. The Americans followed the stream inthe mountain valleys, until, after pursuing its course for3000 miles, they arrived at its fountain head. Thethree streams, which may be regarded as its sources,they named from their great statesmen, Jefferson, Madisonand Gelatin ; and, by way of reflecting a complimenton these gentlemen, they gave two other tributaries thenames of Philosophy and Philanthropy Rivers.The expedition now joyfully proceeded towards thewest, and soon commenced their descent towards thePacific Ocean. They brought with them as an interpretera Shoshonee woman, who had been carried offfrom this country by a band of Indians from the east,in the hope that by her mediation they might be able atonce to establish a friendly intercourse with the natives;nor were their hopes disappointed. They met a troopof warriors, armed and on horseback, preparing toresist a hostile attack ; they at first manifested mistrustand suspicion of the whites, but when the Shoshoneewoman was brought into the tent to interpret betweenthe parties, she instantly recognised her brother in theIndian chief himself, and was for some time unable toCnAP. XII. INTERIOR OF NORTII AMERICA. 183speak from the violence of her emotions. The confidenceand friendship of the Indians were now completelygained, hut this did not prevent the party from feelingseverely the want of provisions. They were obligedeven to kill their horses, lean as they were, to affordthem a few meals, and devoured as many dogs as theycould purchase from the natives. These, better able toendure privations, or less used to feed on quadrupeds,bestowed on the strangers the opprobrious name of dog-eaters.The Americans were now embarked on the Organ,or Great River of the West, to which, with little reason,the name of Columbia has been given. As they descendedto the sea, the inhabitants seemed to improve inmildness of manners and habits of settled industry. TheSkulks live in houses made of mat, and are well suppliedwith fishing implements, by which they procurethemselves an abundant subsistence. The navigationof the Columbia presented many dangers, which our travellersaverted by their skill and firmness ; their hardihoodexcited the wonder and admiration of the nativesthey approached the sea, the river widened till itattained a breadth of two miles, and sometimes expandedinto wide lakes filled with islands. On the 2d of Novemberthey perceived the first tide water ; soon after,they had the pleasure of hearing a native uttering a fewwords of English, which he had learned from the traderswho frequent the coast. On the 7th, as the fog clearedoff", they were delighted with a view of the ocean ; butthey found themselves now in a dangerous and distressingsituation : their canoes were ill fitted for sea navigation,and they drifted for some time at the mercy of the waves,in the severest weather, ill clothed, and with scanty provisions; but at length they reached the open coast, wherethey selected a suitable spot for their winter encampment.Here they established a friendly intercourse with theClasps, Killamucks, and other Indian tribes of whomthey formed a favourable opinion, and returned to FortLouis on the Mississippi in May, 1806.n 4184 MODERN VOYAGES OK DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Lewis and Clarke were the first who travelled acrossthe continent of North America, from the United Statesto the Pacific Ocean ; but the enterprise had been projectedmany years before by Jonathan Carver, who hadtravelled to the sources of the Mississippi, and who intendedto seek the Organ, or Great River of the West,by which he might descend to the Pacific Ocean. " Thecompletion of the scheme," he says, "which I have had thehonour of first planning and attempting, will some timeor other be effected, I make no doubt ; those who are sofortunate as to succeed in it will reap, exclusive of thenational advantages that must ensue, emoluments beyondtheir most sanguine expectations ; and whilst their spiritsare elated by success, perhaps they may bestow somecommendations and blessings on the person that firstpointed out to them the way ; these, though but ashadowy recompense for all my toil, I shall receive withpleasure."While Lewis and Clarke were accomplishing whatCarver here points out, an enterprising young officer,lieutenant Babylon Montgomery Pike, was sent by theAmerican government to examine the sources of theMississippi, and to conciliate the friendship of the Indiannations inhabiting that country. He was hospitablyentertained by the Sioux Indians, and their chief presentedto him the sacred pipe, which was to serve himas a letter of recommendation, and entitle him to thefavour and protection of the kindred tribes. He wasdelighted, as he advanced, with the romantic beauty of thecountry on the banks of the upper Mississippi ; he passedthe mouth of the Chippewa, a majestic river flowinginto the Mississippi from the east, and of the St.Peter's, a still nobler stream, which joins it from thewest. Beyond this the navigation of the river was obstructedby a series of rapids, terminating in the greatfalls of St. Antony. When Mr. Pike and his partyhad advanced 230 miles above the falls, in lat. 45°, theywere obliged to leave their canoes and continue theirjourney on sledges. It was now the depth of winter,CHAP. XII. INTERIOR OF NORTH AMERICA. 185and they suffered as much from the scarcity of food asfrom the severity of the weather. They still followed,however, the course of the Mississippi, which was nowdwindling into a small stream, about 300 yards wide,flowing through a level country. In February theyarrived at Leech Lake, which appeared to be the mainsource of the river ; and here they were hospitably entertainedat a station of the British fur traders fromMontreal. Having also visited Red Cedar Lake, whichlikewise contributes its waters to the Mississippi, Mr. Pikereturned in April to Fort Louis, after a laborious journeyof nearly nine months.Scarcely had he returned, when lieutenant (now major)Pike was appointed to command an expedition, theobject of which was to survey the wide extent of countrybetween the Mississippi and the western mountains, andto examine the sources of the Arkansas and the RedRiver. His party consisted of twenty-three persons,including a surgeon and interpreter. The journey commencedthrough a rich and beautiful country, on thebanks of the Osage River, where the Indians seemed toenjoy greater abundance than often falls to the lot ofthose children of nature. The country on the Arkansasappeared to them the hunter's paradise ; the elk, deer,and buffalo ranged over the plains in such immense herdsas might suffice the whole Indian race for a century.The Arkansas is navigable in boats throughout its wholelength, from the Mississippi to the mountains, a distanceof nearly 2000 miles, except during a few months ofthe dry season, when it is obstructed by sand-bars.Winter had arrived before major Pike reached the headof the Arkansas ; he had not taken into considerationthe elevation of the ground, and the hardships to be enduredin visiting the mountains during the most inclementseason ; he persevered, however, in his attemptsto reach a lofty peak, the snowy summits of which werevisible from the plains at the distance of 100 miles.Little game was to be procured; the party, on one occasion,passed four days without tasting a meal; and some,MODERN* VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.having their feet frozen, were unable to proceed. MajorPike, however, persisted till he reached the head of theArkansas, 1 90 miles above its issue from the mountains.He then directed his course southwards, and in a fewdays arrived at the banks of a large river, which hesupposed to be the Red River, along which it was hisintention to return. The stream at which he had arrived,however, was the Rio del North, which flows throughthe Spanish territory into the Gulf of Mexico : he thusunconsciously advanced within the dominions of a peoplepeculiarly jealous of encroachment. He soon discoveredhis mistake. A party of Spanish soldiers surroundedthe Americans, and led them prisoners to Santa Fe :here, from the raggedness of their garments, their wantof hats, and their wretched appearance, they were generallymistaken for savages. The suspicions of the Spanishcommander being dispelled, the travellers wereallowed to depart, and arrived at Achitophel on the 1 stof July.The American government appears to have rested satisfiedfor some years with the result of these expeditions.Journeys, indeed, were made to the sea, across the RockyMountains, by private traders; but from these the publicderived very little information. An expedition to themouth of the Columbia was undertaken, in 1811, byMr. Hunt • and some of his party, on their return fromthe Pacific, crossed the Rocky Mountains to one of thesources of the Platte, by which they descended to theMissouri through a tract of country before unexplored.In the following year, Mr. Robert Stewart, with fourother traders, left the Pacific for New York. In crossingthe Rocky Mountains, they were robbed by a party of theCrow Indians, who carried off all their horses. Theynow found themselves on foot, with the Rocky Mountainsand a journey of 2000 miles before them ; the greaterpart of which was through a country wholly unknown,as their route lay considerably to the south of that followedby Lewis and Clarke. Having crossed the mountainswith much labour, they travelled east-south-east untilCHAP. XII. INTERIOR OF NORTH AMERICA. 187they struck on the head waters of the great river Platte,which they followed to its mouth; having spent" thewinter upon it, (Loo miles above the Missouri.At length, in 18 19, the American government organiseda new expedition, " of a military and scientific nature,to examine more carefully, with a view to colonisationand defence, their extensive dominions to the east ofthe Rocky Mountains." It was commanded by majorLong. The narrative of it has been written by Dr.James the botanist. The party embarked in a steamboatat Pittsburgh, on the 5th of May, 1819, and on the30th reached the Mississippi. About the middle ofSeptember the steam-boat arrived at the confluence of thePlatte and Missouri, and on the banks of the latter riverthey erected encampments for their winter residence, whichthey named Engineer Cantonment. Here they suffereddreadfully during the winter from the scurvy : and as theyhad no means of checking the disease, for which theywere wholly unprepared, nearly 100 soldiers, about onethird of the party, were carried off.On the 6th of June, the party left their winter quartersto proceed up the valley of the Platte, which presentedto the view, for more than 100 miles along theriver, a vast expanse of prairie or natural meadow, withouta hill or other inequality of surface, with scarcely atree or shrub to be seen upon it. Vast herds of bisonsand deer, in the rear of which packs of wolves aresure to follow, rove over these immense plains. Thewild movements of these animals, with the rare and interestingplants, relieve in some measure the dulness ofthis monotonous scenery. The prairies on the Platte aresucceeded by the great sandy desert, which extends in agentle slope nearly 400 miles to the very base of theItocky Mountains, and nearly 500 miles from north tosouth. Its surface is furrowed by deep ravines, to thedepth of many hundred feet below the common level Inthese the scanty growth of stunted trees skirt the brooksthat meander along the bottom, but on the elevated surfaceof the great desert not a tree is to be found. The188 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.formidable cactus, thickly beset with terrific spines, forbidsthe approach of man or beast.At length the party reached the base of the RockyMountains, and a detachment proceeded to ascend a peakwhich towered to a considerable height above the remainderof the chain. Dr. James, whose name has been givento this peak, speaks in admiration of the astonishinglybrilliant colouring of the plants which he found here.This he ascribes to the intensity of the light transmittedfrom the bright unobscured atmosphere of those regions,and increased by reflection from the immense impendingmasses of snow. " From the summit of the peak,"he proceeds, " the view towards the north-west andsouth-west is diversified with innumerable mountains,all white with snow, and on some of the more distant itappears to extend down to their bases. Immediatelyunder our feet, on the west, lay the narrow valley of theArkansas, which we could trace running towards thenorth-west, probably more than sixty miles. On thenorth side of the peak was an immense mass of snowand ice. To the east lay the great plain, rising as it receded,until in the distant horizon it appeared to minglewith the sky." The altitude of this peak was determinedby trigonometrical measurement to be about 8500feet from its base, which was probably about 3000 feetabove the level of the sea.The party now proceeded southward till they reachedthe Arkansas, the sources of which they explored. Adetachment sent to the south descended the Canadian,which they mistook for the Red River, and were thusconducted back to the Arkansas, where they rejoinedtheir companions. Both parties suffered much fromstormy weather, from want of provisions, and particularlyof water, that of the rivers being generally either muddyor brackish. Naked beds of sand occupied the greaterpart of the country round the upper Arkansas, and wereoften covered by an incrustation of salt like thin ice. Inthese deserts the thermometer in the month of Auguststood at from $5° to 100°, in the shade. Clouds of locustsCHAP. XII. INTERIOR OF NORTH AMERICA. 189filled the air, rattle-snakes of various kinds, and enormousscolopendra, crawled from the chasms in theparched ground. The torment of mosquitoes was notfelt, but their place was supplied by the more formidablewood-ticks, which bury themselves in the skin, andcause an irritation which is often attended with disagreeableconsequences. The detachment that descended theCanadian fell in with a band of the Kaskaias Indians,who occupy the country about the sources of the Platte,Arkansas, and the Rio del North. They appeared to ourtravellers to be the most degraded and miserable of theuncivilised tribes on the eastern sides of the Rocky Mountains.Their wandering life, and the inhospitable natureof the country, precludes the possibility of their advancingbeyond the profoundest barbarism. They are,however, very expert horsemen, and very dexterous incatching wild horses by throwing the noose. The differentexploring detachments having rendezvoused at PortSmith, on the Mississippi, proceeded to Washington,bringing with them, as the fruits of their travels, theskins of many rare animals, some thousand preservedinsects, and an herbal of 400 or 500 new plants.In the mean time another expedition had proceeded tosurvey the country on the British frontier, round thesources of the Mississippi. Mr. Schoolcraft was thehistorian of this expedition, which was commanded bygeneral Cass. They followed the route which Pike hadpreviously explored, but which they were expected tosurvey with more scientific eyes. To complete the surveyof the frontiers, major Long and Mr. Keating weredirected to ascend the St. Peter's, a considerable river,which falls into the Mississippi from the west, nearly inlat. 45°. This river had been formerly ascended byCarver, and still earlier by baron La Hon tan ; butthe Indian tribes inhabiting its banks still remainednearly strangers to the citizens of the United States.Long and Keating traced the river to its source, a distanceof 375 miles, and, proceeding northward a few miles,arrived at the Red River, which flows northwards from190 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V,the British territories into Lake Winnipeg. The laboursof this expedition completed the general survey of thevast territories of the United States.The immense extent of country stretching northwardfrom Lake Superior and the sources [of the Mississippiremains still but very imperfectly known. Its leadingfeatures, however, its chains of lakes and navigablerivers, were very soon discovered by the enterprise ofthe British fur traders. As early as 1715, the Hudson'sBay Company had received from the Indianstolerably distinct accounts of a river flowing to thenorth into the sea, on the banks of which were situatedmines of copper. The intention of the company toexplore this river and its mineral riches was decided in1768, when rich specimens of copper ore were broughtto Fort Prince of Wales by the trading Indians. Forthis laborious undertaking they selected Samuel Herne,who had given proofs of his zeal and ability in examiningthe northern coast of Hudson's Bay and in improvingthe fishery. He set out from the fort on the6th of November, 17^9, accompanied by two whitesand some Indians. The ground was rugged, thoughcovered with snow. Provisions soon began to fail.When he had advanced about 200 miles, his Indianguides abandoned him, and he was obliged to return.He was not discouraged, however, by this failure ; butinthe beginning of February, 1770, he again proceeded,taking with him five Indians, but no Europeans ; who,he found, were viewed with contempt by the natives,from their inability to bear the hardships of the journey.When he had advanced about 500 miles into the interior,he found it necessary to wait till the severity ofthe season relaxed. Great distress was felt in themean time for want of provisions. " It was," he says,either all feasting or all famine : sometimes we hadtoo much ; seldom just enough ; frequently too little ;and often none at all. It would be only necessary tosay, that we have fasted many times two whole daysand nights ; twice upwards of three days, and once nearCHAP. XII. INTERIOR OF NORTH AMERICA. 1QIseven clays, during which we tasted not a mouthful ofany thing, except a few cranberries, water, scraps of oldleather, and burnt bones." Towards the end of Aprilhe again set forward ; and in August, when in lat.63° 10' north, and about 10° 40' west long, fromChurchill River, he was preparing to spend the winteramong a friendly tribe of Indians, when a gust ofwind threw down his quadrant, which was broken topieces, and he determined to return.Undismayed by all these hardships and disappointments,Hearne again set out on the 7th of December, insearch of the Peppermint River, in company with anintelligent Indian named Motannabbi. He followedthis time a more westerly course ; and when in lat. 60°,above 600 miles from the fort, they built canoes, andproceeded by various lakes and streams in a more northerlycourse. On the 13th of July, 1771, the partymuch increased by the accession of straggling bands ofIndians, arrived at the Peppermint River. The Indianshad for some weeks meditated an attack on theEsquimaux, with whom they live in perpetual hostility.About one o'clock in the morning of the 17th, theycommenced the attack. " Finding," says Hearne, " allthe Esquimaux quiet in their tents, they rushed forthfrom their ambuscade, and fell on the poor unsuspectingcreatures, unperceived till close to the eaves of theirtents, when they soon began the bloody massacre, while Istood neuter in the rear." The little horde, thus cruellybutchered consisted of about twenty persons, men,women, and children. An old woman found fishing inaneighbouring stream was tortured and put to deathwith the most shocking barbarity. A few of the Esquimauxescaped ; but the Indians destroyed their tents,broke their stone vessels, carried away their provisions,and then, collecting on the top of a little hill, shouted intriumph to the poor wretches who had taken refuge inthe river below. After this shocking carnage, " we satdown," says Hearne, " and made a good meal of freshsalmon."I£)2 MODERN* VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.On the morning of the 17th, Hearne commenced hissurvey of the mouth of the river. The tide was thenout, but from the marks on the shore it appeared to flowabout twelve or fourteen feet. The water in the riverwas quite fresh ; but from the number of seals which hesaw on the ice, and from the quantity of whalebone foundin the tents of the Esquimaux, Hearne concluded that theexpanse of water before him was the sea. It appearedto be full of islands and shoals, as far as he could discernwith the assistance of a good telescope. On the last dayof June, 1 772, he arrived at Fort Prince of Wales,after an absence of a year and nearly five months.Three years later he was made governor of the establishment.In 1782, Fort Prince of Wales was takenby a French squadron, commanded by La Perouse.This generous and enlightened commander restored toHearne the manuscripts of his journal, on condition thatit should be published immediately on his arrival inEngland. This took place in 1787; but yet, for whatreason it is not known, the publication was deferredtill 1795. To this long delay may, perhaps, beascribed the omission of many important details in thenarrative of his journey. He does not mention thelatitude of the mouth of the river, which in the chartwhich accompanies his volume is placed in about73° 30', or 6° too far to the north. This geographicalinaccuracy, with others of a similar description, longthrew some discredit on the whole narrative, and inducedmany to doubt whether Hearne had actuallyreached the sea.Previous to the year 1775, the great chain of lakeswhich runs towards the north-west from Lake Superiorto the Polar Sea, and forms the great receptacle of thewaters from the Rocky Mountains, was still wholly unknown.In that year, Mr. Joseph Frobisher, a gentlemanengaged in the fur trade, undertook to penetrateinto the country yet unexplored to the westward; and hesucceeded in advancing a considerable distance on theMissinipi, or Churchill River, where he procured asCHAP. XII. INTERIOR OF NORTH AMERICA. 193many furs as his canoes could carry. In this perilousexpedition he sustained all the hardships incident to ajourney through a wild and savage country, where hissubsistence depended upon what the woods and watersproduced. These difficulties, however, did not discouragehim from returning the following year, whenhe was equally successful. His brother then succeededin reaching Lake de la Croix, still farther to the west.In 177S, Mr. Pond followed the track of Mr. Frobisher,and proceeding still farther, at length arrived at Atha-bassa, a country hitherto unknown but from Indianreport. The traders having thus reached that chainof internal waters which affords an almost continuousnavigation from the Canadian lakes to the sea, began toproceed much more rapidly in their discoveries; and itwas not long before they received intelligence of a greatriver flowing to the northward.To explore this river, to which he has given his name,Mr. Alexander Mackenzie set forward en the 3d ofJune, 1789. He commenced his journey from FortChepeweyan, on the south side of the Lake of theHills, attended by a party of Canadians and someIndians, one of whom had been with Hearne. In descendingthe river, when in lat. 6'7 3 45', he learnedfrom the tribe of Indians called the Deguthee-Dinees,or Quarrelers, that the distance overland to the sea onthe east side was not great ; and that to the westwardit was still shorter. On the 12th of July they entereda lake as it appeared, though no land was seen ahead,but, the water was shallow, and covered by ice. " Ata few leagues from the mouth of the river, my people,"says Mackenzie, " could not, at this time, refrain fromexpressions of real concern that they were obliged toreturn without reaching the sea." From this it appealsthat the author was at first disposed to doubt that hehad actually reached the ocean ; but soon after he observeda rising of the water, which, as the wind wasmoderate, was believed by all to proceed from the tide.He ascertained this rise to be about eighteen inches. ItVOL. III. o19 i MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.is possible that the freshness of the water may havecaused him some embarrassment ; but after he sawseveral whales sporting among the ice, he was at lengthdisposed to believe that he had actually reached the sea.He determined the latitude of the island on which theyencamped, and which he called Whale Inland, to be6g° 14'. The expedition returned without any accidentto Fort Chepeweyan, on the 12th of September, 1789.The narrative of Mackenzie, as well as that of Hearne,was long regarded with mistrust, and his assertion thathe had arrived at the sea was generally discredited; butthe result of the recent expeditions has fully vindicatedthe character, and proved the extreme accuracy, of thatintelligent traveller.In 1792 Mackenzie again set forth to prosecute discoveriesto the westward. He ascended the Peace River,which flows from the Rocky Mountains; and in the springof 1 79-% having made his way with much difficulty acrossthis rugged chain, he embarked on a river called theTacoutche Tess, running towards the south-west. Besidesthe hardships which necessarily attend a journeythrough a wild, mountainous, and unknown country, hehad to endure continual vexation from the ignorance,obstinacy, and timidity of his Indian guides. At length,in June, he arrived among a tribe of Indians, who informedhim that the river ran towards the south, and atits mouth, as they had been informed, white people werebuilding houses. They represented their neighbours asavery malignant race, living in subterraneous recesses,and possessing iron arms and utensils, which they procuredin the course of trade from white people whobrought them in great canoes. After overcoming numberlessdifficulties, by his perseverance, and the abundantresources of his ingenuity, our traveller arrived at themouth of the river, the situation of which he determinedwith much exactness. This river meets the sea immediatelyto the south of the Prince of Wales's Islands. Onthe face of a rock he inscribed in large characters, witha mixture of vermilion and grease, u Alexander Mac-chap.XIII. ROSS AND PARRY. 195kenzie, from Canada by land, the 22d of July, 1793."Our adventurous traveller returned by the same route,and arrived at Fort Chepeweyan on the 24th of August.CHAP. XIII.ROSS AND PARRY.VOYAGE OF CAPTAIN ROSS TO BAFFIN'S BAY. ICEBERGS. ERRORSIN" THE CHARTS. NORTHERN ESQUIMAUX. THEY POSSESSIRON. RED SNOW. NORTHERN SHORE OF BAFFIN'S BAY.CLEAR SEA WEST OF THE ICE. SIR JAMES LANCASTER'S SOUND.ROSS DOES NOT EXPLORE IT. RETURNS HOME. GENERALDISAPPOINTMENT AT THE RESULT OF HIS VOYAGE. Expedition"OF CAPTAIN PARRY. HE PROCEEDS UP LANCASTER'SSOUND. PRINCE REGENT'S INLET. THE MAGNETIC NEEDLESINGULARLY AFFECTED. THE SHIPS PROCEED WESTWARD INBARROW'S STRAIT THEY REACH THE MERIDIAN OF 110°WINTER HARBOUR IN MELVILLE ISLAND. INTENSITY' OF THECOLD. PHENOMENA RESULTING FROM IT. WINTER Amusements.NORTH GEORGIAN GAZETTE. EXCURSION ACROSSMELVILLE ISLAND. BREAKING UP OF THE ICE. INEFFECTUALATTEMPTS TO PROCEED FARTHER WESTWARD. THE AURORABOREALIS. SUPPOSED SITUATION OF THE MAGNETIC POLE.RETURN OF THE EXPEDITION.The discovery of a north-west passage had beenalways a favourite object with the British nation ; andthe voyages to which it gave birth, such as those of Frobisher,Davis, Baffin, Hudson, and others, exhibiting asthey do incontestable proofs of perseverance and greatnautical skill operating with slender means, reflect, perhaps,more credit on those who undertook them, thanmany voyages which were attended with brilliant discoveries.When the late war was at an end, and theBritish government had time to employ some portion ofits marine in the labours of peace, it was determinedto send an expedition to explore Baffin's Bay, in thehope that the examination of the shores of that greatsea might detect the long wished for north-west passage.For this purpose the Isabella and the Alexander wereo 2196 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.fitted out, and placed under the command of captain Ross,an officer well experienced in the navigation of northernseas: the Alexander was commanded by lieutenant Parry,a young officer whose name has since become honourablyassociated with north-western discoveries.The ships put to sea on the 18th of April, 1818. Ontheir arrival on the western coast of Greenland theyfound the ice abundant ; and the governor of one of theDanish settlements told them, that for some years hehad found that the winters were growing uniformlymore severe. From observations made at the Island ofWygat, it appeared that this coast was erroneously laiddown in all the charts ; the error in longitude in thoseof the admiralty amounting to more than 5°.In lat. 75° 54', when the ships had passed what washitherto deemed the inhabited part of Greenland, a partyof Esquimaux were seen approaching the ship over theice. With some difficulty they were brought to a parleywith the strangers. Though separated from the Green-lancersby a distance not exceeding two degrees, theywere still ignorant that there were any human inhabitantson the earth besides themselves. They could hardlybe brought to touch the English, whom they regardedat first as supernatural beings. One of them addressedthe ship with much solemnity: " Who are you, whencecome you ? is it from the sun or the moon ? " Thispeople, who, from their ignorance of the canoe, mightbe inferred to want some of the arts and comforts ofother Esquimaux tribes, yet had the singular advantage ofbeing acquainted with iron, of which they had contrivedto fashion themselves knives. They explained that theyfound this valuable metal in a mountain composed entirelyof it, and then, breaking off" small fragments, theyhammered it with stones. From the appearance of themetal, and its analysis, it has been conjectured to bemeteoric iron, and the iron mountain intimated by thenatives has perhaps no other existence than what it owesto the error of the interpreter, and is to be understoodmerely as a large mass. To this tribe, the ugliest of theCHAP. XIII. ROSS AND Pithy. 197Esquimaux race, captain Ross gave the name of theArctic Highlanders.A little farther on, our voyagers saw cliffs coveredwith snow of a deep red colour ; when thawed, it hadthe appearance of muddy port wine. Red snow hadbeen frequently seen before, and observed by skilfulnaturalists in the Alps and Pyrenees ; but how itobtained the colour had never been satisfactorily explained.Red snow from Baffin's Bay was broughthome, and submitted to the examination of naturalistsand chemists : some pronounced that the colouringmatter was of an animal, others of a vegetable, nature ;but the question seems now decided in favour of thelatter opinion, an extremely minute lichen being supposedto vegetate even upon snow.Captain Ross, though an experienced commander,appears to have been deficient in the confident hope andardour which are requisite qualifications in those whoconduct voyages of discovery. He seems to have feltlittle interest in the solution of geographical problems,and his indifference towards the object of the expeditionfrustrated its intentions. He passed by WolstenholmSound and Whale Sound without deigning to examinethem ; the great inlet on the northern coast of Baffin'sBay, which Baffin named Sir Thomas Smith's Sound,was passed at so great a distance as to be barely discernible.But the carelessness with which he examined thoseinteresting shores was not the only fault of which captainRoss was guilty; interposing his private belief whereenquiry ought to have decided the question, he pronouncedthose hides to be only bays, the terminations ofwhich he asserted, on his single authority, to be visible.On descending the western shore of Baffin's Bay, towardthe south, a great change was observed ; the seawas clear of ice, and extremely deep ; its temperaturewas increased, the land was high, and the mountains, ingeneral, free from snow. A noble inlet, nearly fiftymiles wide, with high land on both sides, now offereditself to view. Into this the ships entered on the 29tho 3198 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.of August ; but they had not advanced above thirtymiles within it, when, to the amazement of all hisofficers, captain Ross made a signal to tack about andreturn. In explanation of this manoeuvre, he affirmedthat he saw land stretching across the inlet, at a distanceof eight leagues. To the imaginary range of hillswhich thus seemed to prevent his progress to the west,he gave the name of Croaker's Mountains. His officers,who felt confident that this great inlet, now recognisedas the Sir James Lancaster's Sound of Baffin, was astrait communicating with the open sea to the westward,were no less mortified than surprised on findingthat their commander was about to leave it without anyfarther investigation. Proceeding to the southward,along a coast of which but little was known, the commandercontinued to show the same indifference to addto the stock of geographical information. The shipsheld their course at such a distance from land, that theshore was seen but imperfectly, and never examined.On the 1st of October they had arrived at the entranceof Cumberland Strait, where much still remained to bedone by a commander panting for discovery ; butcaptain Ross directed his course homeward, and arrivedin England without any accident.The failure of captain Ross, so far from dishearteningthe advocates of a north-west passage, added new particularsin favour of their views : it confirmed the authenticityof Baffin's third voyage ; for the old charts ofBaffin's Bay, which were evidently derived from thatnavigator, approached too near the truth to be the worksof imagination. It even proved the existence of thosenumerous inlets, towards the west, which Baffin thoughtfit to name sounds. The great depth of the sea inthose inlets, and the high temperature of the water,showed that they were something more than meregulfs.The government, feeling the force of these arguments,fitted out two ships, the Hecla bomb and Griper gun-brig,to recommence the examination of those seas.CHAP. XIII. Toss AND PABBV. 1,99Lieutenant Parry, who had sailed with captain Ross,hut who dissented from him as to the impracticabilityof the north-west passage, was appointed to commandthe expedition. The ships sailed from the river on the5th of May, 1819 ; and on the 15th of June, Cape Farewell,the southern point of Greenland, was descried ata distance of more than forty leagues. The day afterthey fell in with a stream of ice and several icebergs.As they advanced northwards up Davis's Strait and Baffin'sBay, the ice on the westward presented a continuousbarrier, through which it was found impossible toforce a way. After many ineffectual attempts of thiskind, the ships reached the latitude of 73°, when captainParry, being unwilling to pass the latitude of sir JamesLancaster's Sound, resolved to make another effort topenetrate the ice which occupied the middle of this inlandsea. This was accomplished in seven days, theships being worked in that time through an accumulationof ice about eighty miles in breadth.As soon as the western side of this barrier was gained,our navigators were greeted by some favourable appearances; the sea was deep, no bottom could be foundwith 310 fathoms of line; the swell of the ocean wasalso perceptible. The temperature of the water hadrisen about six degrees, and no ice was to be seen. Theyfound themselves also in the great resort of whales, aboveeighty large ones being reckoned in the course of a day.On the 31st of July our navigators visited the spot inPossession Bay, where they had landed the precedingyear. They found the flag-staff still standing, and thetraces of their feet in some places were so stronglymarked as to lead to the conclusion that very little snowor sleet could have fallen since their last visit. Theywere now about to enter that great inlet or sound towhich their instructions had principally directed theirattention. The hope of finding a north-west passagerested chiefly on their success in this part of their mission.They crowded all sail, while a fresh easterly breezecarried them rapidly to the westward. " It is more easyo 4200 MODERN* VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.to imagine than describe," says captain Parry, " thealmost breathless anxiety which was now visible in everycountenance, while, as the breeze increased to a freshgale, we ran quickly up the sound. The mast-headswere crowded by the officers and men during the wholeafternoon ; and an unconcerned observer, if any couldhave been unconcerned on such an occasion, would havebeen amused by the eagerness with which the variousreports from the crow's nest were received : all, however,hitherto favourable to our most sanguine hopes." Beforenight they had passed the limits explored in the last voyage,and yet could discern no land in the direction oftheir progress. They had reached the longitude of 83°12'; and the two shores of the passage, as far as couldbe discerned, were observed to continue full fifty milesasunder. Thus the expedition proceeded rapidly to thewestward. The sea was deep, had the colour of theocean, with a long swell rolling from the south and east,and was perfectly free from ice. Our navigators beganto flatter themselves that they had actually reached thePolar Sea ; but their joy received some check from discoveringland ahead. This proved to be only a smallisland ; but the ice stretching between it and the northernshore, disturbed their hopes of proceeding to the west.To the south a broad inlet, ten leagues wide, seemeddeserving of being explored. Our navigators entered it,expecting to find a clearer channel to the westward.They had hitherto observed that, from the moment theyhad entered Sir James Lancaster's Sound, the sluggishmovement of the compass cards, and the irregularityoccasioned by the attraction of the ships' iron had uniformlyincreased as they proceeded westward ; but indescending this inlet the compass actually lost the powerof motion ; and they saw for the first time "the curiousphenomenon of the directive power of the needle becomingso weak as to be completely overcome by theattraction of the ship; so that the needle might now beproperly said to point to the north pole of the ship."The inlet in which they were proceeding, opened outCHAP. XIII. ROSS AND PARRY. 201as they advanced southward; and as the western sidecontinually receded towards the south-west, their hopesof reaching the open sea in that direction increased: butwhere the land seemed to terminate in that direction,a barrier of ice prevented the further progress of theships ; however, no land was seen which could induce ournavigators to doubt the practicability of proceeding muchfarther to the south-west, whenever openings in the icewould permit it. The ships had proceeded down thisinlet about 120 miles from its mouth. On their return toBarrow's Strait, as they named the great inlet of whichLancaster Sound is the mouth, the sea, which a few daysbefore had been covered with ice, was now found perfectlyfree. They continued, therefore, to advance to the westward,though not with rapidity, owing to the lightness ofthe winds. On the 22d, in long. 9~^°, an opening eightleagues in width was seen to the north. In looking upthis inlet, which was named Wellington Channel, neitherland nor ice could be seen from the mast-head. Theappearance of this opening, as it convinced our navigatorsthat they were among islands, intersected by numerouschannels, encouraged their hopes that they hadactually reached the Polar Sea.On advancing a little farther their difficulties increased.The passage was studded with small islands, the waterwas shoal, the ice more troublesome, and fogs frequent.They still, however, continued to proceed to the westwardalong the shore of a large island named BathurstInland. A party landed here, and found the remains ofsome Esquimaux habitations. Recent traces of the reindeerand musk ox were seen in many spots. The magneticobservations made here, compared with those madein Prince Regent's Inlet, "led to the conclusion," says captainSabine, " that we had, in sailing over the space includedbetween those two meridians, crossed immediatelyto the northward of the magnetic pole, and had undoubtedlypassed over one of those spots upon the globewhere the needle would have been found to vary 180°,or, in other words, where its north pole would have202 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.pointed due south. This spot would, in all probability,at this time be somewhere not far from the meridian of100° west of Greenwich."As our navigators proceeded towards the west, to thefarthest extreme of another large island which theynamed Melville Island, the difficulties which they hadto encounter from ice and foggy weather continually increased; but on the 4th of September they succeededin passing the meridian of 110° west longitude, by whichthey became entitled to the first sum in the scale of rewardsgranted by parliament, namely 5000/. A projectingpoint of land in this place was named, from thecircumstance, Bounty Cape. A good roadstead, discoveredat no great distance, was named the Bay of theHecla and Griper: here the ensigns and pendants werehoisted; "and it created in us," says captain Parry, "noordinary feelings of pleasure, to see the British flag wavingfor the first time in these regions, which had beenhitherto considered beyond the limits of the habitableworld."The winter was now setting in fast, and it was withdifficulty that the ships were forced through the newice to Winter Harbour, at the head of the Bay of theHecla and Griper. Three days were employed in cuttinga canal with saws, the average thickness of the icebeing seven inches ; and the whole length of the cut wasnearly two miles and one third. As soon as the shipswere moored in their winter quarters, the men hailedthe event with three loud cheers. The mercury in thethermometer had now fallen one degree below zero, andthe sea was frozen over as far as the eye could reach ;nor was open water seen after this period. Preparationswere now made to meet the severities of a long anddreary winter of eight or nine months, during three ofwhich they were to be debarred from the cheering lightof the sun. All the heavy stores were removed onshore, so as to leave the decks clear for ventilation andexercise. The ships were roofed entirely over withthick wadding-tilts, such as are used for covering wa-chap.XIII. ROSS AND PARRY. 203gone. The snow was banked up against them without,while stoves and ovens were provided for their warmthwithin. But notwithstanding these precautions, it wasfound that the vapour generated within the ships, insteadof dissipating itself, as is usual in a temperateclimate, condensed upon the beams and sides in such adegree as to keep them constantly wet ; and as this inconveniencecould be only partially removed by a currentof heated air, it was found expedient to allow thefrozen vapour to settle on the sides of the ships internally,in a solid plate of ice.On their first arrival in Winter Harbour, parties weresent out to hunt, and found abundance of grouse andrein-deer ; but these animals had all migrated fromMelville Island before the end of October, foxes andwolves alone remaining through the winter. Duringthe severest season, no bears were seen, and one solitaryseal was all that appeared. These sports, however, werenot without their clanger : some of the men who neglectedthe necessary precautions, were severely frostbitten; and the torpor and suspension of the mentalfaculties produced by extreme cold, and resembling theeffects of intoxication, were often perceptible in thehunting parties.The greatest danger to be apprehended in the situationin which our navigators were placed, was theliability to depression of spirits, from the want of bodilyexercise, the absence of light, and the gloomy monotonyof external objects. It is well known that mental depressionpredisposes to attacks of scurvy ; while cheerfulness,on the other hand, fortifies the bodily constitution,and mitigates the inconveniences Which cannot begotrid of. To amuse the men, captain Parry and hisofficers got up a play, the first performance taking placeon the 6th of November, the day on which the sun sankbelow the horizon, not to rise again for three tediousmonths. The sailors were delighted with the performance,and characteristically testified their applause bythree hearty cheers. The active minds of the officers204 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.needing more strenuous employment, they engaged in thecomposition of a Christmas piece, in which reference wasmade to the situation of the ships, and the service onwhich they were engaged. They also contributed to aweekly newspaper, entitled' The North Georgia Gazetteand Winter Chronicle, of which captain Sabine undertookthe editorship. This gazette, consisting of oneand twenty numbers, and deriving interest from the circumstancesunder which it was written, was printed onthe return of the expedition. The dramatic performancesbeing observed to be particularly successful in exhilaratingthe men, and also affording them employmentin fitting up the theatre, and afterwards taking it topieces, were repeated once every fortnight during thedark season.Notwithstanding the intensity of the cold and thedarkness, the officers generally rambled a little on shoreevery day ; and they experienced no inconvenience, althoughthe thermometer was from 30° to 50° belowzero, provided there was no wind ; but the least breathof air stirring made the cold intolerable, even when thethermometer was above zero. But these walks affordedno amusement ; the dreary sameness of the scene, thetorpid stillness and deathlike silence, were calculated toinspire no feelings but those of melancholy. In thisway the shortest day arrived, or rather the middle ofthe long night. A little before and after noon on thatday, there was as much light as to enable them to readsmall print, held towards the southern horizon, and towalk comfortably for two hours. During the month ofJanuary the thermometer generally ranged from 30' to40° below zero. The scurvy now made its appearance,in one case, in the crew of the Hecla ; and for some timeits obstinacy caused not a little alarm : but the liberaluse of antiscorbutics at length subdued it. Nothingcontributed more to its cure than a daily supply of freshmustard and cress, which captain Parry contrived toraise in his cabin, in boxes filled with earth, and placednear the stove-pipe. Though colourless for want ofctiap. xirr. ness and parry. 205light, these herbs had as pungent a flavour as if they hadgrown in the open air. The officers still continued towalk on shore, though, as the thermometer in the openair sank at times to 50° below zero, they underwenta transition in passing from the open air to the cabinof from 80' to 100°, and in some instances 120° oftemperature.On the 7th of February, the full orb of the sun wasvisible above the horizon : this was the signal for makinga show of preparations to leave this gloomy abode,though the officers were well aware that many tediousmonths must pass over before they could be free fromtheir icy prison. The month of February was by farthe coldest part of the arctic winter. On the 15th thethermometer descended to 55°, and remained for fifteenhours not higher than 54° below zero. " We amusedourselves," says Captain Parry, "in freezing some mercuryduring the continuance of this cold weather, and bybeating it out on an anvil previously reduced to thetemperature of the atmosphere. It did not appear to bevery malleable when in this state, usually breaking aftertwo or three blows from the hammer. On the 24th, theobservatory constructed on shore was discovered to be onfire. All hands instantly went to work to extinguish theflames, by heaping snow upon them ; the thermometer,at this time, was 44° below zero, or 76° below thefreezing point. The men's faces at the fire presented asingular spectacle : almost every nose and cheek wasfrost-bitten, and became quite white in five minutesafter being exposed to the weather ; so that the medicalmen, with some others appointed to assist them, wereobliged to go constantly round while the men wereworking at the fire, and to rub with snow the partsaffected in order to restore animation. Captain Sabine'sservant, in his anxiety to save the dipping needle fromthe observatory, ran out without his gloves; his fingers,in consequence, were so completely frozen that, his handsbeing plunged into a basin of cold water, the surface wasimmediately covered with a cake of ice from the in-206 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.density of the cold thus communicated to it; but animationcould not be restored in this instance, and it wasfound necessary to resort to amputation."As the cold relaxed, the ice which had for some timelined the ship's side began to melt, and about the 8thof March it became necessary to scrape off this coating.It will scarcely be credited," says Captain Parry,that we this day (8th of March) removed above 100buckets full of ice, each containing from five to sixgallons, being the accumulation which had taken placein an interval of less than four weeks ; and this immensequantity was the produce chiefly of the men's breath,and of the steam of their victuals during meals. Themiddle of April arrived without any perceptible thaw;but on the 30th, the temperature of the atmosphere underwenta remarkable change, the thermometer risingto the freezing point, or, as in this climate it might betermed more properly, the thawing point, being the firsttime it had been so high for eight months. To themen this appeared a summer temperature, and the authorityof the officers was obliged to be interposed toprevent them from throwing aside their winter clothing.Animation began now to spread through the surroundingscene." The first ptarmigan made its appearance on the12th of May, and the day after were seen the tracks ofrein-deer and musk oxen bending their course to thenorth. Thus their migration takes place in the first fineweather after the return of constant daylight. Thesesymptoms and intimations of their approaching liberationwere viewed with delight by our navigators ; but ashower of rain, which fell on the 24th of May, createdin them even feelings of surprise ; " we being so unaccustomed,"says Captain Parry, " to see water naturallyin a fluid state at all, and much less to see it fallfrom the heavens, that such an occurrence became amatter of considerable curiosity, and I believe everyperson on board hastened upon deck to witness so interestingas well as novel a phenomenon." On the 1st ofJune, Captain Parry with some of the officers commencedCHAP. XIII. ROSS AND PARRY. 207an excursion into the interior of Melville Island. Theyreached its northern extremity without perceiving anyland farther to the northward or the westward. Ontheir return from this journey, which employed fifteendays, they found the vegetation round Winter Harbourshooting forth with wonderful vigour, and the ice wascovered with innumerable pools of water ; the purpleflower of a species of saxifrage imparted beauty andgayness to a scene hitherto dreary in the extreme. Bythe middle of July, the thermometer stood as high asfrom 56° to 60° ; and, at length, on the first day ofAugust, the ships were able to effect their escape fromWinter Harbour ; but the immense quantity of floatingice with which the strait was beset rendered theirprogress extremely difficult. They had to face dangerswhich ships less strong, or men less resolute, vigilant,and skilful, could not have escaped from. They stillstruggled to proceed towards the west, but all theirefforts were of no avail to get beyond the south-westextremity of Melville Island ; and on the loth of Augustthe attempt was given up as impracticable. The farthestpoint which the expedition reached in the Polar Sea wasin latitude 74° 26" 25", and longitude 1 13° 46' 43".On leaving Sir James Lancaster's Sound, the shipsstood southward along the western shore of Baffin's Bay,with the view of surveying a coast but little known, andimperfectly seen in the former expedition. It was foundto be indented with numerous deep bays or inlets : inone of these, about the lat. 70° 22', a tribe of Esquimauxwas met with, of whom captain Parry says, " Uponthe whole, these people maybe considered as in possessionof every necessary of life, as well as most of the comfortsand conveniences which can be enjoyed in so rude astate of society." On the 26th of September the icewas seen for the last time, and about the middle of Novemberthe ships arrived in the Thames. The crewsreturned with unimpaired health, after an absence ofnearly eighteen months from their native country.Besides the great additions to our geographical knowsMODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.ledge made by this expedition, it procured a copious stockof materials for scientific investigation. The magneticphenomena observed, and those resulting from extremecold, were highly curious and important. During thewinter months in those regions, such is the extremedryness of the atmosphere, that no snow whatever falls,nor does a cloud, indeed, ever appear in the heavens.Whatever moisture might exist in the air, floats aboutin minute spicula, or needles, in various forms of crystallisation.In very cold weather the breath of a person,at a little distance, looked exactly like the smoke of amusket just fired; and a party of men working on the iceseemed to be enveloped in a thick cloud. The smokefrom the funnel, instead of ascending, floated horizontallyfor some miles from the ship. It is remarkablethat the aurora borealis, though frequent, was by nomeans so vivid, or so rapid in its coruscations, as in alower latitude. Between the parallels of 6'0° and 66°it usually displays a vivid blaze of light ; but here it wasextremely faint, and appeared almost always towards thesouthern horizon. From the variations and dipping ofthe magnetic needle observed during this expedition, ithas been concluded that the magnetic pole may be supposedto be somewhere about lat. 72°, in long. 100°,or in the neighbourhood of Regent's Inlet.CHAP. XIV.parry's voyages.PREPARATION'S FOR A SECOND VOYAGE. — ITS OBJECTS. THESHIPS ENTER FROZEN STRAIT. DISCOVER DUKE OF YORK'S BAY.REACH THE WELCOME. REPULSE BAY EXAMINED. IN-LETS EXPLORED THE SHIPS FROZEN IN AT WINTER ISLAND.VILLAGE OF ESQUIMAUX. THEIR CHARACTER. TALENTSOF II. K.I UK SHE DRAWS A MAP OF THE COAST. THE ICEBREAKS, AND THE SHIPS PROCEED. DIFFICULTIES OF THE Navigation.FOX's CHANNEL. STRAIT OF THE HECLA ANDFURY. IMPOSSIBLE TO PASS TO THE WESTWARD. WINTERchap. xiv. parry's voyages. 209QUARTERS AT IGLOOLIK. SNOW HOUSES OF THE ESQUIMAUX.GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION OBTAINED FROM THEM.EXCURSIONS OVER LAND. LENGTH OF THE WINTER. RE-TURN OF THE SHIPS. THIRD Voyage OF PARRY. HE WintersIN REGENT'S INLET. ENDEAVOURS TO PROCEED IN THESPRING. THE FURY CRUSHED BY THE ICE AND ABANDONED.ATTEMPT OF PARRY TO REACH THE NORTH POLE OVER THE ICE.SAILS TO Spitsbergen. JOURNEY OF TWO MONTHS ON THEICE. IS DRIFTED SOUTHWARDS. FAILURE OF THE ATTEMPT.If the voyage of captain Parry did not lead to the discoveryof the north-west passage, it was at least productiveof information of an encouraging description.There could be no doubt that he had discovered straitscommunicating with the Polar Sea, and through whichhis progress was barred by accumulations of ice, which,in all probability, occasionally break up, and allow a freepassage. The opinion of the old navigators, that thenorthern portion of America is broken land, or rathera cluster of large islands, was rendered still more probable; and as but little was as yet known of the northernshores of Hudson's Bay, it was hoped that some inletmight be there found communicating with the NorthernSea, and in which, from its more southerly situation,navigation might be continued for a longer portion of theyear.The Hecla had answered so well on her former voyage,that the Fury, a similar ship, was prepared to attendher on the second one. Improvements were made inthe internal fittings of the vessels. Charred cork wasplaced between the sides of the ships and the internallining of plank, as a security against the cold ; and asimple but well contrived apparatus for distributingheated air was fixed in each ship. Captain Parry wasdirected by his instructions to commence his examinationof the coast after he had reached some point which hewas sure was on the continent of America; and thenceproceeding to the north, to keep along the coast, minutelyexploring every inlet or opening that occurred, in orderto ascertain the north-east point of that continent roundwhich it was hoped he might reach the open sea, andVOL. III. p210 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.thus effect his passage round Icy Cape, and throughBehring's Straits into the Pacific.The ships left the More on the 8th of May, 1821;and encountered the first iceberg at the entrance ofDavis's Strait on the 14th of June. In Hudson's Straitthe difficulty of navigating among the ice was found tobe much greater than in that of Davis, or Baffin's Bay.The relations of old navigators, respecting the largestones, the quantities of sand, shells, and weeds, seenhere deposited on the floating fields of ice, were foundto be correct. " The quantity in which these substances,"says captain Parry, " here occurred, was reallysurprising, and puzzled us extremely to account for themanner in which they found their way upon the floes.Masses of rock, not less than a hundred pounds inweight, are sometimes observed in the middle of a floe,measuring half a mile or more each way, and of whichthe whole surface is more or less covered with smallerstones, sand, and shells."From the numerous impediments that occurred in thenavigation of Hudson's Strait, it was the 2d of Augustbefore the expedition reached the mouth of the channelformed between Southampton Island and the coast towardsthe north. Captain Parry, who believed this tobe the same channel or strait which captain Middleton,in 1742, had named the Frozen Strait, determined, notwithstandingits inauspicious name, to endeavour to forcea passage through it. If he could succeed in the attempt,it would save him a circuitous voyage of 150 leagues.After struggling onward for some days, the ships arrivedat an inland basin of water, ten miles in width and aboutfive in breadth, having regular soundings and good anchoragein every part, and perfectly free from ice.To this magnificent bay, which captain Parry considersto be " one of the most secure 2nd extensive harboursin the whole world," he gave the name of theDuke of Fork's Bay. On the 21st of August, a swellfrom the southward convinced our navigators that theyhad reached Sir Thomas Rowe's Welcome, which divideschap. xiv. parry's voyages. 211Southampton Island from the mainland of America on thewest. Fogs and a thick fall of snow for some time cut offthe distant prospect, when, the weather suddenly clearingup, they found themselves almost completely surroundedby land, having entered unawares Repulse Bay, in whichnot a piece of ice was to be seen that could obstruct themin its thorough examination. It was found to be closedby land, and to be not very unlike the chart whichMiddleton drew of it. The examination of the northeastcoast of the American continent, which was themain object of the voyage, may be said to have commencedon the 22d of August, just under the arcticcircle. The difficult and laborious task of exploringevery inlet and opening of the shore that might by possibilityafford a passage to the west, was executed witha zeal, perseverance, and ability which have never beensurpassed. The ships were frequently caught in the ice,and drifted with it to the southward ; but the seasonwas already so far advanced as to leave but little time forthe prosecution of their researches. Nearly the wholeof September was employed in surveying and ascertainingthe continuity of land round several deep inlets, whichare laid down on the charts under the names of Lyon'sInlet, Hoppner's Inlet, Gore Bay, Ross Bay, &c. Thewhole extent of coast newly discovered and exploredamounted to more than 200 leagues.This wearisome task was hardly concluded when theappearance of new ice announced the approach of winter;the thermometer at the same time stood at zero. " Theformation of young ice upon the surface of the water isthe circumstance which most decidedly begins to put astop to the navigation of these seas, and warns the seamanthat his season of active operations is nearly at anend. It is, indeed, scarcely possible to conceive the degreeof hinderance occasioned by this impediment, triflingas it always appears before it is encountered. "When thesheet has acquired a thickness of about half an inch, andis of considerable extent, a ship is liable to be stopped byit, unless favoured by a strong and free wind ; and evenp 2 ».212 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.when still retaining her way through the water at therate of a mile an hour, our course is not always underthe control of our helmsman, but depends upon someaccidental increase or decrease in the thickness of thesheets of ice with which one bow or the other comes incontact. A ship in this helpless state, her sails in vainexpanded to a favourable breeze, her ordinary resourcesfailing, and suddenly arrested in her course upon the elementthrough which she has been accustomed to movewithout restraint, has often reminded me," says captainParry, "of Tulliver tied down by the feeble hands of Lilliputians.Nor are the struggles she makes to effect herrelease, and the apparent insignificance of the means bywhich her efforts are opposed, the least just or least vexatiouspart of the resemblance."A small island near the point where the continent beginsto trend to the northward, being found to afford goodanchorage on its southern side, received the name ofWinter Island, and the ships were here suffered to befrozen up. The warmth of the ships was better providedfor in this than the preceding expedition, and thesame arts were employed to amuse and occupy the mindsof the men. Theatrical entertainments were again resortedto. Other evenings were devoted to music, and aschool was established in each ship, from which the menderived equal profit and entertainment. But what chieflycontributed to alleviate the tediousness of a long andgloomy winter was a visit from a party of Esquimaux,who were seen approaching the ships across the ice on the1st of February. Our voyagers accompanied these poorpeople to their huts on shore, and were astonished to findthat those habitations of men, though within sight of theships, had escaped their notice, anxiously as the eyelighted on any object that diversified the tiresome samenessof the scene. " Our surprise," says captain Parry,may in some measure be imagined at finding an establishmentof five huts, with canoes, sledges, dogs, andabove sixty men, women, and children, as regularly andto all appearance as permanently fixed, as if they hadchap. xiv. parry's voyages. 213occupied the same spot the whole winter. If the firstview of the exterior of this little village was such as tocreate astonishment, that feeling was in no small degreeheightened on accepting the invitation soon given us toenter these extraordinary houses, in the construction ofwhich we observed that not a single material was usedbut snow and ice. After creeping through two low passages,having each its arched door-way, we came to asmall circular apartment, of which the roof was a perfectarched dome. From this three door-ways, also arched,and of larger dimensions than the outer ones, led into asmany inhabited apartments, one on each side, and theother facing us as we entered. The interior of thesepresented a scene no less novel than interesting; thewomen were seated on the beds at the sides of the huts,each having her little fire-place or lamp, with all herdomestic utensils about her. The children crept behindtheir mothers, and the dogs slunk past us in dismay.The construction of this inhabited part of the hut wassimilar to that of the outer apartment, being a dome,formed by separate blocks of snow laid with great regularity,and no small art, each being cut into the shaperequisite to form a substantial arch, from seven to eightfeet high in the centre, and having no support whateverbut what this principle of building supplies. Sufficientlight Alas admitted into these curious edifices by a circularwindow of ice, neatly fitted into the roof of eachapartment."The result of an acquaintance of eighteen months withthese people was, on the whole, favourable to their character.They appeared to be inoffensive, remarkablyhonest, and, what could be hardly expected from savages,very affectionate in domestic life. The women were exemptedfrom that degree of labour and drudgery whichusually falls to their lot in uncivilised societies, theirduties being confined to making clothes, cooking, andother domestic concerns. Though the Esquimaux exhibitedin some things an extreme deficiency in intellect,for few of them could count beyond five, and afterp 3214 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.an intercourse of eighteen months not one of them couldspeak a dozen words of English, yet they showed considerableingenuity in providing for their wants. Theywere warmly and comfortably clothed, and the seams oftheir seal-skin boots were beautifully worked.One of the tribe, a woman named Iligliuk, attractedthe notice of our voyagers, by an obvious superiority ofunderstanding, which, it appears, had also raised her inthe esteem of her own countrymen. She was extremelyfond of music, sang correctly, with a soft voice, andwould listen for hours together to the tunes played onthe organ. From her intelligence and readiness in apprehension,she was often employed as an interpreter,and received so many marks of attention from theEnglish, that her vanity at last got the better of hersense, and she was completely spoiled. But in her excuseit may be urged, that few females have ever beenassailed with flattery so hard to be resisted as thefavour and respect of our voyagers must have appearedamong the Esquimaux. The airs which she assumedwere also counterbalanced by her real services ; amongwhich must be mentioned a rude chart which she drewof that part of the coast of America she was familiarwith, and the neighbouring islands. Captain Tarryhaving discovered that the Esquimaux were acquaintedwith the four cardinal points of the compass, markedthem on a piece of paper, with the part of the coastwhere they wintered Having done this, he says, " wedesired her to complete the rest, and to do it mikkce(small) ; when, with a countenance of the most graveattention and peculiar intelligence, she drew the coast ofthe continent beyond her own country, as lying nearlynorth from Winter Island. The most important partstill remained : and it would have amused an unconcernedlooker on, to have observed the anxiety and suspensedepicted in the countenances of our part of thegroup till this was accomplished ; for never were thetracings of a pencil watched with more eager solicitude.Our surprise and satisfaction may, therefore, in somechap. xiv. parry's voyages. 215degree be imagined, when, without taking the pencilfrom the paper, Iligliuk brought the continental coastshort round to the westward, and afterwards to thesouth-south-west, so as to come within three or fourdays' journey of Repulse Bay. The country thussituated upon the shores of the Western or Polar Seais called Akkoolee, and is inhabited by numerous Esquimaux; and half way between that coast and RepulseBay, Iligliuk drew a lake of considerable size, havingsmall streams running from it to the sea, on each side.To this lake her countrymen are annually in the habit ofresorting during summer, and catch there large fish ofthe salmon kind ; while on the banks are found abundanceof rein-deer. To the westward of Akkoolee, asfar as they can see from the hills, which she describedas high ones, nothing can be seen but one wide extendedsea. Being desirous of seeing whether Iligliuk wouldinterfere with Wager River, as we know it to exist, Irequested her to continue the coast line to the southwardof Akkoolee, when she immediately dropped the pencil,and said she knew no more about it."The information thus received was confirmed byother Esquimaux, who were requested to draw charts ofthe countries within their own knowledge ; their delineationsof the coast, made without any concert amongthem, agreed in a surprising manner. Captain Parryand his officers now recollected, that from a high hill atthe head of Lyon's Inlet a brightness in the western sky,resembling what seamen call the ice blink, had been visible;and that from another height, a great deal of water,with islands and capes, had been seen to the west-north-west.The distance from the head of Repulse Bay tothe Northern Sea was stated by the Esquimaux to bethree sticks or sleeps; but their sleeps, or days' journeysare generally very short. On one occasion, a party,who had travelled northward from the ships a journeyof forty sleeps, were overtaken in one day's sailing.Spring made its appearance at Winter Island moretardily, if possible, than it had done at Melville Island,p 42l6 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.in the former voyage ; yet the former place was situatedeight degrees and a half farther to the south. Ninemonths had been already spent here in the ice, when atlength, on the 2d of July, after great exertions, the shipseffected their escape ; but the current setting to the southwarddown Fox's Channel, which our voyagers nowproceeded to examine, carried with it such a quantity ofdrift ice as involved them in continual embarrassmentand danger. The ships had frequently a narrow escape ofbeing crushed by the icebergs, or being lifted up and oversetby floes pressing under them. By unremitting perseverance,however, they reached by the 12th of July asmall opening in the land, in lat. 67° 18', out of which acurrent was observed to issue. As this offered a securityagainst ice, captain Parry anchored as near to it as possible,and a party went on shore to explore the country.Unused as they had been for several months to thecharms of verdure and picturesque scenery, their delightwas indescribable, when, after rambling a little distanceup the banks of a lively stream, they arrived at a seriesof cascades descending from crag to crag, and beyondit found the river increased in width, and flowing with asmooth unruffled surface among romantic hills, whilethe richness of vegetation on its banks seemed nearlymiraculous in this climate. Soon after the ships arrivedat the Islands of Amitioke and Ooglit, laid downin the chart of the Esquimaux, where they were informedthat they should meet with vast numbers ofthe walrus or sea-horse. The report of the Esquimauxwas found to be correct ; for they fell in with such amultitude of these animals as, in captain Parry's opinion,are probably not to be found in any other part of theworld. They were lying, in large herds, upon loosepieces of drift ice, from twelve to thirty in a group.Our voyagers now approached, with trepidation andanxiety, the place where the Esquimaux, whose statementhad hitherto proved to be correct, had marked astrait conducting to the Western Sea. The passage wassoon recognised, and final success was now confidentlyoiiap. xiv. parry's voyages. 217expected ; but what was the grief and mortification ofour voyagers, when they found that an unbroken barrierof ice extended completely across the western mouth ofthe strait, from the northern to the southern land! Asit was now the middle of July, and the ice was evidentlynot a new accumulation, but bore marks of havingbeen long attached to the land on every side, the disappointmentwas complete, and no hope remained of theremoval of the obstacle in that season.After struggling for sixty-five days to attempt toforce a passage to the westward, the ships returned tothe island of Igloolik, where they were frozen in onthe 30th of October. The canal cut through the iceby sawing and boring to bring the ships to their winterquarters, was above 4300 feet in length ; the thicknessof the ice in some places amounted to several feet ; andduring this severe labour the cold was intense, the thermometerbeing at one time nine degrees below zero.Thus were our navigators reduced to the necessity ofspending a second winter in the ice, the pain of whichwas increased by the disappointment they had endured ;for they had sanguinely calculated on a passage throughthe Polar Sea and Behring's Strait, to comfortable winterquarters in the South Sea. The same precautions weretaken as in the preceding winter to keep up the spiritsand preserve the health of the men : but dramaticamusements had now lost their novelty ; and though nodiscontent existed among the people, there seems tohave been less gaiety than on former occasions. Theyhad learned, however, from the Esquimaux, to add considerablyto their comfort by building a high snow Availround the ships, enclosing a large square like a farmyard; the snow-drift was thus kept out, and a place forexercise was formed sheltered from every wind. Bythis measure, also, the heat of the ship was increased.But the presence of a numerous tribe of Esquimauxchiefly contributed to enliven the dulness of the scene.The officers made excursions on both sides of the strait,which captain Parry named the Smit of the Fury and218 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Hecla. In its narrowest part it is two miles across,forming a canal of nearly equal width, and about aleague in length. The land on the south or continentalside is a great peninsula, named by captain ParryMelville Peninsula. It is a rugged mountainous country,intersected by chains of lakes, and on that accountextremely difficult to penetrate. Captain Lyon made anattempt to cross it, but was obliged to desist from theundertaking after having proceeded only seven miles.The land to the north was named Cochburn Inland: theEsquimaux informed our voyagers that it was surroundedby water ; but they were unable to say whetherthe channel round it was navigable or not. Some ofthe officers made an excursion of about sixty miles tothe western shore of Cockburn Island, whence theydiscovered the Polar Sea lying open before them ; butround the entrance of the strait the ice was piled up insuch vast mountains as left little reason to concludethat a navigable passage could ever be found this way.The 1st of August, 1823, arrived, and the ships werestill shut up within a barrier of ice ; but captain Parry,impatient of his confinement, determined to make theutmost exertion to liberate himself, though it appearednecessary for that purpose to saw a canal of four or fivemiles in length. The laborious process was begun, when,the ice breaking up more completely, the ships once morereached the open water on the 12th of August. It wasnot doubted that the Strait of the Fury and Heclacommunicated with the Polar Sea; and the obstaclewhich blocked] it up, however formidable and evendurable it might appear, was evidently of an adventitiousnature, and it was physically possible that a mild season,or accidental causes, might disperse it, and open a freepassage for the ships. Captain Parry, having reachedthe threshold which conducted to the fulfilment of hishopes, was unwilling to turn back while there remainedthe faintest prospect of success. He contemplated,therefore, taking the stores out of the Hecla, and sendinghome that ship, while he himself remained to con-chap.xiv. parry's voyages. 219tine his efforts for another season. This bold scheme,which might have led to disastrous consequences, calculatedto stain the honour of the whole expedition,was happily laid aside from peculiar circumstances.The scurvy had made its appearance in the ships, andthe dread of this formidable disease, with the argumentsof captain Lyon, induced captain Parry to renouncehis desperate attempt, and to make the best ofhis way home. They reached Lerwick, in the ShetlandIslands, on the 10th of October, seven-and-twentymonths having elapsed since they last saw traces ofcivilised man. The officers and crews returned in highhealth, only five men out of 118 having died in thecourse of this laborious voyage, during which they hadspent two long winters in the ice, with the mean temperatureconsiderably below zero.Though this second voyage of captain Parry failed inits main object of finding a passage into the Polar Sea.,yet it cannot be denied that it was productive of muchimportant geographical information. When the difficultiesto be contended with are taken into account, this voyage,compared with those of former navigators to thosefrozen seas, will appear eminently successful. Sufficientlight had been now thrown on the geography ofthe north-west, to satisfy the most sceptical that the continentof America does not, in all probability, extent! muchfarther north than lat. 70° ; and that the Atlantic communicateswith the Polar Sea by numerous channels,more or less obstructed with ice, according to the directionof currents and other circumstances. A strong-currentwas found to run through the Strait of theFury and Hecla, which, carrying down the ice, fixed itfirmly in its western mouth, and will, perhaps, alwaysprevent that channel from being open to navigation. Thestrong current which sets down Fox's Channel, carryingwith it so much drift ice, and, turning eastward,obstructs the navigation of Hudson's Strait, proceedsfrom the Polar Sea through the Strait of the Hecla andGriper. The ice which prevented the progress of captain220 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Parry in his first voyage beyond the south-western extremityof Melville Island seemed also of a permanentnature ; but hopes were entertained that the ice whichhe had seen in Regent's Inlet was one of those accidentalaccumulations which change of wind mightdisperse ; and that a passage into the Polar Seamight be expected through that inlet, which, runningtoward the south-west, is obliquely opened to thecurrents running eastward along the northern shores ofAmerica. The Hecla and Fury were accordingly againfitted out, and placed under the command of captainParry and lieutenant Hoppner.In this, the least successful of captain Parry's voyages,he was thwarted by that run of ill fortune to whichnavigators are always liable. His progress through Baffin'sBay was so much impeded by broken ice, that withmuch difficulty he reached Port Bowen, on the easternshore of Regent's Inlet, before the season when navigationin that climate would be wholly impracticable. Hadhe arrived three weeks or a month sooner, he might, inall probability, have passed through the inlet to the opensea, and wintered, perhaps, on the northern coast ofAmerica.The winter spent at Port Bowen resembled thosealready passed at Melville Island and Igloolik. The menwere occupied in a school, and amused with masquerades.Experience had taught our navigators to provide moreeffectually for their warmth and comfort. By placing thestoves in the very bottom of the hold, and by other arrangements,they were enabled to keep up in the ships auniform temperature of from 50° to 63° ; and the generalhealth of the seamen on this voyage suffered less derangementthan on any former occasion. On the 20th ofJuly, 1825, the breaking up of the ice allowed our voyagersto commence their active operations ; but perhapsthey would have lost nothing by a little prudent delay.They endeavoured to proceed along the western shore ofPrince Regent's Inlet, but the immense masses of icewhich floated along the middle of the strait graduallychap. xiv. parry's voyages. 221approached the ships, and at length forced them on shore.The Fury was so much injured that she could hardly bekept afloat with four pumps at work, and the unitedexertions of officers and men. An attempt was made torepair her by heaving her down on the ice; hut a gale ofwind came on, brought down the ice in large quantities,drove the Fury a second time on shore, and injured herso irreparably that it was deemed necessary to abandonher with all her stores. The officers and men thereforeembarked in the Hecla, and the expedition returned home.Captain Parry did not penetrate so far to the south inRegent's Inlet as he had done in his first voyage.Thus disappointed in his sanguine expectations of anorth-west passage, captain (now sir Edward) Parry didnot at once abandon his schemes of northern discovery.It appeared to him possible to arrive at the North Poleby employing light boats and sledges, which might bealternately employed according as compact fields of iceor open sea interposed in his route. A plan deemedfeasible by such men as Parry, Franklin, and Scores,necessarily commanded attentive consideration. TheRoyal Society recommended it to the Admiralty, whoagain fitted out the Hecla for the expedition, and placedher under the command of captain Parry. Two boatswere constructed, combining in the highest degree therequisite qualities of strength and lightness. They werecovered with waterproof canvas, and lined with felt.Runners also were placed under them on each side ofthe keel, that they might be used for sledges if it werefound convenient.Captain Parry sailed in April, 1827. At Hammerfest,in Norway, he took on board eight rein deer to draw hissledges over the ice, with a quantity of moss as theirprovender. Much time was lost in working the ship tothe north; and when the ice was at length reached, it wasfound thrown into such confusion, and piled so irregularlyby violent gales and the commotion of the sea,that it appeared impossible to commence an expeditionover it. The dangers to which the ship was exposed in222 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.this situation, and the necessity of fixing her in a goodharbour before he set forth on his journey, caused stillfarther delay.At length, on the 22d of June, our adventurers commencedtheir extraordinary journey. From the ruggedand broken nature of the ice, which was no where seento extend in compact fields, it was found necessary to relinquishthe design of employing rein-deer to draw thesledges. It required a zeal little short of enthusiasm toundergo, voluntarily, the toil of this expedition. Whenthe travellers arrived at a pool of water in the ice, theywere then obliged to launch their boats and embark. Onreaching the opposite side, their boats were then to bedragged, frequently up steep and dangerous cliffs of ice,their lading being first removed. By this laboriousprocess, persevered in with little intermission, they wereable to effect but eight miles in five days. They travelledonly during the night, by which means they wereless incommoded with snow blindness, they found theice more firm and consistent, and had the great advantageof lying down to sleep during the warmer portion of thetwenty-four hours. Some time after sunset they tooktheir breakfast, then toiling for a few hours they madetheir chief meal. A little after midnight, towards sunrise,they halted as if for the night; smoked their pipes;looked over the icy desert in the direction in which thejourney was to be resumed ; and then, wrapping themselvesin their furs, lay down to rest. On the 22d ofJuly, they advanced seventeen miles, the greatest distancethey had yet been able to effect in one day ; but thedelays they had already encountered were sufficient todestroy all hopes of being able to reach the Pole, whichwas still 500 miles distant. They had advanced as faras lat. 82° 40', and now limited their ambition toreaching the parallel of 83°; but just at the time whenthe state of the ice seemed favourable for their progress,the wind shifted to the north, and drifted them in theopposite direction, so that when, with great labour, theytravelled ten or eleven miles over the ice, observationsClap. XV. JOURNEY OF CAPTAIN FRANKLIN. 223showed that they were four miles to the south of theposition which they had occupied on the 22d, so that,the drifting of the snow fields had carried them fourteenmiles to the southward. It was obviously vain, underthese circumstances, to persist any longer. Our voyagersreturned, therefore, and arrived at the ship inHecla Cove on the 21st of August, after being twomonths on the ice, completely foiled in their attempt toreach the Pole, and obliged to rest satisfied with thehumble consolation that they had, perhaps, penetratedabout a degree farther to the north than any previousexpedition of complete authenticity.CHAP. XV.JOURNEY OF CAPTAIN FRANKLIN.EXPEDITION OF CAPTAIN FRANKLIN TO THE MOUTH OF THE COP-ermineRIVER. ARRIVAL AT YORK FORT. JOURNEY TOFORT CHEPEWEYAN. MODE OF TRAVELLING IN WINTER. ITSDANGERS. DECREASE OF THE INDIAN TRIBES. JOURNEYFROM CHErEWEYAN COMMENCED. DIFFICULTIES EXPERIENCED.GREAT EXERTION OF MR. BACK. WINTER RESIDENCE ATFORT ENTERPRISE. INTENSE COLD. THE TREES FROZEN.—ESQUIMAUX SNOW-HOUSE. AN INDIAN BEAUTY. THEJOURNEY RECOMMENCED. STRATAGEM OF THE WOLVES.THE MOUTH OF THE COPPERMINE. THE PARTY EMBARK.PROCEED sto THE EASTWARD. POINT TURNAGAIN. THEYCOMMENCE THEIR RETURN OVER LAND. — THE CANOES BROKEN.MEANS DEVISED TO CROSS THE COPPERMINE. DREADFUL SufferingsOF THE Party. — MR. BACK SENT FORWARD TO THEFORT. DR. RICHARDSON REMAINS WITH THE DISABLED, WHILECAPTAIN FRANKLIN GOES ON. MR. HOOD MURDERED BY ANINDIAN OF THE PARTY. RESOLUTE CONDUCT OF DR. Richardson.HE REACHES FORT ENTERPRISE. STATE IN WHICH HEFOUND CAPTAIN FRANKLIN. CONTINUATION OF THEIR Sufferings.RELIEF ARRIVES.While captain Parry was employed in exploring apassage from Baffin's Bay to the Pacific, another expeditionwas despatched over land to ascertain the trueposition of the Peppermint River, and the windings of224 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.the shore to the eastward of it. This measure, whichhad apparently no great difficulties, seemed to promiseeminent advantages to geographical science, and mightprove serviceable to the intrepid navigator employed tothe northward. Lieutenant (now captain) Franklin was-selectedto command this expedition, accompanied byDr. Richardson, a gentleman well skilled in natural history;Mr. Hood, and Mr. Back, two midshipmen; andtwo English seamen.Captain Franklin and his companions embarked inthe end of May, 1819* and arrived in safety at YorkFactory, on the shores of Hudson's Bay, on the 30th ofAugust. Preparations for their long and difficult journeywere immediately commenced, and the information whichthe local experience of the fur traders could supply themwas eagerly collected. On the 9th of September thejourney commenced from York Fort, and on the 22d ofOctober our travellers arrived at Cumberland House; adistance of 6*90 miles. Notwithstanding the lateness ofthe season, captain Franklin resolved to push forward toFort Chepeweyan, near the western extremity of Atha-bassa Lake, in order that he might personally superintendthe preparations for the journey of the ensuingsummer. He accordingly set out with Mr. Back on the18th of January, and arrived at the fort on the 26th ofMarch ; thus performing a journey of 857 miles in thevery depth of winter; the thermometer frequently sinkingto forty and sometimes more than fifty degreesbelow zero. When the rivers, which form the chiefcommunications through these extensive countries, arefrozen up, the traders have recourse to sledges drawnby dogs, in which they can proceed at the rate of fifteenmiles a day. They sleep in the open air, though thethermometer should be many degrees below the freezingpoint ; their dogs sleeping round them, to receive and tocommunicate heat. In these journeys the severity of thecold is not so much dreaded as the danger of perishingfor want of food; when violent snow storms arise the travellersoften lose their way, and are sometimes driven toCHAP. XV. JOURNEY OF CAPTAIN FRANKLIN. 225the sad necessity of killing their dogs for food. Themoose, the rein-deer, and the bison, appear to be quiteexpelled from the great plains between Hudson's Bayand the Mackenzie River; and the fur-bearing animalsare likewise so scarce, that they will be totally extinctin a few years, it is feared, on the eastern side of theRocky Mountains. The influence of Europeans has hadas sinister an effect on the Indian inhabitants of this extensiveregion as on the lower animals. The tribe of theCrees or Kristenaux, spread over an extent of 20,000square miles, does not at present exceed 500 in number;so that this once powerful nation will, probably, soondisappear from the face of the earth. Disease generatedand increased by the too free use of spirituous liquorsis the chief cause of this rapid depopulation.As soon as spring began to appear, Dr. Richardsonand Mr. Hood set forward to join their companions atFort Chepeweyan ; the appearance of spring in theseclimates is exhilarating and enchanting beyond what canbe conceived in countries where nature never investsherself during eight months together in the snowy garbof winter. The thaw is hardly begun, when the treesare clothed with foliage, and the whole vegetable worldcomes forth with a luxuriance no less astonishing thanagreeable. But at the same time clouds of mosquitoes,and the stinging sand-fly, are so active and troublesome,that the traveller who suffers from them is disposed togive the preference to the winter journey, when he hasto endure an intense cold, lying unsheltered on the snow.The whole party were now assembled at Chepeweyan;and on the 18 th of July, 1820, they set forward on theirjourney, with hopes that, before the good season shouldexpire, they might be able to establish themselves comfortablyfor the winter at the mouth of the PeppermintRiver, and to employ the whole of the following springin the examination of the coast to the eastward. Butthe usual difficulties that accompany extensive journeysin these regions were experienced, and, unhappily, to adegree that was not anticipated. The rapids of thevol. in. y226 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.'rivers, the shallows of the lakes, and numerous portages,impeded the progress of our travellers, who suffered also,unhappily, from scarcity of provisions; an embarrassmentfrom which, it may be supposed, a little calculationand foresight might have relieved them. As soon asscarcity was felt, discontent made its appearance amongthe Canadian boatmen ; and the cordiality which oughtto subsist among all engaged in so hazardous an enterprisewas immediately at an end. New ice appearedon the small pools about the 20th of August, and geesewere observed flying to the southward; an unequivocalsign of the approach of winter. The Canadian huntersdeclared that it would be impossible to proceed, andcaptain Franklin was consequently obliged to forego hisintention of reaching the Peppermint River this season ;and the party prepared to settle themselves for the winteron the spot which they had now reached, distant about550 miles from Chepeweyan. On a rising ground nearthe bank of a river named Winter River, the Canadiansconstructed a house, to which they gave the name of FortEnterprise. Trees of considerable size, chiefly pines,grew round the river and the adjoining lake. Fort Enterpriseis situated in lat. 6'4° 28', long. 113° 6'.As soon as our travellers and their retinue were establishedin winter quarters, all hands were employed inlayingin a stock of provisions, and in providing fromthe flesh of rein-deer that preparation of pounded meatknown in North America by the name of pemmican.At first they had prospects of plenty ; rein-deer werenumerous, not fewer than 2000 having been seen in oneday; and before they emigrated to the south, about 180were taken and converted into dried meat : but this apparentlylarge stock, with the addition of fish from theneighbouring lake and river, was barely sufficient for theconsumption of the party, and of the train of Indianswho crowded round the fort, when winter set in, to liveon the charity of the whites. Moreover the ammunitionwas expended, and the packages of blankets, tobacco, andother necessary articles, had not yet arrived from theCnAP. XV. JOURNEY OF CAPTAIN FRANKLIN. 227southward. In consequence, Mr. Back, with some Canadianand Indian attendants, set out on the 18th ofOctober to return to Chepeweyan ; and by this extraordinaryexertion, he relieved the expedition from anembarrassment which would probably have prevented itsproceeding in the following summer. The journey wasperformed wholly on foot, and in the middle of winter,and the sufferings which he endured are thus brieflysummed up in his own words : — " I had the pleasure ofmeeting my friends, all in good health, after an absenceof nearly five months, during which time I travelled 1 104miles in snow shoes, and had no other covering at nightin the woods than a blanket and deer-skin, with thethermometer frequently at 40°, and once at 57°, belowzero, and sometimes passing two or three days withouttasting food." To estimate the courage of the man whovoluntarily undertook such a journey, it must be takeninto account, that walking in snow shoes occasions themost dreadful sufferings to the inexperienced. " Thepain of this mode of travelling," as captain Franklinsays, " can be but faintly imagined by a person whothinks upon the inconvenience of marching with a weightof between two and three pounds constantly attached togalled feet and swelled ancles."Those who remained at Fort Enterprise experiencednearly as much inconvenience from the severity ofthe cold. It is remarkable, that the cold felt here inDecember exceeded, at one time, by three degrees,that experienced by Parry in Melville Island, which issituated nine degrees nearer to the pole. During theseintense colds the atmosphere was generally calm, and thewoodcutters and others were able to pursue their ordinaryoccupations without using any extraordinary precautions:those who perish from cold in this country generallyowe their destruction to the circumstance of beingovertaken in an unsheltered place by a storm of wind,which, as it rapidly extracts the heat from the body,seems to add to the intensity of the cold, and soon provesfatal. The trees round Fort Enterprise were frozen toQ 2228 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.their very centres, and became as hard as stones ; someof the axes were daily broken, and by the end of Decemberonly one was left that was fit for felling trees.Two Esquimaux interpreters from Hudson's Bay accompaniedMr. Back to Fort Enterprise. Immediatelyon their arrival, they commenced the construction of asnow house, which they maintained to be more comfortableand warm than the wooden one already erected.They built themselves a dome about twelve feet in diameterand eight feet high, which, from the purity of thematerial employed in its construction, and the translucencyof its walls, had Within a very agreeable appearance.During the dreary winter months the officers employedthemselves in drawing, and writing their journals. Theyalso found some amusement in studying the character oftheir Indian followers. The old chief of the CopperIndians had a daughter, who was considered the greatestbeauty in the whole tribe, and so much the object ofcontest among her countrymen, that, although under sixteenyears of age, she had successively belonged to twohusbands. Mr. Hood drew her portrait, much to theannoyance of her aged mother, who was exceedinglyafraid, she said, that her daughter's beauty would inducethe great chief who resided in England to send for theoriginal, after seeing the likeness.It was the 14th of June, 1821, before the ice wassufficiently broken in the Peppermint River to allowof its being navigated by canoes. Their stock of provisionswas now nearly exhausted, and it was evidentthat the party, in the prosecution of their journey,would have to depend for subsistence, in a great measure,on the exertions of the hunters ; and these showedsymptoms of insubordination as often as they were remindedof the importance of their exertions. Therocky channel of the Peppermint River presented manyimpediments to navigation; but the grassy plains oncither side abounded with game, particularly with themusk ox, of which a great number were killed. Theseanimals are usually followed by wolves, who hunt inCHAP. XV. JOURNEY OF CAPTAIN FRANKLIN. 229packs, and of which our travellers relate some anecdotesindicating an extraordinary decree of sagacity. Thewolves, being unable to hunt down the moose and reindeer,have recourse to a stratagem to drive them overprecipitous cliffs. " While the deer are quietly grazing,the wolves assemble in great numbers, and, forming acrescent, creep slowly towards the herd, so as not toalarm them much at first : but, when they perceive thatthey have fairly hemmed in the unsuspecting creatures,and cut off their retreat across the plain, they movemore quickly ; and, with hideous yells, terrify theirprey, and urge them to flight by the only open way,which is that towards the precipice ; appearing to knowthat when the herd is once at full speed, it is easilydriven over the cliff, the rearmost urging on thosethat are before. The wolves then descend at theirleisure, and feast on the mangled carcases." This stratagemwas once attempted on Dr. Richardson. Whilesitting, one evening, on the edge of a precipice abovethe Peppermint River, he perceived nine white wolvescreeping towards him in a crescent : he advancedboldly, and they allowed him to pass ; but a poor deer,hemmed in at the same time, was shortly afterwardsdriven over the precipice.On the 18th of July, our travellers arrived at themouth of the Peppermint ; and here the Indians, terrifiedat the thoughts of meeting with the Esquimaux,with which nation they carry on implacable warfare,finally determined to return. Mr. Genteel, a clerk ofthe North West company, went with them, with instructionsfrom captain Franklin to lay in a stock ofprovisions at Fort Enterprise, and to make other arrangementswhich accidents and the necessities of the expeditionmight require. The Canadians, though amusedwith the first view of the sea, were terrified at thethought of launching on it. It required much pains toprevent them from sinking into utter despondency. Thecheerfulness of John Hepburn, the English seaman, whowas delighted with a view of the element to which heQ 3230 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.had been so long accustomed, had a better effect on themthan the exhortations of their commander.The fears of the Canadians were certainly excusable :it required all the hardihood and intrepid resolution ofBritish seamen to embark, at so late a season, on soperilous an enterprise. On the 21st of July, twentypeople, of whom fifteen had never seen salt water,launched on the Polar Sea, in two frail bark canoes, withprovisions fcr only fifteen days, and a voyage before themof indefinite extent. The sea was found to be open,with little or no ice. The tide was scarcely perceptible ;but, from the position of the drift wood along the shore,captain Franklin concluded that a current ran to theeastward. The farthest point to which our adventurousnavigator proceeded was Point Turnagain, in lat.68^°. This point on the east, with Cape Barrow onthe west, formed the opening of a deep gulf thatran southward as far as the arctic circle. This gulf,which captain Franklin named George the Fourth'sCoronation Gulf, is studded with numerous islands,indented with sounds affording excellent harbours, withgood anchorage, all of them supplied with small riversof fresh water, abounding with salmon, trout, and otherfish. Captain Franklin, finding it absolutely necessaryto return, and his stock of provisions being exhaustedbefore he reached Hood's River, at the bottom ofCoronation Gulf, determined to proceed up this riveras far as it was navigable, and then to strike across thecountry in a direct line to Fort Enterprise, instead ofretracing his course, as he had originally intended, tothe Peppermint River. But a cascade 250 feet inheight, in Hood's River, soon put a stop to their navigation; they were obliged, therefore, to prepare for aland journey, to reduce their canoes to more portabledimensions, and to abandon part of their baggage. Onthe fifth day of their journey on foot, when they wereat a considerable distance from the river, they were surprisedby a heavy fall of snow, the harbinger of approachingwinter. Their distresses now increased daily :CHAP. XV. JOURNEY OF Captain FRANKLIN. 231they had to struggle, in boisterous weather, through snowtwo feet deep, and over a barren country which scarcelyproduced a shrub for fuel. The sun being hid, theyhad no opportunity of making celestial observations ; sothat, to increase their anxiety, they were reduced to thenecessity of guessing their way through a country totallyunknown. During a journey of three weeks, all thefresh meat that could be procured amounted to only fivedays' consumption. The only additional resource wasthe tripe de roche, a specious of lichen that grows on therocks ; and this unpalatable weed was so scanty, thatsome days passed without a meal at all. The strengthand spirits of the Canadians sunk rapidly from fatigueand want of food. Despair made them reckless of consequences; and, owing to their inattention, the canoeswere both dashed to pieces, although our travellers wereaware that they should have to cross the PeppermintRiver. On the 26th of September, they arrived on thebanks of this river. The weather had become mild, afew small deer had been killed, and a delusive ray ofhope shone on our weary travellers ; but they were nowwithout the means of crossing the river, which laybetween them and the place of their destination. Notrees could be found to make a raft : faggots of driedwillows bound together were unmanageable without polesor oars. Dr. Richardson, attempting to swim acrossthe river with a line round his body, was soon benumbedby the intense cold, and drawn to land in a state of totalinsensibility. At length a kind of basket was constructed,large enough to hold one person, and coveredwith a few fragments of canvass that remained : in thisfrail machine the party crossed the river one by one ;above eight days of fine, weather having been consumedin this place for want of the canoes.The last stage of the journey turned out to be by farthe most calamitous of the whole. It was now the 4thof October; the weather, which had been unusually mildwhile the party lingered on the eastern bank of the Cop-ermine,now resumed its severity. The ground wasq 4232 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.covered with snow; Fort Enterprise was forty miles off;not a morsel of food remained ; and the whole party weremiserably reduced in strength by toil, anxiety, and privation.Mr. Back and three Canadians hastened forwardin the hope of meeting a band of Indian hunters in theneighbourhood of Fort Enterprise. A few days afterwardscaptain Franklin and seven of the party proceededonward, leaving Dr. Richardson and Mr. Hood to takecare of those who were unable to continue the march.Fort Enterprise was but twenty-four miles off when thisseparation took place. Four of those who set out withcaptain Franklin left him in the course of his journey,being unable to proceed ; but Michel, an Iroquois, alonereturned to Dr. Richardson's party, the other threewere heard of no more. Captain Franklin reached thefort on the 11th, completely exhausted, having tasted nofood for five days; and what was his dismay when hefound the place without an inhabitant, with no provisions,no trace of a living animal, and the ground deeplycovered with snow. He endeavoured to set out in questof the Indians, that he might proceed to the relief ofDr. Richardson and his party; but his strength wasnow utterly gone, and he was obliged to return the nextday to his dreary and desolate abode. Eighteen dayspassed over him in this miserable condition, with no otherfood than the bones and skins of the deer which hadbeen consumed the preceding winter, boiled down intoa kind of soup ; when, on the 29th of October, Dr.Richardson and John Hepburn made their appearance,but without the rest of the party. Each was shocked atthe emaciated appearance and sepulchral voice of theother, not being aware that he was himself as much apicture of misery.Dr. Richardson had now a melancholy tale to relate.For the first two days his party had nothing whatever toeat. On the third day, Michel arrived with a hare andpartridge, which afforded each a small morsel. Thenanother day passed without food. On the 11th, Micheloffered them some flesh, which he said was part of a wolf;CHAP. XV. JOURNEY OF CAPTAIN FRANKLIN. 233but they afterwards became convinced that it was theflesh of one of the unfortunate men who had left captainFranklin's party to return to Dr. Richardson. Michelwas daily growing more insolent and shy, and it wasstrongly suspected that he had a hidden supply of meatfor his own use. On the 20th, while Hepburn wascutting wood near the tent, he heard the report of a gun ;and, looking towards the spot, saw Michel dart into thetent. Mr. Hood was found dead : a ball had entered theback part of his head, and there could be no doubt butthat Michel was the murderer. He now became more mistrustfuland outrageous than before; and, as his strengthwas superior to that of the English who survived, andhe was well armed, they became satisfied that there wasno safety for them but in his death. " I determined,"says Dr. Richardson, " as I was thoroughly convinced ofthe necessity of such a dreadful act, to take the wholeresponsibility upon myself; and immediately upon Michel'scoming up, I put an end to his life by shooting himthrough the head." They employed six days in travellinga distance of twenty-four miles, existing on lichens andpieces of the skin cloak of Mr. Hood. On the eveningof the 2,9th they came in sight of the fort, and at firstfelt inexpressible pleasure when they beheld the smokeissuing from the chimney. The absence of any footstepsin the snow filled them with dismal boding; andthese were realised, when, on entering the house, theysaw the wretchedness that reigned there. Two days afterthe arrival of Dr. Richardson, two of the Indians whoaccompanied captain Franklin expired of want. The onlyremaining man, and the captain himself, were so reducedthat a few hours would in all likelihood terminate theirexistence. Dr. Richardson and Hepburn also felt themselvesrapidly declining, when, on the 7th of November,three Indians, sent by Mr. Back, brought the long-expectedrelief. The Indians cleaned the house and attended thefamished travellers with a kindness which could not havebeen exceeded in the most civilised communities. Whenthe party acquired a little strength, they left the fort and234 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.proceeded to the nearest of the company's posts, wherethey met with their companion Mr. Back, to whose resolutionand physical strength the expedition owed its earlysuccess and its ultimate safety.The results of this journey, which, including the navigationalong the coast, extended to 5500 miles, are obviouslyof the greatest importance to geography. As thecoast, running northward, was followed to Cape Turn-again,in lat. 68^°, it is evident, that if a north-westpassage exist, it must be found beyond that limit. Thecountry traversed by the expedition afforded little opportunityfor the description of scenery; the same generalcharacter seems to pervade all these northern regions ofthe new world. We find every where rivers and chainsof lakes intersecting the whole country, with monotonousforests of pines, bordered by birch and willow, graduallydwindling until they at length totally disappear inabout lat. 68°.The officers of the expedition had many opportunities,during their residence at Fort Enterprise, of studyingthe phenomena, electrical, magnetic, and atmospheric,that accompany the aurora borealis. This meteor, itappears, is more frequent and vivid in the neighbourhoodof the arctic circle than in more northern latitudes. Itwas concluded, from a vast number of experiments, thatthe magnetic needle was affected by the aurora undercertain circumstances, particularly when the flashes appearedto be between the clouds and the earth. Theobservations of the officers also led them to conclude thatthe aurora, instead of being beyond the region of theatmosphere, is rarely at a height exceeding six or sevenmiles. Its beams were seen frequently to dart betweenthe clouds, and it was evidently affected by the wind.One of the fur traders told Mr. Hood, that he once sawthe coruscations of the aurora borealis so vivid and low,that the Canadians fell on their faces and began topray and cry, fearing they should be killed; and that hethrew away his gun and knife, that they might notattract the flashes; for they were within two feet of theCHAP. XVI. JOURNEY OP CAPTAIN FRANKLIN. 235earth, flitting along with incredible swiftness, and movingparallel to the surface. He likewise affirmed thatthey made a loud rustling noise, like the waving of a flagin a strong breeze. This noise made by the flashes ofthe aurora borealis is now, it appears, called in question.The Siberians affirm that it is sometimes so loud that theirdogs, terrified by it, lie down and refuse to draw thesledges. The officers of the expedition never heard thenoise, nor were they able to collect any information respectingit which could establish it on a better foundationthan mere vulgar report.In travelling through the valleys which intersect theCopper Mountains, Dr. Richardson picked up some platesof native copper, various ores of the same metal, andtrap rock associated with it. The Indians dig whereverthey observe the prelate lying on the soil, experiencehaving taught them that the largest pieces of copper arefound in its neighbourhood. They report that copper isto be found in every part of this range which they haveexamined, for thirty or forty miles to the north-west,and that the Esquimaux also resort to them to search forthat metal. Some ice chisels, above a foot in lengthand half an inch in diameter, formed of pure copper,were afterwards found among the Esquimaux.CHAP. XVI.SECOND JOURNEY OF CAPTAIN FRANKLIN.expedition to survey the coast westward from the copper-mineriver. preparations and instructions. voyagedown Mackenzie's river. — winter quarters in greatbear lake. captain franklin proceeds to the mouthof the mckenzie. coal cliffs on fire. the loucheuxindians. —view of the sea. return up the river.great heat. the bear river. amusements in winterquarters. the thaw begins. the exploring partiescommence their labours. captain franklin proceedseastward from the mckenzie. struggle with theesquimaux. ice met with information obtained from236 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.THE ESQUIMAUX. HERSCHEL ISLAND. CLARENCE RIVER.POINT DEMARCATION. INTELLIGENCE RESPECTING THE Russians.FOGGY WEATHER. FRANKLIN OBLIGED TO RETURN.DISCOVERS PEEL RIVER. PROGRESS OF DR. RICHARDSON TOTHE EASTWARD FROM Mckenzie RIVER. INTERCOURSE WITHESQUIMAUX. THEIR CHARACTER. ACCOUNT OF ESQUIMAUXLAKE. WOLLASTON ISLAND. ARRIVAL AT THE COPPERMINE.RETURN TO THE GREAT BEAR LAKE. RESULTS OF TheseSURVEYS.The sufferings endured in the last expedition did notdeter the same intrepid individuals from repeating theattempt to explore the shores of the Polar Seas. Towardsthe close of 1823, government made known its intentionof sending out another expedition under captain Parry,to try to find the passage to the west through Regent'sInlet. At the same time captain Franklin proposed tosurvey the coast westward from Mackenzie River. Hisoffer was accepted, and it was hoped that "experiencedearly purchased would instruct him to obviate all riskof encountering privations like those of the last voyage.Orders were immediately forwarded to the agents of theHudson's Bay company, to prepare a supply of provisions: at the requisite stations boats were constructed,combining, in the highest possible degree, therequisite qualities of strength and lightness ; and thesewere forwarded with the baggage and stores, to proceedinto the interior, from Hudson's Bay. Captain Franklin,Dr. Richardson, Mr. Back, and Mr. Kendal, proceededby way of New York. Their instructions directedthem to form their winter establishment in the neighbourhoodof the Great Bear Lake, and, in the spring of1826, to proceed down the Mackenzie. At the mouthof this river the travellers were to separate : captainFranklin and Mr. Back were to go westward, to endeavourto reach Kotzebue's Inlet, where they mightexpect to meet the Blossom frigate, commanded bycaptain Beechy ; Dr. Richardson and Mr. Kendal were,at the same time, to proceed towards the east, so as toexamine the line of coast between the Mackenzie andPeppermint RiversCHAP. XVI. FRANKLIN'S SECOND Journey. 237The officers, proceeding by New York, Niagara, andLake Superior, overtook the boats in Methyl River onthe 2.9th of June, 1825. This spot is in lat. 56° 10',Ion. 108° 55', and almost at the head of the watersthat flow eastward into Hudson's Bay. The officershad travelled 2800 miles, and the boats 1200, beforethey met together.Once embarked on the Mackenzie, our travellers hadan easy navigation. In many parts of the countrywhich they had crossed, between Isle de la Crosse andthe Mackenzie, their view was impeded by the smokeof woods on fire. Whether these conflagrations arisefrom design on the part of the Indians, or from theirnegligence in scattering the embers from their fires,could not be learned with certainty. In lat. 62° standsFort Simpson, at the confluence of the Mackenzie andthe River of the Mountains, descending from the west.By this river the traders procure provisions, and, amongother articles, potatoes in abundance, the cultivationof which has been advantageously introduced into thisremote region. The Mackenzie, hitherto half a mile or amile in width, spreads, below Fort Simpson, into a majesticstream about two miles broad. Our travellerswere now at no great distance from the Great BearLake ; and, as five or six weeks of the good season stillremained, it was resolved that captain Franklin andMr. Kendal should descend the river to the sea, andsurvey its mouth, by which they might considerablyabridge the operations of the ensuing summer. Dr.Richardson, at the same time, was to examine the eastside of the Great Bear Lake, while Mr. Back wasdirected to superintend tho preparations for wintering.The entrance of the Bear Lake River is distinguishedby a very remarkable mountain, whose summit displaysa variety of insulated peaks, crowded in the most irregularmanner. It is composed of limestone ; and, from thelower cliffs, which front the river, a dark bituminousliquid oozes and discolours the rock. The stream whichdescends from the Bear Lake is remarkably pure and238 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.limpid ; while the waters of the Mackenzie are whiteand turbid. A few miles above the Bear Lake River,and near its mouth, the banks of the Mackenzie containmuch good coal, which was on fire in 1825, as it hadbeen observed to be by Mackenzie, in his voyage to thesea : its smell was very disagreeable. On subsequenttrial, at the winter quarters on Great Bear Lake, thiscoal was found to emit but little heat, and to be totallyunfit for the blacksmith's use. The banks likewisecontained layers of a kind of unctuous mud, which theIndians in the neighbourhood use occasionally as food,during seasons of famine ; and even, at other times,chew as an amusement. It has a milky taste, and theflavour is not disagreeable. Our travellers used it towhiten the walls of their dwellings ; for which purposeit appeared well adapted.The scenery of the Mackenzie below Bear Lake Riveris, in many places, highly romantic. In one place,called by the traders the Ramparts, the river, varying inbreadth from 400 to 800 yards, runs for seven milesthrough a defile, the walls of which are sometimes 1 50feet high. Small streams trickling over the cliffs wearthe rock into a turreted shape, while numerous cavernousopenings, occasionally assuming the form of Gothic archways,sometimes give the cliffs the character of an ancientcathedral. On the 10th of August, captain Franklinarrived at Fort Good Hope, the lowest of the company'sestablishments. This abode of civilised man,whom the love of gain induces to brave the inclemencyof those rigorous climates, is situated in lat. 6'7° 28' 21 "and Ion. 130° 51' 38". This fort was established forthe purpose of carrying on trade with the tribe of Indianscalled Loucheux, or Squanders, an appellation which captainFranklin is disposed to interpret sharp-sighted.They are, he says, a well-looking people, resembling theEsquimaux in manner and general appearance ; but notin their eyes, which are prominent and full. They resemblethat nation, also, in their custom of perforatingthe septum of the nose, through which, like the Esquirexvi. . franklin's second journey. 23Qmaux, they thrust pieces of hone or small strings ofshells, which they purchase from that people.On approaching the sea, captain Franklin experiencedno difficulty but what arose from the number of channelsand branches into which the river divides itself. Thebanks, as well as the islands, are entirely alluvial, supportingwillows at the lower part, and spruce fir trees atthe summits. Two days' voyage through these channelsbrought our travellers within sight of the ocean. Thewater was still quite fresh, and continued so until, rowingtowards an island at a distance, they entirely lostsight of the eastern shore. A line of strong ripple markedthe termination of the fresh water ; that on the seawardside being brackish; and in their further progress of threemiles to the island, they had the indescribable pleasureof finding the water decidedly salt. The sea to the northwardappeared quite free from ice ; numerous seals andwhales, black and white, were seen sporting on its surface.The island on which captain Franklin landed, andwhich he named Garry It/and, is about five miles longby two broad, and seems to be a mass of frozen mud,with an appearance of vegetable mould in some placesexposed to the sun. Here the union flag was hoisted,and captain Franklin placed a letter, with the account ofhis proceedings, at the foot of the flag-staff, in case thatcaptain Parry, on entering the Polar Sea, might approachthat island. Another letter of the same purport, enclosedin a waterproof box, was sent adrift with the sameintention. The rise of tide observed here was only threeinches, and the position of Garry Island was ascertainedto be 6g° 20' lat. and 135° 41" Ion. Mackenzie erredbut little in the latitude he assigned to the mouth of thisriver; and, indeed, captain Franklin fully vindicates himfrom the imputations thrown on his veracity, for assertingthat he had reached the sea without having ascertainedthat the water was salt. " It is probable," says captainFranklin, " that even had the sea been free from ice atthe time of his visit, he could not have gone far enoughto prove its saltness, though the boundless horizon, the240 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.occurrence of a tide, and the sight of porpoises and whales,naturally induced him to say that he had arrived at theocean. The survey of the Mackenzie, made on this expedition,differs very little in its outline from that of itsdiscoverer, whose general correctness we had often occasionto admire."The examination of the mouth of this great riverbeing thus happily effected, our travellers commencedtheir return. The river had fallen considerably, andthe difficulty of ascending the rapids was consequentlyincreased. It deserves to be noticed, that towardsthe end of August, our travellers found the weatheralmost inconveniently warm ; the thermometer in theshade stood at 66°, and at 76° when exposed to the sun.On the same day the refraction of the atmosphere, whichhad been observed to be unusually great towards themouth of the Mackenzie, was particularly powerful.The mountains were distorted into the most extraordinaryshapes, and even the banks of the river at a little distanceappeared to have such an elevation that they couldhardly be recognised.On the 5th of September, captain Franklin and hisparty arrived at the winter residence on Great Bear Lake,to which the officers in his absence had given the nameof Fort Franklin. Dr. Richardson had previously returned,having concluded his examination of the northeasternshore of the lake, where it approaches nearest tothe Peppermint River. He fixed also upon the placeto which the eastern expedition should direct their stepsontheir return from the ( ,peppermint River the followingseason. The establishment at Fort Franklin was composedof several comfortable dwellings, placed on a drysandy bank about twenty-five feet above the lake ;towards the north a ridge of hills of moderate elevationbounded the prospect, and afforded some shelter in thatdirection; the south-western arm of the Bear Lake, hereaboutfour miles wide, opened towards the south. At alittle distance from the fort were trees in abundance,chiefly black and white spruce and larch, some of whichCHAP. XVI. FRANKLIN'S SECOND JOURNEY. 241were fifty feet high. The number of persons assembledat the fort amounted to fifty, including Canadians andIndian hunters, with their wives and children.When the winter set in, the officers amused themselvesin drawing, and writing their journals ; a school also wasestablished, to occupy the men. When the migratingbirds had wholly disappeared, the view abroad becameexceedingly dreary ; but on the 11th of October a greatfall of snow took place, and with this began the amusementsand occupations of a northern winter. Generalpleasure was felt when it w r as first announced that theground was sufficiently covered with snow to allow travellingin dog-sledges. The festivities of Christmas wereduly observed, and a dance was given at which were presentsixty persons, forming a motley assemblage of Englishmen,Scotch Highlanders conversing in Gaelic, FrenchCanadians, Esquimaux, and Indians of four differenttribes. In February, however, some fears began to beentertained of want of food ; the stock of dried meat wasexpended, the fishing lines were unproductive, and themen were placed on short allowance. This distress,however, did not last long ; a moose deer was killedwhich cost six days in hunting, the fisheries improvedimmediately after, and supplies arrived from the company'sstations. In April, warm weather commenced,though the ground was still covered with snow ; Dr.Richardson and Mr. Kendal completed the survey ofGreat Bear Lake, while the men at the fort were employedin building a large boat.On the 22d of June the whole party embarked tofulfil the great object of the expedition. The weatherwas now warm, the thermometer standing at 71° inthe shade. On the 4th of July they reached the forkor point where the principal mouths of the Mackenzieseparate to run east and west. This point they thereforenamed Point Separation. Our travellers dividedinto two parties, to proceed, according to their instructions,one towards the east, the other to the west.By six in the morning of the 4th of July, the boatsVOL. III. R242 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.were all laden and ready for departure: it was impossiblenot to be struck with the difference between our presentcomplete state of equipment and that in which we hadembarked on our former disastrous voyage. Instead ofa frail bark-canoe, and a scanty supply of food, we werenow about to commence the sea voyage in excellent boats,stored with three months' provision. At Dr. Richardson'sdesire, the western party embarked first ; he andhis companions saluted us with three hearty cheers, whichwere warmly returned ; and as we were passing roundthe point that was to hide them from our view, we perceivedthem also embarking."Captain Franklin's party had hardly cleared the mouthof the river, and gained the sea, when they entered awide bay, on the shores of which they perceived a partyof Esquimaux : these soon came off' to the boats in suchcrowds, that our travellers, after proceeding to seventy-three,desisted in despair from counting the canoes.Augustus, the Esquimaux interpreter, informed them thatthe strangers had no object in visiting that coast but tocarry on trade. At this intelligence they testified themost extravagant joy ; but the traffic carried on withthem on this occasion rather tempted their cupidity thangratified their desires. The boats were aground thougha mile from the shore, and were surrounded by nearly300 Esquimaux. These, at first importunate and clamorous,became at length so emboldened as to attemptto steal from the boats. When detected and resisted,they grew furious, and seemed to be concerting measuresfor a simultaneous attack. They flourished their knives,and endeavoured to gain possession of the boats. Forseveral hours this singular struggle continued, and terminatedat length without the loss of blood on eitherside ; the English having preserved their temper so asto refrain from using their fire-arms, while the Esquimaux,unwilling to hurt the strangers, aimed solely atbecoming masters of their property. After the boatshad escaped this danger, Augustus landed, to haranguethe people on the impropriety of their conduct; theyCHAP. XVI. FRANKLIN'S SECOND JOURNEY. 243welcomed him with songs and dances, which, he wassurprised to find, were the same as those practised onsimilar occasions in his own country.The boats now proceeded along the coast, with a fairwind, in a west-north-west direction ; but they had notproceeded many miles before their progress was completelystopped by a sheet of ice, fastened to the shore,and extending to seaward as far as the eye could reach ;and they now found that they had just arrived in timeto witness the first breaking up of the ice. They drewup their boats on shore, therefore, as the delay of a fewdays seemed unavoidable. Here a party of Esquimauxsoon made their appearance ; but they were an inoffensivetribe, and jumped for joy when Augustus explainedto them the advantages to be derived from an intercoursewith white people, to whom they were now introducedfor the first time. When awls and fishing-hooks wereoffered to them as presents, they stuck them in the septumof the nose as ornaments : these people had alsoholes pierced on each side of the under lip, in whichwere placed circular pieces of ivory, with a large bluebead in the centre, like the natives on some parts of thenorth-west coast of America. The men were taller andstouter than any tribes of the Esquimaux hitherto seenon the eastern coast, and their cheek bones Averse lessprojecting ; but they had the general characteristic oftheir nation, the small eye and broad nose. They informedour travellers that, as soon as the wind shouldblow strongly from the land, the ice might be expectedto be removed from the shore, so as to open a passagefor boats, and that it would remain in the offing untilthe reappearance of the stars. Farther to the westward,they continued, the ice often adheres to the land throughoutthe summer j and when it dees break away, it iscarried but a short distance to seaward, and is broughtback whenever a strong wind blows on the coast. Ifthere be any channels in those parts, they are unsafe forboats, as the ice is continually tossing about. Theyexpressed their wonder that the white men were notr 2244 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.provided, like themselves, with sledges and dogs to travelover the land whenever these interruptions should occur.Their houses are built of drift wood, which is foundalong this shore in abundance, brought by the currentfrom the east. Some pine timber was found thirty-sixfeet in length and seven in girth.As soon as the breaking up of the ice allowed ourvoyagers to embark, they struggled, not without difficultyand danger, to reach an island, which captainFranklin named from the philosopher Herschel. Hereagain they met with Esquimaux, who were provided insome measure with knives and other implements ofiron. When interrogated as to the way in which theyprocured them, they replied, that they received themchiefly from a tribe of Esquimaux who reside a greatdistance to the west, and to whom they send theiryoung men every spring, with furs, seal-skins, andoil, to trade for these articles. Some Indians also descenda river that enters the Polar Sea, nearly oppositeHerschel Island, and carry on a similar traffic. Thesepeople supposed that the Indians and the Esquimaux,with whom they traded, obtained the goods from Kab-loonacht, or white people, who dwell far to the west.Thus it appears that Russian manufactures are distributedamong the Esquimaux to the east of theMackenzie.The shallowness of the shore, the great quantity ofbroken ice, and the thick fogs, greatly impeded the progressof the party, who now began to despair of beingable to effectuate the object of their mission. A large river,flowing into the sea near the meridian of 141°, whichseparates the British and the Russian territories, wasnamed the Clarence River. Here a box containing a royalmedal was deposited, and the union jack being hoistedwas saluted with three cheers. Farther on, anotherriver was discovered, and named the Canning River.The water opposite to it was fresh three miles out tosea. The fogs now came on so thick as to compel thevoyagers to draw their boats on shore, and wait till theCHAP. XVI. FRANKLIN'S SECOND JOURNEY. 245weather should clear up, so as to allow them to pursuetheir intricate navigation through the ice. This delaycompletely dissipated the hopes of ultimate success. Itwas now the l6'th of August, and they had only reachedhalf way to Icy Cape. Winter was rapidly advancing,and the temperature of noon was rarely above 37°.Captain Franklin resolved therefore to return immediately,rather than expose the lives of his followersin a hopeless enterprise. The last observation, madenear Return Reef, was in lat. 70° 26', long. 148° 52'.On the last day of the month, the boats reached GarryIsland, and afterwards entered a fine river, which wassupposed to be one of the mouths of the Mackenzie ;nor was the mistake discovered until the voyagers hadadvanced so far as to have mountains on the eastward.This river, which captain Franklin named Peel's River,was from a quarter to half a mile in width : its banks,like those of the Mackenzie, were well clothed withpoplar, birch, and willow. On the 21st of Septemberour voyagers arrived at Fort Franklin, havingaccomplished in three months a voyage of 2048 miles.The extent of shore which they had traced to the westwardof the Mackenzie was 374* miles ; and in thiswhole length there was not a single harbour in which aship could find shelter.The progress of Dr. Richardson's party to the eastwardwas attended with much less difficulty. He was,perhaps, favoured by the current, which runs to theeastward, and had a bolder shore, with deeper water, andconsequently less impeded with ice. He had alsosomething to apprehend from the overwhelming numbersand turbulent manners of the Esquimaux : but hefound them an intelligent and by no means a ferociouspeople ; so that, when treated mildly and firmly, theylaid aside all appearance of hostility. On one occasionthey attempted to seize the boats, but at the sight offire-arms desisted, and parted from the English, exclaiming," Friendship is good I" Dr. Richardson receivedfrom the Indians and Esquimaux an account ofr 3246 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.a great lake, extending about 150 miles from east towest, at no great distance from the shore, and about140 from north to south : it is said to reach withinfour days' march of Fort Good Hope. EsquimauxLake, as this extensive piece of water is called, is said tocommunicate with the Mackenzie, and to receive besidestwo other large rivers. It is reported also to be full ofislands. Dr. Richardson's party followed the shores oftwo extensive bays, respectively named Liverpool andFranklin Bays. The eastern shore of the latter, as itran a long way to the northward, caused them someanxiety ; but on rounding Cape Parry, they again sawthe coast trending to the south and east, as far as the eyecould reach. As they approached the estuary of thePeppermint River, land was descried to the north, whichfilled them apprehensions, lest, joining with the continentof America, it might debar their farther progress ;but as they advanced, they discovered that the land tothe northward was unconnected with the main shore,from which it was separated by a channel from twelve totwenty miles in width. This island, the coast of which,apparently continuous, was observed for above 100miles, received the name of Wollaston Land. On the7th of August the boats had advanced so far in CoronationGulf as to join the survey now made to that ofthe former expedition. The length of coast examinedbetween the Mackenzie and Peppermint Rivers was 902miles. The success which had hitherto attended theeastern detachment continued to the end ; and on the1st of September they reached Fort Franklin withoutan accident.In order to complete, as far as possible, the survey ofthe northern shores of the American continent, governmentsent two expeditions to co-operate with those ofcaptain Franklin and Dr. Richardson. On the 10th ofJune, 1824, captain Lyon sailed from England in theGriper, with instructions to winter in Repulse Bay, andin the ensuing spring to cross from the head of that bayto the northern shores of the American continent, whichchap. xvi. franklin's second journey. 247he was to survey westward; so that his survey joined tothat of Dr. Richardson might complete our knowledgeof the shores of the Polar Sea, from their nearest accessiblepoint to the mouth of the Mackenzie River. Thewhole voyage of captain Lyon was a continued strugglewith bad weather. He arrived late in Sir Thomas Rowe'sWelcome, in which, from the state of the sea, encumberedwith ice, and adverse winds, he was unable to advance;and, after losing all his anchors, was obliged to relinquishthe undertaking and return home.Captain Beeches also, in the Blossom frigate, wasordered to winter in Kotzebue Inlet, and in the summerof 1826 to endeavour to find a passage eastward, roundIcy Cape, so as to meet the expedition of captain Franklin.The ship, however, was prevented by ice from doublingIcy Cape ; but Mr. Elson, the master, was sent in thebarge, to prosecute the voyage as far as possible to theeast. On the 22d of August, he arrived at a low, sandypoint, on which the ice had grounded ; and, as a compactfield of ice extended northward as far as the eye couldreach, Mr. Elson was obliged to relinquish ?ell thoughtsof proceeding farther. This point, which is the mostnorthern part of the continent yet known, lies in lat. 71°23' 39" , and long. 154° 21 ', which is 120 miles beyondIcy Cape. The coast examined by Mr. Elson was flat,abounding in lakes and rivers, and thickly inhabited byEsquimaux, whose winter habitations are close to thebeach. The point from which captain Franklin commencedhis return to the Mackenzie, on the 18th ofAugust, is only 16*0 miles from the point reached by Mr.Elson four days later. Had captain Franklin been awarethat by persevering in his exertions for a few days, hemight have reached his friends, it is possible that aknowledge of the circumstance might have induced him,through all hazards, to continue his exertions. Thus,with the exception of this short space of l6'0 miles, acontinuous line of coast has been explored, by Britishhardihood and perseverance, from Behring's Straits tolong. 108°.r 4248 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.CHAP. XVII.humboldt's travels.GEOGRAPHY ASSOCIATED WITH THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. humboldtEDUCATION. HE PROJECTS VISITING EGYPT AND THEEAST. PROCEEDS TO SPAIN. ENCOURAGED TO VISIT THESPANISH AMERICAN COLONIES. HE ASCENDS THE PEAK OPTENERIFFE. HE ARRIVES AT CUMANA. THE EARTHQUAKES.Caracas. THE SHARKS. HE CLIMBS THE Silly OF Caracas.VISIT TO THE LAKE OF VALENCIA. VIGOUR OFVEGETATION. THE MILK TREE. —JOURNEY ACROSS THE LLANOS.THE GYMNOTUS OR ELECTRICAL EEL ; MODE OF TAKING THEM JTHEIR POWER. REMARKS ON THE CROCODILE. HUMBOLDTASCENDS THE OROONOKO. THE MINGLED CLAMOUR OF WILDBEASTS. THE CARIBITO. VOYAGE THROUGH INUNDATEDFORESTS. DOLPHINS AMONG THE TREES. VOYAGE DOWNTHE RIO NEGRO. HUMBOLDT DETERMINES THE POSITION OFTHE JUNCTION OF THE AMAZON AND OROONOKO. NAVIGATESTHE CASSIQUIARE, WHICH CONNECTS THEM. DESCENDS THEOROONOKO. CATACOMBS OF ATARUIPO. ARRIVES AT Angostura.RETURNS TO CUMANA.— PROCEEDS TO THE Savannah.HIS OCCUPATIONS IN THAT PLACE.We have seen the improvements in astronomy applied tocorrect the errors of geography, and, passing from thehands of the astronomer to those of the navigator, assistingto form an accurate delineation of the surface ofthe globe. But the relations which exist between geographyand physical science in general still remained to bestudied, and it was not till our own days that a travellerappeared qualified, by his ardour, his knowledge, and histalents, to enter upon so grand an undertaking. Alexandervon Humboldt, the person to whom we allude,was born at Berlin, in 1769- He received his education atGottingen and Frankfort on the Oder ; he subsequentlypursued his mineralogical studies at the celebrated schoolof Freiberg. He seems to have cultivated assiduouslyevery branch of knowledge ; but the ardour of learningCHAP. XVII. Humboldt's TRAVELS. 249naturally attached him to the pursuits that were at thattime most in vogue. Chemistry and the phenomena ofanimal electricity chiefly attracted his attention. As hepossessed an ample independent fortune, he was able toadd the accomplishment of travel to that of secludedstudy. He visited England and Holland in companywith G. Forster and Van Guns. Italy and Switzerlandhe visited with Von Hafter and Freiesleben. Theconversation of these men determined the predilectionwhich young Humboldt already evinced for the study ofnature. In 1797 he went from Vienna with his brotherWilliam von Humboldt, a man of eminent learning andabilities, to Paris, where he formed an acquaintance withAime Bonpland, a young botanist of distinguished merit,with whom he concerted various plans of travel.When the expedition of Baudin to the southernhemisphere was first projected, it was expected thatHumboldt would accompany it; but the delays occasionedby the wars in which France was then involved weariedhis patience, and fortunately rescued him from an expeditionin which the naturalists eventually proved toomany for the commander. He then thought of proceedingto Egypt, where he expected to meet a cordial receptionfrom the body of scientific men which accompanied theFrench army. From Egypt he intended to cross throughArabia into Persia, and to proceed by that way to theBritish dominions in India. He waited two months atMarseilles for the sailing of a frigate which was to conveythe Swedish consul to Algiers ; but, tired of thedelay, he proceeded to Spain, whence he expected to beable to cross without difficulty to Africa, and to continuehis route to Egypt: but on his arrival at Madrid, in thebeginning of 1799; the reception he met with at court,and in the literary and scientific circles of that capital,soon wrought an entire revolution in all his plans. Hereceived, in short, permission from the Spanish ministersto travel through the Spanish colonies in America; sothat an immense field was opened to the scientific travellerwhich had been before but superficially examined250 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.On the 6th of June, 1799, he set sail from Corunnawith his friend Bonpland. At Teneriffe our travellerscommenced their geological and botanical researches; theyascended the celebrated peak of Teyde, where theyobserved within a small compass, that geographical distributionof plants which it was their object to trace on amore comprehensive scale. The mountain which formsthe island may be divided into five zones, distinguishedby their vegetation. In the first, or zone of vines, whichextends to the height of 1 500 feet above the level of thesea, are to be found many tropical productions. Hereare to be found the date tree, the plantain, the sugarcane,the Indian fig, the clove tree, mingled with the fruittrees of Europe. Here, also, the culture of the breadfruittree of Otaheite, of the cinnamon tree of the Moluccas,the coffee tree of Arabia, and the cocoa tree ofAmerica, have been tried with success. The secondzone, which may be called that of the laurels, embracesthe woody part of the island. Oaks, chestnuts, with agreat number of beautiful evergreens, crown the hillswhich lead to the volcano. At the height of 5500 feetabove the sea begins the third zone, which is entirelyoccupied by a vast forest of pines. The fourth and fifthzones, covered with alpine broom and herbaceous plants,occupy heights equal to the most inaccessible summits ofthe Pyrenees. Here begins the barren region of thepeak, which has an extent of above nine square leagues.The lower regions viewed from this elevation shrink inthe prospect, so that the island appears an immense heapof terrified matter, hemmed round by a scanty border ofvegetation.The Piston, or sugar loaf, which forms the summit ofthe peak, is a small cone covered with volcanic ashesand fragments of pumice-stone, so steep that it would beimpossible to reach the top but for an old current of lava,the wrecks of which have resisted the ravages of time.By grasping these the traveller is enabled to scale thesteep. On the summit of the Piston our travellers weresurprised to find scarcely room enough to seat themselveschap. xvi. humboldt's travels. 251commodiously; the inconvenience they felt from thesevere cold and the violence of the west wind wasamply repaid by the richness, variety, and extent of theprospect before them. The transparency of the airallowed them to enjoy a landscape, far more comprehensiveand exact than could possibly greet the eye in acolder climate. Nearly the whole of the archipelagoof the Fortunate Islands may be seen in fine weatherfrom the summit of the peak ; and M. Humboldt calculates,that the eye takes in from this point a surface ofthe globe equal to one fourth of Spain. Our travellersreached the bottom of the caldera or crater withoutdanger. It has been inactive, probably, for thousands ofyears, and in its present state is only a solfaterra, not muchexceeding a hundred feet in depth ; through the fissuresin its sides there issued, nevertheless, hot vapours, whichraised the thermometer placed in them to 16*0°. Ourtravellers descended in safety, bringing with them abottle of air from the summit of the peak for chemicalanalysis.In July they reached the port of Cumana in SouthAmerica, in which place they employed some weeks inverifying their instruments, forming botanical collections,and examining the traces of the great earthquake ofDecember, 1797- Humboldt determined, by astronomicalobservations, the longitude and latitude of Cumanawhich in most maps was placed at least half a degree toofar to the south. Until the beginning of the presentcentury the whole of the coast of Terra Firma has beenlaid down too far to the south : this was owing to thecurrent near the Island of Trinidad, which, setting towardsthe north, caused an error in the reckoning ofmariners, and led them to think themselves farther souththan they really were. The greatest pleasure known atCumana is that of bathing in the waters of the Manza-nares, a lively limpid stream, that flows through thetown. The mode of bathing is singular enough : — In afine moonlight night chairs are placed in the water; themen and women are lightly clothed, as in some baths in252 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.the north of Europe ; and parties assembled in the riverpass some hours in smoking cigars, and in conversation.The company are under no apprehensions from thelavas, or small crocodiles, which are now scarce, andrarely attack men. Dolphins, however, ascend the riverin the night, and frighten the bathers by spoutingwater.From the peninsula of Araya and the salt lagoons onthe coast near Cumana our travellers proceeded to themissions of the Indians in the mountains of the interior,through forests of palm and arborescent fern. The thicknessof the forests and the force of vegetation augmentedas they approached the convent of the valley of Caripe,which is celebrated for the extraordinary coolness of theclimate, and still more for the great cueva, or cavern ofthe Guacharo. In a country where the people love whatis marvellous, a cavern that gives birth to a river, and isinhabited by thousands of nocturnal birds, the fat ofwhich is employed in the missions to dress food, is aneverlasting subject of conversation and discussion.The cavern, which the natives call a Mine of Fat, isnot in the valley of Caripe itself, but at three shortleagues' distance towards the west-south-west. TheCueva del Guacharo is pierced in the vertical profile of arock, forming a vault eighty feet broad and seventy-twofeet high. The rock that surmounts the grotto iscovered with trees of gigantic height. Various succulentplants rise from the driest clefts of the rock, while creepingplants, waving in the winds, are interwoven in festoonsbefore the entrance of the cavern. This luxury ofvegetation embellishes not only the outside of the vault,it appears even in the vestibule of the grotto. Plantain-leavedheliconias eighteen feet high, small palm trees,and arborescent arms, follow the banks of the riverthirty or forty paces from the entrance. The travellersmeasured their way by means of a cord, and advancedabout 430 feet without being obliged to light theirtorches. Where the light began to fail, they heard fromafar the hoarse sounds of the nocturnal birds. The Guamxvii. humboldt's travels. 2.53claro is of the size of our fowls, of a dark bluish greyplumage, and resembling in its manners both the goatsuckerand the alpine crow ; it is almost the only frugivorousnocturnal bird that is yet known ; it quits thecavern at nightfall, especially when the moon shines.It is difficult," says M. Humboldt, " to form an ideaof the horrible noise occasioned by thousands of thesebirds in the dark part of the cavern, and which can onlybe compared to the croaking of our crows, which, in thepine forests of the north, live in society, and constructtheir nests upon trees the tops of which touch each other.The shrill and piercing cries of the guacharos strike uponthe vaults of the rocks, and are repeated by the echo, inthe depth of the cavern. The noise increased as we advanced,and the birds were affrighted by the light oftorches of copal ; when, as this noise ceased for a fewminutes around us, we heard at a distance the plaintivecries of the birds roosting in other ramifications of thecavern."The Indians enter into the Cueva del Guacharo oncea year, near midsummer, armed with poles, by means ofwhich they destroy the greater part of the nests. At thisseason several thousands of the birds are killed; and theold ones, as if to defend their brood, hover over the headsof the Indians, uttering terrible cries. The young whichfall to the' ground are opened on the spot ; their peritoneumis extremely loaded with fat, and a layer of fatreaches from the abdomen to the anus, forming a kindof cushion between the legs of the bird. At the periodwhich is commonly called at Caripe the oil-harvest, theIndians build huts with palm-leaves, near the entrance,and even in the porch, of the cavern. There, with a fire ofbrushwood, they melt, in pots of clay, the fat of the youngbirds just killed. This fat is known by the name ofbutter or oil of the guacharo ; it is half liquid, transparent,without smell, and so pure that it may be kepta year without becoming rancid." The members of anIndian family which bears the name of Morocoymas pretend,as descendants of the first colonists of the valley,254 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.to be the lawful proprietors of the cavern, and lay claimto the monopoly of the fat ; but the monks establishedamong them pay little regard to the claims of the Indians,who are obliged to furnish oil for the church lamp.The grotto of Caripe was examined by Humboldt tothe distance of 1 460 feet, and found in the whole of thatextent to preserve the same direction, and nearly the samedimensions. Here the river forms a cascade, beyondwhich the Indians could not be persuaded to advance;but it was said at the convent, that a bishop of St. Thomasof Guiana had measured nearly 2500 feet from themouth of the cavern to the place where he stopped, without,however, reaching its termination. These nocturnalbirds have been found only on the mountains of Caripeand Cumana Coa.Returning over the mountains of Santa Maria, andthrough the missions of Catuaro, our travellers arrivedat the coast of Cumana. On the 4th of November,they experienced a smart shock of an earthquake, and hadan opportunity of observing the singular atmosphericalphenomena that accompany these convulsions. They thenwent by sea to Caraccas, where they arrived on the 21stof November. They were surprised to see, in the portof La Guayra, the free mulattoes and negroes, who wereemployed to lade the ships, wading up to their middlesthrough the water, quite regardless of the sharks, whichare numerous in this harbour. " This fact," says M.Humboldt, " seems connected with what 1 have oftenobserved within the tropics, relatively to other classes ofanimals that live in society, for instance, monkeys andcrocodiles, in the missions of the Oroonoko and the Riverof the Amazons. The Indians, who catch monkeys soseldom, know very well that they can easily succeed intaming those which inhabit certain islands ; whilemonkeys of the same species, caught on the neighbouringcontinent, die of terror or rage when they findthemselves in the power of man. The crocodiles of onepool in the llanos are cowardly, and flee, even in thewater; while those of another attack with extremeCHAP. XVII. HUMBOLDT S TRAVELS. 255intrepidity. It would be difficult to explain this differenceof manners and habits by the aspect of theirrespective localities. The sharks of the port of LaGuayra seem to furnish an analogous example : they aredangerous and blood-thirsty at the island opposite thecoast of Caraccas, while they forbear to attack personsswimming in the ports of La Guayra and Santa Martha.The people, who, in order to simplify the explanation ofnatural phenomena, have always recourse to the marvellous,affirm that in both places the bishop gave hisbenediction to the sharks."The port of La Guayra is but three leagues from thetown of Caraccas, which, though so near the sea, issituated on a table land, among the mountains, wherethe climate is so cool as to admit of the cultivation ofwheat, if that of the coffee tree were not preferred.Humboldt ascended the double-peaked mountain calledthe Silla, or Saddle of Caraccas, which, though at butalittle distance from the town, had never been climbedby any of the inhabitants. By this excursion, he enrichedhis botanical collection, and had an opportunityof repeating his observations on the transparency of theatmosphere and the refraction of light.From Caraccas our travellers returned to Cumanathrough the mountains of Los Tenues and along thefertile banks of the Lake of Valencia. This lake, calledTacarigua by the Indians, exceeds in magnitude thelake of Xeufchatel in Switzerland. The variety andluxuriance of the plants that adorn its banks form anirresistible attraction to a traveller who delights instudying the endless diversity of nature. The brilliancyof the picture here is enhanced by the contrast of vividvegetable colours with the uniform tint of an uncloudedsky. This lake is remarkable, not only forits picturesque beauties ; but also for the gradual diminution"of its waters, — an effect which philosophers differin explaining. According to Humboldt, it may beascribed to the destruction of wood in the neighbouringvalleys, in consequence of which the climate is become256 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.more dry ; and the rivers, instead of copious streams,assume the character of brooks or torrents. From PortoGabelle, on the sea shore, our travellers prepared tocross the great llanos or steppes of Caraccas, which separatethe chain of mountains which run along the coastfrom the valley of the Oroonoko. In passing a secondtime through the valleys of Aragua, they stopped at thefarm of Barbara, to satisfy themselves by ocular examinationrespecting the truth of the accounts they hadreceived of the palo de vasa, or cow tree, the milk ofwhich the negroes were said to consider a wholesomealiment. They found by experience that the virtues ofthis extraordinary tree had not been exaggerated. Thepalo de vasa is a handsome tree, resembling the broad-leavedstar apple : incisions are made in its trunk ; ityields an abundance of glutinous milk, of an agreeableand balmy smell. This sweet and nourishing fluidflows most abundantly at the rising of the sun. Theblacks and natives are then seen hastening from allquarters, furnished with large bowls, to receive themilk. M. Humboldt declares, that, in the whole courseof his travels he never met any object which so stronglyaffected his imagination as the cow tree. This inestimablegift of nature seems peculiar to the Cordilleras ofthe coast.A descent of 1000 feet from the valleys of Araguabrought our travellers to the great steppes or desert thatextends towards the Oroonoko. " I know not," saysM. Humboldt, " whether the first aspect of the llanosexcites less astonishment than that of the chain of theAndes." In these wide and dreary wastes every thingseems motionless. The plain seems to touch the sky,and resembles an ocean covered with sea weeds. Theearth, wherever it was destitute of vegetation, was atthe temperature of 120° : not a breath of air was felt,although whirls of dust continually arose amidst theapparent calm. In those llanos the level of the soilis so perfect, that often in the space of twentysquare leagues there is not an eminence a foot high :chap. xvii. humboldt's travels. : 257sometimes, however, banks of stones, four or five feethigher than the rest of the plain, are seen to extendthree or four leagues in length. There is reason tobelieve that those plains have become more dry anddesert since the discovery of America. Since the llanoshave been inhabited, and stocked with cattle, the savannahis often set on fire, in order to ameliorate thepasturage : groups of scattered trees, beneath the shadeof which vegetation enjoyed a protection from thescorching rays of the sun, are thus destroyed.At Calabozo, in the llanos, our travellers had anopportunity of examining the great gymnotus, or electricaleel, which is found in abundance in the confluentsof the Oroonoko. It was difficult, however, to procurethe fish, as the Indians dread the shock which they areliable to receive in taking it. They believe, indeed,that the gymnoti may be touched with impunity by aman chewing tobacco ; but their faith in this precautionis not practical. At length, it was proposed to " fishwith horses," and, accordingly, the Indians set aboutthis singular operation, by driving about thirty wildhorses and mules from the savannah into a stagnantpool : the struggle which ensued is thus described by ourtraveller: — "The extraordinary noise caused by thehorses' hoofs makes the fish issue from the mud, andexcites them to combat : these yellowish and livid eels,resembling aquatic serpents, swim on the surface of thewater, and crowd under the bellies of the horses andmules. A contest between animals of so different anorganisation furnishes a very striking spectacle. TheIndians, provided with harpoons and long slender reeds,surround the pool closely, and some climb upon thetrees, the branches of which extend horizontally overthe surface of the water : by their wild cries and thelength of the reeds, they prevent the horses from runningaway, and reaching the bank of the pool. The eels,stunned by the noise, defend themselves by the repeateddischarge of their electric batteries : during a long timethey seem to prove victorious ; several horses sink be-vol.III. s258 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V,neath the violence of the invisible strokes which they receivefrom all sides, in organs the most essential to life ;and, stunned by the force and frequency of the shocks, disappearunder the water : others, panting, with mane erectand haggard eyes expressing anguish, raise themselvesand endeavour to flee from the storm by which they areovertaken : they are driven back, by the Indians, intothe middle of the water ; but a small number succeedin eluding the active vigilance of the fishermen : theseregain the shore, stumbling at every step, and stretchthemselves on the sand, exhausted with fatigue, andtheir limbs benumbed by the electrical shocks of thegymnoti."In less than five minutes two horses were drowned ;the eel, being five feet long, and pressing itself against thebellies of the horses, makes a discharge along the wholeextent of its electric organ. The horses are probablynot killed, but only stunned; they are drowned from theimpossibility of rising amid the prolonged struggle of theother horses and the eels. When the gymnoti haveexpended their electric energy, they approach timidlythe edge of the marsh, where they are taken by meansof small harpoons fastened to long cords; when the cordsare very dry, the Indians feel no shock in raising thefish into the air. In this manner several were captured,and carefully examined by our travellers. Some of thesemeasured five feet three inches in length ; and the Indiansassert that they are sometimes seen of muchgreater length. The gymnotus is the largest of electricalfishes, and its electrical action is so powerful, that M.Humboldt says " that he does not remember to haveever received from the discharge of a large Leyden jara more dreadful shock than that which he experiencedby imprudently placing his feet on a gymnotus just takenout of the water."Having determined by astronomical observations theposition of Calabozo, they proceeded towards the Oroonoko.During the night they forded the Uritucu, which is filledwith a breed of crocodiles remarkable for their ferocity :CHAP. XVII. Humboldt's TRAVELS. 259their boldness is the more striking, as the crocodiles ofthe river Tisnao, eight leagues distant, are timid andinoffensive. At San Fernando our voyagers embarkedon the Apure to descend to the Oroonoko. The thickforests on the banks of the river were peopled by an innumerablequantity of birds of various kinds, which,when suddenly put to flight, darkened the air like clouds.The underwood grew close to the water's edge, so as toform a fence about four feet high, through which thewild quadrupeds of this country, the tigers, tapirs, andwearies, have made paths to drink at the river. Hereuntamed and savage nature resumes its dominion. Wildanimals of different kinds are seen to follow one anotherthrough every opening in the forest. The largest tigerour travellers had ever seen, and which surpassed in sizethe tigers of India exhibited in European menageries,was observed lying stretched beneath the shade of a largemany. At sunset the howling monkeys commencetheir moaning, which may be heard at the distance ofmany miles. The other animals then take the alarm,and mingle their various cries in this savage concert;the howling of the tigers, the screams of birds, and thewhistling of monkeys seem vying with each other topredominate in this terrible din. " When the nativesare interrogated on the cause of this tremendous noisemade by the beasts of the forest at certain hours of thenight, they reply gaily, 'They are keeping the feast of thefull moon.' "The Apure, as well as the Oroonoko, is infested withcrocodiles of great size ; the species that is so abundantin these rivers is not a cayman or alligator, but a realcrocodile, with feet dentated at the external edges analogousto that of the Nile. Some were seen measuringseventeen feet in length. There is a small fish, onlyfour or five inches long, known in the country by thename of caribe or caribito, because no other fish has sucha thirst for blood. It attacks bathers and swimmers,from whom it often carries away considerable pieces offlesh : when a person is only slightly wounded, it is dies2260 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.ficult for him to get out of the water without receivingseverer injury. These cruel and voracious fish live atthe bottom of rivers ; but if a few drops of blood besprinkledon the water, they come to the surface in thousands.As no one dares to bathe where this fish is found,the caribito may be considered as one of the greatestscourges of those climates, in which the sting of themosquitoes and the irritation of the skin render the useof baths so necessary.Having at length reached the Oroonoko, our voyagerscommenced the descent of that noble river, which wasin many places three miles wide, at a distance of 500miles from the sea. They continued to descend thisriver till they reached the Semi, which flows into it fromthe south, and which is connected by a short portagewith the Cano Pimichin, which flows into the Rio Negro.On the banks of the Semi the forests are often inundatedto a great extent ; and, to shorten the navigation, theIndians open channels among the trees four or five feetbroad. Thus a part of the voyage was performed througha forest of stately trees, towering to the height of 100or 120 feet. On beating the bushes, shoals of freshwaterdolphins surrounded the boat, and swam acrossthe forest, throwing out those spouts of compressed airand water which have procured them from seamen thename of blowers. This was a singular spectacle in themiddle of the continent, 300 or 400 leagues from themouths of the Oroonoko and Amazon. It was the labourof four days to drag the canoes over land to the CanoPimichin, by which they descended into the Rio Negro,one of the tributaries to the Maranon, or River of Amazons.The object of our voyagers in making this laboriousexcursion, during which they suffered so muchfrom the stings of mosquitoes, the want of rest, and theconfinement in a narrow canoe, was to ascertain, byastronomical observations, the position of the Cassiaa branch of the Oroonoko which meets theRio Negro, and thus establishes a communication betweenthe former river and the waters of the Maranon.chap. xvii. humboldt's travels. 261They found that this junction, which is on the frontiersof Brazil and of the Spanish dominions, is situated twodegrees to the northward of the equator ; though it isgenerally supposed in the country to be placed directlyon the equatorial line. Passing northwards up the Cas-square,our travellers again entered the Oroonoko,flowing here from the east, and would have sought thesources of that great river, but that the Guaica Indians,a fair-complexioned and warlike race, and the savageGranaries, a copper coloured nation of cannibals,rendered the undertaking dangerous. They had nowtravelled 180 leagues in the boat, from San Fernandoon the Apure to San Carlos on the Rio Negro ; and onagain entering the Oroonoko, they had to navigate 320leagues to arrive at Angostura. In the course of theirvoyage down the river they visited the cavern of Ataruipo,situated in a shady and secluded spot, on the declivityof a steep mountain. This grotto is the tomb of a wholeextinct tribe : 600 skeletons are seen here arranged inorder, and perfectly well preserved ; some being dyedred, and some, like real mummies, being varnished withodoriferous resins, and enveloped in leaves of the heliconor plantain tree. At length they reached Angostura,wearied with the length of the voyage and with theinconveniences inseparable from river navigation in asultry climate.From the Oroonoko our voyagers returned to Barcelonaand Cumana, through the missions of the Carrie Indians,a tall and stately race of men, whose figure bespeaksthat physical superiority which once rendered them formidableto the conquerors of the New World. From thecoast they proceeded, through the southern parts of St.Domingo and Jamaica, to Cuba. Here they employedthemselves in contributing, by their knowledge of chemistry,to improve the process of manufacturing sugar;in surveying the coasts of the island ; and in makingastronomical observations.s 3262 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.CHAP. XVIII.humboldt's travels continued.ARRIVAL OF HUMBOLDT AT Cartagena. Volcanos OF TurbanSANTA FE DE BOGOTA. THE FALLS OF TEQUENDAMA.NATIVE TRADITIONS. VIEW FROM THE TABLE LAND. NATURALBRIDGES OF ICONONZO. PASS OF Quamdiu. MODE OF TravellingON" MEN'S BACKS. VISIT TO THE VOLCANO Place.ARRIVAL AT QUITO. VOLCANO OF PICHINCHA. HUMBOLDt'sASCENT OF CHIMBORAZO. HE PASSES BY RIOBAMBA. — DestructionBY EARTHQUAKES. CAUSEWAY OF Vega. HumboldtDESCENDS THE RIVER OF AMAZONS. OBSERVES THEMAGNETIC EQUATOR. Repassed THE ANDES. TRUXILLO. —ARRIVES AT LIMA. OBSERVES THE TRANSIT OF MERCURY.PROCEEDS TO GUAYAQUIL. SAILS TO ACAPULCO. MEXICO.MINES OF MORAN AND REAL DEL MONTE. GUANAXUATO.ACCOUNT OF JORULLO. THE VOLCANOES OF PUEBLA.THE COFFER OF Perte. VERA CRUZ. PHILADELPHIA. —RETURN TO EUROPE. Copland GOES TO BUENOS AYRES. —IS CAPTURED AND DETAINED BY THE RULER OF PARAGUAY.M. von Humboldt had promised Baudin, that, if everthe projected expedition destined for the southern hemispherewere put into execution, he would join it: accordingly,when a report reached him that the ships hadsailed from France, with instructions to double CapeHorn and touch on the coasts of Chili and Peru, he immediatelyleft Cuba to cross South America, in order tomeet the French navigator. And it was not till he reachedQuito, that he learned that captain Baudin's expeditionhad taken a different course, and was to circumnavigatethe globe from west to east.In March, 1801, Humboldt and his friend Bonplandarrived from Cuba at Cartagena, with the intention ofascending to Santa Fe de Bogota, the capital of New Granada,and to cross from thence to the elevated plains ofQuito. But preparatory to this long journey, and tochap, xviii. humboldt's travels. 263avoid the heats of Cartagena, they resided at the beautifulvillage of Turbaco, which is situated among thehills, at the height of 1200 feet above the ocean. TheIndians who attended our travellers in their fertilisationoften told them of a marshy country, situatedamidst a forest of palm trees, and called the Little Volcanoes.They related that, according to traditions stillexisting among them, this country had been formerly inflames; but that a very pious man had succeeded inextinguishing the subterraneous fire, by sprinkling itwith holy water. From that time the fiery volcano hadbecome a volcan de ague, or water volcano. Humboldt,well aware that the stories which the natives eagerlyrelated, in order to draw the attention of strangers to thephenomena of nature, had more in them of superstitionand exaggeration than of positive invention, suffered himselfto be conducted by them to the Little Volcanoes, andwas repaid by a spectacle more important than he couldhave expected.The Volcanitos, or Little Volcanoes, are situatedabout two miles to the east of Turbaco, in a thick forestabounding with balsam of tolu trees. In the centre of avast plain are eighteen or twenty small cones, in heightfrom twenty to twenty-five feet : they are formed of ablackish-grey clay, and have an opening at their summitsfilled with water. On approaching these small craters, ahollow but very distinct sound is heard at intervals, afew seconds previous to the disengagement of a greatquantity of air. The Indians assert that the forms ofthe cones undergo no visible change in a great numberof years. The air disengaged was found to be azotic gas,much more pure than that which is generally procuredin the laboratories of the chemist.At Santa Fe de Bogota, which stands in a valley moreelevated than the summit of St. Bernard, our travellersemployed some months in studying the botanical richesof the country, its mineralogical structure, and its curiosities.The plain in which the city stands, though 8700feet above the level of the sea, is surrounded by loftys 4264 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.mountains, and has the appearance of having been at onetime the bed of a great lake. The river of Funzha,commonly called the Rio Bogota, which collects all thewaters of the valley, seems to have forced its way throughthe mountains to the south-west of Santa Fe. Near thefarm of Tequendama this river rushes from the plains bya narrow outlet, which descends towards the basin of theriver Magdalena, and were this passage closed, the wholeplain of Bogota would be immediately converted into asheet of water. The Indians, ready to ascribe a miraculousorigin to whatever seems to be the work of contrivance,relate that Bochica, a hero of their race, brokeasunder the rocks that enclose the valley, and thus drainedthe waters of the lake of Bogota. He then retired tothe holy valley of Erica, where he lived in the exerciseof austere penitence for the space of 2000 years.Although the cataract of Tequendama is not, as iscommonly believed in Europe, the loftiest cataract on theglobe, it yet forms an assemblage of every thing that issublimely picturesque in beautiful scenery. There hardlyexists a cataract which from so lofty a height precipitatesso voluminous a mass of waters. A little above thefall the river is still 1 70 feet in breadth ; but near thecrevice, which appears to have been formed by an earthquake,it is not above forty feet wide. From this crevicethe whole mass of waters collected in the valley of Bogotafalls, in a double bound, to a depth of 600 feet. Thecolumn of vapour that rises from the fall is visible fromSanta Fe, a distance of five leagues. The enormous massof vapours which continually rises from the cataract, andwhich is precipitated by its contact with the cold air,contributes much, it is believed, to the fertility of thispart of the plain of Bogota. As the river falls into thebasin of the Magdalena, which flows through a warmercountry, the vegetation at the foot of the cataract wearsan appearance totally different from that of the plainabove. The spectator on the heights, leaving behind hima plain rich in corn, and finding himself surrounded withoaks, elms, and other plants which recall to his mindchap. win. humboldt's travels. 265the vegetation of Europe, looks down, as from a terrace,on a country producing the palm, the banana, and thesugar-cane. A few palm trees have sprung up even atthe very foot of the cataract.On his journey from Santa Fe de Bogota, in September,1801, Humboldt and Bonpland passed the naturalbridges of Icononzo. The valley in which these aresituated is one of the deep and narrow crevices, whichare almost peculiar to the Cordilleras, and which, fromtheir magnitude and abruptness, fill the soul with astonishmentand terror. These narrow valleys are inmany parts so deep, that were Vesuvius placed in theirabysses, its summit would hardly exceed the ridge ofthe nearest mountains. A small torrent, called Rio de laSumaa Paz, rushes from the eastern chain of the Andes,which in the kingdom of New Granada divides the basinof the Magdalena from the vast plains of the Meta, theCaviare, and the Oroonoko. This torrent working itsway through a crevice in the centre of the valley ofIcononzo, or Pandi, could not-from the inaccessiblenature of its bed, have been crossed without extremedifficulty, if nature had not provided two bridges ofrock, which are justly considered in the country asamong the objects most worthy the attention of travellers.The road, however, which conducts to thesenatural bridges, is one of the most dangerous and leastfrequented in the Cordilleras ; and nothing but an enthusiasticlove for the beauties of nature can inducetravellers to give it a preference.The torrent of the Sumaa Paz, after falling down twobeautiful cataracts, enters a crevice, which was probablyformed by an earthquake. A portion of thesandstone rock seems to have resisted the shock whichrent the mountains, and now serves as a bridge to crossfrom one side of the valley to the other. This naturalarch is nearly fifty feet long and about forty wide : itsthickness in the centre exceeds eight feet; its heightabove the waters of the torrent is 400 feet. The Indiansof Pandi have formed, for the safety of travellers,266 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.who, however, rarely visit this desert country, a smallbalustrade of reeds, which extends along the road leadingto the bridge. Sixty feet below this natural bridgeis another, approached by a narrow pathway, which descendsupon the brink of the crevice : here three enormousmasses of rock have fallen in such a manner as tosupport each other; that in the middle forms the key ofthe arch. In the middle of the second bridge is a largeaperture, through which the bottom of the abyss is perceived.The torrent seems to flow through a darkcavern, whence proceeds a lugubrious noise, caused bythe nocturnal birds that haunt the crevice. Thousandsof them are seen flying over the surface of the water.It is impossible to catch them, on account of the depthof the valley, and they can be examined only by throwingdown rockets to illumine the sides of the crevice.The height of the natural bridge of Icononzo above thelevel of the sea exceeds 3000 feet.The difficulties of the road, and the heavy rains, renderedthe journey to Quito extremely fatiguing; yetour travellers allowed themselves but little' time for repose.Their zeal to investigate the unexplored recessesof nature led them again into the valley of the Magdalena,and through the forests which clothe the sides ofQuindiu, a mountain in the central Andes which surpassesthe limits of perpetual snow.The mountain of Quindiu is considered as the mostdifficult passage in the Cordillera of the Andes ; it is athick uninhabited forest, which, in the finest season,cannot be traversed in less than ten or twelve days. Notahut is to be seen, nor can any means of subsistence beprocured. Travellers at all times of the year furnishthemselves with a month's provision ; since it oftenhappens that, by the sudden melting of the snows andthe swell of the torrents, they are unable either to returnor proceed. The highest point of the road over Quindiuis nearly 12,000 feet above the level of the sea. Thepathway over the steeps is in many places not above afoot in breadth. The passage of the mountain of Quin-chap.xvi. humboldt's travels. 267diu, like that of many other parts of the Andes, is usuallytraversed on the backs of men : the traveller is seated ona chair, which is tied on the back of a earguero orporter. The occupation of the earguero, though illrecompensed, and exposed to enormous fatigue, is yeteagerly embraced by all the robust young men who liveat the foot of the mountains. They prefer the wanderinglife and independence of a forest to the dull andsedentary vapours of cities. In some parts of SouthAmerica, if a man grows so corpulent and heavy that hecannot find a earguero strong enough to carry him, heis, in consequence, deprived of the power of travellingbeyond the limits of his native valley.Humboldt and Bonpland, not choosing to travelon men's backs, preferred the alternative of walkingbare-footed. This circumstance, with the necessity offording torrents of icy water, rendered the journey extremelydistressing. Their guides, before they enteredthe forests of Quindiu, plucked in the neighbouringmountains several hundred leaves of the vijao, a plant ofthe family of bananas: these leaves, about twenty incheslong by fourteen in breadth, are covered with a peculiarvarnish, that enables them to resist the rain during a longtime.About a hundred-weight of these leaves is sufficientto cover a hut capable of containing six or eight persons.On entering the forest, a few branches lopped from thetrees form the frame of a tent, which in a few minutesis covered with the leaves of the vijao; under these leafytents, which remain perfectly dry amidst violent and incessantrains, our travellers spent some days in the valleyof Boquia. The labours of the journey to Quindiu wereamply repaid by the examination of the treasures whichnature here unfolds. Here they found the palm tree,the trunk of which is covered with a vegetable wax,employed by the natives in the fabrication of tapers ;here the peak of Tolina rises from forests in which thepassion-flower assumes the character of a large tree, andthe bamboo attains a gigantic size.From these mountains they descended into the valley268 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.of Cauca, towards the west ; and, reposing themselvesfor a short time at Carthage, wandered through the provinceof Choco, a country remarkable for the quantityof platina which it yields. Passing by the gold minesof Quilichao, they ascended to Popayan, which, situatedat the height of about 6000 feet above the level of thesea, enjoys a delicious climate, though not quite two anda half degrees from the equator. It is placed at the footof the great volcanoes of Purace and Sotara, of which theformer is among the highest summits of the Andes.The plain round the town is adorned with the most luxuriantvegetation ; while beyond this rich verdure achain of bleak and arid mountains, which seem to havebeen cleft asunder by earthquakes, surround the perpetualsnows of the volcano.The little village of Purace is celebrated for thebeautiful cataracts of the river, which, from the acidityof its water, is named by the Spaniards Rio Visage.This small stream is warm towards its source, and probablyowes its origin to the melting of the snows fromthe sulphur that burns in the interior of the volcano.It forms three cataracts, one of which exceeds 400 feet inheight. The Rio Cauca is destitute of fish for four leaguesafter it receives the acid waters of the Rio Visage.Our enterprising travellers ascended to the crater ofPurace, which is filled with boiling water. They thencrossed the desert Cordilleras of Leaguer, and thehigh table-land of Los Pastor ; and, after a laboriousjourney of four months, arrived at Quito at the commencementof the year 1 802.Here they devoted nearly nine months to researchesinto the monuments of the country, its vegetation, thestructure of its colossal mountains, and its volcanoes.They formed an acquaintance with an accomplishedyoung man, the son of the marquis of Selvalegre, who accompaniedthem in all their future journeyings throughPeru and Mexico. Twice they climbed to the summitof the volcano of Pichincha, in the western Andes,where they repeated their experiments on the constitutexviii. humboldt's travels. 2f>9tion of the air, on electrical, magnetic, and hygroscopicphenomena, and on the properties of the boiling waterthat filled the crater. They visited also the volcanoes ofAntisana, Cotopaxi, Tunguragua, and Chimborazo; andHumboldt, who measured the heights of all thesemountains, was led to conclude that many of them havesunk considerably since the middle of the last century; anopinion which coincides with the observations of the inhabitants.He also concluded that these different summits,far from being a group of distinct volcanoes,constitute a single swollen mass, or enormous volcanicwall, stretching from north to south, and occupying,with its crest, a surface of more than 6*00 squareleagues. These lofty mountains, distant from each otheras they seem to the eye of man, are, probably, but differentconic openings of the same great vault.In May, 1802, Humboldt ascended Cotopaxi, theloftiest of those volcanoes of the Andes which haveundergone eruptions at recent periods. Its absolute elevationis 18,800 feet. Cotopaxi is the most dreadfulvolcano in the kingdom of Quito, and its explosions themost frequent and disastrous. The fragments of rockand the quantities of scoriae which it has thrown overthe neighbouring valleys, would alone be sufficient tomake a considerable mountain. In 1738, the flames ofthis volcano rose more than 3000 feet above the brink ofthe crater. Its roaring have been sometimes heard atthe distance of 200 leagues. Our travellers, when at theport of Guayaquil, fifty-two leagues distant from thecrater, heard continually the thunders of the volcano, likethe discharges of a great battery.Cotopaxi is in its form the most beautiful of thecolossal summits of the high Andes. It is a perfect conecovered with snow, which shines with dazzling splendourat the setting of the sun, when the shadows of the westernAndes spread over the country at its feet. Thesnowy cone of Cotopaxi is six times higher than the conewhich crowns the Peak of Teneriffe; and the craterappears to be surrounded by a circular wall, which, MODERN Voyages OF DISCOVERT. BOOK V.aminetl with a telescope, looks like a parapet. It isextremely difficult to reach the inferior limits of perpetualsnows; and Humboldt, after a near examination ofthe cone, pronounces that it would be impossible to reachthe edge of the crater.On the 23d of June, in the same year, our enterprisingtravellers attempted to reach the summit ofChimborazo ; and, although they suffered much fromthe severity of the cold and the extreme tenuity of theair, they succeeded in reaching a point more elevatedthan any yet attained by man. The ridge to which theyclimbed was 18,576 feet above the level of the sea, and3485 feet above the point reached by Contains in 1745.But the highest peak of Chimborazo, which a deep chasmin the snow hindered them from reaching, was still 1350feet above them. In this elevated situation, while theblood rushed into their eyes and lips from the tenuity ofthe atmosphere, they made experiments on the inclinationof the magnetic needle.From Quito Humboldt and his companions directedtheir course to the River of Amazons, passing throughLactacunga, Hambato, and Riobamba; a country theface of which was totally changed by the earthquake ofFebruary, 1797, and the volcanic eruptions which tookplace at the same time; when torrents of mud and water,pouring down from the mountains, swept through thecultivated valleys, and destroyed about 40,000 of theinhabitants. At Loxia they spent some time in makingresearches concerning the trees of the neighbouringwoods which afford Peruvian bark. They again ascendedthe high Andes to arrive at the river of Amazons:here the magnificent remains of the causeway of Vega,which conducts over the porphyritic ridges of the Andesfrom Cusco to Assay, at a height of from 4000 to6000 feet above the level of the sea, attracted their admiration.At the village of Chamaya they embarked ona river of the same name, which conducted them to theMaranon : this junction was astronomically determined ;and Humboldt constructed a map of this great river,CHAP. XVIII. HUMBOLDT S TRAVELS. 271founded on astronomical observations, from the point atwhich he entered it to the mouth of the Rio Nape,where the observations of Contains had commenced.Thus a chasm in the correct geography of the interiorof America was filled up. Bonpland employed himselfduring this voyage in increasing his botanical collections.In returning to Peru, our travellers crossed, for thefifth time, the great chain of the Andes. In the courseof this journey, in the seventh degree of south latitude,they determined the position of the magnetic equator,or the line in which the magnetic needle has no inclination.They also examined the rich silver minesof Hualguayoc, elevated more than 12,000 feet abovethe level of the sea. From Caxamarca, celebrated forits ruins, they ascended to Truxillo, in the neighbourhoodof which the site of an ancient Peruvian city is markedby pyramids, under one of which an immense quantityof gold coin was discovered in the course of the lastcentury. Crossing the deserts which run along the coastto the south of Peru, our travellers arrived at Lima,where Humboldt had the satisfaction of observing successfullya transit of Mercury.In the commencement of 1803, our travellers proceededto Guayaquil, where they were particularly struckwith the vigour of tropical vegetation. From this portavoyage of thirty days brought them to Acapulco inNew Spain. The immense quantity of local informationwhich Humboldt collected during his residence of a yearin this country, and which he has communicated to theworld in his " Essay on New Spain," is a sufficientproof of his abilities and matchless industry. But,while pursuing his researches into the history and antiquitiesof Mexico, the character and language of itsinhabitants, he still found time to study the naturalphenomena presented to view in this interesting country,and to determine accurately the geographical position ofits chief places. He examined, with the discerning eyeof a disciple of Werner, the mines of Vasco, of Moran,272 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.and Real del Monte. In 1803, the travellers proceededto the southern part of the kingdom, and visited the minesof Guanaxuato, which far surpass in riches those of Potash.Two months were devoted to trigonometrical measurementsand geological researches ; they then descended tothe plains of Jorullo, where they ascended the volcano ofthe same name, and examined its crater. The formationof this volcano is perhaps the most extraordinary physicalrevolution of which we can find a positive record inthe annals of history. In the interior of the continent,thirty-six leagues from the sea coast, and more thanforty-two leagues distant from any active volcano, therearose suddenly from the plain, on the 29th of September,1759, a mountain of cinders and scoriae, 1700 feet high,and surrounded by 1000 little cones, all throwing outflames at the same time. These small cones, varyingfrom six to nine feet in height, extend over a space ofeighty square miles: they are so many funnels, exhaling athick vapour, and communicating insupportable heat tothe surrounding air. The country in the neighbourhoodis remarkably unhealthy.From the fruitful country of Mechoacan they returnedto Mexico through the high plains of Molucca : herethey saw a remarkable tree, the Cheirostcemon, which issupposed to be the only tree of its genus in existence. InMexico they employed themselves in arranging theircollections of plants and geological specimens, in calculatingtheir astronomical observations, and in constructingthe geological atlas for which they had collected materials.They left this city in January, 1804, to examinethe eastern slope of the Cordilleras : here theymeasured geometrically the heights of the two volcanoesof Puebla, Popocatepetl and Itzaccihuatl. The first ofthese is constantly active, though for many centuries ithas thrown out nothing from its crater but smoke andashes : it is 2000 feet higher than the loftiest summitsof Europe, and is itself the highest mountain in NewSpain. The quantity of snow that had lately fallen didnot prevent Humboldt from ascending the summit ofchap, xviii. humboldt's travels. 273the Core, which is above 1300 feet higher than thePeak of Teneriffe. The summit of this mountain commandsa very extensive and varied prospect over theplain of Puebla, and the eastern slope of the Cordillerasof Mexico, covered with thick forests of liquidambar,arborescent ferns, and sensitive plants. Our travellerscould discern from it the harbour of Vera Cruz, thecastle of St. John of Alloa, and the sea coasts. Thismountain has its name of Core, or Coffer, from a nakedpyramidal rock which towers on its summit to the heightof 400 or 500 feet ; and, rising from amidst a forest ofpines, has at a distance a singular and picturesque effect.The peak of Arizona was also accurately measured.After an agreeable residence in these elevated plains,our travellers descended to the port of Vera Cruz, andfortunately escaping the dreadful fever which raged thereatthe time, arrived in safety at the Savannah, wherein1800 they had deposited a large portion of their collections.After remaining here two months, they setsail for Philadelphia, where they passed some weeks instudying the political character of the United States,and in August, 1804, they returned to Europe. Theircollections, mineralogical and botanical, reached Europein safety, with the exception of a very small portionembarked in 1800, which was lost by shipwreck: thecollection of plants, which is chiefly due to the indefatigablezeal of Bonpland, comprises 6*300 species.Bonpland on his return was appointed by Napoleonto the honourable office of superintending his gardensat Malmaison. In 1818 he went to Buenos Ayres asprofessor of natural history. He undertook, in October1820, an excursion up the Parana to the interior ofParaguay ; but when he arrived at St. Anne, on the easternbank of the river, where he had established a colonyof Indians, and made a plantation of the tea plant, hewas on a sudden surrounded by 800 soldiers, sent byDr. Francia, the ruler of Paraguay, who destroyed hisplantation, and carried him off a prisoner. He unconfinedchiefly in Santa Maria, and though allowed toVOL. III. T2J4 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.practise as a physician, was not permitted to quit thefort. The only reason assigned for his captivity washis having ventured to plant the tea tree, which furnishesto Paraguay a valuable article of export. Humboldtwrote in vain to Dr. Francia to procure theliberation of his friend ; and under the ministry of Mr.Canning, the British envoy at Buenos Ayres was employedto exert his influence for the same purpose.These efforts seemed unavailing ; but it has been latelysaid that Bonpland has obtained his liberty, and thathe may be shortly expected in Europe with a large accessionto the Flora of South America.Humboldt, in the course of his travels in South America,determined astronomically the position of morethan 300 places ; but he aimed at something more thanmerely correcting the maps of that country: his observationsextended to every department of natural historyand physical science; while at the same time he studiedwith discerning eyes the characters of the people and oftheir political institutions. No other individual hasever contributed so largely to physical geography, orcollected such a number of observations which tend toelucidate the natural history of our globe. His talentas a writer is fully equal to his industry as a collector :his speculations are bold and ingenious : he does notpedantic shun theories which rest on grounds too conjecturalto flatter a dogmatic spirit, nor, in canvassingquestionable opinions, does he affectedly incline to thesceptical side as the least vulgar : his writings displaythe unrestrained workings of a well-informed and activemind, united to a sincere and ardent love of truth. In1818 this celebrated traveller contemplated a scientificjourney to Tibet and the East Indies, and was liberallysupplied by the king of Prussia with instruments, andthe funds which his plans rendered necessary ; but thisdesign was laid-aside, and he contented himself witha visit to the Ural Mountains, the results of which arenot yet made public.CHAP. XIX. SOUTHERN EXTREMITY OF AMERICA. 275CHAP. XIX.SOUTHERN EXTREMITY OF AMERICA.PARAGUAY. AZARA SURVEYS THE FRONTIERS. THE PAMPASOF BUENOS AYRES. JOURNEY OF CAPTAIN HEAD. Description"OF THE PLAINS. FORMIDABLE GROWTH OF THISTLES.PROJECTED COLONY OF THE SPANIARDS. FALKNEr's ACCOUNTOF PATAGONIA AND THE PAMPAS. SANDY DESERTS. THENATIVE INHABITANTS. THEIR ROVING HABITS. THEIR Stature.THE COASTS OF PATAGONIA SURVEYED BY THESPANIARDS. THE SURVEY OF CAPTAIN KING. ITS RESULTS.THE NEW SOUTH SHETLANDS DISCOVERED. VOYAGE OFMB. WEDDELL. HE EXAMINES THE NEW SOUTH SHETLANDS.REACHES A HIGH LATITUDE. THE NEW ORKNEYS. NEWGEORGIA. ITS APPEARANCE. THE SEAL FISHERY.The avidity for gold which actuated the first conquerorsof America, and their ignorant belief that everyspot that was secluded or difficult of access was therepository of nature's treasures, led them very soon intoalmost every recess of the South American continent.The same regions have been repeatedly viewed by moderntravellers, who have surveyed them with more discerningeyes, and have added much to the informationacquired by those who preceded them. The writings ofAlloa, Barrier, Luccock,Koster,Mawe, Helm, and others,all contain valuable information respecting the tropicalregions of South America. But the analysis of thesewriters lies beyond the compass of a work the object ofwhich is rather to trace the steps by which we first obtaineda knowledge of the globe, than to follow throughall its vicissitudes our progressive acquaintance with it.The labours of Humboldt and of the Spanish hydrographershave contributed much to correct the map ofthe equatorial regions of America. The disputes alsoin which the courts of Lisbon and Madrid were forsome time engaged respecting the southern limits oft22?6 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Brazil gave rise to enquiries calculated to improve geography.In 1781, don Felix de Azara was sent by theSpanish government with some other officers to determineon the spot with the Portuguese commissioners theboundaries of their respective dominions. The executionof the treaty agreed on between the two courts wasembarrassed and retarded by the evasions of the Portuguese; but Azara, a man of an active spirit, and agood naturalist, was in the mean time usefully employedin exploring a part of the Spanish dominions but littleknown. He constructed good maps of the La Plata andits tributaries ; he also wrote an account of Paraguay,dry and unsatisfactory in a geographical point of view,but valuable from its contributions to natural history.Paraguay, which was at that time immediately underthe jurisdiction of the viceroy of Buenos Ay res, had lostthe prosperity which it seemed to enjoy under the managementof the Jesuit missionaries. The Indian nationsdeserted a country in which they were no longerregarded as creatures of importance. If the Jesuitstreated them as children, the Spanish officers used themas slaves. The population and produce of Paraguay inconsequencedeclined, and that country, when visited byAzara, did not awaken the same degree of curiosity whichit does at present, when raised into an independent stateby an extraordinary revolution. On the breaking up ofthe Spanish dominions in America, Paraguay separatedfrom Buenos Ayres, and has since remained under thegovernment of don Jose Gaspar Rodriguez de Francia,who styles himself director : he is assisted in council byforty-two representatives chosen by the people, but inreality he exercises an arbitrary power. Dr. Francia isa Creole, whose notions of government are evidently derivedfrom the lessons of the Jesuits : his boldness,however, fits him to be the ruler of a semi-barbarouspeople. In April, 1827, the independence of Paraguaywas acknowledged, and the government of Dr. Franciarecognised in a solemn treaty, by the emperor of Brazil.The southern portion of the American continent,CHAP. XIX. SOUTHERN EXTREMITY OF AMERICA. 277from the limits of the province of Buenos Ayres to theStraits of Magellan, has been but little visited, and hasmet with comparatively few historians ; nor was itshydrographical outline known even with tolerable correctnesstill the present time.The Pampas, or great plains to the west and south ofthe La Plata, are vividly described in the " Rough Notes"of captain Head. This gentleman being chosen to take themanagement of an association formed to work the gold andsilver mines of the provinces of Rio de la Plata, travelledacross the great plains of the Pampas to the gold minesof San Luis, and from thence to the silver mines of Us-pallaswhich are beyond Mendoza, about 1000 milesfrom Buenos Ayres. Having left his party of minersand surveyors at Mendoza, he rode back on horseback toBuenos Ayres by himself, performing the distance overthe plains in eight days. He soon after found it necessaryto repair to Chili, and again crossing the Pampas,passed over the Andes to Santiago, and travelled about1200 miles through the mountains of Chili to visit goldand silver mines, and then re-crossing the Cordilleras,rode back over the plains to Buenos Ayres. " It washighly desirable," says captain Head, " that I should gofrom place to place as rapidly as possible; and for upwardsof 6*000 miles I can truly declare that I wasriding against time."The following is captain Head's lively and perspicuousdescription of the great level country over which thesegalloping journeys were performed: — "The great plainor Pampas on the east of the Cordilleras, is about 900miles in breadth, and the part which I have visited,though under the same latitude, is divided into regionsof different climate and produce. On leaving BuenosAyres, the first of these regions is covered for 180 mileswith clover and thistles ; the second region, which extendsfor 450 miles, produces long grass ; and the thirdregion, which reaches the base of the Cordilleras, is agrove of low trees and shrubs. The second and thirdof these regions have nearly the same appearance through3278 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.out the year ; for the trees and shrubs are evergreens,and the immense plain of grass only changes its colourfrom green to brown ; but the first region varies with thefour seasons of the year in a most extraordinary manner.In winter, the leaves of the thistles are large andluxuriant, and the whole surface of the country has therough appearance of a turnip field. The clover in thisseason is extremely rich and strong ; and the sight of thewild cattle grazing in full liberty on such pasture is verybeautiful. In spring the clover has vanished, the leavesof the thistles have extended along the ground, and thecountry still looks like a rough crop of turnips. In lessthan a month the change is most extraordinary : thewhole region becomes a luxuriant region of enormousthistles, which have suddenly shot up to a height of tenoreleven feet, and all in full bloom : the road or pathis hemmed in on both sides ; the view is completely obstructed; not an animal is to be seen ; and the stems ofthe thistles are so close to each other, and so strong,that, independent of the prickles with which they arearmed, they form an impenetrable barrier. The suddengrowth of these plants is quite astonishing, and thoughit would be an unusual misfortune in military history, yetit is really possible that an invading army, unacquaintedwith this country, might be imprisoned by these thistlesbefore they had time to escape from them. The summeris not over before the scene undergoes another rapidchange : the thistles suddenly lose their sap and verdure; their heads droop, the leaves shrink and fade, thestems become black and dead, and they remain rattlingwith the breeze one against another, until the violenceof the pamper or hurricane levels them with the ground,where they rapidly decompose and disappear : the cloverrushes up, and the scene is again verdant." The vastregion of grass in the Pampas for 450 miles is withouta weed ; and the region of wood is equally extraordinary: the trees are not crowded, but in their growthsuch beautiful order is observed, that one may gallopbetween them in every direction. The climate of theCHAP. XIX. SOUTHERN EXTREMITY OF AMERICA. 279Pampas is subject to a great difference of temperaturein winter and in summer. In winter it usually freezesat night ; but the ice is seldom more than one tenth ofan inch thick : on the other hand, the summer heats areexcessive, and the climate of the Pampas may be pronouncedmuch hotter than that of the countries in thesouth of Europe, Greece, Sicily, Malta, &c, which areequally distant from the equator. In the eastern partof the plain, or in the region of thistles and clover, theatmosphere is always humid ; but this dampness, whichis most observable in Buenos Ayres, does not appear tobe injurious to health, and, according to captain Head,the whole of the Pampas may be said to enjoy asbeautiful and salubrious an atmosphere as the mosthealthy parts of Greece or Italy, and without beingsubject to malaria. The only irregularity in the climateis the pamper, or south-west wind, which, generatedby the cold air of the Andes, rushes over these vastplains with a velocity and violence which it is almostimpossible to withstand ; but the weather after one ofthese tempests is always particularly healthy and agreeable."In 1 778 the Spanish government entertained the designof colonising the coasts of Patagonia ; and a greatmany families were sent for that purpose to America.They were received in the first instance in the ports ofMonte Video, Maldonado, and San Sacramento ; fromwhich places they were to be distributed in the newsettlements on the coast as circumstances might dictate.Azara was appointed to examine the coast southward ofthe La Plata, that he might select the most fertile anddefensible positions for the new settlements. Thewhole scheme, however, was frustrated by the indolenceof the viceroy or his aversion to the plan. Azara, whosechief attention had been turned to the Portuguese frontiers,perhaps contributed also by his advice to alterthe destination of the emigrants, who were finally settledon the borders of Brazil, near the sources of the Ybicui,where they built a town called Esperanza.t 42S0 Modern VOYAGES OF DISCOVER?. BOOK V.The best account which we possess of Patagonia, or theIndian country from the La Plata to the straits of Magellan,is that written by Falkner, a naval surgeon, who,being converted by the Jesuits, spent nearly forty years inthat country. On the Spanish frontiers the country, hetells us, is low and level, covered with long marshy grass,and abounding in armadillo, deer, ostriches, and wildhorses : in the woods there are both lions and tigers.These woods in some places reach within two leaguesof the sea coast, which is extremely low, and so boggyas to be quite impassable. The first mountains metwith in travelling to the south rise about six leaguesfrom the sea coast, and run about forty leagues to thewestward. They spring almost perpendicularly fromthe plain, and are covered with grass to within a fewyards of the top, where they display a parapet of nakedrock. The summits of these mountains are small tablelands,to which the Indians resort to catch wild horses,first stopping up the narrow defiles by which the animalsmight escape to the lower plains. Beyond these mountainsis a vast sandy desert, called by the Indians Map, or the devil's country, which they never cross,as, if a wind should arise, they might be overwhelmedand buried in the sands. The Casuhiti Mountains,on the north side of the Red River, is the beginningof a great alpine chain connected with the Cordilleraof Chili, branches of which extend as far as theStraits of Magellan. The Casuhiti itself is the highestpart of the range, and some peaks of it are clad inperpetual snow. Numerous great rivers flow into theAtlantic from these mountains : the chief of these arethe Rio Colorado, or Red River, and the Rio de Sauces,or Willow River, more commonly called the Black River.The floods of this river, according to Falkner, aresingularly violent when the rains and melted snowpour down the western side of the Cordilleras, as itreceives all the streams that descend from above 700miles of mountains. From about twenty leagues toCHAP. XIX. SOUTHERN EXTREMITY OF AMERICA. l 28lthe south of the Black River, all the sea coast to thestraits of Magellan is a dry barren country, without inhabitants,and roamed over by only a few guanacoesthat sometimes descend from the neighbouring mountainsto the west. It has no water for a great part ofthe year, and what it has is to be found only in thelakes after great rains. In the wet season the Indiansdescend to this country to bury their dead, to visit thesepulchres, and to collect salt in Port St. Julian or onthe sea coast. The territory occupied by the Indiantribes to the west of this uninhabited country consists,as Falkner was informed, of vales enclosed in lowridges of mountains, watered with springs and brooks,which are swallowed up in small lakes that are dry insummer ; so that in that season the natives usuallymigrate to the banks of some of the great rivers to thenorth. From the borders of Chili southwards to theMagellanic Straits the country is by all accounts mountainous,bleak, barren, and destitute of all the commonnecessaries of life ; yet it appears from the testimony ofByron and other navigators, that many spots in the straitsof Magellan are adorned with a luxuriance of vegetationthat speaks favourably for the soil as well as climate. In theinterior the mountains, it is said, are covered with wood,and even with timber of good size. Falkner receivedfrom the Indians an account of a tree called by themlahual, and supposed by him to be a species of fir : it isremarkable for the facility with which it may be splitinto boards, its trunk being naturally marked withstraight lines from top to bottom, so that it may be dividedinto planks of any thickness by means of wedges,in a better and smoother manner than with a saw.The nations of Indians who inhabit these countriesbear among themselves the general denominations ofTouches, or warriors, and Puelches, or eastern. Ofthe former nation, the Pinches, or those who dwellin the mountains to the north, are, according to Falkner," the most valiant and biggest bodied men of allthe Touches." From one of their tribes inhabiting282 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Arauco, the Spaniards have erroneously given the nameof Araucanos to all the Indians of Chili. This nation,celebrated for its courageous resistance to the Spaniards,and immortalised by the verses of Ercilla, is now dwindledto a mere handful of men, in consequence of itsfrequent hostilities with the Spaniards, and still morefrom the immoderate use of brandy, which the Europeanshave found a more powerful means than the sword ofextirpating the aboriginal inhabitants of the country.Of the Puelches, or eastern people, one tribe bearsthe name of Tehuelhets, or, more properly, Tehuel-Sunny, that is, southern men. These are the peopleknown to Europeans by the name of Patagonians. Theyare a nomade nation, living chiefly on guanacoes, hares,and ostriches, which their country affords, and on mares'flesh when they can get it. They wander from theStraits of Magellan to the Pampas of Buenos Ayres, adistance of nearly 400 leagues. " The Patagonians, orPuelches," says Falkner, with great simplicity, " are alarge bodied people, but I never heard of that giganticrace which others have mentioned, though 1 have seenpersons of all the different tribes of southern Indians."Yet in the sentence preceding this he gives a description ofthe cacique Cangapol, a well proportioned gigantic chief,named by the admiring Spaniards the Cacique Bravo.Falkner says, " He must have been seven feet and someinches in height, because on tiptoe I could not reach thetop of his head. I was very well acquainted with him,and went some journeys in his company. I do notrecollect ever to have seen an Indian that was above aninch or two taller than Cangapol." Again, he informsus, " that the stature of the Tehuelhets rarely exceedsseven, and often not six feet." These Indian nations,of whose courage and kindness of disposition Falknerspeaks in strong terms, threatened Buenos Ayres in1767 with an army of 4000 men ; and there can belittledoubt that, if well armed, they would soon reinstatethemselves in the dominion of those plains of which theSpaniards have dispossessed them.CHAP. XIX. SOUTHERN EXTREMITY OF AMERICA. 283The coasts of Patagonia were surveyed in 1782 bythe Spaniards, whose chief attention nevertheless wasdirected to the careful examination of the Strait of Magellan.An opinion existed at that time that anothernavigable channel might be found still farther to thenorth ; many inlets existing on the western coast ofPatagonia which had never been explored, whilst theeastern coast was almost quite unknown. The result ofthe Spanish survey, however, ascertained the continuityof the land on the western coast ; it also confirmed theopinion of the old navigators, that Tierra del Fuego,though marked in the maps as one island, is in realitya group of many. Again, in 1826', captain King, whohad acquitted himself with such ability in surveying thecoasts of New South Wales, was sent to examine carefullythe coasts of Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego. Itis hard to conceive a more dangerous and laborious taskthan that of surveying a broken and intricate coast, inthe most stormy region of the world. Captain King,however, completed his survey without any accident,and in a manner highly creditable to his zeal and hydrographicalscience.The Spanish survey was found to be erroneous inmany important particulars. The western coast ofPatagonia is bordered by a great chain of islands, thewide channels between which formerly gave rise to thedelusive hope of finding a channel communicating withthe Atlantic ; but the continuous line of coast to therear of those islands in the Spanish charts was found bycaptain King to be not the main land, but another rangeof islands, equal in breadth to the archipelago laid downin former maps. He also found that Tierra del Fungousintersected by a fine navigable channel, runningnearly east and west, with hardly any winding, andwhich he named, from his little vessel, the Beagle Channel.The security with which these surveys mustinspire seamen,, by teaching them to what harbours theymay run for shelter, cannot fail to have a powerful influenceon navigation. The passage round Cape Horn284 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.has been long viewed with no small dread. Marinerswere afraid to approach a broken, rocky shore, on whichthe sea appeared to break with more than ordinary violence.When the wind blew strongly from the west, theywere obliged to run for shelter to some harbour on thecoast of Patagonia. But danger disappears before thelight of knowledge ; and the seaman furnished with goodmaps, if surprised by adverse gales oft' Cape Horn, maynow be sure of finding good shelter and anchorage,without deviating very widely from his course.After the voyage of Cook in 1774, antarctic discoveriesseem to have lost all their interest. But, in theyear 1818, Mr. William Smith, commander of the brigWilliam, on his voyage from Monte Video to Valparaiso,in latitude 6*2°, discovered what appeared to him a longline of coast : in the following year he approached itclose enough to ascertain that it was land. It was barren,and covered with snow, but seals were in great abundanceon its shores. Mr. Smith having communicatedhis discovery to the commander of the Andromachefrigate then stationed at Valparaiso, Mr. Mansfield wassent to make a survey of those coasts. He found theSouth Shetland Islands, as this group has been called,to consist of twelve main islands, and innumerable rocksabove water, extending between lat. 6'1° and 63° S.,and long. 54° and 6*3° W. These islands are almosttotally without vegetation ; but the large species of sealcalled the sea elephant was found in vast numbers. Thefur seal, which was supposed to be found only in theSouth Sea, is still more numerous. The facility ofobtaining here a cargo of valuable seal-skins was atemptation to mercantile enterprise which no dangerscould counteract ; and the South Shetlands were immediatelyvisited by shipping, although there was asyet but little acquaintance with their coasts. The seals,unused to be disturbed, had no apprehension of clanger,and would he still while their neighbours were killedand skinned. The males of the sea elephant are monstrousanimals ; sometimes not less than twenty-four feetCHAP. XIX. SOUTHERN EXTREMITY OF AMERICA. 285long and fourteen in circumference, the females areabout one third less. When the males first arrive onshore, the fat of three or four of them will make a tunof oil. The quantity of seals taken off the New ShetlandIslands by trading vessels, during the years 1821and 1822 may be computed at 320,000; and the quantityof sea elephant oil at <H0 runs. But, by the indiscriminatemanner in which the females who had comeon shore to breed were killed, the fishery proved unprofitableafter the second year ; though it is calculatedthat the shores of the New Shetlands could supply100,000 furs annually, if the seal fishery were underproper management.Among those who visited the South Shetlands, at thecommencement of this trade, was Mr. Wed dell, a masterin the royal navy, who has written an unpretendingvolume, which affords as unequivocal proof of his ability,as his voyages do of his courage and seamanship. Onthe 17th of December, 1822, Mr. Weddell sailed fromthe Downs in the brig Jane, of l6'0 tons, accompaniedby the cutter Beauty, of 65 tons, commanded byMr. Matthew Brisbane. These two little vessels weredestined for the South Seas, on an adventure, to collectfur seal-skins, and were provisioned for two years. Avoyage of such length and danger, undertaken in suchsmall vessels, and conducted with so much boldness,reminds one of the time of the Drakes, the Frobisher,and Devises. After reposing a little in Port St. Elenaon the coast of Patagonia, Mr. Weddell ran to the southeastin the beginning of January, 1823; and on the12th of that month came within sight of the SouthOrkneys, a group of islands situated nearly at 6*1° S.,long. 45° W., discovered by himself in the precedingyear. This coast, he says, is, if possible, more terrificin appearance than South Shetland ; the icebergs, whichform in the bays in winter, break off in summer andform drift ice, which threatens continual danger to shipping.The tops of the islands terminate, for the mostpart, in craggy towering peaks, and look not unlike the286 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERS. BOOK V.mountain tops of a sunken land. The boats coastedthese islands for more than fifty miles ; but seals beingfew, and the weather thick and boisterous, the ships leftthese shores. Mr. Weddell now determined to run tothe southward until he reached the latitude of 70°. Iceislands were numerous ; and, about 68° 30' they wereso close together that it was almost impossible to passthrough them ; but in 70° 26' ice islands disappeared,and the weather became pleasant ; great numbers ofbirds flew round the ship, and whales were seen sportingin the water. As our navigators proceeded south, theweather grew still milder, whales were more numerous,the sea was literally covered with birds of the blue petrelkind, and not a particle of ice of any description was tobe seen. Under these favourable circumstances, Mr.Weddell was hourly in expectation of discovering landahead ; but it was now the 20th of February, the closeof summer in those latitudes : he was in long. 34° 1 6" 45",and had already reached the latitude of 74° 15', when,the wind blowing fresh from the south, he felt that itwould be imprudent to persevere in holding his courseany farther in that direction. " I would willingly," hesays, " have explored the south-west quarter; but, takinginto consideration the lateness of the season, and thatwe had to pass homewards through 1000 miles of seastrewed with ice islands, with long nights, and probablyattended with fogs, I could not determine otherwisethan to take advantage of this favourable wind for returning."In this voyage, Mr. Weddell penetrated within theantarctic circle 3° 5' or 214 miles farther than captainCook or any preceding navigator. This part of theocean, heretofore unexplored, was named by him Georgethe Fourth's Sea. It deserves to be remarked, that hedid not find the difficulties arising from ice increase asheproceeded southward ; on the contrary, he found allthe appearance of a deep sea, a milder temperature, andan open ocean. He found, also, that the compass manifestedthe same sluggishness in a high southern latinXIX. SOUTHERN EXTREMITY OF AMERICA. 287tide, which captain Parry had the opportunity of observingin his voyages in search of a north-west passage.The little vessels of our navigators being separated byviolent gales, repaired to South Georgia, which had beenappointed as the rendezvous. This island is aboutninety-six miles long, with the mean breadth of aboutten : its shores are deeply indented, affording numerouscoves and secure harbours. The mountains are lofty,and perpetually covered with snow ; but the valleys,during the summer season, display an abundant thoughhomely vegetation. The only natural production of thesoil is a strong coarse grass, in general about two feethigh, and growing in tufts. South Georgia was discoveredby La Roche in 1675, but it was not explored,nor its position fixed, till the voyage of captain Cook in1771. "I need not remind the reader," says Mr.Wed-dell, " of the great advantages which navigation, andgeography in general, have acquired from the discoveriesand investigations of that able navigator ; but the publicmay not be aware of the great extent in which his researches,in the south in particular, have been beneficialto Great Britain.His official report regarding the island of SouthGeorgia, in which he gave an account of the great numberof sea elephants, called by him sea lions, and furseals, found on the shores, induced several enterprisingmerchants to fit out vessels to take them ; the elephantsfor their oil, and the seals for their skins. These animalsare now almost extinct ; but I have been crediblyinformed, that since the year they were known to be soabundant, not less than 20,000 runs of the sea elephantoil has been procured for the London market. A quantityof fur seal-skins were usually brought along withthe cargo of oil ; but formerly the furriers in Englandhad not the method of dressing them, on which accountthey were of so little value as to be almost neglected.u The number of skins brought off from Georgia byourselves and foreigners cannot be estimated at fewerthan 1,200,000. I may here also remark, that the288 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Island of Desolation, which captain Cook likewise visited,and first made known, has been a source of scarcelyless profit than the Island of Georgia : hence it may bepresumed, that during the time these two islands havebeen resorted to for the purpose of trade, more than2000 tons of shipping, and from 200 to 300 seamenhave been employed annually in this traffic."CHAP. XX.EASTERN SHORES OF ASIA.PROGRESS OF THE RUSSIANS. VOYAGE OF BILLINGS FROM THEKOLYMA. HE MEETS WITH LEDYARD. HE VISITS THE AleutianISLANDS. JOURNEY THROUGH THE COUNTRY OF THETSHUKTSKI. Baron Range. THE JAPANESE SEAS Unknown.— LABOURS OF Boughton. RUSSIAN EMBASSY TOJAPAN. VOYAGE OF KRUSENSTERN. ILL SUCCESS OF THEMISSION. THE SURVEY CONTINUED. SAGALEEN. GlowsPROCEEDS TO EXAMINE THE KURILE ISLANDS. TAKENPRISONER BY THE JAPANESE. HIS DESCRIPTION OF MATSMAI.HE EFFECTS HIS ESCAPE. RETAKEN, AND CONFINED INA CAGE. KINDNESS OF THE JAPANESE. GOLOWNIN OBTAINSHIS FREEDOM. GEOGRAPHICAL LABOURS OF THE MissionariesIN CHINA. BRITISH EMBASSIES. VOYAGE OF THEAlcestis AND LYRA IN THE CHINESE SEAS. THE GREAT WALL.THE Coran ARCHIPELAGO. ERRORS OF THE MAPS.THE LOO Coo ISLANDS. AMIABLE CHARACTER OF THEPEOPLE. THEIR INTELLIGENCE WRECK OF THE Alcestis.There is nothing that exemplifies more forcibly howlittle the active genius of man is deterred from the pursuitof interest by considerations of distance or of dangers;and, on the other hand, how little all the advantagesof proximity conduce to enquiry, when the motives ofinterest are removed, than the fact that European nationswere tolerably well acquainted with the intricate northwesterncoast of the New World, while they still hadbut a very obscure and imperfect knowledge of theeastern coasts of Asia. The examination of those coasts.CHAP. XX. EASTERN SHORES OF ASIA. 289indeed, was chiefly to be expected from the Russians,who had not, however, as yet attained that share ofnautical experience and skill which is requisite in a navigatorwho attempts to examine unknown shores. Yetthe sovereigns of Russia were not indifferent to theirinterests, nor blind to the advantages that might resultto their vast empire by the careful examination of itsboundaries, and by obtaining a knowledge of the countriesadjoining it to the south, particularly near the seashore.Mr. Joseph Billings, an officer who had sailed withcaptain Cook in his last voyage, was induced to engagein the Russian service, and was appointed by CatherineII. to descend the Kolyma, and to examine thenorthern coast of Siberia, from that river to East Cape.Two light vessels being built at the Kolyma, captainBillings embarked in the spring of 1787, as soon as theice broke up. The river, however, was so swoln by themelting of the snow and ice, as to render the navigationexceedingly dangerous, the vessels being oftenforced by the current out of the channel of the river intothe woods, which were inundated. After sailing forabout three weeks to the north and east, and having fallenin with much ice, Billings thought it unadvisable toproceed. The farthest extent of his progress in thisshort voyage was about five leagues beyond Cape Tamen. Captain Sarytcheff, who accompaniedBillings, offered to proceed eastward in an open boat ;but to this proposal Billings would not give his assent.On returning to Yakutsk, Billings was surprised to findthere his former comrade John Edward, who was corporalof marines on board the Resolution in Cook's lastvoyage. Edward was animated by an enthusiastic love ofadventure, and with no other funds than a sum of aboutfifty pounds, raised for him by subscription by sir JosephBanks, he undertook to travel across the old world ;and, crossing from Kamtschatka to America, to cross thatcontinent likewise on foot in its broadest part. AtIrkutsk, however, he was arrested as a spy by order ofVOL. III. u290 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.the Russian court ; and Billings, from whose knowledgeof his character and intentions he expected some advantage,declined to interfere in his behalf, as if he weredesirous of engrossing to himself the imperial favour,which he was conscious he did not deserve.Billings was now ordered to examine the islands onthe north-west coast of America, and two ships werebuilt at Okotsk for that purpose. In June, 1790, hevisited the Aleutian Islands ; and he has the merit, ifnot of contributing largely to our stock of geographicalinformation, at least of vindicating the rights of humanity,by revealing the tyranny and oppression exercisedby the Russian traders over the unhappy islanders.Notwithstanding the exertions made by the Russian government,in consequence of his representations, to shieldthe American islanders from the tyranny of the Russianmerchants, the intolerable burden of slavery, and thehardships of the hunter's life, in which their employerskeep them constantly engaged, have had the effect ofnearly extirpating the aboriginal race of islanders.From the Bay of St. Lawrence, on the south side ofBehring's Strait, Billings proceeded over land on the13th of August, 1790, to examine the country of theTshuktski. He was desired by his instructions to examinethe north-eastern coast of Siberia, as far as theKolyma. It does not appear that in this journey hefollowed the sea coast, or that he made any attemptto trace its windings. His attempts to explore acountry but little known were feeble and fruitless :he made short journeys, and halted often ; and addednothing to geography by his various expeditions, except,perhaps, by ascertaining with tolerable correctness thelongitude of the Kolyma. Of the bold and independentpeople who inhabit the north-eastern portion of Siberiathe following account is given in Safer's history of theexpedition : — " We passed three villages, and haltedat a fourth for the night. The huts were dug underground,covered with earth, of a square form, with afireplace in the middle, and four large stones made theCHAP. XX. EASTERN. chokes OF ASIA. 29 1hearth. We were obliged to treat with them for water,and for fuel to boil our food, and to pay for it immediately.Observing our good nature and want of power,they took a liking to the buttons on our coats, and cutthem off without ceremony. The men were tall andstout, and the warrior had his arms and legs punctured :the women were well made, and above the middle size ;healthy in their appearance ; and by no means disagreeablein their persons : their dress was a doe's skin, withthe hair on, and one garment covered their limbs andtheir whole body. They wore their hair parted and intwo plaits, one hanging over each shoulder, their armsand face being neatly punctured." The Tshuktski werenot pleased to see the Russians measuring their country ;and, in consequence, took from them their measuringlines ; neither would they permit them to write anynotes or observations.The Russians have, since 1818, made many attemptsto push their discoveries into the Northern Ocean.Baron Wrangel, an enterprising officer, made a journeyof fifty-eight days on the ice, but could not discover anyof those islands which former adventurers had reportedto exist. He determined the latitude of North Cape,and has contributed to discountenance the opinion thatthe shores of America any where approach those of Siberia.But it is in the Japanese seas and among the KurileIslands that the Russians have been most successful intheir hydrographical labours. There are no seas in theworld with which Europeans have become acquainted soslowly and imperfectly as those of Japan and of thearchipelago to the northward along the coast of Tatary.This is to be attributed to the dangerous nature of thoseseas, and to the jealousy of the Japanese, who allow noforeign vessels to take refuge in their ports. The accurateknowledge of the coast of Tatary began with thevoyage of La Perouse, whose survey extended fromCore, with little interruption, to the southernmost ofthe Kurile Islands. About nine years later, captainu 2292 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Broughton surveyed nearly the same shores ; making,however, valuable additions to the labours of the Frenchnavigator. Captain Broughton sailed up the Bay ofAnima, the deep gulf or channel which separates Saga-beenfrom Tatary ; and, when he had reached lat. 52°,he saw a low strip of land which seemed to terminatethe channel to the northward. La Perouse was inducedto believe, by what he heard from the natives, thatSagaleen was an island separated from the main land ofTatary by a narrow and shallow channel; but Mr.Brough-ton seems to have ascertained that it is a peninsula.As soon as Russia was taught to know, from thecircumstances of the fur trade, the advantages of herseaports on the east coast of Siberia, she began to turnher eyes upon Japan. That rich and remarkable empire,which had remained quite unknown to Europe till themiddle of the sixteenth century, observed so mistrustfuland cautious a policy, that Europeans were still muchless perfectly acquainted with it than might have beenexpected from its commerce, industry, and civilisation.After the expulsion of the Jesuits and Portuguese, theDutch alone were allowed to carry on any trade withJapan ; and they, willing to secure themselves in themonopoly of a paltry traffic by numberless humiliationsand acts of baseness, calumniated other European nations,so as to widen the breach between the Japaneseand the civilised nations of the West. It is remarkablethat no people so addicted to commerce, so enterprisingin their system of trade, and so well instructed, havefurnished fewer materials to the geographer than theDutch. Whatever information they obtained respectingJapan they seemed to have concealed from the rest ofthe world ; and for some knowledge of that singular empirethe learned are chiefly indebted to the industry andintelligence of Kamipfer a German, and Thunder aSwede, who were at different times allowed to accompanythe Dutch embassy to Japan.But though Europeans were strictly forbidden to enterthe ports of the Japanese empire, it was not clear thatCHAP. XX. EASTERN SHORES OF ASIA. 293the Russians were included in this prohibition ; and anopportunity occurred about 1780, which the empressCatherine thought might be improved into the means ofopening a friendly correspondence with that country.A Japanese merchant ship was wrecked on one of theAleutian Islands ; the crew with their commander weresaved and taken by the Russians to Irkutsk, where theylived about ten years. At the end of that time, generalPill, the governor of Siberia, was ordered to send backthe Japanese to their own country, accompanied by anenvoy of inferior rank, who was to convey to the emperorof Japan the compliments and presents of generalPill, and not of the Russian empress. These precautionswere taken, lest the pride of the Japanese, if flattered inthe first instance, might raise insuperable difficulties. Inthe course of their negotiations, lieutenant Laxman wasselected as the envoy ; and, in 1 793, he arrived at Mats-mai,one of the most northern of the islands of Japan.The Japanese treated the Russians with the greatestcivility and attention ; showed them every mark of honourconformable to the customs of the country ; maintainedboth men and officers during the whole time theyremained on land, and heaped them with presents attheir departure. But the overtures of commercial intercoursewere not listened to by the Japanese government.The harbour of Nangasaky alone it was stated was opento foreign shipping ; and if any negotiations were to becarried on, the Russians ought to proceed to that harbour: Laxman returned with this answer in 1793.Although the permission which the Russians received tosend a vessel annually to Nangasaky was a mark offavour exceeding what they had a right to expect, yetten years were allowed to elapse before any further noticewas taken of it.At length, in 1803, it was resolved to send an embassyto Japan, in the hope of establishing a better understandingbetween the two empires. M. Resanoff waschosen as the ambassador; and two ships were equippedto convey him to Japan ; and, when that part of thev 3294 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.mission was fulfilled, to proceed on a voyage of discovery.Captains Krusenstern and Lisianskoy, able youngofficers, both trained up in the British service, were appointedto command the ships. Krusenstern, who hadvisited the East Indies, was often heard at St. Petersburgto declare that no trade could be carried on betweenRussia and Japan unless by ships making the circuitouspassage by the Cape of Good Hope, and with seamenused to the navigation of the eastern archipelago, andpractically acquainted with the Japanese seas. Hisviews appeared to the emperor as just as they were bold,and he was selected to command an expedition whichforms an epoch in the history of the Russian marine.On the 5th of October, 1803, the Russian ships leftFalmouth, having supplied themselves in the Englishport with instruments, charts, books, provisions, andmany articles requisite in the course of a long voyage.On the 26th of November they crossed the equator, andhere, under a salute of eleven guns, they drank thehealth of the emperor Alexander, "in whose glorious reignthe Russian flag first waved in the southern hemisphere."The Russians having arrived at Nangasaky, expectedto be treated with distinction ; to be excused from thehumiliating forms imposed on the Dutch; and hopedthat, in travelling with the ambassador to the imperialresidence at Jeddo, they might be able to procure somemore authentic information respecting this extraordinarypeople than had hitherto been afforded. In all theirexpectations, however, they were cruelly disappointed.The negotiations proceeded slowly, and the ambassador,the officers, and crews, were kept close prisoners for twomonths on board the ship. On the plea of sickness theambassador obtained leave to walk on shore ; but heretheir imprisonment was nearly as close and irksome ;the space allowed for them to walk on the beach was 1 00paces long by forty wide, shut in on the land side byhigh fenced bamboos, and guarded by a watch-house ateach end. Every boat passing to and from the ship toCHAP. XX. EASTERN SHORES OP ASIA. - 295this walk was guarded by ten or fifteen Japanese vessels: nor were the Russians allowed to hold the leastcommunication with the Dutch. After some monthsspent in tedious suspense, the Russians learned that theyhad no chance of being honoured with an audience atJeddo; but that a great nobleman was expected at ,who might save them the trouble of so long a.journey. When this plenipotentiary arrived, four dayswere consumed in arranging the ceremonies of the audience,and the Russian ambassador was admitted onagreeing to pay to the representative of the Japaneseemperor the same compliment which Europeans are accustomedto pay to their own sovereigns; on condition,however, that he left behind him his sword and hisshoes, and that he should squat on the floor with hisfeet folded under him, as it was quite impossible toallow him to expose them to the eyes of so great a man.The first interview was confined to the exchange of afew compliments, and enquiries of no importance. Atthe second, which was conducted with the same ceremonies,the plenipotentiary delivered to the Russianambassador a paper containing the commands of his imperialmajesty to the following effect : — " That noRussian ship should thenceforward be permitted to enterany port of Japan ; that the presents intended for hisimperial majesty could not be accepted, nor the letter ofthe emperor of Russia received." " Such," says captainKrusenstern, " was the result of an embassy whichhad given rise to vast expectation. We not only gainedby it no new advantages, but lost even those which webefore possessed, namely, a written permission, whichLaxman had obtained for us to visit Nangasaky with oneship yearly."On leaving the islands of Japan, Krusenstern proceededalong the eastern coast of Sagaleen to Kamts-chatka, where M. ResanofF the ambassador landed, toproceed to Europe. Krusenstern then returning to completehis survey, doubled the northern extremity of Sa-galen,discovered the north-west coast of it to be av 4296 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK Y.continued series of sandy downs, and descried the oppositecoast of Tatary ; but, owing to the strong current,issuing as he supposes from the river Amur or SagaleenAula, he was unable to proceed southward, and reluctantlyreturned. In the course of this voyage, however,Krusenstern found the means of enlarging and materiallyamending the geography of the Tatarian Gulf, theKurile archipelago, and the coasts of Japan and Yesso.His labours, added to those of Broughton and La Perouse,form a correct and tolerably complete outline of the easternshores of the Old World.In April, 1811, captain Golownin, of the Russiannavy, was ordered by his government to survey the coastof Tatary northward to Okotsk, and the Kurile Islands,the southernmost of which are in the possession of theJapanese. Having ventured on shore on one of theseislands, he was taken prisoner with two of his officers,and four seamen, and sent to Matsmai. The immediatecause of this severe proceeding was not the jealouspolicy of the Japanese government, but the unprovokedoutrages committed by a Russian captain, who a fewyears before had attacked the Japanese villages on thoseislands. Golownin observes, that during his journeysouthwards, along the coast to Chakodade, a distance exceeding500 miles, he beheld populous villages on everybay and creek. During the summer the people reside inleaf huts, built between these villages ; the whole populationis employed in catching, salting, and drying fish;they likewise gather a kind of sea weed, which grows ingreat abundance on the coast, and which the Russianscall sea cabbage. This weed is spread upon the sands todry, then collected into heaps resembling hay-cocks, andcovered with matting, until the time arrives for loadingthe vessels which carry it to Siphon. The Kurile villagesconsist of small huts, without gardens or plantations,and have an appearance of extreme poverty ; but theJapanese villages present a very different aspect. Theyare large ; have regular streets ; and the houses are veryneatly constructed of wood. Every house has a garden,CHAP. XX. EASTERN SHORES OF ASIA. 297and many are furnished with orchards. The cleanlinesswhich prevails in the streets and houses filled the Russianswith astonishment. The inhabitants are extremelyvivacious, and contentment seems painted on everyvisage.The southern Kuriles appear to be a different racefrom those who inhabit the islands claimed by Russia.They are tall and strongly made, very active, and far morehandsome than their northern neighbours, from whomthey also differ totally in language. The Kurile islanders,like the Patagonians, have given rise to much contradictionand variety of opinion among travellers. Thegigantic stature of the latter, and the hairiness of theformer, have been asserted and denied in equally positiveterms. Captain Saris was informed in Jeddo, by aJapanese traveller, that the people of Yesso had theirbodies covered with hair, like monkeys. Spanker confirmedthis story ; and Broughton observes of theseislanders, that " their bodies are almost universallycovered with long black hair, and that even in childrenthe same appearance is observable;" but notwithstandingthis weight of testimony, and the difficulty of proving anegative, Krusenstern ventures to assert that the hairinessof the Kuriles is an idle story; because, as far as hisexamination went, he found these islanders as smooth asEuropeans. Yet Golownin, who had abundant opportunitiesof observing these people, frequently speaks ofthe hairy Kuriles as a separate people.On approaching Chakodade, multitudes came out tomeet the Russian captives, who were conducted to prisonwith a kind of processional pomp. " Both sides ofthe road," observes Golownin, " were crowded withspectators, yet every one behaved with the utmost decorum.I particularly marked their countenances, andnever once observed a malicious look, or any signs ofhatred towards us ; and none showed the least dispositionto insult us by mockery and derision."The prisoners having little hopes of liberation, andprompted by the glimpse of the sea which they caught2{)8 MODERN* VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.from the windows of their prison at Matsniai, resolvedto attempt an escape. Being conducted by their guardsto exercise on the skirts of the city, they were enabledto take a view of the country, and to observe the pathswhich they might choose in their flight. In the night ofthe 23d of April, they broke an opening in the fence of theirprison, through which they crept, and made their waythrough the trees to tenderest hill. Theislandof Matsmaiis extremely mountainous and almost uninhabited in theinterior. The Russians, who avoided the roads andwandered in the most unfrequented places, were extremelydistressed from fatigue, owing to the ruggednessof the country, from exposure to the cold during thenight, and from want of good food. Winter still reignedamong the mountains, but they preferred the regions offorests and of snow to the chance of falling again intothe hands of the Japanese. Their intention was to descendto the sea shore during the night ; and, seizing onsome large boat, to put to sea, and trust themselves tofortune. But they were not unobserved. For two orthree nights they visited the beach, but their strengthwas so much reduced that they were unable to launch theboats that were drawn up on the shore. They causedan alarm that proved fatal to their hopes; and, beingsurrounded in a thicket where they took shelter, werecompelled to surrender to the Japanese soldiers. "Whenwe passed through the villages," says Golownin, ' ' the inhabitantsflocked from all sides to look at us ; but to thehonour of the Japanese it ought to be observed, that notone of them treated us with any thing like insult. Theyall seemed to commiserate us, and some of the womeneven shed tears while they presented us with somethingto eat or drink. Such was the expression of feelingamong a people whom enlightened Europe has regardedas barbarians."To prevent any further attempts at escape, the Russianswere now more rigorously confined. They wereimprisoned in small cages, placed together in the sameroom, and nearly excluded from light. That in whichCHAP. XX. EASTERN SHORES OF ASIA. 299Golownin was obliged to enter was six paces long,five broad, and about ten feet high. They were inspectedby the guards every half hour, and awakenedfrom their sleep to answer the call. This rigour, however,was of short continuance ; the disposition of theJapanese seems to be as humane as their principles aresevere. The governor of Matsmai represented thestrangers favourably to the emperor ; and this, unitedwith the negotiations of captain Rikord, who had captureda wealthy Japanese by way of reprisal, had theeffect of procuring their liberation, after a confinement ofabout two years. The kind-hearted Japanese evincedthe sincerest joy at their release ; and in conformitywith the general wish of the inhabitants, the bunyo orgovernor of Matsmai ordered that prayers for the safevoyage of the Russians should be offered up in all thetemples for the space of five days. During their residenceamong the Japanese, they had abundant opportunityof observing the honesty, industry, and generalcivilisation of that singular people. The Japanese arevery fond of reading, and constantly carry books withthem. The Russians were at first unable to sleep inprison from the constant reading aloud of their guards.A native academician availed himself of the knowledgeof the Russians to improve himself in mathematics andnatural philosophy ; others took a pleasure in formingvocabularies of the Russian language.The government of China, like that of Japan, is sostudious to avoid a close intercourse with Europeannations, that our knowledge of that country, at present,very little exceeds that which we possessed two centuriesago. The English and Russian embassies to Pekinhave been productive, indeed, of much important information.The history of lord Macartney's embassy,and that of lord Amherst, with the travels of Barrowand others, afford abundant instruction as well asamusement. But yet from these attempts to establisha correspondence with that remote and extensive empire,little has been added to our geographical knowsMODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.ledge. Of the sea coasts of China we should know butlittle, if it were not for the labours of the Jesuit missionaries,who, notwithstanding the difficulties they had toencounter from the prejudices of the people, succeededin constructing an excellent map of that country.Important amendments, nevertheless, in the hydrographyof this part of the world, were made by the exertionsof the commanders who carried out lord Amherston his embassy to China. The ambassador being landed,the ships proceeded to explore the gulf of Lea-tong,hitherto unexamined by any European ship. As theyapproached the shore of Tatary, in lat. 39° 29', theycaught a glimpse of the great wall of China. It wasseen winding over a long range of hills, and was lostto view on the summit of a very lofty mountain inthe distance. The people on the coast here seemedwholly unacquainted with Europeans. An officer whowent on shore, and seated himself beneath a tree, wasquickly surrounded with people, who examined himand his dress with the minutest scrutiny. They wereparticularly pleased with the anchor buttons, andoften accepted them in bartering, when they refuseda dollar. The women, impelled by curiosity, madetheir appearance in great numbers; and they allhad small feet. These people were Chinese in everyrespect, but apparently more simple, and at the sametime more polite, than those of the southern provinces.The houses and gardens were remarkably neat ; andthe English officers remarked that there was an air ofcomfort about their villages, not always to be found inthe more civilised parts of Europe. Captain Maxwell,in surveying this gulf, took the liberty of givingEnglish names to islands, bays, and capes, which thenatives no doubt have named already. We findLeopold's Isle, Cape Charlotte, Leadenhall Passage, andsimilar designations on the populous coast of China.This liberty of giving names to places named beforecannot fail, in the course of time, to create the utmostconfusion in geography. Captain Hall, in the Lyra, hadCHAP. XX. EASTERN SHORES OF ASIA. 301in the mean time surveyed the western and southernshores of the Gulf of Pe-che-li; and the two shipshaving joined company at the head of the Yellow Sea,proceeded eastward along the shore. They met withsome islands, which Averse named Sir James Hall'sGroup; and as they passed to the south, they foundthat the sea was studded with islands as far as the eyecould reach. They were visited by an old chief fromthe shore, remarkably inquisitive and courteous; butwhen they ventured to land, he evinced the strongestsigns of grief, and by drawing his hand across histhroat, and shutting his eyes, he seemed to intimatethat he should lose his head in consequence. Findinga piece of paper in the ship's cabin, he wrote some charactersupon it, which being afterwards interpreted atCanton, proved to be, " I dont know who you are :what business have you here ? "Basil's Bay, as this place was named, lies in lat. 36°9', long. 126° 32' ; being at least 120 miles up thecountry according to the existing charts ; so that themissionaries, in laying down this part of the coast,seem to have depended wholly upon report. The ships,proceeding to the southward, found the sea coveredwith innumerable islands, all lofty, though not of greatextent. They appeared also to be cultivated, and theinhabitants crowded to the highest eminences to gaze onthe ships as they passed by. From the top of one ofthe highest, 135 other islands were counted around;the main land, which seemed lofty, was distant aboutforty miles to the east. The intervening spaces betweenthe multitude of isles, generally from one to three, andsometimes four miles across, appeared to be all closeharbours, and capable of containing in security all thenavies of the world : they form, in fact, an almostendless chain of harbours, communicating with eachother. As these islands are all inhabited, it is probablethat they possess fresh water. By this voyage it wasascertained that the western coast of the peninsula ofCore had been hitherto laid down on the charts from302 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.130 to 150 miles too far to the west. The densearchipelago also, which fronts this coast, was quite unknown; the succession of islands, perhaps, being mistakenfor continuous land, and supposed to belong to themain.Having completed this important survey, the shipsproceeded to the Loo Choo orLekeyo Islands, with whichEuropeans were previously but little acquainted. CaptainBroughton, indeed, after the loss of his ship, theProvidence, in 1797, experienced the humanity of theseislanders, who at the same time testified much uneasinesswhile he remained on their coasts. In order to find apretence for visiting the harbour of the great Loo ChooIsland, the hold of the Alceste was filled with water,and the pumps set to work, as if the ship had sprung aleak. The islanders sympathised with the distress ofour people, and sent a number of carpenters on board inorder to assist in stopping the leak. The ships wereafterwards visited by the chiefs ; friendships were contractedwith the natives; and during five weeks that theEnglish remained here, every day's experience raised thesimple inhabitants of Loo Choo still higher in their estimation.The island itself is described as one of themost beautiful and agreeable spots on the surface of theglobe. Such is the felicity of its soil and climate, thatproductions of the vegetable kingdom, very distinct intheir nature, and generally found in regions far distantfrom each other, grow here side by side. Here thebanyan of India and the Norwegian fir, the orange andthe lime, the tea plant and sugar cane, all flourish together.In addition to these advantages, the island iswatered by numerous fine rivers, and boasts severalsecure harbours.The natives of Loo Choo are a very small race ofpeople; the average height of the men not exceeding fivefeet two inches at the utmost. The whole animal creationseems here to be of a diminutive size; the bullocks,goats, and pigs being all reduced in the same proportion.The islanders are as fair as the natives of the south ofCHAP. XXI. TRAVELS IN THE HIMALYEH. 303Europe, and resemble the Chinese in every thing butinnot possessing the elongated eye which distinguishesthe latter. They seem to be remarkably intelligent; andone of them made, in a short time, considerable proficiencyin the English language: their politeness also kvery striking, and free from the oppressive load of ceremonieswhich disgraces the good breeding of the East.On the voyage of the Alceste to Batavia she waswrecked on a coral reef in the Straits of Banda. Twoof the boats, in which were the ambassador and aboutforty-six individuals, proceeded to Batavia to procureassistance for their shipwrecked companions. The narrativeof the conduct of these, while continually threatenedby bands of Malay pirates, and ignorant when theirmisfortunes would terminate, offers a conspicuous exampleof the advantages of discipline, and redoundsmuch to the credit of the British navy.CHAP. XXI.TRAVELS IN THE HIMALYEH.JOURNEY OF WEBB AND RAPER IN THE HIMALYEH. — GREATHEIGHT OF THESE MOUNTAINS. MEASUREMENTS OF COLE-brookeDEWALAGIRI CHUMULUREE. — JOURNEY OF MR.MOORCROFT. PUNDIt's MODE OF MEASURING. PASS OF THEKIT! GHAUT. Dana. APPEARANCE OF Grope. THE SacredLAKE OF MANASAROWAKA. GENERAL CHARACTER OFTHE MOUNTAINS. VILLAGES. RETURN OF MOOKCROKT.DOUBTS AS TO THE HEIGHT OF THE HIMALYEH. SECONDJOURNEY OF MR. WEBB. HEIGHT OF PERPETUAL SNOW.ELEVATED PLAINS OF THE Indes— THEIR PRODUCE. JOURNEYOF MR. Fraser. SUPPOSED POISONOUS WIND. GANGOUTRI.PECULIAR APPEARANCE OF THE HIMALYEH.There are no objects in nature which mankind, in theearly stages of society, are more prone to regard withgratitude and admiration than great rivers. The fameof the Ganges was widely spread abroad even in the304 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.earliest times; and it is no wonder that the British, whenthey became masters of India, should view with peculiarcuriosity a river which was to the natives an object ofthe profoundest veneration. Of its sources nothing certaincould be known ; in most maps they were placedfar to the north in Tatary, as it was thought necessarythat the fountains of so great a stream should be situatedat an immense distance from its mouth. A few onlywere disposed to think that it had its rise on the southside of the Himalyeh or Snowy Mountains, which formthe northern boundary of India.To decide this question, lieutenant Webb, accompaniedby captains Raper and Hearsay, was despatchedin 1808, with directions to proceed to Gangoutri, wherehe was to view the narrow of the Ganges called theCow's Mouth, a spot held sacred by the Hindooss. Theyarrived at Hardware on the 1 st of April, and had thepleasure of viewing the immense crowds which are assembledon the plains here every twelfth year by thedouble motives of commerce and religion. At this pointmerchants arrive from all parts of India, as well asfrom Cashmere, and the countries beyond the Punjaband the Himalyeh : the numbers assembled at the fairwas supposed by the British officers not to fall short of2,000,000. On entering the mountains, the dangerswhich they bad to encounter in climbing precipices andjourneying along steep mountains, on paths sometimesnot a foot broad, were compensated by the magnificenceof the alpine scenery that surrounded them. The tablelandsover which they occasionally travelled were clothedwith European vegetation. The mountains above themwere covered with forests of fir, while in the chasmsbelow them, at the depth of 4000 feet, the productionsof India still flourished luxuriantly in the neighbourhoodof the mountains. From this height they saw severalchains of mountains, seven or eight in number, onebehind the other ; the view terminating in the snowypinnacles of the mighty Himalyeh. After crossing torrentsby bridges of ropes, and encountering all theCHAP. XXI. TRAVELS IN THE IIIMALYEH. 305dangers of a mountain journey, our travellers werestopped at a village called Ararat by the assurancethat the road to Gangoutri was beset with the most formidableperils ; they were contented, therefore, withsending forward a moonshine with a few pious Indiansto examine the Cow's Mouth, and to explore the river,if possible, to its termination. In three weeks they returnedwith a formidable account of their adventures.The Cow's Mouth, it appears, is a mere fragment ofrock in the river, which chance or its sequestered situationhas rendered an object of worship. They hadtraced the river a few miles above Gangoutri, where itwas about fifteen or twenty yards broad, and about waist-deep;farther up the valley, where no one had ever beenable to penetrate, it was entirely covered by beds ofsnow. They proceeded so far up in their explorationthat every object before them was covered with snow.The party returned by Serinagur, which had been visitedtwelve years before by captain Hardwicke, the firstBritish traveller who had crossed these mountains fromIndia. Among the alpine bridges which they met withintheir journey, one appeared peculiarly critical: it wascomposed of a few ropes stretched across the ravine witha hoop resting on them ; in this the traveller rested hisback, and then, suspended from the ropes, by his handsand legs he worked his way across. The travellers proceededfrom Josiah to examine the source of the Alasa chief tributary of the Ganges ; and theysucceeded in tracing that river to the point where itemerged from the snows which had covered it for ages.All the mountains around were covered with perpetualsnow ; the scene resembled the depth of a northernwinter. A few stunted pines appeared near the banksof the river ; but not a trace of verdure could be discoveredon the northern sides of the mountains as far asthey were visible. The inhabitants of this mountainouscountry had handsome countenances, with florid complexions,and in general resembled the Tatars rather thanVOL. III. x306 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.the Hindooss. Many of them amassed considerable wealthby the transit trade, in which they are engaged, carryinggold, bezoar, musk, salt, and borax from Tibet toIndia. Our travellers found in the remote and almostinaccessible valleys of the Snowy Mountains numerousshrines and temples, venerated in proportion as it wasdifficult to reach them, and resorted to by pious Hindooss,numbers of whom perish annually in the snow in thesedangerous pilgrimages.The great chain of the Himalyeh was crossed near itshighest part by Mr. Moorcroft, who undertook his arduousjourney with the double view of procuring specimensof the wool from which the celebrated Cashmere shawlsare made, and of surveying the sacred lake of ,which is an object of the deepest venerationthroughout all Hindostan. At the village of Josiah,which is far within the mountains, Mr. Moorcroft hireda pundit as the companion of his journey, with the singularstipulation, that in walking he should make everystride precisely four feet in length ; by this means it wasintended to ascertain correctly the space travelled over.Our travellers' path lay along the banks of the Pauli, atorrent falling into the Alacananda. The glens wereclothed with forests of pine ; and above, the mountainsreared their summits covered with perpetual snow. Fromthe narrowness of the paths, the abruptness of the slopes,and the quantities of snow and stones which were occasionallyprecipitated down, our travellers were kept incontinual alarm. In these rugged passes goats and sheepare the only animals which can be used as beasts ofburden.After a fatiguing journey of seven days from Josiah,Mr. Moorcroft and his companions arrived at malaria,a small village in the midst of the mountains. Thehouses were built of stone, and ornamented round theupper stories with flowers and mythological pictures,after the Hindoo fashion. This village forms the summerhabitation of a little horde, who carry on a trade betweenTibet and India, conveying their merchandise on theCnAP. XXI. TRAVELS IN THE HIMALYEH. 307backs of sheep and goats. In winter they remove to theplains on the northern side of the mountains.At length our travellers arrived at Niti, on the frontierof India ; and it was not without pressing entreatiesand tedious negotiations that they were allowed to proceed.At this place they experienced, for the first time,that difficult and quickened respiration which is alwaysfelt in ascending great heights, from the tenuity of theatmosphere. The changes of temperature in the courseof twenty-four hours were also remarkable. In the afternoonthe thermometer rose to 80°, and the heat wasnearly insupportable ; while during the night the coldwas intense. As the party advanced beyond Niti, andbegan to ascend the Ghaut, or mountain pass, they hadsensible proof of their having reached an elevation farabove the level of the sea. The difficulty of respirationcontinually increased till they were obliged to stop atevery three or four steps to take breath and recover theirstrength. Blood burst from the lips of Mr. Moorcroft ;he was affected with a giddiness in the head, which seemedto threaten apoplexy. On the summit of the mountainpass which separates Hindostan from the northern worldof Asia, the boundary is marked merely by a heap ofstones, in which is fixed a pole bearing numerous piecesof cloth, the devout offerings of pilgrims who have passedthat way. They now began to descend by gradual slopesthrough a country naked and sterile in the extreme, andwanting the bold magnificence that characterises thesouthern sides of the mountain.A journey of ten days from Niti brought our travellersto Daba, a town situated on the summit of a rock,too steep and narrow to retain the snow, and at the sametime sheltered from the cold winds. Although the travellershad advanced into this country without permission,they were treated with civility by the governor ofDaba. In the college of the Gelums, or Shaman monks,Mr. Moorcroft saw the greatest assemblage of Hindoodeities that he had ever beheld. The lama, or chief ofthe college, treated them with much kindness, and takingx 2308 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.hold of one of their cotton gowns at their departure, hesaid, " I pray you, let me live in your recollections aswhite as this cloth." On leaving this place the partytravelled for some time through valleys bordered bymountains, on which the snow was occasionally falling.A journey of five days brought them to Gortope, whichhad the appearance of a Tatar encampment, the villagebeing composed of a few black tents, made with blanketsfastened with hair ropes. The plains round the villagewere covered with prodigious multitudes of goats, sheep,and yaks or Tatarian oxen. It appeared to Mr. Moor-croftthat their number could not be less than 40,000.As Mr. Moorcroft came in the character of a merchant,and appeared willing to give a good price for the finewool, he was treated here with respect and attention.He received permission also to visit the lake of ,but with the disagreeable condition, that heshould return as he came, through the Niti pass. Fromthe Tatar merchants of Ladak he received some informationrespecting the geography of this little knowncountry, considerably at variance with European maps,yet not sufficiently precise to enable us to correct them.A river flowed through Gortope, which Mr. Moorcroft,in the first instance, hastily supposed to be the Oxus;but some further information and reflection led him torecognise in it a chief and perhaps the main branch ofthe Indus.Our travellers arrived on the 5th of August at thesacred lake of Manasarowara, the most venerated of allthe places of pilgrimage resorted to by the Hindooss, arace singularly prone to reverie and veneration. The lakewas about fifteen miles long and eleven broad, and withits borders of towering crags, and its surrounding barrierof lofty mountains wrapt in perpetual snow, it formed amagnificent scene. Numerous convents are scatteredalong its borders, into one of which Mr. Moorcroft was invitedto enter, as he supposed, from motives of charity.His health was so much affected by the length and fatiguesof his journey, that he was unable to complete hisCHAP. XXI. TRAVELS IN THE HIMALYEH. 309survey of the lake, so as to ascertain whether any riversflow out of it. From personal examination, he was convincedthat no rivers flowed out of it on the northern,western, and southern sides. He despatched two of hisHindoo attendants to examine an angle to which he wasunable to proceed, and they reported, on their return, thatno river flowed from the lake on the eastern side. But ageographer who takes into consideration the size of thislake, situated in a region where evaporation cannot bevery great, and the freshness of its water, may not, perhaps,be disposed to rely on a conclusion supported onlyby the evidence of a Hindoo.On the 8th of August the party left the lake, andbegan their return. All the villages which they sawin this country resembled each other in situation andappearance : they were all perched on the heads ofabrupt precipices, with higher cliffs, which served asshelter, rising above them. The houses were generallypainted with flowers or grotesque figures, and lookedsingularly picturesque in the midst of these wild andstupendous mountains. The season in which the passof the Himalyeh was practicable now hastened to aclose, and Mr. Moorcroft, whose health was much impairedby the fatigues of the journey, lost no time inreturning from Papa, by the same road which he hadfollowed in his journey to that place.Until the journeys of Mr. Webb and of Mr. Moor-croft,the attention of the enquiring world had neverbeen drawn to the stupendous height of the Himalyehmountains. The great elevation which these travellerswere sensible they had reached above the plains of India,and the immense ranges of snowy mountains which theystill saw before them, rising one above another, struckthem with deep astonishment, and led them to supposethat the snowy pinnacles of the Himalyeh might atleast rival in height the colossal summits of the Antea.Measurements had been made by colonel Crawford, in1802, which, though not published at that time, wereknown to the scientific world, and made them, for thex 3310 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.first time, acquainted with this great mountain range.Observations made by colonel Colebrook, from theplains of Rohilcund, 1 44 miles distant from the mountains,gave them an elevation of nearly 22,000 feet ; buttimidity, rather than exaggeration, appears to havemingled with and modified these calculations. LieutenantWebb, in his journey towards the source of theGanges, made several observations on the remarkablepeak called Jamunavatari, near the source of the Jumna,which stands conspicuous in the foremost range of theHimalyeh. The result of his observations gave Janusa height of 20,000 feet above the table-land onwhich he stood, and which he estimated to be at least5000 feet above the plains. As all these calculations,however, seemed too vague and imperfect to satisfy thecritical, he was determined to measure, with the utmostaccuracy of mathematical science, the height of someconspicuous peak, and so Dewalagiri, or the WhiteMountain, was selected for this purpose. Elaboratemeasurements, made from the plain of Gorakhptir, gavethis mountain an absolute elevation of 27,550 feet.The testimony of all the travellers who visited theHimalyeh corroborated the inferences derived from thesescientific observations. The immense ranges which theysaw rising successively one above the other impressedthem more strongly with the belief of the great heightof these mountains than could have been produced, perhaps,by the sublime spectacle of an isolated peak risingat once from the sea and towering above the clouds.Colonel Kirkpatrick, in describing the mountain sceneryof Nepaul, itself an elevated land, observes, that thefirst range of mountains, though absolutely lofty, yetappear but hills compared with the great mountainsthat rise behind them. One of these, Sheoopoorah, wassupposed to rise 4000 feet above the valley ; fartherback, however, Mount Jibjibia, clothed nearly to its summitwith pendulous forests, still rose 6*000 feet higher ;but these great mountains sunk into hills of no importancewhen compared with the mighty barrier of snowyCHAP. XXI. TRAVELS IN THE HIMALYEII. 311mountains which terminated the prospect. These weresupposed to be at least 20,000 feet above the valley,which is itself 4000 feet above the sea. This conjecturalestimation was confirmed by mathematical observationmade by colonel Crawford of eight conspicuouspeaks, which were found to range from 15,000 to 24,000feet above the level of the sea. But these lofty mountainsall yield the preeminence to the mighty peak ofChumulari, which stands on the frontiers of Bootan andTibet. This great sovereign of the Indian mountainsis supposed, from the great distance at which it is visiblein the plains of India, to be not less than 30,000 feetin height.Notwithstanding all these observations having the aidof mathematical precision, doubts were still entertainedrespecting the elevation of the Himalyeh mountains.The learned were slow to acknowledge the accuracy ofcalculations which were liable to be influenced by thenatural proneness of the human mind to yield itself upimplicitly to whatever is sublime and wonderful. It wasobjected, that the line of perpetual snow, according tothe accounts of travellers in the Himalyeh, was attoo great a height above the valleys to render itlikely that the latter had so great an elevation as wasassigned to them : it was supposed that the limit ofperpetual snow in those climates ought to be at theheight of about 13,000 feet above the sea; and thisprinciple but ill accorded with the height assignedto mountains in the Himalyeh richly covered withforests of gigantic pines. But it was certainly invertingthe proper order of philosophical reasoning to judgeperemptorily of observations by supposed laws of nature,instead of endeavouring to discover those laws from observations.Half a century ago, measurements of heightmade with barometers were considered much too erroneousto be relied on, and a preference was given to themeasurement of angles ; but in this case the lattermode of observation was not thought satisfactory, andrecourse was had to the barometer. In a second journey,x 4312 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Mr. Webb proceeded to the Niti Ghaut, the height ofwhich he ascertained, by barometrical measurement, tobe 16,814 feet. This is perhaps the highest mountainpass in the world ; yet there was no snow here, nor onthe cliffs 300 feet above it ; and Mr. Webb confirmedthe accounts of Mr. Moorcroft respecting the nobleforests of pines, mingled with cypresses and cedars,which clothed those lofty ridges on which the humanbeing finds it difficult to respire. The high limits ofperpetual snow on the Himalyeh mountains is justlyascribed by Mr. Webb to the great elevation of thetable-land or terrace from which those mountain peaksspring up. As the heat of our atmosphere is derived chieflyfrom the radiation of the earth's surface, it follows thatthe temperature of any elevated point must be modifiedin a very important degree by the proximity and extentof the surrounding plains. These observations seem torefute satisfactorily the objections started respecting thegreat height of the Himalyeh mountains, which may betherefore safely pronounced to be the loftiest mountainchain on the surface of the globe.But the anomalies which these great mountains seemto present, when viewed from the south, are insignificantin comparison with the contradiction given by the greatplains beyond them, to the confidence of theory. Thehigh table-land known in Europe by the name ofLittle Tibet, and called by the Hindooss the Indes, orregion of wool, is supposed to have a general elevationof nearly 15,000 feet ; and yet, so far from being clothedwith perpetual snow, as theory would have it, it affordsthe finest pasture for innumerable herds and flocksthroughout the year. In some favoured spots of thiselevated land there is a species of grain cultivated fromwhich the natives make their bread : it is bearded, likebarley ; but is said to be a species of wheat. Thesummer of this table-land is very short, hardly extendingto two months ; but vegetation starts up vigorously assoon as the snow disappears, and the fruits are quicklyripened by the rays of a glowing sun. Thus, it is notCHAP. XXI. TRAVELS IN THE IIIMALYEII. 313surprising that the limit of perpetual snow should bemuch higher in the Himalyeh than in the Ancles; sincethe lofty peaks of the former range rise from a tablelandat least 5000 feet higher than that of Los Pastor,which lies amongst the highest Andes.Another journey through the snowy range of theHimalyeh, was made by Mr. Fraser, whose route laybetween the ravines of the Rutledge and Alacananda :he was not provided with instruments, nor does heseem to have contemplated adding by his journey tothe stock of scientific information ; but he gives aninteresting and amusing account of the industrioushabits of the mountaineers, of their singular customs,and particularly of the prevalence of polyandrythroughout the whole of the hilly country, where " itis usual for a family of four or five brothers to marryand possess the same woman at the same time, whothus becomes the wife in common to all." Havingreached the source of the Jumna, at the foot of Jamuna-vasari, the height of which was estimated by Mr.Colebrook at 25,500 feet, Mr. Fraser was in the veryheart of the lofty Himalyeh, yet, even in this elevatedsituation, village succeeded village in the most romanticand terrific positions, and surrounded on every sideby snow : Mr. Fraser talks even of growing crops ofwheat, of a lovely wooded and flowery path, and of thefinest walnut trees he ever saw. From this place heproceeded to cross directly over the mountains toGangoutri. His guides described the journey as mostdangerous, and endeavoured to dissuade him from it :they affirmed that a pestilential wind blew from themountains, which renders the traveller senseless, anddeprives him of motion. The second day brought himto the highest limits of vegetation : the heaths andjunipers had disappeared, but still flowers of the mostbrilliant hues continued to raise their heads among thepatches of snow. Here the Hindooss began to complainof the poisoned wind. " I had no idea," says Mr.Fraser, " that height could have so severely affected314 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.the strength and chest, and yet it must have been thisalone ; for, severe as was the ascent, and bad as the roadwas, we had met with fully as bad some days before ;and though the people asserted that the air was poisonedby the scent of flowers, and though there really was aprofusion of them through the whole of the first partof the march, yet the principal part of them had nosmell, nor could I perceive any thing in the air, exceptacold and somewhat raw wind ; besides which, thechief distress was experienced after we reached thelofty gorge of Bomsooroo, which was beyond the regionof vegetation, and consequently could not be easilyaffected by the perfume of flowers. After reaching thatplace, no one was proof against this influence." Atthe time when our travellers experienced those distressingsensations of sickness, giddiness, and lassitude,they were several thousand feet below the nearest ofthe snowy summits. These fatigues, however, wereamply repaid by the grandeur of the mountain sceneryround Gangoutri ; a spot where the sentiments excitedby the magnificence of nature derive additional forcefrom the religious feeling with which the Hindoossregard this fountain of their sacred river. ThoughMr. Fraser was unprepared or unqualified to measurethe heights of the Snowy Mountains, he vividly describestheir wild and singular appearance ; their deep glens,and obelisks of bare rock, shooting up from the slopesof everlasting snow. " There is that in the appearanceof the Himalyeh range, which every person who hasseen them will allow to be peculiarly their own : noother mountains that I have ever seen bear any resemblanceto their character: their summits shoot in themost fantastic and spiring peaks to a height thatastonishes, and, when viewed from an elevated situation,almost induce the belief of an ocular deception."chap. xxii. bruce's travels. 315CHAP. XXII.bruce's travels.BRUCE Appointed CONSUL AT ALGIERS. HIS TRAVELS ONTHE BARBARY COAST. LION's FLESH USED AS FOOD. PetrifiedCITY OF RAS SEM. BAALBEC AND PALMYRA. RE-Caption OF BRUCE AT CAIRO. HE PROCEEDS UP THE NILE. —JOURNEY ACROSS THE DESERT. JIDDA. THE MOUNTAIN OFEMERALDS. COMMERCE. JOURNEY FROM MASACH. MountainOF Tyrant. RUINS OF AXUM. STEAKS FROM ALIVING COW. HE ARRIVES AT GONDAR. RECEIVED ATCOURT. RAS MICHAEL, VISITS THE CATARACTS OF Plata.—INTERNAL DISSENSIONS. INTERVIEW OF MR. BRUCE WITHFail. MADE GOVERNOR OF Geese. PROCEEDS TO THESOURCES OF THE NILE. LAKE Sana. SUPERSTITIONS OFTHE PEOPLE. DESCRIPTION OF THE FOUNTAINS. ExultationOF MR. BRUCE. HIS MERITS. HE DISINGENUOUSLYENDEAVOURS TO ENHANCE THE VALUE OF HIS DISCOVERIES.Few narratives of travels have ever excited greater interest,or are better calculated to afford amusement, thanthat written by the subject of this chapter. No travellerever possessed in a higher degree the confidence andcourage requisite to enforce respect among rude nations ;few were better qualified by talents of observation andgeneral knowledge ; and none, perhaps, has ever experiencedmore fully the reluctance with which mankindallow travellers the privilege of colouring the truthto give interest to their relation.James Bruce, a gentleman of good family and fortunein North Britain, conceived in early life the project ofexamining the sources of the Nile, and thus solvingwhat from the remotest times had been considered as themost interesting geographical problem. He travelledthrough most countries in Europe ; and in Holland,where the oriental school of Erpenius and Schultensstill flourished, he acquired a knowledge of the Arabic,and Gee or Ethiopia languages. He also appliedSI 6 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.himself to mathematics and to practical astronomy.The consulship of Algiers having become vacant in1762, it was offered to Bruce, who accepted it withpleasure, and proceeded to his post, provided with a goodcollection of instruments for the purpose of observingthe transit of Venus, and with the determination tomake himself master of the Arabic tongue as it isspoken, being already well acquainted with the writtenlanguage.But he did not long enjoy the repose of office. Inthe beginning of 1765, in consequence of a violentquarrel with the dey, he found it expedient to resignthe consulship. He proceeded accordingly to travel inthe East, for which his residence in Algiers had completelyprepared him. On the coast of Barbary hetouched at every place at which he could expect to meetwith the remains of antiquity. At Hydra, the Thuno-unum of the ancients, on the frontiers between thekingdom of Algiers and Tunis, he found a tribe ofArabs called Welled Side Boogannim, or the Sons of theFather of Flocks, who maintain themselves in a state ofindependence. They form a sort of religious or militaryorder ; their chief being considered a saint. By theirinstitutions they they are obliged to eat lion's flesh fortheir daily food. From this law it follows that theyare bold and expert hunters. Their character for intrepidity,and the service they render the country inwhich they dwell by destroying the wild beasts, gainthem the exemption from tribute which they enjoy.Bruce himself had an opportunity of feasting on lion'sflesh, which he found to be lean, tough, with a muskysmell and disagreeable flavour.At Jibbel Aurez he was surprised to see that themountains were inhabited by a tribe with blue eyes andfair complexions. They were a savage independentrace, and were supposed by our author to be a remnantof the Vandals. Their mountain dwellings were hutsconstructed with mud and straw.Our traveller, who appears to have been much underchap. xxii. bruce's travels. 317the influence of a strong propensity towards the wonderful,travelled hy Arsinoe and Barca to lias Sem, avowedlyfor the purpose of disproving a story common in Africa,and related, hut not believed, in Europe, respecting theexistence of a petrified city in the desert. The inhabitantsof lias Sem, it was stated, to the great amazementof the credulous, were still to be seen, fixed in the severalattitudes and the different employments in which they-hadbeen overtaken by divine vengeance. A Frenchconsul of Tripoli offered some Arabs who related thestory a large reward if they could procure for him oneof these petrified men ; and after much delay and evasionthey at length brought to him a mutilated statue, whichthey had found amongst some of the ruins on the coast.After a narrow escape from being drowned in the harbourof Bengal, Bruce visited Rhodes, Crete, Cyprus ; andfrom thence proceeded to Sidon, with the intention ofexploring the mountains of Linus and Antilibanus.He visited the venerable ruins of Baalbec and Palmyra ;and while apparently in doubt in what direction to pursuehis travels, the advice of Dr. Russell, well knownfor his history of Aleppo, decided him to give the preferenceto Abyssinia. Rumours, it appears, had circulatedat home respecting his projected travels, and hisintention of visiting the head of the Nile, and some insinuationsso much annoyed him, that he affected toabandon that scheme ; but it is obvious, from the choicethat he finally made, that he had never seriously abandonedthe thoughts of carrying his favourite projectinto execution.At the time when Bruce visited Egypt, that countrywas not so accessible to strangers as it is at present.Christians were exposed to violent outrage and insult ;and it required both courage and address to face and toescape the dangers with which he was threatened. Ithappened, luckily, at the time of our traveller's arrivalat Cairo, that Ali Bey, the pasha of Egypt, was completelygoverned by his secretary, a Copt named Risk. Thisinfluential minister was much devoted to astrology, and318 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.was strongly impressed in favour of our traveller at thesight of his apparatus of instruments, which wereopened and examined at the custom-house. He assuredBruce that he was under the immediate protection ofthe bey. Our traveller was at first uneasy at this unusualsemblance of friendship in one who was known to be of atreacherous and insidious disposition ; but when helearned that the secretary enquired earnestly respectinghis knowledge of the stars, he at once understood theaffair, and his fears were dispelled.At Cairo he lodged in the convent of St. George, wherehe fortunately met with an old friend, a Greek priest,from whom he had received instructions in the Greeklanguage at Algiers. His former preceptor had nowrisen to the second dignity in the Greek church in Egypt :from him Mr. Bruce received much important informationand assistance in regard to his plan of penetratinginto Abyssinia ; and he procured from him letters ofintroduction to the heads of the Greek church in thatcountry.On the 12th of December, 1768, Bruce embarked toascend the Nile. In the course of his voyage he appearsto have observed rather the proofs of lawlessnessand poverty among the people than of the fertility andabundance of the soil. It appeared to him that thepeople in the date villages were of a more yellow andsickly complexion than any whom he saw elsewhere ;their countenances also were inanimate and dejected.After the third day's voyage the scene changed for thebetter : the Nile was a full mile broad, with a considerabledepth and strong current ; the banks were coveredwith villages, all surrounded with palm trees, verdantand pleasant, but not free from the dull monotony whichfatigues the eye of the traveller in Holland. At a villagecalled Rhoda he saw the magnificent ruins of theancient city of Anxious, built by Adrian : unfortunatelyhe had not known of them when he left Cairo, and was,in consequence, unprovided with those passports andrecommendations which might have enabled him to visitchap. xxii. bruce's travels. 319them in safety. On his enquiring into the character ofthe people who dwelt here, he was informed that thetown was inhabited by very bad Turks, very bad Moors,and very bad Christians ; that several devils had latelybeen seen among them, who had been discovered bybeing better and quieter than the rest. A little beforeour traveller reached Tender, he saw the first crocodile,and afterwards hundreds of them lying upon everyisland like herds of cattle ; yet the inhabitants of tenderdrive their beasts of every kind into the water, andthey stand there for hours. The women, too, comingto fetch water in jars, often venture into the river, butour traveller could not learn that they were ever attackedby the crocodiles.At Furshout, higher up the river, Bruce visited aconvent of Italian friars. This town, which containsabove 10,000 inhabitants, stands in a large cultivatedplain, covered with wheat and plantations of sugar canes.While our traveller remained here, it rained incessantlythe whole night, at which the people were much alarmed,and declared their apprehensions that the town was aboutto be destroyed. In this part of Egypt rain is extremelyrare. The prophets, when called on to explain thephenomenon, said that it portended the dissolution ofgovernment ; which, in fact, soon afterwards took place,accelerated perhaps not a little by the prophecy.On the 16th of February, 1796, Mr. Bruce left theNile, and proceeded to cross the desert with the caravanfor Kennel, the Cone Emporium of antiquity. At a wellcalled Birambar, or the well of spices, he had an opportunityof observing the singular edifices inhabited bythe Azaizy, a poor tribe of Arabs : these huts are madeof potters' clay, in one piece, in the shape of a bee-hive;the largest is not above ten feet in height and six indiameter. The road lay through an open plain, boundedby hillocks of sand and fine gravel ; not a trace couldbe found of any living creature, not even the antelopeor ostrich, the usual inhabitants of dreary deserts. Atoneof the halting places the caravan received an accession320 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.of twenty Turks from Caramania, distinguished fromthe Arabs by their superiority of appearance, and thegravity and neatness which characterise their nation:they had been pillaged on their journey by the Arabs,and otherwise ill treated. On learning that an Englishmanwas in the caravan, they immediately sought hisfriendship as their countryman ; for, according to Mr.Bruce, the Turks believe that a district called Caz-Dagli,on the frontiers of Caramania, was the country fromwhich the English first drew their origin ; and on thisaccount they are always ready to claim kindred withthe English when they meet them, especially if theystand in need of their assistance.On the road from Terfoowey to Coster, Bruce confusedlyrelates that he saw naked mountains of jasper,granite, and marble of a great variety of colours, butchiefly red and green ; and he supposed that the RedSea derived its name from some of those hills whichstretch towards it, and in which the red marble predominates.At Coster he embarked in a small vessel ofArab construction, the planks being sewed together. Theobject of his voyage was to visit an island called by theArabs the Mountain of Emeralds, a name irresistiblyattractive to one so forcibly influenced by the love ofthe marvellous. Here Mr. Bruce found some greenishcrystal, which in the East is commonly denominatedemerald ; but yet, as it is not the true emerald of Europeanlapidaries, he endeavours to explain away theArabic title for this wonderful mountain.At Jidda, he was surprised at the activity of commercein a place apparently so wretched, and at thesingular manner in which it was carried on. Valuablecargoes are disposed of by the English, on credit, toArab and Turkish merchants, of whom they know nothing; and the dealings are regulated by brokers, forwhose good conduct there is apparently no guarantee.*' These Indian brokers are neither Mahometan norChristians, but have credit with both. They sit downon the carpet, and take an India shawl, which theychap. xxn. bruce's travels. 321carry on their shoulders like a napkin, and spread itover their hands : they talk, in the mean time, on differentsubjects ; of the arrival of ships from India orof the news of the day, as if they were employed in noserious business whatever. After about twenty minutesspent in handling each other's fingers under the shawl,the bargain is concluded, without a single word havingbeen spoken on the subject, or pen and ink used in anywaywhatever."Jidda is one of the most insalubrious spots of a remarkablyunhealthy coast. To the eastward of the town, immediatelybeyond the gate, is a desert plain, filled withthe huts of the Bedouins, or wandering Arabs, built withbundles of spartan, or bent-grass. These Bedouins supplyJidda with milk and butter. The town owes its consequenceto its advantages as a sea-port : the merchandisewhich arrives here from India is again transported toMecca, whence it is dispersed over the whole East.Notwithstanding the letters of recommendation whichMr. Bruce carried from the governor of Jidda to themaybe of Casual, he found it difficult to escape fromthe unscrupulous rapacity of this chief; but his firmnessand fortunate circumstances enabled him to leave thisplace, and pursue his journey into Abyssinia. His roadlay at first through a narrow naked plain, from whichhe beheld the three successive ridges of the Abyssinianmountains : the first was composed of precipitous hills,thinly covered with shrubs ; the second, higher andsteeper, was still more bare and rugged ; the third wasa row of sharp uneven mountains, which would be countedhigh in any country in Europe. After this moderate description,our author incautiously adds, " Far above thetop of all, towers that stupendous mass, the mountain ofTaranta, probably one of the highest in the world, thepoint of which is buried in the clouds, and very rarelyseen but in the clearest weather ; at other times abandonedto perpetual mist and darkness, the seat of lightning,thunder, and of storm." In descending the mountainof Hamhamon, he saw some huts of the tribe ofAorta, who live wholly on the milk of cattle ; theirvol. in. Y322 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.flocks and herds were seen browsing on the branches oftrees and shrubs, neglecting the luxuriant grass thatclothed the river side. The caper tree here attains thesize of the English elm.Immense flocks of antelopes fled across the path ofour traveller as he ascended the hills that skirt the mountainof Taranta. Hyenas, in pursuit of them, prowledround the caravan, and succeeded at length in carryingoff an ass. Mr. Bruce describes, in his ostentatiousmanner, the difficulties which he had to encounter inconveying his quadrant and other instruments up themountains of Taranta ; but the plain at the top ofthis mountain, which, he says, " is perhaps one ofthe highest in the world," was found to produce cropsof good wheat of excellent grain, though the stalk wasnot above fourteen inches high. The inhabitants of thiselevated plain differed in complexion, and were superiorin character to those at the foot of the mountain. Herdsof beautiful cattle fed on the hills ; the cows were completelywhite, with large dewlaps hanging down to theirknees, white horns, and long silky hair.Divan, the first town at the foot of Taranta on theAbyssinian side, was found to be a populous place,inhabited by Moors and Christians in equal numbers.Their only trade is that of selling children, this townbeing the great market for the robbers and kidnappersof all Abyssinia. At Adowa, the seat of a valuablecotton manufacture, Mr. Bruce was kindly and hospitablyreceived by Anni, an Abyssinian merchant, towhom he was the bearer of recommendations. In thecountry round this town there are three harvests annually; but with all the advantages of a prolific soil and agenial climate, the Abyssinian farmer is always poorand miserable. After leaving this place, our travellerpassed through the ruins of Axum, formerly the capitalof Abyssinia. He then entered a country so rich andpicturesque as amply to compensate for the toils of theprevious part of his journey. Here also Mr. Brucewitnessed an adventure, the relation of which unfortunatelyprovoked the ridicule of the incredulous, andchap. xxii. bruce's travels. 323threw more suspicion on his veracity than might havebeen produced by fictions of a graver nature. " Soonafter losing sight of the ruins of this ancient capital ofAbyssinia, we overtook three travellers driving a cowbefore them. They had black goat-skins upon theirshoulders, and lances and shields in their hands. Inother respects they were but thinly clothed, and seemedto be soldiers. The cow did not seem to be fatted forkilling ; and it occurred to us that it had been stolen.This, however, was not our business ; nor was such anoccurrence at all remarkable in a country so long engagedin war. Soon after the drivers suddenly trippedup the cow, and gave the poor animal a very rude fallupon the ground, which was but the beginning of hersufferings. One of them sat across her neck, holdingdown her head by the horns ; the other twisted thehalter about her fore feet, while the third, who had aknife in his hand, in place of taking her by the throat,got astride upon her belly, before her hind legs, andgave her a very great wound in the upper part of herbuttock." Mr. Bruce did not see the remainder of theoperation, as he supposed that the animal was about tobe killed ; but when informed that this was not theirintention, his curiosity was awakened, and he then sawwith astonishment, two pieces, thicker and longer thanordinary beef-steaks, cut out of the upper part ofthe buttock of the beast. The skin, however, had notbeen cut away, and being now flapped over the wound,was fastened by a few small pins ; a plaster of clay wasplaced over it, and the animal was again driven on.The intrinsic improbability of this story furnished a goodtheme of animadversion to those who disbelieved ourauthor; while others supposed that he was justified in hisstatement by the ascertained fact that the Abyssiniansoften feast on raw flesh cut out from the animal themoment it is killed. But it has not occurred to thecritics, that an act of wantonness might in this instancebe mistaken for a common usage ; and that^MrBruce might relate the truth, without enabling us toY 2324 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.conclude that the Abyssinians are in the habit of cuttingsteaks from their living cows.The road to Gondar, the capital of Abyssinia, layover the mountain of Lamalmon, which, notwithstandingits height, is covered with luxuriant crops ofwheat. The mountaineers of this district are an activeindustrious people, primitive in their manners, and enjoymore comfort than the other Abyssinians. Their generalsuperiority is ascribed by the ignorant lowlahdef sto their skill in magic. On the plains below Lamalmonwere several plantations of sugar canes, which growfrom the seed. The province of Wbggora, which liesnext to Gondar, is one of the most fruitful in Abyssinia;yet notwithstanding their threefold harvests, the inhabitantsare miserably poor. The prolific nature of thesoil here is also in a great measure counterbalanced bythe prodigious quantities of large ants, and swarms ofrats and mice, which commit great havoc in the granaries.The ravages of war to which the country roundthe capital was particularly exposed, and, above all, thevices of a barbarous government, went far to counterbalancethe benignity of nature.When Mr. Bruce arrived in Gondar, both the kingand Ras Michael, the governor of the province, were absent; and the other persons of consequence to whom ourtraveller bore letters of recommendation had followedthe court. In this situation he might have sufferedsome embarrassment but for the kindness of his Moorishcompanions, who instructed him how to proceed. Hisfriend Anni also had written from Adowa to a noblemanof wealth and influence, named Alto Aylo, to informhim that the capital was about to be visited by a strangerof distinction, whom he recommended to his acquaintance.The very evening of Brace's arrival in Gondar,Alto Aylo came to visit him. Their interview commencedwith a profusion of civilities on both sides. Mr.Bruce soon found that his visitor perfectly understoodTigre and Amharic, the two native languages of Abyssinia,and had a little knowledge of Arabic ; that is, hechap. xxii. bruce's travels. 325understood it when spoken, for he could neither read norwrite it, and spoke it very ill. The beginning of theirdiscourse was in Arabic, which was rather embarrassed,but they had plenty of interpreters in all languages. Thefirst bashfulness being removed on both sides, the conversationbegan in Tigre, which, since Michael hadusurped the chief power, was become the fashionablelanguage in Gondar. Aylo was not a little surprised tohear Mr. Bruce speak it so well, and observed, that therewas no fear but that he would make his way.At the time when Bruce arrived in Abyssinia, thatkingdom was agitated by violent political commotions.Michael, the governor of Tigre, having put the king todeath, usurped the chief power, while an inexperiencedyouth was allowed to occupy the throne ; and, in order toincrease his influence, he married Ozoro Esther, thedaughter of the queen-mother. To this lady our travellerwas soon introduced under very favourable circumstances,as a Frank and as a physician, characters usually associatedby Mahometan. He was called upon to attend herchildren, who were attacked with the small-pox. Hebegan with prescribing temperance, cleanliness, andventilation ; and his patients all recovered. By thisopportune service he gained the favour of the ladies ofthe royal family, who alone appear to have enjoyed astable influence in the midst of these revolutions. Ourtraveller was now introduced to the formidable RasMichael. " He was an old man with white hair, dressedin many short curls : he appeared to be thoughtful, butnot displeased ; his face was lean ; his eyes quick andvivid, but seemed to be a little sore from exposure to theweather. He seemed to be about six feet high, thoughhis lameness made it difficult tc guess with accuracy ; hisair was perfectly free from constraint. They must havebeen bad physiognomists that did not discern his capacityand understanding by his countenance ; every look conveyeda sentiment with it; he seemed to have no occasionfor other language, and indeed he spoke but little." Fromthe young king our traveller afterwards obtained a dis3MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.extinguished mark of favour, in being appointed governorof the province of Ras el Feel. This was an appointmentwhich Mr. Bruce had not sought, nor desired indeed,for himself; and he immediately transferred it to a worthyfriend of his, named Sasine.The coarse festivities of the Abyssinian court sensiblyaffected Mr. Bruce's health, and he felt happy beyondmeasure when, after much solicitation, he obtained leaveto make an excursion to the sources of the Nile. Thishad been all along the grand object of his journey; butthe Abyssinians could not be brought to comprehend thenature of his enthusiasm. The Itegbe, or queen-mother,laboured hard to dissuade him from leaving Gondar. Shetreated the intention of going to the source of the Nileas a fantastic folly, unworthy of any man of sense orunderstanding, and earnestly advised him to remain inher palace at Koscam, to await the result of the dissensionswhich agitated the kingdom. " See," said she,how every day furnishes us with proofs of the perversenessand contradiction of human nature. You are comefrom Jerusalem, through vile Turkish governments, andhot unwholesome climates, to see a river and a bog, nopart of which you can take away, were it ever so valuable;and you take it ill when I discourage you from thepursuit of this fancy, in which you are likely to perish,without your friends at home ever hearing when or wherethe accident happened : while I, on the other hand, themother of kings, who have sat upon the throne of thiscountry more than thirty years, have for my only wish,night and day, that, after giving up every thing in theworld, I could be conveyed to the church of the holysepulchre in Jerusalem, and beg alms for my subsistenceall my life after."In spite of these sensible representations, Mr. Bruceset forward, on the 4th of April, 1770, on his journey tothe sources of the Nile. On his way he passed by thelake Sana, the largest piece of water in Abyssinia. Itis forty-nine miles in its greatest length, and aboutthirty-five miles broad ; it varies much, however, inchap. xxii. bruce's travels. 327magnitude in the wet and dry seasons. The Abyssinians,who, he harshly says, "are very great liars,"report that the islands in this lake are forty-five innumber ; but he, more accurate in matters of numericalcalculation, reduces them to eleven. On the shores ofthe lake they saw a great number of hippopotami, someswimming in the lake at a small distance, some risingfrom feeding on the high grass in the meadows, andwalking, seemingly at great leisure, till they plunged outof sight.A few days' journey brought our traveller to the fallsof Alata, called in Abyssinia the second cataract of theNile. The river, here half a mile in breadth, and considerablyswelled by the rains, falls down a height offorty feet in one sheet of water, with a force and noisetruly terrible. Mr. Bruce is here very anxious to correctJerome Lobo, who says that he sat under an arch orintervening space between the rock and the stream ofwater that fell from it. This, according to Bruce, is adownright falsehood ; for the water reaches to the footof the rock, and is in perpetual agitation. But thosewho would wish to deal more mildly with Lobo may,perhaps, find sufficient grounds of apology for hisstatement. A few years ago it was possible to creepbelow the great column of falling water at Niagara; butthe wearing of the rock at the edge of the cataract hasrendered impossible a feat which subsequent changes ofthe rocky bed may again permit. But Bruce, thoughunwilling to admire Lobo's wonders, makes the most ofhis own : " The cataract of Alata," he says, " was amost magnificent sight, that ages added to the greatestlength of human life would not deface or eradicate fromhis memory : it struck him with a kind of stupor, and atotal oblivion of where he was, and of every other sublunaryconcern. It was one of the most magnificent,stupendous sights in the creation, though degraded andvilified by the lies of a grovelling fanatic peasant."The journey of Mr. Bruce to the source of the Nilewas now interrupted by the bursting of the politicaly 4328 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.storm. Fazil, a chief of the Galla tribe, took arms againstMichael, under pretence of revenging the death of thelate king ; and many of the Abyssinian nobility joinedhis standard. The hostile armies met ; Michael was defeated,and fled ; the insurgents elected a new king, andFazil was now master of Gondar. Bruce, still bent uponexploring the sources of the Nile, was under the necessityof paying his court to this semi-barbarous chieftain :when admitted to his tent he found Fazil sitting upon acushion with a lion's skin upon it, and another stretchedlike a carpet before his feet ; he had a cotton cloth likea dirty towel wrapped round his head ; there was noother carpet or cushion in the tent, and only a littlestraw scattered thinly about it. The manners of Fazilwere as uncouth as his appearance ; and Bruce, whosecourage, to judge from his own account, often outranhis discretion, had a warm altercation with him on thesubject of his proposed visit to the sources of the Nile.On the next morning, however, he breakfasted with thechief of the Galla on honey, butter, and raw beef inabundance. Fazil was propitiated by a few presents;and not only permitted Mr. Bruce to proceed on hisjourney to the sources of the Nile, but also invested himwith the government of the Ago Geesh, the district inwhich the fountains are situated. But this was notenough: our traveller wanted guides; and with these,likewise, Fazil took care to supply him. " Hear me,"says he ; " you see those seven people" (our travellernever saw more ill-looking fellows in his life), — "these areall leaders and chiefs of the Galla, savages if you please;they are all your brethren ; you may go through theircountry as if it were your own, without a man hurtingyou." He then spoke to them in Galla, and they allanswered by a wild howl, and struck themselves uponthe breast as if assenting. Still further, Fazil gave himhis horse bridled and saddled, which he was to drivebefore him as a sort of passport ; for the Galla tribe paythe same respect to the chief's horse as to the chiefhimself.chap. xxii. bruce's travels. 329Thus completely provided for his journey, Bruce atlength reached the Nile at a place where it was only2(i0 feet broad. He was pleased to find that the Avows,who dwelt upon its banks, still venerated the divinity ofthe river ; they would not allow the party to ride across iton their mules, and even insisted on their taking offtheir shoes. Our traveller, after being long thwarted inhis desire to reach the fountains of the river, by the perversenessof his Galla guides, at length succeeded in hisobject. When the spot was pointed out to him wherethe sources of the river were to be found, he ran downin breathless haste till he reached an island of green turf,in the form of an altar, and apparently the work of art :where he stood enraptured over the principal fountainthat rises in the middle of it. He describes, with morethan usual pomp, the exultation and triumph of hisfeelings at this moment, " when he stood on that spotwhich had baffled the genius, industry, and enquiry ofboth ancients and moderns, for the course of near 3000years. Kings had attempted this discovery at the head ofarmies ; and each expedition was distinguished from thepreceding only by the difference of the numbers whoperished in it, and agreed only in the disappointmentwhich uniformly, and without exception, followed themall. Fame, riches, and honour, had been held out, foraseries of ages, to every individual of those myriadswhom these princes commanded, without having producedone man capable of gratifying the curiosity of hissovereign, or wiping off this stain upon the enterpriseand abilities of mankind, or adding this desideratum forthe encouragement of geography."While our traveller gave way to his enthusiasticfeelings, and endeavoured to engage the sympathy ofStates his Greek servant, some peasants observing froma distance the gestures and grimaces of the latter, wereinformed by Waldo, the Galla guide, that the man hadbeen bitten by a mad dog, and was out of his senses.They replied, that he would be infallibly cured by theNile ; but that the custom, after meeting with such a330 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.misfortune, was to drink the water fasting. This remedyfor hydrophobia originated probably in the livelyfancy of Bruce himself.He enters into a minute description of the three fountainswhich constitute what he is pleased to call thesources of the Nile. They were regarded by the Avows,the inhabitants of the district, with a veneration equalto that felt by the English traveller. They annuallysacrifice a black heifer at the principal fountain ; andhaving carefully washed it with the water of the river,distribute it in stated portions to the heads of the clans,who, having made an end of their feast, collect thebones together, and burn them to ashes. They alwayslay aside their shoes or sandals on approaching the bogwhere the Nile rises ; nor do they use the water of thatsacred river to wash themselves, or their clothes, butrepair for that purpose to a little stream that joins theNile lower down. Our traveller ascertained, by astronomicalobservations, the precise situation of these fountains; and from observations with a barometer he wasled to conclude that the plain in which they are situatedis more than two miles above the level of the sea.The grand object of our traveller's ambition beingthus attained, he began to think of his return home ; butthe intestine divisions of the country for some timethrew impediments in the way of his departure. Heatlength, however, set out to reach Egypt by way ofSenna and through the deserts of Nubia. This dangerousjourney occupied him eleven months ; but withhis arrival at Syene in Egypt his troubles were at anend; and on the 10th of January, 1773, he reachedGrand Cairo, whence he had no difficulty in returninghome.Bruce has the merit of being among the first to makea long and perilous journey, at his own expense, merelyfor the purpose of discovery. He again recalled tonotice the long agitated question of the sources of theNile ; but on the first publication of his travels hiscredit was violently assailed, and it was not perfectly re-chap. xxii. bruce's travels. 331established until his narrative was confirmed in all materialpoints by the testimony of more recent travellers,particularly lord Valencia and Mr. Salt. If it be admittedthat Bruce in no instance amuses his reader with mereinventions, it must, on the other hand, be allowed thathe writes with a levity and a tone of bravado whichoperate much to his disadvantage. In every page of hisvolumes he shines as a hero ; and, by his total want ofsobriety, he gradually and inevitably alienates the confidenceof his reader. His great boast was, that he haddiscovered the sources of the Nile ; but he disingenuouslyconceals from his reader that the Nile, whosesources had been in all ages an object of curiosity, wasthe Bahr el Abiad, or White River, flowing from thewest. He admits, in the course of the narrative, thatthis river far exceeds in magnitude the Bahr el Argue,or Blue River, which descends from Abyssinia, andwhose fountains he had explored. He also endeavouredto conceal from the public, and even from himself, thefact, that the sources of the Bahr el Argue had beenformerly visited by the Portuguese traveller, Pays, whodescribes the mountains of Geesh, the ceremony of sacrificinga cow to the river, and the cataract of Alata,nearly in the same terms as Bruce himself. He indulges,also, in the same expressions of exultation inhaving discovered what eluded the search of so manyheroes of antiquity. Thus Bruce, though he did notdeceive the world as to matter of fact when he statedthat he had visited the sources of the Nile, yet wasguilty of dealing dishonestly with the question, and ofpurposely concealing whatever might lessen the brilliancyof his achievement.332 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.CHAP. XXIII.park's travels.THE AFRICAN ASSOCIATION. LEDYARD. LUCAS. HOUGHTON.Mungo PARK ENGAGED TO TRAVEL TO THE NIGER. HISRECEPTION FROM THE KING OF BONDOU. OBLIGED TO PresentHIS COAT. INTERVIEW WITH THE KING'S WIVES.KINDNESS AND GAIETY OF THE NEGROES. ACCOUNT OF THELOTUS. MR. PARK TAKEN BY THE MOORS. HIS SUFFERINGSAND ESCAPE. HIS JOURNEY THROUGH THE DESERT. FIRSTVIEW OF THE NIGER. Sago. SONG OF THE NEGRO WOMEN.Barbara. VEGETABLE BUTTER. MR. PARK OBLIGED TOTRAVEL ON FOOT. HIS ARRIVAL AT Silly. — INFORMATIONRESPECTING THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE INTERIOR. HE IS ObligedTO RETURN. HIS DISTRESS. JOINS A KAFILA.RETURNS TO THE COAST. — HIS SPECULATIONS RESPECTING THEOUTLET OF THE NIGER. PROCEEDS ON HIS SECOND JOURNEY.THE EXPEDITION NEARLY ROUTED BY BEES. GOLD PITS.SICKNESS ATTENDING THE RAINY SEASON. THE EXPEDITIONEMBARKS ON THE NIGER. RECEPTION IN Barbara. PARKBUILDS A BOAT AT Standing. STATE OF THE EXPEDITION.THEY PROCEED DOWN THE-river. THEIR FATE.The close of the eighteenth century was distinguishedfor an extraordinary ardour in the pursuit of geographicaldiscoveries. Navigation had assumed a boldnesswhich naturally gave an impulse to geographical enquiries; and while our ships visited the remotest partsof the globe, it seemed disgraceful that we should stillremain in ignorance of the interior of Africa. To promotediscovery in this quarter, a society was formed in 1778,and named the African Association. Its object was toemploy persons of enterprise and intelligence to explorethose unknown countries; supplying them with funds,and directing the movements in such a way as to leadto the most advantageous results. With the formationchap, xxiii. park's travels. 333of this society begins a new era in the history of Africandiscovery.The first person despatched by the Association wasEdward, who had attempted, as before noticed, totravel over land to Kamtschatka with the intentionof proceeding across the American continent to theUnited States. He arrived at Cairo in August, 1778,and employed himself for some time in collecting informationfrom the dealers in the slave-markets at Cairo,and in making himself acquainted with the manners ofthe people. He was ready to proceed by a caravan toSenna, whence he intended to go westward towardsthe Niger, when he was seized with a bilious complaint,which terminated his life.Mr. Lucas, the next person employed by the AfricanAssociation, had resided sixteen years in Morocco, wherehe acquired a perfect knowledge of the Arabic language.The offer of his services being accepted by the Association,he left Tripoli in February, 1789, with the caravanfor Fezzan, situated in the heart of the great desert.Of its capital, Morzouk, he gave an excellent description; and obtained from the people much valuableinformation respecting the country beyond the desert.The difficulties attending the journey across theSahara drew the attention of the Association to the populousdistricts along the Gambia, by which it wasjustly supposed that the country of the Niger might bereached by a shorter route. In 1791, major Houghtonproceeded through the Mandingo country to Bamboo.From this place he set forward to pursue his routeto Tombuctoo ; but at Jarra, or Barba, he was robbedand murdered by the Moors, or, according to otheraccounts, died of a dysentery.The failures of Edward and Houghton did not discouragethe African Association, nor did they meet withany difficulty in finding persons sufficiently animatedwith the spirit of enterprise to engage in the undertaking.Surrounded as it was by manifest danger, Mr. MungoPark, a native of Scotland, who had paid a visit to the334 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.East Indies, and was inflamed with the desire of exploringunknown countries, voluntarily offered himselfto the Association ; and they, finding him to possess therequisite courage and intelligence, readily embraced hisoffer.On the 21st of June, 1795, Mr. Park arrived at Jilton the northern bank of the Gambia ; and thenproceeded to Pisan, where he resided for some time inthe house of Dr. Laidley, employing himself in thestudy of the Mandingo language, in learning the productionsand customs of the country, and in endeavouringto collect information respecting the geography ofthe interior from the negro merchants, who, perhapsfrom commercial jealousy, were all averse to his proposedjourney. On the 2d of December he set forward,attended by two negro servants, Demba, a sprightly youth,acquainted with some of the languages of the interior,and Johnson, who had been a slave at Jamaica, wherehe had learned the English language. He was accompanied,likewise, by two black slates, or slave merchants,and two negroes : one of them a blacksmith, who hadbeen some years employed by Dr. Laidley, and was nowabout to return to his native country. All these attendantslooked up to him with respect, and relieved thefatigue of the journey by their cheerfulness and goodhumour. The negroes travelled on foot, driving theirasses before them. Mr. Park rode a small but hardyand spirited horse : his baggage consisted of provisionsfor two days ; a small assortment of beads, amber andtobacco, for the purchase of a fresh supply ; a fewchanges of linen, and other necessary apparel, an umbrella,a pocket secant, a compass, and a thermometer,with two pairs of pistols, and two fowling-pieces.In three days the travellers arrived at Medina, thecapital of Woolly ; a town of 1000 houses, surroundedwith a wall of clay, and a fence of sharpened stakes andprickly bushes. The aged king gave Mr. Park a kindreception, but warned him not to persist in the prosecutionof so dangerous a journey. Here Mr. Park hiredchap, xxiii. park's travels. 335three elephant hunters to accompany him as guidesthrough the wilderness that extends from Woolly to thefrontiers of Bondou. When he arrived at Fatteconda,the capital of that kingdom, he was obliged immediatelyto repair to the presence of the king. Dreadingthe well known rapacity of this prince, Park took withhim one canister of gunpowder, some amber, tobacco,and his umbrella, as presents ; and put on his new bluecoat,in order to preserve it. The king, who supposedthat all white men are merchants, was surprised to hearthat Mr. Park did not wish to purchase any slaves orgold: he could not be brought to comprehend that hetravelled from motives of curiosity. The presents gavehim much pleasure ; and particularly the umbrella,which his majesty repeatedly furled and unfurled, tothe great admiration of his attendants. He commenceda long oration in praise of white men, extolling theirgreat riches and humanity ; and he then proceeded to avery pointed eulogium on Mr. Park's blue coat, not forgettingthe yellow buttons, which had particularlycaught his fancy ; and he hinted that, if it were given tohim, he would wear it on all public occasions, andinform all the world of the donor's generosity. Parkfelt that this request was equivalent to a command, andsorrowfully laid his new blue coat at the feet of the king,who, in gratitude, furnished him with provisions, andexempted him from duty at the custom-house.The next morning Mr. Park was informed that theking's wives wished to see him. " I had no soonerentered," he says, " the court appropriated to the ladies,than the whole seraglio surrounded me ; some beggingfor physic, and some for amber, and all of them desirousof trying that great African specific, blood-letting.They were ten or twelve in number, most of themyoung and handsome, and wearing on their heads ornamentsof gold and beads of amber. They rallied mewith a good deal of gaiety on different subjects, particularlyon the whiteness of my skin, and the prominencyof my nose. They insisted that both were artificial : —336 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.the first, they said, was produced when I was an infant,by dipping me in milk ; and they insisted that my nosehad been pinched every day till it had acquired its presentunsightly and unnatural conformation. On mypart, without disputing my own deformity, I paid themmany compliments on African beauty. I praised theglossy jet of their skins, and the lovely depression oftheir noses; but they said that flattery, or, as they emphaticallytermed it, ' honey mouth,' was not esteemedin Bondou. In return, however, for my company, or mycompliments, to which they seemed not so insensibleas they affected to be, they presented me with a jar ofhoney, and some fish, which were sent to my lodging."On leaving Fatteconda, the road lay through a countryso much infested with robbers that it was thoughtexpedient to travel through it by night. Not a wordwas uttered during this part of the journey ; the howlingof wild beasts alone disturbed the deep solitude ofthe forest. Wolves and hyenas were seen gliding likeshadows from one thicket to another. At Joag, thenext town he arrived at, Mr. Park was plundered of alarge share of his property by the booty or magistrateof the place. As he was sitting here, listlessly chewingstraws, an old female slave asked him, as she passed by,whether he had got his dinner : he made no reply, notunderstanding the drift of her question ; but when hisboy answered that the king's officers had robbed him ofall his money, the kind-hearted slave took her basketfrom her head, and presented him with some handfulsof ground nuts. The next morning our traveller leftJoag in company with the nephew of the king ofKasson, who offered to conduct him to the latter place.In the evening he reached Same, on the banks of theSenegal, which is here a beautiful but shallow streamrunning over a bed of sand and gravel.As the party approached Jumbo, the native town ofthe blacksmith who accompanied Mr. Park, a numberof the inhabitants came out to meet their countryman,whom they conducted into the town with songscrrAr. xxii. park's travels. 337and dances. A minstrel who headed the procession,extolled in extemporaneous verse the virtues of theblacksmith, and exhorted his friends to give him asumptuous feast. The affectionate joy with which thenegro was welcomed home by his friends highly interestedMr. Park, who retired a little from the crowdto observe their movements. The blacksmith then wenton to relate his adventures, making frequent mention ofthe kindness of the white man ; and at the conclusionof his story he pointed to Mr. Park, and exclaimed,See him sitting there ! " The eyes of all were nowturned upon the stranger, whom they viewed with surprise,not wholly free from apprehension ; but theblacksmith assured them that he was quite inoffensive ;and our traveller spent a whole day with these worthypeople in feasting and merriment.Mr. Park was favourably received by the king ofKasson, who furnished him with a guide to Kemmoo,the capital of Kaarta. The direct road to this placewas now rendered impracticable by the wars which desolatedthe interior ; so Mr. Park had no alternative butto take the circuitous route through the Moorish kingdomof Ludamar. At the commencement of this journey,he saw, for the first time, the people gatheringtombstones, the fruit of the rhombus lotus. They aresmall farinaceous berries, of a yellow colour and delicioustaste. The natives convert them into a sort ofbread, by exposing them for some days to the sun, andafterwards pounding them gently in a wooden mortar,until the farinaceous part of the berry is separated fromthe stone. This meal is then mixed with a littlewater, and formed into cakes, which, when dried in thesun, resemble in colour and flavour the sweetest gingerbread.This shrub is found on the northern coast ofBarbary ; and there can be little doubt that it was thefood of the lotophugi of antiquity.From Jarra, or Barba, Mr. Park despatched all hispapers by his servant, Johnson, to the Gambia, andproceeded on his journey to the Moorish town of Be-vol.III. z338 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.now. He found it to consist of a great number oftents, scattered irregularly over a large extent of ground,and divided by herds of camels, cattle, and goats.From the Moors he experienced the most brutal treatment.The chief, an old sullen Arab, surveyed himwith attention, but scorned to speak to him. The ladieswere far more inquisitive : they asked a thousand questions; searched his pockets, opened his waistcoat to examinethe whiteness of his skin; and even counted histoes and fingers, as if they doubted whether he wasa human being. Mr. Park was lodged in the samehut with a wild hog, placed there on purpose to annoythe Christian. His clothes, instruments, and every thingthat belonged to him, were taken possession of by Ali, theMoorish chief, whose superstitious fears, however, wereawakened, when he observed that the magnetic needlealways pointed to the Great Desert. To explain thisphenomenon, Mr. Park informed him that his motherresided far beyond the sands of Sahara, and that whileshe was alive the piece of iron would always point thatway, and serve as a guide to conduct him to her ; andthat if she were dead it would point to her grave. TheMoor was now doubly astonished ; and after viewing thecompass a long time with attention, he returned it to theowner, afraid of keeping in his possession so dangerousan instrument.The sufferings of our traveller continued without alleviation,until he was introduced by Ali to Fatima hisqueen. She was an Arab woman, with long blackhair, and remarkably corpulent. Though shocked atfirst at the sight of a Christian, she soon took pleasurein his intelligence, and contributed not a little, by herhumanity, to mitigate the hardships of his slavery.Through her interest Mr. Park was permitted to accompanyAli in a journey which he made to Jarra. M r hilehe remained there, the king of Kaarta approached withan army to punish the rebellious inhabitants, whotook to flight in the utmost confusion ; and Park at thesame time contrived to escape from the Moors. No-chap,xxiii. park's TRAVELS. 33$thin? could exceed his joy when he found himself iuthe wilderness, beyond the reach of his pursuers. Hewas without food, and knew not where to find water :but these miseries seemed light in comparison with thosefrom which he had escaped. He proceeded east-south-eastthrough the forest ; but excessive thirst and fatigueat length overcame him, and he fell down on the sandin a state of insensibility. Towards evening a violentshower of rain gave him some relief; and in a negrovillage at which he arrived, the charity of an old womansupplied him with a good meal. He soon after enteredthe kingdom of Bambara: the people mistook him for aMoor, and seeing him in such a miserable plight, anddriving his horse before him (for the poor animal wasno longer able to carry him), asked him in ridicule whetherhe was come from Mecca.He travelled in company with a party of fugitiveSpartans, expecting every moment to see the Niger : atlength one of the negroes called out Geo-ajjilli! see thewater ! and he then beheld, with infinite pleasure, thegreat object of his mission, the long-sought Niger, glitteringin the morning's sun, as broad as the Thames atWestminster, and flowing slowly to the eastward. " Ihastened," he says, " to the brink, and, having drank ofthe water, lifted up my fervent thanks in prayer to thegreat Ruler of all things, for having thus far crownedmy endeavours with success." Sego, the capital ofBambara, at which he was now arrived, was an extensivecity of 30,000 inhabitants : the houses were built ofclay, some of them with two stories, and many of themwhitewashed ; the numerous canoes upon the river andthe bustle of the population gave the place an air ofcivilisation that our traveller did not expect to find inthe heart of Africa. While he was waiting for an opportunityto cross the river, he received a message fromthe king desiring him to desist from the attempt, and refusingto see him until he knew what brought him intothe country. The messenger likewise advised Mr. Parkto seek a lodging in an adjoining village, which hez 2340 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.pointed out ; but here our poor traveller found, to hisgreat mortification, that no one would admit him intohis house : he was regarded with astonishment and fear,and was obliged to sit all day in the shade of a treewithout tasting food. He feared also that he should beobliged to spend the night in the open air, though theneighbourhood was infested with wild beasts. The mannerin which he was relieved from this distressing situationis related by him in the following words : —About sunset, as I was preparing to pass the nightin this manner (in the branches of a tree), and hadturned my horse loose that he might graze at liberty, awoman returning from the labours of the field stoppedto observe me ; and, perceiving that I was weary anddejected, enquired into my situation, which I brieflyexplained to her ; whereupon, with looks of great compassion,she took up my saddle and bridle, and told meto follow her. Having conducted me into her hut, shelighted a lamp, spread a mat on the floor, and told me Imight remain there for the night. Finding that I wasvery hungry, she said she would procure me somethingto eat ; she accordingly went out, and returned in ashort time with a very fine fish, which, having causedto be half-broiled upon some embers, she gave me forsupper. The rights of hospitality being thus performedtowards a stranger in distress, my worthy benefactress,pointing to the mat, and telling me that I might sleepthere without apprehension, called to the female part ofher family, who had stood gazing on me all the whilein fixed astonishment, to resume their task of spinningcotton, in which they continued to employ themselvesgreat part of, the night. They lightened their labourby songs, one of which was composed extempore, for Iwas myself the subject of it. It was sung by one of theyoung women, the rest joining in a sort of chorus. Theair was sweet and plaintive, and the words literallytranslated were these: —* The winds roared, and the rains fell. The poorwhite man, faint and weary, came and sat under our tree.chap, xxiii. park's travels. 341He has no mother to bring him milk, no wife to grindhis corn. Chorus. - Let us pity the white man, nomother has he " &c. &c. The only recompense Mr.Park could oftener to this charitable woman, at his departurenext morning, was four brass buttons off his waistcoat.The king of Bambara refused to admit Mr. Park to apersonal interview, perhaps from a fear that by so doinghe might embroil himself with the Moors : he orderedhim to depart from Sego, but at the same time sent him5000 cowries (equal to about one pound sterling), wishing,as he said, to relieve a white man in distress. Thenegro inhabitants of this country appear to be a kindhearted,hospitable, and communicative race ; securityand good government are alone required to raise theminto civilisation. The large town of Abba, at whichMr. Park next arrived, was situated in the midst of abeautiful and highly cultivated country, bearing someresemblance to the midland counties of England : herethe people were all employed in collecting the fruit ofthe shea tree, from which they prepare their vegetablebutter. The shea tree very much resembles the Americanoak, and the fruit is not unlike the Spanish olive.The butter produced from the kernel, " besides the advantage,"says Mr. Park, " of its keeping the wholeyear without salt, is whiter, firmer, and to my palateof a richer flavour, than the best butter I ever tastedmade from cow's milk." This commodity, which isproduced in great abundance in Bambara, is the chiefarticle of their inland commerce.Pursuing his journey from this place through numerousvillages inhabited by fishermen, he arrived at thepopulous town of Sansanding, a place of considerable-trade,and much resorted to by the Moors, who treatedour poor traveller with their usual insolence and brutality.He saw on the river here several large canoes loadedwith merchandise, and covered over with mats. Thekindness of his negro landlord compensated in somemeasure the insults of the Moors ; the hospitable negrodesired no better payment than a sophie or charm: il If2 3312 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.a Moor's sophie is good," said lie, " a white man's mustneeds be better." Mr. Park assented to his request, andwrote for him the Lord's Prayer on a thin piece ofboard.Beyond this place part of the journey lay through aplain infested with wild beasts; and the sight of somelarge lions crouching among the bushes, filled our travellerwith dismay ; but this anxiety and alarm gaveway to feelings of calm delight at the sight of Modiboo,a beauteous village on the banks of the Niger. Theriver is here of a majestic breadth, encompassing numerousgreen islands, the peaceful retreat of Fouls, whosecattle are secured by their situation from the depredationsof wild beasts ; and the view is altogether oneof the most enchanting in the world. Having spent thenight here, Mr. Park proceeded in the morning on hisjourney to Kea, being by this time robbed of all his clothessave what he carried on him, and these were now wornto rags. He was sick and weary; and while he was littleable to walk, his horse was still less able to carry him.About six miles beyond Modiboo the poor animal fellfrom weakness, and it was found impossible to set himon his legs again. " 1 sat down for some time," saysMr. Park, " beside this worn-out associate of my adventures; but finding him still unable to rise, I took off thesaddle and bridle, and placed a quantity of grass beforehim. I surveyed the poor animal as he lay panting onthe ground, with sympathetic emotion; for I could notsuppress the sad apprehension that I should, myself, inashort time, lie down and perish in the same manner, offatigue and hunger. With this foreboding I left my poorhorse." At Kea, a fishing village, he experienced a surlyreception from the booty or chief magistrate ; but lieluckily met with a fisherman, who consented to carry himdown the river in his canoe. Towards evening he arrivedat Silla, a large town on the southern bank, where he wassurrounded till dark by crowds of wondering negroes.Here he had a slight attack of fever; and when he consideredthat he was penniless, ill clad, exposed to thechap, xxiii. park's travels. 343insults of the Moors, and that he had a journey ofmany hundred miles to perform on foot, in order to reachthe Gambia, his heart sank within him, and he almostdespaired of ever being able to effect his return ; but hedetermined at all events to proceed no farther eastward.He endeavoured, therefore, to collect from the negrotraders what information he could, respecting the countriesfarther down the river. From them he learnedthat two days' journey from Silla is the town of Jenny,standing on an island in the Niger, and containing moreinhabitants than Sego. At the distance of two daysmore, the river spreads into a great lake called Dibbie, orthe Dark Lake, so large that canoes, in crossing it fromwest to east, lose sight of land for one whole day. Inissuing from this lake the river divides itself into severalbranches ; the two chief of which, after encircling agreat island called Jinbala, meet again at Kara, theport of Tombuctoo, from which it is one day's journeydistant. The whole distance by land from Jenne toTombuctoo is ten days' journey.From the information which Mr. Park received, itwould appear that Tombuctoo is a Moorish city; but helearned that Houssa, the capital of the kingdom of thesame name, situated farther to the eastward, was largerand more populous than Tombuctoo : there, also, thegovernment was in the hands of the Moors. None ofthe merchants whom he consulted could give him anyaccount of the termination of the Niger. They describedits great length in vague and hyperbolic terms, sayingthey believed " it ran to the world's end."On his return from Silla, Mr. Park had the good fortuneto recover his horse; but the difficulties that awaitedhim on his journey back were far greater than he hadanticipated. The motives of his journey became moresuspected. He was obliged to avoid Sego, and prosecutehis journey along the banks of the Niger; often obligedto wade through deep marshes, with little food, and inconstantapprehension from wild beasts. At Wonda helay for several days in a fever, occasioned by fatiguez4344 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.anxiety, exposure to the night air, with little food, andalmost without clothes. On leaving this place, he repaidthe lukewarm kindness of his landlord by presenting himwith his horse. The country he afterwards passedthrough suffered severely from famine, and he whollydepended for subsistence on the charity of the negroes,who were themselves nearly starving. At length hejoined a kafila, or caravan .'of slaves, proceeding to theGambia, and the slate, or slave merchant, willinglyagreed to provide for him during the journey, on conditionof receiving a suitable reward when they reachedthe coast. Among the slaves he recognised a man whosehospitality he had experienced at Caracalla. The poornegro observed, with a sigh, "The irons were not then uponmy legs." On the 5th of June, Mr. Park arrived atJindey, where he had parted from Dr. Laidley eighteenmonths before.The sufferings which Mr. Park had experienced in hisformer journey did not at all shake his courage, or inducehim to shrink from the dangers of African discovery.After his return to England, he became acquainted witha gentleman who had often visited, as a trader, the mouthof the river Congo, and the coasts in its vicinity. Theywere mutually pleased at each other's discoveries ; and,while each speculated on the great river he had seen, theirviews gradually came to coalesce, so that they at lengtharrived at the conclusion that the Niger, after a circuitouscourse through central Africa, discharges itself into thesea by the channel of the Congo. This suppositionformed the basis of the plan of operations which Mr.Park proposed to follow, when, in 1804, he was appointedby government to command a new expedition to explorethe course of the Niger. He proposed to enter Bambaraby his former route. There he was to construct twoboats forty feet long and eight feet broad, with which hewas to navigate down to Angora, and thence reach thesea by Congo. He required, in order to carry his planinto execution, thirty-six Europeans, of whom six shouldbe artificers and the rest soldiers ; asses, to convey thechap. xin. park's travels. 345baggage; tools, for constructing the boats; besides merchandise,and numerous articles to distribute in presentsor for trade. Government liberally granted him allthat he demanded, and an ample remuneration wassecured to him in case of his ultimate success.Mr. Park arrived at Gore on the 28th of March,180o; and some time being employed in preparations,he began his journey from Pisan, on the Gambia, onthe 27th of April. To his impatience in thus settingforward on so arduous an undertaking at the commencementof the wet season, may, in a great measure, beascribed Ins subsequent misfortunes, and the total failureof the expedition. In passing through the wildernessof Tenda, the people unfortunately disturbed a largeswarm of bees, which, issuing forth, put their assailantscompletely to the rout. In the confusion which ensued,the fire spread through the dry grass, and threatenedto consume the baggage ; so that for half an hourthe expedition appeared terminated by the attack of thebees. Some of the cattle died from die stings, andnone escaped unhurt. On the 8th of June they experiencedthe first tornado, the usual forerunner of theperiodical rains ; and with this visitation began theirtrain of sorrows. The ground was now covered withwater, the heat intolerable ; and on the third day afterthe commencement of the rains, twelve men were onthe sick list. The negroes, hearing that the white menwho passed through their country were sickly and distressed,and that they carried with them immense riches,which they were unable to defend, lost no opportunityof trying to despoil them. In the mountainous countryof Konkodoo, Mr. Park had the opportunity of visitingseveral gold pits, and of observing the way in whichthe natives collect and prepare that precious metal.The country was richly cultivated, and the mostpicturesque he had ever seen ; but the beauty of thelandscape could not win his mind from dwelling onthe state of the expedition, which was now melancholyin the extreme. Half of the men were sick, and lay346 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.down on the road, refusing to proceed. The natives,seeing their weakness, grew more bold and daring. Asthe party proceeded, every day added to their distress.Mr. Park himself was afflicted with a fever ; but in themidst of all these sufferings his enthusiasm still supportedhim ; and when, on the 27th of July, he hada distant view of the mountains to the south-east,the certainty that the Niger washed the southern baseof these mountains made him forget his fever, and hethought of nothing but how to climb over their bluesummits." Near this place died the last of the fortyasses which they had brought with them from the coast.Every day some of the men were either buried or abandoned.On the 19th of August, Mr. Park reached thesummit of the mountain ridge which separates the Nigerfrom the remote branches of the Senegal ; and from thebrow of the hill " he once more saw the Niger rollingits immense stream along the plain." But the joy thathe might have derived from this prospect was marredby the most melancholy reflections. Of thirty-eightmen who had accompanied him from the Gambia, onlyseven remained ; all sick, and almost all despairing ofrecovery. He hired a canoe to carry him down theriver, which was from one to two miles broad, andflowing at the rate of five knots an hour. The Nigeris here called by the natives the Joliba or Great River.Apprehensions were for some time entertained lest^theyshould not be permitted to pass through the kingdom ofBambara. The natives, it appeared, were unable to comprehendthe motives of those dangerous journeys, andviewed them with suspicion ; but Park, by an ingeniousaddress, completely removed the scruples of theking's prime minister. " You know," he said, " thatthe white people are a trading people, and that all thearticles of value which the Moors and the people ofJenny bring to Sego are made by us. If you speak ofa good gun ; who made it ? The white people. Wesell them to the Moors ; the Moors bring them toTombuctoo, where they sell them at a higher rate :chap, xxiii. park's travels. 347the people of Tombuctoo sell them to the peopleof Jenne at a still higher price ; and the peopleof Jenne sell them to you." These arguments, secondedby a splendid present of two double-barrelledguns, and some other articles, secured our travellers thefavour of the court, and permission to build a boat atSansanding. Three old canoes were patched together,so as to form a boat of about forty feet long and sixbroad, which was named His Majesty's Schooner theJoliba. Before the boat was finished, however, Parkmet with a severe blow in the death of his relation andcompanion, Dr. Anderson. This, he says, was the firstevent during the journey which threw the smallestgloom over Ins mind. " He then felt himself left asecond time lonely and friendless amidst the wilds ofAfrica."On the 17th of November, 1805, this adventurous travellerleft Sansanding on his voyage down the river. Hisparty was now reduced to four Europeans besides himself,lieutenant Martin and three soldiers, one of whomwas in a state of derangement. Isaac, his negro attendant,brought back his letters and journal to the Gambia,but no further intelligence was received of himself.From the information collected by captain Clapperton,it appears that Park and his companions descended theriver from Tombuctoo to a town called Boussa. Thesultan of Your, to whom they sent presents from thisplace, offered to supply them with guides to conductthem through the rocks which impede the navigation ofthe river a little below the town ; but they, instead ofpaying attention to this offer, set off at night, and theboats soon after struck on the rocks. The people on bothsides of the river began to assail them with arrows, and thetwo white men jumped into the water and were drowned.Some books and papers, according to the same account,remained in the boat ; and one of the books was said tobe still in the possession of the sultan of Your.348 MODERN" VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK V.CHAP. XXIV.DEN HAM AND Clipperton's TRAVELS.Horseman. HIS FATE. ADAMS VISITS TOMBUCTOO. DOUBTSAS TO HIS JOURNEY. EXPEDITION OP CAPTAIN Tucker.ARRIVAL AT THE CONGO. THE CATARACT OF YELLALA.APPEARANCE OF THE RIVER. FATAL TERMINATION OF THEEXPEDITION. JOURNEYS OF MAJOR Eddie; CAPTAIN Campbell;MR. RITCHIE. THK1R UNHAPPY RESULTS. DEN-hamAND Clipperton CROSS THE GREAT DESERT. LAKEShad. ARRIVAL AT KOIKA. THE SHEIKH EL KANEMY.EXPEDITION TO Mandate. ANGORNOU. DEATH OF LieutenantTools. Clipperton GOES TO KANO. APPEARANCEOF THE COUNTRY. ARRIVAL AT Cockatoo. THE SULTANBELLO. HIS SUSPICIONS OF THE ENGLISH. HIS PROMISES.HIS MAP OF THE NICER. INFORMATION RESPECTING PARK.RETURN OF Dunham AND Clipperton. DEATH OF MR. TYR-whit.Clipperton's SECOND JOURNEY. — HE REACHESCockatoo FROM BENIN. ILL RECEIVED HIS DEATH. RE-Salts OF HIS TRAVELS. MAJOR LAING REACHES TOMBUCTOOAssassinated. TRAVELS OF Caille. HIS ACCOUNT OFTOMBUCTOO.The calamitous termination of Park's second journeymight have been thought sufficient to damp the ardourof even the most enterprising ; but the impulse of curiosity,and the encouragement of hope, still prompted manyto face the dangers of a tropical climate, and of a journeythrough suspicious and bigotted nations. In 1798,Frederick Horseman, a German of good education, wasengaged by the African Association to attempt to penetrateto the Niger from the eastward. In September ofthat year he joined the caravan from Cairo to Fezzan.Of this ancient caravan route he has given an excellentdescription. From Morzouk he paid a short visit toTripoli, and then returned to the capital of Fezzan, withthe intention of pursuing his journey into the interior.But after his departure from Morzouk no further intel-chap.XXIV. DKNIIAM And CXArPERTOX. 349licence was received from him. Major Denham learnedthat he penetrated as far as Nyffe, on the Niger, wherehe died of sickness brought on by the climate.The great object of European research in the interiorof Africa was first visited, in 1811, by a seaman namedAdams, who, being shipwrecked en the African coast,was taken prisoner by the Moors, and, after a variety ofadventures in his servitude, was at length carried stoTombuctoo. He remained there for six months, whenhe was again carried across the desert by the Moors, andransomed by the British consul at Mogadore. After residingsome time in London, in a state of extreme poverty,his adventures reached the ears of a gentlemanwho took much interest in African affairs. Adams wasthen strictly examined as to what he had seen in theinterior of Africa, and the result published. But theaccount which Adams gives of Tombuctoo did not satisfythe high expectations that were formed of that long soughtcity ; and doubts were thrown on the authenticity of hisnarrative. The objections raised to his story, however,are more specious than solid. His narrative begins in1810; whereas it is known that the shipwreck whichthrew him on the coast of Africa did not take place till1811. This, however, is a mistake, and not a fiction ;and does not at all affect the consistency of the remainderof his story. It is also said, that his shipmates have deposedthat he was never separated from them during hiscaptivity with the Moors : but in answer to this it maybesaid, that more confidence is due to a narrative theinvention of which would suppose a considerable degreeof knowledge and ability, than to the depositions of seamen,who, if called upon by either party to lend the aidof their testimony, would, under such circumstances,readily aver whatever they found agreeable.After the late war, when the British government madeso many exertions to extend the circle of geographicalknowledge, the grand object of reaching the interior ofAfrica was not overlooked. The persuasion which guidedPark in his last expedition had not lost its influence, and350 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.it was determined to proceed by exploring the river Congofrom the sea as far as possible. For this purpose anexpedition was despatched, in 1816", under the commandof captain Tuckey, a distinguished officer, who was accompaniedby Mr. Smith, an eminent botanist, and severalother gentlemen of scientific abilities. The ships reachedthe mouth of the Congo in the beginning of July, andproceeded a little way up the river. It was found advisable,from the strength of the current, to leave the ship,and to proceed up the river in the boats. When theyhad advanced about 150 miles from the mouth of theriver, they arrived at the Yellala's Wife, a cataract orrapid extending nearly across the river. The party weretherefore obliged to leave the boats, and pursue theirjourney by land. A few miles farther on they found theYellala, or Great Cataract, which is in reality only arapid, but at the same time so violent as to put a stopto the navigation of the river. Near these rapids theCongo was extremely contracted in its channel, and did notappear to pour down a large volume of water ; but abouttwenty-four miles above Yellala it opened into a noblestream, sometimes three or four miles wide : the sceneryon its banks being at the same time highly picturesqueand varied. But now, when a ray of success seemed togleam on the expedition, their calamities commenced ;one by one the party were attacked by fever, and obligedto proceed to the ship. They began their return, whenthey had advanced about 280 miles from the mouth ofthe river. " Terrible march," exclaims captain Tuckey,worse to us than the retreat from Moscow ! " Mr Smiththe botanist, Mr. Branch the zoologist, Mr. Tudor thegeologist, and Mr. Galley, a gentleman of science whovolunteered his services to the expedition, all died soonafter they reached the ship; and captain Tuckey himselfdid not long survive his companions. Thus terminatedthis unfortunate expedition, another large sacrifice to thecause of African discovery.In the mean time an expedition had been despatched,under major Peddie, to reach the Niger by the usualCHAP. XXIV. Dunham AND Clipperton. 351route of the Gambia, and to ascend that river, which itwas hoped would enable him to form a junction withcaptain Tuckey's party. In November, 1810", the party,consisting of 100 men and 200 animals, landed at Ka-undyon the Rio Nunez. Here major Peddie was attackedwith fever, and died in a few days. Captain Campbell,on whom the command devolved, proceeded to thefrontiers of the Fouls, where he was detained for somemonths by the jealousy of the natives, who were alarmedat seeing so large a party of white men about to entertheir country. Their cattle all perished, and they wereobliged to return to Kakundy, where captain Campbelldied soon after, worn out by fatigue and vexation. LieutenantStoke, his successor in the command, sunk in likemanner under the deadly influence of the climate.While these ill fated exertions were made to reachthe interior of Africa from the west, the British governmentdid not overlook the opportunity that seemed to beoffered by the friendly disposition of the pasha ofTripoli. In March, 1810., Mr. Ritchie, accompaniedby lieutenant Lyon, proceeded from Tripoli to Fezzan,with the intention of accompanying one of the expeditionswhich the pasha promoted through all thecountry to the southward, as far as Soudan, for thepurpose of procuring slaves ; but the climate of Morzoukproved fatal to Mr. Ritchie ; and the health of Mr.Lyon being also seriously affected, he was unable toproceed farther than the southern frontiers of Fezzan,whence he returned to Tripoli, with a large stock ofhearsay information respecting the country beyond thedesert.Notwithstanding the unhappy failure of this attempt,and the fate that seemed inevitably to await all whoendeavoured to solve the great mysteries of Africangeography, government was still determined to try thesuccess of another expedition, from Tripoli, across theGreat Desert, to Bornou ; a route which the British consulasserted was as open as that from London to Edinburgh.Major Denhani, lieutenant Clapperton, of the navy, and352 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.Dr. Oudney, a naval surgeon sufficiently conversant withnatural history, were the persons selected for this perilousmission. They arrived, on the 8th of April, 1822, atMorzouk, the capital of Fezzan, where they luckilybecame acquainted with Boo Khaloom, a wealthy merchant,who was preparing to travel across the desert toBornou, and who readily offered to become their guidein the journey. In an excursion westward from ,Dr. Oudney had an opportunity of observingthe manners of the Tricks, a fine people, whose dominionsare confined within the limits of the desert,and who view with sovereign contempt the inhabitantsof cities. On the 29th of November, 1822, our travellersleft Morzouk on their journey across the desert :it was undertaken with favourable circumstances,, andwas accomplished, without any accident of importance.On the 5th of February, the waters of Lake Tshad,the receptacle of the rivers of Bornou, were discoveredby our delighted travellers. Major Denham hastened,in the morning, to the water's side, and found the shorecovered by multitudes of water-fowls of all descriptions,and so unused to be disturbed that his presence causedthem no alarm. Fish is so abundant in the lake thatthe women catch them by wading in a little distance, andthen driving them on shore.On the 17th of February the caravan arrived atKouka, the capital of Bornou ; and our travellers, withanxious hearts, remained for some time on horsebackat the gate of the palace, while the form of their receptionwas arranged within. After some delay, theywere admitted into the presence of the Sheikh el Enemy,the dictator of Bornou, into whose hands the necessitiesof the state had thrown the supreme power. He wasfound in a small dark room, sitting on a carpet, plainlydressed, in a blue gown and shawl turban : his personalappearance was prepossessing: he was apparently notmore than forty-five or forty-six, with an expressivecountenance and benevolent smile. He asked our officerswhat was their object in visiting his country : to whichCnAP. XXIV. DEN-HAM AND Clipperton. 353they replied, " Merely to see it, and to give an accountof its inhabitants, produce, and appearance ; as theirsultan was desirous of knowing every part of the globe."At a second interview, they presented to him the giftsent by the English government. The sheikh was gratifiedat the assurance that the king of England hadheard of Bornou and of himself; and turning to one ofhis attendants, he observed, " This is in consequence ofour defeating the Begharmis." Upon this, a chief whohad distinguished himself in the war alluded to, demanded," Has he ever heard of me?" to which ourtravellers very promptly answered in the affirmative.Huts were built for the English near the palace,and they experienced an extent of hospitality whichseems characteristic of the interior of Africa : besidesoccasional presents of bullocks, camel-loads of wheatand rice, leathern skins of butter, and jars of honey,they had a daily allowance of rice mixed with meat,and savoury paste made of barley flour. The marketof the town, which assembled at least 15,000 persons,exhibited to our travellers all the productions and manufacturesof the country, with a great variety of Africancostume.As the English officers became better acquainted withthe sheikh, he rose in their estimation, and gave new proofsof his friendly disposition: he was delighted beyond measurewith rockets, which were fired off to amuse him, andwhich struck what he considered a wholesome terror intohis people. Hillman, the shipwright, who accompaniedmajor Denham, made him a gun carriage, on which hemounted a small brass cannon that he had procured fromTripoli. The English also cut out a set of harness, andinstructed him in the first manoeuvres of the light artillery: he was thus soon convinced of their greatsuperiority ; but his delight knew no bounds when hewas presented with a musical snuff-box, which he hadlistened to with rapture, and despaired of obtaining.His kindness to our travellers was not quite un-vol.in. A A354 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.mingled with suspicion : it was reported by the peoplethat the English, who are supposed by the Africans tohave no homes but on the water, intended to build shipson Lake Tshad, and take possession of the country. Thesheikh was unwilling to allow the officers to go far fromKouka, and peremptorily refused them permission tocontinue their journey to Soudan and the Niger.An opportunity, however, soon occurred of seeingsomething of the country towards the south. BooKhaloom was desirous of making an incursion with hisArab retinue into some of the countries inhabited bypagan negroes, in order to collect slaves ; and, aftermuch discussion, he was allowed to proceed southwardsto Mandara. Major Denham resolved, at any rate, toaccompany the expedition ; and the sheikh, though atfirst averse, at length yielded his assent, and appointeda select band of his warriors to take charge of theEnglish officer. This band of marauders, though seeminglycountenanced by the sheikh of Bornou and thesultan of Mandara, appears to have been purposely conductedby them against an enemy capable of punishingtheir temerity. Boo Khaloom led his forces against theFelatahs, who occupy the mountains to the south ofMandara ; but they vigorously repulsed the Arabs andtheir auxiliaries : Boo Khaloom himself died of hiswounds ; and major Denham, after being stripped nakedby the conquerors, escaped almost miraculously fromtheir hands, and rejoined the dejected remnant of theinvading army. A superficial knowledge of about 200miles of country was the sole fruit of this expedition,in which he embarked his own life and the character ofhis country. He also found means to visit Birnie, theancient capital of the kingdom ; where the sultan treatedhim with the profuseness of African hospitality. Fromthis place, he proceeded to Angornou, the largest andmost populous town in Bornou, and situated but a fewmiles from Lake Tshad : it is better built than Kouka,many of the huts having four mud walls and twobathers. The inhabitants are about 30,000 in number ;CHAP. XXIV. Denial AND Clipperton. Sandin peaceable times the weekly market is said to beattended by 80,000 or 100,000 persons.The health of the English suffered severely during therainy season, but during this period they had the opportunityof ingratiating themselves with the sensiblesheikh. On the 21st of December, a kafila arrived,and with it came an Englishman ; lieutenant Toole, whowas sent by government to strengthen the mission. Hebrought word that Mr. Tyrwhit, the gentleman appointedfor the purpose, had been detained by sickness, and thatlie was sent forward to convey the intelligence to majorDenham and his companions. In January, 1824, heaccompanied major Denham on a journey round LakeTshad, but he soon sunk beneath the noxious influenceof the climate, and expired on the 26th of February.On the lO'ih of May, Mr. Tyrwhit arrived, bearingsplendid presents to the sheikh, who readily agreed thathe should remain in Bornou as consul.But, previous to these transactions, on the 14th ofDecember, captain Clipperton and Dr. Oudney had departedfor Kano in Soudan, the Grana of Edrisi andother Arabian geographers. Dr. Oudney, who had beenfor a long time in a weak state of health, was unable tobear the exertion of travelling, and expired on the12th of January. Captain Clapperton, though his ownstrength was very much impaired, and though his spiritswere sunk by the melancholy fate of his friend, yetpersevered in his intention of making himself well acquaintedwith the topography of Soudan. The countrythrough which he journeyed was open, well cultivated,and covered with numerous villages ; but Kano, thegreat emporium of the kingdom of Houssa, caused himsome disappointment; from the descriptions of the Arabs,he was led to suppose it a city of surprising grandeur;whereas he found the houses nearly a quarter of a milefrom the walls, and in many parts scattered into detachedgroups between large stagnant pools of water. In themarket here, however, he bought an English cottonumbrella, and his attention was particularly engaged byA a 2356 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.the appearance of the cooks' shops near the shambles,consisting merely of a-wood fire, stuck round withwooden skewers, on which small bits of meat were roasting.Beyond Kano the appearance of the country continuallyimproved : the herds of cattle were particularlyfine; and the wood, thinly scattered over the hills, gavethe scenery the appearance of an English park.At length he reached Sockatoo, the residence of thesultan Bello. A numerous escort came out to meet him;and he, to impress the natives with a high opinion of hisofficial importance, arrayed himself in his lieutenant's coattrimmed with gold lace, white trousers, and silk stockings; and, to complete his finery, he wore Turkish slippersand a turban. He found Bello seated on a smallcarpet, between two pillars supporting the roof of athatched house not unlike an English cottage. He wasa handsome man, about forty-four years of age, dressedin a blue cotton robe, with a white turban ; the shawl ofwhich he wore over his nose and mouth, after the Trickfashion. He admired exceedingly all the presents thatwere brought him, especially the compass and the telescope."Every thing," he said, addressing lieutenantClapperton, "is wonderful; but you are the greatestcuriosity of all." While our traveller remained in Sockatoo,provisions were regularly sent to him from thesultan's table on pewter dishes with a London stamp;and one day he had a piece of meat served up in a whitewash-hand basin of English manufacture.The sultan was desirous to know whether the king ofEngland would send him a consul and a physician, toreside in Soudan, and merchants to trade with his people; and whether there were any productions in hiscountry which the English would purchase. Accordingto him, the river Quorra, as the Niger is here called,enters the sea at Funds; and he offered to give the kingof England a place on the coast to build a town, so thatgoods might be conveyed up the river to his country.He spoke also of Mungo Park, and said that a double-barrelledgun, which was found in the boat when that un-chap.XXIV. Dunham AND Clipperton. 357fortunate traveller perished, had been once in his possession.But though the sultan willingly granted that theEnglish " were a wonderful people," he does not appearto have been ever satisfied with the replies made to hisoften repeated question, "What are your motives for cominghere?" lie had learned from the Moors that theEnglish, first visiting India as traders, had at lengthmade themselves masters of the country, and he hintedhis fears that they might have similar designs on the interiorof Africa. Yet he repeated his offers of friendship.He wished to have some Arabic books, and a map of theworld, to be sent to him from England ; and in returnpromised his protection to as many learned men fromthat country as wished to visit his dominions.Mr. Clapperton returned through Krishna, a considerabletown, but going fast to ruin ; and on the 8thof July he arrived in Kouka, to which place majorDenham also returned, ten days later, from his journeyround Lake Tshad. On the Kith of August, 1824, ourtravellers left Kouka, and arrived at Tripoli on the 25thof January in the following year. Mr. Tyrwhit, whoremained behind as consul, did not long survive thedeparture of his friends : his health was delicate whenhe arrived at Kouka, where he breathed his last on the22d of October.The information obtained from sultan Bello respectingthe course of the Niger, and its communication withthe sea, with the willingness he expressed to engage inacommercial intercourse with the English nation,seemed to hold out inducements more distinct andpowerful than those which had hitherto actuated thepromoters of African discovery. Mr. Clapperton wasequipped a second time, and directed to proceed intoSoudan from the Gulf of Benin, a route hitherto untried,though obviously the shortest of any. As it was supposedalso that the Niger emptied itself into the sea on this partof the coast, it was hoped, that he might be able to traceit from the mouth up, and thus finally set at rest a questionwhich during ages had caused so much embarrassmentA A 3358 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.to geographers. When the party arrived on the coast,however, they renounced the intention of ascending theriver, the mouth of which they were informed was surroundedwith pestilential swamps. On the 7th of September,1825, captain Clapperton, accompanied by captainPearce, an excellent draughtsman, and Dr.Morrison, anaval surgeon of some experience, departed from Badagry,on their journey into the interior of Africa. Before theexpiration of the month, however, death had deprivedcaptain Clapperton of his two scientific companions,and he was left to pursue his journey with no Europeanassociate but his faithful servant Richard Lander.In the kingdom of Yarriba, sixty miles from the coast,he met with a distinguished reception. All seemed tovie in offering him proofs of respect and friendship.Eyes, or Katunga, the capital of this kingdom, is fifteenmiles in circumference ; but there are so many fieldsand open spaces within this wide circuit, that it wasfound impossible to conjecture the population.The chief difficulty which Clapperton had experiencedin this journey arose from the desire of theAfrican princes to engross the acquaintance of thestranger ; and though willing to shower favours on himthemselves, they reluctantly allowed the same gratificationto their neighbours. Our traveller, however, visitedBoussa, a place interesting as the scene of Park'stragical death. Notwithstanding the devastation ofwar and the political confusion to which these Africanstates are continually liable, the country appeared generallypopulous and cultivated. The territory ofZegzeg was covered with fine crops and rich pastures,and produced the finest rice grown in any part of Africa.The population of its capital town, Maria, within thecompass of which are many large gardens and fields ofcorn, was supposed to amount to 50,000.Captain Clapperton, after a most interesting journey,at length arrived at Cockatoo ; but it was at an inauspiciousmoment that he waited on the sultan, who nolonger regarded him with a friendly countenance. HeCHAP. XXIV. Dunham AND CLAPPEUTOIS'. 359knew that the English traveller was the bearer of a presentto the sheikh of Bomou, containing among otherarticles six muskets ; and as a war had recently brokenout between Bornou and Soudan, this appeared to thesultan a suspicious circumstance. It was rumouredamong the people that the English contemplated thesubjugation of the nations of Africa; that Clappertonwas a spy, sent to examine their condition ; and somedeclared that he ought to be immediately put to death. Alittle time and address might have got the better of thesedifficulties, and enabled Clapperton to resume that swayover the sultan to which his civilisation entitledhim ; but his spirits were depressed by disappointmenton his first arrival in Sockatoo ; his irritated feelingspreyed on a frame weakened by exertion, and the influenceof a baneful climate ; and after a protracted illness,he expired on the 13th of April. Bello appears to havebeen somewhat affected by his death, and allowedLander to perform his funeral obsequies with everymark of respect.Lander, whose return home was facilitated in everypossible way by the sultan, determined to proceed southwardsto Funds, in the hopes that by pursuing thatcourse he might be able to trace the Niger to its outlet ;and he had actually reached the latitude of that placefurther to the east, when he was stopped by four horsemen,who were sent to conduct him to the king of Zegzeg.His intention was thus frustrated, and he was obligedto return to Badagry on the coast, where he arrived onthe 21st of November, 1827.The additions to our geographical knowledge of theinterior of Africa which we owe to captain Clappertonfar exceed in extent and importance those made by anypreceding traveller. The limit of captain Lyon's journeysouthward across the desert was in lat. 24°, while majorDenham, in his expedition to Mandara, reached lat. 9°15'; thus adding 14| degrees, or £)00 miles, to the extentexplored by Europeans. Horseman, it is true, had previouslycrossed the desert, and had proceeded as farA A 4360 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK V.southwards as Nyff4 in lat. 10 J. But no account wasever received of his journey. Park in his first expeditionreached Silla, in long. 1 ° 34' west ; a distance of 1 1 00miles from the mouth of the Gambia. Denham andClapperton, on the other hand, from the east side ofLake Tshad in long. 17°, to Sockatoo in long. unexploreda distance of 700 miles from east to west in theheart of Africa; a line of only 400 miles remaining unknownbetween Silla and Sockatoo. But the secondjourney of captain Clapperton added tenfold value tothese discoveries. He had the good fortune to detectthe shortest and most easy road to the populous countriesof the interior; and he could boast of being thefirst who had completed an itinerary across the continentof Africa from Tripoli to Benin.While Clapperton proceeded on his second journey,major Laing, an officer who had distinguished himselfin the Ashantee war, undertook to penetrate to Tombuc-too. From Tripoli he crossed the desert to the southwestby way of Ghadamis. The kafila with which hetravelled was attacked by a ferocious band of Tricks.Our poor countryman received four-and-twenty wounds,and was left for dead; but by the care of his companionshe recovered in a manner almost miraculous, and proceededon his journey. On the 18th of August, 1826,he achieved the grand object of his mission in reachingTombuctoo, where he remained above a month. Lettersreceived from him while residing there state that thetown is about four miles in circuit, that it is populous andflourishing, and that he had collected valuable materialsfor the geography of central Africa. On leaving ,Laing agreed with a Moorish merchant namedBamboos to conduct him as far as Sego : the wretchassented to the proposal; and on the third day of thejourney, in passing through the desert, he murdered theunhappy traveller whom he had engaged to protect. Buthe knew the value of major Laing's papers. It is saidthat they were conveyed to Tripoli, and that they havebeen prevented from reaching the British governmentCHAP. XXIV. Denial AND Clipperton. selbythe selfish machinations of a person connected withthe French consulate in that city.Tombuctoo has been since visited by a young Frenchmannamed Caillie, a person of limited education, butwho had early become inflamed with the desire to visitunknown countries. He joined the unfortunate expeditionof major Gray, which penetrated as far as Bedouin1818; and having spent much of his time in thesettlements on the Gambia and Senegal, he acquired suchan acquaintance with the language and manners of theMoors as encouraged him to undertake a journey aloneinto the interior of Africa. He accordingly set out fromKakundy on the 19th of April, 1827, with a small caravanof Meninges. He was dressed as an Arab, assumedthe grave deportment of a Mussulman, and passed onwithout suspicion. On the 20th of April, 1828, heentered Tombuctoo : but he says, t( The spectacle beforeme did not answer my expectation : at first sight it presentsbut a heap of houses neither so large nor so wellpeopled as I expected. Its commerce is less considerablethan is stated by public report, a great concourse ofstrangers coming from every part of Soudan. I met inthe streets only the camels coming from Kara. The cityis inhabited by negroes of the Missouri nation: they formthe principal population. The city is without any walls,open on all sides, and may contain 10,000 or 12,000 inhabitants,including the Moors." He remained in about a fortnight, and then returned across theGreat Desert to Morocco. He reached Tangier on the18th of August, 1828, after a most distressing journeyof about fourteen weeks. The authenticity of his narrativehas been questioned, but on very insufficientgrounds. There appears no reason to deny him thehonour that courage and enterprise may claim, when unassistedby learning and education. The descriptions ofCaillie are always vague and incorrect : he may boast tohave been among the first to visit Tombuctoo; but atthe same time geography derives but little benefit fromhis exertions.CONCLUSION*.In Southern Africa the missionaries from the Cape ofGood Hope have added considerably to our geographicalknowledge • but there is nothing, either in the naturalfeatures of the countries which they have traversed, orinthe social condition of the tribes which possess them,to give interest or brilliancy to their discoveries. Thecentral regions of Africa, from Soudan to Mozambique,and from Abyssinia to Congo, still remain utterly unknown.The progress of discovery on that continentmust necessarily be slow until some traveller be found,who, following the example of the great navigator Cook,makes the preservation of health the chief object of hiscare, and instead of hurrying forward continually, regardlessof seasons, of fatigue and infirmity, will be contentedto advance more slowly, without injury to his constitution.A vast portion of central Asia is still but little known.From the Malayan peninsula to the northern frontier ofGreat Tatary, and from the confines of China to theplains of Bokhara, regions of great extent, including perhapssome of the most anciently inhabited countries of theglobe, and possessed by nations raised in general considerablyabove barbarism, are still almost hidden from theknowledge of the civilised world.National jealousy and religious bigotry present obstaclesmore difficult to be overcome by the curiosity ofman than the barriers of seas and mountains which naturehas interposed between nations. Little more than threecenturies have elapsed since the earth was first circumnavigated,and its sphericity thus practically proved ;and what an amazing progress have navigation and hydrographymade during that period ! Except within thecomparatively narrow circles rendered inaccessible bypolar ice, European vessels now visit every part of theocean ; and a navigator can, at the present day, consultmaps of the islands in the South Sea far surpassing, inaccuracyand minuteness, the maps of Sicily possessed bythe Romans in their most cultivated age.INDEX.Abused, his account of China, i.16 5.Adam of Bremen, i. 228.Adams, William, voyage of, ii. 194.Taken prisoner, ii. IJ)o. Retained,with liberty to travel through thecountry, and employed by theEmperor of Japan to build ships,196. His death, 199.Adams, a seaman, his visit to .Doubts as to his journey,iii. 3-19.Admirer, Peter, his account of themariner's compass, i. ,'549.Aerolites, extraordinary fall of, i.1*3.ethiopians, i. 14.Africa, march of Albus into, i. 97.Expedition of Suetonius Paulinusinto, 198. Northern coast of, representedby Ptolemy as nearly astraight line, 112. Frequentedby the Arabians, 170.African association, iii. 332.Agatharchides, geographical knowledgeof, i. 73.Agricola, his invasion of Britain, i.90.Akkoolee, a country situated on theshores of the Western or Polarsea, iii. 215.Albion New, discovery of, ii. 255.Albuquerque, Alphonso de, becomesviceroy of India, ii. 109.His expedition against Malacca,Sumatra, &c. ; his death, 110.Alcazava, voyage of, in 1534. Attemptsto reach Peru by theStraits of Magellan, ii. 2H. Arriveson the coast of Patagonia ;despatches an expedition up thecountry ; failure of his voyage,and his death by mutiny, ii 242.Alexander, march of, to India, i. 58.Meets with Searches, havingsuffered from famine and distress,62, Makes arrangements for examiningthe southern coast of thePersian Gulf, and dies, 03.Aleutian Island, iii. 290.Alligator rivers, discovery of, iii.142.Alraaguiram, narrative of, i. 172.Almeida, Don Francisco, appointedviceroy, and governor-general ofIndia ; sails for India, ii. 108.Death of, 109.Alvarado, expedition of, to the interiorof Mexico; he builds thecity of St. Ago, ii. 61. Opposedto Benalcazor, 80.Alvarez, Diego, anecdote of, ii. 87.Amur, river, first heard of by theRussians, in the year 1639, '333.Amber Coast, in the Baltic, i. 51.Amber, connection of, with theriver Eridanus and the Po, i. 135.America, discovery of, attributed tothe inhabitants of Dieppe, ii. 24.Origin of the term, 26. Furtherorigin of the term, 28.Early discoveries in, £9. North,the interior of, iii. 178.Americans engage with eagernessin the fur trade, iii. 179.Amherst, Lord, his embassy toChina productive of importantamendments in hydrography, iii.300.Amsterdam, island of, ii. 293. Cook'sdescription of the inhabitants of,iii. 51.Anaximander, i. 26.Andalusia, description of the oldinhabitants of, by Strabo, i. 80.Angouleme, discovery of, ii. 219.Arian Straits, ii. 279.Anson, Captain John, commandsan expedition to attack theSpanish settlements in the SouthSea, ii. 326. Distress of his crew,327. Success of his expedition,328.Apalachin, invasion of, by theSpaniards, ii. 91. Distressed stateof the invaders, 92.Apsley Strait, iii. 143.Apure, Humboldt's, description ofits banks, iii. 259.Arran, his description of China, i.llfi.Arabians, their monopoly of theIndian trade, i. 125. Commerceand conquests of, 125.Aremphaei of Pliny, i. 95.Aristotle, geography of, i. 55.Armenia, habits of the people of,i. 52.364,A rteaga, Don Ignacio, expeditionof, iii. 169.A asia, northern regions of, describedby Marco Polo, i. 309.Astrachan, description of, ii. 187.Ascetic, mission of, to the Tatars,L 246.Athens, Homer's knowledge of, i.12.Atahualpa, inca or governor of thePeruvian empire, ii. 75. Takenprisoner by Pizarro, 76. Strangledat the stake, 77.Alarautes, ignorance of the use ofproper names, L 38.Australia known to the Portuguesebefore it was known to the Dutch,ii. 288.Australian continent, the BlueMountains of, attempted to bepenetrated, by Lieutenant Daws;also by Captain Tench, by ColonelPatterson, iii. 146. By Mr. Hacking,and Mr. Bass, 147. ByBareillier ; a passage discovered,148.Azara, Don Felix de, explores theSpanish dominions, iii. 276.Azores, obscurely known before theyear 1380, i. 235.B.Bacchus, island of, ii. 218.Back, Mr., expeditions of, with CaptainFranklin, iii. 224. JoinsFranklin's second expedition, 236.Baffin, William, observations onthe longitude by, ii. 171. DiscoversWhale Sound, 173. Observationson refraction in northernlatitudes, 177.Baffin's Bay, discovery of, it 173.Baie de Ternai, discovery of, iii.99.Albus, Cornelius, march of, to theinterior of Africa, i. 97.Balkh, city of, i. 283.Banks, Sir Joseph, expedition of,with Cook to observe the transitof Venus over the sun's disc, iii.32.Bare, servant of Commergon, discoveredto be a woman, iii. 27. •Bareillier, M., attempts a passageover the Blue Mountains in theAustralian continent, iii. 148.Barei>tz, William, a Dutch pilot, ii.156. Appointed chief pilot of anexpedition to China, by a northeastpassage, 157. Fails in theexpedition. Discovers Spitz,burden, 158. Calamities in Ice.haven, 159. Leave* Ice Havenwith the remainder of his crewin two small boats, 161. Arrivesat Cola, and embarks in a Dutchvessel, 161.Barmesfield, Mr., sent to survey theSouth Shetland Islands, iii. 284.Bartoli, Fernando, map of, iii 5.Basil's Bay, discovery of, iii. 301.Bass and Flinders, expedition of, inTom Thumb, iii. Become distinguishedfor zeal and enterprise,128.Bass, Mr., expedition of.todiscovcrwhether an open strait betweenNew Holland and Van Diemen'gLand existed ; arrives at a harbourwhich he calls Port Western,iii. 1S9. Joins an expedition withMr. Flinders to investigate theinsularity of Van Diemen's Land,130. A attempt* a passage over theBlue Mountains in the Australiancontinent, 147.Bass's Strait, iii. 131.Ravelin commands an expeditiondespatched by the First Consul tocomplete the discovery of TerraAustralis, iii. 138.Bay, Poverty, iii. 40.Bay, Mercury, Hi. 40.Bav of the Duke of York, discoveryof the, iii 210.Battel, Andrew, sails for la Plata,ii. 226. Anchors at St. Sebastian;suffers from want of provision ;is made prisoner by the Indians,and carried to Rio Janeiro; isemployed by the governor to tradebetween Loango and Angola,227. Escapes on board a Dutchvessel; again made prisoner;banished to Massangano ; escapesfrom imprisonment, 228. Betrayedby an old negro, and againimprisoned ; again employed aspilot by the governor ; discoversthe encampment of the Giagas,229. Left as hostage by the Portugueseto the Benguelas, 230.Escapes and joins tie army of theGiagas ; escapes from the Giagasand returns to the Portuguesecolony; again escapes from captivityin hopes of pardon, usuallygranted at the triennial changeof governor, 231. Reaches theLake of Kasansa ; constructs aboat for the purpose of escape:succeeds in getting to sea ; pickedup at sea by an old shipmate, andleft at the port of Loango, 232.At length returns to his nativeplace in England, Leigh in Kent,232.i Batuta, Ibn, his description of theNile, i. 176. His description ofthe baths of Tiberias, 177. Setsout to the tomb of the Prophet,178. Visits Bagdad, Medina, andMecca, 17!). " Night of Revival"described by Batuta, 178.Visits th pearl fisheries, 181.Is entertained by the brotherhoodof youths, 182. Visits Bulgar,184. Visits Constantinople, 187.Visits Chorus, Bokhara, Balkh,and liarwan, 191. Visits Dchli,and is made judge, 193. Resignshis oiiiee, 194. Is sent on an embassyto China, 19.x Attacked byrobbers and made prisoner, 196.Arrives at Calicut, 199. Visitsthe Maldive Islands, 200. Visitsthe mountain of Serendib, orAdam's Peak, 201. Sails for Coromandel,202. For Sumatra, £03.Arrives in China, 204. Journeysthrough the interior of China,205. Sails to Sumatra, Calicut,and Ormuz, 206. Takes up hisresidence at Fez, 207.Beagle Channel, the, iii. 2S3.Beechy, Captain, expedition of, iii.2t7.Behring, expedition of, ii. 344.Benalcazar opposed to Alvarado, ii.80.Bennet, Stephen, voyage of, ii. 174.Discovers a lead mine in CherryIsland, 175.Bermudas taken possession of bythe English, ii. 216.Banco, map of, i. 235.Billings, Mr. Joseph, expedition of,iii. 289. Examines the islands onthe north-west coast of America,290.Bligh, Captain, voyage of; his stayat Otaheite iii. 113. His crewmutiny and turn him adrift in anopen boat ; he reaches the Dutchsettlement at Timor, 114. Returnsto the South Sea, and succeedsin effecting the object of hismission, 1 18.Bog river, i. 29.Bokhara, description of, ii. 1S9.Bonaventure, Edward, voyage of,to discover a north-east passage toCathay, ii. 142. Fails in his project,143.Bonpland, expedition of, in companywith Humboldt, iii. 250.Reaches the port of Cumana, inSouth America, 251. Arrives atthe Cueva del Guacharo, 252.Returns to Cumana, 255. Returns,and is appointed by Napoleonto superintend his gardensat Malmaison ; taken prisoner,Boon, Daniel, his partiality for theIndian mode of living, iii. 179.Found dead near the Missouri,180.Bougainville embarks on an expeditionto the Falkland Islands, tonegotiate with the Spanish king,iii. 25. Arrives at the islandscalled by him Archives Dangc-rex, or Panmotu and Tahiti, 26.Arrives at a group of islandswhich he calls Les Grandes Cyclades; .discovers Louisiade andarrives at Batavia, 27. Arrivesat St. Malo, 28.Bounty, the ship, commanded byCaptain Bligh, arrival of at Tahiti,iii. 113. Mutiny of the crew ;put themselves under the commandof Christian Fletcher, andset sail for Toobooai, 114. Areapprehended by Captain Edwards,naBrazil, discovery of, ii. 31.Brewer, Captain, despatched to takepossession of Am hem's Land,and to form an establishment onwhatever spot was deemed mostmost eligible for a mercantiledepot, iii. 1(50.Broughton, Captain, in the Chatham,accompanies Captain Vancouveron an expedition to NootkaSound, iii. 172. Returns to England,174.Brown is ts found New Plymouth, inMassachusetts, ii. 218.Bruce, James, his travels, iii. 315.Made Consul of Algiers, 316.Travels by Arsinoe and Barca toRas Sem ; visits Egypt, 317. Embarksto ascend the Nile, 318.Visits a convent of Italian friarsat Furshout ; leaves the Nile andproceeds to cross the desert, 319.Relates that he saw naked mountainsof jasper, 320. Pursues hisjourney from Edda to Abyssinia,321. Ascending the hills skirtingthe mountain of Taranta, meetswith flocks of antelopes, pursuedby hyenas ; arrives at Texan, 322.His anecdote of the cow, 353.Arrives at Gondar, 324. Arrivesin Abyssinia; gains the favour ofthe ladies of the royal family ofTigre, 525. Appointed governorof the province of Ras el Tell ;makes an excursion to the sourceof the Nile, 326. Arrives at thefalls of Alata, 327. Is permittedby Fazil to proceed on his journeyand invests him with the governmentof the Ago Gush, ."'28. Discoversthe source of the Nile, 329.His description of the three fountains; reaches Grand Cairo, andreturns home, 330. His narrativeconfirmed hy Lord Valencia andMr. Salt, 331.Bruce, travels of, in Africa, it 239.Ascends the Senegal.Brusa, the city of, i. 184Buccaneers, expeditions of, in theSouth Seas, ii. '299. They form asociety called " Brethren of theCast," 30". Importance of thetrade carried on by, 301. Seizeon the island of Tortuga, 301. Ascendthe river Mosquito, 302.Plunder New Segovia, 302. Defeatthe Spaniards in a pitched battle,303.Buenos Ayres, foundation of, it 90.Bulgarians, i. 168.Barlow, voyage of, ii. 206.Button, Sir Thomas, appointedcommander of an expedition toGreenland, ii. 169. DiscoversNelson's River, 169. DiscoversMansfield Islands, 170.Byron, Commodore, his voyage ofdiscovery, iii. 17. Takes shelterat Port Desire, 18. His intercoursewith the Patagonians, 19.Visits the Falkland Islands, andcasts anchor in Port Egmont, 20.Distress of his crew, 21. Arrivesat the Islands of Disappointment,22. Arrives at Batavia, and returnsto England, 23.C.Cabral, Pedro Alvarez, commandsan expedition to India, ii. 103.Discovers Santa Cruz, 104.Cabot, Sebastian, expedition of, ii.89.Cade Most, expedition of, to theAfrican seas, i. 357. His accountof the Moors, 358. The wanderersof the desert, 359. Banksof the Senegal, 360. Is well receivedby King Budomcl, 361.Cailac, city of, i. 266.Caillie, execution of, toTombuctoo,iii 361.Caledonians, their descent, i. 91.Caledonian, New, iii. 58.Calystiri, or dog-faced people describedby Ctesias, i. 53.Cam, or Cano, Die^'O, voyage of, i.368. Brings Cazuta to Portugal,and has him baptized, i. 369.Cambridge Gulf, iii 141Cameeu, i. 317.Campbell, Captain, expedition anddeath of, iii. S51.Canary Isles, i. 100.Kandahar visited by Batuta, i. 192.Canfu, i 164.Canning river, discovery of, iii. 244.Canada made prisoner by Hojeda,ii. 25.Cape Catastrophe, discovery of, iii.132.Cape Charlotte, iii. 300.Cape Dalrymple, iii. 165.Cape of Good Hope, discovery of,L 374.Cape Horn, supposed discovery of,by Sir F. Drake, ii. 259.Cape Keep Weer discovered by theDutch, it 287.Cape St Catharine, discovery of, i.368.Cape Tribulation, iii. 43.Cape Prince of Wales, iii. 80.Cape Verd Islands, discovery of, byNun Tristan, t 356.Caracorum, city of, described byRubruquis, i. 266.Salamanca, his meeting with DeAzambuja, i. 365.Caravan, province of, described byMarco Polo, i. 303.Coromandel, coast of, i. 103.Carol, falls of, ii. 210.Carpentaria, discovery of the coastof, ii. 288. The gulf of, 134.Carping, journey of, into Tatary,i. 241. Mission of, to the Tatars,24aCarteret, Captain, expedition of,iii. 23. His distress, 24.Carthage, foundation of, i. 9.Carthaginian, their manner oftrading with the Africans, i. 39.Cartier, Jaques, proceeds on a voyageof discovery, 140. DiscoversCanada, 140. Voyage to St. Lawrence,218. Stratagem of Indiansto dissuade him from landing,219. Ascends the river to Montreal,221.Cassini, his labours to improve geography,iii. 8.Caspian Sea, supposed by Strabo tojoin the northern ocean, i. 87.Abused's opinion of, 166.Cass, General, expedition of, to surveythe country on the Britishfrontier round the sources of theMississippi, iii. 189.Hassan, description of, ii. C39.Cassiterides, or Tin Islands, i. 131.Castemme, island of, ii. 268.Castlereagh river, iii. 154.Caswini^alluMon of, to a universalprinciple of attraction, L 161.Catherine II. of Russia, appointsBillings to descend the Kolymato examine the northern coast ofSiberia, iii. 289. Endeavours toopen a friendly intercourse withthe Japanese, 293.Cavendish, Thomas, equips a vesselto Virginia, ii. 263. Second expeditionof, against the Spanish settlementsin the South Sea in1586, 263. Arrives at San Feline,264. Leaves the Straits, andenters the Pacific ocean, ii. recommencedhis career as privateer,'.'til. Captures the StAnn, 700 tons, richly laden, andcommanded by the admiral of theSouth Seas, 264. Arrives in thestraits of Linda, 2(55. Arrives atthe Cape of Good Hope, 265.Geographical remarks of, 265.Visits the island of St. Helena,265. Arrives at Plymouth, 1588,265. Equips a second fleet, 266.Unsuccessful termination of, 266.Heath of, 266.Cerne, called so by the Arabians,i. 74.Ceylon, isle of, i. 164. Described byMarco Palo, 306.Clack, Martin, deposition of, ii. 280.Chancellor, Richard, expedition of,ii. 143.Chazellcs, his improvements inmaps, iii. 8.China, invaded by the Romans, sentby Marcus Aurelius Antonius, i.120. Commencement of the tradeof, with western Asia, 121. Travelsof Marco Polo to, 293. Provinceof Maiyi, the richest in theeastern world, according to MarcoPolo ; King Faufur ; custom ofexposing children to death or interringthem alive, 294. Overthrowof King Faufur by KublaiKhan emperor of the Tatars ;superstition of the queen, 295.Revenue from salt; Van-gui city ;Polo made governor of a city ;Siege of the city of Sayanfu, 296.Services of Nicoloo and MaffioPolo ; city of Singui, 297. RiverKiang, 297. Trade at Singui ;population and inland trade ofKui-sai ; its size, 298. Canals;bridges ; markets, 299. Mannersof the people, 300. Consumptionof pepper, 301. Saleof children, 300. City of Zaitun ;Manufacture of porcelain, 301.Province of Concha ; cannibal -,302. Crocodiles; custom of gildingthe teeth, 303. Oderic proceedsto China ; his descriptionof the inhabitants ; custom ofbinding the feet, 326. Mode offishing ; Zaitun ; Pekin ; courtof Cabala, 327. Valley of thedead, 328. Ambassadors sent toChina by the Persians, 340. Passthrough the desert of Coi ; arrivalat Socheu, 341. In Kan-che,an immense idol ; turningtowers ; their arrival at Cabala,343. Introduction to the emperor;ceremonies; Chinese juggling,344. Accident to the emperor; the embassy dismissed ;the great wall not mentioned bythe ambassadors, 345.Cherry Islands, discovery of, ii. 158.Taken possession of by the Muscovycompany in 1609, 175.Christian, Fletcher, commands themutineers of Captain Bligh's crew jsails for Toobooai, iii. 114. Hisfate made known by the expeditionof Captain Folgar, 116. Pitcairn'sIsland called after himChristian's Island, 117.Cimmerian, i. 16. Considered byHomer to be at the end of theocean, 22.Clapperton, lieutenant, expeditionof, to the interior of Africa, iii.351. Arrival of, at Moorzook,352. Arrival of, at Kano, 355.Arrives at Cockatoo, 356. Arrivalof, at Tripoli ; equipped a secondtime, and directed to proceed intoSoudan from the Gulf of Benin,357. Departs on a journey intothe interior of Africa ; arrives atCockatoo, 358. His death, 359.Clarence river, discovery of, iii. 244.Clark, Mr., shipwreck of, at Fur-beauxIslands, iii. 127.Clarke, Captain Edward, commandsthe discovery in Cook's third voyage,iii. 69. Succeeds CaptainCook ; repeats the attempt to finda passage in the northern ocean,86. Impossibility of a northernpassage ; arrives at Kamtschatka,and dies of a decline, 87.Clarke, William, Captain, expeditionof, ISO.Care and Lewis, the first two whotravelled across the continent ofNorth America from the UnitedStates to the Pacific ocean, iii. 184.Cla"ijo, Ruy Gonzales de, appointedambassador to the court of Timor,i. 331. His second embassy toTimor, 332. Proceeds to Sultanaand arrives at Domghaun,334. Arrives at Samacrand, andis well received, S35. Returns toEurope, 338.Clipperton, Captain, expedition of;death of, ii. 322.Cockburn Island, iii. 218.Collect, Captain, voyage of, iii. 16fi.Columbus, i. 38). His birth ; sentto Paria to prosecute his sudics ;settles in Lisbon, 382. Voyage tothe North, marries the-daughterof Percstello, 383. Considers thepracticability of sailing to Indiaby the West, 384. Opinions ofhis age, 385. His reasonings, 386.Proposes his plans to Genoa ;seeks the patronage of the Kingof Portugal ; makes overtures tothe Kings of Spain and England,386. Despairs of success ;The expedition resolved on, 387.Proceeds to the port of Palos ;the expedition sails ; Lie ofFerro, 388. Insubordination ofthe men, 389. Land discovered,390. Their disappointment, 391.The New World discovered, 393.The natives ; the islands of Conception,Ferdinand, Isabella, andCuba, 394. St. Domingo, 396.Ship of Columbus wrecked, 396.Kindly treated by the Cacique ;erection of a fort, 396. Sets sail ;directs their course to Spain ;dangerous situation ; driven bya storm into the Tagus ; reachesPalos again, 397. Received withenthusiasm ; proceeds to court ;honours conferred on him byFerdinand, 398. Second voyageof, ii. 1. Enthusiasm in favourof, 2. Discovers the island of Dominica; captures some of theCaribs ; and approaches Hispaniola,4. Makes a plain near themountain of Cibao the situationof his new settlement and foundsthe city of Isabella ; pursues hisvoyage to the West, 5. Reachesthe eastern extremity of Cubaand discovers Jamaica ; supposesCuba a part of Asia, 6. Returnsto Hispaniola in a state of badhealth, 7. Returns to Spain andis well received ; sets out on histhird voyage, 9. Discovers thecontinents of America ; discoversthe river Orinoco ; passes theDragons' Mouth and sails to St.Domingo, 10. Sent home a delinquentloaded with irons, 11.Public indignation at his humiliatingstate ; arriving in chainsin Spain, 12. His fourth voyage,13. Touches at Hispaniola contraryto the orders of the Kingand Isabella, 14. Reaches theisland of Granada; receives accountsrespecting Mexico, 1.1.Sufferings of the expedition andshipwreck, lr>. His distressedstate ; inhumanly treated byOvando; a general sympathy atSt Domingo for his sufferings,17. Arrives in Spain ; his deathand will, is. His ashes removedfrequently, and finally depositedin the cathedral of Havana, 20.His honour for the discovery of.America disputed, 24.Columbus Diego, Don, maintains alaw suit to prosecute his claimsto his father's possessions, ii. 20.Columbia, the river, description of,i. 183.Columbus, Bartholomew, arrivalof, in Hispaniola, and createdadvantage, or lieutenant-governor,ii. 8.Columbus, Diego, takes the chiefcommand in the colonies, ii. 42.Commercon, the naturalist, accompaniesthe expedition of Bougainville,iii. 26. His young servantBar£ discovered to be afemale, 27.Compagnon passes to the boundariesof Bamboo, under the protectionof a native prince, ii. 239.Endeavours to obtain specimensof the golden earth.Company, king George's Sound,formed by an association of merchants,iii. 164.Compass, mariner's, discovery of,i. 347.Compass, mariner's, known at anearly period to the Arabians andChinese, 348. First adopted as auseful companion, not a soleguide, i. 349 ; employed by theScandinavian mariners, 350.Constantinople visited and describedby Batuta, i. 187. Describedby Clavigo, 332.Cook, Captain James, his parentageand early education, iii. 28. Mateof a coal vessel. Master of theMercury, 29. Surveys the riverSt. Lawrence, the coast of Newfoundland,and Labrador, 30.Appointed to observe the transitof Venus over the sun's disc, 30.Chooses the ship Endeavour, 32.Sails from Plymouth being raisedto the rank of lieutenant, 33.Voyages round Cape Horn, arrivesat King George the Third'sIsland, and anchors in PortRoyal Bay, 34. The observationmade successfully, 34. He winsthe confidence of the Otaheiteans,35. visits the islands of Ulietea,Borabora, Omaha, Huaheine, andRaiataia. Calls them the SocietyIslands, 37. Discovers Ohe-terra, and arrives at New Zealand,38. His departure fromPoverty Bay, 40. Explores a riverto the north west of New Zealand,which he called the Thames, 40.Beaches a capacious harbour,which he calls Queen Charlotte'sSound, 41. Completes the circumnavigationof New Zealandand steers for New Holland, 42.Arrives at New Holland, andBotany Bay, 42. His ship strikeson coral rocks, extricates her,and rinds shelter in a river whichhe denominates the Endeavour,43. Discovers New South Wales,and calls one of the islands thePossession Island, 44. Arrivesat Batavia; his crew afflictedwith sickness, the mortality considerable,45. Second voyage of,46. Meets with islands of ice ;parts company with his secondvessel the Adventure, 47. Meetswith lights resembling auroraborealis ; anchors at Dusky Bay ;and makes a present of a fewuseful animals at Queen Charlotte'sSound, 48. Proceeds toexamine the Southern Oceanwithin the latitude of 46°, 49.Acquires a more intimate acquaintancewith the Otaheitans,50. His favourable reception atAmsterdam Island, 51. Sails toprosecute his examination of theantarctic seas ; crosses the antipodesof London, and arrives atDavis's Land, 52. His account ofthe island of Roggewein, 53. Arrivesat the Marquesas ; discoversHow's Island, returns toOtaheite and anchors in Matavaibay, 54. Entertained with a navalreview by the Otaheitans, 55.Repeats his visit to the FriendlyIslands; Shepherd's Isle, 56.Arrives at Sandwich and TuaIslands, 57. Explores a group ofislands which he calls the NewHebrides, 58. Sails for New Zealand,58. Leaves New Zealand,and pursues his voyage to theeast, 59. Arrives at the SouthernThule, and returns to England,60. The fate of his ship the Adventure,61. Third voyage of, raisedto the rank of post captain,and appointed one of theCaptains to Greenwich Hospital,elected a Fellow of the RoyalSociety, and receives the CopleyTOL. III.t. 369medal, 66. Sails from PlymouthSound on his third voyage of discovery,69. Arrives at Kerguelen'sLand, and calls it the Islandof Desolation ; anchors in AdventureBay, 70. Leaves VanDiemen's Land, and anchors inQueen Charlotte's Sound, 71.Leaves Queen Charlotte's Soundand discovers the island calledby its inhabitants Mangeea, 72.More to the north he discoversanother island called Woteeo, 73.Arrives at Anamooka, 74. "Leavesthe Friendly Islands, and arrivesat Otaheite, and puts on shoresome live cattle, 76. Settles Oim iin the island of Huaheine, 77.Leaves Borabora and discoversthe Sandwich Islands, 78. Examinesthe north-west coast ofAmerica, and arrives at NootkaSound, 79. Arrives at PrinceWilliam's Sound ; at Cape Princeof Wales; and ascertains thewidth of the strait separatingAsia from America, 80. Stoppedby hoe in the Northern Ocean;communication of with the Russians; discovers the islands ofMoreland Owhyhec,81. Anchorsin Karakakooa Bay ; entertains afriendly intercourse and trafficwith the people, 82. Returns toKarakakooa Bay, which is foundnearly deserted ; bold depredationsof the natives, 83. Fails inhis endeavours to entrap the king,84. The natives in immensemultitudes on the shore ; Cookfires his musket at a chief, 84.Cook and his men retreat; Cookreceives a blow of a club; isstabbed, and after much struggling,drowned, 85.Cook, John, leader of the Buccaneers,expedition of, ii. 305.Core, description of, ii. 200.Cornelian, Cornelius, undertakesa voyage to discover a north-eastpassage in 1594, ii. 156.Cortereal's, Gaspar, second voyageto India, by north-west passage;lost in the attempt, ii. 139.Cortereal, Michael, lost in the attemptto discover his brotherGaspar, ii. 139.Cortereal, John Vas Costa, discoversNewfoundland, ii. 138.Cortereal, John, discovers Greenland; discovers Labrador, ii. 132.Cortez, embarks in an expeditionunder Velasquez, ii. 54. Arrivesat the coast of Mexico, 55. Buildsthe town of Vera Cruz, and destroyshis ships and defeats theTlascala, 56. Quells an insurrection,and takes Montezuma prisonerand loads him with chains ;Defeats Larvae, 58. He defeatsthe Mexicans on the plains ofOtumba, 59 The capital of theMexican empire surrenders tohim, .and the governor and hisfamily become his prisoners, 40.Checks the insurrection of DeOli, and puts him to death, 62.Returns to Spain, and successfullyvindicates his character, 66. Discoversthe peninsula of California,67. Returns to Spain ; isneglected by Charles V., and dies,68.Cosmos, geography of, i. 156.Cotopaxi, description of, iii. 269.Cousin, expedition of, ii. 24.Cow tree, described by Humboldt,iii. 256.Ctesias enters the service of thePersian king,and visits India, i.53.Cush, i. 4.Chorus, foundation of, i. 19.D.Dalrymple, Alexander, expeditionof, iii. 13. His code of laws, 14.Damascus, one of the oldest cities,i.4.Dampier, William, adventures of,ii. 303. Discovers Duke ofYork's Islands ; arrives in theWest Indies, which terminateshis expedition, 304. Arrives inEngland, 312. Appointed to commandan expedition to New Hollandand New Guinea ; arrivesat Rosemary Island, 313. Arrivesat Nova Britannia, and returns toEngland, 315. Takes the commandof the St. George, 316. Disorderlystate of his crew, 317.Plunders the town of Plena; arrivesat the East Indies, 318. Engagedas pilot in an expeditioncommanded by Captain WoodRogers, 319.Danube, or Sister, described by Herodotus,i. 28.D'Anville, J. B., geography of, iii. 9.Darling river, discovery of, iii. 157.Davis, John, expedition of, ii. 1.03.Enters the service of the Dutch,155. Succeeds Cook in commandat Galapagos, it 307. Scours thesouth sea, and captures severalvessels ; returns to England, ii.308.Davis's Land, or Eastern Island,Cook's arrival at, iii. 53.Daws, Lieutenant, attempts to passoverthe Blue Mountains in theAustralian continent, iii. 146.D'Azambuza commands an expeditionto the coast of Africa, i. 364.Meets with Salamanca, 365.Made governor of Mina, 367.De Albuquerque, Francisco, conductsa fleet to India in 1503, ii. 107.De Aguado, Juan, expedition of,ii. 9.De Dillon, Lucas Vasquez, expeditionof, ii. 45.De Archon, Fernando, expeditionof, ii. 98.De Allegro, expedition of, ii. 71.Disagreement of, with Pizarro,74.Sutlers from cold in advancing tothe conquest of Chili, 78. Quellsan insurrection at Cuzco, and isexecuted, 79.De Ayala, Don Juan, expeditionof, iii. 169.DeAyolas, Juan.expedition of,ii.90.De Balboa, Nunez, expedition of,ii. 40. Death of, 41.De Bastions, Rodrigo, expeditionof, ii. 32.De Bentancourt, John, made kingof the Canary Islands, i. 355.De Bobadilla, Francisco, sent to St.Domingo to assume the chiefpower ; sends Columbus home inirons, ii. 1 1 . Superseded byOvando,12. Perishes by shipwreck, 14.De Bougainville, M., expedition of,iii. 16.De Covilham, expedition of, i. 374.Proceeds to Abyssinia in searchof Prester John ; marries andremains in Abyssinia, 376.De Coronado, Vasques, expeditionof, ii. 98. Rage and disappointmentof his crew ; reaches Qui-vera,9!).De Gama, Vasco, expedition of, i.376. Anchors in the bay of St.Blaine, 377. Arrival of, at Melinda,378. His reception at Calicut,379. His return to Lisbon,380. Expedition of, to Indiaunder command of Pedro AlvarezCabral, ii. 103. Again commandsa fleet to India in 1502. DiscoversAchilles Islands, 106.De Gray, Blasco, his experimentfor propelling a ship, ii. 100. Analogyof, to the steam engine, 101.De Grijalva, Juan, expedition of,ii. 44.De Guevara, Ago, expedition of;meets with Cortez, ii. 64.De Guzman, expedition of, ii. 67.De la Pollard, J. Baptiste, commandsthe first French ship thatnavigates the South Sea, ii 323.INDEX.De Laval's, Francis Piraid, voyageto the East Indies; wrecked onthe Maldives, ii. 201. Descriptionof Maldives, 202.Delaware, Lord, governor of James'Town, ii. '216.De Leon, Juan Ponce, expeditionof, ii. 42. Seeks the fountain ofyouth, +.'!.Delhi visited and described by Ba-tota,i. 1113.De Lisbon, Antonio, expedition of,i. 373.Delisle, his reformation in geography,iii. His death, 9.De Loyasa, Garcia, expedition of,ii. 63. His death, 65.De Mendoza, expedition of, ii. 90.Denham, Major, expedition of, tothe interior of Africa, iii. 351.Arrival of, at Moorzook, j;V2. Escapesmiraculously, 354. MeetsClapperton at Kouka, and leavesit with him, 357.De Nizza, Marcos, expedition of, ii.98.Denmark, King of, sends an expeditionto Greenland in 1605. .D'Entrecasteaux, Admiral, expeditionof, to investigate the fate ofPerouse, iii. 1(:6. Sails roundNew Holland on the west andsouth ; follows the supposed routeof La Perouse, but fails in hisobject, and dies, 107.De Oli, Cristal, sent by Cortez toHonduras, and found s the colonyof El Triumph de la Cruz ; rebelsagainst Cortez, ii. 61. Issubdued and put to death, 62.De Pavva, Alphonso, expeditionof, i. 374.De Provins, Guilt, first Europeanwho mentions the mariner's compass,i. 349.De Quiros, Pedro Fernandez, voyageof, ii. 270. Discovers islandof Sagittaria; difficulty of reachingthe shore ; Ponce throwshimself into the water and gainsthe shore, 271. Arrives at theIsle de la Gente Hermosa ; defianceof the natives; arrives atthe island of Torumaco, 272.Anchors in the port of VeraCruz ; takes possession of VeraCruz in the name of Philip III. ;driven out to sea from VeraCruz ; returns to Mexico, entreatingthe King to add thesesettlements to the Spanish dominions; dies at Panama on hisway to Lima, 273.Deshniew, expedition of, ii. 338.Desolation, island of, iii. 70.De Toto, Fernando, expedition of,ii. 9d His death, 97.Desventuradas, or Unhappy Islands,ii. 49.De Valdivia, governor of Chili, ii.79.Dia, Bartholomew, expedition of,i. 373. Discovers a passage bythe Cape, 374.Diego, Don, head of the governmentof Isabella, ii. 5.Dillon, Captain, expedition of, iii.108. Discovers some clue to thefate of Perouse, 109. Gets commandof the ship named the Research; sails on his voyage ofinvestigation ; proceeds to Ma.colo and obtains information respectingPerouse, 110. Arrivesin Paris with relics of Perusesexpedition, 111.Diodorus, his account of Bamboo,i. 68.Disappointment, Islands of, iii. 22.Dixon, Captain, voyage of, iii. 164.gains a minute knowledge of theAmerican coast ; discovers a capewhich he calls Cape Dalrymple;visits Nootka Sound, 165.Domghaun, described bv Clavigo,i. 334.Dominica, island of, discovered byColumbus, ii 4.Don Henry, son of John I of Portugal,appointed to the dukedomof Vise, i. 351. Sends vessels toexplore the coast of A africa, 352.Sends Antonio Gonzales andNun Tristan to continue theirdiscoveries, 356.Doomsday-book, i. 231.Doughty, Mr. Thomas, executionof, ii. 250.Drake, Sir Francis, enters the PacificOcean by the straits of Magellan,ii. 247. Voyage of, to theSouth Sea, 249. Sails from Plymouthin 1577, 250. Arrives atLa Plata ; description of inhabitants; arrives at St. Julian ; passesthrough Straits of Magellan ; fleetdispersed by a violent pale, 251.His captures at Porto Valparaiso;seizures at Arica ; enters the portof Calico, 252. Capture of the ,253. Relics at the islandof Cannot; attempts to seek thepassage back toEuropeby a northeast;leaves Cannot ; abandons thehope of finding a north-east passagebetween the Atlantic and Pacificoceans, 254. Discovers NewAlbion : description of atheniansof North America ; receives avisit from High ; makes an B 2INDEX.version up the country ; sets sailfrom New Albion, 255. Arrivesat the Pelew Islands ; visits easterncoast of Celebes ; describesthe land crab ; miraculously escapesshipwreck; arrives at Plymouthin 1580 ; first Englishmanwho passed the straits of Magellan; first who sailed under Englishcolours in the Pacific Ocean,2-58. Review of the discoveriesof, 259. Political advantages derivedfrom the discoveries in theSouth Sea, 261.Eastern Seas obscurely known tothe early Greeks, i. 128.Edwards, Captain, expedition of, inthe Pandora frigate, iii. 116.Edward IV. of England, ambassadorssent from Portugal to remonstrateon his premeditatedinvasion of Guinea, ii. 2i4.Edrisi or Eldrisi, geography of,i. 159.Eel, electrical or great gymnatus,iii. 257.Egmont, Port, discovery of, iii. 20.Egmont Island, iii. 25.Egypt, survey of, by Joseph, i. 8.herodotus's knowledge of, 36.El Dorado, ii. 208.Elizabeth, Queen, grants a patentto the merchants in Exeter to• trade to Senegal and Gambia,ii. 2 13. Enthusiasm of the nobilityin the reign of, ii. 261. Grantsa charter to London merchantsto trade to the East Indies in 1600,193.Elson, Mr., expedition of, iii. 247.Endeavour River, iii. 43.England, survey of, by William theConqueror, i. 230. Trade of, withJapan discontinued, ii.199. Makesher first voyage to India by theCape of Good Hope, 192.Eratosthenes, the first who usedparallels, i. 72. His mention of1 China, i. 116.Scotland, discovery of, i. 223.Eudoxus, expedition of, i. 75. Beingdisgraced and stripped of allhis gains, sets out on another expeditionto the eastern side ofAfrica, i. 76 Returns to Spain ;sets out again, and no more mentionmade of him, i. 77.Euphrates, River, i. 63.Europe, Strabo's account of, 181.Invaded by the Mongols, i. 242.Euxine Sea, i. 20/Evemerus, his discovery of a groupof islands to the south of Arabia.L151.Falkland Islands, named by theFrench Malouines,iiL 16. Claimedby Spain, 28.Fanfur, King, character of, i. 294.Maria, Antonio de, turns pirate,ii. 122. Shipwrecked, 124. Receivedwith rejoicing at King Po,125. Arrives at Calemplery, 126.Again wrecked, 127. Receptionof in China, 128.Faulkner, his account of Patagoniaand the Pampas, 280.Fernandez, Juan, discovery of,ii. 244.Fernando Po, discovery of, L 363.Feudal system, i. 230.Fitch, Mr. Ralph, expedition of,ii. 191.Flinders and Pass, expedition of,in Tom Thumb, iii. 127. Becomedistinguished for zeal and enterprise,128.Flinders, Mr., expedition of, to investigatethe insularity of VanDiemen's Land, iii. 130. Employedto survey Harvey andGlass-house Bays,"l31. DiscoversCape Catastrophe, 132. Discernsa number of mountains, the highestof which he calls MountBrown, 131. Enters Spencer'sGulf ; passes Kangaroo Land ;discovers Port Philip ; proceedsto Port Jackson ; sails again forthe north, 133. Explores thegulf of Carpentaria, 134. Returnsto Port Jackson, 1.35. Shipwrecked,136. Made prisonerby the French, 137. His meritsas a navigator, 138.Folgar, Captain, commands anAmerican trader ; arrives atPitcairn's Island, and learns thefate of Christian Fletcher, iii. 116.Fox, Take, voyage of, ii. 178.Fort Franklin," iii. 240.Franklin, Captain, expedition of,to the mouth of the PeppermintRiver, iii. 283. Arrives on theshores of Hudson's Bay, and atFort Chepewayan, 224. Meetswith Dr. Richardson and Mr.Hood, 225. Constructs a housefor winter quarters,, scarcity ofprovisions, 226. Journeys on footto Chepeyawan ; the hardships hesuffered, 227. Builds a snow-house,228 ; journey re-commenced,2-.'8. Stratagem of the wolves ;arrival of, at the mouth of thePeppermint, 229. Fears of theCanadians at the sea ; arrival of,at George the Fourth's CoronationGulf: party embark ; andjourney on land, 230. Distress ofthe party, 231. Air. Hack hastensforward to Fort Enterprise.Captain Franklin and sevenothers follow. 233. Ice chiselsformed of pure copper foundamong the Esquimaux, 235.Second Expedition of; sets out tosurvey the coast westward fromthe Peppermint River, 236. Embarkson the Mackenzie ; examinesthe river, 237. Coal cliffson fire ; arrival of, at Fort GoodHope, 238. View of the sea, 239.Return of, up the river, and arrivalof, at the winter residenceon Great Bear Fake, 240. Reachesthe point where the mouths of theMackenzie separate to run eastand west, and calls it Point Separation,241. Surrounded by threehundred Esquimaux, 2+2. Meetsanother party of Esquimaux, 243.Discovers Herschel's Island, theClarence and Canning rivers, 244.Discovers Reel's River : and arrivalof at Franklin Fort, 24.3.Receives an account of EsquimauxLake, and discovers Wollaston'sLand, 246.Franklin, Fort of, iii. 240.Franklin, bay, iii. 246.Eraser, Mr., voyage of, iii. 313. Hisdescription of the Snowy Mountain,314.French, expedition of, under thecommand of Baudin, iii. 138.Meet with Flinders in EncounterBay ; pass Terra Napoleon. NameSpencer's and St. Vincent's GulfsrespectivelyGolfe Buonaparte andJosephine, 139. Examine thethe Swan River, 140.Friesland, i. 221, and ii. 146.Frobisher, Martin, discovers ormeets with Friesland, ii. 146. Discoversa passage to Catania, 147.Frobisher, Joseph, expedition of, tothe Mississippi or Churchill river,iii. 192.Fuca, Juan de, expedition of, ii. 280.Return of, to Acapulco, 281.Fuente, Admiral, Bartolommeo de,his work, entitled " Memoirs forthe Curious," ii. 282.Funnel, William, expedition of,ii. 318. Returns to England, 322.Fur trade, commencement of,iii. 163.G.Galileo discovers the eclipses ofJupiter's satellites, iii. 7.Gallus, julius, attempt of, to penetrateArabia, i. 88.Gale, Francisco, voyage of, in 1582,ii. 259.Gamelecco, i. 317.Gambia, river, description of, ii.235.Ganges, source of, explored byWebb, iii. 304.Garments, i. 38.Garcia, Diego, expedition of, ii. 89.Garry Island, iii. 239.Gavotta or Cabot, John, arrival dfin England, ii. 136. Expeditionof; supposed to have discoveredNewfoundland, 137.Geography, objects of, i. I. Of theHebrews, 2. Mosaic account, andslow growth of, 3. Extent of thegeographical knowledge of theHebrews, 2. Ancient poets' knowledgeof, gained from oral traditions,22. Of Herodotus, 40. Ofthe Greeks, 46. Of Epirus, 54.Of Aristotle, 55. Improvementin system of, by Eratosthenes, 72.Of Strabo, 80. Of Ptolemy, 108.Of the Hindooss, 138. OfCosmas,156. Of Massed, 158. OfEdrisi,159. Progress of in the middleages, 209, Advantages renderedto by the seamen of the north,211. Ignorance of, in the middleages, 266. Benefits to, from thelabours of the missionaries, 227.Errors in, of antiquity, adoptedby the learned, iii. 2. Illustratedby Constantinople, Carthage, &c.&c., 3. Supposed difference longitudebetween Rome and Nuremberg,Ferrara and Cadizz, 4.Improvement in maps, 5. Doubtfulnessrespecting the distanceand separation of Asia and America,(i. Advanced by the discoveryof the eclipses of Jupiter'ssatellites, 7. Advanced by thelabours of Cassini; reformed byDelisle, 8. Improved by thelabourof D'Anville, 9. Improved byHalley, 10. Motives of theFrench to make discoveries in,15.Georgia, New, iii. 174.Georgia, Gulf of, iii. 174.George, Fort St., founded at Mina,i. 267.George the Fourth's CoronationGulf, iii. 230.George, King, Island of, discoveryof, iii. 22.George III., his accession, iii. 15. ,B B 3INDEX.Gets, the most upright of theThracian, i. 29.Grana, on the Niger, i. 170.Giagas, description of, ii. 232.Giacomo, map of, iii. 5.Gibbons, Captain, commands twovessels on the North-west expedition,ii. 170.Gilbert, Sir Humphrey, expeditionof, to the northern part of Americaand Newfoundland, ii. 150.Shipwreck of, 151.Gilianez makes the passage roundcape Bahadur, i. 355.Gillam, Captain Zachariah, voyageof, to Hudson's Bay, ii. 181.Gioga, not the inventor but the improverof the mariner's compass,l. 349.Giutarchan, i. 316.Gold Coast, a fort erected on, i 367.Golfe Buonaparte and Josephine,iii. 139.Golownin, of the Russian navy, expeditionof, to survey the coast ofTatary, iii. 296. Imprisonmentof, 2V»7. A attempts to escape, andagain imprisoned, 298. Liberationof, 999.Comer, son of Japhet, i. 5.Gomez.Fernando, farms the Guineatrade from king Alphonso, i. 363.Gore, Captain, succeeds CaptainClarke in command and arrivesat Macao, iii. 87. Return ofhome, 89.Gorilla, savages so called, i. 47.Gower Island, iii. 25.Great Bear Lake examined by CaptainFranklin, iii. 237.Green, Mr, an astronomer, expeditionof with Captain Cook to observethe transit of Venus over thesun's disc, iii. 3-2. His death, 45.Greece, States of, Homer's knowledgeof, i. 12.Greeks, unacquainted with the useof money, i. 9. Wars of, firstoriginated from piratical abductions,12. Civilisation and literatureof, 12. Acquainted withnaval warfare, 14. Inadequateknowledge of earth's surface of,25. Philosophers system of, 26.Greenland, discovery of, i. 217.Grenville, Sir Howard, voyage of ;arrives at Roanoke and establishesa colony, ii. 21/7.Grey, (apt tin, voyage of, to thenorth-west coast of America, iii.167.Griffons, i. 30.Grosseliez attempts to establish afur trade with Hudson's Bay, ii.180.Guiana, proposed conquest of, ii.209.Guinea, English attempts to establishtrade with, ii. 224. Tradeestablished in, 22ftGuise sails from Bombay to NootkaSound, iii. 161H.Hacking, Mr., attempts a passageover the Blue Mountains, in theAustralian continent, iii. 147.Hath, journey of, i. 274.Hakluyt's Islands, discovery of, ii.173.Hall, James, pilot of a fleet toGreenland ; arrives at CunninghamFord, where he discovers asilver mine ; mutiny of his crew ;his death, ii. 163.Hall, Captain, expedition of, iii.500. Discovers a group of islandswhich is called Sir James Hall'sGroup ; and discovery of Basil'sBay, 301.Halley, observations of, iii. 10. Studiesphysical geography, 11. Senton a mission to the Adriatic andVienna, 12.Ham, i. 4.Hamilton, voyage of, to Spain, i. 48.Hanna, Captain, sails from Cantonacross the seas of Japan, iii. 163.Anno, expedition of, i. 46. 48.Hawkins, John, commands an expeditionto the Gulf of Mexico,it 248.Head, Captain, journey of, iii. 277.Hearne, Samuel, expedition of, iii.190. Commences his survey ofthe mouth of the Copper-mineriver, 192.Hearsay, Captain, expedition. SeeWebb.Hebrews, geography of, i. 2. Wellacquainted with Egypt and Arabia,7.Hebrides, the New, iii. 58.Henry III. of Castile, gives permissionto adventurers to visitthe Canary Islands, i. 354.Henry 111 of England equips twoships for a voyage to the NorthPole, ii. 141. The expeditionfails, 142.Heraclitus, i. 27.Herodotus, reads his works beforethe senate of Athens, i. '.'". Travelsof, describes the Istur orDanube, '.8. His division of theScythian, and his description ofthe Geta\ 29. His knowledgeof the Caspian Sea, 33; of Asia,34 ; of India ; of the Hindooss, 35 ;of enormous ants in India; ofAfrica ; of the Nile and Egypt,Si ; of the Carthaginian mannerof trading, 39. Makes no mentionof Rome, 42. Character of hiswritings, 43. His ignorance ofthe voyages of Anno and hamilton,46.Herschel, Island of, iii. 2+4.Herbage, Theodore, expedition of,ii. 288,Hesiod, his knowledge of the west,i. 18.Himalyeh visited by LieutenantWebb's expedition, iii. S4. Measurementof, 309. Doubts as tothe height of, 311.Hindooss, i. 35. Mythic geography■ of, IS. Marco Polo's accountof, i. 307.Hippalus, the summer monsoonscalled after him, i. 101.Hippocrates, travels of, i. 54.Hispaniola visited by Columbus,ii 4. Insubordinate state of thefirst settlers, 5. Insurgents sailfor .Spain, and bring complaintsagainst Columbus.Hojeda, expedition of, ii. 25. Mutinyof his crew ; leaps over-boardin chains, but is saved, 37. Miraculousescape of, from the Indians,his crew being massacred,38. His distress and' death, 39.Holland, New, unknown coasts of,iii. 12.5.Homer, his knowledge of the earth ;of the States of Greece, i. 12 ; ofEgypt, 13. His description ofLydia ; ignorance of India, andthe seven mouths of the Nile, 14.Limited knowledge of the west,18.Homai, son of Oberea, and king ofthe Otaheitans, iii. 36.Hoppner, expedition of, to theNorth Pole, in company with SirEdward Parry, iii. 220.Horseman, Frederick, expeditionof, iii. 34S.Houghton, Major, expedition of,iii. 333.Howell, Mr., expedition of, iii. 156.Hudson's Pay Company, privilegesgranted to,'bv Prince Rupert, in1669, ii. 182.Hudson, Henry, appointed to thecommand of an expedition toseek a passage across the NorthPole to India, ii. 164. Supposedto have discovered the inclinationof the magnetic needle, 164.Makes a second voyage, 165. Remarkson the magnetic needle ;mermaid seen by, ii. 165. Em.B B 4played in a similar expedition bythe Dutch, 166. Discovers CapeDigges, 166. Discovers MichaelmasBay, 167.Humboldt, Alexander Von, birthand education of, iii. 248. Sailsfrom Corunna on an expedition ;ascends the peak of Teneriffe,250. Arrives at Cumana in SouthAmerica, 251. Arrives at theCueva del Guacharo, 252. Examinesthe grotto of Caripe ; arrivesat Caraccas, 254. Returnsto Cumana, 255. Stops at thefarm of Barbara to examine thepan de vasco, or cow-tree ; arrivesat the great steppes or desertthat extends towards theOroonoko, 256. Examines thegreat gymnotus, or electrical eel,at Calabozo in the Llanos, 257.Proceeds towards the Oroonokoby the Apure, 258. Its bankspeopled with birds and beasts ofvarious kinds, 259. Descends theOroonoko, 260. Visits the cavernof Ataniby ; returns to Barcelonaand Cuban, 261. Arrival of, atCartagena, 262. Visits the littlevolcanoes near Santa Fe de Bogota,263. His description of thecataract of Tequendama, 264.Passes the natural bridges ofIcononzo, £65. Journeys to Quito,266. Mode of travelling to Quin-diu,267. Ascends to Popayan ;ascends to the crater of Purace,268. Ascends Cotopaxi, the loftiestof those volcanoes of theAndes, 269. Attempts to reachthe summit of Chimborazo ; directshis course to the river ofAmazons, 270. Proceeds to Guayaquil; his knowledge of Mexico,272. Descends to the port of VeraCruz, 273. Visits the Ural mountains,274.Hume, expedition of, to New SouthWales, iii. 156.Hunt, Mr., undertakes an expeditionto the mouth of the Columbiain 1811, iii. 186.Hunter, Captain, appointed governorof Port Jackson, iii. 127.Hyperborean, i. 30. Their situation,147.I.Iceland, discovery of, i. 216. Remarkablefor its fisheries, 236.Iligluik, a woman of the Esquimauxtribe, superiority of, iii.214.India, a communication with, maintainedby the Arabs, i. 9. Unknownby name to Homer, 14.A recent discovery in the timeof Herodotus, SI. Alexander'sexpedition in, 58. First growthof the trade of, 59. Kings of, 165.Indians, a numerous people, i. 35.those in the neighbourhood ofFort Maldon ; tradition respect-theirorigin, iii. 181.Indus, river, i. 34.Inferno, or Hades, isle of, i. 234.Innocent IV., Pope, answer fromthe Tatars to, i. 248.Ireland, not mentioned by the ancients,i. 48. Placed by Tacitusbetween Spain and Britain, 90.Discovered at an early period bythe Northmen, 213.Ireland, New, iii. 25.Isabella, city of, founded by Columbus,ii. 5.Isle of Nags, ii. 50.Isle de la Crosse, iii. 37.Islands, Prince Edward's, iii. 69.Isidore, i. 31.Isteor, the river, i. 28.Italy, republics of, i. 346.Jackson, Port, establishment of acolony at, iii. 126.Jambalo, adventures of, i. 68.James, Thomas, voyage of, ii. 179.James Town, colony formed at, ii.212. Reinforced by new settlers,216.Jamaica, discovered by Columbus,ii. 6.Laetus, i. 5.Japhet, meaning of the term, i. 5.Jason, expedition of, i. 19. Supposedto have ascended the Ta-nails,24.Java, described by Marco Polo, i.305.Edda, Brace's account of, iii. 320.Jefferson, plans the first great nationalexpedition undertaken bythe citizens of the United States,iii. 180.Jenkins, journey of, in 1558, ii.187. Leaves Bokhara; his correctionsin its geographical errors,190.Job, his description of the earth,i. 8.Hobson, Richard, expedition of, ii.235. Ascends the Gambia ;reaches Tarragona ; describesthe country and arrives at Jena,286.John 1., of Portugal, his invasionof the Moorish territory, i. 351.;John II., of Portugal, orders a fortressand church to be built atthe port of Nina, i. 364.Jones's, Alderman, Sound, ii.175.Joshua, visit of, to the land of Canaan,i. 4.Juan, St., Island, discovery of, ii.246.Juan de Nova, discovers St Helena,ii. 105.Juan, Gigantic, it 48."Junks, Chinese ships described by,Batuta, i. 199.K.Kangaroo Island, iii. 133.Keeling, Captain, voyage of, ii.193.Kendal, Mr., accompanies Franklin'ssecond expedition, iii. 236.Kerguelen, expedition of, iii. 65.Khan, Kublai, described by MarcoPolo, i. 288.Khoja, Shade, ambassador to China,i. 340. Astonished at the idol inKaucheu, and arrival at Cam-ball,.'34'-'. Reception at court,344. Returns home, 345.Kinsai, described by Marco Polo, L298.King, Lieutenant, takes commandof the Discovery, Captains Cookand Clarke being dead, iii. 87.Returns home, 89.King, Captain, sent to examine thecoasts of Patagonia, Tierra delFuego, iii. 283.King, Philip Parker, importance ofhis discoveries, iii. 142. His examinationof Van Diemen's Land,143. Discovers Cambridge Gulf,144.Knight, Mr., expedition of, ii. 183.Death of, 185.Concha, province of, described byMarco Polo, i. 302.Kotzebue, expedition of, iii. 176.Returns home, 177.Krupishef, expedition of, ii 347.Krusenstern, Captain, commandsan expedition from Russia to Japan,iii. 294. Leaves the islandof Japan, and proceeds along theeastern coast of Sagaleen to Kamaiii. 295.Kurile Islands, iii. 296.Lacedaemon, Homer's knowledgeof, i. 12.Ladrillero, Juan Fernandez de, depositionsof, ii. 28.La Guayra, port of, iii. 255.Lamlam, i. 170.Lancaster, Sir James, Sound of, li.173. Expedition of to the EastIndies, 193.La Plata, the river, ii. 89.Leadenhall Passage, iii. .300.Edward, expedition and death of,iii. 333.Lee Boo, Prince, accompanies CaptainWilson to England, and dies,iii. 118.Leopold's Isle, iii. 300.Leucippus, i. 25.Lewis, Captain Mere wether, expeditionof, iii. 180. On ascendingthe southern branch of theMissouri obtains a distant viewof the Rocky Mountains, 182.The first who travelled acrossthe continent of North Americafrom the United States to thePacific Ocean, 184.L'Hermide, Jaques, expedition of,ii. 298.Linus, Mount, i. 177.Libya, Homer's description of, i. 14.Liverpool River, discovery of, iii.142.Liverpool Bay, iii. 246.Lok, Captain John, expedition of,ii. 225.Long Island, discovery of, ii. 212.Long, Major, commands an expeditionunder the American governmentof a military and scientificnature, to examine thedominions to the east of the RockyMountains, iii. 187. Arrives atthe base of the Rocky Mountain,188. Proceeds to Washington,189.Loo Choo, or Lekeyo Island, iii.302.Lop, desert of, i. 284.Lotophagi, i. 37.Loucheux, or Squanders, a tribe ofIndians who carry on traffic atFort Good Hope, iii. 238.Lowric, sails from Bombay toNootka Sound, iii. 164.Lucas, Mr., employed by the AfricanAssociation to investigatethe interior, iii. 333.Luque, Fernando, expedition of,ii. 71.Lyon, Captain, expedition of, iii.246. Arrival of in Sir ThomasRowe's Welcome, and returnhome, 247.M.Machin and Anne Dorset, i. 354.M'Kay, John, adopts the mannersof the people at Nootka Sound,and learns their language, iii.168.Mackenzie, Alexander, voyage of,iii. 193. Encamps on Whale Island; returns and sets out againand embarks on a river calledthe Tacoutche Tess, runningtowards the south-west, 194. Arrivalof at Fort Chepewcyan,195.Macquarie, Governor, with hislady, passes over the Blue Mountainsin the Australian continent,iii. 148. Fixes on a sitesuitable for the erection of atown to be named Bathurst, 149.Macquarie River, iii. 149.Macedonians, i. 21.Madagascar, colonised by the Arabians,i. 171.Madam, i. 5.Madeira, island of, i. 234. and 353.Made, voyage of, i. 215.Magellan, Fernando, ii. 45. Expeditionof, 47. Mutiny of his crew,48. Arrives at the Philippine Islands; converts King Zebu toChristianity, 50. History of, writtenby order of Charles V., 52.Magog, i. 5.Mahomet, successors of, i. 169.Manu, James, expedition of, ii.269.Maldive Islands, i. 200. and ii. 112.Mandan Fort, iii. 181.Mandeville, Sir John, travels of, i.329. His mention of Prester John,i. 330.Mango, ii. 6.Marquesas, discovery of, ii. 247.MartineZjDon Esterban,despatchedwith two frigates to take formalpossession of Nootka Sound, iii.170.Massed, geography of, i. 158.Maurelle, Antonio, expedition of,iii. 169.Maxwell, Captain, expedition of,iii. 300.Mayen, Jan, voyage of, ii. 176.Mayen Island, discovery of, ii. 176.Meaco, description of, ii. 198.Meares, second voyage of to thenorth-west coast of America, iii.166.Demosthenes, i. 66.Melville Island, iii. 143.Melville Peninsula, iii. 218.Mendana/Alvaro de, voyage of, ii.246.Mere, Mount, i. 139.Mexico, invaded by Cortez, ii. 55. 'Michaelmas Bay, discovery of,ii. 167.Middleton, Sir Henry, voyages tothe Moluccas, ii. 193.378 in]Middleburgh, island of, discoveryof, ii. 293.Missionaries, i. 227. Proceed toMataraba at the instigation ofQueen Zingha, ii. 233. Takeup their residence in Otaheite,iii. J22. Make a present of ahorse to the Otahcitean king, andcarry with them a printing-press,iii. 123.Missouri, description of, iii. 180.Mir, or Mizraim, i. 4Mohammed, Emperor of Delhi,i. 193.Moluccas, discovery of, ii. 113.Songe engaged in the expeditionof La Perouse ; quits it at Tenetiii 95.Mongol empire, rise of, i. 2*1.Carping's account of, 255. Climateof, 257- Defeated by theIndians, 259. Tribes of, enumeratedby Haitho, 275.Montezuma of Mexico receivesCortez and his followers withpomp and friendship ; secretlyattacks the Spaniards, and takesone prisoner, ii. 57. Taken prisoner,and loaded with chains,58. His death, 59.Moorcroft, Mr., crosses the greatchain of the Himalyeh ; arrivesat the villages Malaria, iii. 306.Arrival of, at Niti, on the frontierof I india ; arrives at Tab,307. Visits the sacred lake ofManasarowara, 308. Return of,309. Second journey of, 313.Morgan, Henry, leader of the buccaneers,ii. 302.Mosque of the Foot, described byBatuta, i. 177.Mowee, discovery of, iii. 81.Murray River, discovery of, iii.158.N.Larvae, expedition of, againstCortez, ii. 58.Nasamones, i. 37.Nassau, Prince of, expedition of,iii. 26.Searches, expedition of, t 60.Distress of, from the monsoons,61. Meets with Alexander, 62.Necootabootaboo, island of, iii. 75.Neuter, expedition of, ii. 191.Newfoundland, discovery of, ii. 23.and ii. 138. Settlement formedin, it 205.Newport, Captain, voyage of, ii. 212.Niger River, first described by Ptolemy,i. 112.Night, John, voyage of, ii. 1C3.Nile receives its appellation fromHesiod, i. 18.Nootka Sound taken possession ofby the Spaniards, who seize a Britishvessel in the harbour, iii 170.England demands restitution,anddespatches Captain Vancouver onan expedition for that purpose,iii. 171.Norfolk Island, iii. 58.Norman expedition to the east,ii 201.Nunez, Avaro, succeeds Mendozain the province of Buenos Ayres;sent to Spain a prisoner, ii. 97.Is tried and acquitted, 98.O.Oberea supposed to be queen ofthe Otaheiteans ; her attachmentto Wallis, iii. 24. Separatedfrom her husband, 36. Obscurityof, 50.Oderic of Portent, a minoritefriar, visits Trebizond, i. 318.Passes Mount Ararat, and thetower of Babel, 319. VisitsThana, 320. Digs up the bonesof the martyrs who suffered inThana, 321. Performs miracleswith these bones, and arrives atMalabar, 322. His description ofthe wonderful idol in Moabar,323. Visits Labour, 324. VisitsChina, 326. Resides three yearsin Pekin, 327. His fable of theValley of the Dead, 328.Oltrarra, i. 317.Operates, his account of Ceylonor Taprobane, i. 67. His accountof the Hyperborean, 148.Oohyhee, discovery of, iii. 81.Orellana, expedition of, ii. 83. Hisdeath, 84.Organe, a powerful king in Africa,supposed by the King of Spain tobe Prester John, i. 370.Orinoco, the river, discovered byColumbus ii. 10.Otaheite, discovery of, ii. 271.Cook's description of, iii. 35.Other, voyage of, i. 211.Oudney, Dr., expedition of, in companywith Lieutenant Clapper-ton; arrival of, at Moorzook, iii.352. Death of, 355.Ovando supersedes Bobadilla, ii. 12.His delay in equipping a fleet forthe relief of Columbus, 17.Owhyhee, the cession of, to thesovereign of Great Britain, iii.175.Oxley despatched to explore thecountry between Bathurst andthe Lachlan ; follows the courseof the Lachlan, iii. 150. Arrivesat a valley which he calls theWellington valley ; follows thecourse of the Macquarie, 151.Crosses Peel's river and Castlereagh,154. Reaches the summitof the Blue Mountain ; and furtheron, beholds the ocean, 155.Calls the summit Sea ViewMount, 156.Osman, John, voyage of, to theGulf of Mexico, ii. 248. Capturestwo prizes richly laden in theSouth Sea ; becomes prisoner tothe Spaniards; death of, 249.P.Palibothra, city of, i. 66.Pampas, of Buenos Ayres, iii. 277.Park, Mungo, engaged to travel tothe Niger, iii. Sto. Arrives atJillifree, and also at Medina, 334.Arrival of, at Fatteconda, andinterview of, with the king andhis seraglio, 3:>5. Arrival of, atJoag, lift Arrival at Kasson,and favourable reception of, 337.Brutally treated by the Moors ;introduced to Fatima, queen ofAli, 338. Escapes from theMoors ; arrives at the Niger, andat Sego, the capital of Bambara,339. Obtains food and shelter inthe hut of a negress ; her song,340. Refused an interview withthe king of Bambara, and orderedto quit Sego ; arrives at the townof Sansanding, 3+1. Obliged totravel on foot ; arrives at Silla,3+2. Gains information respectingthe geography of the interior;returns, and recovers his horse,343. Joins a kafila ; returns tothe coast, and, 1804, commands anew expedition to the Niger, 344.arrives at Gore, 345. Loses avast number of his men, 346.Builds a boat, leaves Sansanding,and is heard no more of, 347.Parry, Captain, voyage of, iii. 198.Visits the spot, in Possession Bay,where he had landed the precedingyear, 199. Magnetic needlesingularly affected, 200. Returnsto Barrow's Strait ; WellingtonChannel; passes Bathurst Island,201. Proceeds to the west to thefarthest extreme of Melville Island; arrives at Bounty Capeand the Bay of Hecla and Griper ;settles at Winter Harbour, 202.Amusements, and effects of theintense cold ; the officers perform:x. 379a play, and establish a weeklypaper, 204. The sun seen abovethe horizon ; and a thaw commences,206. Journeys with someof the inferior officers into theinterior of Melville Island ; leavesWinter Harbour, and Sir JamesLancaster's Sound ; returns toEngland, 207. Second voyage qf,to the North Pole ; discovers thethe Duke of York's Bay, 210.Winter approaches, 211. Shipsfrozen up near Winter Island ;visited by a party of Esquimaux,212. Description of their snowvillage, and character of the people,213. Superiority of a womanof the Esquimaux tribe namedIligluik ; her chart of part ofthe coast of America, 214. Excursionover land, 216. Returnsto winter quarters, and buildsa snow wall round the ships, 217.Escapes from the ice, 218. Arrivesat the Shetland Islands, 219.Sets out again accompanied byLieutenant Hoppner, 220. MadeSir Edward Parry ; sails fromHammerfest, and takes rein-deerto draw his sledges over the ice,221. Journey of two months onthe ice; is drifted southward,£22. Fails in his attempt, 223.Patagonians, iii. 282. Faulkner'saccount of, 280.Patterson, Colonel, attempts a passageover the blue mountains inthe Australian continent, iii. 146.Peddie, Major, expedition of, iii.350. Death of, 351.Pedrarias obtains the governmentof Darien, ii. 41.Pegoletti, discovery of, i. 314.Peel's river, iii. 154. £45.Pelagian, i. 12.Pelew islands long known to theSpanish navigators ; the Antelopewrecked on them ; the crewkindly treated by islanders, irish 18.Penelope, Don Diego, expedition,of, to discover whether Californiawere an island or a peninsula, ii.282.Pericles, the, of the Ervthraean sea,i. 101.Peron, the naturalist, his accountof the expedition commanded byBaudin, iii. 139.Perouse, La, voyage of, iii. 93. Directionsgiven to him, 94. Preparationsfor his expedition, 95.Steers for Easter Island ; descriptionof the inhabitants ; examinesthe north-west coast of America,96. Discovers a harbour, andINDEX.enters it, 97. Sends three boats tosound the entrance of the harbour,two are upset and twenty-one liveslost, iii. 98. Fixes the positions of.Lad ones and Bashee islands, andanchors at Macao, 98. DiscoversCape Not and Bate de Ternai,99. Arrives at the land of Saga,been and describes its inhabitants,100. Re-establishes the inscriptionon the tomb of CaptainClarke, 101. Obtains leave fromthe governor of Kamschatka toallow M. Lesseps to proceed toEurope by land, 102. Arrives atthe Navigator's Isles; anchors atthe island of Maouna, 102. Insolenceof the natives, and melancholyaffray, 103. Arrives atBotany Bay, and overjoyed to seesome English men of war, 104.Sails from Botany Bay, and nomore heard of him, 105. Thenational assembly pass a decreerelative to a search being madefor him, 106.Peru, conquest of, ii. 74.Peter the Great, instructions of, foravoyage of discovery, ii. 344.Philanthropy river, iii. 182.Philip, Captain, expedition of, iii.126.Philippine islands, colonisation of,it 246.Phoenicians, no writings transmittedto us from ; pilots of Solomon'sfleet, i. 8. Participated inthe civilisation of the Egyptians,9. Wealth and luxury of, in thedays of Homer, 131.Picard, observations of, iii. 7.Pike, Lieutenant Babylon Montgomery,sent by the Americangovernment to examine thesources of the Mississippi, and toconciliate the friendship of thenative Indians, iii. 184. Returnsto Fort Louis, and appointed tocommand another expedition,185. Advances within the dominionsof the Spanish, and istaken prisoner and liberated, 186.Pilgrims, L 227.Pinion, expedition of, ii. 24.Pined commands the expeditionfor Francisco Gray, ii. 43.Pintados islands, discovery of, ii. 66.Pinto, Ferdinand Mended, narrativeof the adventurer, ii. 117. Hisvoyage to India, 117. Made prisonerby the Turks, 118. Hismission to Sumatra with the ambassadorBattas, 119. He promisesassistance to the king ofAaru from the Portuguese, 120.Attacked by pirates, 121. Confinedat Quansy,T29. Deliveredby the arrival of the king of Tartary,129. Accused of sorcery,131. Proceeds to Lampoon, 133.Sent by Pedro Maria to Martaban,1S3. Becomes a slave, 134. Tradesto Sunday, 134.Pinzon, Vincent Yanez, expeditionof, it 30. First European to crossthe line in the western seas, 31.Pinzon and Solis, expedition of, it35.Pirate nations, L 129.Pitcairn's island, ii. 50. and iii. 24.and iii. 117.Pizarro, Gonzales, expedition of,ii. 81. Explores the country fromZumaco to the east, 82.Pizarro, Francisco, expedition of, ii.71. Arrives at Peru, and returnsto Spain, and solicits leave to conquerPeru, 73. Surprises a Peruviantown, 74. Takes the governorof Peru prisoner, 76. Extortsfrom his captive an immensequantity of gold, and puts himto death, 77. Founds the city ofLima, 78. His death, 85.Pliny, the first writer who mentionsScandinavia, i. 93. Northernlimit of his geographical knowledge,94.Polo, Maffio and Nicoloo, visit Bol-gar,i. 276. Meet a Tatar nobleman,277. Bear letters fromGregory X. to the Grand Khan,278.Polo, Marco, birth of, i. 277. Madeofficer of the household of theGrand Khan, i. 278. His descriptionof Balkh and Cashier, 283;of Samarcand, Khotan and Cash-gar,284. First European visitorto China, 293. His description ofPersia, Arabia, Eastern Africa,- and Northern Asia, 309.Pomare, king of Tahiti, embracesChristianity, iii. 122. He strikesoff the first impression of theGospel of St. Luke, 23.Pond, Mr., expedition of, iii. 193. "Poole, James, voyage to the NorthPole, ii. 175. Second voyage of,176.Port des Francois, discovery of, iii.98.Pollock, examines a number ofinlets and harbours on the NorthAmerican coast, iii. 165.Porus, an Indian chief, opposesAlexander, i. 58.Poisonous, his account of Eudosus,i. 75.Potomac River,discovcry of, ii.213.INDEX.Prester, John, i. 258. mentionedby Rubriquis, i. 272. The titleof, given by early travellers toUng or Une Khan, 371.Princes Isle, discovery of, i. 363.Ptolemy, i. 106. His high reputationas a geographer, 11+. Hisacquaintance with the Chinese,116.Puelches, or eastern, iii. 281.Puerto Santo, discovery of, i. 353.Purace, village of, iii. 268.Pvlstaart island, discovery of, ii.293.Pythias of Marseilles, voyage of, i.49. Makes no mention of Ireland,50. Voyage of, in the baltic,51. Scientific character of,51.Q,Quindiu, mountain of, iii. 266.R.Raamah, i. 4.Raleigh, Sir Walter, equips twoships for discovery in Newfoundland,ii. 205. Second expeditionof, 207. Loses his popularity, 21 1.Sails for Guiana in 1595 ; takesTrinidad, £09. Ascends the Orinoco,and obtains an interviewwith Tapiowary, 210. VisitsMano, 211.Raper, expedition of, (see Webb.)Resanoff, M., chosen as ambassadorfrom Russia to Japan, iii. 293.His interview with the representativeof the Japanese emperor,295.Rhinoceros described by MarcoPolo, i. 306.Richardson, Dr., expedition of, incompany with Captain Franklin,iii. 221. His second expedition,236.Ritchie, Mr., expedition of, iii. .351.Robson, Captain, expedition of, inthe Bengal ship, Hunter, iii. log.Rogers, Captain Wood, expeditionof, ii. 319.Roggewein, Jacob, memorial of, tothe East India Company, ii. 323.Roggewein, island of, great statuesseen on, by Cook, iii. 53.Romanzotf, a Russian nobleman,fits out a small vessel, and entrustsit to the command of lieutenantKotzebue, iii. 176.Rome, not mentioned by Herodotus,i. 42. Conquests of,j78.Ross, Captain, expedition of, to exploreBaffin's Bay, iii. 195. PassesGreenland and meets a party ofEsquimaux, which he calls ArcticHighlanders, 196 Meets withcliffs covered with snow of a deepred colour; his negligence as anavigator, 197. Gives the nameof Croaker's Mountains to animaginary range of hills, and returnsto England, 198.Rotterdam Island, discovery of, ii.295.Rubruquis, mission of, to the Tatars,i. 261. Arrives at the residenceof Mango Khan, 267. His descriptionof the palace of MangoKhan, 268. His account of PresterJohn, 272. Arrives at themountains of Alan or Ossa, 273.Russians described by the Arabiangeographers, i. 168. Invaded bythe Mongols, 242. Billings engagesin the service of, to examinethe northern coast of Siberia, iii.289. Make attempts to pushtheir discoveries into theXorthernOcean, 291. Turn their attentionto Japan, 292. Endeavour toopen a friendly correspondencewith the Japanese, 293.S.Saba, i. 4.Saracens mentioned by Agathachides, i. 73. " Men of Stature,"74.Sagaleen visited and described 'byLa Perouse, iii. 100.Sago first brought into Europe, i.306.Samarcand described by Clavigo, i.336.San Bernardo Islands discovered,ii. 247.San Feline, city of, founded, ii. 262.reduced by famine, 263.Sandwich Islands, iii. 57. Discoveryof, by Cook, 78. Revolutionin, 121. British influencepredominant, 122. The establishmentof Christianity ; productionof increased civilisation in, 124.Sanson, maps of, iii. 9.Santa Cruz, discovery of, i. 373.Santa Maria de la Consolation, discoveryof, ii. 30.Sarmicuto Pedro, voyage of, in.1579,to examine the Straits of Magellan,ii. 261. Astronomicalobservations of; loses the favourof the King of Spain, 262. Takenprisoner by the English on hisreturn to Spain, 262.Sarah Khan, his reception ofRubruquis, i. 263.Sataspas, voyage of, i. 41.Savanna, siege of, L 296. Trade of,298.Scandinavian?, antiquity of, i. 210.Schestakoflf, expedition of, ii. 346.Schildtberger, his travels over Asia,i. 338. Follows Teagra into tartar,339. Returns to his native■ city, 340.Schouten, voyage of, to the SouthSeas, ii. 276. Arrive at Port Desire; the smallest of these vesselsdestroyed by fire ; discover StatenLand ; reaches Juan Fernandez,277. Arrives in Java, where theEast India Company seize hisvessel, 278.Scripture, cosmological ideas of, i. 8.Scythian, descry' prions of, by Hero.dot u*, i. 29. Of the Indo-teutonicrace, 32.Selkirk, Alexander, his residenceat Juan Fernandez, ii. 320.Selvalegre, Marquis, joins the expeditionof Humboldt, iii. 268.Senegal river, described by CadeMost, i. 360. and ii. 238.Shark's Bay affords the only secureanchorage hitherto found on thewestern shores of New Holland,iii. 162.Sheba, i. 4.Shetland Islands taken by theNorthmen, i. 213.Shetland Islands, South ; discoveryof, iii. 284.Sicily, Homer's knowledge of, i. 15.Called Trinacria, 17.Signal inhabit the country beyondthe Sister, L 29.Since, mentioned by Arran, i. 116.Sinope, foundation of, i. 19.Smith, Mr. William, commander ofthe brig William, discovers theSouth Shetland Islands, iii. 284.Smith, Captain John, protector ofJames's Town ; explores ChesapeakeBay, ii 213. His extraordinaryescape, 214.Solander, Dr., experiences thedrowsiness produced by excessivecold, having landed on Tierra delFuego, iii. 33. Death of, 45.Solis and Pinzon, ex pod it ion of, ii.35. Death of, 3fi.Solomon, commercial enterprisesof, discontinued by his successors,and fleets of, navigated by servantsof the king of Tyre, i. 6.Sound of Queen Charlotte, iii. 41.Cannibalism common among theinhabitants of, 52.Sound of Prince William, iii 80.Of King George the Third, 161.South Sea Islands, importantchanges in the circumstances of,since the time of Cook, iii. 119.European shipping chiefly engagedin whale fishery, fur trade,&c, 121.Spain, Strabo's account of, i 80.War with the Moors, 350.Spanker, Martin, expedition of, ii.349.Spaniards, jealousy of, awakenedby the approach of the Russian*to the Spanish American territories,iii. 168. Despatch a secondexpedition, which reaches PrinceWilliam's Sound, and fancy themselveson the coast of Kamt-schatka, 169. Decline of, in thearts of navigation, 170.Spanish attempt to plant a colonyin the Straits of Magellan,ii. 262.Spencer's Gulf, discovery of, iii. 132.Spitsbergen, George, voyage to theMoluccas by the Straits of Magellanin 1614 , passes through thestraits in thirty-four days; describesthe gigantic stature of thePatagonians; enters the SouthSea, ii. 274. Arrives in Hollandin 1617, 275.Spitsbergen, discovery of, ii. 158.Taken possession of, by the English,177.St Christopher Island, settlementmade on, ii. 301.St. Helena, discovery of, ii. 105.St. Ago, foundation of; Cortexdespatches Alvarado and Sandalon an expedition to acquire amore perfect knowledge of Mexico; sends Cristal de Oli toHonduras, ii. 61.St. Thomas, discovery of, i. 363.Staduchin, expedition of, ii. 340.Stains, Captain, his arrival at Pitcairn'sIsland, iii. 116.Start, Captain, expedition of, totrace the internal waters of NewSouth Wales, iii. 156. Discovertthe Darling River, 157. Discoversthe Murray River ; reachesEncounter Bay and Lake Alexandria,158.Strait of the Fury and Hecla, iii.218.Stehbs, Captain, makes a secondattempt to ascend the Gambia, ii.237.Stone Tower, or Chasten, or theforty columns, i. 118.Strabo, his division of the earthinto zones, i. 89.Snares succeeds Albuquerque inthe government of India; attemptsto establish commercewith China, ii. 114.INDEX.Sumaa Pos, the torrent of, iii. 265.Sumatra, isle of, i. 161.Swan River, examination of, by theFrench, iii. 140. Strength andstability of the colony at, 160.Swcta-dwipa, or White Island ofthe West, i. 142.Swan, Captain, expedition of, ii.308. Sails westward from theAmerican coast, 309. Arrives ata group of islands between Laconiaand Formosa, 310. Arrives atthe north-west coast of New Holland,311. Arrives at St. Augustine'sBay, 312.Tabula Peutingeriana, i. 155Tacitus mentions the Ports of Ireland,i. 91.Tame-tame-hah, chief of the SandwichIslands, iii. 121.Tana Island, visited by Cook, i. 285.Tarshish, disquisition respecting,i. 7.Tasman, Captain Abel Jansen, expeditionof, to the South Land ;discovers Antony Van Dieman'sLand, ii. 290. Discovers NewZealand, which he calls StatenLand, 292. Discovers ThreeKings Island, 292. DiscoversAmsterdam Fold ; traffics with| the natives, 293. Arrives at theeastern extremity of New Guinea,297.Taurus, described by Clavijo, i. 333.Tequendama, cataract of, iii. 264.Terrier Rouge, description of, ii.23X.Texeira, Tristan Vas, voyage of, i.352. Discovers Pueno Santo andMadeira, ii.33.Thebes, Homer's knowledge of,i. 12.Theirs River, i. 29.Tibet, described by Rubruquis,i. 267.Th'ma?, i. 116.Thompson, George, embarks fromBarbary to Timbuctoo, ii. 234.Ascends the Gambia, 235. Deathof, 235.Thracian, i. 29.Throbs, Mr., discovers a secondpassage over the blue mountainsin the Australian continei)t,iii. 149.Thule, Pythias discovers, i. 50.Thvmaterion, foundation of, i. 46.Timbuctoo, i. 39. 170.Timoviet, German, expedition of,ii. 331.Timor, description of his palace,&c. by Clavigo, i. 335.Toole, Lieutenant, expedition anddeath of, iii. 355.Torres, Louis Vas de, voyage of, ii.273. Takes possession of NewGuinea for the king of Spain, 274.Trinidad, La, discovery of, ii. 10.Troy, Homer's knowledge of, i. 12.JTshirikof, Alexoi, expedition of,ii. 344.Tuckey, Captain, arrival at theCongo ; the cataract of Yallala ;appearance of the river ; fataltermination of the expedition,iii. 350.Tyrwhit, Mr., expedition of, iii. 355.Death of, 357.U.Ulysses, vessels built by, i. 14.Voyage of, 15.Ungu'l, i. 289.Urdaneta, Andrew de, discoveriesascribed to, ii. 279.Vanilla, expedition of, ii. 79.Valde, Diego Flores, expeditionof, ii. 262.Valerian, Apostles, expeditionof, ii. 280. Return of, to Acapulco,ii. 281.Van Noort, Oliver, commands anexpedition to the coast of NewSpain and Peru, ii. 267. Reachesthe South Sea, 268. Arrives atManilla ; touches at Borneo ; atlength arrives at Rotterdam afteran absence of eighty-three years,269.Vancouver, Captain, expedition of,to Nootka Sound, iii. 171. Sailsin the Discovery and surveys thecoast of New Holland ; discoversthe Snares and Opera or Papa,172. Arrives on the coast of NewAlbion, and falls in with a shipcommanded by Captain Grey, 173.Explores Columbia river ; wintersin the Sandwich Islands, 174.Directs his course to the Americancoast ; returns to England,175. His death, 176.Velasquez, Diego, expedition of, ii.54. Sends an expedition to stripCortez of his authority, and is defeated,58.Vera Cruz, foundation of, ii. 56.Vespucci, groundlessness of his pretensionsto the discovery of America,ii. 27.Villanous, voyage of, in 1542, ii.243. Discovers coral islands ;arrives at Mindanao j attemptsto fix a colony at the Philippines,244.Virginia, discovery of, ii. 206.Viscayno, Sebastian, expedition of,ii. 285. Discovers 'the harbourPuerto de Monterey ; his death,286.Vinland, discovery of, i. 220.Vistula, or Wisla river, i. 212.Vitomotoniakkin, an Indian priest,visits England, ii. 216.Volcanitos, or little volcanoes, nearSanta Fe de Bogota, described byHumboldt, iii. 263.W.Wales, New South, discovery of,iii. 42.Wallis, Captain, expedition of, iii.23. His intercourse with theOtaheiteans, and return home, 24.Wanton, Lieutenant William, expeditionof, ii 349.Watts, Lieutenant, commands thePenrhyn from Port Jackson toChina ; arrives at the island ofOtaheite, and persuades the Ota-heiteans that Captain Cook stilllived, iii. 113.Webb, Lieutenant, expedition of,to investigate the source of theGanges, iii. 304. Stops at thevillage of Ararat, and sendsforward a moonshine with a fewpious Indians to examine theI Cow's Mouth, and to explore theriver, 305.Weddell, expedition of, to the SouthShetland Islands, iii. 285. DiscoversGeorge the Fourth's Sea, 286.Wellington Valley, iii. 151. A settlementmade in it, 152.Weymouth, Captain, voyage of in1605. discovers Long Island, ii.212.Whale Fishery, commenced generally,ii. 177.White.Captain, arrives at Roanoke,and establishes the colony a thirdtime, ii. 207.William, a Mosquito Indian, left onthe Island of Juan Fernandez, ii.304. Found three years after,306.William the Conqueror, survey ofEngland made by, i. 230.William's, Prince, Island discovered,it 296.Willoughby, Sir Hugh, lost in attemptingto discover north-eastpassage to Carthage, ii. 143.Wilson, Captain, commanding theAntelope, wrecked on the PelletIslands ; returns to England accompaniedby Prince Lee Boo;Abba Thulle, king of the PelletIslands, his kind reception ofCaptain Wilson and his crewwhen wrecked on those islands,iii. liaW'indham, Captain, trades withGuinea in 1553, ii. 224.Wooden, discovery of, ii 206.Wollaston Land, iii. 246.Wood, Captain John, voyage of, in1676. ii. 183.Wrangel, Baron, expedition of, iii.291.Austen, travels of, L 212.X.Xenophon, retreat of the ten thousand,L 52.Yellow Stone River, iii 182.Zaitun, described by Marco Polo,i. 301.Zamolxis, god of the Get, i. 30.Zanguebar, i. 171.Marco, John Gonzales, expeditionof, to the coast of Africa, i. 35£Discovers Puerto Santo and Madeira,353.Zebu, king of, receives Magellanwith courtesy and embracesChris-dignity, ii. 50. Puts to death theSpaniards, 51. Pigafetta, his accountof Magellan's voyage, 62.Beni, voyage of the, i. 221.Zero, Nicoloo, discoveries of, i. 222.LONDON :Printed by A. & R. Spottiswoode,New-streets Square.