THE HISTORYOFMARITIME AND INLAND DISCOVERY.VOL. II.LONDON:PRINTED FORHangman, Trees, ORME, BROWN, AND GREEN,Paternoster-row ;AND JOHN TAYLOR,UPPER GOWER STREET.1830.uCONTENTS.BOOK IV.MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY, FROM COLUMBUS TO CAPTAINCOOK.CHAP. I.COLUMBUS.Second Voyage of Columbus. — General Enthusiasm in his Favour. —Arrives at the Caribbee Islands. — Approaches Hispaniola. — Finds theFort destroyed. — Fate of the Spaniards who had remained. — The Cityof Isabella founded. — Columbus pursues his Voyage to the West. — DiscoversJamaica. — Supposes Cuba to be a Part of Asia. — Returns toHispaniola in broken Health. — Confusion of Affairs. — Arrival of BartholomewColumbus. — Complaints sent home. — Juan de Aguado appointedCommissioner. — Columbus returns to Spain. — Well received.His third Voyage — Discovers the American Continent. — State ofthe Colony at St. Domingo. — Bobadilla appointed Governor. — He sendshome Columbus in Chains. — Public Feeling towards the Admiral. —Ovando supersedes Bobadilla. - Page 1CHAP. II.COLUMBUS AND AJIERIGO VESPUCCI.Fourth Voyage of Columbus. — Occurrences at Hispaniola. — Fate of Bo-bacilli.— Columbus reaches Honduras. — Receives Accounts respectingMexico. — Examines the Coast of Veragua. — Sufferings of the Expedition.— Shipwreck on the Coast of Jamaica. — Bold Voyage to Hispaniolain a Canoe. — Distress of Columbus. — Inhuman Conduct of Ovando. —The Admiral at length relieved. — Returns to Spain. — His Death. —Honours paid to his Ashes. — Merit of his Discovery. — Expressions ofthe Classic Writers supposed to relate to America. — Claims of theDieppois to the Discovery of the New World. — Of the Basques andBretons. — Alonzo de Hojeda follows in the Track of the Admiral. —Amerigo Vespucci falsely claims the Honour of having discovered theContinent. — Testimony of the Pilots. — Causes which enabled him toimpose his Name on the New World. - . 13A 3CHAP. III.EARLY DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA.Navigators who emulated the Fame of Columbus. — Vincent Yanez Pinson.Discovers Brazil. — The River of Amazons. — Brings home the firstOpossum seen in Europe. — Voyage of Bastidas. — Explores Venezuelaand Cartagena. — His Distresses. — Provinces awarded to him. — Policyof the Spanish Court — Jealousy excited by the English and Portuguese.Expedition of Pinzon and Solis to South America. — Second Voyage ofSolis. — Its Object. — He reaches the River La Plata. — Devoured by theSavages. — Exertions of Hojeda. — His Expedition to colonise Uraba. —Finds a Rival in Nicuessa. — Defeated by the Indians — Builds St Sebastian.— His Sufferings and Death. — Wretched Fate of Nicuessa. — Balboaremains in Darien. — Marches across the Isthmus. — Discovers the SouthSea. — Superseded by Pedrarias. — His unhappy End. - - Page 29CHAP. IV.SPANISH DISCOVERIES, AND FIRST CIRCUMNAVIGATION OP THE EARTH.Diego Columbus takes the chief Command in the Colonies. — IncreasedEnergy. — Ponce de Leon seeks the Fountain of Youth. — DiscoversFlorida. — Observes the Eastward Currents. — Expeditions of Garay. —Cordoba visits Yucatan. — Grijalva discovers New Spain. — Aillon reachesthe Coast of Carolina. — Attempts to make a Settlement. — His melancholyFailure. — Fernando Magellan. — Respective Rights of Spain andPortugal. — Magellan engages to conduct a Fleet westward to the Moluccas.— Winters on the Coast of Patagonia. — Mutiny in the Fleet. —His stern Conduct. — The Natives described. — The Guanaco. — Magellanenters the Pacific Ocean. — Arrives at the Philippine Isles. —Convertsthe King of Zebu, and engages in Warfare for his Sake. — Is slain bythe Islanders. — Treacherous Conduct of the King of Zebu. — The tworemaining Ships reach the Moluccas. — Fate of the Trinidad. — TheVictoria completes the Circumnavigation of the Earth. — Loss of a Dayin her Reckoning. . - - - . 42CHAP. V.FERNANDO CORTEZ.Education of Cortez —Arrives at Cuba. — Appointed to command theExpedition against New Spain. — Throws off the Authority of Velasquez.—Builds Vera Cruz. — Commences his March. — Defeats the Tlascalans. —Massacre at Cholula. — The Spaniards enter the City of Mexico. — Dangerof their Situation. — Cortez arrests Montezuma. — Defeats Narvaez. —Revolt of the Mexicans. — Death of Montezuma. — Battle of Otumba,and Triumph of the Spaniards — Mexico surrenders. — Alvarado marchesto Guatemala. —Expedition of De Olid. — Cortez conducts an Army fromMexico to Honduras. — Convention of Badajos. — Loyasa sent with aFleet to the Moluccas His Fate. — Voyage of the Pataca. — Cortezsends Saavcdra to assist Loyasa. — Surprise of the Portuguese. — Saavedradiscovers New Guinea and other Islands. — His Fate. — Cortez becomesCONTENTS. VUan Object of political Jealousy. — Visits Spain. — How received. —Returns to Mexico with diminished Power. — Discovers California. —Consumes his Fortune in fruitless Expeditions. — Returns to Spain. —His African Campaign. — Neglected by the Court.— His Death. Page 53CHAP. VI.CONQUEST OF Peri.New Efforts of the Spaniards. — Combination of Pizarro, Almagro, andLuque. — First Attempt of Pizarro on Peru. — His Failure. — Succeedsin visiting that Country. — His Negotiations in Spain. — Invades Peru.Seizes the Inca. — The Spaniards obtain an immense Treasure. — TheInca put to Death. — Almagro invades Chili. — Sufferings of theSpaniards. — Revolt of the Peruvians. — Civil War between Almagro andPizarro. — Almagro defeated and put to Death. — Valdivia penetrates tothe Southern Borders of Chili. — Extraordinary Journey of Vanilla. —Benalcazar conquers Quito. — Expedition of Alvarado. — Gonzalez Pizarromarches in search of the Cinnamon Country. — Difficulties of theMarch. — Gonzalez reaches the Cinnamon Country, and rashly explorestowards the East — Sufferings of the Expedition. — Francisco de Orel-landembarks on the Maragnon. — Descends that River to the Ocean. —He propagates Stories of El Dorado and Nations of Amazons. — Fate ofOrellana. — Return of Gonzalez Pizarro to Quito. — Rebellion of Almagro'sParty. — Death of Francisco Pizarro. --69CHAP. VII.CONQUESTS OF THE SPANIARDS.Brazil neglected by the Portuguese. — Diogo Alvarez shipwrecked on theShores of that Country ; spared by the Savages, and becomes a Cacique.Visits Europe, and returns to Brazil. — Colony of Janeiro founded. —Sebastian Cabot explores the River La Plata. — Ascends the Parana." —Pedro de Mendoza founds the City of Buenos Ayres. — Ayoles ascendsthe River Paraguay, and crosses the Mountains to Peru. — Yrala completeshis Discovery. — Narvaez undertakes the Conquest of Florida. —Penetrates to Apalachan. — His calamitous Retreat. — Adventures ofhis Treasurer, Avaro Nunez. — The Savages shocked at the Cannibalismof the Spaniards. — Avaro turns Merchant and Physician to the Indians.Travels from Florida to Mexico. — Florida bestowed on Fernando deSoto. — His unhappy Fate. — Avaro Nunez made Governor of La PlataHis Journey from the Coast to the Parana. — Calamitous Terminationof his Command. — Journey of Marcos de Nizza to Civola. — Expeditionof Alarchon and Coronado in search of the Seven Cities. — Their disappointment.— Supposed Invention of a Steam Ship by Garay. — RapidDecline of Energy in the Spanish Colonies. . . 86CHAP. VIII.CONQUESTS OF THE PORTUGUESE.Policy of Portugal with respect to its Conquests in India. — Cabral despatchedwith a Fleet. — Discovers Brazil. — Fate of Bartholomew DiaA 4>Vlll CONTENTS.—Success and Return of Cabral. — Juan de Nova discovers AscensionIsland and St. Helena. — Second Voyage of De Garaa. — He discovers theSeychelles. — Vincent Sores visits the Red Sea. — Expedition underFrancisco de Albuquerque. — The Portuguese obtain a Footing at Cochin.— Almeyda the first Viceroy. — His Successes and melancholy End.—Victories of Alfonso de Albuquerque. — He takes Goa, Calicut, Malacca,and Ormuz. — His Death. — Discovery of the Isles of Tristand'Acunha, — of Sumatra, and of Madagascar. — First Visit to Ceylon. —Serrano discovers the Moluccas. — A Colony founded there by De Britto.Trade established with China. — Misfortune of the Ambassador Pereira.Page 102CHAP. IX.FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO.First Adventures of Mended Pinto. — He goes to India. — Visits AbyssiniaCarried in Chains to Mocha. — Sold as a Slave. — Ransomed, andgoes to Goa. — Sent as Ambassador to the Battas. — Wonders of Sumatra.— He proceeds to Aaru. — Shipwrecked and captured. — His Misery.— Redeemed, and goes to Patana. — Attacked by Pirates. — HisEscape. — Turns Pirate. — Captures a Bride. — Wreck, d on Pirates'Island. — Singular Deliverance. — Death of Coja Acemm. — Sails in searchof Calempluy. — Adventures during the Voyage. — Wrecked. — Sent aPrisoner to Nankin. — Remarks on the Chinese. — Proceeds to Pekin.Meets with Christians. — Condemned to labour at Quansy. — TatarInvasion. — How treated by the Tatars. — Reaches Cochin-china. —Joins a Pirate. — Cast away on Japan. — Cures the King of Bungo's Son.Dismissed. — Wrecked on the Great Lequio. — Condemned to Death.Saved by the Compassion of the Women. — Mission to Pegu and Ava.The Idol Tinagoogoo. — Pinto turns Jesuit. — Remarks on his History.- - . - - - - 116CHAP. X.VOYAGES TO THE NORTH.Voyages of Sebastian Cabot — First Discovery of Newfoundland. — TheCorporeal. — Voyages of the French. — Canada. — First Expeditions ofthe English. — Attempts to find a North-East Passage. — Fate of SirHugh Willoughby. — Richard Chancelor goes to Moscow. — His Reception.— Steven Borough reaches the Strait of Waigatz. — Frobisher sailsto discover the North Western Passage. — Friesland. — Brings homesome Esquimaux. — Supposed Gold Ore. — His second Voyage. — nam. — His unfortunateEnd Drake's Expedition. — The Patagonians. — ExecutionofDoughtie. — Voyage through the Straits of Magellan. — Drake drivenfar to the South. — His Successes on the Coast of Peru. — Takes a Shipladen with Treasure Seeks a Passage by the North. — Reaches a highLatitude. — New Albion. — The Country ceded to Drake. — He sails tothe Moluccas. — Is well received by the King of Ternate. — Crab Island.Narrow Escape. — Safe Return of Drake. — How received at home. —Adventures of William Carver. - - - - Page 241CHAP. XVII.VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA.Remarks on Drake's Voyage round the World.— Its Celerity.— Discoveries.Sarmiento surveys the Straits of Magellan. — Proposes to fortify them.Expedition for that Purpose. — Its Sufferings. — San Felipe founded.Its speedy Ruin. — Expedition of Sir Thomas Candish — He passes theStrait. — His Success. — Captures the St. Anne. — Voyage home. — HisObservations. — His Death. — The Dutch turn their Attention to theTrade with India. — Expedition of Van Noort. — Account of the MagellanicTribes. — The Ladroness. — Return of Van Noort. — Voyage ofVerhagen's Fleet. — Struggles of De Weert. — Remarkable Voyage ofQuiros. — Discovers many Islands. — Sagittaria or Otaheite. — Island ofHandsome People. — Taumaco. — Information received from the Natives.He discovers Australia del Elspiritu Santo. — His Exultation. — He appliesto the King. — His Death. — Discoveries of Torres. — He coasts NewGuinea. — New Holland seen — Expedition of Spilbergen. — Account ofthe Patagonians. — His Success. — Voyage of Schouten and Le Maire. —Its Origin. — Discovery of Cape Horn. — Tyranny of the Dutch EastIndia Company. — The Totals survey Tierra del Fuego, and completethe Circumnavigation of South America. - 258CHAP. XVIII.VOYAGES IN THE PACIFIC, AND DISCOVERY OF AUSTRALIA.The Straits of Anian. — Discoveries ascribed to Urdaneta. — Depositionsof Ladrillero and Martin Clack. — Fabulous Voyage of Maldonado. —Expedition of Juan de Fuca. — Vindication of his Voyage. — Voyage ofDe Fonte. — He discovers the Archipelago of St. Lazarus. — Enters LakeFiasco. — Proceeds to Lake Belle. — Descends a River. — Arrives at theAtlantic. — Bernardo explores the Sea of Tatary. — Viscayno surveysCalifornia. — Aguilar arrives at the River of Quivira. — Secrecy of thSpaniards. — First Discovery of New Holland. — Voyage ofHertoge. —Eels, De Nuytz, and Carpenter. — New Holland known early to thePortuguese. — Expedition of Abel Tasman. — He discovers Van Diemen'sXU CONTENTS.Land. — Arrives at New Zealand. — Driven away by the Natives. — Hefinds the Friendly Islands. — Amsterdam Island. — Rotterdam. — Kindlyreceived by the Natives.— Dangerous Shoals. — Tasman returns by NewGuinea-.„-. Page 279CHAP. XIX.EXPEDITIONS OF THE BUCCANEERS IN THE SOUTH seas.Rise of the Buccaneers. — Oppressive Government of the Spaniards. —The Cruisers supply themselves with the Cattle of Cuba. — Carib Modeof preparing the Flesh . — The Name of the Buccaneers. — Their Customs.Settlement of St. Christopher's. — The Buccaneers seize Tortuga. —Elect a Chief. — Exploits of Henry Morgan. — He takes Porto Bello. —Marches to Panama. — The Buccaneers embark on the South Sea. —Their Adventures. — Lose a rich Prize through Ignorance. — LeaveWilliam the Indian on Juan Fernandez. — They return round CapeHorn. — The Buccaneers under Davis. — Dampier returns home in theCygnet — The Flying Pross. — Reception of the Buccaneers at Mindanao.— The Five Islands. — The Natives of New Holland described. —Wreck of the Cygnet. — Dampier sent on Discovery. — (lusts NewHolland. — Rosemary Island. — Proceeds to New Guinea. — Discovers aStrait — New Britannia. — Homeward Voyage — The Roebuck wreckedat Ascension Island. — Return of Dampier. . 298CHAP. XX.VOYAGES OF PRIVATEERS AND OTHERS TO THE SOUTH SEA.Privateers under Dampier. — Discords in the Expedition. — Stradling andDampier separate. — Alexander Selkirk left on Juan Fernandez. — Fateof Stradling. — Clipperton leaves Dampier. — He crosses the PacificOcean in a small Bark. — Dampier deserted by Funnel and others. —His Adversity. — He prevails on the Merchants to equip another Expedition.— Voyage of Woodes Rogers. — Arrival at Juan Fernandez. —Adventures of Alexander Selkirk on that Island. — Success of Rogers. —Unfortunate Voyages of Shelvocke and Clipperton. — French Privateers.Their rapid Increase. — The Dutch. — Koggewein's Expedition. —Belgia Austral. — Easter Island. — Dangerous Shoals. — VerquikkungIsland. —Disputes between Great Britain and Spain. — Anson's Expedition.— His Squadron manned by Invalids. — Unhappy Consequences ofthat Measure. — Voyage round Cape Horn. — Distress of the Ships. —The Acapulco Galleon taken. — Anson returns. — Fate of the otherShips. . . . . . . .316CHAP. XXI.DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS.First Intercourse between Russia and Siberia. — The Promyshleni. —Tradecarried on by StrogonofC— Adventures of Yermac— He defeats KutchamKhan. — Becomes Master of Siberia. — Offers his Dominions to the Czar.His Proposals well received. — Yermac defeated and slain. — Siberialost— Recovered by the Russians. —They approach the Amur. — Ex.CONTENTS. XU1petition of Pojarkof. — First Collision with the Chinese. — Hostilitiesbetween the two Empires. — Treaty of Merchants. — Russian Embassyto Pekin. — Misconduct of the Russians. — They are expelled from China.—Treaty of Kiachta. — Intelligence obtained by Michael Staduchin. — TheTshuktzki discovered. — Remarkable Voyage of Simon Deshniew. — Hepasses from the Icy Sea to Bearing's Straits. — Suffers Shipwreck. —Establishes a Trade on the Coast. — Fate of his Companions. — Conquestof Kamtschatka. — Taras Staduchin. — Expedition of Popow against theTshuktzki. — He receives Intelligence respecting America. Page 329CHAP. XXII.DISCOVERIES OP THE RUSSIANS.Desire of Russia to communicate with America. — Expedition designed bythe Czar Peter. — His Instructions. — First Voyage of Bearing. — ItsResult. — America marked in Russian Maps. — Expedition of Schestakof.His Fate. — Extraordinary March of Paulutski. — Voyage of Krupishef.He discovers America. — Effects of the Discovery. — Attempts tonavigate the Icy Sea. — Japanese Vessel wrecked on Kamtschatka. —Spangberg visits Yedzo. — Behaviour of the Japanese to Walton. — SecondVoyage of Bearing and Tschirikof. — They are separated. — Bearingreaches America. — Intercourse with the Natives. — Distress of theRussians. — The Ship cast away. — They Winter on a desert Island. —Death of Bearing. — The Remains of his Company escape. — Voyage ofTschirikof. — Discovery of the Aleutian Islands. — Settlements of theRussians. — Conclusion. . 313THE HISTORYOFMARITIME AND INLANDDISCOVERY.BOOK IV.MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY, FROM COLUMBUS TOCAPTAIN COOK.CHAP. I.COLUMBUS.SECOND VOYAGE OF COLUMBUS. GENERAL ENTHUSIASM IN HISFAVOUR. ARRIVES AT THE CARIBBEE ISLANDS. APPROACHESHispaniola. FINDS THE FORT DESTROYED. FATE OF THESPANIARDS WHO HAD REMAINED. THE CITY OF ISABELLAFOUNDED. COLUMBUS PURSUES HIS VOYAGE TO THE WEST.DISCOVERS JAMAICA. SUPPOSES CUBA TO BE A PART OF ASIA.RETURNS TO HISPANIOLA IN BROKEN HEALTH. CONFUSIONOF AFFAIRS ARRIVAL OF BARTHOLOMEW COLUMBUS. COM-PLAINTS SENT HOME. JUAN DE AGUADO APPOINTED Commissioner.COLUMBUS RETURNS TO SPAIN. WELL RECEIVED.HIS THIRD VOYAGE. DISCOVERS THE AMERICAN Continent.STATE OF THE COLONY AT ST. DOMINGO. BOBA-l Della APPOINTED GOVERNOR. HE SENDS HOME COLUMBUSIN CHAINS. PUBLIC FEELING TOWARDS THE ADMIRAL.OVANDO SUPERSEDES BOBADILLA.The grand discovery made by Columbus caused ageneral transport of joy throughout Europe, and filled thepopular mind with sanguine anticipations. He was im-vol.II. B51 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.mediately considered as one marked out by destiny forgreat achievements. The voyage across the ocean, underhis auspices, was no longer looked upon with mistrust orgloomy boding; it was regarded, on the contrary, asconducting to certain distinction and unbounded riches.The honours heaped on the admiral by his gratefulsovereigns, as well as the specimens of gold and rareproductions which he had brought from the newly-discoveredcountries, all operated as incentives to thebold and the ambitious, the covetous and the needy.After the court had resolved to furnish the previousexpedition, the greatest difficulty had been experiencedin equipping three small vessels. That task had beenimposed on the port of Palos, a place of some importancein Andalusia ; but although sought to be enforcedby magisterial authority, yet so many difficulties arosefrom the disinclination of the people to embark in whatthey considered a desperate enterprise, that the requisitionmight perhaps have never been effectually compliedwith, had it not been for the personal influence ofthe Pinions. Martin Alonzo Pinzon, the eldest of thefamily, was a person of some consideration in this maritimedistrict. His reputation as an able navigator, no lessthan his affluent circumstances, procured him the regardand deference of his neighbours. He engaged heartilyin the enterprise of Columbus, advanced money, providedthe ships, and, what was of greater importance,embarked himself with his two brothers to share in allthe toils and peril of the expedition. In an unluckyhour he swerved from the line of rectitude and forgothis duty to the admiral : the painful consciousness ofhaving done what was unworthy of him, aggravated hisbodily disease, and hastened his death. But the unhappyinstability of conduct which contributed to embitterthe last moments of this brave man's life, mustnot lead us to forget the habitual generosity of hischaracter.When Columbus prepared to embark on his secondvoyage, no difficulty was found in equipping the ex-chap.I. COLUMBUS. 3petition. The public favour, of which he was now theobject, rendered every exertion easy. A fleet of seven-«teen vessels, three being ships of burden, the remaindercaravels, was quickly fitted out ; and about fifteen hundredpersons, many of whom were volunteers, eager togather in the new world the first harvest of glory andof gold, embarked full of hope and animation.On the twenty-fifth of September, as the sun rose, thefleet hoisted sail, and stood out of the bay of Cadizz. Thisappears to have been one of the happiest moments inthe life of Columbus. When he first descried the landof Guanahani, the sensations of delight, the sentimentsof gratitude, and conscious pride of having earned byhis courage, sagacity and perseverance, rank, fortune,and an immortal name, must have filled his bosom withsensations the most powerful and exalting of whichhuman nature is susceptible ; but the ocean still gapedbetween him and the immortality for which he sighed ;his glorious task was but imperfectly achieved until hehad returned and communicated his discoveries to theworld. But now he found himself at the head of aconsiderable fleet; his merits had been duly appreciated ;he was cheered by the applause of Europe, and theflattering kindness of his sovereigns ; he was confirmedin the possession of those titles on which he seems tohave laid so much stress ; and what perhaps musthave gratified him still more, he no longer prosecuted acareer opposed to the current of vulgar opinion ; thepublic enthusiasm was now enlisted in his cause, andflattered, with new-born ardour, the darling speculationof his life. Yet the motives which impelled so many toembark under the guidance of Columbus were of a natureessentially different from the enthusiasm which fired hisown breast. The principle of dissociation soon developeditself, and harassed with unceasing vexations theremainder of the life of that great man.The admiral on this occasion steered for the CapeVerd islands, intending to pursue a course to the southof that held in his former voyage. On the thirteenthb 24 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.of October the island of Ferro disappeared from view;favourable breezes wafted the fleet gently towards thewest ; and on the second of November an island wasdescried, to which the name of Dominica was given,from the circumstance of its being discovered on aSunday. Columbus had now an opportunity of becomingacquainted with the Caribs, that fierce nation,of which the un warlike inhabitants of Hispaniola hadgiven him such terrific accounts. While the fleetpassed along the Antilles or Windward Islands, theSpaniards had many rencounters with the natives, inwhich they experienced their hardihood and obstinatecourage. The women fought as desperately as the men,and when driven from their canoes into the water, stillmaintained the combat as they clove their way throughthe boisterous element. At Guadaloupe the Spaniardssaw, for the first time, that delicious fruit the anna orpineapple ; they also beheld with, horror human limbsroasting at the fire, or hanging up as provision forfuture festivals. This appalling spectacle, however, didnot abate their courage so as to prevent them fromtaking captive some of the warlike Caribs, whom theycarried with them to Hispaniola, where they arrived onthe twenty-second of November.On approaching that part of the coast where the fortof Navidad had been established, the Spaniards on boardthe fleet watched anxiously for the welcoming signals oftheir countrymen who had remained upon the island.But the dreary silence that reigned along the shoreboded something disastrous, and filled them with apprehensions.No canoes were seen paddling round theships: the natives, so kind and attentive to the Spaniardsin their former visit, now kept aloof; but the cause ofthis mysterious coolness was easily conjectured, whenthe fort of Navidad was found reduced to ashes, andcircumstances traced which left no doubt that the garrisonhad been destroyed in warfare with the Indians.The melancholy fate of the first settlers in Hispaniolathrew a gloomy damp over the spirits of the newlyCHAP. I. COLUMBUS. 5arrived adventurers, and a provident mind might haveseen in their destruction a portentous indication of futurecalamities. As soon as some intercourse could he establishedwith the natives, it was ascertained that theadmiral had hardly disappeared from the coast, whenthe garrison of the fort threw off all subordination, andabandoned themselves to the most insolent licentiousnessin their treatment of the natives. This simple peopletherefore soon ceased to regard them with awe andreverence as a superior order of beings ; and from theheedless excesses of which the Spaniards were guilty, itwas found as easy as it was necessary to destroy them.The misconduct of the colonists themselves was the mostinstructive part of the tragical story. In order to avoidscenes so likely to make sinister impressions, Columbusresolved to choose another situation for his new settlement;and selected for this purpose a plain bordering ona good haven, at no great distance from the mountainof Cibao, which was reported to contain numerous goldmines. Here he founded the city of Isabella, so calledfrom his royal mistress. The public buildings, such asthe church and magazine of the new city, were of stone;the rest were hastily constructed of reeds, plaster, andwhatever materials could be most easily procured.After having explored in several directions the interiorof the country, chiefly with a view to discoverthe mines of gold and other precious metals, and havingtaken such measures as seemed best fitted to ensure thevaluable friendship of the Indians, and to infuse aspirit of order and activity in the infant colony, Columbusprepared to set out on his voyage of discoverytowards the west. "With this view he appointed tohold the reins of government during his absence acouncil or junto, of which his brother Don Diego wasthe chief. Matters being thus arranged, he set sail onthe twenty-fourth of April, 1494, in three small vessels.His object was to examine the coast of Cuba, from thepoint where his researches had terminated on his firstvoyage, and to proceed westward as far as possibleb 3O MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.along that land which he firmly believed to be a part ofthe continent of Asia.In five days the admiral reached the eastern extremityof Cuba, at present known by the name of Cape Mays,whence he directed his course along the southern shore.Wherever the ships stopped, the natives came off intheir canoes, bearing fruits and other provisions to theirwondrous visitors, whom they beheld with astonishmentand delight. When questioned respecting gold, theysignified by gestures, that it was found in abundancein a great country to the south. This gave a newdirection to the route of Columbus : on the 3d of Mayhe stood towards the south, and in a short time the bluesummits of Jamaica rose into view. On approachingthis fine island, the Spaniards were filled with admirationat its luxuriant shores, its picturesque diversity ofoutline, and its waving groves of pimento. Its inhabitantsappeared to be more warlike and ingenious thanthose of Cuba or Hispaniola. Their canoes displayedmuch art in their construction, and were elegantly carved:some of them, hollowed out of a single tree, measuredabove ninety feet in length.The hopes of finding gold here, however, were disappointed; and Columbus, with the gratification of havingadded another noble island to the fist of those alreadydiscovered by him, returned to his former course alongthe coast of Cuba. Here, as he pursued his voyage tothe West, he fell in with a cluster of small islands, somebare and rocky, while others were clothed with wavingtrees, and all the richness of tropical vegetation. Thebirds, too, and the fishes, as well as the trees and flowers,shone with all that brilliancy of hue which nature delightsso much to display in tropical climates. Theheated imagination of Columbus eagerly embraced thebelief that he had at length reached that archipelago ofIndia of which Mandeville and Marco Polo had givensuch glowing descriptions. The natives also informedhim, that towards the west there was a great countrycalled Mango, in which the people wore clothing.CHAP. I. COLUMBUS. 7This he supposed to he the Magi of the Venetian traveller.He persevered, accordingly, in steering westward,hoping that he might succeed in circumnavigatingthe globe, and return to Europe by the lately discoveredpassage round Africa : but the difficult navigation whichhe had pursued along an intricate coast had exhaustedthe spirits of his crews ; the ships were also in a crazyand disabled state, so that it was absolutely impossible,for the present, to prosecute the voyage any further.Columbus, however, would not relinquish his favouriteproject of western discovery, until every individual onboardof his fleet signed a paper, expressing the positivebelief that Cuba was a continent, and a part of India.Fernan Perez de Lima, the secretary of the expedition,attended by four witnesses, went from ship to ship toreceive the names of those who assented to the admiral'sopinion, and to convince those who still remained indoubt. This singular document is still in existence.*Had the voyage been continued two or three days longer,the western extremity of the island would have beenreached, and the truth revealed. On the voyage homewardthe fleet again made Jamaica, and steered alongthe southern shores of that island. It then stood overfor the southern coast of Hispaniola, where it had tostruggle with adverse winds and a succession of violenttempests. At length the weather moderated, and Columbusstood out to sea with the intention of runningeastward, so as to complete his survey of the Caribbeeislands. But the unusual hardships which he had latelyendured completely overpowered his naturally strongconstitution. When the moment of repose arrived, hisspirits flagged, and he sunk beneath the accumulatedweight of toil, broken rest, and anxiety of mind. Helay in a deep lethargy, which led his crew to believethat his dissolution was not far off, and in this state ofinsensibility he was brought back to the harbour ofIsabella.Munoz. Hist, del Nuevo Mundo, p. 217. Navarretete. Collection de losfringes, && torn. ii. p. 143.B 48 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.A short time after Columbus had set out on his voyageto Cuba, his brother Bartholomew arrived at the newcolony ; and now, when the admiral returned exhaustedin spirits, and worn out with bodily fatigue, this fortunatecircumstance contributed not a little to the restorationof his health. Bartholomew Columbus was a man ofundaunted courage, possessing an active spirit and greatpractical talents ; he was also an able and experiencedmariner, and is supposed to have accompanied BartholomewDiazz in the celebrated voyage in which the Capeof Good Hope was discovered. The aid of such a friendwas now become particularly necessary to the admiral,from the disturbed state of the colony ; and he accordinglyinvested his brother with the powers and title ofadelantado, or lieutenant-governor. During his absencethe affairs of the new settlement had run into the mostlamentable confusion. The greater number of thosewho accompanied Columbus from Spain were greedyadventurers, who expected to amass unbounded wealthwith little or no toil, in a region which they were taughtto believe was the grand repository of nature's gifts.But when they experienced some of those hardshipswhich always attend the establishment of a colony in anew climate, their spirits sunk from the extreme of sanguineexpectation, to that of utter despondency. Theyfound that considerable exertion was necessary to procureeven subsistence ; and in the bitterness of their disappointment,they accused Columbus as the author of alltheir calamities. The general discontent was fomented,as is usually the case, not by those who suffered most,but by the most malignant and restless spirits. Thedisorder rose to such a pitch, that the insurgents seizedon some vessels in the harbour and set sail for Spain.Among these seceders was Friar Boyle, a Franciscanmonk, the first apostle to the West Indies, who foundmeans to diffuse through the court his complaints againstthe administration of Columbus. The president of thecouncil of the Indies, Fonseca, bishop of Badajos, adetermined enemy of the admiral, countenanced theCHAP. I. COLUMBUS. iffriar's accusations, and, in consequence, a commissionerwas sent out to report on the state of the colony. Thiscommissioner, Juan de Aguado, was a creature of theparty opposed to the admiral ; and as he collected thematerials of his report in the evident spirit of hostility,Columbus deemed it advisable to accompany him on hisreturn to Spain, in order to counteract the force of hismisrepresentations.When Columbus made his appearance at the court ofSpain, he was received with distinguished favour. Hisfrank exposition of the disordered state of the colony,his manifest solicitude for its welfare, and his just viewswith respect to its future management, restored him atonce to the full confidence of his sovereigns, and clearedaway all the aspersions of his enemies. Ships weredespatched to Hispaniola, with fresh supplies of menand provisions ; but the revenues of Spain were at thistime so much exhausted by the altercations of Europeanpolitics, that two years elapsed before an armament couldbe fitted out to carry back the admiral himself.At length, on the 30th of May, 1498, Columbus setsail with a fleet of six vessels, on his third voyage ofdiscovery. In his second voyage he had steered a moresoutherly course than in his first, and fell in with a moresteady current of favourable winds : he now ventured toproceed still farther to the south, so as to lose no opportunityof extending his experience. From the CapeVerd islands he steered south-west, until he approachedwithin five degrees of the equator. Here the ships werebecalmed; and the effects of the intense heat were soviolent, as to bring to mind the fable of a torrid zonemade uninhabitable by the scorching rays of a directsun. The stifling glow of the atmosphere was so oppressiveand enervating, that it was found necessary,after a few days, to turn towards the north-west ; andthe ships had not proceeded far in this direction, whenthey fell in with fresh breezes, a genial temperature, anda clear sky. On the 31st of July land was seen ahead.Three peaks were descried just emerging from the horse10 Modern VOYAGES OP DISCOVERT. BOOK IV.son, and on a nearer approach were found to be united attheir base. From this circumstance Columbus gave theisland the name of La Trinidad, or the Trinity.Sailing to the south and west of this island, he enteredthe great gulf of Paria, and saw land extending to thesouth as far as the eye could reach. At first he imaginedthat he had arrived on the coast of some great island ;but the sudden swells of the sea within the gulf, andthe rapid current running through it towards the north,soon led him to form a different conclusion. He argued,with equal boldness and sagacity, that these phenomenacould only arise from some great river flowing into thesea through the low tracts which bounded his view tothe south, and having its source in great mountains, situatedat an immense distance, and probably beneath theequator. The river whose existence he thus detectedwas the Orinoco. He remarked, with astonishment, theluxuriance of the country, the mild temperature of theair, and fair complexions of the inhabitants, when comparedwith the regions of Africa situated under the sameparallel of latitude. Uniting observations made in a transportof delight with theories framed under the influenceof enthusiasm, he supposed that he had now approachedthe region of the terrestrial paradise, and that the greatriver which poured its ample waters into the gulf ofParia descended from the garden of Eden. His spiritswere elated also by the quantity of pearls which he herecollected from the natives. The ships worked their waywith difficulty through the Dragon's Mouth, as the narrowchannel is called that runs between the promontoryof Paria and the isle of Trinidad ; and after followingthe continent to the west as far as Margarita, they stoodaway direct for Hispaniola.When Columbus arrived at the river Ozema, wherehis brother the adelantado had founded by his order thetown of St. Domingo, he found the colony in the wildeststate of anarchy and confusion. All subordinationwas at an end ; the turbulent had taken up arms ; and,though often defeated by the adelantado, were yet ableCHAP. I. COLUMBUS. 1 1to maintain themselves in a posture of defiance. Theadmiral dreaded the consequences of a prolonged civilwar, both to the settlement and to his own character.He preferred gaining over the disaffected by concessions,to the hazardous employment of force in reducing themto obedience. By reinstating Soldan, the leader of themalcontents, in his office of alcalde-mayor or chiefjustice, and by other conciliatory measures, he succeededin suppressing the flames of open insurrection. But theembers of civil discord still glowed within. The factiouscommotions that had raged so long assumed but a deceptionsappearance of tranquillity. Every ship thatsailed for Spain carried home fresh murmurs and complaints.The same despatches from the admiral thatconveyed the intelligence of his new discoveries, containedalso an account of insurrections and of hostilitieswith the Indians which seemed to threaten the existenceof the colony. The court, therefore, resolved to sendout an officer provisionally authorised to assume thechief power, and restore order to the distracted settlement.The person selected for this office was DonFrancisco de Bobadilla, a gentleman of the royal household.He appears to have been a man of weak characterand impetuous temper; and as his interest seemed torecommend the utmost use of the powers confided to hisdiscretion, he did not hesitate, on his arrival at Hispaniola,to treat Columbus at once as a delinquent; toarrest him, and load him with irons. This great manwas so deeply affected by the indignities wantonly heapedupon him, and by the numerous expressions of hatredthat assailed him, that he even began to entertain apprehensionsfor his life. When Valley, who commandedthe vessel in which he was to embark for Spain,entered his prison in order to conduct him to the harbour,Columbus, dreading that they were about to leadhim out to the scaffold, cried out in a tone of dejectionand despair, " Valley, whither are you going to takeme ? " and it was not till that brave officer had repeatedhis assurance that they were preparing to embark, that12 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.the admiral regained his composure. When arrived onhoard, he would not allow his fetters to be taken off;but, being sensible of his great merits, and sure of futurefame, he fondly wore those affecting testimonies of hisvicissitudes, and even expressed a wish that when hedied they might be hung upon his tomb.When it was known in Spain that Columbus wasbrought home a prisoner and in bonds, the public indignationwas loudly expressed against those who advisedthis unworthy treatment of a man so eminently distinguishedby his services. The needless severities usedtowards him betrayed the injustice of his enemies, andthe wantonness of faction. The generous minded Isabellasympathised with his wounded heart ; and Ferdinand,however coldly disposed towards the admiral, wasobliged to give way to the tide of popular feeling.Columbus and his brothers were ordered to be immediatelyset at liberty, and were received at court withevery mark of distinction. The admiral's vindication ofhis conduct was listened to with deference and apparentsatisfaction. Bobadilla, whose arrogant and headstrongtemper had done him so much wrong, and still kept alivethe factions of the colony, was immediately recalled.But though Columbus frequently and anxiously entreatedto be reinstated in his government, his suit ws& constantlyevaded; and Don Nicholas de Ovando, a cavalierof eminent accomplishments and well versed in business,was chosen to succeed Bobadilla.CHAP. II. COLUMBUS. 13CHAP. II.COLUMBUS AND AMERIGO VESPUCCI.FOURTH VOYAGE OF COLUMBUS. OCCURRENCES AT Hispaniola.FATE OF BOBADILLA. COLUMBUS REACHES Honduras.RECEIVES ACCOUNTS RESPECTING MEXICO. ExaminesTHE COAST OF Veranda. SUFFERINGS OF THE Expedition.SHIPWRECK ON THE COAST OF JAMAICA. BOLDVOYAGE TO HISPANIOLA IN A CANOE. DISTRESS OF COLUMBUS.INHUMAN CONDUCT OF OVANDO. THE ADMIRAL AT LENGTHRELIEVED. RETURNS TO SPAIN. HIS DEATH. HONOURSPAID TO HIS ASHES. MERIT OF HIS DISCOVERY. ExpressionsOF THE CLASSIC WRITERS SUPPOSED TO RELATE TOAMERICA. CLAIMS OF THE DIEPPOIS TO THE DISCOVERY OFTHE NEW WORLD. OF THE BASQUES AND BRETONS. ALONZODE HOJEDA FOLLOWS IN THE TRACK OF THE ADMIRAL.AMERIGO VESPUCCI FALSELY CLAIMS THE HONOUR OF HAVINGDISCOVERED THE CONTINENT. TESTIMONY OF THE PILOTS.CAUSES WHICH ENABLED HIM TO Impose HIS NAME ON THENEW WORLD.While the ambition of Columbus was in this mannerthwarted, and his rightful authority superseded, in thevery countries which he had discovered, his spirit didnot languish in inactivity, nor did he relinquish hisformer purpose of penetrating by the west to those richcountries of India described by Marco Polo and othertravellers. He begged to be placed again at the head ofan expedition ; and events had recently occurred whichadded weight to his entreaties. About a year before hisreturn from Hispaniola, Vasco de Gama had arrived atLisbon, after accomplishing the voyage to India by theCape of Good Hope, and had brought back such anaccount of those rich and populous countries as inflamedthe desire of every European state to open an intercoursewith them. The reputation of Columbus as a learnedand sagacious cosmographer was now established beyonddispute, and he offered to conduct a fleet to the Indies bya shorter route than that followed by De Gama. He hadtraced the coast of Caracas a long way to the west ; he14 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.had also surveyed the southern shores of Cuba, which hesupposed to be the continent, in the same direction ; hetherefore concluded that the ocean extended betweenthose limits, and that the strait leading into those Indianseas which had been visited by the Portuguese lay somewherein the direction of Darien. This conjecture,although erroneous, exhibits abundant proof of a penetratingspirit.The expedition which Columbus commanded in hisfourth voyage of discovery consisted of only four smallcaravels, the largest of them not exceeding seventy tonsburden. With this weak armament he intended topenetrate the mysteries of the Western Ocean, and tocomplete the circumnavigation of the globe. He set sailfrom Cadizz on the 9th of May, 1 502, and reached Martinique,one of the Windward Islands, on the 15th ofJune. He was advised, in a kind letter from the kingand queen, not to touch at Hispaniola, where his presencemight revive the commotions which had grown toso alarming a pitch under his administration. But, asone of his vessels was a heavy sailer, he was desirous tosubstitute another in its stead by exchange or purchase,and with that view steered for St. Domingo, hopingthat the exigency of the case would excuse his neglectof the royal intimation. The wish of the sovereigns,however, was already known in the island, and Columbuswas not permitted to enter the harbour. Hisexperience enabled him to foresee the approach of aviolent tempest ; and as a large fleet was at the timeabout to set sail for Spain, he warned Ovando of thedanger, and advised him to delay its departure. Buthis counsel was received with mistrust, as the officioussuggestion of a secret enemy, and was accordinglydisregarded. The fleet, however, had hardly put to seawhen a furious hurricane came on, by which the greaterpart of it was destroyed. The ship in which Bobadillaand his ill-acquired treasures were embarked was amongthose that sunk : the only vessel that completely withstoodthe gale, and was able to continue her voyage toCHAP. II. COLUMBUS. 15Spain, was a small caravel containing the property whichColumbus had left on the island. This circumstance wasascribed, by the friends of the admiral, to a direct interpositionof Providence in his favour, while his enemiesaccused him of employing magic arts to awakenthe fury of the elements. As his skill in providingagainst danger was equal to his foresight, he had takensuch measures as enabled his own small squadron towithstand the violence of the storm in which his enemiesperished.As soon as the weather permitted, Columbus stoodout to sea, to prosecute his voyage of discovery. Thecurrents carried him to Cuba, whence he steered southwesttill he reached the island of Granada, on the coast ofHonduras. Here he found among the inhabitants proofsof a higher degree of civilisation than had been as yetobserved among the natives of the New World. Theyhad utensils of copper, and wore cotton garmentscuriously worked and dyed with a variety of colours.Among the animals of this coast, he was particularlystruck with the peccary or American pig, and the monkeyswith prehensile tails; which are also peculiar to thenew continent. A cacique gave him three pigs of soterrible an appearance, he says, " that they wouldfrighten an Irish dog"* One of these animals beingthrown to a wounded monkey, the latter seized the snoutof the peccary with its tail in such a manner as to bindits jaws firmly together, and then clawed unmercifullyits helpless adversary. " This appeared to me so strange'says Columbus, in his letter to the king and queen,that I thought it fit to write it down for the informationof your majesties." The natives gave him to understandthat to the west there lay a country remarkable forits arts, riches, and population. This he supposed tobe Cathay, and it appeared to him not at all surprisingthat the sea-coast of so great an empire should be inhabitedby poor fishermen, for such he deemed the savages.Neglecting these indications, which would have led himHe alludes to the Irish greyhound j a species now extinct.16 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.to the discovery of Mexico, Columbus persevered insearch of that strait which he supposed to be situated inamore southern latitude. He continued his course,accordingly, along the whole extent of coast from Trux-illo, in Honduras, to the Gulf of Darien, not terminatinghis examination till he arrived at a point whichhad been already reached by the successful navigatorBastidas, from the East. In this coasting voyageColumbus suffered much from adverse winds, conflictingcurrents, and the hostilities of the natives. Anattempt to make a settlement on the coast of Veraguawas defeated by the desperate courage of the latter.Several of the Spaniards lost their lives ; and it requiredall the energy and strength of the adelantado to rescuethe remainder from destruction. Anxiety and fatiguepreyed so much on the constitution of the admiral, thathe was scarcely able to appear on deck. The ships ofhis small squadron stood so much in need of repair thatit was with difficulty they were navigated or even keptafloat. But this was not all : as they approached thecoast of Cuba a violent storm arose; the shattered vesselswere no longer in a state to bear the tossing of a tempestuoussea ; their foundering was inevitable ; and theonly means of preventing their being swallowed up inthe ocean was to run them aground on the shore ofJamaica. This was fortunately done : the wrecks wereimmediately visited by the canoes of the natives, whohospitably supplied the Spaniards with provisions. Theadelantado took measures to maintain order among themurmuring crews, while the admiral lay . completelybroken by the united afflictions of bodily pain andmental suffering.In a short time the Indians grew weary of supplyingthe wants of the strangers, whom they perceived to benow established as permanent guests among them. Provisionsbegan to fall short, and the dread of famine inflamedthe mutinous spirit already prevailing among thecrews, part of whom threw off all obedience to theadmiral, and roved through the island committing theCHAP. N. COLUMBUS. 17most wanton violence on the simple and inoffensive inhabitants.The destruction of the Spaniards by want,the enmity of the natives, and their own dissensions,seemed to be at no great distance. In this lamentablestate of affairs, Diego Mended and Fresco a Genoese,undertook to cross over to Hispaniola in a canoe purchasedfrom the Indians, and to acquaint the governorwith the distressed situation of Columbus and his companions.The hardy enterprize succeeded, and the courageousmariners reached Hispaniola after a voyage of fourdays. But Ovando attended more to the suggestions ofjealousy and hatred than to the calls of humanity, andpurposely delayed equipping a vessel for the relief ofColumbus. He sent, however, a small vessel with aletter of compliment to the admiral, and for the purpose,perhaps, of observing his condition. The appearance ofa friendly sail approaching raised the liveliest emotionsof joy among the shipwrecked mariners ;' but what wastheir dejection and despair when they saw it standingout again to sea, without offering them the least relief !Columbus dissembled his mortification at this wantoninsult : he dexterously gave such a colouring to the circumstanceas kept alive the hopes of his companions;and by foretelling an eclipse of the moon, he opportunelyturned to account the ignorance and superstition of thenatives, and procured from them an abundant supply ofprovisions.In the mean time the sufferings of so great a manexcited a general sympathy among the colonists at St.Domingo ; and the conduct of the governor in delayingto rescue him from his perilous situation was loudly andseverely censured. The unprincipled and politic Ovando,though he cared little for the life of Columbus, wascareful to preserve his own popularity. A vessel wastherefore despatched to carry off the admiral and hisfaithful companions, after they had languished in thewrecks a whole year of painful anxiety.Columbus was received at St. Domingo with everyVOL. II. c1 8 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.manifestation of joy and enthusiasm. His misfortuneshad allayed the rancour of popular hostility ; and noungenerous revival of past altercations was allowed toaggravate the present distresses of so eminent a man.Even Ovando, while he wounded the feelings of theadmiral by various harsh and unjust .proceedings, treatedhim studiously .with the show of courtesy and outwardrespect. As soon as the health of Columbus was sufficientlyrestored to enable him to bear the hardships ofanother voyage, he set sail for Spain, where he arrivedon the seventh of November, 1504. Here terminatedthe labours of this great navigator. In his third voyagehe had discovered the continent of America, and in hisfourth and last expedition he had touched at some ofthe richest countries of that favoured region, and hadreceived alluring intelligence respecting the wealth ofMexico, which was destined at no distant period topour its treasures into Spain. Notwithstanding his longservices and the ample dignities which he had stipulatedfor in his contract with the crown, he was now in astate of extreme poverty. His patroness, queen Isabella,was dead, and Ferdinand, habitually slow tohearken to the voice of justice, unless seconded by thatof interest, paid but little attention to his claims. Invain Columbus solicited to be restored to his authorityas viceroy of the Indies. The king endeavoured toelude by delay the suit with which he was unwilling tocomply. These politic evasions hastened, perhaps, theevent which they had in view. The bodily infirmitiesof Columbus were increased by the pangs of disappointment,and he expired at Valladolid on the twentieth ofMay, 1506. Among other provisions in his will, heenjoined that his eldest son Diego, or whoever mightsucceed to his dignities and tides, should simply signhimself " the Admiral," so as to keep always in viewthe great founder of the family. The high offices, theexercise of which was refused to Columbus, were afterwardsconfirmed, with a few slight modifications, to hiseldest son Diego, who, by marrying a niece of the dukeCnAP. II. COLUMBUS. 19of Alva, was admitted to an alliance with the first nobilityof Spain.The partiality with which mankind are naturally disposedto regard a distinguished character has ascribedall the disappointments which troubled the latter daysof Columbus to such an unlucky union of malice andselfishness in all with whom he had to deal, as must necessarilyexcite the mistrust of those who are unwillingto sacrifice their esteem for human nature in order toexalt a favourite hero. The enthusiastic temper ofColumbus, though well calculated to achieve an extraordinaryenterprise, was very ill adapted to the delicatetask of governing an infant colony. His dreams ofaggrandisement were of the most extravagant nature.On concluding his capitulation with Ferdinand andIsabella, he made a vow to lead an army of fifty thousandmen to the Holy Land within seven years after hisconquest of the Indies, and to rescue Jerusalem fromthe hands of the infidels. Gold was the immediate objectof his search in the New World; and it is surprisingwith what eager credulity he listened to every accountwhich flattered his hopes of acquiring sudden riches.The constitutional ardour of his mind was never cooledby hardship or reverses ; and the sanguine confidence bywhich he, in the first instance, attracted others to hisschemes, became a principle of repulsion as soon as theireyes were opened to the reality of their situation. Thepertinacity with which he clung to his delusions exposedhim to the bitter derision of those whose simplicity hehad misled, and whose repining he treated with thehaughty severity of a confirmed visionary. His discontentedfollowers had, probably, good reason to accusehim of inordinate rigour ; for enthusiasm too often attemptsto eradicate vices by violent means, withoutawaiting the growth of virtuous habits. When Ferdinandand Isabella withheld from Columbus the governmentof Hispaniola, it does not appear that theywished to deprive him of any thing but the power whichhe was unqualified to wield. They even satisfied him,c 220 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.at first, of the expediency of his retiring from a scene,where the hostility to his person was so violent as evento threaten his life. The queen, though her gentle naturewas shocked by his scheme to reduce the Caribs toslavery, yet continued, while she lived, to treat the admiralwith the favour due to his genius and eminentservices. After her death, Columbus still experiencedfrom Ferdinand as many marks of consideration, perhaps,as an enthusiast could expect from a cool andcalculating prince.*The body of Columbus, at first interred in the churchof Santa Maria in Valladolid, was afterwards removedto Seville. In the year 1536, however, his remainswere transported to Hispaniola, and entombed near thegrand altar in the cathedral of St. Domingo. Here theyremained till the cession of Hispaniola to the French in1795. On that occasion the Spaniards, unwilling toabandon relics so gloriously associated with the mostbrilliant period of Spanish history, determined to removethem to the island of Cuba. No solemnity of religion,no pomp of military display, was omitted, that could dohonour to the memory of the illustrious dead. Theashes of Columbus were deposited in the cathedral ofHavana ; and this last tribute of attention paid to hisfame, after a lapse of three centuries, displayed a gratefuland ardent enthusiasm, not inferior to that, perhaps,which greeted him on his return from the discovery ofthe New World.The posterity of Columbus long enjoyed the wealthand honours which prompted his ambition. His son,Don Diego, in prosecuting his claims, was obliged tomaintain a tedious lawsuit with the royal fiscal, theobject of which was to ascertain precisely what portionsof the New World had been discovered by his father.Don Luis, the son of Don Diego, gave up his pretensionsto the viceroyalty of the Indies for the titles of Duke ofVeraguas and Marquess of Jamaica : he resigned, at thesame time, his claim to a tenth of all revenues in theKavarrcte, torn. i. p. 67.CHAP. II. COLUMBUS. 21Indies for a pension of a thousand doubloons of gold.In 1608, the male line being extinct, the titles andestates of the family reverted to Don Nuiio Selves dePortugal, who was descended from a daughter of DonDiego Columbus. Thus the dignities of ' the Admiral'passed to a branch of the noble family of Braganza.The dukes of Veraguas were, in 1712, raised to the firstrank of Spanish grandees ; the perspective of elevationcontemplated by Christopher Columbus being thus completed.The present duke of Veraguas, however, hislineal descendant and representative, was stripped of allhis property and reduced to extreme distress by the revolutionswhich deprived Spain of her colonies in theWest Indies. That nobleman was in consequence obligedto apply to his government for indemnification. Hisclaim has been recently admitted, and a pension of twenty-fourthousand dollars has been assigned him on the revenuesof Cuba and Porto Rico. *Among all the great men who have conferred importantbenefits on mankind by their enterprise oringenuity, there is not one who appears at first view tohave shot more completely beyond the age in which helived, or to have acted more independently of surroundingimpulses, than Columbus. The enthusiasm whichurged him to cross the ocean in search of a new worldwas all his own. It was also the result of mature andAvell directed reflection. The justness with which hecombined all the various circumstances that evinced theexistence of trans-Atlantic countries alone displays thevigour and comprehensiveness of his genius.Yet the discovery of America was prepared by a longtrain of events. The improvement of the mariner'scompass, the adoption of the astrolabe to measure altitudesat sea, the maritime boldness derived from thediscoveries of the Portuguese, independent of the generalrapid growth both of political energy and scientificspeculation in Europe, had conducted the age in whichColumbus lived to that state of maturity, when geogof Columbus, abridged by Washington Irving, 1830. p. 357.c 322 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.graphical knowledge could be no longer confined withinits ancient limits, but must have necessarily extendeditself over the whole surface of the globe. WhenCabral, the Portuguese navigator, who conducted a fleetto the East Indies in 1500, stood far out to sea in orderto avoid the adverse winds that prevail near the coast ofAfrica, he fell in with the coast of Brazil ; so that allthe enthusiasm and veteran hardihood of Columbusanticipated by only twelve years the effect of accident.This reflection, however, does not in the least derogatefrom the merit of Columbus ; for the superiority of asocial being must consist in being eminent among hisfellows, and not separate from them. As long as theprogress of society depends on the growth of knowledge,and not on mere hazard, so long must the speculationsof the man of genius be in close connection with theintelligence of the many.It would detract as little from his fame, if we wereto suppose, with some of the learned, that America hadbeen already visited in ancient times by Phoeniciannavigators, and that the obscure hints found in classicwriters relative to oceanic regions were derived fromtheir traditions. The doubtful claims of the Phoeniciansto proficiency in the arts of navigation have been alreadyexamined * ; and as to the traditions preserved inGreek and Latin authors, they present to the criticaleye much more the general forms of mythology andspeculation than the individual features of reality.The belief in the existence of land beyond the oceanwas widely diffused in antiquity ; nor is it reasonable toascribe its origin either to the fancy of Plato, or totraditions reaching beyond the date of those physicalrevolutions which may be supposed to have separatedthe old world from the new. The spherical figure ofthe earth, though easily detected on reflection, is by nomeans obvious to the vulgar eye. The supposition thatthe earth is an extended plain, though repugnant toreason, leaves unbounded liberty to the imagination, andSec vol j. chap. ix. of this work.CHAP. II. COLUMBUS. 23must have always obtained the preference with contractedobservers. But as the idea of an interminable world isnot easily entertained, it was natural to believe that theterrestrial habitation of man was bounded by the ocean.In order to fix limits, however, to the ocean, it wasagain necessary to have recourse to another solid region.Thus the rings of land and water continually alternate ;the limit which reason cannot find is fixed by superstition,and a peculiarly sacred number, as in" the systemof the Hindoo, determines the limits of the universe.This process of speculation is so natural, that it wouldbe surprising if the ancients had not made any allusionto regions beyond the ocean ; and it appears a strangeinattention to the activity of the human mind in theearly stages of civilisation to mistake these hints forany thing but the offspring of primitive philosophy. *It has been seen in a previous part of this work, thatthe northern nations ventured at a very early age onsome bold maritime excursions ; that they reachedGreenland, and probably were not strangers to the adjoiningcoast of North America. Notwithstanding theloss of the Greenland colony, it is not likely that seasonce navigated were ever utterly abandoned ; and thereis some reason to suspect that the fisheries of Newfoundlandwere frequented before the time of Columbus.The Normans and Bretons visited the same seas asearly at least as 1504, or only twelve years after thefirst voyage of Columbus ; and it is not very probablethat a fishery at so great a distance should have beencommenced only a few years after the discovery of thebanks. The ablest geographers of the sixteenth century,such as Cornelius, Mercator, Witfliet, Pontus,and others, looked upon it as indisputable, that theBasques of Cape Breton near Bayonne, and the othercod-fishers of the same province, had discovered Newfoundlandbefore the time of Columbus ; and theyAntonio Ribera dos Santos has collected the various passages of theancient writers, which may be supposed to have a reference to transatlanticcountries, in the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences at Lisbon,torn. v. p. 101.c 424 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.venture even to assert, that these bold navigators hadpenetrated as far as Canada, and that Columbus hadinformation of their route from a Basque pilot. Theseopinions were chiefly grounded on traditions preservedamong the fishermen of Biscay.*There is, however, a want of clear and authentictestimony in support of those early discoveries. Don M.de Navarretete, whose authority on this point seems conclusive,is disposed to think that the Biscayans did notdiscover Newfoundland till 1 526, and he shows that theydid not frequent the banks till 1540.tA bolder claim to the honour of discovering Americahas been recently advanced in favour of the inhabitantsof Dieppe, who were reckoned, during the fourteenthand fifteenth centuries, among the most expert and hardynavigators of Europe. It is said that one Cousin, aninhabitant of Dieppe, influenced by the conjectures orspeculation of a townsman named Declaimers, whom theNormans regarded as the founder of hydrographicalscience, undertook some voyages of great length, anddiscovered, in 1488, the mouth of the river of Amazons,whence he returned the following year, touching on hisway homeward at the coasts of Africa. It is also stated,that one Pinion, who commanded a small vessel inCousin's expedition, was tried on his return, and dismissedfrom the service of the city, for his turbulentbehaviour and disobedience to his commander. Thosewho credit the story of Cousin's voyage conjecture thisPinion to have been one of that family who sailed withColumbus from the port of Palos, and perhaps the sameindividual who equipped an expedition in 1499> withwhich he directed his course to the river of Amazons.This last circumstance, united to the identity of nameand resemblance of character, give to the conjecture anair of probability. Yet as the archives of Dieppe were alldestroyed by fire in 1 694, and no original documents relatingto Cousin's voyage are at present extant, the whole• Diction. Geog. Mxt. tie Espana, por la Academia de la Historia, torn, itp. 313. Art. St. Sebastian.+ Navarretete, torn. iii. p. 179.CHAP. II. COLUMBUS. 25story must be regarded as apocryphal, notwithstandingtke ingenuity with which the testimonies of contemporarywriters are sought to be collected in its favour.*Thus it appears that the honour of having discoveredthe New World is disputed with Columbus on insufficientgrounds. Whatever speculative opinions may have beenafloat in his time respecting the existence of trans-Atlanticcountries, very little can be detracted from that originalityof conception which marks his strong persuasion ; andnothing at all from the boldness of his enterprise.The number of those who ventured to follow histraces across the ocean was soon considerable; and,independent of the success or personal qualities of thosedaring mariners, the rapidity with which these expeditionssucceeded one another deserves especial notice inthe History of Maritime Discovery.Among those who accompanied Columbus to Hispaniolain his second voyage was Alonzo de Hojeda, ayoung and handsome cavalier, small of stature, butpossessing wonderful strength and activity of body, andwith courage equal to the most desperate enterprise. Hehad distinguished himself in the wars with the Moorsof Grenada, and exhibited before the queen some featsof personal prowess. In Hispaniola he soon becameconspicuous for his boldness and dexterity, and rendereda most important service to the colony by seizing andcarrying off from the midst of his people Caonabo, theCarib chief of the interior. Hojeda happened to be atthe court of Spain, when intelligence arrived from Columbusrespecting the discoveries made by him in histhird voyage ; his route along the coast of Paria, whichhe justly conjectured to be the continent, and the quantityof pearls he saw with the natives. Hojeda immediatelyconceived the design of following the traces ofthe admiral, so as to profit at once from the discovery ;and, as he enjoyed the favour of Fonseca his project wasimmediately approved of. He accordingly fitted out anMourn. Asiatique, torn. ix. p. 35+. ; end in the French translation ofNavarretete, torn i. p. 343. note.26 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.expedition of four ships, with which he reached thecontinent of South America, at no great distance fromthe equator ; then keeping the coast always in view, hepassed the mouths of the rivers Essequibo and Orinoco.From Margarita he steered westward, and examined thewhole coast of Venezuela, as far as Cape Vela, whencehe directed his course to Hispaniola.Hojeda was accompanied in his first expedition byAmerigo Vespucci, a native of Florence, who, by affixinghis name to the new continent, has surreptitiously obtainedthat testimony of fame which was unquestionablydue to Columbus. Vespucci was a man of considerabletalents and acquirements ; an experienced mariner, anda good cosmographer. Some writers suppose that heattended Columbus in the first voyage of that great manto the New World ; but the earliest authentic mention ofhim in Spain occurs in official documents of the year1495. At that time he appears to have been an agentor partner of Beard, a Florentine merchant, establishedat Seville, who was a confidential friend of Columbus,and who, from his intimacy with the admiral or onaccount of his great wealth, was usually commissionedby the government to equip the armaments destined forHispaniola. From the year 1 500, when Amerigo Vespuccireturned from his voyage with Hojeda, to thebeginning of 1505, he appears to have been engaged inthe service of the king of Portugal, and during thisperiod he may have visited the East Indies, or the coastof Brazil. He afterwards returned to Spain, where hewas very favourably received ; the value of his intrinsicmerits, his great experience as a navigator, his commercialknowledge, and his steady conduct, being perhapsenhanced by the circumstance of his having been wonfrom a rival court. On the death of Columbus, theking of Spain endeavoured to supply so great a loss byattaching to his service the ablest navigator of the time,and accordingly named Vespucci his chief pilot. Butno enterprise of any moment resulted from this appointment; an expedition, prepared in 1507, for the discoveryCnAP. II. AMERIGO VESPUCCI. 27of a western passage to the Spice Islands, and which wasto have been entrusted to Amerigo Vespucci and VincentYanez Pinzon, having been abandoned in consequenceof remonstrances made by the king of Portugal. Amerigodied in the service of Spain in the year 1512.The claim of Amerigo Vespucci to the honour ofhaving discovered the continent of the New World hasbeen strenuously advocated by many learned men, evenof the present age.* The Florentine pilot lost no time incultivating the favour of the literary world, and in 1507the account which he had written of his four voyageswas already printed in Latin ; having been previouslytranslated into French and Spanish from the originalItalian. There are many circumstances in his narrativecalculated to alarm a suspicious critic, and it may beeven doubted whether he ever actually performed the fourvoyages he describes. The date which he assigns to thecommencement of his first voyage, May, 1497, is thefoundation on which rests all his title as a discoverer ;yet this is evidently an artful falsification. It is admittedon all hands that he accompanied Hojeda; and the firstvoyage of discovery made by this commander is fixed unanimouslyby all the Spanish writers in 1499j> or a yearlater than the voyage in which Columbus fell in withthe coast of Paria. In the tedious lawsuit which tookplace a few years later between the royal fiscal andDon Diego Columbus, all the circumstances of the firstvoyages to the New World were brought into full lightby examination of the most eminent navigators alive,many of whom had been the companions of Columbus.In documents which are still in existence, Hojeda declaresthat he sailed in 1499.> taking with him Juande la Cosa and Amerigo Vespucci as pilots, and that hewas the first who made a voyage of discovery after theadmiral. He made the voyage, he says, because he hadseen the drawings or maps of his discoveries whichColumbus had sent home ; and he adds a particular,Bending, Vita di Amerigo Vespucci. 1745. Canova, Viaggi ili Amer.Vest. 1819. Malte Brun, Geog. Univ. torn. i. p. 500.28 Modern VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.which is carefully omitted in the relation of Vespucci,that he found traces of the admiral in the Isle of Trinidad,near the Dragon's Mouth.* In the legal proceedingsabove alluded to, it was proved by a hundredand nine witnesses, among whom were the Pinions,Hojeda, Bastidas, Morales, Oedema, and other distinguishednavigators, that Christopher Columbus was thefirst discoverer of the West Indies, of Terra Firma, andof Darien : and it is worthy of remark, that while thegrand object of this investigation was to determine thepriority of discovery, no one ever thought of the claimsof Amerigo Vespucci ; nor was he even alluded to byany of the witnesses except Hojeda. tNotwithstanding the groundlessness of his pretensions,the ambition of the Florentine to give his name to theNew World met with flattering success so early as 1 507.In a treatise of cosmography printed in that year, andprefixed to his voyages, the writer, who was probablyVespucci's countryman, remarks, " that the new continentought to be called America, from its discoverer America,a man of rare ability ; inasmuch as Europe and Asiaderived their names from women." J Thus it appearsthat the New World has silently and irrevocably assumedthat general denomination which first appeared in print.Popular fables, and the enthusiastic dreams of Columbus,intercepted from him a portion of his glory. He fanciedthat he had reached the Indies, the favoured seat ofluxury and wealth ; and would have felt sorry, perhaps,to relinquish that favourite idea for the honour of assumingthe rich blazonry of fame to which he was trulyentitled, and of giving his name to a new quarter of theworld. The illiberal jealousy and reserve of the courtof Spain, which throws a shade over the career of all• Navarretete, torn. iii. p. 544. + Id. pp. 538 — 592.t Cosmography cum quatuor itinerant America Vesputii, &c. printed in1507, and again in 1509 : these rare little volumes are in the library of theBritish Museum. The author of this treatise shows his solicitude to giveAmerigo's name to the new continent by repeating the above-cited observationwithin the space of a few pages. May he not have been a near kinsmanof the navigator, whose fame he wished to exalt ? A commentaryon the Sphere of Sacrobosco, written by one Bartolommeo Vespitcci, wuprinted in 1508. Pinelo, Bibliotheca orientale et occidentale, p. 961CHAP. III. DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA. 2Qwho engage in its service, has contributed not a little tothe injustice with which posterity has treated that greatman. Amerigo Vespucci was the first who publishedan account of the newly-discovered countries, and mankindhas liberally repaid the information it received.*CHAP. III.EARLY DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA.NAVIGATORS WHO EMULATED THE FAME OF COLUMBUS.VINCENT YANEZ Pinson. DISCOVERS BRAZIL. THE RIVEROF AMAZONS. BRINGS HOME THE FIRST OPOSSUM SEEN INEUROPE. VOYAGE OF Bastions. EXPLORES VENEZUELAAND Cartagena. HIS DISTRESSES. PROVINCES AWARDEDTO HIM. POLICY OF THE SPANISH COURT. JEALOUSY ExcitedBY THE ENGLISH AND PORTUGUESE. •>— EXPEDITION OFPinson AND SOLIS TO SOUTH AMERICA. SECOND VOYAGE OFSOUS. ITS OBJECT. HE REACHES THE RIVER LA PLATA.DEVOURED BY THE SAVAGES. EXERTIONS OF HOJEDA. HISEXPEDITION TO COLONISE URABA. FINDS A RIVAL IN NICUESSA.DEFEATED BY THE INDIANS. BUILDS ST. SEBASTIAN. HISSUFFERINGS AND DEATH. WRETCHED FATE OF NICUESSABALBOA REMAINS IN DARIEN. MARCHES ACROSS THE Isthmus.DISCOVERS THE SOUTH SEA. SUPERSEDED BY PegHIS UNHAPPY END.The discovery of America filled mankind with astonishment,and awakened the lively curiosity of thelearned. Countries of such vast extent, and which hadremained so long unknown, held out attractions to themost active propensities — the love of novelty and of gain.The ardour of hope is so much nourished by imagination,and this faculty had such full scope to expand itself in theimperfectly descried regions of the New World, that weneed not be surprised at the alacrity and perseverancewith which expeditions were fitted out to undertake theA letter of Columbus on his return from his first voyage was translatedinto Latin by Leander de Cusco, and printed in 1493, with the title Epistolade Insults Indice super Ganges nuper invents, &c. But this evidently didnot announce the discovery of a New World.30 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.dangerous voyage across the Atlantic, and pursue thetracks of ill-requited discovery.Yet, notwithstanding the multitude of adventurerswho pressed forward in this new career of fame or fortune,the eminence of Columbus remained obscuredby rivalry ; or rather, the lustre of his fame was renderedstill more conspicuous by the boldness of navigators,who had almost all been his companions or disciples.Among the most distinguished of these wasVincent Yanez Pinzon, who had accompanied the admiralin his first voyage of discovery. His spirit ofenterprise was roused by the intelligence that the continentwas discovered ; and as great confidence was reposedin his ability and experience, he found no difficultyin equipping four caravels, and in inducing someof those who had visited the coast of Paria with Columbusto embark as pilots in the expedition. Thus prepared,he sailed from Palos in the beginning of December,1499. From the Cape Verd islands he held hiscourse three hundred leagues towards the south-west,the pole star being still visible above the horizon. Inthe midst of the ocean, however, a violent tempest cameon, which drove the vessels along for some hours, atan unusually rapid rate; and when the wind abated,and the clouds cleared away, so that the heavensmight be observed, the seamen were astonished tofind that the north pole was now completely concealedfrom their view, and that the starry hemisphere hadchanged its aspect. Unacquainted as yet with the constellationsnear the southern pole, and being consequentlyat a loss for some fixed point to guide them intheir path through the seas, they became filled withsuperstitious terrors. Pinzon, however, persisted in hiscourse to the south-west ; and on the 20th of January,1500, when in eight degrees of south latitude, he discoveredland, to which he gave the name of Santa,Maria de la Consolation. He immediately went onshore, and, with the usual formalities, took possessionof the country in the name of the crown of Castile. NoCnAP. III. DISCOVERY OF BRAZIL. 31inhabitants were seen here ; but the Spaniards imaginedthat they saw footsteps and other traces of men ofgigantic stature.Thus Pinzon was the first European who crossed theline in the western seas. To the same navigator is alsounquestionably due the discovery of Brazil, which isusually assigned, however, to Pedro Alvarez Cabral, aPortuguese admiral, who, while conducting a fleet toIndia, and standing out far to the west, in order toavoid the variable winds which prevail near the Africancontinent, arrived unexpectedly on the same shore aboutthree months later than Pinzon, and two degrees fartherto the south. He took possession of the country for thecrown of Portugal, and called it Santa Cruz, a nameeventually supplanted by that of Brazil, which it obtainedfrom the red dye-wood found there in great abundance.The Spanish navigator steered northwards along thecoast from Cape St. Augustin, and explored with wonderthe mouths of the Maragnon, or river of Amazons,which pours down, through numerous mouths, such animmense body of water, as to freshen the sea to thedistance of many leagues from land. From the sizeof this great stream, Pinzon justly inferred the vastmagnitude of the continent from which it flows. Theislands near the shore were inhabited by a simple andharmless people, who generously shared with their strangevisitors every thing they possessed. In return for thiskindness and hospitality, a number of them weft treacherouslyseized by the Spaniards and carried off captive.Proceeding along the shore, Pinzon passed through thestrait called the Dragon's Mouth, and steered for Hispaniola.Leaving this, he encountered a dreadful stormwhich sunk two of his vessels, and reached Palos in theend of September, many of his people having perished,and the remainder being worn out with fatigue. Nothingwas gained by this voyage but the honour of having exploredfour hundred leagues of coast hitherto unknown.But the mind of Pinzon was still possessed with the magnificentfancies of Columbus. He fondly thought that he32 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.had arrived at the Indies, and brought home with him avariety of vegetable productions, which he looked upon asprecious drugs and spices. About three thousand pounds'weight of dye-woods, of various colours, formed the onlyvaluable part of his cargo. Among the specimens ofstrange animals which he brought with him from the NewWorld was an individual of the opossum species, a tribewhich nature has provided with the singular appendageof a pouch or bag attached close under the belly, inwhich the young are carried, until they acquire strengthto shift for themselves. The young of the opossumwhich Pinzon took on board died during the voyagehome; but the old one reached Spain in safety, andwas sent from Seville to the court at Grenada, where itexcited not a little astonishment by the novelty of itsappearance. Diego de Lee and Alonzo Velez de Mendozafollowed soon after in the traces of Pinzon : theyadded but little to his discoveries, and were equally unsuccessfulin collecting treasures.Towards the close of the same year (1500), Roderigode Bastidas, accompanied by the celebrated pilotJuan de la Cosa, set sail from Cadizz with two smallvessels, to try his fortune in the career of discovery.Passing between the mainland and the island of Guada-loupe, he held a westerly course across the gulf ofVenezuela to Cape Vela, where former discoveries inthat direction had terminated. He followed the coast,however, to the west ; observed the mouth of the Magdalena,the harbour of Cartagena, and entered thegulf of Uraba, round which he sailed, to Cape St. Bias :he prosecuted his examination of the coast as far asPuerto del Retreat in ten degrees north latitude; thesame haven at which Columbus, a few months later, desistedfrom the arduous struggles of his fourth voyage ofdiscovery. From this place, Bastidas directed his courseto Jamaica, in order to repair his ships, which length ofservice and the attacks of the teredo worm had renderedincapable of encountering the risks of a protractedvoyage. Furious gales, however, overtook him in hisCHAP. III. DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA. 33passage : his frail barks seemed destined to destruction,and little hope was entertained of their preservation,when they were providentially thrown on the coast ofJamaica. Here Bastidas refreshed his wearied crews,took in a stock of provisions, and when the weatherseemed tolerably settled, departed for Hispaniola. Ona little island about a league distant from the shore ofthis latter country, he found a secure and commodioushaven, where he unloaded his ships, drew them ashore,and proceeded to refit them completely.As soon as the necessary repairs were finished, andthe vessels were in a state to put to sea, the weatherbeatenmariners embarked with the intention of steeringdirect for Cadizz. The prudent conduct of Bastidashad enabled him to carry on a lucrative traffic with thenatives of the continent, and to collect more gold, as wellas slaves, dye-woods, and articles of curiosity, than mostof the navigators who had preceded him in the west.The possession of so much treasure increased his anxietyto reach the termination of his voyage. He hadhardly put to sea, however, when violent tempests compelledhim to seek shelter under one of the headlands ofHispaniola, where he remained a full month in anxiousexpectation that the winds might abate and allow him toproceed. A treacherous gleam of fair weather temptedhim again to set sail ; but hurricanes immediately cameon which drove him into the port of Paraguay ; and as thegale continued with unmitigated fury, his ships atlength sunk with all the treasures they contained. Thisaccident occurred, however, so near the shore, that agood portion of the precious cargoes was recovered. Thejealousy of the governor, Bobadilla, now proved as harassingand rapacious as the elements. A rumour that somechests of gold, saved from the shipwreck, had been secretedby Bastidas, in order to defraud the royal treasury,reached the ears of the weak governor, who wantonlyadded to the vexations of the embarrassed navigator.Bastidas, however, had perseverance and address sufficientto overcome these difficulties, and at length arrived inVOL. II. D34 Modern VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Cadizz in September 1502, after an absence of three-and-twentymonths ; still retaining a considerable quantity ofgold and other treasure, notwithstanding the losses incurredby shipwreck and incidental expenses. Hissuccessful perseverance in this voyage of discovery, andthat of the pilot Cosa, were rewarded by grants of futurerevenues, to be derived from the province of Uraba ;the court of Spain, by a policy at once subtle and economical,thus stimulating the hopes and exertions ofprivate adventurers by liberal donations of treasures tobe sought for at the farthest limit of their researches.The facility with which the court of Spain bestowedimmense territories in the New World on those whowere bold enough to attempt their conquest gave loosereins to enterprise, and developed energies but littleknown in the confinement of society. Nor was this prodigalgenerosity without an object. The Spanish monarchscould not relinquish the hope of deriving not onlydignity but also unbounded riches from the accession ofdominions in the newly-discovered countries. Theydreaded the active rivalry of foreign nations, particularlyof the English and Portuguese, and hoped, by makingsettlements immediately, to preclude the possibility ofdisputing their right of possession. Hence, with a liberalitywhich cost them nothing, they gave provinces toall who undertook to found a colony.The nations whose maritime boldness was most to bedreaded were the English and the Portuguese. Thelatter had long enjoyed great maritime eminence : theyhad discovered the passage to the East Indies; andCabral,while conducting a fleet thither, had unexpectedly fallenin with the coast of Brasil. This country, of which hehad taken possession in the name of his sovereign, wasfound also to lie within the portion of the globe assignedto Portugal by the famous line of demarcation suggestedby the papal bulls, and which, by a conventionmade in 1494, was fixed at three hundred and seventyleagues west of the Azores. The English, on the otherhand, had sent out an expedition in 1497 under Sebas-CHAP. III. DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA. 35tian Cabot, who appears to have examined Newfoundlandand die continent near the river St. Lawrence. Theyunquestionably despatched some other expeditions, ofwhich, however, few or no particulars remain to us.Hojeda in his first voyage of discovery (1499) met withEnglish navigators near the gulf of Maracaibo.* In theagreement made with him by the Spanish governmentin July 1500, previous to his second voyage, he wasordered " to follow and examine the coast which he hadalready discovered, and which appears to run east andwest, as that is the part which the English are known tobe exploring; and also to erect marks bearing the arms ofSpain, and other known signals, in order that it may bemanifest that he visited the coast, and that a stop may beput to the discoveries of the English in that quarter." +The dread of these formidable competitors quickened thegrasping policy of the court of Spain. To Vincent YanezPinzon was given the country which he had discoveredbetween Cape St. Augustin and the Maragnon : the immenseline of coast between Paria and Darien was sharedbetween Bastidas and the restless Hojeda. The ablestnavigators in Spain, — Vincent Yanez Pinzon, Juan de laCosa, Amerigo Vespucci, and Juan Diazz de Solis, — wereconsulted by the royal council in 1507, on the directionwhich ought to be given to future voyages of discovery,and on the probability of finding a western passage tothe East Indies ; and it appears to have been the unanimousopinion of those navigators, that the southern continentoffered a fairer field to future researches.Pinzon and Solis, who had recently examined the wholecoast of South America from Paria to Darien, were accordinglysent out for the purpose of exploring its westernshores through their entire extension. In June1508 these experienced voyagers set sail, and arrived,without any accident, at Cape St. Augustin, on thecoast of Brazil, beyond which point discovery had asyet extended but a little way. Following the coast ofthe continent towards the south, they reached as far asNavarretete, torn. iii. p. 41. f Id. p. 85.d236 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.the fortieth degree of southern latitude, erecting crosseswherever they landed, and taking possession of thecountry for the crown of Castile. The want of harmonybetween the commanders prevented their furtherprogress. When Pinzon and Solis returned toSpain in 1509, their disputes became the subject of judicialinvestigation ; and the latter being deemed culpable,was thrown into prison. But his condemnationalone was sufficient to satisfy the forms of justice ; thecourt was too well acquainted with the value of histalents to suffer him to languish in confinement ; he wassoon liberated, and, on the death of Amerigo Vespucci,was appointed to the vacant dignity of chief pilot.An expedition was shortly after fitted out to employthis experienced mariner. The king, whose jealousyof Portuguese encroachments was daily increasing, gavefour thousand golden ducats towards the equipment ofthe vessels, the remainder of the expense being borneby Solis himself. The profits of the voyage were to bedivided equally between the king, Solis, and the crewcollectively. Full of sanguine anticipations, and elatedby the many marks of royal favour which he had received,the chief pilot embarked on his voyage in November1514. His instructions enjoined him particularlyto endeavour to reach the southern side of the isthmusof Darien, where Balboa had recently discovered thegreat ocean, and to construct accurate maps of all thecountries he should discover. Beginning his survey atCape St. Augustin, Solis proceeded towards the south,ascertaining the position of every headland with all theaccuracy which the instruments of that age admitted.At length he found a great opening conducting to thewest, and to which, from the freshness of the water, hegave the name of Mar dulce. Entering into this gulf,which was the mouth of the great river of La Plata,Solis went on shore with a small party, in order to observethe soil and natural productions. He had notadvanced far when he fell into an ambuscade of the Indians,who seized him with five of his companionsCHAP. III. DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA. 37and having killed their captives, roasted and devouredthem.The Spaniards who remained on board, and who witnessedthis shocking catastrophe, disheartened by theloss of their commander, immediately steered homewards,abandoning the prosecution of the voyage, which,but for the cruel fate of Solis, would probably havebeen conducted gloriously to the desired result, — thecircumnavigation of South America.Not a little encouragement was afforded to the perseveranceof navigators by the discovery of the South Seaor Pacific Ocean, made a short time previous to the dateof this expedition. It arose naturally from the ardourwith which the Spaniards pressed onwards to the west.Hojeda, that daring cavalier, who had so much distinguishedhimself in Hispaniola under Columbus, andsubsequently in the career of discovery, proceeded in1501 to the gulf of Maracaibo, for the purpose of establishinga colony in the province there assigned him.But the violence of his character was ill suited to command; dissensions arose among his followers, who resistedhis authority, and loaded him with chains. Inthis situation he seized an opportunity of throwing himselfoverboard, confident of his strength, and hoping tobe able to swim to land, and thus escape from the mutineers.The weight of his iron fetters, however, was morethan he could sustain, and he was on the very point ofsinking to the bottom, when a boat, despatched to hisassistance, rescued him from present death for newscenes of peril and adversity.This extraordinary man, so well fitted by his hardihoodand restless spirit to plant the standard of Spanishdominion on unknown shores, was tempted again, in1509, by the royal grant of an immense territory, to forman establishment on the northern coast of South America.The extensive country comprised between the middle ofthe gulf of Darien or of Uraba, (that is, of Canoes') asit was then called, and Cape Vela, was given to himunder the name of New Andalusia ; the adjoining tractd 338 MODERN Voyages OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.from Cape Vela to Cape Gracias a Dies was bestowed onNicuessa, a wealthy gentleman of Hispaniola, whose readinessto catch at the baits held out for needy adventurerswas gladly indulged by the Spanish government.Hojeda saw, with indignation, this unexpected rivalshare with him a dominion, the moiety of which wasstill far beyond his grasp. In his train were some destinedto rank amongst the most distinguished charactersof a brilliant age. The veteran mariner Juan de la Cosawas his pilot; Balboa and Francisco Pizarro, whosenames will occur again in the course of the followingpages, followed his fortunes ; Hernando Cortez also wasto nave joined the expedition, but was detained in Hispaniolaby unexpected illness.On reaching the shores of Cartagena, Hojeda, inconformitywith the royal instructions, began by exhortingthe Indians to embrace the doctrines of Christianity,to deal kindly towards the Spaniards, and to acknowledgethe authority of the king of Castile. The simple inhabitants,not comprehending the drift of these novelpropositions, replied to them by a fierce attack on thestrangers, whom they probably regarded as dangerousintruders. Though terrified at first by the dreadfulsound and fatal effects of fire-arms, they returned to theonset with a courage unusual among the natives of theNew World. The Spaniards, notwithstanding the superiorityof their arms and the advantages of discipline,were unable to resist the poisoned arrows and overpoweringnumbers of the Indians. They all fell, aboutseventy in number, among whom was the pilot, Juan dela Cosa. Hojeda alone saved himself by the rapidity ofhis flight. When those who had remained on board,and who were still in ignorance of what had befallentheir companions, sent a boat on shore after some hours,to learn their proceedings, they found their commanderconcealed in the mangroves at the water's edge, faintand exhausted with hunger and fatigue.Warned by his recent disaster, Hojeda avoided collisionwith the warlike inhabitants of these regions, andCHAP. III. DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA. 39at length succeeded in building a fort, which he namedafter St. Sebastian ; the protection of that saint being supposedcapable of guaranteeing the settlers from the effectsof poisoned arrows. But famine and disease soon beganto be felt in the infant colony : the sufferings of hispeople became so severe that Hojeda was obliged todepart for Hispaniola to endeavour to procure provisions.On his arrival there, he learned that succours had beenalready despatched to St. Sebastian : his hopes suddenlyrevived at this intelligence; and in spite of all his hardshipsand reverses, his buoyant spirits once more revelledin brilliant dreams of future wealth, power, and dominion.But he now bore the stigma of misfortune:—the mistrustful coldness which he experienced on everyside preyed upon his feelings ; and he died soon afterof a broken heart, and so poor, that all his propertywas found insufficient to defray the expenses of his funeral.Hojeda is said to have written a history of hislife, — a life of unceasing action and romantic adventure;but these interesting memoirs, along with those of YanezPinzon, and other early travellers, have been condemned,by the cautious and illiberal jealousy of the Spanish government,to moulder forgotten in the national archives.The fate of Nicuessa was no less wretched than thatof his unhappy rival in ambition. He left Hispaniolawith four large ships and one caravel ; but had hardly lostsight of land, when a violent tempest dispersed his fleet.Shipwrecked on a strange shore, he found his way withincredible toils to Veragua, which had been appointedthe general rendezvous of his squadron : here his followerswere cut off rapidly by want, disease, and thehostility of the Indians ; whichever way he turned, byland or sea, fresh calamities awaited him. At Darien,where he hoped to find refuge among his countrymen,Balboa at first refused to admit him. He was, however,permitted to land, and soon after driven again to sea inasmall vessel, with only seventeen followers ; but wasnever heard of afterwards. While embarking to returnto Hispaniola, he was reproached by Balboa with havingd 440 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.sacrificed so much human life to his ambition ; — a reproachnot undeserved, perhaps, but which came with abad grace from one who led the vanguard of Spanishadventurers.The most important result of these expeditions wasthe establishment of a small colony in Darien, whichwas placed under the command of Nunez de Balboa.This enterprising officer made numerous incursions onthe territories of the neighbouring caciques, in thecourse of which he received intelligence from the Indiansof a great sea a few days' journey to the south. Thishe justly concluded to be the ocean which Columbushad so long sought in vain. Inflamed with the idea ofeffecting a discovery which that great man had beenunable to accomplish, and eager to reap the first harvestof victory in countries said to abound with gold, heboldly determined to march across the isthmus, and witnesswith his own eyes the truth of what he heard. Butinthe execution of his design he had to contend withevery difficulty which could be opposed to him by thehand of nature or the hostility of the natives : he hadto lead his troops, worn out with fatigue and the diseasesof a noxious climate, through deep marshes renderednearly impassable by perpetual rains, over mountainscovered with trackless forests, and through defiles fromwhich the Indians, in secure ambuscade, showered downpoisoned arrows. But no sufferings could damp thecourage of the Spaniards in that enterprising age ;Balboa surmounted every impediment. As he approachedthe object of his research, he ran before his companionsto the summit of a mountain, from which hesurveyed, with transports of delight, the boundless oceanwhich rolled beneath ; then hurrying to the shore, heplunged into the waves, and claimed the sovereignty ofthe Southern Ocean for the crown of Castile. Thisevent took place in September 1513. The inhabitantsof the coast on which he had arrived gave him to understandthat the land towards the south was without end;that it was possessed by powerful nations who hadCHAP. III. DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA. 41abundance of gold, and who employed beasts of burden.These allusions to the civilisation and riches of Peru,Balboa supposed to apply to those Indies which it wasthe grand object of European ambition to approach ; andthe rude sketches of the Peruvian lama, drawn by theIndians on the sand, as they resembled the figure of thecamel, served to confirm him in his error. Delightedwith the importance of his discovery, he immediatelydespatched messengers to Spain, to give an account ofhis proceedings, and to solicit an appointment correspondingto his services. But the Spanish court wasmore liberal in exciting enterprise than in rewardingmerit, and preferred new adventurers to old servants.The government of Darien was bestowed on PedrariasDavila, who, regarding Balboa with the hatred whichconscious weakness always bears towards superior worth,meditated unceasingly the destruction of his rival. Heatlength found an occasion to satisfy his vengeance; andthe heroic Balboa was publicly executed in Darien, in1517, affording another instance of the unhappy fatewhich attended the first conquerors of America.42 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.CHAP. IV.SPANISH DISCOVERIES, AND FIRST CIRCUMNAVIGATIONOF THE EARTH.DIEGO COLUMBUS TAKES The CHIEF COMMAND IN THE COLONIES.INCREASED ENERGY. PONCE DE LEON SEEKS THE FOUNTAINOF YOUTH. DISCOVERS FLORIDA. OBSERVES THE EASTWARDCURRENTS. EXPEDITIONS OF Gray. —CORDOBA VISITS Yucatan.GRL1ALVA DISCOVERS NEW SPAIN. Dillon REACHESTHE COAST OF CAROLINA. ATTEMPTS TO MAKE A Settlement.HIS MELANCHOLY FAILURE. FERNANDO MAGELLAN.RESPECTIVE RIGHTS OF SPAIN AND PORTUGAL. MAGELLANENGAGES TO CONDUCT A FLEET WESTWARD TO THE MOLUCCAS.WINTERS ON THE COAST OF PATAGONIA. MUTINY IN THEFLEET. HIS STERN CONDUCT. THE NATIVES DESCRIBED.THE GUANACO. MAGELLAN ENTERS THE PACIFIC OCEAN. —ARRIVES AT THE PHILIPPINE ISLES. CONVERTS THE KING OFZEBU, AND ENGAGES IN WARFARE FOR HIS SAKE. ISSLAIN BY THE ISLANDERS. TREACHEROUS CONDUCT OF THEXING OF ZEBU. THE TWO REMAINING SHIPS REACH TheMOLUCCAS. FATE OF THE TRINIDAD. THE Victoria COM-Plates THE CIRCUMNAVIGATION OF THE EARTH. — LOSS OF ADAY IN HER RECKONING.During these transactions on the southern continent, thespirit of discovery was actively at work in other quarters.Diego Columbus, the son of the celebrated admiral,had arrived, in 1509, at Hispaniola, invested with allthose powers and prerogatives which had been so unjustlywithheld from his father. He was followed to the NewWorld by a large train of noble and wealthy persons,whose presence gave new animation and vigour to thecolonies. Settlements were made in Cuba and otherislands, and expeditions to examine the neighbouringseas proceeded advantageously from different points atonce. In 1512, Juan Ponce de Leon, governor of PortoRico, fitted out three ships to go in search of Bayuca,an island, in which was a fountain, as the Indiansrelated, possessing the virtue of restoring all who bathedin it to youth. Tales such as this were readily believedCHAP. IV. SPANISH DISCOVERIES. 43by romantic adventurers. Those who had braved theperils of the ocean to seek their fortunes in a newworld fancied that they trod on enchanted ground ; andwhere nature appeared in so new a garb, the invariablelaws by which she directs her operations were easily lostsight of. Ponce de Leon failed to discover the miraculousfountain ; but, after sailing a considerable distanceto the north-west, he fell in with land, to which, fromthe circumstance of its being discovered on Easter-day,he gave the name of Florida.* He remarked the strongeasterly currents running near the newly discoveredcountry ; and by this voyage the Spanish navigators weretaught the advantage of steering by the straits of Bahamaon their return to Europe.The fierce resistance of the savages prevented Poncede Leon from making any settlement on the coast ofFlorida; and little notice was taken of his discovery till1519, when Francisco Garay, the governor of Jamaica,sent four ships to make farther researches in the north.Pined, who commanded the expedition, commencing hissurvey at Florida, which had hitherto been supposed tobe an island, succeeded in following the coast westwardas far as Vera Cruz in New Spain. In describing theIndian nations which he had seen in the course of hisvoyage, he indulged largely in the privilege of fictionallowed to travellers : some, he says, were giants, otherspygmies, and some were of ordinary statureThe voyage of Pined completed the survey of theMexican Gulf; for discoveries had already been madetowards the west, which awakened the curiosity andprompted the exertions of Garay. In the year 1517,Francisco Hernando de Cordoba sailed from Cuba towardsthe west ; examined a considerable portion of thenorthern coast of Yucatan; and returned to the Havanawith accounts collected from the Indians of a civilisedand wealthy nation situated to the west of the coastwhich he had explored. In the following year, Juan deEaster day is called by the Spaniards Pasquaflorida.f Navarretete, p. 65.44 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Grijalva proceeded from the same port to continuethese discoveries. Having passed the limits of precedingnavigators, he came to a country which the nativescalled Quimpech or Campeachy. Farther on, he landedon a small island near the shore, beautifully ornamentedwith plantations; and in the centre of it he foundseveral stone temples apparently in decay, with longflights of steps conducting to their summits; and amongthem one exceeding all the rest in height, and containingan idol to which human victims were offered insacrifice. The farther Grijalva proceeded towards thewest, the more the country seemed to improve in opulenceand civilisation. The white houses built of stone,agreeably scattered along the shore, reminded the Spanishseamen of their native land, and they bestowed onthis promising region the flattering title of New Spain.No difficulty was found in trafficking with the natives,who were peaceable and obliging. Gold was procuredin large quantities; Grijalva even received from thehands of a cacique a complete suit of armour made ofthat precious metal. Having collected not a little treasure,and pursued his discoveries northwards beyondPanuco, he hastened to make his way back to Cuba, inthe hope of returning shortly to this land of riches, andof levying new contributions on the weakness or facilityof its simple inhabitants.Thus, within the space of six-and-twenty years fromthe first discovery of America, the Spaniards had labouredwith unceasing activity to extend their knowledgeof the New World ; they had established numerous coloniesin it at a great distance from one another ; andwithout any national exertions, but carried forwardsolely by the impulse of individual ambition, they hadexamined the winding and circuitous coast of that greatcontinent, from the Rio de la Plata to the extremity ofFlorida. As their knowledge increased, their boldnessand curiosity augmented with it; and accidents frequentlyoccurred which widened the limits of their geographicalknowledge. Lucas Vasquez de Aillon sailedCHAP. IV. SPANISH DISCOVERIES. 45from Hispaniola in 1520, to capture slaves in the Bahamaislands : failing, however, in the immediate objectof his voyage, he directed his course northward, anddiscovered that part of the coast of North America whichis included within the limits of the two Carolinas. Hefound the natives peaceable, and in great numbers. Theywere at first terror-struck at the novel appearance of theSpaniards and their ships ; but when the timorous feelingsof amazement had passed away, they crowded onboardto indulge their curiosity in a nearer survey oftheir strange visitors. The Spaniards watched theiropportunity, and suddenly weighing anchor, bore off theunhappy Indians from their native shores to miserableservitude. Proud of his success, Aillon repaired to thecourt of Spain to solicit a grant of the country which hehad discovered. This was readily conceded ; and heengaged to establish a colony at his own expense, eighthundred leagues from Hispaniola, and within three yearsfrom the time of the grant, or before 1528. He attemptedto comply with these conditions ; fitted out anexpedition of six ships, and five hundred persons ; landedat the mouth of a river, in 33° 40', which is probablythe George Town river of modern maps, and proceededto build a town in an eligible situation. But sickness,want, and the unceasing attacks of the Indians, brokethe spirits of his people. Aillon himself was among thenumber of those who fell victims to the insalubrity ofthe climate. Of the five hundred who had accompaniedthat unfortunate commander, in a short time not abovea hundred and fifty remained ; and this miserable remnant,shocked at the rapid mortality of their companions,fled from the scene of so much distress, and returned toHispaniola.Some time previous to these events, an importantdiscovery had been made in the southern hemisphere,which promised brilliant advantages, and added largelyto the triumphs of the Spanish nation. Fernando ,or, as he is ordinarily called, Magellan, a Portuguesecommander, of distinguished ability and expelMODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.hence, dissatisfied with the Neglect in which he wasallowed to languish after long services in the East Indies,where he assisted at the siege of Malacca, and unable toobtain from his sovereign that meed of favour to whichhe felt himself entitled, resolved to abandon for ever akingdom in which meritorious exertions were so illrequited. A man of his stamp was sure to meet with agracious reception at the court of Spain. Being secretlyinvited thither, he repaired, in 1517, to Valladolid,where Charles V. at that time resided with his court.Magellan answered all the enquiries of that prince withrespect to the situation of the Moluccas, and supportedthe opinion that Spain had a right to those valuableislands.The bull by which pope Alexander VI. adjusted theconflicting claims of the Spaniards and Portuguese determinedthat a line, drawn from pole to pole, a hundredleagues to the west of the Azores, should be the commonboundary of their respective domains ; that all countriesdiscovered 180 degrees to the west of that line shouldbelong to the Spaniards ; and those at an equal distanceon the east of it, to the Portuguese. This mode ofdemarcation, sufficiently positive and exact in the Atlantic,was practically useless at the other side of theglobe. Geographers were as yet unable to measuredegrees of longitude with accuracy. Those who followedPtolemy, and held that China was 180 degrees from theCanary islands, were disposed to believe that the Moluccas,or Spice islands, lay beyond that portion of theglobe bestowed on Portugal by the sovereign pontiff,and of course that they belonged to Spain if reachedfrom the west. The convention of 1494, in whichthose rival courts had agreed to remove the line ofdemarcation to the distance of 370 leagues westward ofthe Azores, while it opened to Portugal a footing inBrazil, necessarily enlarged the claims of Spain in theeastern hemisphere, and threw fresh confusion on thetitle to the very spot, the possession of which was soardently coveted by the contracting parties. In no otherCHAP. IV. SPANISH DISCOVERIES. 47instance have political speculations been so remarkablyfrustrated by geographical ignorance.Magellan maintained the right of Spain to the Moluccas,and engaged to conduct a fleet thither by thewest ; for he was persuaded of the existence of a passageround the American continent : and as he had the art ofimpressing his own serious conviction on the minds ofothers, his proposal was readily accepted. The fleetequipped for this great enterprise consisted of fivevessels, two of a hundred and twenty, two of ninety,and one of sixty tons : the crews amounted altogetherto two hundred and thirty men. Magellan hoisted hisflag on board the Trinidad, Juan de Cartagena commandedthe San Antonio, Luis de Mendoza the Victoria,Gaspar de Quesada the Conception, on board of winchvessel was Sebastian del Cano in quality of lieutenant,who had the honour of bringing back the Vittoria, afterhaving made the complete circuit of the globe ; lastly, theSantiago, a small vessel, was commanded by RodriguezSerrano. The preparations being completed, the fleetsailed from San Lucar on the 20th of September 1519:,and arrived, without any accident, on the coast ofBrazil. Pursuing his voyage slowly to the south, Magellanreached, in April, a safe and commodious harbour,in nearly fifty degrees of southern latitude, to which hegave the name of Port St. Julian. Here he resolved topass the winter, which in that part of the world is extremelyrigorous from May to September. But thestrict economy observed by him in the distribution ofprovisions, together with the hardships of a raw and tempestuousclimate, gave rise to discontentment among theofficers of the expedition, who were otherwise little disposedto submit to the authority of a foreigner. Theymurmured at the privations and at the dangers to whichthey were exposed, while remaining inactive on a strangeand barren coast, during the most inclement season of theyear : they demanded to be conducted back to Spain ;and on Magellan's absolute refusal to comply with theirwishes, they broke out at once into open disobedience.48 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.In this trying conjuncture, Magellan behaved with apromptitude and courage worthy of the grand enterprisewhich he was so unwilling to abandon, but unhappilysullied by such an act of treachery and criminal violenceas no danger can excuse. He sent to Luis de Mendoza,the leader of the malcontents, a messenger, instructed tostab that captain while conferring with him. This cruelorder was punctually executed, and the crew of Mendoza'sship immediately submitted. The execution of Quesadafollowed the next day ; and Juan de Cartagena was senton shore and deserted, with the expectation, perhaps, ofsuffering a more cruel fate.The fleet had remained two months at Port St. Julian,during all which time not a single native was seen. Atlength, one day, when it was little expected, a man ofgigantic stature, and almost naked, appeared on thebeach not far from the ships. He sung and dancedviolently, at the same time sprinkling dust upon hishead. A seaman was immediately sent on shore, withorders to imitate exactly all his movements ; a complaisancewhich proved so effectual, that the savagereadily consented to go on board of Magellan's vessel.He pointed to the sky, as if to enquire whether theSpaniards had descended from above. " He was sotall," says Pigafetta, " that our heads scarcely came uptohis waist, and his voice was like that of a bull." Thenatives now collected in great numbers on the shore,marvelling vastly to see such large ships and suchlittle men." One of them made frequent visits to theships, was even taught to pronounce the Lord's Prayer,and was at length christened by the name of JuanGigantic.The greatest number of these people seen at any onetime in the neighbourhood of the ships was eighteen.They had with them four young animals, which theyled about with halters, using them to decoy wild animalsof the same species. This animal, a species of the lama,was described by the Spaniards as having the head andears of a mule, the body of a camel, the legs of a stag,CHAP. IV. SPANISH DISCOVERIES. 49and the tail of a horse, which it resembled also in itsneighing. It was called by the natives Guanaco, whencemodern naturalists have named it Camels Huanacus.The natives wore shoes made of its skin, so inelegantlyformed, as to make their feet resemble those of theanimal ; on which account Magellan called them Patagonia,that word signifying in Spanish clumsy-hoofed.The mutiny being quelled, Magellan left Port St.Julian in October 1520, and in a few days reached thatstrait which still bears the name of its illustrious discoverer.Nothing could exceed the joy of the seamenon finding an opening leading to the west, with a strongcurrent running in the same direction, and so great adepth of water, as rendered it highly improbable that thechannel should be that of a mere inlet instead of a communicationbetween two great oceans. While the shipswere passing through the strait, the St. Antonio purposelystayed back, and at last parted company and returnedto Spain : the St. Ago had been wrecked notlong before. With only three vessels, therefore, remainingof Ins fleet, Magellan, on the 28th of November, clearedthe straits, and entered, with feelings of triumph, thatgreat ocean which was so long the object of research.The name of South Sea, given to this ocean byBalboa, who viewed only the small portion of it thatwashes the southern shores of the isthmus of Darien,and that of Pacific Ocean, adopted by the Spaniardswho navigated the calm seas of Peru and Chili, areequally inadequate designations of the greatest collectionof waters on the surface of the terraqueous globe. Threemonths and twenty days were employed by Magellanin crossing this ocean, from the strait which bears hisname to the Philippine isles, where he arrived on the1 6th of March 1521; and it is not a little surprising,that during a voyage of such length, and through seassince found to be thickly studded with well peopledislands, he should have fallen in with only two islands,and these of so lonely and deserted an appearance, thathe gave them the name of Desventuradas or Unhappy.M) MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERT. BOOK IV.It is doubtful whether they have been visited again byEuropeans since their first discovery.Arrived at the cluster since called the PhilippineIslands, Magellan was well received by the king of Zebu.That prince was so courteous as to acknowledge himselfthe vassal of the king of Spain, and at the first exhortationconsented to embrace Christianity ; he was accordinglybaptized with a great number of his people.A native of Malacca, who had accompanied the Spanishexpedition, acted as interpreter on these occasions, themerchants of this archipelago being acquainted withmany Indian languages. The bold spirit of Magellanwas so far transported by the enthusiasm which reignedaround him, that he imprudently offered to defend hisroyal proselyte from all his enemies. The proposalwas immediately accepted. A chosen body of Spaniards,with Magellan at their head, marched to attack aneighbouring prince, the enemy of the Christian kingof Zebu. But they had hardly entered on the hostileterritory, when they found themselves surrounded by animmense multitude, who overwhelmed them with stonesand other missiles. The Spaniards, animated by theexample of their leader, defended themselves during awhole day with undaunted courage. But their ammunitionwas all spent, and retreat was become necessary.As they gave way, the enemy redoubled their onsets.At this crisis, a large stone struck Magellan on thehead and stunned him, a second broke his thigh, andas he fell a shower of lances deprived him of life. Thusperished, the victim of his rashness, a man eminentlyqualified by his genius as well as courage to accomplishthe grandest undertakings. The navigation completedunder his guidance was by far the boldest, both in designand conduct, which had been as yet accomplished. Theart of commanding was possessed by him in the highestdegree ; for the mutinous disposition of his officers,which was grounded in national antipathy, had neverinfected their crews ; and the seamen in general lookedup to him with the implicit deference due to one intrinsicallysuperior.CHAP. IV. SPANISH DISCOVERIES. 51On the death of Magellan, the king of Zebu, forgetting atonce his Christianity and his friendship for the Spaniards,treacherously put to death all of them who remainedupon the island. Those who were on board, when theylearned the wretched fate of their companions and theirchief, finding themselves too much reduced in numberto manage three vessels, burned the Conception, andwith the other two went in search of the Moluccas.They touched at several points on the eastern coast ofBorneo, passed north of Celebes, and at length arrivedat Tudor, one of the Moluccas, where the king of theisland received them with joy on learning that theywere adverse to the Portuguese, who had taken the kingof Ternate, his enemy, under their protection. TheTrinidad being leaky, remained here to repair, andwhen refitted, attempted to return by the Pacific Oceanto America ; but being baffled by contrary winds, she wasobliged to steer again for the Moluccas, where she arrivedin a sinking state, and the crew were made prisoners bythe Portuguese. In the mean time the Vittoria, underthe command of Sebastian del Cano, returned by theCape of Good Hope, and arrived at San Lucar on the6th of September 1 522, the men being nearly worn outbythe fatigues of a voyage which had lasted three yearsand fourteen days. Thus was achieved, for the firsttime, the circumnavigation of the globe.The feeble state of the art of navigation in the ageimmediately succeeding that of Columbus, may bereadily collected from the preceding details of thischapter. Shipwrecks were of frequent occurrence, andmany lives were lost in expeditions which were thoughteminently successful if they discovered two or threehundred leagues of coast. The progress of the Spaniardsin discovering the shores of the New World may bejustly called rapid, if estimated by the ardour and perseverancewhich were requisite to effect it ; but it wasextremely slow, compared with what might be done inan age when nautical science has arrived at perfection.In the voyage of Magellan, nevertheless, the maritimee 252 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.art seemed to make a sudden stride towards improvement.The conduct of that great navigator was as skilful ashis genius was confident and daring ; and he neverallowed his own conceptions to be fettered by the routineof ordinary seamen. His determination to winter inPort St. Julian, which gave so much alarm to his officersalready disposed to mutiny, is alone sufficient toshow the force and originality of his spirit.The Vittoria was drawn ashore, and long preservedas a monument of the most remarkable voyage everperformed. The pilots were ordered to send their journalsto the court, and the seamen were separately examinedas to what had occurred to them during the voyage.From these materials, a history of the expedition waswritten by command of the emperor Charles V. ; butthe manuscript of this work is supposed to have beendestroyed by the flames during the sack of Rome in1527, and the world would have remained ignorant ofthe particulars of Magellan's extraordinary voyage, hadit not been for the narrative of Antonio Pigafetta, agentleman of Vicenza, who accompanied that commander.* Pigafetta was a lively but an extremelycredulous observer. His narrative derives great interestfrom the picture which he draws of the South Seaislanders, who were as yet quite unacquainted withEuropeans. We owe to him also the first vocabulariesof the languages spoken by the nations which he visited ;those of the Philippine islands and the Moluccas arestill of use, and his general accuracy has been confirmedby all subsequent travellers. It is curious to observethat previous to his time, the Arabian language of salutationhad been introduced into the Philippine islands.From his vocabulary of the Patagonia language, Shakspeareborrowed the demon Sctebos.f• Pigafetta's history of the first voyage round the world was known onlyby abridgments and extracts, until the commencement of the present century,when a complete manuscript of the work was found by Amoretti inthe Ambrosian library at Milan. It was published at Paris by Jansen in1801.T his art is of such power,It would control my dam's god, Setcbos.— The Tempest, Act I. Sc II.CHAP. V. Fernando CORTEZ. 53As the course of the Vittoria round the earth wasfrom east to west, or in the same direction as thediurnal motion of the sun, that luminary had of coursemade, with respect to that vessel, one revolution lessthan it had performed in relation to any fixed point onthe surface of the globe. When Sebastian del Cano,therefore, arrived at San Lucar, he was surprised to findthat he had lost a day in his calculation ; reckoning asthe fifth what in every calendar of Europe was thesixth of September. This circumstance, which admitsof so easy an explanation, perplexed not a little thelearned of the day, and gave rise to many a groundlesstheory.CHAP. V.Fernando CORTEZ.EDUCATION OF CORTEZ. ARRIVES AT CUBA. APPOINTED TOCOMMAND THE EXPEDITION AGAINST NEW SPAIN. THROWSOFF THE AUTHORITY OF VELASQUEZ. BUILDS VERA CRUZ.COMMENCES HIS MARCH. DEFEATS THE TLASCALANS.MASSACRE AT CHOLULA. THE SPANIARDS ENTER THE CITYOF MEXICO. DANGER OF THEIR SITUATION. — Cortez ArrestsMONTEZUMA. DEFEATS Larvae. REVOLT OF THEMEXICANS. DEATH OF MONTEZUMA. BATTLE OF OTUMBA,AND TRIUMPH OF THE SPANIARDS. MEXICO SURRENDERS.ALVARADO MARCHES TO GUATEMALA. EXPEDITION OF DEOLID. CORTEZ CONDUCTS AN ARMY FROM MEXICO TO Honduras.CONVENTION OF Badajoz. LOYASA SENT WITH AFLEET TO THE MOLUCCAS. HIS FATE. VOYAGE OF THEPATACA. CORTEZ SENDS SAAVEDRA TO ASSIST LOYASA. —SURPRISE OF THE PORTUGUESE. SAAVEDRA DISCOVERS NEWGUINEA AND OTHER ISLANDS. HIS FATE. CORTEZ BECOMESAN OBJECT OF POLITICAL JEALOUSY. REVISITS SPAIN.HOW RECEIVED. RETURNS TO MEXICO WITH DIMINISHEDPOWER. DISCOVERS CALIFORNIA. CONSUMES HIS FORTUNEIN FRUITLESS EXPEDITIONS. RETURNS TO SPAIN. HISAFRICAN CAMPAIGN. NEGLECTED BY THE COURT. HISDEATH.Great revolutions in the history of mankind are aptto call forth the energies of individuals in an extraordi-e 354 Modern VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.nary degree, and to furnish a splendid scene of remarkablecharacters. The discovery of America, the mostimportant event perhaps in the annals of history, fullyjustifies this observation. The Spaniards in the NewWorld were led to conquest by a train of heroes, who, inthe vastness of their designs and daring courage, perfectlycorresponded with the grandeur of the theatre inwhich they moved. Among the most conspicuous ofthese was Hernando Cortez. This celebrated man wasborn in 1485, at Mechlin in Estremadura, of a noblebut not wealthy family. Being intended for the bar,he received a good education ; but, as he grew up, theextreme ardour of his temper disqualified him for thestudies of scholastic life, and determined him to embracethe profession of arms. The wars in Italy at that timeoffered an inviting field to the aspirants after militaryrenown, and Cortez was prevented by sickness alonefrom trying his fortune in that quarter. He was reservedfor more singular achievements than could beexpected from the well-balanced struggles of Europeanwarfare. In 1504 he departed for Hispaniola, wherehe was well received by the governor Ovando, who wasalso his relation. Illness prevented his accompanyingHojeda in that expedition to Uraba, in which Balboa,Pizarro, and others, who afterwards figured so eminentlyin the transactions of the New "World, followed in thetrain of that unfortunate leader.In 1511 Cortez attended Diego Velasquez in hisexpedition to Cuba, and won the esteem of that officerby his application to business. The impetuosity of hisyouth had subsided into a habit of persevering activity,and the frankness of his demeanour easily gained the confidenceof those with whom he was engaged. WhenGrijalva returned from the discovery of New Spain,Velasquez immediately fitted out an expedition for theconquest of that country ; but being of a weak and suspicioustemper, he was unwilling to entrust so importanta commission to one who deemed himself entitled to it,and who had already risen to distinction. EmbarrassedCHAP. V. Fernando CORTEZ. 55in his choice of a commander by the opposite suggestionsof jealousy and prudence, he at length selectedHernando Cortez, who embarked accordingly on the 18thof November 1518, with ten ships, containing six orseven hundred men, eighteen horses, and a few piecesof artillery. He had no sooner left the shore, than Velasquezrepented of the step he had taken, in placing somuch power in the hands of one whose talents hefeared, and whose secret intentions he mistrusted. Butit was now too late to correct the error : Cortez, securein the attachment of his soldiers, easily defeated theattempts of the governor to recall him, and pursued hisvoyage without further molestation.In the month of March 1519, the Spaniards disembarkedon the coast of Mexico. The Indians surveyedtheir strange visitors with fear and wonder : the size ofthe ships, the thunder of the artillery, and above all,the strength and swiftness of the horses, filled themwith amazement, and led them to regard the Spaniardswith a superstitious awe, of which the latter were notslow to take advantage. Cortez soon learned that thecountry in which he had arrived formed part of thedominions of Montezuma, whose extensive empirestretched from sea to sea, and embraced the territoriesof thirty powerful caciques. The Spaniard insisted onbeing conducted to the presence of the Indian prince.But the prudence or boding apprehensions of the Mexicanswere opposed to such a step : every argumentwas enforced, every art employed, that was thoughtlikely to divert Cortez from his design. Rich presentswere sent to him from the court, consisting of finelywrought utensils of gold and silver, cotton stuffs, andpictures formed of feathers ; and as they offered atempting evidence of the wealth and civilisation of thecountry, the effect produced by them on the deliberationsof the Spaniards was directly the contrary of that whichwas intended. The heroic Cortez, undaunted by the accountswhich he received of the power and character ofMontezuma, who ruled with despotic sway a rich and poe456 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.populous empire, now consolidated by a political existenceof a hundred and thirty years, and who was able to leadinto the field an army of two hundred thousand men,resolved to meet all dangers rather than relinquish soglorious a prize, and to attempt at once a conquest worthyof his daring ambition.He began his preparations by building the townof Vera Cruz : he then burned all his ships, in orderthat his followers might have no alternative but conquestor destruction ; and engaged in his interestsome of the Indian caciques who were dissatisfied withthe violent and arbitrary temper of Montezuma. Thesemeasures being taken, he commenced his march intothe interior, with a little army of five hundred men,six cannons, and fifteen horses. The inhabitants ofTlascala alone offered him any resistance. These fiercerepublicans, who had successfully defied all the effortsof the Mexicans to subdue them, were now completelydefeated in three successive battles by a handful ofSpaniards, who did not even purchase their victoriesover greatly superior numbers by any loss on their side.The brave Tlascalans were obliged to sue for peace, andfrom enemies cheerfully consented to become the alliesof those whose irresistible valour they had experienced.Thus strengthened by a union with the people, whoseancient hostility to the Mexicans was a pledge of theirfidelity to him, Cortez continued his march to thecapital of Montezuma. That prince, afraid to opposethe Spaniards openly, sent forward to acquaint themthat they should be received in his dominions as friends.At Cholula, accordingly, they met with a gracious reception; but the suspicions of Cortez were awakenedby the warnings of his Tlascalan friends : he seized theMexican priests, and drew from them the confession,that preparations were making in secret to exterminatenim and all his followers. The Spaniards, enraged atthis scheme of treachery, took ample vengeance on theguilty city : six thousand Cholulans perished in theslaughter that ensued ; and the Indians were no lessCHAP. V. Fernando CORTEZ. 57confounded by the discernment than by the strength andarms of their strange invaders.To the Spaniards, who were hardly less astonished attheir own success than the simple people over whomthey triumphed, the view of the rich and boundless plainof Mexico, with its spacious lake, surrounded by populoustowns, and the great capital itself, rising on anisland near the shore, seemed to realise some vision ofromance or dream of the imagination. At every stepthey found new cause to admire the riches of the country,and their own audacity. Montezuma received themwith studious pomp, and with every manifestation offriendship. The people viewed them as supernaturalbeings, and paid to Cortez, whom they believed to bethechild of the sun, the most submissive reverence.The first care of Cortez was to fortify himself in thepalace assigned for his residence. His sole study wasto contrive the means by which he might make himselfmaster of this opulent empire. An event, however,had occurred which threatened to disconcert hisambitious plans. A Mexican general, acting by the secretcommands of Montezuma, had attacked the feeblegarrison left at Vera Cruz ; and, although finally repulsed,had killed some of the Spaniards, and taken oneprisoner. This unfortunate captive was put to death,and his head sent round to all the chief cities of theempire, in order to convince the people that their invaders,however formidable, were yet not immortal. Thesuperstitious dread with which the Spaniards had inspiredthe natives, and which was the foundation oftheir power, was thus threatened with subversion. Thespell once broken, by which they maintained their ascendant,they must soon sink, notwithstanding all theadvantages of arms and discipline, beneath the overwhelmingnumbers of their enraged enemies.Cortez, whose eyes were fully open to the dangers ofhis situation, and whose spirit was as bold as it wasvigilant, resolved to prevent all the dangers of his temerityby an act still more daring than any which he58 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.had as yet committed, and to decide the fate of Mexicobefore the people had learned generally to suspect hisweakness. He proceeded, accompanied by his officers,to the palace of Montezuma, and when persuasionsproved fruitless, prevailed on that unhappy prince, bythreats and menaces, to accompany him to the quartersof the Spaniards. When once master of the monarch'sperson, he in reality possessed all the authority of government.The Mexican general, who had attacked theSpaniards, was delivered up to his vengeance, andcruelly sentenced to be burned alive. The Spanishconqueror was aware what a tendency scenes of bloodhave to fortify the impressions of superstition ; and hispolicy condemned to the most signal punishment thosewho had thrown a doubt on the inviolability of theSpaniards. Montezuma was loaded, for a time, withchains, and compelled to acknowledge himself the vassalof the emperor Charles V. To this forced submissionhe was obliged to add a present of six hundred thousandmarks of pure gold, besides a great quantity of jewels.But the oppressed prince, while thus stripping himselfof his power, could not be induced to change his religion,notwithstanding all the pious exhortations of theformidable Cortez. The Spaniards, however, put a stopto the abominable rites of human sacrifice ; and for thepiles of human skulls which decorated the temples,substituted the images of the saints and of the holyVirgin.The triumph of Cortez now seemed secure, when helearned, on a sudden, that a Spanish army had disembarkedunder the command of Narvaez, sent byVelasquez for the purpose of stripping him of his authority.He encountered this new difficulty with hisusual promptitude and boldness. Leaving two hundredmen in Mexico, under the orders of his lieutenant, heledthe remainder of his forces with the greatest possibleexpedition against Narvaez. The contest was soon decided.Narvaez was taken prisoner, and his troopsgladly consented to serve under the banners of the con-chap.V. Fernando CORTEZ. 59queror. Cortez had no sooner returned to the capitalthan new troubles broke out : the Mexicans rose in armsagainst him with increased hostility. Montezuma, nowa passive instrument in the hands of his enemies, waswounded by his enraged subjects while endeavouring toharangue them ; and this new evidence of his degradedstate struck so forcibly on his spirit, that he refused allnourishment, and expired in a few days.The Spaniards were now pressed with such vigour,that they saw no hope of safety but in retreat. Theycommenced their march in the dead of night, hopingthat they might cross the causes conducting fromthe city to the shores of the lake, before the enemyshould be apprised of their movement. The Mexicans,however, were on the watch : and they poured on their oppressorswith such irresistible fury, that notwithstandingthe valour with which the Spaniards defended themselves,they lost all their horses and artillery, and someof their bravest troops. Cortez endeavoured to animatehis dejected soldiers by his exhortations and example, asthey marched through deep swamps, harassed by partiesof the enemy, who hung upon their rear, and whoshouted to them, " Go on, robbers ! till you arrive at theplace where just punishment awaits you." This menacingintimation was not understood by them till, onascending the heights which look down on the greatplain of Otumba, they saw an immense army drawn out,and ready to receive them. At this spectacle, the heartsof the Spaniards were ready to faint within them ; butthe heroic spirit of Cortez always appeared to greatestadvantage in the most desperate conjunctures. Withoutallowing his soldiers time to contemplate the fearfularray of the enemy, but reminding them that they mustchoose between death and victory, he gave the signal ofbattle ; rushed, with a chosen band, into the thickestof the fight ; and, having seized the sacred standard of theMexicans, gained, with little loss, a most decisive victory.This remarkable battle, in which a handful ofSpaniards defeated the Avhole forces of the Mexican MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.pire, was fought on the 7th of July 1520. On the followingday Cortez reached Tlascala, the inhabitants ofwhich continued faithful to him in all his reverses.The followers of Cortez, who had been unable tomaintain their ground in Mexico, supposed that nocourse was now left them to adopt but to abandon astruggle, to which their numbers and provision were inadequate.But Cortez himself was obstinately bent oneffecting the subjugation of the Mexican empire. Heemployed agents to procure him ammunition, and tocollect recruits among the adventurers of the Spanishcolonies. The fame of his exploits, and of the richspoils won at Otumba, brought not a few to join hisstandard. About six months after his disastrous retreatfrom the Mexican capital, he commenced his secondmarch towards it, with an army of about five hundredSpaniards, and nine field-pieces, besides a strong bodyof Tlascalan auxiliaries. Guatimozin, the new emperor,defended his city with obstinate courage, and, for somemonths, baffled all the efforts of Cortez, who, by theconstruction of a few brigantines, had rendered himselfcompletely master of the lake. But the Spanish artilleryat length prevailed. Guatimozin, endeavouring toescape in a canoe, with his wife and children, was takenprisoner ; and the fate of the Mexican empire wasfinally decided by the surrender of the capital, on the13th of August 1521.At the conclusion of this siege, Cortez saw no fewerthan two hundred thousand Indians ranged under hisstandard ; such extraordinary success had attended hispolicy and resolution. The account of his victories,which he had despatched to Europe, secured him theapprobation of the court of Spain, and excused the irregularityof his conduct. Charles V., overlooking theclaims of Velasquez, appointed Cortez governor and of Mexico. The grateful monarch, at thesame time, bestowed on the conqueror the valley ofGuaxaca, with the title of marquess, and ample revenues.Fernando COItTKZ.6TAs soon as Cortez found his authority confirmed bythe royal sanction, he applied himself with fresh ardourto consolidate his dominion, by the establishment ofpolice, by building towns, and encouraging the arts ofpeace. The struggle with the Mexicans was no soonerdecided, than several expeditions were despatched by him,in order to obtain a more perfect knowledge of the country.Alvarado and Sandal, two of his most enterprisingofficers, marched over the countries bordering on theSouth Sea, receiving the submission of the inhabitants,and extorting from them gold, the sole motive of all thetoils encountered by the conquerors of the New World.Alvarado carried his victorious arms as far southwardas Guatemala, where he built the city of St. Jago. Inthis expedition he travelled four hundred leagues, throughcountries previously unknown, passing over hills of sulphur,and through rivers so hot that the soldiers couldhardly endure to wade through them.*About the same time Cortez was informed, that theprovinces of Higueras and Honduras contained richmines. Some sailors reported that the native fishermenof these countries fastened to their nets weights made ofgold alloyed with copper : they alleged, also, that astrait or passage into the Pacific Ocean would probablybe found in that direction. Thus it appears that thesurveys made by the Spanish navigators along theseshores were not of so accurate a nature, or of suchgeneral notoriety, as to do away with the popular beliefin the existence of a strait. Cortez determined, accordingly,to send an expedition by sea to Honduras ; andhaving fitted out a considerable armament, placed itunder the command of Cristal de Oli. This officer,on his arrival in Honduras, founded the colony ofEl Triumph de la Cruz; but, from personal hostility toCortez, he soon threw off obedience to. his authority.The troops under his command were, at the same time,disappointed to find that the quantity of gold whichcould be wrung from the natives was far below their62 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.sanguine anticipation. Every attempt to levy tributewas met with fierce resistance. Some of the Indiantribes with whom they had to contend wore good armourof quilted cotton capable of warding off the blowsof a Spanish javelin. Their ferocity in battle was increasedby the presence of women covered all over witha mixture of paint and cotton wool, who were supposedto possess supernatural powers, and who promised themcertain victory. Cortez now determined to lead an armyin person against the rebellious general. He had sentthe former expedition to Honduras by sea, in order toavoid the tediousness and labour of the march by land ;but on this occasion he resolved to brave all the difficultiesof a journey through such an immense extent ofwild and unexplored country. When he arrived at Tabasco,the cacique of that province gave him a map ofcotton cloth, whereon was painted all the towns, rivers,and mountains of the country, as far as Nicaragua. Allthe resources of his fertile genius were required to surmountthe difficulties of his undertaking. With hisIndian map, and the mariner's compass, he guided hisarmy through woods so entangled, gloomy, and monotonous,that the soldiers, imagining themselves inextricablylost, began to sink under despair. The trees wereso thick as to exclude completely the rays of the sun ;and, if any eminence occasionally occurred, from whicha wider survey could be made, nothing was to be seenbut an endless continuation of the same imperviousforest. At length the perseverance and the skill ofCortez triumphed over all the obstacles of nature, andhe reached the sea-coast of Honduras, after a mostextraordinary march of nearly a thousand miles. DeOli was put to death, and the Spaniards established inthe country cheerfully submitted to the conqueror ofMexico.About this time a convention was held near Badajos,for the purpose of deciding on the pretensions of Spainand Portugal to the possession of the Spice Islands.Charts were produced by both parties, in which thoseHERXAXD0 CORTEZ.coveted regions were represented as falling within thejurisdiction of the respective claimants. After muchwarm debate, the Junta de Badajos terminated withoutproducing any useful result, each party deciding for itself.When the king of France heard of those disputes,and of the great quantities of gold which were broughtinto Spain from the New World, he is reported to havesaid, " Since the kings of Spain and Portugal divide theworld between them, I wish that they would show methe will of our father Adam, that I might see in whatterms he has constituted them sole heirs."On the dissolution of the junta, the court of Spain,determined to assert its right to the Moluccas, immediatelyequipped a fleet of six vessels, which was placedunder the command of Garcia de Loyasa, a knight ofMalta. Sebastian del Cano, who had already circumnavigatedthe globe, and some others, companions ofMagellan, embarked in the expedition. The fleet, onboardof which were four hundred and fifty men, sailedfrom Corunna in July 1525. In January of the followingyear they reached the strait of Magellan, wherethey employed four months in effecting their passageinto the Pacific Ocean. During all this time, they sawbut few natives ; and as these showed signs of hostility,no intercourse was maintained with them. The bodiesof some were found, who had died from extreme cold.The Spaniards estimated the length of the strait at ahundred and ten leagues : it appeared to be from oneto seven leagues wide. In some parts of it, the mountainsrise to so great a height that they seem to reachthe heavens : as the rays of the sun are completelyexcluded from these places, the cold is extreme ; thesnow never melts, but takes the blue colour of a glacier.Notwithstanding the rigour of the climate, trees areabundant in sunny situations; and, among other species,a kind of cinnamon tree, of which the Spaniards carriedoff some of the bark.The fleet had not advanced far in the great oceanwhen it encountered a violent tempest. The Pataca, a6<i MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.pinnace commanded by Jago de Guevara, and anothersmall vessel, completely lost sight of the larger ships.Their situation was desperate ; for they carried no provisions,having daily received their supplies from theadmiral's stores. Guevara, under these circumstances,thought the most prudent course to be adopted was tosteer for New Spain. His men had little to subsist onbesides the birds which they caught in the rigging. Onboardof the Pataca there was, by good luck, a cock andhen ; and the hen, as soon as the vessel entered the warmlatitudes, laid an egg every day. The captain of theother ship offered Guevara a thousand ducats for his twofowls, which the latter refused ; the eggs being the chiefnourishment of the sick men. At length, after enduringextreme sufferings for some weeks, they saw land ; butas they approached the shore, they found it covered withsavages. The coast was low, and so beset with breakers,that it appeared utterly impossible to land from theirvessels ; nor was it evident that the natives watchedthem with friendly intentions. But necessity now compelledthe adoption of desperate measures : some onemust devote himself for the good of all, and Juan deArrayzaga offered to attempt to gain the beach in anempty chest. He had not proceeded far, however, whenthe chest upset : he endeavoured to reach the shore byswimming ; but his strength soon failed him ; and hemust inevitably have perished in the waves, had not theIndians rushed forward to his assistance. When drawnon shore, he found himself in the midst of twenty thousandnatives, armed with bows and arrows. Apprehensionseized him for a moment ; but what was his joy,when a cacique, pointing to a cross erected at a littledistance, pronounced the words Sancta Maria ! Array-sagathen learned that he was arrived at Tecoantepec, onthe coast of Mexico. Provisions were immediately senton board the Pataca; and Guevara, having landed, wasconducted to Cortez.The storm which had driven the Pataca from hercourse had dispersed the other vessels of Loyasa's fleet.CHAP. V. Fernando CORTEZ. 65Loyasa himself died just when he approached the equator,and the celebrated pilot, Sebastian del Cano, survivedhim but four days. The vessels arrived at the Ladroneislands under the command of Salvator. Here they founda Galician, who had deserted from Magellan's fleet, andwho had learned the language of the natives. Pursuingtheir course to the Moluccas, the Spaniards engaged inhostilities with the Portuguese, and having lost theirships, either fell in battle or pined in captivity. Fernandode la Torre, with a few other individuals ofLoyasa's fleet, returned from the Moluccas to Europein 1534, having thus made the complete circuit of theearth.Cortez had been apprised by the court of Spain of thesailing of Loyasa's expedition, and desired to co-operatewith it. As soon as he was informed by Arrayzagathat the admiral had already crossed the Pacific Ocean,he equipped three caravels, which he placed under thecommand of Avaro de Saavedra, a skilful and enterprisingofficer. In October, 1526, Saavedra sailed fromJevatlancio in Mexico, and after discovering a group ofislands, which he called The Kings, reached Mindanao,and afterwards the Moluccas, where the Spaniards andPortuguese were now carrying on with each other awar of extermination. It caused not a little astonishment,when, on being questioned whence he came, hereplied, from New Spain. On the first appearance ofthe Spaniards in those seas, the Portuguese were at aloss to comprehend how their rivals, by sailing westward,could reach those sequestered countries, at whichthey themselves had arrived by holding a directly oppositecourse. But when Saavedra, in a small caravel,declared that he had crossed the ocean from New Spain,which he estimated to be at a distance of two thousandand fifty leagues, his statement was hardly credited ; somuch was ignorance confounded by the full discovery ofthe geographical relationship between the old and newworlds.The Spanish commander, after taking on board suchvol. n. F66 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.of the companions of Magellan and Loyasa as still survivedin the Indian islands, sailed from Tore in June,1528, to return to Mexico. After a navigation of twohundred and fifty leagues, he anchored near certainGolden Isles, of which his description does not remain ;but which are supposed, with good reason, to have beena part of Papua or New Guinea. The inhabitants werenegroes, and entirely naked. Endeavouring to effecthis voyage to New Spain, Saavedra reached some islandsin the middle of the Pacific Ocean, where he was surprisedto find the inhabitants handsome and fair complexioned; they were tattooed and painted all over, onwhich account he gave the islands the name of Pintados.Adverse winds drove him back again to the Moluccas ;whence he made a second attempt to reach Panama,with a cargo of cloves, but with no better success. Hedied during the voyage, and the vessel returned to tore.Saavedra appears to have indulged much in thebold speculation of cutting a canal across the isthmusof Darien.*The court of Spain, whose policy it was to encourage,in every daring adventurer, the first ambition of conquest,but to prevent the consolidation of his power,began now to view with a jealous eye the success ofCortez. The complaints of his enemies were wellreceived, and commissioners were appointed to enquireinto his conduct. The conqueror of Mexico, hurt atthis unworthy treatment, and aware that an equitabletrial was not to be expected in the New World, wherethe sentiments of justice and generosity were chokedby habitual violence and rapacity, resolved to return toSpain, and vindicate his conduct to the emperor in person.He appeared at Toledo with a costly retinue, andsuch a display of wealth as was calculated to raise theestimation of those rich countries which he had annexedto the Spanish crown. Some of the Mexican nobilityfollowed in his train. This splendour produced theintended effect. Cortez, now marquess del Valle deAnt. Galvaom. clos dcscrobrimcntos antigone.CHAP. V. Fernando CORTEZ. 67Guaxaca, was received by the emperor with every demonstrationof favour and esteem. But although hisenemies were silenced, the inflexible policy of the governmentwas not moved by the openness of his behaviour.His authority was abridged ; and Antonio deMendoza was appointed viceroy of New Spain, whilethe marquess was allowed to retain only the powers ofcaptain-general and admiral of the South Seas.The enterprising genius of Cortez, thus confinedin its operations, and debarred the further pursuit ofpolitical greatness, engaged eagerly in the prosecution ofgeographical discoveries. Here an ample field lay opento him, in which his active spirit might be laudably employedand fame acquired. During his absence in Spain,Nunez de Guzman had marched with an army fromMexico, towards the north-west : he had collected in hiscourse a large quantity of gold, and received the submissionof many caciques. To the rugged mountainouscountry which terminated his progress northward, hegave the name of New Alicia. Cortez, desirous to obtaina perfect knowledge of the coast in the same direction,fitted out an armament at Acapulco, which heplaced under the command of Hurtado de Mendoza ;but violent storms, and the misconduct of the officersemployed, defeated the object of the expedition. Atlength, in 1536, Cortez equipped a second fleet, of whichhe took the command in person, and, after enduringgreat hardships, discovered the peninsula of California,and advanced above fifty leagues within the Gulf of California,called also the Vermilion Sea. The Spaniardsstill name it from its discoverer, Mm' de Cortez. Sixyears later, when the viceroy Mendoza sent an expeditionto continue the discoveries of Cortez, the officers engagedin it are said to have reached the fortieth degree of latitude,where they saw snowy mountains on the coast,and met with ships having their yards gilded and bowsadorned with silver. These vessels, according to thenarrators of the tale, were supposed to have come fromJapan or China.v 268 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Two vessels, which Cortez sent about the same timewith succours to Pizarro, and with orders to steer fromPeru to the Moluccas, accomplished the voyage withsuccess. They sailed for a thousand leagues across thePacific without seeing any land ; but afterwards touchedat numerous islands. These expeditions, from whichso little resulted, are said to have cost Cortez three hundredthousand crowns.* But he hoped that the generosityof the emperor would indemnify him for lossesincurred in undertakings of this nature : he also expectedto obtain restitution of the estates which had been unjustlywrested from him during the former suspensionof his authority. With these views he returned to Spain,in 1540. But his merits weighed lightly in the interestedcalculations of the Spanish court. Charles V. receivedhim coldly, and evaded his demands. Cortez attendedthe emperor in the celebrated expedition to Algiers : thevessel in which he had embarked was stranded, and inwading to the shore he lost his valuable jewels. In the combatthat ensued he had a horse killed under him, and appearedconspicuous, for the last time, in the field of battle.Charles V. treated him with such neglect, as not even toallow him the favour of an audience. Cortez, on oneoccasion, forced his way through the crowd, and stoodon the step of the emperor's carriage. Charles V., astonishedat his boldness, demanded who he was. " I amone," replied the conqueror of Mexico, " who has givenyou more provinces than your ancestors have left youtowns." But his boldness gave offence to imperial pride,and he was allowed to remain in obscurity. His healthnow rapidly declined : worn out by fatigues, disappointmentincreased his natural infirmities ; and this extraordinaryman expired near Seville on the 2d of December,1547, in the sixty-second year of his age. His remainswere interred with great pomp in the chapel of thedukes of Medina Sidon; but were afterwards removedto New Spain, in conformity with the desire expressedin his will. The titles of Cortez have passed by Diazz.CHAP. VI. CONQUEST OP PERU. 6$)rage to the dukes of Monteleone, who also retainedpossession of his immense estates in Mexico up to therecent revolutions in the New World.CHAP. VI.CONQUEST OF PERU.NEW EFFORTS OF THE SPANIARDS. COMBINATION OF PIZARRO,ALMAGRO, AND Loue. FIRST ATTEMPT OF PIZARRO ONPERU. HIS FAILURE. SUCCEEDS IN VISITING THAT Country.HIS NEGOTIATIONS IN SPAIN. INVADES PERU. —SEIZES THE INCA. — THE SPANIARDS OBTAIN AN IMMENSETREASURE. THE INCA PUT TO DEATH. ALMAGRO INVADESCHILI. SUFFERINGS OF THE SPANIARDS. REVOLT OF THEPERUVIANS. CIVIL WAR BETWEEN ALMAGRO AND PIZARRO.ALMAGRO DEFEATED AND PUT TO DEATH. VALDIVIA PenetratesTO THE SOUTHERN BORDERS OF CHILI. ExtraordinaryJOURNEY OF Vanilla. BENALCAZAR CONQUERS QUITO.EXPEDITION OF ALVARADO. GONZALEZ PIZARRO MARCHESIN SEARCH OF THE CINNAMON COUNTRY. DIFFICULTIES OFTHE MARCH. GONZALEZ REACHES THE CINNAMON COUNTRY,AND Rash? EXPLORES TOWARDS THE EAST. SUFFERINGS OFTHE EXPEDITION. FRANCISCO DE ORELLANA EMBARKS ON THEParagon. — Descends THAT RIVER TO THE OCEAN. HEPROPAGATES STORIES OF EL DORADO AND NATIONS OF AMAZONS.FATE OF ORELLANA. RETURN OF GONZALEZ PIZARRO TOQUITO. REBELLION OF ALMAGRO's PARTY. — DEATH OFFRANCISCO PIZARRO.The success of Cortez almost realised the expectationsformed respecting the riches of the New World, andrevived the declining spirit of adventure. By his sagaciouspolicy, his promptitude, and his courage, he hadachieved the first conquest of which the Spaniards couldjustly boast in that quarter of the globe. Instead ofconfining his ambition to the establishment of a colony,or to the discovery of new and fertile regions, he attackedand overturned a mighty empire, celebrated by everyIndian tribe for its power and civilisation, and capableof yielding an ample revenue. The conquest of Mexicof 370 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.fully proved the vast disproportion that existed in respectto courage, strength, and armour, between the Americanand European warrior. The armour and the discipline ofthe Spaniards completely secured them from the assaultsof their feeble enemies ; who, on the other hand, knewnot how to resist a volley of musketry or a charge ofhorsemen. The superstitious dread with which theIndians were impressed by the superiority of the Spaniardsincreased the advantages from which it sprung.From these circumstances, and from the deceitful conductof Cortez, who always announced himself as anambassador, the bearer of a friendly message, must beascribed the fall of Mexico, and not to the remissness ormisconduct of Montezuma. Cortez, with his handful offollowers, defeated repeatedly the brave Tlascalans, whohad successfully defied all the efforts of Mexico to subduethem ; he routed at Otumba an immense army ofMexicans, collected at a time when that people had in agreat measure lost their fear and were animated by themost bitter hatred of the Spaniards. It cannot be reasonablysupposed, therefore, that any political calculationsof the Mexican prince could have provided for aconjuncture so extraordinary as the arrival of the Spaniards;or that his prudence could have averted theconsequences of an event, all the circumstances of whichlay so far beyond his experience, or even his conception.The facility with which so great a conquest had beeneffected, excited the Spanish adventurers to noblerexploits than those to which they had been hithertoaccustomed. It taught them to rely more confidentlyon their own strength and the kindness of fortune. WhenBalboa, after crossing the Isthmus of Darien, had reachedPanama, on the South Sea, he there received intelligenceof a great nation situated far to the south, possessingthe precious metals in abundance, and advanced in thearts of civilised life. These flattering indications ofPeru tempted the enterprise of many. But that vasttract of country lying between the settlements at Panamaand the northern provinces of Peru, to which the .VI. CONQUEST OP PERU. 71niards gave the name of Tierra Firtna, presented somany obstacles to their progress, as to defeat completelyall their attempts to penetrate across it. Fruitlessmarches under continual and heavy rains, in a singularlynoxious climate, and through dark forests renderednearly impervious by the tangled underwood, so brokethe health and sunk the spirits of the few who survivedsuch efforts, as to damp the ardour of discovery towardsthe south ; and even hope almost ceased to look in thatdirection.Yet among the Spaniards settled at Panama therewere three men whose spirits were proof against discouragement.These were Francisco Pizarro, Diego deAlmagro, and Hernando Luque. The first of thesewas the natural son of a gentleman, whose name heassumed. He received no education, but was bred up atTruxillo in Estremadura, in the mean employment of aswineherd. The natural energy, however, of youngPizarro's character soon drove him to seek a more activeand varied occupation. The wars of Italy offered hima field in which he enlarged his experience and developedhis talents. After serving some years in that country,he embarked for America, the grand rendezvous of thebold and needy, where he took a conspicuous part in thedisastrous expedition of Hojeda. Almagro was a braveand open-hearted soldier, used to command, and sufficientlyambitious, but neither politic nor designingenough to engage singly in any schemes of aggrandizement.Luque was a wealthy ecclesiastic, who ardentlydesired to be the spiritual chief of some extensive countrieswon by the toils of another. Such were the menwho combined to overturn the empire of Peru. Eachengaged to risk his whole fortune in the adventure:Pizarro, who was the least wealthy of the three, offeredto take the post of danger, and to command the armamentfitted out for the daring enterprise.A single vessel, having on board a hundred and twelvemen, was all that could be equipped for an expeditionfrom which such important results were expected. Pif472 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.varro, unacquainted with the navigation of the seas whichhe intended to cross, commenced his voyage at a seasonof the year when the winds were directly opposed to hisprogress southwards. He touched at several points onthe coast of Tierra Firma, but he found every where anuninviting country, covered with swamps and imperviousforests. The fatigues of the voyage, the scarcityof provisions, and the maladies peculiar to the climate,reduced considerably the numbers of his followers, who,notwithstanding the example afforded them by the resolutionof their leader, gave way to feelings of discouragementand despair. Almagro, who followed Pizarro witha small reinforcement, was equally unsuccessful. Atlength, having united the feeble remnants of their forces,they withdrew to the little island of Gallo, whenceAlmagro returned to Panama, to collect fresh troops andmake the necessary provisions for a new campaign.But notwithstanding all the precautions of the leaders,the complaints and distresses of the soldiers, who hadendured ouch sufferings in the late expedition, foundtheir way into the colony. It may be easily imaginedthat the most respectable inhabitants of the new settlementswere averse to enterprises, which from their natureheld out particular inducements to persons of desperatecharacter and fortune. The waste of life and recklessprofligacy of manners which usually attended these wildadventures were not always compensated by a rich harvestof pillage. The expectations held out by Pizarrohad miserably failed. So odious had his schemes ofconquest become at Panama, that ballads were circulatedamong the people, in which he was styled the butcher ;and Almagro, whose office it was to prepare supplies forhis colleague, was called the drover. Pedro de los Ros,the new governor of Panama, obeyed the impulse ofpopular indignation, and not only prohibited the adventurersfrom raising recruits within his jurisdiction, butalso sent a vessel to the island of Gorgonaa, where Pizarrohad now established himself, to bring back those of hisfollowers who had survived the influence of a peculiarlyCHAP. VI. CONQUEST OP PERU. 73unhealthy climate. Pizarro drew a line with his sword inthe sand, and ordered those who were willing to depart andto relinquish the hopes of splendid conquests to cross it.All accepted the offer but twelve men. With these resoluteadherents he remained upon the island, where heendured for some months all the miseries of want andexposure to the weather. At length a. vessel arrived fromPanama with succours ; and Pizarro, whose courage wasrather provoked than subdued by the hardships he hadundergone, immediately determined to direct his courseagain to Peru. A voyage of only twenty days broughthim within sight of that long-sought country. Hetouched at several places on the coast ; and the Spaniardswere no less astonished than gratified by the proofs theysaw of industry and opulence among the people. Butthey had not force sufficient to make a settlement ; andhaving satisfied themselves as to the wealth of the Peruvianempire, they returned in 1527 to Panama. Threeyears had nearly elapsed since the first expedition wasfitted out for the conquest of Peru, and the funds of theassociates were now quite exhausted by the expenses oftheir fruitless efforts. Yet they were far from abandoningan enterprise which they wanted means to prosecute.Their prospects were now brightened by a promisingthough tardy gleam of success ; and hope took the officeof calculation.Pizarro proceeded to Spain, to solicit from the crownof Castile permission to conquer the empire of Peru ;and all his demands were acceded to. He was appointedgovernor and captain-general of all the country which heshould conquer, for an extent of two hundred leagues tothe south of the river St. Ago. Before he left Spain, hereceived a supply of money from Cortez, who, havingalready amassed great wealth by his achievements in theNew World, was willing to assist an old comrade whowas about to commence a similar career.* His maternaluncle Francisco de Alcantara, and his three brothers,Perhaps there existed some family connection between Cortez andPizarro. The mother of the former was named Catalina Pizarro.74 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Ferdinand, Juan, and Gonzalez, of whom the first alonewas legitimate and a gentleman of education, attachedthemselves to his fortune and followed him.When Pizarro arrived at Panama, he found Almagrohighly incensed at the treacherous way in which his interestshad been dealt with in the late negotiation : forwhile Luque had obtained the dignity of bishop, as originallyagreed on between the associates, the command ofa fortress was all that was allowed to him, and the rankof lieutenant-governor, for which he had stipulated, waswithheld by his jealous colleague. Pizarro, however,had art. enough to appease the natural irritation of arough soldier, the levity of whose temper was as transientlyaffected by the sentiments of self-interest as bythose of justice. The confederation was renewed, andpreparations were made for the enterprise, the issue ofwhich was no longer looked upon as doubtful.But although the invasion of Peru had now receivedthe sanction of royal authority, and was no longer thefurtive project of a few obscure individuals, it was founddifficult to collect persons willing to engage in whatappeared an extremely hazardous undertaking. Thearmament fitted out for the conquest of a populousempire consisted of three small vessels, with one hundredand eighty soldiers, of whom thirty-six were horsemen.With this force Pizarro set sail in February, 1531, leavingAlmagro behind to collect reinforcements. After a prosperousvoyage of thirteen days he landed in the bay of St.Matthew, and immediately commenced his march southwards.On reaching the province of Chaque, the Spaniardssurprised a Peruvian town, in which they foundsuch a quantity of gold and silver as effectually removedall doubts, and seemed to justify the most sanguineexpectations. Pizarro saw the advantages to be derivedfrom this auspicious commencement. He immediatelysent large remittances to Panama and to Nicaragua, inorder to entice new followers by the display of his rapidSuccess ; and soon after was joined by detachments fromthe latter place, under the command of Sebastian Benal-CHAP. VI. CONQUEST OF PERU. 75czar and Hernando de Soto, both officers of great reputation.As he imitated the policy of Cortez in the conquestof Mexico, he advanced directly towards the heart of thePeruvian empire; at the same time amusing the inca,or sovereign of the country, with the pretence that hecame as the ambassador of a powerful monarch, and notwith any hostile intentions. Atahualpa, the reigninginca, lulled into security by these professions, sent presentsto Pizarro as evidences of his friendship, andallowed him to pursue his march unmolested to Caxa-malta, where the court at that time resided. On hisarrival at this place, Pizarro posted his troops in a court,in which some public buildings and ramparts of earthsecured him from any sudden attack ; and here heawaited the coming of Atahualpa, who had announcedhis intention of visiting the Spaniards the next day.As soon as the sun rose, the Peruvian camp was all inmotion. Atahualpa wished to dazzle the strangers byan imposing display of pomp and magnificence. Pizarro,on the other hand, keeping in his eye the success ofCortez and the fate of Montezuma, resolved to decideat once the destiny of Peru, by seizing the person of itsmonarch. A great part of the day was consumed byAtahualpa in preparations to heighten the splendour ofhis appearance. At length the procession was seen approachingby the Spaniards, when their patience wasnearly exhausted by delay. Four harbingers, clothed inuniform, marched in front, to clear the way before theinca. Next came the prince himself, borne on a throne,and covered with plumes of feathers and ornaments ofgold and silver. Some of his chief courtiers followed insimilar state. Bands of singers and dancers hoveredround the royal train ; while troops, amounting, it is said,to thirty thousand men, accompanied the pageant.The Spaniards, drawn up in order of battle, awaitedin silence the approach of the Peruvian procession.When the inca was near enough to be addressed, fatherValverde, the chaplain to the expedition, stepped MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.ward and delivered a speech, in which the most mysteriousdoctrines of religion were mixed with the mostunwarrantable assumptions of political powers, and inwhich he exhorted the Peruvian monarch to embrace theChristian faith, and to acknowledge himself the vassalof the king of Spain. This harangue, of which all thatwas not unintelligible was highly offensive, drew from theinca, who appears not to have apprehended any dangerfrom the handful of Spaniards whom he saw before him,a firm and contemptuous reply. The signal of attackwas immediately given. Pizarro, with a chosen band,rushed forward to seize the inca ; and, notwithstandingthe zeal with which the Peruvians sought to defend theperson of their monarch, the unfortunate Atahualpa wascarried off a prisoner. An immense booty was found onthe field ; and this single stroke of fortune seemed at onceto justify the hopes of the most ardent imaginations.Some historians, in order to explain the facility withwhich the Spaniards made the conquest of Peru, are carefulto explain the dissensions which at that time existed inthe royal family, and which unquestionably distracted theforce of the empire. But so great was the superiorityin the field of the Spaniards above the simple natives ofAmerica, and so little did they scruple to employ the vilestarts of treachery and deceit, that the Peruvian empire,while it tempted them by its wealth, could hardly, underthe most fortunate circumstances, have offered them anyeffectual resistance. How needless, and even impertinent,are explanations founded on the disordered state ofPeru at the time of its invasion, will be evident to thosewho reflect that the Spaniards, though not above onehundred and sixty in number, and with only three masques,marched direct into the heart of the empire ; seizedthe inca by a mixture of violence and fraud ; routed anarmy of thirty thousand Peruvians, and slew four thousandof them, without the loss of a single man on theirown side. Proceedings of this nature do not belong toordinary revolutions, and cannot be associated with subtlecalculations.CHAP. VI. CONQUEST OF PERU. 77The captive inca endeavoured to regain his liberty,by addressing his arguments to the predominant passionof the Spaniards — the love of gold. The apartment inwhich he was confined was twenty-two leet long andsixteen wide : this he engaged to fill with gold as highas he could reach with his hand, and Pizarro joyfullyaccepted the offer ; though nothing was farther from hismind than to perform his part of the agreement, and,having received the ransom, to release his prisoner. TheSpaniards watched impatiently the accumulation of thestipulated treasure ; and at length, unable to containthemselves in the sight of so much wealth, they resolvedto divide it before the whole quantity agreed on wascollected. It was found to amount to a sum, which,taking into consideration the change in the value of theprecious metals, Avould exceed three millions sterling.The share of each horseman was equivalent to abouteight thousand pounds of our present money ; that ofthe foot soldier was one fifth less. Many of Pizarro'sfollowers, finding themselves now suddenly enriched beyondtheir most sanguine expectations, resolved to riskthemselves no longer in the lottery of adventure, andsolicited their dismissal. He readily allowed them todepart ; convinced, that when they published their goodfortune, crowds would throng to join his standard."When Atahualpa had exhausted his resources, andproved no longer a convenient instrument to collect thetreasures of his kingdom, the Spaniards began to talk oftaking away his life. The conquerors of Mexico andPeru were, in views and sentiments, not superior tobanditti, and knew no principle but that of acquiring thegreatest possible booty. Their general rudeness andignorance are evinced in the farcical display which theysometimes made of the forms of justice. Atahualpa wassolemnly tried on a series of ridiculous charges; and,being found guilty, was condemned to be burned alive ;but his sentence was mitigated on his allowing himselfto be baptized, and he was strangled at the stake. Pizarrofound little difficulty in suppressing the rebellions78 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.which broke out after the death of the Peruvian prince.He founded, in an advantageous situation, the city ofLos Eyes, since known by the name of Lima, corruptedfrom Rima, the name of the valley in which it stands.The court of Spain, astonished at the immense quantityof treasure which he remitted as the royal portion ofthe spoils, rewarded the successful conqueror with agrant of seventy leagues of coast in addition to what hadalready been assigned him, and bestowed on him the titleof marquess.Almagro, who from interested motives had warmlyurged the execution of the inca, now made preparationsfor the conquest of Chili, where a tract extending ahundred leagues along the coast had been granted himby the crown of Spain. In marching southwards toinvade that country, the Spaniards endured severities ofclimate surpassing any thing they had hitherto experienced.In the rugged and elevated regions by whichthey penetrated into Chili, the cold was so intense thatseveral men and horses were frozen to death ; and fivemonths afterwards, when the army was returning toPeru, they were found in the same positions and in thesame state as when they had been first overpowered bythe cold. Almagro found the inhabitants of Chili to beastrong and courageous race, who, though unable towithstand the Spaniards, were not to be speedily subdued.They were clad in the skins of seals and sea-wolves,and showed great address in the use of the bowand arrow. The Spaniards were at a loss what measuresto adopt in order to secure themselves in their conquest,when unexpected events recalled Almagro to Peru.The possession of Cuzco, the capital of the incas, hadbeen long a subject of dispute between-him and Pizarro ;but the latter, with his usual dexterity, had contrived toover-reach his colleague, and persuaded him to remainsatisfied at first with the conquest of Chili. When theroyal patents arrived, however, Almagro became convincedthat the city of Cuzco lay within his territory.Intelligence at the same time reached him that the PegVI. CONQUEST OF PERU. 79ruins had flown to arms ; that they threatened tooverwhelm the Spaniards hy their superior numbers ;and were actually besieging Cuzco with the greater partof their army. Anxious to preserve his countrymen fromdestruction, and still more to save from the hands of theenemy the city on which he had set his affections, hehastened to return to Peru; and while he avoided therigorous climate of the mountains, he lost a great numberof men in the parched dry deserts of the sea coastthrough which he passed. On his arrival at Cuzco,Almagro found that the Peruvians had already madethemselves masters of half the city, while a handful ofSpaniards, under the command of Ferdinand and GonzalezPizarro, still obstinately defended the other half.He totally routed the Peruvian army ; took the Pizarroprisoners ; and thus obtained possession of the city.Yet his triumph was of but short duration : the wilygovernor resorted to negotiations till both his brotherswere out of Almagro's power; and he then preparedopenly to decide the quarrel by arms. Almagro, weigheddown by the infirmities of age, was unable to make hiswonted exertions in the battle that ensued. He wastotally defeated and taken prisoner. Although littledanger was to be apprehended from one of his advancedyears, now that his party was dispersed, yet, as he hadlately had the Pizarro in his power, personal animosityand a spirit of revenge decided his doom, and he wascondemned to die. The courage of the veteran shrunkfrom the ignominy of the scaffold, and he stooped toentreaties in order to save his life ; but when he foundhis enemies inexorable, he resumed his fortitude, andmet his fate with a firmness worthy of his reputation.After the death of Almagro, the government of Chiliwas bestowed on Pedro de Valdivia, who advanced intothat country as far as the fortieth degree of southernlatitude. At the same time, the Spaniards in SouthAmerica pushed forward their discoveries in other directionswith an activity and dauntless perseverancewhich it is astonishing to contemplate. Vanilla, in 1537,80 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.marched with a few followers from Uraba, on the Gulfof Darien, to the southern limits of Peru, a distance of1200 leagues. This journey, a great part of which laythrough mountains and unfrequented forests, was lookedupon at the time as the most extraordinary ever performed.In 1533, Benalcazar, an officer of Pizarro's,subdued the province of Quito ; but he had not beenlong in possession of the country, when he was alarmedby the approach of a formidable competitor. Alvarado,who had served with great distinction under Cortez, andhad been rewarded with the government of the southernprovinces of New Spain, still panting for new acquisitions,determined to assert his right to Quito, which heconsidered as lying within his jurisdiction. He accordinglyinvaded that country with an army of five hundredmen, — a strong force among the adventurers of the NewWorld ; and advanced from the coast along the riverGuayaquil, till he reached the elevated table-land of theinterior. On ascending the mountains his troops experiencedunusual and unexpected hardships ; — intensecold, heavy snow, or else torrents of rain, perpetuallyincommoded them. They were sometimes overwhelmedby immense showers of ashes, thrown forth, as theyafterwards learned, from volcanoes at a distance of eightyleagues. Great numbers of them fell victims to thedifficulties of the road and to the scarcity of food. Whenat length the troops of Alvarado approached those ofBenalcazar, both parties felt how foolish it was to contendfor the single possession of regions so extensive, thattheir combined forces were hardly numerous enough evento explore them. An accommodation was proposed,and Alvarado consented to withdraw his army, on thereceipt of a sum large enough not merely to indemnifyhim for the expenses of the expedition, but even for therelinquishment of his hopes.An expedition of greater importance in its geographicalresults, and attended with circumstances of apeculiarly romantic character, issued a few years laterfrom Quito. The mountainous country to the east ofCHAP. VI. CONQUEST OF PERU. 81that city was reported by the Indians to abound in aromaticproductions, and particularly in cinnamon ; fromwhich circumstance the Spaniards gave it the name ofLos Candles. The difficult task of penetrating to thosewild and remote regions, through hostile tribes of Indians,trackless forests, and over mountains covered withperpetual snow, was undertaken by Gonzalez Pizarro,who at this time had the government of Quito. Heaccordingly set forward on his inarch in 1540, with anarmy of 350 Spaniards, of whom nearly one half werehorsemen, and about 4000 Indians. His progress overthe mountains was retarded by impediments of a morefearful kind than any which he had anticipated. Whilethe Spaniards were marching through the country ofthe Quixos, they felt repeatedly the shocks of a violentearthquake : the earth opened in many places, and swallowedup above 500 houses. The atmosphere sharedin the general commotion. The thunder and lightningwere incessant ; and the rain fell in such torrents asquickly to deluge all the valleys, so as to cut off everycommunication between the Spaniards and the cultivatedcountry, and to reduce them at once to absolutewant. Farther on they were obliged to cross a loftyridge of the Andes, on the top of which the cold wasso intense, that many of the attendant Indians werefrozen to death. At length Gonzalez reached the provinceof Zumaco, where the cinnamon trees were foundin the greatest abundance. Throughout the whole ofthe country these trees were found in great numbers inthe woods ; but the Indians also cultivated them withmuch attention in their plantations, and the cultivatedtrees produced a much better cinnamon than those whichgrew wild. The inhabitants of Zumaco carried on anadvantageous trade by means of it ; exchanging it forprovisions and whatever else they stood in need of. *- * Rate, Hist del Peru. The Winter's bark and white cinnamon ofAmerica are very different from the true cinnamon of Ceylon and CochinChina. The tree (a species of laurel) which produces the latter, was introducedtowards the close of the last century into St. Domingo and FrenchGuiana, where it is at present cultivated with very little mercantile success.VOL. II. G82 MODERN VOYAGES OF Discover. BOOK IV.From Zumaco, Gonzalez proceeded to explore thecountry to the east. He followed the course of a rivertill he arrived at a place where the whole stream fellover a height of 600 feet : the noise of the cataractcould be heard distinctly six leagues off. The Spaniardsmarched fifty leagues along the banks of this river withoutbeing able to find a place where they could crossover.At length they came to a spot where the crags,jutting out at an immense height above the channel ofthe river, approached each other so closely, as to permitthe construction of a temporary bridge by throwing sometrees across. After passing the river the Spaniards hadto march through a flat country, intersected by floodsand marshes ; and in some places so covered with wood,that they found it extremely difficult to cut their waythrough it. Wild fruits were now their only subsistence.Gonzalez deemed it necessary to build a bark, inorder to search for provisions along the rivers, as wellas to transport the baggage and the sick. Every one,without regard to rank, was obliged to labour in itsconstruction. The worn-out shirts of the Spaniardswere used to caulk the seams ; and the gums that exudedfrom some of the forest trees served instead of pitch andtar. Relying on the advantages to be derived from thissmall vessel, Gonzalez continued to advance in spite ofall the difficulties that beset his progress. He penetratedin this way above 200 leagues, always followingthe course of the river, until the supply of roots andberries became so scanty, that it was necessary to haverecourse to some bold expedient in order to procurefood for the famished army. Gonzalez, in consequence,ordered Francisco de Orellana, one of his chief captains,to proceed expeditiously down the river with fifty meninsearch of provisions ; and, having loaded the barkwith a plentiful supply, to return, leaving all the baggageat a place where two great rivers joined, according to theinformation received from the Indians.Orellana accordingly went forward, and found thestatement of the Indians respecting the confluence of theCHAP. VI. CONQUEST OP PERU. 83two great rivers to be correct. The stream which hehad been descending was a tributary of the great riverMaragnon, perhaps the Nape, which, at the point wherehe had arrived, joins the main stream, or Western Amazons,as it is now called. But during his voyage hemet with no populous villages or cultivated fields ; nothingwas to be seen around but flooded plains, or thegloomy solitude of impenetrable forests. Curiosity, andthe ambition of discovery, now prompted Orellana tofloat down the majestic stream on which he was embarked,and to neglect the orders of Pizarro. Perhapshe was likewise urged to that conduct by some feelingof necessity. His exhausted crew were quite unable torow back against the current to rejoin their companions ;and if they should succeed in the attempt, of what usewould it be, since they had not procured any provisions?By his returning to the main body no distress could bealleviated, but all seemed threatened with a commondestruction; if he continued to descend the river, on theother hand, his own party might be saved, and discoveriesmade that would compensate, in some measure,the disasters of the expedition. On the last dayof the year 1540, the Spaniards under his command,having eaten their shoes and some saddles boiled with afew wild herbs, commenced their adventurous voyage,and abandoned themselves to the current of the river toconvey them they knew not whither. The very imperfectaccounts which remain to us of Orellana's voyageare filled with wild tales and fanciful exaggerations notill suited to the spirit of the enterprise or the age inwhich it was undertaken. Many of his companionsperished in conflicts with the warlike tribes of Indianswhom they met with in their progress. After incrediblesufferings borne with courageous resignation, and difficultiesencountered with equal skill and perseverance,he reached the sea in August, 1541, after having navigatedthe river above a thousand leagues, and contrivedto steer his frail bark to the colony at Cubagua. Herehe bought a vessel, and returned to Spain, where heg 284 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.related his adventures with all the decorations that hopeand imagination could suggest. He was the first whopropagated the fable of an El Dorado or country aboundingso much in riches, that the roofs of the templeswere covered with gold. He also told of certain nationsof female warriors, inhabiting the banks of the river, towhich, on that account, he gave the name of the riverof Amazons. Some have called it the Orellana, inhonour of the illustrious adventurer who first exploredits whole extent; but the name of Maragnon orMarkham (perhaps a native one) is of older date, andwas probably made known to Europe by Yanez Pinzon.Orellana obtained from the Spanish government a grantof extensive territories in the fertile regions which hehad discovered, and returned in 1549 with a numeroustrain of followers to effect a settlement ; but he fell avictim soon after to the diseases of a moist and sultryclimate, and the infant colony immediately dispersed.When Gonzalez Pizarro arrived at the confluence ofthe Nape and the Maragnon, and saw no sign of Orel-land,whom he expected to meet there with a goodsupply of provisions, he was overwhelmed with dismay.He had never suspected the fidelity of that officer ; andnow, when he found himself deserted by him, his eyessuddenly opened to the horrors of his situation. Hehad advanced 400 leagues from Quito into wild andsolitary forests, in which he could find neither shelternor subsistence. The difficulties which his soldiers hadto encounter in penetrating so far, were now doubled inthe eyes of men dispirited and enfeebled by such a continuanceof suffering and privation. No course, however,was left but to return. His followers, were reducedto such extremities as to feed on their horses and dogs,their saddles, sword belts, the coarsest roots, and evenwhatever reptiles they could collect. After incrediblesufferings he reached Peru, having been absent nearlytwo years, with about eighty Spaniards remaining of the350 who had marched with him. Above 4000 Indiansare said to have perished in this disastrous expedition.CHAP. VII. CONQUESTS OF THE SPANIARDS. 85In the absence of Gonzalez Pizarro, a most importantrevolution had taken place. Those who were dissatisfiedwith the arbitrary conduct of the governor, FranciscoPizarro, among whom were all the followers of Almagro,gathered round the son of that unfortunate general asround a common centre. Young Almagro united theadvantages of a good education to the generous dispositionand frankness of manner which had made hisfather so great a favourite with the soldiers. His factionrapidly augmented, while the governor, secure inthe terror which his name inspired, took no precautions,though apprised of his danger. At length, on the 26thof June, 1541, a party of the conspirators, headed byJuan de Errata, a distinguished officer, issued in completearmour from Almagro's house, and forced theirway into the governor's palace ; Pizarro defended himselfbravely against his numerous assailants, but was atlength overpowered, and receiving a stab in the throat,immediately expired. He left behind him no legitimatechildren to inherit his title and estates ; and, on thedeath of his brothers, which took place a few years later,his family became extinct.CHAP. VII.CONQUESTS OF THE SPANIARDS.BRAZIL NEGLECTED BY THE PORTUGUESE. Diego ALVAREZSHIPWRECKED ON THE SHORES OF THAT COUNTRY J SPARED BYTHE SAVAGES, AND BECOMES A CACIQUE. VISITS EUROPE, ANDRETURNS TO BRAZIL. COLONY OF JANEIRO FOUNDED.SEBASTIAN CABOT EXPLORES THE RIVER LA PLATA. ASCENDSTHE PARANA. PEDRO DE MENDOZA FOUNDS THE CITY OFBUENOS AYRES. AYOLAS ASCENDS THE RIVER PARAGUAY, ANDCROSSES THE MOUNTAINS TO PERU. YRALA COMPLETES HISDISCOVERY. Larvae UNDERTAKES THE CONQUEST OF Florida.PENETRATES TO APALACHEN. HIS CALAMITOUS RE-TREAT. ADVENTURES OF HIS TREASURER, ALVARO NUNEZ.THE SAVAGES SHOCKED AT THE CANNIBALISM OF THE Pag386 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.NIARDS. ALVARO TURNS MERCHANT AND PHYSICIAN TO THEINDIANS. TRAVELS FROM FLORIDA TO MEXICO. FLORIDABESTOWED ON Fernando DE Soho. HIS UNHAPPY FATE.ALVARO NUNEZ MADE GOVERNOR OF LA PLATA. HIS JOURNEYFROM THE COAST TO THE PARANA. CALAMITOUS TerminationOF HIS COMMAND. —JOURNEY OF MARCOS DE NIZZA TOCIVOLA. EXPEDITION OF Archon AND CORONADO IN SEARCHOF THE SEVEN CITIES. THEIR DISAPPOINTMENT. SUPPOSEDINVENTION OF A STEAM SHIP BY Gray. RAPID DECLINE OFENERGY IN THE SPANISH COLONIES.By the conquest of Mexico and Peru, the Spaniardsbecame masters of extensive territories, in which therealready existed some degree of social organisation, andin which an intercourse between the several provinceswas more or less intimately maintained. The acquisitionof dominions enjoying such advantages of internalcommunication increased the activity of the conquerorsas much as their power. As distance from control, noless than the excitement that accompanies romantic enterprise,is apt to loosen the bonds of authority, the firstadventurers in America, thinly scattered over immenseregions, where the stupendous magnificence of natureworks so powerfully on the imagination, frequentlythrew off all obedience to government, and sallied forthon the wildest and most daring schemes of independentdiscovery. Nor was it merely in Peru and Mexico thatthis active spirit displayed itself: in every part of theNew World it expanded with equal force; and had otherempires of equal wealth and population been met with,there would not have been wanting heroes to subduethem. The energy with which a few thousand Europeansspread themselves as conquerors over the Americancontinent within a few years after its discovery, isamong the most extraordinary phenomena in the historyof mankind. But to what purpose would it be to relateall the details of the various expeditions fitted out tocolonise and survey that fertile quarter of the globe ?The reader would soon be fatigued with the frequentrepetition of similar events ; of easy victories obtainedover the Indians, and of wanton cruelties committed byCHAP. VII. CONQUESTS OP THE SPANIARDS, 87the Spaniards. It will be sufficient for the object ofthis work to give a brief account of those who werechiefly instrumental in making Europe acquainted withthe full extent of the New World.The Portuguese, though zealous in asserting theirright to the sovereignty of Brazil, nevertheless neglectedthat country for many years after it was definitivelyceded to them. Their eastern possessions held out muchstronger inducements to national exertion and privateenterprise. Ships of all nations resorted indiscriminatelyto the shores of Brazil to cut dye-woods ; and notwithstandingan interesting accident which drew a momentaryattention towards it, that country seemed destinedto become a sort of common to European traders. APortuguese adventurer named Diogo Alvarez, a nativeof Diana, while seeking a cargo of dye-woods on thecoasts of Brazil, happened to be shipwrecked among theshoals north of the bar of Bahia : some of the crew weredrowned, the rest were captured and devoured by thenatives. Diogo, aware that he had no chance of escapinga similar fate but by convincing the savages ofhis utility, exerted himself to the utmost in savingwhatever he could from the wreck ; and he gained theirfavour so completely that his life was spared. Among thearticles which he had the good fortune to bring to shore,were some barrels of gunpowder and a musket. A fewdays afterwards he shot a bird in the presence of someof the natives, w T ho called him, in consequence, Caramurwor the man of fire. His reputation was now establishedamong the savages ; and, as he promised to make warupon their enemies, they immediately marched forthwithhim against the nation of the Tapuyas. But thefame of Caramuru had gone before him ; the Tapuyasfled, and abandoned their country to the allies of theshipwrecked mariner. When once adopted by the Indiantribe, he soon obtained a rank proportioned to hisabilities ; and from a slave he became a sovereign. Hemarried the daughters of several chieftains, who wereproud of his alliance; and the principal families inq 488 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Bahia at present trace their descent from him. Afterthe lapse of some years, he embarked on board a Frenchvessel with his favourite Indian wife Paraguay : hisother wives were so disconsolate at the thoughts of losinghim, that they attempted to swim after the vessel whichcarried him away from them ; and one persisted in themad effort until her strength was exhausted, and shesunk before his eyes. When Diogo arrived in Franceand related his singular adventures, he was receivedmost favourably at court, but was not allowed to proceedto Portugal according to his intention. He foundmeans, nevertheless, of conveying to his sovereignsuch information respecting the country which he hadvisited as might be serviceable in prompting or directingthe establishment of a colony. The court ofFrance, though desirous to have the exclusive benefit ofhis experience, did not oppose his returning to Brazil.He set sail for that country accordingly, taking withhim, among other things, some artillery and a goodstock of ammunition, so as to ensure his ascendancyamong the native tribes. In return for the cargoes ofthe two vessels that he took with him, he undertook tofreight them with the productions of the country.Notwithstanding the presage of success afforded bythe adventures of Diogo, the Portuguese governmentpaid no attention to their possessions in America till1531, when the first Brazilian colony was founded byMartin Alfonso de Sousa. He met with no oppositionfrom the natives, who were conciliated towards him bythe friendly offices of a Portuguese sailor who had beenshipwrecked on that coast. Sousa built the town ofJaneiro, so called from his arriving at that spot on thefirst of January ; he likewise introduced the sugar-caneinto his colony, the early success of which gave amplepromise of its future importance.The Spaniards, confined in their rage of adventure tothe New World, manifested much greater zeal to colonisethe territories of which they claimed the sovereignty.The cruel fate of Sobs, indeed, appears to have dissipatedCHAP. VII. CONQUESTS OF THE SPANIARDS. 89for a time all thoughts of forming a settlement on thegreat river to which he gave his name ; and it was nottill the year 1526 that the project was revived. Inthat year Diego Garcia was sent with a single ship tothe river of Solis ; but as he lingered on his way at theCanary islands, he was anticipated in his discoveries bySebastian Cabot. That celebrated navigator had sailedfrom Spain a few months later than Garcia, with fourships, and orders to proceed to the East Indies by thestraits of Magellan. On touching at the mouth of theriver in which Solis had lost his life, he found twoSpaniards who had deserted from that commander, besidesfifteen other stragglers from subsequent expeditions.All these men concurred in representing thecountry up the river as singularly rich in the preciousmetals ; and easily persuaded Cabot to proceed in thatdirection. Leaving the large vessels at anchor in thatpart of the river where Buenos Ayres was afterwardsbuilt, Cabot proceeded to ascend the stream in smallbarks constructed for the purpose. He followed thecourse of the river Parana till he came to the rapids inlatitude 27° 27' 20" ; remained there a month with theGuaranty Indians; and then returned, after an absence ofa year. He had not descended above thirty leagues belowthe Paraguay when he met Garcia, who claimed an undividedauthority in these regions, the expedition of Cabothaving been unequivocally destined to the East Indies.The rival commanders, however, at length agreed tocontinue their discoveries jointly. Cabot, in the meantime,contrived to send home to the emperor an accountof his proceedings ; and as he had found amongthe savages of the interior some ornaments of gold andsilver, which he easily obtained in exchange for varioustrinkets, he took advantage of this slender circumstanceto represent the country as abounding in those metals ;and, in conformity with his description, he gave theriver the name of La Plata, — a name which it still preserves,though it is now known that the country along itsbanks affords no trace whatever of the precious metals.90 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.The king of Spain was satisfied with the conduct ofCabot ; commanded him to continue his conquest ; andeven promised him assistance. The wealth which hadrecently poured in from Mexico rendered the courtcautious how it damped the ardour of adventurers. Butas the royal treasures were at this time in an exhaustedstate, a commission to conquer and to rule the wealthycountry of La Plata was readily granted to Pedro deMendoza, a gentleman of fortune, who undertook tomake the necessary preparations at his own expense.Sebastian Cabot accordingly returned to Spain in 1530.Mendoza embarked for his government with fourteenships and a train of 2500 followers. Soon after his arrivalin the La Plata, in 1 535, he founded the city of BuenosAyres. Juan de Ayolas was despatched, at the same time,to select a favourable position for a settlement higher upthe river. He ascended the Paraguay above a thousandmiles, till he reached nearly the twenty-first degree of latitude; then, leaving Domingo Martinez de Yrala to commandthe vessels, with orders to wait six months for hisreturn, he struck off to the west with about two hundredSpaniards, in the hopes of being able to penetrate toPeru. In this he succeeded : crossing the countries ofthe Chacas and Chiquitas, he arrived on the borders ofPeru in 1537, and having received some supplies fromthe governor of the province, returned to the Paraguay ;but the six months had already elapsed, and Yrala wasgone. Ayolas, thus left to shift for himself, becameembroiled with the Indian nations ; and, being surprisedby the Mbayas, was massacred with all his companions.Twelve years later Yrala made a second attempt to accomplishthe same arduous undertaking. Ascending theParaguay to the seventeenth degree of latitude, he crossedthe mountains to the river Guapay, and, after enduringincredible fatigues, succeeded in establishing a communicationbetween Peru and its dependency the governmentof La Plata.A variety of circumstances concurred to direct theprincipal afflux of Spanish adventurers to the continentCHAP. VII. CONQUESTS OF THE SPANIARDS. 91of South America. But few tried their fortune blushingtowards the north, and the sufferings of thesedeterred others from following in their footsteps. Larvae,the officer sent by Velasquez to dispossess Cortezof his authority in New Spain, and who was takenprisoner by that bold leader as above related *, was desirousto efface by some signal exploit the memory ofhis defeat on that occasion. He had interest to obtainthe title of adelantado, and a commission to conquer andto rule the extensive territories extending from Cape casPains to Cape Florida ; and having raised a force ofabout six hundred men, set sail from St. Lucar, in June,1527. The treasurer to the armament was AvaroNunez, surnamed Cabeza de Vasa, whose singular personaladventures form the most interesting portion ofthe account which he afterwards wrote of the expedition.While waiting to take in supplies at Cuba, Narvaez andhis companions experienced the fury of a hurricane suchas is rarely felt in any other region of the globe. Thehouses were blown down ; and when the affrighted inhabitantsfled to the woods for shelter, their terror wasincreased at the sight of the largest trees torn up by theroots, and scattered in every direction by the violence ofthe winds. The fleet suffered so much from this storm,that it was found necessary to desist from any furtheroperations during the winter.In February, 1528, the armament put to sea, and, afterencountering much rough weather, reached the coast ofFlorida. The country was taken possession of with theusual solemnities ; but nothing was found here to gratifythe cupidity of the Spaniards. When the natives werequestioned respecting some golden ornaments seen withthem, they all pointed to Apalachen, a country situatedat a distance in the interior, as the quarter whence theseand other commodities were derived. Narvaez, who hadno positive knowledge of the country or the adjoiningseas, was disposed to yield himself up to the guidanceof hope and imagination; and being at a loss whatSee page 58.32 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.course he ought in prudence to take, resolved to pressforward into the interior and invade Apalachen. The intelligentAvaro strongly urged the danger of commencingan arduous journey without guides or provisions, andbefore some secure haven had been found for the fleet.But the insinuation that he slunk from difficulties silencedhis remonstrances, and made him declare his determinationto follow his countrymen into every extremity.On the 1st of May, 1528, the Spaniards commencedtheir march into the interior. They had little morethan a single day's provision ; when that slender stockwas consumed, they were obliged to satisfy their hungerwith roots and the fruit of the wild palm tree. For fifteendays they travelled without meeting with a humanhabitation. At the end of that time they arrived at anIndian village, where they found guides to conductthem to Apalachen. The country which they had totraverse was wild and unequal ; sometimes mountainous,but more frequently overspread with deep marshes, renderednearly impassable by the huge trees blown downand lying across them in every direction. At length,on the 26th of June, the wearied Spaniards arrived insightof an Indian village, which they were told wasApalachen. They found no difficulty in renderingthemselves masters of the place. But they had not remainedhere many days, when they perceived on whata chimerical foundation all their plans were reared. InApalachen they found nothing. The exasperated Indianslurked in the woods, and watched all their movements : toadvance was useless, if not impossible, from the difficultyof the country ; and retreat was exposed to the worstills of Indian warfare. But retreat was now necessary ;and the Spaniards, relinquishing the fancied wealth ofApalachen, directed their march towards the sea-coastin the country of Ante, at present called the bay of St.Mark. Unspeakable hardships awaited them. Nearlya third of their number perished by the arrows of theIndians ; and of the remainder a large proportion labouredunder disease, brought on by fatigue and privation.CHAP. VII. CONQUESTS OF THE SPANIARDS. 93When the Spaniards arrived at the sea-shore in thislamentable plight, it was obvious that the attempt tomarch along the coast in search of the fleet would probablylead to their destruction. No alternative remainedbut to construct vessels, and encounter at once thehazards of the sea. Their shirts were sewn togetherfor sails, and ropes were made of the fibrous bark of thepalm tree. A horse was killed every third day, and itsflesh distributed in small portions to the workmen andto the sick. So zealously did they labour, that in littlemore than six weeks they had completed five boats, capableof holding from forty to fifty men each. In thesesmall barks they put to sea, although they were socrowded that the gunwales of their overladen boats werebut a few inches above the water ; yet desperation urgedthem on. For some weeks they endured all the miseriesof want and anxiety. At an Indian village on the coastthey obtained some trifling relief; but, quarrelling withthe natives, they were obliged to re-embark with precipitation.In these desperate circumstances Narvaezresigned the authority which he was unable to use beneficially.As his boat was well manned he hastened forward,leaving his companions to shift for themselvesin the best way they could. The boat commanded byAvaro reached a small island after some days of extremesuffering, when the exhausted crew had hardly strengthenough to crawl on shore upon their hands and feet.The Indians took pity on their wretched condition, andloaded them with fruits, fish, and whatever provisionsthe island afforded. A stock of these being formed,Avaro prepared to continue his voyage ; but just as theSpaniards were embarking, a wave overset the boat,which sunk with all their clothes. Three of the crewwere drowned by this accident ; the remainder threwthemselves naked on the sand.No resource now remained to the survivors but thecompassion of the savages, who generously shared withthem the few comforts they possessed. But some ofthe Spaniards, who had witnessed the rites with which94 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.the Mexicans sacrificed their prisoners, felt for a longtimemore horror than consolation from the care bestowedon them by the natives ; supposing that theywere destined to be devoured when restored to health.The liberality of the savages proved greater than theirindustry : as winter approached they felt the scourge offamine, and the Spaniards, who were instrumental incausing, were the chief sufferers by, this scarcity of food.Some other of the followers of Narvaez, thrown on thesame coast, had been reduced to such extremities as todevour one another ; a deed which shocked the Indiansso much that they never afterwards regarded the Spaniardsfavourably. Avaro and his companions were,in consequence, reduced to the condition of slaves, andtreated with much severity ; as all the calamities ofwant and disease from which the Indians suffered,were ascribed by them to the presence of these wickedstrangers.Avaro at length made his escape to the continent,where he contrived to set on foot a singular traffic. Hecarried into the interior shells and other marine productions,and for these he brought back in exchange redochre, with which the savages daubed themselves ; hidesfor thongs ; canes and flints for the manufacture ofarrows. In his capacity of merchant, Avaro acquiredgreat estimation among all the savage tribes, whose perpetualhostilities made them feel the want of a neutralhand to manage the little commerce which they werecapable of sustaining one with another. After spendingsome years in this occupation, Avaro grew weary of sohopeless an exile, and determined to encounter any perilin the attempt to revisit his native country. His onlychance was to reach Mexico overland; and in this daringproject of crossing such an extent of country, inhabitedby savage tribes, and hitherto unexplored, he was joinedby two companions in misfortune, Andrea Durante andAlonzo de Castiglione.The three wanderers suffered severely at the outset oftheir journey : the first tribe they encountered was theCHAP. VII. CONQUESTS OP THE SPANIARDS. Q5most barbarous they ever met with. The wretched Spaniardswere reduced to slavery, and compelled to subsiston worms, loathsome reptiles, fish bones, and even wood.The savages, their masters, were in that abject conditionin which parental attachment is unequal to the care ofrearing a family ; and it was their practice to expose alltheir female offspring. When the summer arrived, andthe woods were loaded with fruits, Avaro and his companionscontrived to escape during the festivities inwhich the savages celebrated this season of temporaryabundance. The Indian nation which he next arrivedat offered him a better reception : and the respect shownto him as a stranger was very much increased when hebegan to display his medical skill; for he had learnedon the coast that pretensions of this sort might beprofitably united to the business of a merchant. Byblowing on his patients, or muttering certain words,according to the nature of the case, he wrought manywonderful cures, and, as he relates, on one occasioneven raised a dead man to life : nor will this bold assertionshake our confidence in the general veracity of hisnarrative, when we consider how easy it is to workmiracles among the ignorant ; and how naturally weimbibe the most absurd persuasions, if they tend to raiseus in our own esteem. The three Spaniards, now reverencedas the children of the sun, were escorted intheir journey to the west by a troop of their admirers,who proclaimed as they went along their wondrousvirtues and preternatural gifts ; and this impulse, oncegiven to the superstitious admiration of the Indians, waseasily propagated from tribe to tribe. Avaro, travellingwestward, crossed a great river (the Mississippi), andthen entered upon those deserts which separate the territoriesof Mexico from those of the United States. Inanswer to his enquiries respecting the Christians, he wasinformed that a wicked nation so named dwelt to thesouth-west ; and was warned not to have any dealingwith that mischievous and inhuman people. These accusationshe found to be not quite groundless ; for when96 modern voyages of discovert. BOOK IV.he approached the Mexican frontiers, it was with difficultyhe could prevent the Spaniards from reducing toslavery the Indians who accompanied him as guides; andwhen he remonstrated with them for their brutal conducthe was himself made prisoner, and experienced greaterseverities from his own countrymen than from any ofthe savage tribes among whom he had wandered. Whenhe arrived in the interior of the country, however, wherethe manners of the colonists were less violent and licentiousthan on the borders, he was treated with abundantcourtesy and respect, and liberally supplied withevery thing he wanted. In the following year he embarkedfor Europe; and arrived at Lisbon in August,1537.When Avaro arrived in Spain, he applied for a grantof territory and a government in Florida, to which hewas eminently entitled according to the principles bywhich the court affected to guide itself in bestowing suchgifts. But he was forestalled in his suit by a rival possessingoverwhelming interest. Hernando de Soto, oneof the most distinguished captains of Pizarro's army,had returned to Spain from the conquest of Peru withimmense wealth, and all the reputation which brilliantsuccess is sure to add to competent abilities. By hisjudicious liberality at court, he won the unboundedfavour of the emperor, whose pecuniary difficulties madehim quick to discern the merits of a wealthy subject.Soto, who had acted but a subordinate part in Peru,imagined that in a higher station he might expect thesame good fortune and more conspicuous fame. Heaccordingly asked for and easily obtained the governmentof Florida — ambition rendering him blind to the lessoninculcated by the failure of Narvaez. So ample werehis means, and so great his reputation, that he was ableto equip an armament of ten ships, on board of whichwere 900 men, most of them trained to arms.In May, 1539, Soto disembarked on the coast ofFlorida. But he was disappointed in all his hopes ofgaining the confidence of the native chieftains : neitherCHAP. VII. CONQUESTS OF THE SPANIARDS. 97by kindness, nor patience, nor demonstrations of hispower, could he succeed in conquering their deeplyrooted aversion to the Spanish name. After fightingmany battles to little purpose ; after proceeding a longway into the interior, towards the north-west, withoutfinding the expected treasures of gold and silver ; aftersubduing many Indian nations without making a singlesettlement ; Soto died in the fourth year of his ill-fatedenterprise. His companions, long tired of their fruitlesslabours, lost all courage on his death. They immediatelyresolved to abandon Florida for ever ; and makingtheir way to the sea-shore, pursued by the Indians,who were now emboldened by the dejection of theiradversaries, hastily embarked for Mexico. Here theywere kindly treated, but the exasperation of disappointmentlong hindered them from incorporating with themass of peaceable and industrious citizens.Avaro Nunez, whose just claims to the governmentof Florida had been so unwisely slighted at court, wasappointed, in 1 540, to succeed Mendoza in the provinceof Buenos Ayres. Having lost two of his vessels on thecoast of Brazil, he determined to proceed by land ; abold measure, in which the experience acquired by a tenyears' residence among savage nations rendered himpeculiarly qualified to succeed. Ascending the riverYtabucu, opposite to the island of St. Catharine, hereached a chain of desert mountains, which he crossed,and in nineteen days arrived in the fertile countryof the Guaranty. Here he purchased canoes, in which thesick and delicate embarked to descend the Parana. Hehimself, with the remainder of bis troop, continued hisjourney by land, and after a four months' march reachedhis capital in safety. His authority, however, was notof long continuance ; by his zeal to protect the Indiansfrom oppression he gave offence to the colonists, whorebelled against him in 1544, and sent him back a prisonerto Spain. Eight years were suffered to elapsebefore that dilatory court proceeded to examine hiscomplaints, or those of his adversaries. The trial atVOL. II. H98 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.length took place, and Avaro was fully acquitted of allthe charges brought against him : but his accusers wereallowed to go unpunished ; he was not reinstated in hiscommand; nor did he receive any indemnification forthe injuries he had received.*The arrival of Avaro Nunez on the north-westernfrontier of-mexico, after accomplishing his extraordinaryjourney through so many savage tribes, and the informationwhich he gave respecting them, excited a livelyinterest in New Spain to extend the boundaries of geographicalknowledge in that quarter. The viceroy donAntonio de Mendoza accordingly sent Marcos de Nizza,a Franciscan monk, to explore, as far as possible, thecountry towards the north. In 1539, the monk returnedwith an account of a nation so rich that their domesticutensils of the most humble description were made ofgold. Cevola, or Cibola, one of their cities, appeared tohim to contain twenty thousand houses, mostly built ofstone, and several stories in height. Of this wealthycountry the monk claimed possession clandestinely, bysetting up a small cross on which was inscribed thename of the viceroy of New Spain. This relation of DeNizza filled all Mexico with hope and exultation. Twoexpeditions were fitted out : one, to proceed by sea, wasentrusted to the care of Fernando de Alarchon ; theother, placed under the command of Vasquez de Coronado,was to invade the Seven Cities by land, — for theold legend of the Seven Christian Cities was revived byDe Nizza.t Coronado and his army endured extremesufferings in their march over rugged mountains or ariddeserts. The road was far more difficult and muchlonger than they had been led to imagine. Althoughtheir experience of the journey had taught them todoubt the veracity of the monk, yet when they at lengtharrived at Civola, and found, instead of a great citysouthey's History of Brazil, vol i. p Ribs. Azara, in his arcountof Paraguay,views the character of Avaro Nunez less favourably ; and says thatthe council of the Indies, on examining into his conduct, treated him withmore severity than his enemies, and sentenced him to banishment in Africa.Voyage dans I'Ami'riquc Meridional, voL ii. p. 3G&+ See vol. i. p. 38j.OIIAr. VII. CONQUESTS OF THE SPANIARDS. 99abounding in gold and silver, only a large village ofabout lour bundled houses, without any trace of theprecious metals, nothing could equal their rage and disappointment.The inhabitants, indeed, were more civilised,and the country more populous, than was usual inthe New World ; and these circumstances, exaggeratedin the relations of the rude Indian tribes, appear to havegiven rise to the fictions which so long imposed on theSpaniards. Coronado having learned that Quivira, amaritime city, was the most populous in this part ofAmerica, reached it across a route of 300 leagues.He found it really much superior to any of the sevenof which the fame had been so widely blazoned. Thesobriety of Coronado's relation, and the vestiges ofancient civilisation which are found in that part ofAmerica, go far to vindicate him from the imputation ofinventing fables. Nevertheless, though Quivira was foralong time after the grand object of Spanish enterprise,no city of that name or site was ever again recognised.The peculiar breed of sheep (as he called them), whichconstituted the sole wealth of the country, remains stillbut imperfectly known to naturalists. The maritimeexpedition under Alarchon returned without effectingany discovery of importance. The fabulous city ofCivola was placed in old maps in 37° north latitude.Quivira was situated four degrees farther to the north,in the very region pointed out by native historians asthe original country of the Mexicans.*The extraordinary energy of character developedamong the Spanish adventurers in the colonies, by thefree scope allowed to the exercise of their talents, appearsto have communicated a momentary impulse to theparent state, and to have prompted attention, in particular,to the principles of commerce and to the artsconnected with naval affairs. As early as 1517, the.menes cf Hispaniola recommended to the court theestablishment of a perfectly free trade between Spainand the West Indies. This wise counsel was urgentlyIlun.boldt, Esse; Pol. sur la Nouvelle Espagne, torn. ii. p. 420.100 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IT.repeated in 1527 ; yet two centuries and a half elapsedbefore that bigoted and suspicious government couldlearn to relax the bonds of despotism, and adopt thesystem which its interest dictated. The damage done toshipping in the West India seas by the teredo worm(as experienced by Columbus in his fourth voyage) soontaught the necessity of protecting the bottoms of vesselsby a metallic sheathing; and already, in 1514, theSpaniards employed lead for that purpose.* But theinvention which Spanish historians are most zealous inclaiming for their countrymen of the sixteen century, isthat of the steam-vessel. This claim, which has beenbut recently advanced, rests upon the following statement,collected from documents preserved in the royalarchives of Simancas.In 1543, Blasco de Garay, a captain of a ship,offered to the emperor Charles V. to construct a machinecapable of propelling large vessels, even in a calm andwithout the aid of sails or oars. In spite of the oppositionwhich his project met with, the emperor consentedto witness the experiment ; and it was made accordinglyin the port of Barcelona, on the 17th of June, 1543.Garay would not uncover his machinery or show it publicly; but it was evident that it consisted of a caldronof boiling water, and of two wheels set in motion bythat means, and applied externally on each side of thevessel. The experiment was made on the Trinidad, aship of 200 tons, laden with corn.The persons commissioned by the emperor to reporton the invention in general approved of it, and praised,in particular, the readiness with which the vessel tackedabout. The treasurer Ravage, however, who was hostileto the plan, said that a ship with the proposed machinerymight go at the rate of about two leagues in three hours ;that the apparatus was complex and expensive; and,finally, that there was great danger of the boiler bursting.The other commissioners maintained, that a vesselso equipped might go at the rate of a league an hour atNavarre, torn. I p. 292. French trans.CHAP. VII. CONQUESTS OF THE SPANIARDS. 101the least, and would tack about in half the time requiredby an ordinary ship. When the exhibition was over,Garay took away the apparatus from the Trinidad.The wood-work was deposited in the arsenal at Barcelona: the rest of the machinery he kept himself. Notwithstandingthe objections raised by Ravage, the emperoraffected to favour the project of Garay ; but hisattention at the time was engrossed by other matters.He promoted Garay, however; gave him a sum of money,besides paying the expenses of the experiment made atBarcelona ; and showed him other favours." *If it be admitted that this contrivance of Garay wasidentical in principle, at least, with our steam-engines,there is yet reason to doubt how far we ought to commemoratein a history of useful inventions a germ ofdiscovery never fairly brought into the light, and consignedto oblivion the moment it was seen. The ingeniousmen who have in our own times brought thesteam-engine to such wonderful perfection lose nothingof the merit of originality by the prior inventions ofa Spaniard whom they never heard of. Nor has theSpanish nation much reason to pride itself on the discoveryof Garay ; since the more we admire the geniusof the individual, the more must we lament his ill-fortunein being the subject of a narrow-minded andilliberal government, capable of robbing him of his fairfame, and mankind of the benefits of his invention.But it was not in this instance alone that the jealouspolicy of the Spanish government damped the ardour ofthe people and checked their progress in civilisation.The astonishing boldness and activity displayed by theconquerors of the New World, of which so many examplesoccur in the preceding chapters, were the virtuesof adventurers released in a great measure from therestraints of authority. The court of Spain threw loosethe reins to individual enterprise, and, for a share inthe profit, connived at the violence and licentiousnesswhich it pretended to denounce. But when the lawless-navarre,torn. i. p. 286.H 3102 MODERN* VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. ROOK IV.ness of the Spanish colonists ceased, their activity ceasedwith it. The causes which paralysed the energies ofSpain in the sixteenth century extended their influenceto its dependencies in the West. As soon as order andauthority were established in the colonies, they sunk intoa state of comparative torpor ; and the zeal and successwith which the Spaniards at first prosecuted geographicaldiscoveries, is not more astonishing than the indifferencewith which they regarded them for centuries after.CHAP. VIII.CONQUESTS OF THE PORTUGUESE.POLICY OF PORTUGAL WITH RESPECT TO ITS CONQUESTS ININDIA. — CABRAL DESPATCHED WITH A FLEET. DISCOVERSBRAZIL. FATE OF BARTHOLOMEW Dial. SUCCESS ANDRETURN OF CABRAL. JUAN DE NOVA DISCOVERS ASCENSIONISLAND AND ST. HELENA. SECOND VOYAGE OF I)E GAMA.HE DISCOVERS THE SEYCHELLES. VINCENT Sores VISITSTHE RED SEA. EXPEDITION UNDER FRANCISCO DE Albuquerque.THE PORTUGUESE OBTAIN A FOOTING AT COCHIN.Almeida THE FIRST VICEROY. HIS SUCCESSES AND MelancholyEND. VICTORIES OF ALFONSO DE ALBUQUERQUE.HE TAKES GOA, CALICUT, MALACCA, AND ORMUZ. HISDEATH. DISCOVERY OF THE ISLES OF TRISTAN d'aCUNHA.OF SUMATRA AND OF MADAGASCAR. FIRST VISIT TOCEYLON. Servant DISCOVERS THE MOLUCCAS. A COLONYFOUNDED THERE BY DE BRITTO. TRADE ESTABLISHED WITHCHINA. MISFORTUNE OF THE AMBASSADOR PEREIRA.In the preceding chapters we have seen with what rapidstrides the Spaniards advanced in the discovery and conquestof the New World. It was no sooner demonstratedthat a voyage of a month or six weeks across the AtlanticOcean conducted to fertile countries of indefinite extent,than all the difficulties of the navigation seemed suddenlyto vanish, and numbers were found ready to trust theirlives and fortunes to the sea, at a time when naval sciencewas so imperfect that a very large proportion of thosewho ventured on long voyages were sure to perish. TheCHAP. VIII. CONQUESTS OP THE PORTUGUESE. 103grand motive of all this enterprise was, in the firstinstance, the famed wealth of India. The ardent wishto arrive at the seat of so much riches even swayed thejudgment of Columbus, and concealed from him thetrue nature of his own discoveries. The Portuguese, inthe mean time, had reached the long sought goal bythe Cape of Good Hope, and followed up their successwith an alacrity worthy of so glorious an achievement.The court of Portugal had long prided itself on the encouragementit gave to maritime enterprise ; and whenthe object of its long continued exertions was at lengthattained, it proceeded to reap the fruit of its discoverieswith the same vigour with which it had prosecuted themhitherto. Instead, therefore, of following the policyadopted by Spain in the New World, and giving upIndia, on condition of future contingent benefits, toneedy individuals of desperate fortunes, the crown ofPortugal resolved to maintain its dignity and provide forits interests in the East by national armaments.The expense incurred by the equipment of De Gama'sexpedition had caused not a little public discontentment:but so much more persuasive is success than reason ; somuch more does experience weigh with the bulk of mankindthan all the arguments in the world ; that the tideof popular sentiment was totally changed by the issueof the voyage, and those who had most loudly decriedthe passage to India as a wild chimera were now mostsanguine in estimating its advantages. Soon after thereturn of Vasco de Gama, orders were issued for thepreparation of a new and more imposing armament.The fleet destined for this second voyage to India consistedof no less than thirteen ships, well manned, andsupplied with every thing that the naval experience ofthat age deemed requisite for the accomplishment of anarduous navigation. The command of the expeditionwas given to Pedro Alvarez Cabral, who carried withhim a number of Franciscan monks to convert the nationsof the East, and 1200 fighting men to strike terror intothose who might seem disposed to treat him with hostility.h 4104 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Cabral was accompanied by able officers, and appearsto have been himself a navigator of eminent abilities.Aware of the difficulties and delays likely to be experiencednear the coast of Africa from adverse winds andcurrents, he formed the resolution of holding his. coursefar to the west of that continent, until he should arrivenear the latitude of the Cape of Good Hope; and heactually persevered in this south-westerly course, until,in 17° southern latitude, he discovered land, to whichhe gave the name of Santa Cruz. He took possessionof the country for the crown of Portugal ; and the crosswhich he erected on that occasion is still preserved inBrazil.* This discovery appeared to him of such importance,that he immediately sent back a ship to Portugalto announce it : and although Vincent YanezPinzon had visited the same coast a few months earlier,the court of Spain relinquished, in this instance, therights of priority; and the claims of the Portuguese tothe sovereignty of Brazil were never disputed. ThusCabral, with singular sagacity, chose at once the verycourse which is now usually taken by ships bound toIndia ; and his boldness appears more worthy of admirationwhen contrasted with the timidity which confinedPortuguese seamen, a few years before, to short strugglingvoyages along the shores of Africa.The gleam of success which shone in the commencementof Cabral's voyage was soon overcast with the darkestadversity. In the passage from Brazil to the Cape ofGood Hope the fleet encountered the most tempestuousweather. Furious hurricanes and a raging sea continuedfor twenty days with little intermission. Four shipsfoundered in the gale; and one of these was commandedby Bartholomew Diazz, the intrepid mariner who firstdiscovered the Cape of Good Hope. It was not allottedto him to witness the value of the discovery to which hehad so largely contributed, nor does he appear to havereaped distinctions from his sovereign commensuratewith his merit. But Canoes has compensated him for• Kindly. Narrative of a Voyage to Brazil, p. 2JZCHAP. VIII. CONQUESTS OP THE PORTUGUESE. 105the neglect of courts. That great poet represents himas perishing by no vulgar fate; but as engulfed in theabysses of the ocean, to satisfy the vengeance of thegenius of the Stormy Cape, upon whose repose he haddared to intrude.Cabral stayed some time at Mozambique to refit theshattered remnant of his fleet, and then steered forIndia. As his armament, though reduced to only sixships, was still strong enough to inspire fear, he wastreated with attention and respect by all the nativeprinces. The zamorin of Calicut, now acquainted withthe formidable power of the Portuguese, was willing toatone for his equivocal treatment of DeGama; and withthis view gave Cabral a house, by a legal deed engrossedin letters of gold ; permitted him to erect over it thearms or standard of Portugal, to appoint a factor orconsul for his nation, and to open magazines for thepurchase of goods. This friendship, however, had butashort continuance. Cornea, the factor, and about fiftyPortuguese, who dealt with the natives rather as conquerorsthan merchants, fell victims to an ebullition ofpopular anger provoked by their own arrogance. Cabralthen sailed to Cochin, Coilan, and Cananore ; receivedassurances of friendship from the comparatively feeblechieftains of these cities; and, having freighted his shipswith rich cargoes, proceeded to return home, with ambassadorsfrom these three princes. He doubled theCape without difficulty, and arrived at Lisbon in July,1501. Notwithstanding his discovery of Brazil, andthe ability and spirit with which he had conducted himselfin India, yet, owing to the loss of life which hadattended his expedition, he was treated as one who hadmet with but dubious success.Some months before the return of Cabral, the king ofPortugal had sent Juan de Nova to meet him with asquadron of four ships. On his outward voyage DeNova fell in with Ascension Island in 8° south latitude.He missed Cabral's fleet, but arrived safely inIndia, where he contributed to raise the warlike MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.nation of the Portuguese : he defeated a numerous fleetsent against him by the zamorin of Calicut ; took in richcargoes at Cananore and Cochin; and on his return homediscovered the island of St, Helena, of which he gaveso favourable a description that the Portuguese admiralsreceived instructions to touch there for the future forrefreshments.If the three voyages already undertaken to India didnot yield large profits, they had the effect, at least,of nourishing great hopes. No difficulty was now experiencedin raising the funds requisite for the equipmentof new expeditions; and the king, persuaded ofthe necessity of sending a strong armament, where somuch opposition was likely to be encountered, gaveorders for the preparation of twenty good-sized ships.Vasco de Gama was induced to leave his retirementand take the command of this fleet. In the springof the year 1502, he sailed from Lisbon, and, arrivingwithout any accident at Quiloa, compelled the kingof that place to become tributary to the king of Portugal,and to agree to the annual payment of two thousandcrowns of gold. From Quiloa he stood across theocean to India, and in his way fell in with a groupof islands, to which he gave the name of the Admiral'sIsles. They form a part of the cluster at present bestknown as the Seychelles.When the Portuguese admiral made his appearancein the Indian seas with an increased force, the friendlysovereigns of Cananore and Cochin hastened to receivehim with warm congratulations. The Christians ofIndia, or, as they are generally called, the Christiansof St. Thomas, entreated of him to leave a squadron fortheir protection, when returning to Europe; a request towhich he very willingly assented. The zamorin of Calicutin the mean time fitted out a fleet to attack the Portuguese;but De Gama won a complete and easy victory.Two ships were captured, containing immense riches ;for, besides gold and silver plate to a great value, therewas on board one of them an idol of pure gold weighingCHAP. VIII. CONQUESTS OF THE PORTUGUESE. 107sixty pounds ; the eyes formed by emeralds of greatsize, and in the breast was a ruby as large as a chestnut.Vasco de Gama freighted his ships with the most valuableproductions of India, and returned to Lisbon withoutthe occurrence of any accident. He was received, onlanding, with the utmost joy; and the tribute of theking of Quiloa, in a silver basin, was carried beforehim.Vincent Sores, in the mean time, remained in theIndian seas, with six large ships. As his chief objectwas the acquisition of wealth, he totally neglected theinterests of his allies on the coast of Malabar, and cruisedoff the Red Sea to capture prizes. He was the first Portuguesewho visited the island of Scotia, or who coastedthe shores of Arabia Felix. But his avarice controlledhis prudence; and, neglecting the advice he received,not to visit the Arabian seas before the tempestuous seasonwas over, he perished with all his treasures.In the year 1503, Francisco de Albuquerque conducteda fleet of nine ships to India. His nephew,Alfonso de Albuquerque, who afterwards acquired sogreat a reputation in India, commanded one of thesquadrons. From the first arrival of the Portuguese inthe eastern seas, they had proved a source of jealousiesand wars among the native princes; some of whom weredetermined to repulse those new and dangerous visitors,while others felt inclined to give them a favourablereception. The king of Cochin was among the latternumber. The partiality which he had manifested towardsthe strangers provoked the hostility of the comorinof Calicut, their implacable enemy ; and, unableto resist so powerful an adversary, he had been compelledto fly, and abandon his dominions. But on thearrival of Albuquerque the balance of victory wasquickly changed. The forces of the zamorin were immediatelydriven from Cochin, and the fugitive princewas reinstated in his kingdom. In return for this importantservice, he granted the Portuguese permission tobuild a fort in Cochin. The work was soon finished.108 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.and the fort received the name of St. Ago. A churchwas erected at the same time, and dedicated to St. Bartholomew.In this manner the Portuguese nation, as itshistorians inform us, became possessed of dominion bothspiritual and temporal in India. The Albuquerque,leaving behind them a squadron of three ships, anda hundred and fifty men in the fort at Cochin, setsail for Europe with a very rich cargo. Francisco andthe ships under his command were never heard ofmore : but Alfonso arrived safe in Lisbon ; and, amongother things, brought the king forty pounds of largepearls, a diamond of extraordinary size, and two horsesthe one Persian, the other an Arab — which werehighly prized, being the first of those generous racesseen in Portugal.Conquest in India was now begun; and the king ofPortugal deemed it expedient to confirm the first stepstowards power, by assuming the style and exterior ofregular authority. He accordingly selected Don FranciscoAlmeyda, a nobleman of courage and experience,for the chief command in the East, and gave him thetitle of viceroy and governor-general of the Indies; assigninghim, at the same time, guards for his personanumber of chaplains, and whatever was thought necessaryto give an air of grandeur to his office. Almeydasailed from Lisbon in March, 1 507, with a considerablefleet; and having stormed the city of Mom baa, on theeastern coast of Africa, and reduced the inhabitantsto slavery, he arrived in India without any accident.The success of the viceroy justified the high opinionentertained of his abilities. Under his government, thePortuguese rapidly increased their possessions in India,extended their discoveries in every direction, and carriedtheir arrogant sense of superiority so far as to seize allvessels which were not provided with a passport orletter of protection from the viceroy. Almeyda, havinglost his son in a sea-fight with the Egyptians, who hadjoined the zamorin and other enemies of the Portuguese,was resolved on taking vengeance. He sailed, accord-chap.VIII. CONQUESTS OP THE PORTUGUESE. 109ingle, from Cananore, with a fleet of nineteen vessels,and attacking Kabul, reduced it to ashes. No provisionscould be procured here, the country having been desolatedby locusts, great quantities of which were foundin pots, preserved by the natives for food. The Portuguesefound them pleasing to the palate, and not unlikeshrimps in flavour. Almeyda came next to Diu, a cityat that time in the power of Male 1 .: Azz, a Russian renegade.Here he found the combined fleets of Egypt,Cambay, and Calicut. An engagement immediatelyensued, in which the Portuguese obtained a completevictory, purchased with little loss on their side. Theplunder of the enemies' ships was very rich; and a greatnumber of volumes, in many languages, are said tohave been found in them. The whole coast between Diuand Cochin being subdued, and the time of Almeyda'sviceroyalty having expired, the government devolved onAlfonso de Albuquerque. Almeyda reluctantly resignedhis power, and sailed for Europe in November, 1509.On passing the Cape of Good Hope, he was overjoyed tofind events so far falsify the predictions of the witchesof Cochin, who prophesied that he should not live topass it. But shortly after, his ships putting into the bayof Saldanha", a little to the north of the Cape, he wentashore, and was killed, with fifty of his crew, in aquarrel with the savages. The unhappy fate of Almeydawas sincerely lamented by the king of Portugal.Alfonso de Albuquerque, Who succeeded Almeyda inthe power but not in the title of viceroy, had alreadyrisen to the highest reputation in India. His attacks onOrmuz, in the Persian Gulf, although unsuccessful, hadshown how bold and comprehensive were his designs;and now that he was invested with the chief command,he displayed an unwearied activity along with boundlessambition. The first measure of his government was toattack Calicut, which he reduced to ashes : he thenturned his arms against Goa, one of the most importantcommercial cities of India. The Moors, who held theplace, made an obstinate resistance, but were at length110 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.overpowered and put to the sword. Albuquerque erecteda fort and coined silver and copper money at Goa, whichhe designed to be the chief of the Portuguese possessionsin the East. It became, in 1559., the seat of the governor,and of an archbishop and primate of the Indies.The next exploit of Albuquerque was of a still morebrilliant character. In the year 1509, Almeyda haddespatched Sequeira with a small squadron to makediscoveries in the East. This officer directed his courseto Malacca, where he was received with feigned demonstrationsof warm friendship. Suspecting treachery, hedeclined the invitations he received to attend a grandfestival prepared for him by the king ; but of his companions,who went on shore to buy merchandise, somewere killed and a great many made prisoners. Sequeiraretaliated by plundering several richly laden vessels alongthe coast, and then returned to Portugal. Albuquerquenow prepared to punish the affront offered to the Portuguesename, by the subjugation of Malacca. He set sailfrom Cochin in May, 1511, with an armament of nineteenships and 1400 righting men. On his arrival offthe coast of Sumatra, he received friendly messages fromsome of the kings of that island. Among the Malayscaptured at sea was a chieftain who had acted a conspicuouspart in the treachery practised on Sequeira's crew.As soon as he was recognised he was pierced with anumber of mortal wounds, but, to the astonishment ofall, shed not one drop of blood ; when, however, theIndians (who discovered the amulet) took from his armacertain bracelet of bone, he bled copiously. Thisbracelet was considered a most valuable prize, and broughtto Albuquerque. The Moorish sovereigns of Malaccawithstood the assaults of the Portuguese but a few days.They were killed, with their followers, or driven fromthe city, which was immediately peopled by Malayansand other natives of the East. The conquerors foundhere so rich a booty that the fifth reserved for the kingwas bought on the spot by merchants for 200,000 piecesof gold. And they took, say the veracious historians ofCHAP. VIII. CONQUESTS OF THE PORTUGUESE. IllPortugal, 3000 pieces of cannon. Albuquerque built afort and a church at Malacca, and then set sail for thecoast of Malabar ; but on his passage, near the coast ofSumatra, he encountered a violent storm, which destroyedthe greatest part of his fleet, with all the riches on board.The vessel in which he himself sailed struck on a rock ;and just as he was putting off from the wreck in thelong boat, he saw a young man fall from one of themasts of the ship into the sea. The general sprang tohis assistance, and saved him ; and by this heroic act,perhaps, raised himself higher in the estimation of hisfollowers than by his most important conquests.Nothing was wanting now but the conquest of Ormuzto render the Portuguese perfect masters of the commerceof India. Albuquerque had formerly attempted to constructa fort there, but without success : his power beingnow increased, he proceeded to accomplish his design.The king of Ormuz, a weak and spiritless prince, offeredno resistance: he admitted Albuquerque into the citadel,surrendered all his artillery, assigned the Portuguesesome of the best houses in the town for their factory,and ordered their flag to be displayed on the palace.A short time after the return of Albuquerque to Goa, inDecember, 1515, he was seized with a violent illness,which carried him off in a few days, at the age of sixty-three.The epithet great has been affixed to his nameby the gratitude of his countrymen ; yet he does notseem to have possessed any merit but the vulgar one ofbeing a conqueror ; and it must be remembered that hefought with his inferiors. He was a lawless soldier,totally ignorant or regardless of the rights of nations,and not often attentive to those of humanity. Theaffairs of the Portuguese in India were raised by him tothe highest state of prosperity, and obviously began todecline not long after his death, — a circumstance toolightly ascribed by historians to the inability of his successors: but a dominion reared wholly on violence hasno natural stability; nor can rapine and spoliation alwaysyield a rich harvest. Among the wild schemes which112 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.he conceived, were those of desolating Egypt hy divertingthe course of the Nile in Abyssinia ; and of plunderingMecca, by an expedition of 300 horsemen from thePersian Gulf.The preceding rapid sketch of the rise and progressof the Portuguese empire in India will suffice for the objectof this work, and show how the foundations of thatpolitical edifice were laid, from which European intelligenceand activity afterwards issued forth to examineall the recesses of the East. As soon as the Portugueseobtained a settlement in India, and adopted the plan ofalways maintaining a fleet in those seas, their ardour toarrive at those rich countries which their hopes still descriedon the bounds of their geographical knowledgeacquired fresh vigour; and they prosecuted their researcheswith an alacrity and good fortune which maybebest estimated from a brief notice of their severaldiscoveries in the order in which they occurred.In the year 1506, when Alfonso de Albuquerquewas proceeding to India, a violent tempest dispersed hisfleet. Tristan de Acunha, one of his captains, wasdriven so far to the south that his crew suffered severelyfrom the cold : he fell in with those sequestered islandswhich still bear his name, and which are at present inhabitedby a few English families. At the same time,Avaro Telez ran so far to the east that he came toSumatra, and thence returned to the coast of Arabia ;thus making an imperfect discovery of the Indian Archipelago.The same gale forced Emanuel de Menses toMadagascar, which he named the island of St. Lawrence.In the same year Soared discovered the Maldives, whichimmediately attracted the covetous regards of the Portuguese.But as these usurpers were never able to obtaina firm footing in that insular kingdom, they affected todespise it. The sovereign of the Maldives, nevertheless,is decorated with the pompous title of king of thirteenprovinces and of 12,000 islands. Ceylon naturally followedin the order of discovery. Lorenzo Almeyda, theson of the viceroy, landed on that fine island in 1506,CHAP. VIII. CONQUESTS OF THE PORTUGUESE. 113anil erected a column, with an inscription importing thathe took possession of that country for the king of Portugal.He treated at the same time with the nativesovereign, whose consent he extorted to the payment ofa large annual tribute of cinnamon.It has been already related how Sequeira, in 1509,made a voyage to Malacca. He found Sumatra governedthen, as at present, by a number of petty princes, whosewarlike propensities were so well exercised by theirunceasing hostilities with one another, that the Portuguesewere never able to make any impression on them.This island," says Gallant *, " is the first land whereinwe knew men's flesh to be eaten, by certain people wholive in the mountains, called Backs (Battas), who areaccustomed to gild their teeth. They affirm that theflesh of black men is sweeter than that of white. Theoxen, kine, and fowls of that country are as black intheir flesh as any ink." Although the merit of beingthe first to penetrate so far eastward as Malacca is generallyascribed to Sequeira, it is hard to avoid suspectingthat he had been preceded by some of his adventurouscountrymen. It is barely possible that the Portugueseshould have deferred so long their visit to a great emporium,to which they had destined an expedition fiveyears before ; for the fleet in which Amerigo Vespuccisailed on his last voyage, in 1504, and which was probablythat commanded by Coeli, appears to have hadMalacca for its objectsThe Moluccas, or Spice Islands, though so long theobjects of research, were not discovered, or rather reached,by the Portuguese till the year 1511. Francisco Serranoand Diego d'Abreu were then sent by Albuquerque tomake discoveries towards the east ; and being separatedby a storm, the former penetrated as far as Ternate,but the latter visited only the island of Amboyna. Theyspent about eight years in these discoveries, duringHist, des Descubrimientos.f Igitur ex Lisbon port . . . exivbnus, cum propositi), insula unaversus horizontal {prientem '/) postal invisendi, quite Mercia decatur, etdivitiarum multarum/atnosa, ljc. Navig. quart.VOL. II. I114 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.all which time they experienced the most kind and hospitabletreatment from the natives. Serrano perished onhis return home. In 1521, the Portuguese proceededto take possession of the Spice Islands. A strong armamentequipped for this purpose was despatched under thecommand of George de Britto; but he, making a descenton the coast of Sumatra, in order to plunder a certaintemple which was reported to contain immense riches,lost his life in the attempt, and the command devolvedon Antonio de Britto. When this officer arrived in theMoluccas, the natives contended with one another forthe honour of entertaining their new visiter. Such wastheir simplicity and want of foresight, that each wassolicitous to obtain for his own country the distinctionof being elected by the Portuguese as the seat ofa military establishment. Ternate at length obtainedthe dangerous preference : a fort was built there ; andas the degeneracy of manners is naturally increased bydistance from control, the Portuguese of the Moluccasfar surpassed their superstitious and rapacious countrymenof western India in the heinousness of their crimes.De Britto was astonished to find in the Moluccas thecompanions of Magellan, who had reached them in thecourse of the first voyage round the world : these heseized and imprisoned ; and the native islanders nosooner became acquainted with Europeans, than theywere presented with the odious spectacle of their violentanimosities.Soared, the successor of Albuquerque in the governmentof India, was the first who thought of establishinga trade with China. For this purpose he sent Andrea,in 1517, with a squadron of eight ships laden withmerchandise, to Canton, together with Those Perez asambassador from the king of Portugal. The Chineseregarded these strangers with suspicion and mistrust.Only two of the ships were allowed to proceed up theriver to Canton, on board of which were Andrea andthe ambassador Perez. The former of these completelywon the confidence of the Chinese by his conciliatingCHAP. VIII. CONQUESTS OF THE PORTUGUESE. 113demeanour and upright conduct, and more particularlyby his advertising beforehand the time fixed for hisdeparture, that all who had demands on him or his crewmight apply for satisfaction. Pereira in the mean timeproceeded towards Pekin. Matters were in this favourabletrain, when the Portuguese, who had remained atthe mouth of the river, unable to restrain for a shortseason their habitual rapacity, began to trade with theChinese, and to display towards them the same insolentlicentiousness in which they were accustomed to indulgeamong the other nations of the East. As soon as thegovernor of the province learned these proceedings, heassembled a great naval force, and surrounded the Portugueseships, which he would probably have captured,had not a sudden storm dispersed his fleet and allowedthem an opportunity of making their escape. Perez,however, who was on his road to court when this tookplace, became the victim of his countrymen's misconduct.He was sent back to Canton in chains, and thrown intoa dungeon, where he lingered for several years, till deathput a period to his sufferings.In the year 1542, three Portuguese seamen, Antoniode Mota, Francisco Zeimoro, and Antonio Pexoto, desertedfrom the ship in which they were employed onthe coast of Siam, and embarking in a Chinese junk,sailed towards the east. Storms drove them to Japan,and they were the first Europeans who visited that celebratedempire. But in the same year Japan was visitedby a Portuguese adventurer of greater notoriety, andwhose wanderings shall form the subject of the succeedingchapter.i 2116 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.CHAP. IX.FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO.FIRST ADVENTURES OF MENDEZ PINTO. HE GOES TO INDIA.VISITS ABYSSINIA. CARRIED IN CHAINS TO MOCHA.SOLD AS A SLAVE. RANSOMED, AND GOES TO OOA. SENTAS AMBASSADOR TO THE BATTAS. WONDERS OF SUMATRA.HE PROCEEDS TO AARU. SHIPWRECKED AND CAPTURED.HIS MISERY. REDEEMED, AND GOES TO Patna. AttackedBY PIRATES. HIS ESCAPE. TURNS PIRATE. CapturesA BRIDE. WRECKED ON PIRATEs' ISLAND. — SINGULARDELIVERANCE. DEATH OF Cosa Ace. SAILS IN SEARCHOF CALEMPLUY. ADVENTURES DURING THE VOYAGE.WRECKED. SENT A PRISONER TO NANKIN. REMARKS ONTHE CHINESE. PROCEEDS TO PEKIN. MEETS WITH Christians.CONDEMNED TO LABOUR AT QUANSY. TATAR IN-Vision. HOW TREATED BY THE TATARS. REACHES CO-cinchona.JOINS A PIRATE. CAST AWAY ON JAPAN.CURES THE KING OF Bingo's SON.— DISMISSED. WreckedON THE GREAT LEQUIO. — CONDEMNED TO DEATH.saved BY THE COMPASSION OF THE WOMEN. MISSION TOPEGU AND AVA. THE IDOL TINAGOOGOO. PINTO TURNSJESUIT. REMARKS ON HIS HISTORY.When the Portuguese had once established their dominionin the East, they no longer spread themselves abroadto gratify curiosity, or for the liberal purpose of enlargingtheir knowledge of the globe. The wealth of the Indiesand the weakness of the natives called forth their worstpassions. Avarice, inflamed by religious bigotry, becametheir chief spring of action, and they are thenceforwardto be viewed not so much in the light of skilful andintrepid navigators, as in that of rapacious adventurers,military merchants, pirates, and missionaries. The personalnarrative of one of the most extraordinary adventurersof that remarkable age remains to us, and in itwe find marked out not only the farthest extent of thegeographical knowledge of the Portuguese in the sixteenthcentury, but also an exact and vivid picture of theirmanners.CHAP. IX. FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO. 117Ferdinand Mended Pinto, the author and hero of thisnarrative, was one of the first Europeans who visitedJapan ; and if the geographical notices which occur inhis volume are too often obscure and unintelligible, hecontributes, on the other hand, to throw a light on thehistory of geography, by revealing to us the habits andcharacter of those of his countrymen who first reachedthe remotest countries of the East.Mended Pinto was born of humble parents, in thetown of Monte mor Ovelho, in Portugal. When abouteleven or twelve years of age, his uncle, desirous toadvance him in life, brought him to Lisbon, where heplaced him in the service of a lady of high rank. Butinthis situation he was guilty of some crime, or, as heexpresses it, " an accident befell him, that cast him intomanifest peril of his life." Being constrained to fly, heembarked at Petra in a small bark which he found readyto go to sea. But the vessel was hardly out of sight ofland when she was captured by a French pirate, which,abandoning this prize shortly after for one of greatervalue, landed the wretched captives and Mended Pintoamongst the rest, " covered with nothing but the stripesthey had received the day before." After this he enteredinto the service of Francisco de Faria, who recommendedhim to the commander of St. Jago. But finding thepittance allowed in great men's houses insufficient for hissupport, he left his master, for the purpose of making avoyage to the Indies, which he believed to be the bestway to rid himself of his poverty.In March, 1537, he commenced his voyage. Arrivedat Diu, he joined an expedition about to sail to the RedSea. The mission was well received at the Abyssiniancourt, where our author visited the mother of PresterJohn, and gratified her curiosity by telling her the nameof the " holy father the pope, and also how many kingsthere were in Christendom." The object of this missionwas to form some alliances that might countervail theformidable power of the Turks in the Red Sea. ThePortuguese, on their return, espied three Turkish vesselsi 3118 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.to which they immediately gave chace. But when theycame up with them, the Turks proved strongest, andonly eleven out of fifty-four Portuguese survived thebattle. The captives were carried to Mocha, and paradedthrough the town chained all together. The people,incited by their priests, vied with each other in insultingthe Christians. They were then cast into a dungeon,where they remained seventeen days without anyfood but a little oatmeal or dry peas soaked in water.The captives were conducted several times to themarket-place, and exposed to sale; but owing to thecivil commotions which raged in the town no purchasercame forward, and they were glad to fly back for shelterto their dungeon. At last, when the disturbance wasover, the seven Portuguese who still remained alive weresold into slavery : and as for Mended Pinto, fortune, hissworn enemy, as he tells us, made him fall into thehands of a Greek renegado, who used him so cruellythat he "was several times upon the point of poisoninghimself. But this tyrant, afraid of losing his slave,disposed of him to a Jew, who carried him to Ormuz,where he was ransomed by the Portuguese governor.He now embarked in the armament of Pedro VasCoutinho, to return to India. Being defeated in anattack on a Turkish galley, they seemed disposed toavenge their ill success on their ally the queen of Snore;but she assured them, by her ambassador, " that she wasas much afflicted at the notice of their disaster, as shecould have been if she had been made to eat cows' fleshat the principal gate of the temple where her father layinterred." The Portuguese squadron hastened after itsdefeat to Goa, where Mended Pinto engaged in the serviceof Pedro de Faria, who was proceeding as governorto Malacca. As soon as Faria arrived at the seat ofhis government, he was surrounded by the envoys ofthe neighbouring chieftains, soliciting his favour andprotection. Among these was the ambassador from theking of the Battas, a warlike nation of Sumatra, bearinggifts of precious woods, and a letter written on the barkCHAP. IX. FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO. 119of the palm-tree ; and at the same time praying for theassistance of the Portuguese against the people of Ache.Faria granted his request, and dismissed the ambassadorwith presents of " fire-pots, darts, and murdering pieces,wherewith he departed from the fortress so contentedthat he shed tears for joy."When the ambassador of the Battas was about toreturn to Sumatra, it was thought advisable to send aPortuguese agent with him, and Mended Pinto was theperson selected for the purpose. He was instructed toobserve carefully the condition of the natives, and especiallyto learn whatever was to be known respecting theIsle of Gold. While ascending the river in Sumatra,Pinto saw a number of strange animals, which, from thedelicate regard that he had to his reputation for veracity,he is fearful to describe. The strange creature which hecalls the caquesscitan is probably the cassowary, whichhe fantastically describes as hopping and flying togetherlike the grasshopper. He saw serpents with heads aslarge as calves ; and was told that they hunted their preyin this manner : — " They get up into a tree, and windingtheir tails about some branch of it, let their bodieshang down to the root, and then laying one of their earsclose to the ground, they hearken whether they can perceiveany thing stir during the stillness of the night ; sothat if an ox, a boar, or any other beast, doth chanceto pass by, they presently seize on it, and so carry itup into the tree, where they devour it." In this storyit is easy to recognise an embellished description of theboa constrictor. The great baboons, which our authorinforms us frequently attack and defeat the negroes ofthe country, are obviously the formidable pongos.When Pinto arrived at the court of the king of theBattas, he was received with every manifestation ofwelcome. " Man of Malacca," said the old womanwho conducted him to the royal presence, " thy arrivalin the king my master's land is as agreeable unto himas a shower of rain is to a crop of rice in dry and hotweather; wherefore enter boldly, and be afraid of 4120 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV,thing." Pinto made liberal promises to the king, ofPortuguese assistance, and vowed not to leave him tillsuch time as he returned the conqueror of all his enemies.The sincerity of his professions may be estimated fromhis remarking, " This poor king presently believed allthat I said to be true, chiefly because it was conformableto his desire ; so that, rising out of his thronewhereon he sat, I saw him go and fall on his kneesbefore the skeleton of a cow's head set up against thewall, whose horns were gilt, and crowned with flowers."Notwithstanding the encouragement derived from theproffered aid of the Portuguese, the king of the Battaswas unable to make head against his enemies, the peopleof Ache, who exultingly styled themselves " drinkersof the troubled blood of miserable Cares, who aretyrannical men and usurpers, in a supreme degree, ofother men's kingdoms in the Indies and the islands ofthe sea." Such were the strong terms in which theyexpressed their well-founded detestation of the Portuguese.Pinto, escaping from this troubled scene,proceeded on an embassy to the king of Aaru. Butbefore he left the king of the Battas, he learned fromhim that the Isle of Gold is situated beyond the riverof Calendar, 160 leagues from Sumatra, in 5' south,environed by many shelves of sand and dangerous currents.On his return from the king of Aaru, Pinto sufferedshipwreck, and was obliged to crawl with his companionsthrough the deep mud that lined the shore, tormentedby myriads of insects, and in constant fear ofbeing attacked by the serpents and wild beasts thathaunted the neighbouring woods. One of his companionsdied in his arms. With the remaining dire hereached a small river, which it was necessary to cross ;but the two foremost of the party had scarcely reachedthe middle of the stream, when they were seized by alligatorsand dragged to the bottom. Pinto and his survivingcomrade continued standing in the sea, as thesafest place they could choose. A small vessel at lengthCHAP. IX. FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO. 121approached the shore, in which they embarked to returnto Malacca. The boat's crew, however, soon commencedbeating the two Portuguese, to force them to confesswhere their treasures lay concealed. Seeing that theflogging proved ineffectual, they supposed that theircaptives had swallowed their gold, and in consequenceadministered to the companion of Mended Pinto so violentan emetic, that he died soon after; and Pintohimself escaped similar treatment only from the ill successof this experiment. He was dragged ashore nearlydead from famine and ill usage; but as his weaknessmade him an unprofitable slave, no food was given to him,and " he was turned," he says, " a grazing like a horse."A Mahometan merchant, hearing that he had friends atMalacca, at length put an end to his sufferings, and redeemedhim for a sum equivalent to about seventeenshillings and sixpence of our money.Having recovered at Malacca from the effects of hislate ill usage, he returned to proceed to Pan and Patanaon a mercantile voyage, in the hopes of mending his fortune.He had hardly arrived at the former place, whena popular commotion broke out, and the mob, freed fromauthority, attacked the stores of the Portuguese, andcarried off all their goods. Our adventurers, therefore,were glad to escape to Patana, where a subscription wasmade by their countrymen to relieve their present distress,and they obtained permission from the king toindemnify themselves on shipping belonging to theguilty city. In consequence, they soon after attacked,and captured three Chinese junks belonging to merchantsof Pan, as they declared, though it is probable theywere not very scrupulous in their choice. Antonio deFaria, unable to dispose of his large stock of merchandiseat Patana, w r as persuaded to try the populous cityof Lugor. His wealth was all embarked, and MendedPinto proceeded with the cargoes. But when near theplace of their destination they were attacked furiouslyby pirates, and quickly overpowered. Pinto and threeothers, of whom one was soon drowned, jumped overt22 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.board to save themselves by swimming. The remainderof the crew were butchered by the pirates, who sunkthe Portuguese vessel, having first taken out her cargo.Pinto and his two comrades gained the shore near themouth of the river of Lugor. Here they made theirway with difficulty, through mud and deep marshes,in vain imploring those who passed up and down theriver to approach the shore and lend them some assistance.At length they were relieved by a vessel ascendingthe river; and found, when taken on board, that theywere indebted for their preservation to the compassionof a lady who had learned from misfortunes to hearkento the calls of humanity. Her father, sons, and twobrothers, had been torn in pieces by the king of Siam'selephants. This charitable lady furnished our adventurerswith the means of returning to Patana.tien Antonio de Faria learned the fate of his vesselsand the ruin of his hopes, he became furious with despair.It was impossible for him to return to Malacca,and to face his creditors in his present poverty. Hepreferred rather to take the short but dangerous road towealth, and to turn pirate ; and covering his avaricewith a show of honest feeling, he vowed to avenge thedeath of the fourteen Portuguese who had been murderedby the pirate. The old lady who had so kindlyrelieved Mended Pinto likewise informed him that thepirate in question was Coja Acemm, a native of Guzerat,an implacable enemy of the Portuguese, in battle withwhom his father and two brothers had lost their lives.Faria found no difficulty in collecting fifty-five desperadoesto join him in his enterprise ; and Pinto, whowas unable to return to Malacca, where he owed fivehundred ducats, and who " had been able to save nothingbut his miserable carcass, wounded in three places by ajavelin, and his skull cracked with a stone," was amongthe number.Many were the adventures which our heroes met withat the commencement of their cruise, and in all theycame off with success. They pillaged towns, capturedCHAP. IX. FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO. 123native pirates, and seemed to have thought that in rightof their nation they were not bound by any restraints ofmorality or justice. On one occasion they observedseveral small vessels approaching, with music playing,banners flying, and other demonstrations of rejoicing.On board of one of these was the daughter of the governorof Cole, betrothed to a neighbouring chieftain,who was to have met her in this place. The bride,mistaking the ships of the Portuguese for those of herdestined spouse, sent a letter, couched in the hyperbolicallanguage of the East, to reproach him for hiscoldness. She assured him, " that if the feeble sex ofa woman would permit her, she would fly to kiss histardy feet as the hungry falcon flies after the fearfulheron." The Portuguese in the mean time lay concealed,their Chinese seamen alone remaining on deck.The bride's vessel, and those which attended her, werecaptured without resistance. The lady and her brothers,being young, white, and well favoured," with abouttwenty of the seamen, were retained; the rest, who weregood for nothing, were sent ashore. The bridegroomsoon after made his appearance with five vessels, andsaluted the Portuguese as he passed, " with great storeof music and show of gladness," ignorant that they werecarrying off' his bride.After Faria and his associates had cruised up anddown seven months and a half without hearing of CojaAcemm, they agreed to winter in Siam, and divide thespoil. This agreement being sworn to and signed byall, they went and anchored under the island De losLadroness, or Pirates' Island. Here a violent hurricaneovertook them ; and about two hours after midnight thefour vessels ran foul of one another, dashed on shore,and went to pieces. Four hundred and eighty personswere drowned : of fifty-three who were saved, onlytwenty-three were Portuguese.Faria, a second time reduced to utter poverty, foundstrength in despair. He even endeavoured to drawconsolation from religion, while he abandoned every MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. ROOK IV.ciple of morality, and assured his followers, that as Godnever did ill but for a greater good, there was no doubtthat for the 500,000 ducats they had lost, he would permitthem to rob 600,000 more. One day, when ouradventurers were scattered in the woods, gathering fruitsfor their subsistence, a small vessel was seen to approachthe shore: the Chinese, to whom she belonged, aboutthirty in number, jumped on land, and commencedlighting fires, drying their clothes, and amusing themselvesas men weary of a long voyage and suspectingno harm. Faria in the mean time drawing his companionstogether, assured them that the boat was sentby a special providence to their relief; and as superstitionis naturally selfish, they readily gave credit to amiracle wrought in their own favour. Their measureswere soon concerted; and a signal being given, theyrushed suddenly to the shore, made themselves mastersof the boat, and stood out to sea. The Chinese, whowere taken by surprise, stood stupefied with horror andamazement when they found themselves left thus helplessand forlorn.Proceeding in this small vessel to the port of Ingram,our heroes boarded a large junk in the dead of night,and, getting out to sea in their new prize, shortly afterjoined company with a Chinese pirate, who promisedto serve them faithfully on condition of receiving onethird of the spoil. This reinforcement arrived at alucky season. Faria received intelligence of his deadlyenemy Coja Acemm, whom he proceeded immediately toencounter. The battle was desperately contended ; butthe victory remained with the Portuguese. The bodyof Coja Acemm was cut in pieces, and thrown overboard ;five of his followers, who remained alive, were cast intothe hold, in order to be tortured till they might disclosethe valuable secrets of his hidden treasures. The victorssailed to Liampoo (Ning-po), where they were receivedwith the greatest honours by the Portuguese merchants.Faria was met on his arrival by a splendid procession,and conducted to the town, where preparations had beenCHAP. IX. FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO. 125made for his reception. When the Chinese enquiredwho was the person treated with so much distinction,it was answered, " that his father shod the horseswhereon the king of Portugal rode ; and the Chinese,believing all this to be true, cried out, in admiration,Truly there are great kings in the world whereof ourancient historians, through ignorance, hath made nomention.' " The public rejoicing at the arrival of Fariaconcluded with a mass and sermon, which our piousauthor ventures to criticise in a vein of jocularity. " Massbeing ended, the sermon followed, that was made byEstevano Roguery, an ancient man, and curate of theplace, who, to speak the truth, through discontinuanceof preaching, was but little versed in pulpit matters.Howbeit, desiring to show himself that day a learnedman in so remarkable a solemnity, he laboured to makedemonstration of his best rhetoric ; to which effect hegrounded all his sermon on the praises of Antonio deFaria, and that in words so ill placed, and so far fromhis text, that our captain was much ashamed of it ;wherefore some of his friends plucked him three or fourtimes by the surplice to make him give over, but hebeing nettled, cried, ' I will not stop, but will rather saymore, for I speak nothing but what is as true as gospel.In regard whereof let me alone, I pray you ; for Ihave made a vow to God never to desist from praisingthis noble captain, as he deserves it at my hands, forsaving me 7000 ducats' venture that Merit Tardahad of mine in his junk, and was taken from him bythat dog Coja Acemm ; for which let the soul of so curseda rogue and wicked devil be tormented in hell for everand ever : whereunto say all with me, Amen.' "At Liampoo, Faria became acquainted with a Chinesepirate named Similau, who gave him an extravagantaccount of an island called Calempluy, in which werethe tombs of seventeen kings of China, all of gold, besidesimmense treasures of different descriptions. ThePortuguese adventurer, " being naturally curious," asour author observes, resolved to seek and carry off these1 26 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.riches. It is obvious that Similau, when he spoke ofgolden tombs, related a popular story; and it shows inwhat estimation the courage and the prowess of the Portuguesewere held, when a prize too romantically rich tobe sought by a Chinese alone was thought a fit objectfor their ambition. It is not easy to understand thecourse which our author says was followed in this enterprise.They arrived at a port called Buxipalem in49° north, where the climate was cold and the seacrowded with monsters which our author is fearfulto describe. They were now two months and a halfat sea, generally following a north-easterly course, andhad not yet arrived at Calempluy. The Portuguesereproached Similau with steering only by guess, andFaria at one time grew so violent that he threatenedto stab him. Similau, in consequence, made his escape,and his example was followed by thirty-six of the Chineseseamen. Faria, thus left without a guide, persistedin seeking the royal sepulchres, and at length arrived atCalempluy, in the description of which our author maybesuspected of drawing largely on his imagination.The island," he says, " about a league in circuit, isall enclosed with a platform of jasper six and twentyspans high ; the stones being so neatly joined that thewhole wall seemed one piece. Pillars of copper, at intervalsof about forty feet, were ranged on the wall, and oneach of these was the figure of a woman holding a bowlin her hand. Within this gallery were rows of arches,gilt towers, and monstrous figures, cast in metal, withthree hundred and threescore hermitages, dedicated tothe gods of the year. Faria immediately landed, andbreaking into one of the hermitages, began to collectthe silver which was mixed with the bones of the dead,and which was derived, as he was informed by theastonished hermit, from the alms carried with them bythe deceased to support them in the world of the moon,where they live eternally."Faria, while ransacking this place, confessed himselfconscious that it was a very great sin, and declared thatCHAP. IX. FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO. 127it was his intention, at some future period, to atone bypenance for so enormous a crime. To this the Chinesesage replied, " that he who knows these things, anddoth them not, runs far greater danger than he whosins through ignorance." The Portuguese robbers thenwithdrew to their ships, intending to return to the workof pillage with the daylight. But their sins, as ourauthor observes, would not allow them to see the happy-issueof the business.They were hardly on board when they saw fireslighted on the island, and heard bells ringing, fromwhich they concluded that the alarm was given. Fariahastened again on shore in the dead of night, and ran upand down with a frantic desire to carry off some valuableprize ; but it was now too late, and the danger was soimminent that his companions forced him to fly. Theyspread all sail, and stood out to sea, so sad from theirdisappointment that they hardly spoke to one anotherduring the voyage. When they had been about a monthat sea, a furious gale came on in the gulf of Nankin,which reduced them to such distress, that they wereobliged to lighten the ships by every means in theirpower, to cut down their masts, and throw overboardtheir chests full of silver. About midnight, the peoplein Antonio de Faria's ship were heard to cry out " Lordhave mercy upon us !" and when day broke it was foundthat she had disappeared. The other ship was in a sinkingstate, and the crew, as their only chance, ran her uponthe coast, where she instantly went to pieces. FourteenPortuguese were saved; the number of the drowned,including Chinese mariners, was six and thirty. " Thismiserable disaster," says our author, " happened on aMonday, the 5th of August, in the year 1540, for whichthe Lord be praised everlastingly."The shipwrecked pirates met with but an indifferentreception from the Chinese, who seem to have a particulardislike to the appearance of a lawless vagabond.Pinto and his companions were thrust into apond, where they were almost devoured by leeches.128 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Whenever they arrived at a town, they were sure to beexpelled from it with a sound beating. They representedthemselves as " poor natives of Siam," and thefalsehood of their story was probably recognised at once.At length they were sent to Nankin with other criminals,where they were condemned to lose their thumbsand to be whipped. The latter part of the sentence wasimmediately put in execution with such severity thattwo of the party died of it. Here they met a Russian,who," says Pinto, " understood Chinese as well aswe." From Nankin, of which our author gives a copiousdescription, the Portuguese were sent to Pekin, travellingthe greater part of the way by canals. On theroute they met with Christians, the descendants of thosewho had been converted more than a century before byMatthew Escaudel, a Hungarian missionary. They alsomet with a daughter of Those Perez, the unfortunateambassador who had been detained in China some yearsbefore. Pinto's observations with respect to the Chineseare lively and accurate. He remarks the multitude ofthose who dwell upon the rivers. Their mode of rearingwater-fowl ; the good order observed by the commonpeople ; the strictness with which industrious habits areenforced ; the regulations of their markets ; their modeof hatching eggs by artificial heat; their eating withchop-sticks ; with many other particulars, are reportedwith the exactness of an eye-witness. In fine, he observes," I dare boldly say, if my testimony be worthyof credit, that in one and twenty years' space, duringwhich time, with a world of misfortunes, labour, andpain, I traversed the greatest part of Asia, as may appearby this my discourse, I had seen in some countries awonderful abundance of several sorts of victuals andprovisions which we have not in Europe ; yet, withoutspeaking what each of them may have in particular, Ido not think that in all Europe there is so much asthere is in China alone. And the same may be said ofall the rest wherewith heaven hath favoured this climate ;as well for the temperature of the air as that which con-chap.IX. FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO. 12$ceres the policy, riches, and greatness of their estate:but that which gives the greatest lustre unto it is theexact observation of justice; for this country is so wellruled, that it may justly be envied by all others in theworld." This tribute of praise to Chinese justice is singularlycandid in one who had so often felt its severeapplication. The criminals reached Pekin, chained threeand three together, " where for their welcome they hadat their first dash thirty lashes apiece given them."The nine surviving Portuguese, all chained together,were at length conducted to the hall of audience, towhich they had appealed, to hear their final sentence,and were overjoyed to find that they were condemnedto only a year's hard work at the reparations of Quansy.Pinto gives us a minute account of Pekin, where heresided two months and a half, and a description ofwhich, in Chinese, he tells us he brought home withhim to Portugal. He also impudently affirms that heread it. The Portuguese had served about eight monthsof their captivity, when news arrived that the king ofTatary, with a host of 1,800,000 men, had attackedPekin, and that a part of the invading army was advancingagainst Quansy. This place was soon reduced,and the Portuguese slaves were led off by the conquerors.An accident soon brought them into notice. The castleof Nixiamcoo resisted all the efforts of the Tatars; whenJorge Mended, the most resolute of the captives, boastedthat he could take it. The Tatar general embraced hisoffer ; and Mended, with two other Portuguese, led agreat army of Tatars to the assault. Their couragetriumphed, and the Portuguese were thenceforward heldin the highest honour in the camp. The Tatar generaldeclared " that they were almost as resolute as those ofJapan."When our adventurers were led before the king ofTatary, he began by demanding whence they came; towhich they replied that their country was called Portugal,that the king thereof was exceedingly rich and mighty,and that from thence to Pekin was at least three years'130 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.voyage. At this answer the king, not knowing that theworld is so large, testified much surprise, and repeatedlyasked, Pricau $ pricau ? that is, How far ? how far ?Being assured that it was a distance of three years'voyage, he observed, " that there either must be muchambition, or little justice, in the country of these people,since they go so far to conquer other lands." Beingfrustrated in his attempt on China, he thought fit toretreat, the Portuguese still following in his train. Ata town called Quanginau, the king was visited by thetalapicor of Lecount, who, Pinto informs us, is theirpope. This personage granted to the inhabitants ofQuanginau, in recompense for the liberal reception theygave him, that they might be all priests ; and empoweredthem to give bills of exchange on heaven to all who werewilling to pay them for that accommodation. What ourauthor tells us of the talapicor seems to suit very well withthe grand lama of Tibet. The city of Lecount is, heinforms us, " the chiefs of the religion of the Gentiles ;and such it may be as Rome is amongst us." The Portuguese,having obtained permission to depart, travelledwith the ambassadors of Cochin China to the sea-side,where they hoped to find a ship ready to sail to Malacca.In this hope, however, they were disappointed, and wereobliged to engage a small vessel to carry them to Lampoon.But they quarrelled among themselves on the voyage,and behaved so outrageously that the captain of thevessel abandoned them on a desolate island, from whichthey were afterwards picked up by a pirate; and heretheir lawless career commenced again.Their first adventure was an engagement with a pirate,in which five of the eight surviving Portuguese losttheir fives. The junk in which the other three wereembarked escaped from the fight with little injury ;but a violent storm coming on, they were in momentaryexpectation of going to the bottom. The pirate whocommanded the vessel ran for the Sequins or LoochooIslands ; but the wind drove him from his course. Atlength he saw land with fires on it; and running towardsCHAP. IX. FERDINAND Mended PINTO. 131the shore, found anchorage in good shelter. Some ofthe natives soon came aboard, and they found that theyhad arrived at Tanixumaa, one of the islands of Japan.The nautaquim, or governor of the island, began withinterrogating the Portuguese respecting the wonders oftheir country. " The first thing he propounded was,how he had learned from the Chinese and Sequins thatPortugal was far richer and of a larger extent than thewhole empire of China; which we confirmed unto him.The second, how he had likewise been assured that ourking had upon the sea conquered the greatest part of theworld ; which also we averred to be so. The thirds thatour king was so rich in gold and silver, as it was heldfor most certain that he had above two thousand housesfull of it even to the very tops ; but thereunto we answeredthat we could not truly say the number of thehouses, because the kingdom of Portugal was so spacious,so abounding with treasure, and so populous, as it wasimpossible to specify the same."One of the Portuguese, named Diego Zeimoto, gaveto the governor an arquebuss, which the Japanese imitatedwith such skill, that in 1556', when our authorvisited these islands a second time, they were said tohave thirty thousand stand of fire-arms. The king ofBungo, wishing to see the strangers, Mended Pinto wassent to him; and here an accident occurred which hadnearly proved fatal to our hero. He amused himselfoccasionally with shooting birds ; and the natives, whowere ignorant of the composition of gunpowder, used toascribe the effect of the gun to sorcery. One day theson of the king of Bungo took up the gun, and chargingit to the muzzle, fired at a tree ; but the gun burst, andtore the prince's hand in a dreadful manner. The people,supposing that the prince had been killed by the magicalarts of Pinto, called out for vengeance. Our poor adventurerhad no expedient to save his life, but to play thedoctor. He looked as confident as possible ; and " becausethe hurt of the right thumb," he says, " was mostdangerous, I began with that, and gave it seven stitches ;k 2132 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IVwhereas, peradventure, if a surgeon had dressed him, hewould have given it fewer." Covering the wound withtow dipped in the whites of eggs, he bound it up close,and in twenty days the prince was quite cured. Pinto'smedical reputation procured him presents to the value of1500 ducats. The Chinese pirate, with whom they hadarrived, being now ready for sea, the Portuguese set sailfor Liampoo, where they arrived in safety. •When Pinto and his companions told their countrymenresiding there of the wealth of " the new land ofJapan which they had just discovered," and of the greatmarket that might be found there for foreign merchandise,the money-making enthusiasm inflamed bythis news was so great, that in fifteen days no fewerthan nine junks were ready to sail to Japan, most ofthem ill provided for the voyage, and without pilotsacquainted with the navigation. Seven of these vesselswere lost in the passage, and with them perished 600persons ; and merchandise was sunk to the value of300,000 crowns. The junk which carried our authorwas thrown on the rocks near the great Lequio : thegreater part of the crew were drowned, only twenty-fourescaping, among whom were some women. Theislanders seem to have been well acquainted with theiniquities of the Portuguese. When these were broughtbefore the governor, he demanded of them — " I wouldfain know why your countrymen, when they took Malacca,impelled thereto by extreme avarice, killed ourpeople so unmercifully ? " Nevertheless they were aboutto be dismissed, when a Chinese merchant accused themof piracy, and affirmed " that it was the custom of thePortuguese to play the spies in a country under pretenceof trading, and then to make themselves masters of it,like robbers, putting all to the sword they met withal."This charge wrought so powerfully on the king's mind,that he ordered the Portuguese to be quartered, and theirlimbs to be hung up on the public roads.When this sentence was made known, the Portuguesewomen testified their affliction in so violent a manner asCHAP. IX. FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO. 133sensibly to affect the compassionate islanders. The Lequioladies gathered round the sufferers, and, participating intheir sorrow, resolved to intercede in their favour. Theyaccordingly wrote a letter to the king's mother, whomthey styled " a sacred pearl congealed in the greatest shellof the profoundest depth of the waters;" and conjuredher to take pity on the strangers and procure their pardon.Female compassion was not without effect ; thePortuguese were discharged from prison, and providedwith a ship in which they sailed for China. " In thismanner," says Pinto, " we departed from Pungor, thecapital city of the island of Lequio, of which I will heremake a brief relation, to the end that if it shall one dayplease God to inspire the Portugal nation, principally forthe exaltation and increase of the catholic faith, andnext for the great benefit that may redound thereof, toundertake the conquest of this island, they may knowwhere first to begin, as also the commodities of it, andthe easiness of its conquest." The inhabitants (he adds)are little inclined to arms, and altogether unfurnishedwith them.Pinto arrived safely at Liampoo ; whence he returnedto Malacca, little improved in fortune by his adventures.Here the governor, Pedro de Faria, willing to renderhim a service, despatched him on a mission to Martaban,the object of which was to conclude a treaty of peacewith the king of that country. He had no sooner arrivedthere than he witnessed one of those terrific revolutionsthat characterise and so often desolate the East. The kingof Martaban was besieged by the king of Brama, defeated,and taken prisoner : he was flung into the river alongwith about fifty of his nobles ; his wives, 140 in number,were hanged with their heads downwards. Many othercruelties are here ascribed to the king of Brama, whichcould hardly have entered into a European imagination;but of which, unhappily, instances still frequently occurin eastern countries. Mended Pinto, with some otherPortuguese captives, was carried to Ava; whence heaccompanied the ambassador of the king of Brama tok 31 34 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Templar, the capital city of the calamine, or lord ofthe white elephant.This journey he performed in the humble capacity of aslave. The country which he traversed in his route to Tim-planis but little known ; and the names which he givesto places are obviously so disfigured that little instructioncan be derived' from his account. His description of thefeast or fair of the Gentiles' at the pagoda of ,coincides exactly with the fair of Juggernaut.Fanatics threw themselves under the wheels of the chariots,or, cutting themselves with knives, flung pieces oftheir flesh among the crowd. The statue of Tinagoogoo,he observes, had the hair of a negro, the ordinary characteristicof Buddha. The frightful instances of franticdevotion exhibited by its votaries, made our author remark," How little we do to save our souls, comparedwith what they do to lose them I"On his return to Malacca, Pinto was furnished withthe means of trading to Sunday, in order that he mightrepair his fortune : but repose or prosperity did notbelong to his eventful life. To his levity and love ofchange, perhaps, it may be attributed, that he was involvedin every revolution that took place, and that his life wasan unbroken series of hazardous adventures. At Malaccahe joined the society of the Jesuits, and wrote home anaccount of Siam and Pegu, calculated to encourage themissionaries to engage in the work of converting the inhabitantsof those countries. The Siamese, it appears, arein the habit of crying, whenever they sneeze, Sam rope !or Three and one ! which mysterious expression seemedto the devout novice to intimate a disposition to becomeChristians.* He afterwards visited China; and accompaniedthe missionary Belquior to Japan, in 1556'; andappears to have acquitted himself well on this mission,for on his return to Portugal, in 1558, he brought withhim from the governor of Malacca a testimonial of hisservices. But the court set less value on his adventures• Diverse Avi«i call' India di Portofjallo call' anno 1551 sino al 1558,daJli Rev. Padre della Comi>agnia di Giesu. 12mo. Vent.CHAP. IX. FERDINAND MENDEZ PINTO. 135than he did himself; and he complains bitterly, thatafter enduring endless hardships for one and twentyyears in the service of his country, as he is pleased tosay, he met with no reward. Credit was long denied tothe narrative of Mended Pinto, or Mental Pinto, as alearned writer of ours jocosely calls him*; and ourgreat dramatic poet has given currency to this opinionsBut as we have acquired a greater knowledge of thecountries which he visited, his credit has become re-established,and his travels can no longer be looked upon asmere fictions. He unquestionably embellishes his adventures; but this liberty, as well as the contradictions ofwhich he is frequently guilty, are pardonable in an unletteredman who writes from memory, and whose tasteis swayed by the secret attachment which ignorancealways feels to whatever is wonderful. Yet his volumeis not characterised by exaggeration so much as by themultitude of events and particulars graphically set forth,and related with all the air of reality. When he tells hisconversations with the Chinese and other eastern people,he must certainly be assisted by his imagination : yet itought to be considered that he lived for years amongadventurers of all nations ; that he was rarely withoutinterpreters ; and that in all his descriptions he preservesthe language and manners of the East with a fidelitywhich proves that he studied from the life. He is nowhereboastful of his own exploits; on the contrary, healways seems to have been the least considered of hisparty ; and, indeed, no credit could redound to himselfor his countrymen from the adventures that he relates.The simplicity and vividness of his style, with the varietyof his fortunes, procured great success for his history,which was long regarded by the Portuguese as a classicalproduction.Ashley's Collection, vol. i. p. 85.f Ferdinand Mended Pinto was but a type of thee,Thou liar of the first magnitude!Shakspeare. 'K 4136 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.CHAP. X.VOYAGES TO THE NORTH.VOYAGES OP SEBASTIAN CABOT. FIRST DISCOVERT OF Newfoundland.THE Corporeal. — VOYAGES OF THE FRENCH.CANADA. FIRST EXPEDITIONS OF THE ENGLISH. AttemptsTO FIND A NORTH-EAST PASSAGE. — FATE OF AsiaHUGH WILLOUGHBY. RICHARD Chancellor GOES TO Moscow.HIS RECEPTION. STEVEN BOROUGH REACHES THESTRAIT OF WAIGATZ. FROBISHER SAILS TO DISCOVER THENORTH-WESTERN PASSAGE. FRIESLAND. BRINGS HOMESOME ESQUIMAUX. SUPPOSED GOLD ORE. HIS SECONDVOYAGE. HIS SHIPS LADEN WITH THE ORE HE SAILS ATHIRD TIME TO PLANT A COLONY. FAILURE OF THE Attempt.VOYAGE OF SIR HUMPHREY GILBERT. ■ — SHIPS ProvidedWITH AMUSEMENTS. HE FIXES A COLONY IN Newfoundland.PROCEEDS ON DISCOVERY, AND PERISHES.The conquests of the Spaniards and Portuguese inthe New World and the East present such a brillianttrain of exploits and discoveries as must always hold aprominent place in an historical review of geographicalknowledge. But other nations in the mean time werenot inattentive to these movements, or indifferent to theadvantages that might result from an improved acquaintancewith the globe. They did not proceed, it is true,in their researches with the same bold strides ; but theirslow and patient efforts were of a nature better calculatedto conduct to ultimate success. England in particularsoon distinguished itself as the school of intrepidand skilful mariners.John Gavotta or Cabot, a native of Venice, arrivedin England, and settled at Bristol, in the reign ofHenry VII. That monarch, disappointed in his hopesof forming an engagement with Columbus, gladly extendedhis protection to the Venetian, whose reputationas a skilful pilot was little inferior to that of the celebratedGenoese. By a patent dated the 5th of March,CHAP. X. VOYAGES TO THE North. 137lion, he granted to Cabot and his three sons, Louis,Sebastian, and Sanctus, permission to go in search ofunknown lands, and to conquer and settle them. In theaccounts which remain to us respecting the voyages undertakenin virtue of this patent, irreconcilable diversitiesand contradictions occur. Of Sebastian Cabot alone weknow any thing with certainty. In the report madeto the pope's legate in Spain *, he is made to say, thatunderstanding, by reason of the sphere, that if heshould sail by way of north-west, he should by a shortertract come into India, he thereupon caused the kingto be advertised of his device, who immediately commandedtwo caravels to be furnished with all thingsappertaining to the voyage, which was, as farre as heremembered, in the year 1 496, in the beginning of summer.He began, therefore, to sail toward the northwest,not thinking to find any other land than that ofCathay, and from thence to turn towards India ; butafter certaine days he found that the land ran toward thenorth, which was to him a great displeasure. Nevertheless,sailing along the coast to see if he could findany gulf that turned, he found the land still continued tothe seth degree under our pole. And seeing that therethe coast turned to the east, despairing to find a passage,he turned back again, and sailed downe by the coast ofthat land toward the equinoctial (ever with intent tofind the said passage to India), and came to that part ofthis firm land which is now called Florida ; where hisvictuals failing, he departed from thence and returnedunto England, where he found great tumults among thepeople, and preparations for warren in Scotland, by reasonwhereof there was no more consideration had unto thisvoyage."It is probable that John Cabot and his son jointly, intheir first voyage, discovered Newfoundland, to whichthey gave the name of Prima Vista. It appears thatthey brought home with them three of the natives ; and<( these savages, it is said, were cloathed in beasts skins,In Ramus and Hakluyt. <138 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.and did eat raw flesh, and spake such speech that noman could understand them ; and in their demeanourwere like to brute beasts, whom the kinge kept a timeafter"* Ramus relates that Cabot sailed as far northas 67i° ; and another contemporary writer mentions thathe met with Indians who had abundance of coppersSebastian Cabot sailed in 151 6 with sir John Pert toPorto Rico, and afterwards returned to Spain, from whichcountry he conducted that expedition to the Rio de laPlata, of which mention has been made above But inthe year 1548, when Henry VIII. was on the throne,he returned to England ; and on the accession of EdwardVI. was created by the young king pilot major,and received from him a pension for life of 500 marksor 1 661. 13s. 4tf. a year, — a munificent reward in thosedays, and deservedly bestowed. Cabot was placed at thehead of the society of merchant adventurers ; and by hiszeal, mature judgment, and extensive experience, contributednot a little to kindle and direct that spirit ofmaritime enterprise by which England has risen to herpresent naval eminence.The discoveries of Cabot soon attracted the attentionof the Spaniards and Portuguese, who dreaded nothingmore than rivalry for the dominion of the seas. Indeed,there seems little reason to doubt that a Portuguesenavigator had discovered Newfoundland long before thetime of Cabot. John Vas Costa Cortereal, a gentlemanof the royal household, had explored the northern seasby order of Alphonse V. about the year 1463, and discoveredthe Terra de Baccalhoos or land of cod fish,afterwards called Newfoundland. § There is even reasonto believe that the Portuguese were in the habit notonly of fishing on the banks of Newfoundland, but ofsettling there also, toward the close of the fifteenth century.Gaspar, the son of John Cortereal, sailed fromLisbon in the year 1500, and, steering northward fromthe Azores, discovered in 60° land, to which he gave» Hakluyt + Peter Martyr. % See page 89.Barrow's Chronological History of Voyages in the Arctic Kegioru.CHAP. X. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 1 39the name of Terra Verde, that is, Greenland. From hisown account it appears, that having employed nearly ayear in this voyage, he had discovered between west andnorth-west a continent till then unknown to the restof the world ; that he ran along the coast upwards of800 miles ; that, according to his conjecture, this landlay near a region formerly approached by the Venetians*,and almost at the north pole; and that he was unable toproceed farther on account of the great mountains ofice which encumbered the sea, and the continued snows.The great country discovered by Cortereal is evidentlythat which is at present known by the name of Labrador,to which geographical writers in the sixteenthcentury not unfrequently gave the name of Corterealis.Gaspar Cortereal, elated by his discoveries, and confidentthat he should find a north-western passage toIndia, easily obtained the king's consent to undertakea second voyage; and sailed from Lisbon in May, 1501,never more to return. His voyage is said to have beenprosperous as far as Greenland; but there a storm separatedthe ships : his consort returned; but Cortereal wasnever again heard of.His brother, Michael Cortereal, sailed in search ofhim the following year, with three vessels. When theyarrived upon the coast of the newly discovered land,which is broken by numerous rivers and inlets, the shipsseparated, in order that they might examine the coastmore narrowly, having arranged to meet at a certainpoint on the 20th of August. Two of the vessels didactually return according to the appointment; but MichaelCortereal never made his appearance, and no tidingswere ever received of his fate. Vasco Eames Cortereal,master of the king's household, disconsolate for the lossof his brothers, determined to go himself to unfold themystery which hung over their fate. But the king,having already lost two of his most valued servants,resolved to preserve the third ; and could not be prevailedupon, by any entreaties, to part with the only susanallusion to the voyages of the Beni, see voL i. ». £21.HO MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.living branch of the family, to which he was sincerelyattached.These voyages, though they terminated so unfortunatelyto the individuals that conducted them, familiarisedthe Portuguese seamen with the navigation of theNorthern Ocean, and thereby conduced not a little tothe progress of discovery in that quarter. Very extensivefisheries were carried on by the Portuguese on thebanks of Newfoundland, employing at one time betweentwo and three hundred vessels from the ports of Dianaand Aveiro alone. This source of prosperity, openedby the efforts, or we may say the self-devotion, of theCorporeal, continued as long as Portugal remained anindependent monarchy.*The French nation alone seems to have remained unaffectedby that impulse of curiosity or love of glorywhich urged other nations forward in the career of geographicaldiscovery. Yet the French were not indifferentto the gains of commerce, or slow to avail themselves ofthe discoveries made by their neighbours. In 1508, amariner of Dieppe, named Aubert or Hubert, sailed toNewfoundland, and brought home with him a nativeof that country, who was exhibited to the court in Paris.But no schemes of enterprise arose out of this adventure,nor do we hear any thing more of French discoveriestill 1 534-, when Jaques Cartier examined the river SaintLawrence; in which, however, he was unquestionablypreceded by Cortereal and the Spanish navigator Vasco.From Cartier we learn, that among the nativesinhabiting the northern banks of the Saint Lawrence,a hamlet or collection of houses was called canada, —the name which Europeans have subsequently given tothe whole country. A more fantastical derivation of thisname has been widely circulated. It is said, that whenthe Spaniards first entered the river, and sought in vainto discover any traces of the precious metals, they criedout, in their disappointment, Ca nata! or, "Nothinghere ! " and these words, being caught up by the savages,» Barrow.CHAP. X. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 141and repeated by them to the Europeans who afterwardsarrived there, were considered to be the name of thecountry.The spirit of discovery seems also to have languishedin England at the commencement of the sixteenth century;or, which is more probable, the feeble efforts ofearly voyagers were not crowned with the brilliant successnecessary to attract the attention of the historians ofthat age. The first enterprise undertaken solely by Englishmenwas suggested by Mr. Robert Thorne, a wealthymerchant of Bristol, who had long resided at Seville, andwho had imbibed, perhaps in Spain, the spirit of geographicaldiscovery. He is said to have exhorted kingHenry VIII. " with very weighty and substantial reasonsto set forth a discoverie even to the north pole." Andsuch a voyage seems actually to have taken place. Forwe are informed that "king Henry VIII. sent two fairships, well manned and victualled, having in them diverscunning men, to seek strange regions; and so they setforth out of the Thames the 20th day of May, in thenineteenth year of his reign, which was the yeare of ourLord 1527-"* All that we know of the result of thisvoyage is, that one of the ships was cast away on thenorth of Newfoundland. Again, in 1536, a voyage ofdiscovery to the north-west parts of America was projectedby a person named More, of London; " a man ofgoodly stature, and of great courage, and given to thestudies of cosmographie." It is remarkable, that of six-scorepersons who accompanied him, thirty were gentlemenof the inns of court and chancery; whence it maybeconcluded that the pursuit of science and gratificationof a laudable curiosity were the object of this voyage,rather than mercantile speculations. But this enterprisehad a calamitous termination, unworthy the disinterestedmotives that gave birth to it. On their arrival in Newfoundland,they suffered so much from famine that theywere driven to the horrible expedient of cannibalism.While gathering roots in the woods for their subsistence,Hakluyt.Ii MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.some were treacherously murdered and devoured bytheir companions. The captain, on hearing the circumstance,endeavoured to bring back the crew to a sense oftheir duty, and to teach them resignation, by keepingalive their hopes. But the famine increased, and theywere driven to the necessity of casting lots who shouldperish. The same night a French ship arrived onthe coast; and the English, by a stratagem with whichwe are not made acquainted, contrived to make themselvesmasters of the vessel, and returned home. TheFrenchmen were afterwards liberally indemnified byHenry VIII., who pardoned the violence to which necessityhad impelled the English adventurers.The foreign trade of England in the sixteenth centuryhardly extended beyond the Flemish towns, Iceland,and a limited fishery on the banks of Newfoundland.But the presence and counsel of Sebastian Cabot, whowas well acquainted with the bold navigations of theSpaniards, opened the views and inflamed the ambitionof a people not insensible of their own capabilities.When that experienced navigator was created grandpilot of England by Edward VI., he was at the sametime constituted " governour of the mysteries and companieof the marchants adventurers for the discoverie ofregions, dominions, islands, and places unknown." Byhis advice, and under his direction, a voyage was undertakenin 1553 for the discovery of a north-east passageto Cathay. Three ships were fitted out for this expedition,of which sir Hugh Willoughby was appointedcaptain-general. Richard Chancelor, the pilot major ofthe fleet, Commanded the Edward Bonaventure. Asthe promoters of this expedition had no doubt of itssuccess, they omitted none of those precautions whichwere deemed necessary for the safety of vessels navigatingthe Indian seas, and caused them to be sheathedwith lead in order to defend them from the worms thatwere found to be destructive to wooden sheathing inwarm climates. This is the first account we have ofships coated in England with a metallic substance. ThatCHAP. X. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 1 13practice,' as we have seen, was long familiar to the Spaniards.*While the ships lay at Greenwich, where the courtat that time resided, the mariners received every markof royal favour which could cheer and encourage menembarking on a dangerous and important enterprise.But the result of this voyage, which held out such flatteringpromises, was most disastrous to the gallant sirHugh Willoughby and his brave associates, who, withthe whole of the merchants, officers, and ship's company,as well as those of the Bona Confidential, to the numberof seventy persons, perished miserably, from the effectsof cold and hunger, on a barren and uninhabited part ofthe eastern coast of Lapland, at the mouth of a rivercalled Arzina, not far from the harbour of Kegor. Theships and the dead bodies of those that perished werediscovered the following year by some Russian fishermen; and from papers found in the admiral's ship,and especially by the date of his will, it appeared thatmost of the company of the two ships were alive inJanuary, 1554. They had entered the river on the 18thof September preceding. No regular journals appearto have been kept in the ships. That of sir HughWilloughby is extremely meagre, and contains only thefollowing brief reference to their distressed situation : — ■Thus remaining in this haven the space of a weeks,seeing the ye're farre spent and also very evil wether, asfrost, snow, and haile, as though it had been the deepof winter, we thought it best to winter there. Whereforewe sent out three men south-south-west, to search ifthey could find people; who went three dayes journey, butcould find none. After that we sent out other three westward,four dayes journey, which also returned withoutfinding any people. Then sent we three men south-east,three dayes journey, who in like sorte returned withoutfinding of people or any similitude of habitation."Richard Chancelor, the pilot of the fleet, was morefortunate in his voyage. He seems to have held aSee page 100. Barrow's Chronological Hist. p. CG.144 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.northerly course ; or, as he expresses it, " he sailedso far towards that unknown part of the world, thathe came at last to the place where he found no nightat all, but a continual light and brightness of the sunshining clearly upon the huge and mighty sea." Atlength he entered a great bay, where he found inhabitants,who first seemed alarmed at his arrival; but onbecoming acquainted with " the singular gentlenessand courtisie of the strangers, they brought them provisions,and entered into familiar intercourse with them."Our navigators learned that the country in which theyhad arrived was Russia or Muscovy, governed by aking named Juan Vasilovich. Chancelor managed hisnegotiations with address, and had the courage to undertakea journey of nearly 1500 miles to Moscow,where he was favourably entertained; and his ableagency laid the foundation of that commercial intercoursewhich has since subsisted with little interruptionbetween England and Russia.The account of his first interview with the czar of Moscowis extremely curious and entertaining. The Englishtravellers were astonished beyond measure at the pompand magnificence of the Russian court. The emperorat first observed towards the strangers a reserved andstately carriage ; but, at the second interview, he conversedmore familiarly with them. " The prince calledthem to his table, to receive each a cup from his handto drink, and took into his hand master George Killing-worthiesbeard, which reached over the table, and pleasantlydelivered it to the metropolitan, who, seeming tobless it, said in Russ, ' This is God's gift ;' as indeedat that time it was not only thick, broad, and yellowcovered, but in length five foot and two inches ofassize." In the following spring, Chancelor sailed fromArchangel, and arrived safely in England, bringing withhim a letter from the Czar to Edward VI.* The fortunateresult of Chancelor's voyage, and the prospect ofestablishing a trade with an extensive empire, appearedHakluytClap. X. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 145to compensate the unhappy fate of Willoughby, and thefailure of the expedition in its immediate object. Anew charter was granted to the community of merchantsadventurers ; and Richard Chancelor, with two others,was commissioned to treat with the czar of Muscovy,with respect to the commercial privileges and immunitieswhich he might be pleased to grant to the newlychartered company. The adventurers were instructednot merely to seek for commercial gain, but also toincrease their information, and " to use all waves andmeanes possible to learned howe men maye pass fromRussia, either by land or by sea, to Catania."But while preparations were made to despatch Chancellora second time to Russia, towards which country.he singular events of his first expedition invited hisexertions, the project of a north-eastern passage wasnot wholly abandoned. Stephen Burrow, who hadaccompanied Chancelor in the preceding voyage, sailedin April, 1556", in a small vessel, to explore the northernseas. On the last day of July they reached the islandof Waigatz, and learned from the Russians that theland ahead of them was called Nova Zembla, or the NewLand, and that the people who inhabited the great islandswere called Samos, and had no houses, but tentsmade of deer-skins. On landing they found a multitudeof idols belonging to this people, rudely carved,and in some instances smeared with blood. The prevalenceof the eastern winds prevented our adventurersfrom advancing beyond this point; and wintering atColmar, they returned to England the ensuing year.In the mean time Chancelor had proceeded on his embassyto Archangel and to Moscow, and is said to havemade a profitable voyage. On his return home, in 1556,he was accompanied by Ose Need, the ambassador ofthe czar. But the voyage was most calamitous; offour ships which composed the fleet, three suffered shipwreck.The vessel in which Chancelor and the ambassadorhad embarked was wrecked in Pitsligo Bay,on the eastern coast of Scotland ; and Chancelor, withVOL. II. l]46 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.most of the crew, were drowned : the ambassador wassaved with much difficulty. He was conducted toLondon with great pomp ; treated with much kindnessand distinction ; and the commercial relations of the twocountries were established on a closer and more solidbasis.*The efforts thus made for the discovery of a northeasternpassage to the Indies, though fading in theirspecific object, yet, like every other exertion of humanenergy and industry, were crowned, as we have seen,with positive though unexpected advantages. Perhapsthe flattering results as well as the disappointments ofthose voyages had a tendency to stimulate the vigour ofdiscovery in another direction, and to revive the questionof a north-west passage round America to Cathay .and the East Indies. Many sound observations, andnot a few questionable or even fabulous relations, wereadduced to countenance the opinion of the possibility ofsuch a passage. Martin Frobisher, a mariner of greatexperience and ability, had persuaded himself that thevoyage was not only feasible, but of easy execution ;and "as it was the only thing of the world that wasleft yet undone whereby a notable mind might be madefamous and fortunate," he persisted, for fifteen years, inendeavouring to procure the equipment of the expeditionwhich was the constant object of his hopes and speculations.At length, in 1576, by the patronage of Dudley earlof Warwick, he was enabled to fit out two small vessels,one of thirty-five and the other of thirty tons. As ouradventurers passed Greenwich, where the court thenresided, queen Elizabeth gave them an encouraging farewell,by waving her hand to them from the window.On the 1 1 th of July Frobisher discovered land, whichhe supposed to be the Friezeland of Zero : but the landwhich he believed to be an island, is evidence the southernpart of Greenland. He was compelled by the floatingice to direct his course to the south-west, till he reached• Hakluyt, voL i.CHAP. X. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 147Labrador. Sailing to the northward along this coast, heentered a strait in latitude 63° 8', which was afterwardsnamed Lumley's Inlet. The Esquimaux in their boatsor kajaks were mistaken by our voyagers for porpoises,or some kind of strange fish. With one of thesestrange infidels, whose like was never seen, read, norheard of before," Frobisher set sail for England, wherehe arrived on the 2d of October, " highly commended ofall men for his great and notable attempt, but speciallyfamous for the great hope he brought of the passage toCatania." One of his seamen chanced to bring homewith him a stone, as a memorial of his voyage to thosedistant countries; but his wife throwing it into the fire,it " glittered with a bright marquess of gold." Thisaccident was soon noised abroad ; and the gold-fingers ofLondon, being called upon to assay the stone, reportedthat it contained a considerable quantity of gold. Thusthe hope of finding gold again became the incentive todistant voyages and geographical researches. The queennow openly favoured the enterprise ; and Frobisher againdeparted, in May, 1577, with three ships, one of whichwas equipped by her majesty. He sagaciously observed,that the ice which encumbers the northern seas must beformed in the sounds, or inland near the pole, and thatthe main sea never freezes. He steered for the straitwhere his preceding voyage had terminated, and soughtthe spot where the supposed gold ore had been pickedup, but could not find on the whole island " a piece sobig as a walnut." On the neighbouring islands, however,the ore was found in large quantities. In theirexamination of Frobisher's Strait, they were unable toestablish a pacific intercourse with the natives. Twowomen were seized; of whom one, being old and uglywas thought to be a devil or a witch, and was consequentlydismissed. As gold, and not discovery, was theavowed object of this voyage, our adventurers occupiedthemselves in providing a cargo, and actually got onboardalmost 200 tons of the glittering mineral whichthey believed to be ore. When the lading was com-l 2148 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.plated, they set sail homewards; and though the shipswere dispersed by violent storms, they all arrived safelyin different ports of England.The queen and the persons engaged in this adventurewere delighted to find " that the matter of the gold orehad appearance and made show of great riches andprofit, and that the hope of the passage to Catania bythis last voyage greatly increased." The queen gave thename of Meta Incognita to the newly discovered country,on which it was resolved to establish a colony. Forthis purpose a fleet of fifteen ships was got ready, and100 persons appointed to form the settlement, and remainthere the whole year, keeping with them three ofthe ships : the other twelve were to bring back cargoesof gold ore. Frobisher was appointed admiral in generalof the expedition, and on taking leave received from thequeen a gold chain as a mark of her approbation of hispast conduct. The fleet sailed on the 31st of May,1578, and in three weeks discovered Friezeland, ofwhich possession was formally taken, and then held itscourse direct to Frobisher's Straits. The voyage hithertohad been prosperous, but distresses and vexations ofevery kind thwarted the attempt to fix a colony. Violentstorms dispersed the fleet ; drift-ice choked up thestrait ; one small bark, on board of which was the woodenhouse intended for the settlers, was crushed by the icebergsand instantly went down ; thick fogs, heavy snow,with tides and currents of extraordinary violence, bewilderedthe mariners, and involved them in endlessdistresses. At length, after enduring extreme hardships,it was resolved to return, and postpone to the ensuingyear the attempt to make a settlement in the country.The storms which had frustrated the object of the expeditionpursued the fleet in its passage homeward : theShips were scattered, but arrived at the various ports ofEngland before the commencement of October. *The Buss of Bridgewater, in her homeward passage,fell in with a large island to the south-east of Frieze-hakluyt,vol iii.CHAP. X. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 149land, in latitude 57^°, which had never before been discovered;and sailed three days along the coast, the landappearing to be fertile, full of wood, and a fine champagnecountry. On this authority the island was laiddown in our charts, but was never afterwards seen, andcertainly does not exist; though a bank has recentlybeen sounded upon, which has revived the opinion thatthe Friezeland of Zero and the land seen by the Bussof Bridgewater were one and the same island, which hasbeen since swallowed up by an earthquake.*Success seems to have deserted Frobisher after hisfirst voyage, which alone indeed had discovery for itsobject. When the sanguine expectations to which hehad given birth were disappointed, his voyages werelooked upon as a total failure ; and he appears himself,for a time, to have fallen into neglect. But in 1585he served with sir Francis Drake in the West Indies;three years later he commanded one of the largest shipsof the fleet which defeated the Spanish armada ; and hisgallant conduct on that trying occasion procured him thehonour of knighthood.Frobisher's zeal in the pursuit of north-western discoveriesis supposed to have been fostered by the writingsof sir Humphrey Gilbert, a gentleman of brillianttalents and romantic temper. When we contemplatethe early discoveries of the Spaniards and Portuguese,we see needy adventurers, and men of desperate characterand fortune, pursuing gain or licentiousness withviolence and bloodshed. But the English navigators,who, in the reign of Elizabeth, sought to extend ourknowledge of the globe, were men of a different stamp,and driven forward by motives of a more honourablenature. They undertook the most difficult navigationsthrough seas perpetually agitated by storms and encumberedwith ice, in vessels of the most frail constructionand of small burden ; they encountered all the difficultiesand distresses of a rigorous climate, and, in mostcases, with a very distant or with no prospect of ultimateBarrow's Chron. Hist, p. 94.L 3150 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.pecuniary advantage. Sir Humphrey Gilbert was oneof those gallant spirits who engaged in the career ofdiscovery chiefly from the love of fame and thirst ofachievement. In 1578 he obtained a patent, authorisinghim to undertake western discoveries, and to possesslands unsettled by Christian princes or their subjects.The grant in the patent was made perpetual, but wasat the same time declared void unless acted upon withinsix years. In compliance with this condition sir Humphreyprepared, in 1583, to take possession of thenorthern parts of America and Newfoundland. In thesame year queen Elizabeth conferred on his youngerbrother, Adrian Gilbert, .the privilege of making discoveriesof a passage to China and the Moluccas, by thenorth-westward, north-eastward, or northward; directingthe company, of which he was the head, to be incorporatedby the name of " The colleagues of the fellowshipfor the discovery of the north-west passage."The fleet of sir Humphrey consisted of five ships,of different burthens, from 10 to 200 tons, in whichwere embarked about 260 men, including shipwrights,masons, smiths, and carpenters, besides " mineral menand refiners;" and for the amusement of the crew,and allurement of the savages, they were provided ofmusic in good variety, not omitting the least tones, asmorris dancers, hobby horses, and Manlike conceits,to delight the savage people, whom they intended to winby all fair means possible." This little fleet reachedNewfoundland on the 30th of July. It is noticed, thatat this early period, " the Portugal and French chieflyhave a notable trade of Asking on the Newfoundlandbank, where there are sometimes more than a hundredsail of ships."On entering St. John's, possession was taken in thequeen's name of the harbour and 200 leagues everyway ; parcels of land were granted out ; but the attentionof the general was chiefly directed to the discoveryof the precious metals.The colony being thus apparently established, sirCHAP. X. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 151Humphrey Gilbert embarked in his small frigate, theSquirrel, which was, in fact, a miserable bark of tentons ; and, taking with him two other ships, proceededon a voyage of discovery to the southward. One ofthese vessels, the Delight, was soon after wrecked amongthe shoals near Sable Island; and of above 100 men onboard,only twelve escaped. Among those who perishedwere the historian and the mineralogist of the expedition; a circumstance which preyed upon the mind ofsir Humphrey, whose ardent temper fondly cherishedthe hope of fame and of inestimable riches. He nowdetermined to return to England ; but as his littlefrigate, as she is called, appeared wholly unfit to proceedon such a voyage, he was entreated not to venturein her, but to take his passage in the Golden Hide.To these solicitations the gallant knight replied, " I willnot forsake my little company going homeward, withwhom I have passed so many storms and perils." Whenthe two vessels had passed the Azores, sir Humphrey'sfrigate was observed to be nearly overwhelmed by agreat sea : she recovered, however, the stroke of thewaves; and immediately afterwards the general was observed,by those in the Hide, sitting abaft with a bookin his hand, and calling out, " Courage, my lads ! weareas near heaven by sea as by land." The same nightthis little bark, and all within her, were swallowed upin the sea, and never more heard of. Such was the unfortunateend of the brave sir Humphrey Gilbert, whomay be regarded as the father of the western colonisation,and who was one of the chief ornaments of themost chivalrous age of English history.*Hakluyt, vol. iii.L 4152 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.CHAP. XI.VOYAGES TO THE NORTH.voyages of john davis. result of his researches.he believes in the existence of a north-west passage.northern expeditions of the dutch. voyages ofwilliam barentz. cornelian passes the strait ofwaigatz. barentz reaches the northern extremityof nova zemblat — description of the walrus. secondvoyage of barentz. —information received fromthe samoyeds. third voyage.— spitsbergen and cherryisland discovered. barentz and his crew winterin nova semble. their sufferings. extraordinaryrefraction. death of barentz, and voyage of thecrew in open boats. attempts of the danes to exploregreenland. voyages of james half fate ofhall and of knight. henry hudson. he makes observationson the dip of the needle. his voyagetowards the pole. second voyage. place of themagnetic pole. a mermaid described. third voyage.discovers Hudson's river. — fourth voyage. — sailsto the west. enters hudson's bay. narrative ofhis proceeding. mutiny of the crew. hudson and thesick men turned adrift. return of the mutineers.The zeal and ability exerted by Frobisher in the causeof north-western discovery was foiled, as we have seen,by the vain pursuit of the precious metals. The ill successof the recent voyages restored speculation to itslegitimate pursuit ; and it was now resolved to despatchan expedition of which discovery should be the soleobject.The merchants of London, being satisfied " of thelikelihood of the discovery of the north-west passage,"fitted out two small barks, the one of fifty, the other ofthirty-five tons, which they entrusted to the commandof John Davis, an expert and courageous seaman. Hesailed from Dartmouth on the 7th of June, 1585, andby the middle of July was on the western side ofGreenland, where the coast presented such a bleak andCHAP. XI. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 153gloomy aspect, that Davis gave it the name of theLand of Desolation. Here he found a great quantityof drift-wood, and picked up a tree sixty feet inlength. From this coast he stood to the north-west,where he saw land in latitude 6*4° 15'; the air beingtemperate, and the sea free from ice. This proved tobe a groups of islands among which were numerousgood harbours. To that in which Davis cast anchor hegave the name of Gilbert's Sound, in honour of hispatron, Mr. Adrian Gilbert, the brother of the unfortunatesir Humphrey. The natives were numerous andfriendly ; they danced with the sailors, and shared withthem whatever they possessed. On the 1st of AugustDavis stood to the north-west, and on the 6th discoveredland in lat. 66° 40' : they anchored under a promontory,which they named Mount Raleigh, " the cliffswhereof were orient as gold." The foreland towardsthe north they called Die's Cape, and that towards thesouth Cape Walsingham. Proceeding to the northward,an open strait was discovered to the west, fromtwenty to thirty leagues wide, and quite free from ice.The colour of the sea also resembling that of the mainocean, gave our adventurers greater hopes of their havingfound the long-sought passage. They proceededsixty leagues towards the west, until they saw a clusterof islands in the middle of the strait. But meeting herewiththick mists and adverse winds, they were unableto make farther progress, and returning home in consequence,arrived at Dartmouth on the 30th of September.The discovery of a free and open passage to the westward;the friendly disposition of the natives, who seemeddisposed to maintain a brisk commerce of peltry; andthe general ability manifested by Davis in the conductof his voyage ; encouraged the merchants in the west ofEngland to assist him in fitting out a second expedition.On the 7th of May he again sailed from Dartmouth ;and by the middle of June had reached the west sideof Greenland, where the natives came to him in great154 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.numbers to trade, with the skins of seals, stags, whitehares, and with fish. They were believed by our sailorsto be witches, and to practise many kinds of enchantments.The icebergs which Davis saw in this voyagewere of so great a size that he declines describing them,lest his veracity should be called in question. From thecold occasioned by the accumulation of ice, the seamenbecame sickly and dispirited, and it was with difficultythat Davis could prevail on them to persist in thevoyage northwards. In latitude 66° 33' N. land wasdescried, which turned out to be a group of islands. Thesea was now free from ice, the weather extremely warm,and mosquitoes were very numerous and troublesome.In latitude 67° they found land to the westward ; andrunning southward to 54°, they saw numberless inlets iwhich, from the appearance of the sea, kept alive theirhopes of a passage. But the weather proving tempestuouson the coast of Labrador, Davis steered homewards,and arrived in England in the beginning of October.During the greater part of this voyage he was alone inthe Moonshine, a little bark of only 35 tons.Though in the preceding voyages Davis had neitherdiscovered the north-west passage nor established animportant commerce, he had so much enlarged his nauticalexperience, and found so many great arms of thesea conducting to the west, that his hopes of finallysucceeding in the attempt were rather inflamed thandepressed by the result of his previous efforts. A thirdvoyage was therefore resolved on ; and he sailed fromDartmouth, with two vessels, on the 19th of May,1587- In June he was on the west coast of Greenland,along which he held his course till he reached 72° 12',where, finding the sea open, he turned to the west, andran forty leagues in that direction without seeing anyland. By currents or the violence of the north windsthey were driven to the south, and arrived at the straitdiscovered by Davis in his first voyage, and which isnow named Cumberland Strait. They explored it aboutsixty leagues; and then running to the south-east acrossCHAP. XI. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 155a great gulf, they descried, in latitude 6\° 10', a headland,to which they gave the name of Cape Whitley.Thus it appears that the straits which bear the nameof Hudson were in reality discovered by Davis, whosename, however, is very properly given to the strait inwhich he sailed to the highest point of northern latitude.Davis arrived in England on the 15th of September.The result of his three voyages was not suchas to encourage the merchants to support him in thefarther prosecution of his researches. But his own zealcontinued unabated ; and he believed that as he becameacquainted with the western seas he approximated tothe discovery of the north-western course to India, thenavigation of which he imagined to be not only practicablebut easy. In a little volume published by him afew years after his return *, he gives an interesting andvivid summary of his three voyages. He says, that headvanced eighty leagues in Cumberland Strait, and foundthat the tide ebbed six fathoms, which he regards as aproof of its connection with the main ocean. He expressesan opinion that the northern regions of the newcontinent are all islands ; an opinion maintained by theablest navigators, from the time of Sebastian Cabot tothe present day. Davis also affirms that he sailed northward,in the sea at present called Baffin's Bay, to thelatitude of 75°. This intrepid seaman, who subsequentlyaccompanied Candish in his second voyage to the Straitsof Magellan, and who persisted singly in forcing a passageinto the Pacific Ocean, afterwards entered into theservice of the Dutch, and made no less than five voyagesto the East Indies, — an instance, in those days, of wonderfulgood fortune.When the Dutch were driven to assert their independence,and to aim at sharing in that lucrativecommerce which had hitherto been engrossed by theSpaniards, they did not at first think of encounteringtheir oppressors in their established track, but deemedit more advisable to reach the Indies, if possible, by aThe Worlde's Typographical Description, 1595.156 MODERN VOYAGES' OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.course to which usurpation had hitherto advanced noclaim. In consequence, they turned all their attentionto the discovery of a north-eastern passage; and in 1594the United Provinces sent forth an expedition, of whichCornellss Cornelison was admiral, and William Parentsthe chief pilot. Cornelison, having passed North Cape,found the weather in July as warm as in Holland in thedog-days, and the mosquitoes were exceedingly troublesome.The island of Waigatz was covered with verdure,and embellished with a variety of beautiful flowers. Theidols seen by Burrow were also observed by the Dutch,who named that part of the island Afgoden Hoe, or IdolPoint. By the Russians it is called Waigati Loss, orthe Cape of carved Images : and hence, undoubtedly,the name of Waigatz is derived. But as that namemight signify windy strait in the Dutch language,some have supposed that it was first employed byCornelison and his companions, though it is evidentthat Stephen Burrow was acquainted with it many yearsbefore. The Dutch admiral passed the Straits of Waitand at first met with considerable interruption,but afterwards reached a deep blue sea. About fortyleagues from the strait the main land in sight appearedtrending to the south-east. This direction of the coast,with the depth and openness of the sea, gave our navigatorssuch confident hopes of a passage to Cathay, that,instead of prosecuting their discoveries, they agreed toreturn to Holland with the happy tidings. They consequentlyrepassed the strait, and arrived safely in Hollandon the 26'th of September.In the mean time Barentz, who had not sailed incompany with the admiral, crossing the White Sea tothe north-eastward, arrived on the coast of Nova Zemblaon the 4th of July, and followed the shores of thatcountry towards the north till they reached latitude77° 25', where they found an extensive field of ice ofwhich they could not descry the end. They were inconsequenceobliged to return towards the south, andemploy themselves among the islands in lading the shipsCHAP. XI. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 157with the teeth of the walrus or sea-horse. Of thisanimal an accurate and lively description is given bythe Dutch journalist. " This sea-horse is a wonderfulstrong monster of the sea, much bigger than an oxe,which keeps continually in the seas, having a skin likea sea-cafe or seale, with very short haire, mouthed likea lion, and many times they lye upon the ice. Theyare hardly killed, unless you strike them just upon theforehead. It hath four feet, but no ears; and commonlyit hath two young ones at a time. And when the fishermenchance to finde them upon a flake of ice with theiryoung ones, shee casteth her young ones before her intothe water, and then takes them in her arms, and soplunged up and downe with them : and when she willrevenge herselfe upon the boats, or make resistanceagainst them, then she casts her young ones from heragaine, and with all her force goeth towards the boat ;whereby our men were once in no small danger, for thatthe sea-horse had almost stricken her teeth into thesterne of their boat, thinking to overthrow it, but bymeanes of the great crie that the men made she wasafraid, and somme away againe, and tooke her youngones againe in her armes. They have two teeth stickingout of their mouthes on each side, each being about halfean ell long, and are esteemed to bee as good as any ivorieor elephants' teeth." *Barentz, in returning southward, touched at a placein 71° 33', which had been previously visited by OliverBruncll, an Englishman, of whose voyages we knownothing but from the obscure allusions of the Dutchnavigators. He shortly afterwards joined the ships ofCornelison, and returned with him to Holland.This voyage raised the hopes of those who panted forthe discovery of a north-eastern passage to China. Thestates-general equipped a fleet of seven vessels, six ofwhich were laden with merchandise suited to the easternmarket, and Barentz was appointed chief pilot of theexpedition : but the fleet departed too late to effect anyThree Voyages made by the Dutch ; trans, by Phillip, 1607.1 58 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.thing of importance ; the coast of Nova Zembla wasrendered unapproachable by the ice. On passing throughWaigatz, the Dutch fell in with a Russian boat fromPectora, sewed together with ropes, in quest of walrus'teeth, seals, and fowls. From the Russians they learnedthat in nine or ten weeks the cold would be so intense,and the rivers frozen so hard, that men might pass overthe ice to Tatary. From the Samoyeds, whom theyconversed with here, they learned that five days' sailingto the north-east would bring them to a point of landbeyond which the coast took a south-easterly direction.This piece of intelligence was received with great joy,as tending to confirm their hopes of a passage to China.But as the cold was now severe, and the weather unfavourable,it was resolved to return home ; and the fleetarrived safely in the Makes on the 18th of November.Two expensive expeditions having thus terminated indisappointment, the spates-general felt no longer disposedto prosecute the discovery of a north-eastern passage. Yet,unwilling to relinquish the hope, and aware of the benefitsthat must accrue to the state from fostering a maritimespirit in the people, they issued a proclamation offeringa certain reward to such persons as should accomplish avoyage to China by the desired route. The merchantsof Amsterdam were thus encouraged to fit out two ships,the command of which they entrusted to the experiencedpilot Barentz. He sailed at an earlier period than on hispreceding voyage, and by the 1st of June had reachedso high a latitude that he had no night. On the 9th hearrived at Bear (afterwards called Cherry) Island, wherethe Dutch killed a bear whose skin measured twelve feetin length. Ten days afterwards they discovered landto the eastward, and found by observation they were inlatitude 80° 11'. This is unquestionably the first discoveryof Spitsbergen. The Dutch were surprised to findthat this northern land was covered with good herbage,and supplied with herds of deer, while Nova Zembla,four degrees to the south, was a bleak and barren desert.Here also they found a multitude of red geese, such asCHAP. XI. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 159visit some parts of Holland in the winter, but of which, asour author says, "it was never known till this time wherethey hatched their eggs ; so that some men have takenupon them to write that they sit upon trees in Scotlandthat hang over the water, and such eggs as fall fromthem down into the water become young geese, and swimthere out of the water ; but those that fall upon the landburst in sunder and are lost." Thus the fable of thebarnacles was supposed to be for the first time experimentallyrefuted.From Spitsbergen the two ships steered south-westtill they arrived at Bear Island : and here they agreed topart company; Jan Cornellss wishing to examine the eastcoast of Spitsbergen, while Barentz hoped to find thepassage to the eastward in a lower parallel. He steeredaccordingly for Nova Zembla, where by the first week inAugust he had reached the latitude of 77°. But strongwinds from the east opposing his progress, he was obligedto make fast the ship to an immense iceberg, which soonafter burst into innumerable fragments with a suddenexplosion. Being forced to return, they reached withdifficulty Icehaven, in lat. 73° 50', on the 26th, andhere the ice which had beset them in the voyage immediatelyclosed them up. The unhappy crew, now reducedto seventeen persons, found themselves under thenecessity of passing the winter in this dreary and inhospitablespot. Luckily for them, the drift-wood on theshore was sufficiently abundant to supply them with fueland with the materials for a house. They calmly preparedto meet the difficulties of their situation ; and thejournal of their sufferings is rendered doubly interestingby their patience and resignation. It is difficult to conceive,and impossible to describe in adequate language,the feelings of men thus doomed to an abode of darkness,desolation, and intense cold, where bears and foxes arethe only inhabitants of the forlorn scene. On the 4thof November the last rays of the sun forsook them, andthe cold increased until it became almost too intensefor endurance. Their wine and beer were frozen and160 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.deprived of their strength. By means of great fires, ofapplying heated stones to their feet, and wrapping themselvesin double fox-skin coats, they were just able tokeep themselves from being frozen. But in searchingfor drift-wood they were obliged to endure acute painand to brave imminent danger. They were also frequentlyattacked by bears, which fearlessly assaultedtheir wooden hut. But they found means to kill someof those animals, the fat of which they used for theirlamps. It is remarkable, that when the sun disappearedthe bears also took their departure, and then the whitefoxes came in great numbers. These animals, whichserved at once for food and clothing, were easily takenby traps set on the roof of the house.When the 19th of December arrived, these unhappymen derived comfort from the consideration that theseason of darkness had half expired, and that with thereturn of the sun they would find new resources andmeans of preservation. Their spirits were not so farsunk as to prevent them from celebrating Twelfth-evewith an extra allowance of wine and with games. Thegunner was made king of Nova Zembla, " which is atleast 200 miles long, and lyeth between two seas." Atlength the joyful moment arrived. On the 27th ofJanuary the entire disc of the sun was visible abovethe horizon, to the surprise of Barentz, who did notexpect its appearance for fourteen days to come. Butthe calculation of Barentz was undoubtedly erroneous ;while, on the other hand, the narrative cannot be easilyexplained ; for, under ordinary circumstances of refraction,the appearance of the sun would seem to havebeen premature by seven or eight days. The appearanceof the northern limb of the sun above the horizon onthe 24th of January, in lat. 76° N., supposes a refractionof nearly three degrees. With the light of thesun the bears also returned. The weather grew moreboisterous and inclement, so that it was June beforethey could set about repairing their two boats : for theship was too much injured by the ice to be again re-CHAP. XI. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. refittedby their feeble exertions. On the 13th of thatmonth they prepared to quit their wretched abode ; butBarentz first drew up in writing, and left in the woodenhut, a list of their names, with an account of their misfortunes,and a description of what had befallen themwhile residing there. They then left Icy Haven in twosmall boats. But Barentz, enfeebled by sickness andanxiety, was unable to profit from the gleam of hopewhich now broke in upon them. He died on the 26th,to the great affliction of the crew, who placed unboundedconfidence in his skill and experience. There are manyinstances en record of long voyages performed throughthe ocean in open boats; but, perhaps, there is not oneof so extraordinary a character as the present, in whichtwo small boats ventured to cross the frozen ocean,more than 1100 miles, continually threatened by massesof floating ice, liable to the attack of bears, and exposedfor upwards of forty days to the extremities of cold, famine,sickness, and fatigue. At length the exhaustedcrews arrived at Cola, where they found three Dutchships, in which they embarked, and reached the Makes insafety in October, 1 597.The unfortunate issue of all the voyages hithertoundertaken in the cause of northern discovery did notproduce the discouragement that might have been expected.The lucrative monopoly enjoyed by the Spaniardsof the commerce of the East, magnified in theeyes of political rivals, was a temptation as strong as itwas permanent. The first voyage of the English to theEast Indies proved a miserable failure. But captainLancaster, on his return from it, brought back the informationthat the passage to the Indies by the westwas in latitude 62° 30' N. This piece of intelligence,which had no better foundation than the fabulousachievements of some Spanish navigators, gave rise toan expedition despatched in 1602 under the commandof captain Weymouth, but which was not productive ofany advantage.The rapid progress of navigation and geographical1(52 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.discoveries in the sixteenth century was favoured by thecompetition of the Spaniards and the Portuguese, andthe ardour with which they disputed the possession ofthe opposite hemisphere. The hostilities which sprangup in the course of that century between the Spanishand English nations introduced a third party to strugglefor the prize. The Dutch, forced into the war of independenceby the tyranny of Philip, and encouraged bythe example of the English, were urged by prudence aswell as animosity to snatch from the Spaniards a shareof the lucrative commerce of the East. The politicalmovement, thus originating in peculiar circumstances,was soon propagated amongst neutral states ; and nationsat first indifferent spectators of the contest eagerlyjoined in the race, when a prospect of advantage wasopened to view. During the first expeditions towardsthe north-west, the Danes, who might have been supposedto have felt the deepest interest in the discoveryof Greenland, looked on with indifference until the sanguinerepresentations of the English navigators flatteredthem with the hopes of commercial profit. In 1605, theking of Denmark caused an expedition to be fitted outto explore the coasts of Greenland. Three small vesselswere placed under the command of admiral Linden;but most of his inferior officers, and among othersJames Hall the chief pilot, were Englishmen. Thevice-admiral's ship, commanded by a Dane, was deterredby the difficulties of navigating among the ice on thecoast of Greenland, and stood away to the southward :but Hall persevered, and coasted the shore of that countryas far as latitude 69°, discovering many good sounds,bays, and rivers, and meeting with great quantities ofdrift-wood, the presence of which occasioned him muchsurprise. He wished to persist in his northerly course,but his crew proved refractory ; and having put on shoretwo Danish malefactors, who had been brought out forthat purpose, he steered towards the south and returnedhome.The following year, four small vessels were despatchedCHAP. XI. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. lesfrom Elsineur to follow up the discovery of Greenland,and Hall was again appointed pilot of the fleet. Theobject of this voyage appears to have been the discoveryof mines of gold and silver, and not of the lostcolonies ; for when they arrived at Cunningham's Fiord,they all landed to see the silver mine, where (saysHall) it was decreed we should take in as much as wecould." On the banks of a river in 66° 25' they sawabout forty houses of the natives, built with whalebone,and covered over with earth. Here they seized five natives,whom they carried with them to Denmark. Thisfruitless expedition was succeeded in the following yearby one still less creditable to the country from which itissued. The crew mutinied after reaching Greenland,and compelled Hall to return. This experienced marinermade a fourth voyage to Greenland in 1612, in the serviceof the merchant adventurers of London ; but he hadno sooner reached the coast from which, in his secondvoyage, the Danes had carried off the five Esquimaux,than a native, who recognised him as one of the aggressors,gave him a wound in the side with his dart, of whichhe died shortly after. Upon this all intercourse with thenatives ceased, and the ships returned home without prosecutingtheir researches any further.John Knight, who had accompanied Hall in his firstexpedition, and who had likewise brought home glowingaccounts of the silver mines of Greenland, proceeded, in1606, for the discovery of the north-west passage, in asmall bark fitted out by the company of Muscovy merchants.On approaching the coast of Labrador, he wasso threatened with the ice, which floated in large massesfrom the north, that he was obliged to take refuge in acove, where he intended to draw his bark ashore andrepair the injury she had sustained. As soon as helanded, he proceeded with three others towards the highestpart of the island, in order to examine the country;but he never returned : and as the crew were soonafter fiercely attacked by the natives, it was concludedthat Knight and his companions had already fallen them2MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.victims of their savage ferocity. The remainder of thecrew, therefore, having repaired their vessel, steered forNewfoundland ; whence, after numberless perils, theyarrived in England.So many defeats in the attempt to reach the Indiesby a north-east or north-west passage diverted for a timethe attention of the speculative to another direction.But hope, though checked, was not wholly subdued.The coast, discovered in the voyages to the north, hadnot been so accurately surveyed as to demonstrate theimpossibility of the desired navigation. The numerousexpeditions hitherto fitted out had proved fruitless, fromdifficulties of navigation which experience might learnto conquer. It was resolved by the merchants of Londonto explore a new route, and to seek a passage directlyacross the north pole. For this bold enterprise theyselected Henry Hudson, a skilful and intrepid seaman,who appears to have united more than common scienceto the characteristic courage of his profession. He issupposed to be the first Englishman who made observationson the dip or inclination of the magnetic needle.*Hudson sailed from Gravesend on the 1st of May,1 607, in a small bark, with a crew of only ten men anda boy. The first land he saw was in latitude 70°, onthe east coast of Greenland. Advancing three degreesfarther, he descried a range of lofty mountains free fromsnow. The severity of the cold appeared to diminishbeyond a certain latitude towards the north pole. Theair was temperate, and the rain fell in large drops, likethunder-showers in England.From Greenland he directed his course to Zealand,or Spitsbergen, which he made in latitude 78°. Herehe was much incommoded by the ice, which, he observes,commonly embarrasses a blue sea, while a greensea is comparatively free. In 80° some of his crewwent on shore, and found morses' teeth, whalebone,deer's horns, and the tracks of other beasts. The landappeared to him to stretch far into 82°; but in thisBarrow, p. 179.CHAP. XI. VOYAGES TO Time NORTH. 105Observation, which rested chiefly on the colour of thesky, he was unquestionably deceived. As the season wasnow far advanced, and he had no stores for a protractedvoyage, he bore up in his little bark on his return home,and arrived safely in the Thames on the 15 th of September.The following year Hudson was provided with a shipfor a second voyage, and his crew was increased to fourteenmen. As the ice had hindered him from passingto the northward of Spitsbergen, he was now directedto repeat the attempt to find a north-eastern passage toChina. In the course of this voyage he made manyinteresting observations with the dipping needle, or in-clinatory, as he calls it. In 74° 30' the inclination ofthe needle was found to be 86°; and in 75° 22' Hudsonmade an observation, which, if its correctness could berelied on, would lead to the conclusion that one of themagnetic poles was then situated near this parallel, somewherebetween Nova Zembla and Cherry Island. Inthis part of his voyage, " one of our company (saysHudson) looking over board, saw a mermaid; and callingup some of the companie to see her, one more came up,and by that time shee was close to the ship's side,looking earnestly on the men : a little after a sea cameand overturned her. From the navill upwards herback and breasts were like a woman's (as they say thatsaw her) ; her body as big as one of us ; her skin verywhite ; and long haire hanging downe behind, of colourblacke : in her going downe they saw her table, whichwas like the table of a porpoise, and speckled like amaxwell. Their names that saw her were Thomas Hillsand Robert Rayner."Hudson found such a quantity of ice between Spitz-bergenand Nova Zembla, that he lost all hope of effectinga passage in that direction, and resolved therefore totry the Straits of Waigatz, where he expected also tocollect a cargo of walrus' teeth sufficient to defray theexpense of his expedition. He describes Nova Zemblaas a land pleasant to a man's eye, with much high land,w 8166" MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.covered with verdure in many places. . It is likewise tobe remarked, that he considers the quantity of ice thatencumbers the northern seas to arise from the extentof sea-coast which environs them; regarding it as certainthat the main sea never freezes. Being foiled inhis attempt to pass to the eastward, he steered home,and arrived safely at Gravesend on the 26th of August.The same enterprising navigator was employed the followingyear by the Dutch, in a voyage of which it isdifficult to divine the object. He passed the North Capeon an eastward course, but afterwards returned to Newfoundland; and coasting North America, discovered theriver which at present bears his name, and on which theDutch soon after established a colony.Hudson's character as an able and enterprising navigatorwas so high, as to resuscitate the hopes of thosewho still believed in the existence of a north-westernpassage. A vessel of fifty-five tons, provisioned for sixmonths, was fitted out for the voyage, and placed underhis command. On the first week of June, Hudson arrivedat the entrance of Frobisher's Strait. He had longto struggle with the ice and contrary winds; but, persistingin a westerly course, he at length arrived at thenorth-western point of Labrador, which he named CapeWolstenholm, and descried a cluster of islands to thenorth-west, the nearest headland of which he called CapeDigges. Here the land seemed to turn towards the south,and a great sea opened to view But in this interestingpart of his voyage, the narrative of Hudson himselfsuddenly terminates; and we are acquainted with hisfuture proceedings only through the medium of the imperfectand doubtful relation of Aback Pricket, one ofhis mutinous crew. The discontents which ended in thedestruction of this celebrated navigator began here firstto show themselves. Hudson, it appears, when besetwith ice, and despairing how he should proceed, showedhis crew that he had already advanced above a hundredleagues farther in the strait than any preceding navigator.Afterwards proceeding to the south, he entered a bay.CHAP. XI. VOYAGES TO THE NOllTH. 1 6*7which was named Michaelmas Bay, from the day onwhich it was first discovered. During three monthshe was involved in a labyrinth of islands and intricatechannels. But on the 1st of November they hauled theship aground, and ten days after were frozen in.Hudson, it appears, had charitably taken under hisprotection a young man of the name of Green, of respectableconnections but profligate manners; and hadcarried him to sea, to serve in the capacity of clerk.The want of provisions soon produced discontents,which this young man ungratefully inflamed to the destructionof his benefactor. At the commencement ofwinter, the white partridges were in such abundancethat little suffering was experienced from actual want offood; but these were succeeded by geese, ducks, swans,and other fowls more difficult to surprise; and the menwere at length reduced to feed on moss and frogs. Onthe breaking up of the ice in spring, fish were taken, atfirst in large quantities. But this resource also soon disappeared.At length Hudson made preparations to leavethe bay; and with tears in his eyes distributed to thecrew the stock of provisions that remained, and whichwas barely sufficient for fourteen days. On the 21st ofJune the conspiracy broke out. Green and his associateshad secretly resolved to turn the master and the sickmen adrift, and to share the provisions among the remainder.The following oath was administered to eachof the conspirators: — "You shall swear truth to Godsyour prince, and country; you shall do nothing but tothe glory of God and the good of the action in hand,and harm to no man." Immediately after, Hudson wasseized and bound, and was lowered with the sick andlame men, nine persons in all, into the boat. A fowling-piece,some ammunition, a small quantity of meal, andan iron pot, were all that was allowed them. The tow-ropewas then cut, and the boat turned adrift among thefloating ice, in a situation which it is painful to contemplate.When the boat was out of sight, the mutineersbegan to feel some misgivings as to the course whichm 41 6'8 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.they should pursue. They feared to return to England;and Green, who was short after elected captain, vowedthat he would keep the sea till he had the king's seal toshow for his safety. In an island near Cape Digges,however, Green was killed in a quarrel with the savages.The survivors, now reduced to desperate extremities,endeavoured to shape their course for Ireland. Theirscanty supply of wild fowl was soon consumed; and theywere compelled at last to eat their candles, and to frythe skins and crushed bones of the fowls, which, with alittle vinegar, is stated to have made " a good dish ofmeat." In this part of the voyage, Robert Ive, thechief of the mutineers after Green, expired from absolutewant. They at length arrived in the bay of Galloway,whence they were carried in a fishing-smack toPlymouth. *CHAP. XII.VOYAGES TO THE NORTH.voyage of sir thomas button. beaches the westernshore of hudson's bat. winters in nelson's river.his ability as a commander. gibbons attempts tofollow op his discoveries. voyage of blot and baffin.skill of the latter in the science of navigation.their second voyage. instructions giventhem. discover baffin's bay. extraordinary variationof the compass. extent of their navigation.—commencement of the north sea fishery. voyages ofsteven bennet. cherry island taken possession opby the muscovy company. whale fishery begins.voyages of james poole. — mayen's island discovered.Baffin's observations. — voyages of fox and james.reports of canadian hunters. first english settlementmade in Hudson's bay. — Hudson's bay companyINCORPORATED. WOOd's VOYAGE TO NOVA ZF.MBLA.UNFORTUNATE EXPEDITION OF KNIGHT TO HUDSON 's BAY.Purchas hia Pilgrims, voL iiiVOYAGES TO THE NORTH.VOYAGE OF CAPTAIN Middleton. CONTROVERSY BETWEENDOBBS AND Middleton. REWARD PROPOSED BY GovernmentFOR THE DISCOVERY OF A NORTH-WEST PASSAGE.The great sea discovered by Henry Hudson to the westof Cape Wolstenholm was a new beacon lighted up, asit were, for the guidance of future discovery. The merchantsof London caused an expedition to be fitted outin lfi 12, which they intrusted to captain (afterwards sirThomas) Button, an able seaman, at that time in theservice of the accomplished prince Henry. Pricket andBylot, who both accompanied Henry Hudson in his lastunfortunate voyage, though they might both be justlysuspected of having participated in the guilt of themutiny, yet, being recommended by their experience ofthe western seas, were engaged to proceed in the presentvoyage. The names of the vessels equipped were thesame as those which sailed under the celebrated Cookin his last voyage — the Resolution and the Discovery.Button, entering Hudson's Straits, kept an undeviatingwesterly course, till he reached the coast of a largeisland, at present called Southampton Island. From thiscontinuing to sail westward, he fell in with the mainlandof America in latitude 60° 40', to which he gavethe name of Hopes Checked, He now ran south; andwhen in latitude 57° 10', on the 1.5th of August, enteredthe mouth of a river, to which he gave the nameof Nelson's River, and on which was subsequently situatedthe chief establishment of the Hudson's Bay company.In this place he made preparations to spend thewinter. Some of the crew died from the intensity of thecold. But in spring there were intervals of mild weather,of which Button took advantage to employ his companyin killing game. White partridges were in suchmultitudes, that no less than eighteen hundred dozenare said to have been taken and consumed by the crewsof the two vessels. Button, who seems to have beena person of consummate ability, did not neglect anymeans of supporting the spirits of his people under thedepressing influence of cold and inactivity. He proposed170 modern VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.to them questions on the subject of navigation and discovery,so as to mingle amusement with instruction;and animated their zeal, while he kept their minds fromdrooping. The art of managing a crew, in which theearly Spanish navigators were so deficient, and of whichwe have seen such an instance of unexampled skill in therecent voyages of captain Parry, appears to have beenduly attended to by sir Thomas Button. In April, whenthe ice disappeared, he launched his vessels, and sailingnorthward, along the western coast of Hudson's Bay, asfar as lat. 65°, he fell in with a cluster of islands, towhich he gave the name of Cancel's (at present Mansfield's)Islands. After this he directed his course homeward,passing Cape Whitley; and in sixteen days reachedEngland, in the autumn of 1613. Button was the firstwho reached the eastern coast of America, on the westernside of Hudson's Bay. His expedition appears to havebeen conducted with remarkable firmness and skill; yethe never published an account of it, and even somemystery was allowed to hang over the object and theissue of his voyage. It seems surprising, that one whohad acquitted himself with such ability in the difficulttask of navigating unexplored seas was not again sentforth to prosecute his discoveries. The death of hispatron prince Henry seems to have put a stop to hisexertions. But captain Gibbons, his relation, the companionof his former voyage, proceeded, in 1614, in theDiscovery, to seek the north-west passage, respectingthe existence of which sir Thomas Button, it seems,entertained the most sanguine expectations. But Gibbonswas so harassed throughout his voyage by boisterouswinds, fogs, and floating ice, that he was unableto make any progress, and returned without adding anytiling to geographical discovery.Notwithstanding the numerous disappointments whichhad occurred in the attempts to discover a north-westpassage, the visible progress of geographical knowledge,arising from the active spirit of maritime enterprise, wastoo great to admit of discouragement. The merchantsCHAP. XII. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 1?1adventurers, who had felt the advantage of possessing alarge field for their operations, were determined to persevere.In l6l 5, the Discovery was fitted out for afourth voyage towards the north-west. Robert Bylot,who had frequently navigated those seas, was appointedmaster ; and William Baffin, who wrote the account ofthe voyage, his mate. The crew was composed of fourteenmen and two boys — so small was the force withwhich those difficult enterprises were undertaken. Onthe voyage out icebergs were seen, some of which were2-10 feet above the sea, and, including the submergedportion, were calculated to be at least l6'80 feet Inheight. William Baffin had sailed in l6'12 with JamesHall, in the expedition which proved so fatal to its commander,and had written an account of the voyage, whichis chiefly remarkable as being the first on record rhwhich a method is laid down for determining the longitudeat sea by an observation of the heavenly bodies. *And it is evident, from the rules proposed, that Baffinpossessed a considerable degree of knowledge of thetheory as well as practice of navigation. In this voyagewith Bylot, Baffin continued to exercise his scientificacquirements. In the neighbourhood of ResolutionIsland he saw the sun and moon at the same time, andavailed himself of this circumstance to make an observationfor the longitude. He observes, with much justice," if observations of this kind or some other weremade at places far remote, as at the Cape Bona Speranza,Bantam, Japan, Nova Albion, and Magellan's Straits, Isuppose we should have a truer geography than wehave." Our navigators, observing the tide to flow fromthe northward, were at one time confident of success*But as they advanced within the inlets which flatteredtheir hopes, the holiness of the water soon undeceivedthem ; and after running great risks from the floatingice, they passed Resolution Island in the beginning ofAugust, and reached England in a month without theloss of a man.Barrow, p. 201.172 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.The merits of Baffin as a skilful navigator were tooconspicuous to allow him to remain unemployed. Hisnumerous observations supplied philosophers with thematerials of speculation, and compensated, in some degree,the absence of geographical discoveries. Thesame company of merchants who had equipped the precedingexpedition again fitted out the little bark, theDiscovery, for her fifth voyage in search of a north-westpassage. Robert Bylot was again appointed master, andWilliam Baffin pilot. The following clear and well-digestedinstructions for their voyage were probablydrawn up without consulting the latter, who seems neverto have relished this voyage.For your course you must make all possible hasteto the Cape Desolation ; and from thence, you, WilliamBaffin, as pilot, keep along the coast of Greenland, andup Fretum Davis, until you come toward the heightof 80°, if the land will give you leave. Then, for feareof inhaling by keeping too northerly a course, shapeyour course west and southerly so farre as you shall thinkit convenient, till you come to the latitude of 60°; thendirect your course to fall in with the land of Yedzo,about that height, leaving your farther sailing southwardto your owne discretion, according as the time of theyear and the winds will give you leave. Although ourdesires be, if your voyage prove so prosperous thatyou may have the year before you, that you go so farresoutherly as that you may touch the north part of Japan,from whence or from Yedzo, if you can so compass itwithout danger, we would have you to bring home oneof the men of the countrey ; and so, God blessing youwith all expedition, to make your return home againe." *The Discovery sailed from Gravesend on the 26th ofMarch, l6l6, with seventeen persons on board. Runningnorthward in Davis's Straits, they anchored in asound in lat. 70° 20'. The natives fled from them,leaving their dogs behind. The rise of the tide here wasonly eight or nine feet, — a circumstance which Baffin• Purchas, voL iii.CHAP. XII. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 173looked upon as a presage of disappointment. The inhabitantsof this coast were wretchedly poor, living onseals' flesh, which they devoured raw. They were supposedby our voyagers to worship the sun, pointingconstantly to it, and stroking their breasts, while theycalled out at the same time, Ilyout! But, perhaps, thetrue meaning of these gestures was, that their visitors;were men who had come from that luminary. As theice was now disappearing, Baffin persisted in a northerlycourse ; but the weather was occasionally dreadfully cold;and on Midsummer day the sails and ropes were frozenso hard that they could scarcely be handled. In lat.75° 40' the ice disappeared, and the prospect of an opensea again revived the hopes of a passage. Stormy weatherforced them into a sound, in which there were so manywhales that they named it Whale Sound. To another spaciousinlet, running to the north of 78°, they gave thename of Sir Thomas Smith's Sound; and an island near itwas called Hakluyt's Island. " This sound," says Baffin,is admirable in one respect, because in it is the greatestvariation in the compass of any part of the world known ;for, by divers good observations, I found it to be abovefive points or 56° varied to the westward." They nowstood to the south-westward in an open sea, and with astiff gale, till they made land near the entrance of a soundwhich they named Alderman Jones' s Sound. Still proceedingwestward, they found again in 74° 40' anothergreat opening, which they called Sir James Lancaster'sSound. The hope of a passage was now greatly diminished;the shore was unapproachable from the ice,which seemed to thicken towards the south. They sailedalong this barrier, however, till they came down to65° 40', near the opening of Cumberland's Strait. Here,there remained no longer any hope of a western passage ;and as the men were sickly, they stood across for thecoast of Greenland, where, making salads of scurvy-grass,sorrel, and open, the crew soon recovered. They leftthis harbour on the Cth of August, and anchored safelyat Plymouth on the 13th of the same month; " for the174 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.which," says Baffin, " and all other his blessings, theLord make us thankful." This voyage, in which Baffindiscovered the sea which now bears his name, and hadadvanced so many degrees beyond any preceding navigator,is not described by him with his usual minutenessand copiousness of detail. So few geographical pointswere settled in the published account of his navigation,that " Baffin's Bay" was for a long time drawn in thecharts almost from the fancy of the artist. The meagrenessof his narrative, indeed, and the deficiency ofparticulars, are in some measure attributable to Purchas,who says " that Baffin's map, with the tables of hisjournal and sailing, were somewhat troublesome, and toocostly to insert." *Mercantile enterprise did not fail to take advantageof the enlargement of geographical information. Thevoyages into the arctic seas, though they failed in discoveringa passage to the Indies, laid the foundation ofseveral lucrative branches of trade. So early as the year1603, Steven Bennet sailed with a small vessel, fittedout by the " worshipful Francis Cherie," to Cola on thenorthern coast of Lapland, with instructions to disposeof the cargo in that place, and afterwards to proceed ondiscovery. Bennet sailed north from Cola till he foundan island, on which he saw foxes, but no inhabitants.He determined its latitude to be 7&° 30', and gave itthe name of Cherry Island, which it still retains ; thoughit is the same which Barentz had discovered and namedBear Island several years before. Bennet returned toCherry Island the following year, and found it coveredwith a multitude of fowls and morses. The teeth of thelatter were a valuable article of trade; and his crew endeavoured,unsuccessfully, to take a cargo of them. Theyblew out the eyes of the morses with small shot, and thenattacked the blind animals with hatchets. But this cruelproceeding was of little avail ; and of a thousand theykilled but fifteen. The next year another voyage wasmade to Cherry Island by the same owners ; and theyPurchas, vol. iii.CHAP. XII. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 175had improved so far in the art of taking the walrus, thatthey succeeded not only in procuring a cargo of theteeth, hut also in boiling the blubber into oil. They atthe same time discovered a lead mine, and brought homewith them a small quantity of the ore. This traderapidly improved. When Bennet visited the island in16'06, he collected, in a fortnight, three hogsheads ofteeth and twenty-two tons of oil. His employers againproceeded with him to Cherry Island in 16*08; and inthe space of seven hours they killed nearly a thousandmorses. A couple of these animals were brought home,and the male was exhibited to the court, " where theking and many honourable personages beheld it withadmiration for the strangeness of the same, the likewhereof had never before been seen in England. Notlong after, it fell sick and died. As the beast in shapeis very strange, so it is of strange docility, and apt tobe taught, as by good experience we often proved." Theweather in Cherry Island at the end of June is said tobe calm and clear, and as warm as it usually is in Englandat the same season. The pitch ran down the ship'ssides, and the tar exuded from the sides of the mast thatfaced the sun. These profitable voyages could not failto catch the attention of monopolists ; and formal possessionwas taken of Cherry Island in lGOQ, in the nameof the Muscovy company. Multitudes of foxes werenow seen; several bears were killed; three lead minesdiscovered ; and, what is remarkable, five ships happenedto meet here at the same time, whose united crewsamounted to 182 men, all engaged in lading with furs,oil, and walrus' teeth. The Muscovy company, havingtaken possession of Cherry Island, despatched a smallvessel towards the north pole in 1610, for the doublepurpose of trade and discovery. Jonas Poole, who hadbeen on all the former voyages, was appointed master.He advanced beyond 78° ; and repeats emphaticallyan important observation which had been made bypreceding navigators, that the climate in the open sea,towards the pole, is much more temperate than in lower1 76 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IVlatitudes. " A passage," he says, " may be as soonattained this way by the pole as any unknown waywhatsoever, by reason the sun doth give a great heat inthis climate, and the ice that freeze here is nothingso huge as I have seen in 73°." Poole did not reachbeyond 79° 50' in this voyage, which was intendednot only as an experiment to " catch a whale or two,"and to kill walruses, but also for northern discovery.This is manifest from the tenour of his instructions,which are conceived in the following terms : — " Inasmuchas it hath pleased Almightie God, throughthe industry of yourself e and others, to discover untoour nation a land lying in eighth degrees toward thenorth pole ; we are desirous not only to discover fartherto the northward along the said land, to find whetherthe same be an island or a mayne, and which waythe same doth trend, either to the eastward or to thewestward of the pole ; as also whether the same be inhabitedby any people, or whether there be an open seafarther north than hath been already discovered," &c*Jonas Poole sailed again in loll, in company withthe first ship despatched from England for the expresspurpose of killing the whale : six Biscayans, accustomedto that business, were added to the crew. Whilethis ship was engaged in fishing, Poole proceeded as farnorthward as 80 J , near Spitsbergen, and then crossingwestward, ran along the eastern shore of Greenland,forty leagues beyond the most northern point laid downin the charts. In the same year, Jan Mayen, the commanderof a Dutch whaler, discovered to the north ofIceland the island which still bears his name, and whichwas for many years a fishing station for the Dutch,where they boiled their blubber, till it became unapproachableby the accumulation of ice. So rapid wasthe improvement made, chiefly by the assistance of theBiscayans, in the art of killing whales, that Poole's shipalone this voyage took no fewer than thirteen : and inthe year l6l.'3, above twenty ships — French, Dutch,Purchas, vol. iii.CHAP. XII. VOYAGES TO THE North. 1 77Spanish, and Biscay — besides six from England, wereassembled together in the sea of Spitsbergen ; one ofthe English ships was commanded by the celebratednavigator William Baffin.The English, having taken possession of Spitsbergenin the name of his majesty, prohibited the ships ofother nations from fishing there. It was expected thatthe foreign fishermen would resist this order, but theyquietly submitted to the usurped authority of theEnglish. In this voyage the observant Baffin remarkedthe extraordinary refraction of the atmosphere innorthern latitudes, and determined its quantity at thehorizon to be twenty-six minutes ;. and he philosophicallyadds, " I suppose the refraction is more or lesse accordingas the air is thick or clear, which I leave for betterscholars to discuss." He did not despair of the probabilityof a passage by the pole, relying on the existenceof a spacious sea between Greenland and Spitsbergen ;and he recommended the Muscovy company to expendannually 150/. or 200/. in exploring the northern seas,a task which he thinks might be adequately performedby a little pinnace, with a crew of only ten men.The great success of the northern fisheries again rousedthe Danes into action. In 1619, two ships, chieflymanned by English seamen, and commanded by JanMunk, were fitted out on a voyage of discovery, with theintention of pursuing the tracks of Hudson and of Baffin.The ice prevented Munk from running along the westerncoast of Greenland : he consequently steered for Hudson'sStrait ; and finding the coast of America in 63° 20',he took shelter in a harbour (perhaps the ChesterfieldInlet of our maps) to which he gave the name of Munk'sWinter Harbour. The surrounding country he namedNew Denmark. He entered this harbour on the 7th ofSeptember ; and as it was evidently impossible to crossHudson's Bay at this late season, he began to build huts,and to search the neighbouring country for game andfuel. His crews amounted in all to sixty-four men;but when the rigour of the winter prevented them from178 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERT. BOOK IV.exercising, and compelled them to live on salted provisions,they became afflicted with the scurvy. Whenthe spring approached, their bread was consumed; andthough game was in abundance, they had not sufficientstrength and activity to take it. Their condition wasnow most deplorable; famine was added to disease.Long comfortless, they were now without hope, anddied rapidly : Munk remained alone in a little hut, in sodejected a state as to expect nothing but death. Hungerat length compelled him to crawl forth and seek his companions; but of these he found only two alive — the resthad ali perished. The three survivors encouraged eachother in their efforts to procure food. They dug underthe snow for herbs and roots ; they took fish ; and, astheir strength returned, caught birds and other animals.At length they had the resolution to equip the smallerof their two vessels. They put to sea, and after a stormypassage, in which the ship was almost abandoned toherself, they arrived safely in a port in Norway. Thereturn of these men was looked upon, and justly, aslittle short of a miracle. That three men surviving aloneof the company of sixty-four, after enduring all the miseriesof an arctic winter, should recover by feeding upongrass and the coarsest herbs, should collect provisionsfor their voyage, and bring home one of their ships insafety, is a narrative which almost exceeds the boundsof credibility.The severities of the climate, perhaps, rather than thedangers of a sea beset with ice, deterred navigatorsfrom the prosecution of voyages to the north-west. But,indeed, the voyage of Baffin in l6l6 seemed so conclusiveagainst the existence of a passage round the northof the American continent, as greatly to discourage futureexertions in that quarter. In consequence, manyyears elapsed without any further attempts being madeto follow up those ungrateful researches, until in 1631captain Luke Fox, who, he says, " had been itching afternorthern discovery ever since 1606, when he wished tohave gone as mate to John Knight," obtained from theCHAP. XII. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 179king the loan of one of his ships for the proposed voyage.On taking leave, he received from the king a map of allhis predecessor's discoveries, his majesty's instructions,and a letter to the emperor of Japan.Fox was a bold man, but inordinately self-conceited ;and this failing appears conspicuously in the florid accountwhich he has given of his expedition. Yet hewarns " the gentle reader not to expect here any flourishingphrases or eloquent terms ; for this child of mine,begot in the north-west's cold clime, where they breed noscholars, is not able to digest the sweet milk of rhetoric." *In Hudson's Strait, Fox was much hampered with ice,the masses of which nevertheless he affirms " were seldombigger than a great church'' At Salisbury Island,he observes that the needle becomes sluggish or insensible,a phenomenon which he ascribes " to the sharpness ofthe air interposed between the needle and his attractivepoint." To an island on the eastern coast of Americahe gave the name of Sir Thomas Rowe's Welcome :here he found the burying place of the natives ; and withthe bodies were deposited bows, arrows, and darts, manyof which were headed with iron, and one with copper ;whence it was concluded that Europeans had been therebefore. At Nelson's River he found a cross which hadbeen erected there by sir Thomas Button. Fox returnedto England on the last day of October, " not havinglost one man nor boy, nor any manner of tackling, havingbeen forth near six months, all glory be to God."He was evidently dissatisfied With the issue of his voyage,and continued firmly to maintain the probability ofa north-west passage, which he thought might be foundin Sir Thomas Rowe's Welcome, Adhere the tide wasobserved to come from the northward, and where themultitude of the whales seemed to indicate the proximityof a great sea. While Fox was preparing to embarkin this enterprise, the merchants of Bristol, determinedto contest with London the praise of maritime activity,despatched captain Thomas James with like instructions,North West Fox. 1655.N 2180 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.and furnished by the king with similar credentials. ButJames was probably much less able, and certainly lessfortunate, than Fox. His ship suffered much in Hudson'sBay from ice and boisterous winds : " For the sea," hesays, " so continually over-reached us, that we werelike Jonas in the whale's belly." As his ignorance ofthe art of navigating among ice kept him in continualembarrassment, he could not venture to cross Hudson'sBay at the commencement of winter, and preferred remainingon an island now called Charlton Island, lyingin latitude 52°. A hut was built for the sick, and coveredwith the main sail. These poor men had toendure the usual miseries of an arctic winter. Theirwine, vinegar, oil, and every thing else that was liquid,were frozen as hard as wood, so that they were obligedto cut them with a hatchet. In February the scurvybegan to make its appearance among the crew, and itwas not till July that they could get the ship ready fortheir homeward voyage. James was evidently an unskilfulnavigator ; and if not actually timid, was at leastwell disposed to magnify difficulties. He was one ofthe few who maintained the improbability of a northwestpassage ; and his opinion had less weight, as it wascontradicted by those who displayed far more sagacityand skill in the conduct of a similar enterprise.The voyages to Hudson's Bay, although they did notdisprove the existence of a north-west passage, were notcalculated to raise sanguine expectations of finding it inthat quarter. Besides, the difficulties of the navigationand the hardships arising from the climate gave navigatorsa disinclination to proceed thither. The Englishhad almost forgotten Hudson's Bay, when an accidentagain drew their attention towards it ; and it becamethe object of commercial, when it ceased to awakengeographical interest.The French settlers in Canada, in their travels throughthe interior in search of peltry, at length arrived on theshores of Hudson's Bay. One of these adventurers,named Grosseliez, having visited that coast, conceivedCHAP. XII. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 181that it possessed great advantages for the prosecution ofthe fur trade. He proceeded to France and laid hisrepresentations before government. He met, however,with no encouragement from the French ministers ; butthe English ambassador at Paris listened to him withattention, and gave him a letter to prince Rupert, withwhich he came over to England. Here he was favourablyreceived, and immediately engaged to go out in oneof his majesty's ships; not merely to make a settlementin Hudson's Bay, but also to seek again for the passageto China by the north-west. Respecting this projectedvoyage, Mr. Oldenburg, the first secretary to the RoyalSociety, writes in the following terms to the celebratedMr. Boyle : — " Surely I need not tell you from hencewhat is said here with great joy of the discovery ofa north-west passage made by two English and oneFrenchman, lately represented by them to his majestyat Oxford, and answered by the royal grant of a vesselto sail into Hudson's Bay, and thence into the South Sea;these men affirming, as I heard, that with a boat theywent out of a lake in Canada into a river which dischargeditself north-west into the South Sea, into whichthey went, and returned north-east into Hudson's Bay."Captain Zachariah Gillam was appointed to carry outGrosseliez to Hudson's Bay, and to prosecute the northwesterndiscoveries. Gillam wintered at Rupert's River,considerably to the north of Charlton Island, yet doesnot complain of the severity and long continuance of thecold, from which James's company suffered so much.At this place captain Gillam laid the foundation of thefirst English settlement, by building a small stone fort,to which he gave the name of Fort Charles. The king,who had encouraged the expedition, continued to favourthe adventurers " in consideration of their having undertaken,at their own costs and charges, an expedition toHudson's Bay for the discovery of a new passage intothe South Sea, and for the finding of some trade infurs, minerals, and other commodities, whereby greatadvantage might probably arise to the king and his dow3182 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. ROOK IV.minions. His majesty, for the better promoting theirendeavours for the good of his people, was pleased toconfer on them exclusively all the lands and territoriesm Hudson's Bay, together with all the trade thereof,and all others which they should acquire," &c. Thisextraordinary charter, with its sweeping exclusive privileges,which was granted to the Hudson's Bay Companyin 1669, continues without abridgment to thepresent day. Though discovery was among the ostensibleobjects of this charter, the indolence of monopolyprevailed, and for some time the north-west passageseems wholly to have been forgotten.In the mean time, however, the hope of a north-eastpassage to China was revived by the writings of JosephMoon, a fellow of the Royal Society. Besides thespeculative arguments adduced by this gentleman insupport of his opinion, he relates that he received anaccount from the pilot of a Greenland ship that he hadsailed to the north pole : " whereupon his relation beingnovel to me, I entered into discourse with him, andseemed to question the truth of what he said ; but hedid assure me that it was true, and that the ship wasthen at Amsterdam, and many of the seamen belongingto her could justify the truth of it ; and told me, moreover,that they had sailed two degrees beyond the pole.I asked him if they found no land or islands about thepole ? He replied, ' No ; it was a free and open sea.'I asked him if they did not meet with a great deal ofice ? He said, ' No ; they saw no ice.' I asked himwhat weather they had there ? He told me fine warmweather, such as was at Amsterdam in the summer time,and as hot." *Hope once more awakened, enterprise was sure tofollow. Captain John Wood, an active and experiencedseaman, who had accompanied sir John Marlborough inIts voyage to the South Sea, presented a memorial tothe king, in which he strongly supported the existenceof a north-east passage. His arguments met with attendBrief Discourse, by Joseph Moon, F.R.S. 1675.CHAP. XII. VOYAGES TO THE NORTH. 183tion ; and two vessels, the Speedwell and Prosperous,were equipped for the expedition. They were victualledfor sixteen months, and stored with such merchandiseas was thought most likely to turn to account on thecoast of Tartary and Japan. Wood sailed in 1676,holding a good course to the north, desiring to keep as faras possible from land ; but at length finding the seacovered with ice before him, he had no choice but to runnorth-west, and thus seemingly retreat from the object ofhis destination, or else to approach the land by holding asouth-eastern course. Towards the end of June he sawthe western coast of Nova Zembla ; but soon after, hisvessel struck on a ridge of rocks and went entirely topieces. Wood and his crew were saved in the smallervessel ; but after this misfortune all thoughts of prosecutingthe voyage were at an end. Wood suffered hischagrin to overcome his candour ; and though he hadadvocated by many ingenious arguments the existenceof a north-east passage, yet on the loss of his ship hechanged his opinion, and disingenuously criticised theaccounts of preceding navigators.In the beginning of the eighteenth century Mr. Knight,governor of the factory established by the Hudson's Baycompany on Nelson's River, learned from the nativeIndians, that at some distance to the northward, and onthe banks of a navigable river or inlet, there was a richmine of native copper. He immediately applied to thecompany for ships to discover this rich mine. Hisrepresentations, however, met with no attention, andhe was obliged to remind the company that they werebound by their charter to make discoveries ; and hethreatened to call on government to enforce that conditionbefore they would comply. Two ships were atlength fitted out for the expedition, the sole direction ofwhich was entrusted to him ; and he sailed in 1719?by God's permission, to find out the Straits of Anian,in order to discover gold and other valuable commoditiesto the northward." These ships never returned; andmany years elapsed before any thing was known respect4>1 84 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.ing the fate of the unhappy crews. A vessel, indeed,was despatched in 1722, from Churchill River, in Hudson'sBay, under the command of captain Scrooge, insearch of the preceding expedition. But the narrativeof his voyage makes no allusion to those enquiries whichought to have been his principal object. He broughtback, however, a confirmation of the reports respectingthe existence of a copper mine. " He had seen twonorthern Indians, who told him of a rich copper minesomewhere in that country, upon the shore, near thesurface of the earth ; and they could direct the sloop sonear it as to lay her side to it, and be soon loaded withit. They had brought some pieces of copper from it toChurchill, that made it evident there was a mine thereabouts.They had sketched out the country with charcoalbefore they left Churchill, and so far as they wentit agreed very well." *Nothing was learned respecting the melancholy fateof Knight and his companions till the summer of 1 1&9,when Mr. Herne collected from the Esquimaux in theneighbourhood of Marble Island the following account :" When the vessels arrived at this place (Marble Island)it was very late in the fall, and in getting theminto the harbour the largest received much damage ; buton being fairly in, the English began to build the house,their number at that time seeming to be about fifty.As soon as the ice permitted in the following summer,1720, the Esquimaux paid them another visit ; bywhich time the number of the English was very greatlyreduced, and those that were living seemed very unhealthy.According to the account given by the Esquimaux,they were then very busily employed, but aboutwhat they could not easily describe ; probably in lengtheningthe long boat, for at a little distance from thehouse there was now lying a great quantity of oak chips,which had been made most assuredly by carpenters.A sickness and famine occasioned such havock» Account of the Countries adjoining Hudson's Bay. By Arthur Dobbs,Esq.CHAP. XII. SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST. 185among the English, that hy the setting in of the secondwinter their number was reduced to twenty. Thatwinter, 1720, some of the Esquimaux took up theirabode on the opposite side of the harbour to that onwhich the English had built their houses, and frequentlysupplied them with such provisions as they had, whichchiefly consisted of whales' blubber, and seals' flesh, andtrain oil. When the spring advanced, the Esquimauxwent to the continent ; and on their visiting Marble Islandagain, in the summer of 1721, they only found fiveof the English alive, and those were in such distress forprovisions that they eagerly ate the seals' flesh, andwhales' blubber quite raw as they purchased it from thenatives. This disordered them so much, that three ofthem died in a few days ; and the other two, though veryweak, made a shift to bury them. Those two survivedmany days after the rest, and frequently went to the topof an adjacent rock, and earnestly looked to the southand east as if in expectation of some vessels coming totheir relief. After continuing there a considerable timetogether, and nothing appearing in sight, they sat downclose together and wept bitterly. At length one of thetwo died, and the other's strength was so far exhausted,that he fell down and died also in attempting to dig agrave for his companion. The skulls and other largebones of those two men are now lying above ground,close to the house. The longest fiver was, according tothe Esquimaux' account, always employed in workingiron into implements for them ; probably he was thearmourer or smith." *Journey from Prince of Wales Fort, &c. by Samuel Herne.186 MODERN Voyages OF DISCOVERY.CHAP. XIII.SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST.JOURNEY OF JENKINEON TO BOKHARA. DESCRIPTION OF astrachan.Timor SULTAN. MANNERS OF THE Turbans.—BLADEBONE DIVINATION. — BOKHARA. TRADE OF THE Caspian.TRADE OF VENICE WITH THE EAST. THE ENGLISHENGAGE IN THE LEVANT TRADE. JOURNEY OF FITCH ANDNEWBERY TO INDIA. FIRST VOYAGE FROM ENGLAND TOINDIA BY THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE. UNFORTUNATE RESULT.EAST INDIA COMPANY INCORPORATED. SUCCESSFUL VOYAGEOF LANCASTER. MIDDLETON SAILS TO THE MOLUCCAS. —AN AMBASSADOR SENT TO THE GREAT MOGUL. EAST INDIATRADE OF THE DUTCH, i— THEY Supplant THE PORTUGUESEIN JAPAN. VANDERHAGEN's EXPEDITION. ADVENTURESOF WILLIAM ADAMS. HE BUILDS A SHIP FOR THE EMPEROROF JAPAN. HIS INTEREST AT COURT. NOT ALLOWED TODEIWRT. FAVOURS THE DUTCH. HIS LETTER. CAPTAINSARIS ARRIVES AT JAPAN. HIS DESCRIPTION OF THAT Country.THE EMPEROR'S LETTER TO THE KING OF ENGLAND.TERMINATION OF THE ENGLISH TRADE WITH JAPAN.DUTCHMEN WRECKED ON Cora. THEIR ADVENTURES. —ESCAPE. THEIR DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY. VOYAGESOF THE FRENCH TO THE EAST. — Picard DE LAVAL WRECKEDON THE MALDIVES. — HIS ACCOUNT OF THOSE ISLANDS.— HISDREAM AND FORTUNATE LIBERATION.The success of Chancelor's mission to Moscow divertedthe attention of the merchant adventurers for a timefrom seeking a passage to the Indian seas. But a betteracquaintance with the newly discovered country, Russia,tended to inflame that ardour in the pursuit of easterncommerce which it had for a moment allayed. It wasfound that the Russians carried on a lucrative trade withPersia and Bokhara ; and it was determined to turn toadvantage the favour with which the English werereceived at the court of Moscow, and to trace the commercialroutes of the interior of Asia. For this purposeMr. Anthony Jenkinsonon was selected; a resolute andCHAP. XIII. SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST. Isintelligent gentleman, well acquainted with Muscovy,to which country he had made several journeys, andwhere he afterwards appeared in the quality of ambassadorfrom queen Elizabeth.Jenkinsonon departed from Moscow in April, 1558.The country between the Volga and the Caspian hefound desolate and depopulated: the inhabitants, to thenumber of a hundred thousand, were in that yeardestroyed by civil war, pestilence, and famine, to thegreat satisfaction, he observes, of the Russians. The cityof Astracan appeared to him neither strong nor handsome.The ramparts were built of earth : all the houses,except the governor's, were of the meanest description.The only food was fish, especially sturgeon : these werehung up in their streets and houses to dry. The air wasin consequence infected, and the myriads of flies thatswarmed round the putrefying fishes were insupportable.The distress among the Nogay Tatars in the neighbourhoodwas so great, that they offered their children forsale, and Jenkinsonon could have bought thousands of themfor a small loaf of bread apiece. Merchants resortedto Astracan in great numbers; but the commodities inwhich they trafficked were bought in such small quantitiesas to excite the contempt of our English traveller,who concludes " that there is no hope of a trade inthose parts worth following."On the 6th of August, Jenkinsonon embarked with hismerchandise on the Volga, in company with some Persiansand Tatars, to enter the Caspian sea, being obligedto take upon himself the care of the navigation.In four days he entered the Caspian; and nine daysafter passed the mouth of the river Jack, on which,he tells us, is situated the town of Seraphic, the capitalof the greatest of the Nogay princes. But he adds,There is no trade in this country ; the natives havingno money but cattle, and living by robbery." He soonbecame acquainted with their propensity to pillage; for,the day after he passed the river, while the greater partof his crew were on shore, a boat containing thirty armed188 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.men came alongside of his bark, intending to make aprize of her. But one of Jenkinsonon's companions, a Mahometansaint, by prayers and oaths dissuaded them fromtheir purpose. They assured him that they came onlyto see whether there were any Russians or other unbelieversin the vessel ; and as he swore lustily that therewere none, they departed. In three weeks they arrivedat the port of Manguslave, on the south-eastern side ofthe Caspian. They were no sooner landed, than theyexperienced to the fullest extent the dishonest and rapacioustempers of the persons with whom they came todeal.Our merchants departed with a caravan of a thousandcamels; and in five days came to the dominions of TimourSultan, whose officers proceeded very unceremoniouslyto levy a large and arbitrary duty on the merchandise.Jenkinsonon, in consequence, hastened to thesultan himself, who received him kindly, and regaledhim with the flesh of a wild horse and mare's milk. Ifhe had not thus thrown himself on the hospitality ofthis Tatar prince, who was a noted robber, he wouldin all probability have been his victim. The sultan livedin the fields, without a town or castle. Jenkinsonon foundhim sitting in a small round house, built of reeds, coveredwith felt, and hung with carpets. The merchants,proceeding on their journey, travelled twenty days throughthe desert without seeing a house or habitation. Theirprovisions failing, they were forced to feed on their cattle.Jenkinsonon himself was obliged to kill a camel and a horse.There were no rivers; and the wells were few in number,deep, and scantily supplied with brackish water.In the city of Urjenz they remained a month ; and hereagain we are informed that the trade which is carried onby merchants from Persia and Bokhara " is not worthspeaking of." The manners and civilisation of thecountry which he had passed through are thus summarilydescribed by our author : — "All the country from theCaspian sea hither is called the Land of Workman. Thepeople dwell in tents, roving in great companies withCHAP. XIII. SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST. 189their camels, horses, and sheep; which last are large,and have tails weighing sixty or eighty pounds. Manyof the sheep as well as horses are wild, and are takenby means of hawks, who worry them till they are nolonger able to run. The khan and his five brothers rulethe whole country. Each is king in his own territory,and seeks to destroy the rest, as they are born of differentmothers, and are commonly the children of slaves.When these brothers are at war, which is commonlythe case, he who is vanquished flies to the desert, andthere robs travellers and caravans till he can gatherstrength to take the field again."Leaving Urjenz, our merchants travelled a hundredmiles along the banks of the Oxus, and then enteredanother great desert, where they were attacked by aformidable band of robbers, sent against them, as theysuspected, by the very prince whose protection theyhad just paid for. Here Jenkinsonon witnessed the Tatarmode of divination, which is still in vogue on the shoresof the Black Sea. An old pilgrim killed a sheep ; andburning the blade-bone, mixed the ashes with the blood,and then wrote certain mystic characters, from which hepretended to discover that they should be attacked byrobbers and should vanquish them. This predictionproved true, and justified the sagacity of the pilgrim.The city of Bokhara, our author informs us, is ofgreat extent, inclosed with a great wall of earth. Butof its trade and riches he seems to have formed a verylow estimation. Bad government and religious warfarewere the causes of its poverty. The Tatars and thePersians were continually at variance about certainarticles of faith, and particularly because the latter obstinatelyrefused to shave the upper lip.While Jenkinsonon was in Bokhara, caravans arrivedthere from India, Persia, Balkh, and Russia. But heagain observes, " that the merchants are so poor, andbring so few wares, that there is no hope of any tradeworth following." The trade with Cathay had beenobstructed for three years by the wars of Tasked and1 90 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Cashier. Similar impediments existed on the side ofPersia, and prevented our author from executing hispurpose of examining into the trade of that country ;although," he says, " he had learned enough atAstracan and Bokhara to perceive that it is not muchbetter than among the Tatars."In March, 1559, the English left Bokhara, to returnhome in company with a caravan of 600 camels ; andin ten days after, the city was besieged by the king ofSugarcane. On their arrival at the Caspian, they foundthat their ship had been stripped of all her rigging bythe roving Tatars. Jenkinsonon, however, contrived torefit her, and to proceed on his voyage. Of the Caspianhe remarks, " that the fewness of the ships, the want oftowns and harbours, the poverty of the people, and theice, rendered the trade good for nothing." He arrived atMoscow on the 2d of September; and shortly after appearingbefore the emperor, kissed his hand, presented him awhite cow's tail of Cathay and a Tatarian drum. He alsointroduced the Tatar ambassador who had accompaniedhim, and the Russian slaves whom he had redeemed.He was allowed to dine in the presence of the emperor,who honoured him so far as to send him meat from hisown table by a duke. Jenkinsonon's narrative contributedmuch to the improvement of geography, as he observedthe latitudes of the chief places through which he passed ;and his description of the Caspian reduced considerablythe excessive breadth from east to west assigned to thatsea by Ptolemy and his followers. The English whohad accompanied him had also collected itineraries of theroute to Cathay, which they learned to be a nine months'journey, together with many particulars concerning theinternal trade of Asia.The result of Jenkinsonon's journey was extremelyunfavourable to the hope of establishing a lucrativecommerce in the East through the channels laid open bythe friendly disposition of the czar of Muscovy. Englandwas still chiefly supplied with Indian produce bythe Venetians, who still carried on the trade by the RedOUAP. XIII. SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST. lullSea and Alexandria, as they had been used to do, withgreater profit, before the passage by the Cape of GoodHope was discovered. It is probable that the competitionof the Portuguese diminished their profits even inthis country : and the negotiations entered into by Elizabethwith the grand signor put an end to their carryingtrade altogether. The last of the Venetian argosies thatvisited this country, a great vessel of 1100 tons, waswrecked on the Needles at the Isle of Wight, in 1587,and all the crew and passengers perished except sevenpersons. After this the English themselves took anactive share in the Levant trade ; enjoying in the portsof Turkey the same privileges which had before beenexclusively held by the Venetians. This step towards atrade with the East was accompanied by other measurescalculated to improve our acquaintance with the easternmarts.Mr. Ralph Fitch, Mr. John Newbery, and two others,were despatched, in 1583, by some merchants of London,in order that they might extend the trade which theEnglish merchants had recently acquired in the Levant;and proceeding by Aleppo, Bagdad, and Bussorah, toOrmuz and Goa, they might procure the commodities ofIndia as nearly as possible at first hand. In the prospectof their being able to penetrate into India, and even intoChina, Newbury was furnished with letters of credencecr recommendation from queen Elizabeth to ZelabdimEchebar (Saladin Akbar or Akbar Shah, emperor of theMogul conquerors of Hindostan), who is styled king ofCambria, and also to the emperor of China. Thesetravellers are said to have visited Ceylon, Malacca, Pegu,and Siam, along with Hindostan. But though there isno doubt that they proceeded to India, there is muchreason to call in question the authenticity of the narrativeascribed to them. The expedition failed in itsintention chiefly through the jealousy of the Portuguese,by whom our travellers were thrown into prison atOrmuz. Newbery, in one of his letters, remarks, " althoughwe be Englishmen, I know no reason why we192 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IVmay not as well trade from place to place as the nativesof other countrys ; for all nations may and do comefreely to Ormuz, as Frenchmen, Flemings, Germans,Hungarians, Italians, Greeks, Armenians, Nazarenes,Turks, Moors, Jews, and Gentiles, Persians, and Muscovites.In short, there is no nation they seek to troublebut only ours." The cause of the antipathy which thePortuguese manifested to the English is explained in thesame letter, by the alarm which, our author tells us,the appearance of sir Francis Drake had created in theIndian seas.The first attempt of the English to reach the Indieswas made, as we have already seen, in the year 1527,when a ship was despatched to seek a direct passage toCathay by the north pole. The English at that timedid not feel themselves competent to cope with the navalstrength of Portugal ; and were desirous, in consequence,of finding some passage by which they could reach theEast without encountering the fleets of their jealousrivals. But all the attempts to find a passage by thenorth proved unsuccessful ; and, on the other hand, thevoyages of Drake and Candish showed how little theEnglish had to fear from the maritime superiority ofany nation. They may be truly said to have openedthe route to the East. The English nation, rapidlyincreasing in resources, and taught by recent politicalevents to know its strength, resolved to share in theprofits of that trade to which its enemies arrogantlypretended an exclusive right. In 1591 three ships werefitted out for a voyage to the Indies by the Cape ofGood Hope — the first which the English had as yetattempted by that route. The object of the expeditionwas not to carry on trade, but to cruise on the Portuguese.Its issue, however, was in the highest degreeunfortunate. One of the ships was obliged to returnfrom the Cape of Good Hope with the sick men of thefleet, who were very numerous : another was lost, withallher crew, about sixty leagues beyond the Cape : thethird, commanded by captain James Lancaster, reachedCHAP. XIII. SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST. 1,93the East Indies in a shattered plight ; and, on her returnhome, being forced by stress of weather to the WestIndies, was there cast away; and Lancaster, with onlyseven of his companions remaining, was compelled toreturn home in a French privateer. All these disasters,however, did not discourage the English merchants, whoknew that success is rarely had without perseverance.English seamen and merchants, in great numbers, hadvisited the East in foreign vessels, and agreed in representingit as an easy matter to establish factories andcarry on a lucrative trade in the Indies. The chiefmerchants of London were resolutely bent on accomplishingthis end ; and they found no difficulty in obtainingfrom queen Elizabeth a charter, dated the 31stof December, 1 600, by which they were incorporated asThe governour and company of merchants of Londontrading to the East Indies." This charter was exclusive,the queen binding herself not to grant a charter toany other merchants for a space of fifteen years. Thenewly established company despatched five ships in May,l6'01, under the command of Lancaster, with cargoesvalued at 27,000/. This voyage had a fortunate termination: the admiral, as Lancaster was styled, concludeda treaty with the king of Ache, sent a pinnaceto the Moluccas, established a factory in the island ofJava, and returned safely to England, having realised ahandsome profit on the adventure. In l6'04, sir HenryMiddleton visited the Moluccas, where he was wellreceived by the native princes, notwithstanding the rumoursspread by the Dutch to his disadvantage. Thevoyage of captain Keeling, in lC07, deserves to be mentionedfor the circumstance that he did not lose a singleman in the voyage out and home. This fleet also carriedout captain William Hawkins, our first ambassadorto the Great Mogul, by whose prudent management afriendly intercourse was established between the twocourts.The Dutch East India trade commenced nearly aboutthe same time as that of the English ; but it acquiredVOL. II. o1 Q-i MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.strength sooner, and shot up with more wonderful rapidity.In the years 1613 and 1614 the Dutch hadno fewer than twenty-seven large armed vessels in theIndian seas ; and, notwithstanding the expensive natureof their armaments, the profits on their trade, during thetwelve years preceding the last named date, averagedabove thirty-seven per cent.* The English, at the commencementof their naval career, do not appear to haveever prided themselves on the use of large vessels. Indeed,the most surprising circumstance in the voyagesof our early navigators is the smallness of the vessels withwhich they ventured to cross unknown seas, throughstormy latitudes. In consequence of this predilectionfor small ships, (which may be traced to the constitutionalfreedom that leaves it to the funds and discretionof individuals to embark in enterprises which,under arbitrary governments, are reserved for the state,)the English soon became distinguished as good seamen;but their fleets seemed relatively weak. They mannedand piloted the ships of foreign states, which, regardingthe increase of their marine as a national object,swept the seas with more imposing forces. The Dutchsoon supplanted the Portuguese in the Moluccas; andshortly after, by a singular accident, found means toextend their commerce to Japan. The annual value ofthis branch of trade at that time in the hands of thePortuguese was said to be worth above one million sterling.The advantages of the Japanese trade, of whichthe Dutch retain exclusive possession, were first obtainedby them through the mediation of an Englishman.An expedition of five ships departed from the Texelin 1 598, to sail by the Straits of Magellan to Yedzo andthe Moluccas. Some particulars of this attempt to circumnavigatethe earth will be related in a succeedingchapters The pilot of the fleet was William Adams,who appears to have been long in the service of theDutch, and who, there is reason to believe, accompaniedCornellss Ryp and Barentz, in 1596, in that voyage inHarris, vol i. p. G28. + See chap. xvii.CHAP. XIII. SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST. 1QSwhich Spitsbergen was discovered. The voyage of theDutch fleet to the South Sea was an unbroken series ofdisasters : famine was soon felt ; and on reaching thePacific Ocean the ships were dispersed by storms, andnever afterwards joined company. Adams held hiscourse for Japan, and at length had sight of the land,Ashen only five of the crew retained strength enough towork the ship — so much were they reduced by the wantof food and incessant fatigue. As soon as they had castanchor the Japanese came on board, and stripped theship of her cargo without loss of time. They took care,however, to supply the sea-worn mariners with food.The Portuguese, and the Jesuits in particular, alarmedat the appearance of the Dutch, hastened to representthem as outlaws and pirates ; and kindled such an alarmamong the people by their calumnies, that Adams andhis companions began to fear crucifixion — the ordinarypunishment of pirates in that country.The emperor, however, hearing of a ship that hadarrived at his dominions from the East, ordered the pilotto be brought before him. Adams accordingly, tremblingfor his fate, entered the imperial presence : theemperor viewed him with stedfast attention, but witha mild and gracious countenance which soon relievedAdams from the dread that he had previously felt. Heput numerous questions to the pilot, by his interpreters,respecting the country from which he came, its inhabitants,manners, military force, natural productions, laws,government, and religion. Many of these questionscaused Adams some embarrassment, although he seemsto have been an intelligent man. But he puzzled theemperor still more when he showed him in his chartthe Straits of Magellan, through which he had sailedfrom Europe to Japan. The emperor, who had a goodopinion of him before, began now to doubt his veracity ;yet, as Adams firmly persisted in maintaining the fact,and the chart seemed a sort of written testimony in hisfavour, the emperor was at length obliged to believeimplicitly what he was unable to comprehend. He waso 21 §6 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.pleased with the conversation of Adams, whose appearance,probably, spoke that perfect probity which evenhis enemies allowed to belong to his character. Hegradually rose in estimation with the emperor, whoturned a deaf ear to the calumnious insinuations of thePortuguese to his prejudice ; and, though kept in confinement,was otherwise kindly treated.His interest with the emperor daily increasing, hewas at length freed from his imprisonment, and wasallowed to visit his old comrades, who were not a littlesurprised to see him alive, as the Portuguese had takencare to spread a report that he had been executed longbefore. But he found that the ship had been whollyplundered, and all his goods and instruments gone.When this came to the emperor's ear, he ordered a strictsearch to be made for their recovery ; and, as it provedunavailing, he gave the Dutch a large sum of money asan indemnification. He would not, however, listen totheir petition to allow them to pursue their voyage andto return home; but, on the other hand, he granted thema liberal maintenance in money and provisions, withliberty to go through the country as they pleased.After they had spent four or five years in Japan, exercisingtheir trades in different parts of the country, theemperor sent for Adams, and commanded him to builda ship on the European model. In vain the Englishpilot urged that it was his business to guide a ship atsea, not to build one : but the emperor was so earnestin his demand, that he was obliged to undertake thebusiness; and, summoning up all his ingenuity, he succeededin building a stout vessel of eighty tons. Theemperor walked the deck of this little vessel with a gratificationlittle short of rapture, and the maker of it rosevery high in his esteem. Adams had some knowledgeof geometry and practical mathematics, which he taughtthe emperor, and was regarded by him as a luminary ofthe first order. His modesty and integrity, perhaps,contributed as much as his abilities to procure him theimperial favour. He at length obtained, by his steadyOJIAP. XIII. SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST. .197conduct, a complete ascendancy over the mind of theemperor, and got, to use his own expression, " the exactlength of his foot." He again solicited in vain for permissionto depart; hut the emperor, to solace him forhis absence from his native land, gave him an estate,and eighty or ninety slaves to do his rural work. Healso employed Adams to sail in the vessel which he hadbuilt as far as Edda ; which, our author tells us, is asfar as from London to the Lizard, or the Land's Endin Cornwall. In this also the Englishman succeeded.He was next commanded to build a ship of larger size,but on the same model : and he accordingly constructeda vessel of 100 tons, which was 60on afterwards employedto convey to Acapulco, in New Spain, about 350Spaniards who had been cast away on the shores ofJapan. From this circumstance it may be concludedthat Adams was well acquainted with the general principlesof ship-building.At length, finding it impossible to procure leave forhimself to depart, he exerted his interest at court inbehalf of the Dutch captain and his mate, and finallysucceeded in his efforts. The very year in which theDutchmen were dismissed, a small vessel came to Japanfrom Johore, eager to glean the first fruits of the newlyopened trade. To the commander of this vessel, at hisdeparture, he gave a letter, addressed To his unknownfriends and countrymen, desiring that it might be carriedeither to Limehouse, near London, or to Gillingham, InKent, in which town it appears that he was born. In thisletter he gives a superficial account of Japan, which hesupposes to be about 228 leagues in length, and of stillgreater breadth. He commends, in strong terms, thekindness, courage, and civility of the Japanese, their loveof justice, and strict administration of the law. The influenceof Adams immediately obtained for the Dutch adecided preference ; and the Portuguese accuse him ofinspiring the Japanese with that hatred of the Jesuitswhich terminated in the expulsion of their nation and ofChristianity from those islands.1J)8 MODERN VOYAGES 0? DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.The letter written by Adams to his friends reachedBantam about the year 1612 ; and in the following yearan English vessel, commanded by captain John Saris,arrived at Japan. Adams exerted his influence at courtexpeditiously and effectually, to establish a friendly intercoursebetween Japan and his country. The emperorgranted the English an unrestrained trade to his dominions,and accompanied this permission with presentsto the king of England, and a letter, in which he observes,u I acknowledge your majesty's great bounty insending me so undeserved a present, such as my landdoes not produce, and I have never seen before, whichI receive, not as from a stranger, but as from your majesty,whom I esteem as myself; desiring the continuanceof friendship with your highness, and that itmay please you to send your subjects to any port in mydominions, where they shall be most heartily welcome.I applaud much their worthiness in the admirable knowledgeof navigation, not being terrified with the distanceof so mighty a gulf, nor greatness of such infinite cloudsand storms, from prosecuting honourable discoveries andmerchandising, wherein they shall find me to furtherthem according to their desires. I return unto yourmajesty a small token of my love, desiring you to acceptthereof as from him who rejoiceth in your friendship." *Captain John Saris appears to have been a sensible,plain man ; and his remarks on Japan are still amongstthe most valuable which we have respecting that extraordinarycountry. He passed through several cities,as Hecate, Osaca, Strange, and Meaco, all which hedescribes to be as large as London, which, in his time,had a population of at least 550,000 souls. The riverat Osaca appeared to him to be as wide as the Thamesat Greenwich, and had numerous fine wooden bridgesover it. Meaco was the largest city in Japan, and aplace of immense trade. The streets were all regular,and the mechanics were distributed in different quartersaccording to their employments ; for order and arrange-harris,voL i.CHAP. XIII. SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST. 199ment are conspicuous in all the habits of the Japanese.The great temple of Meaco appeared to be as long asSt. Paul's, and not inferior to it in height. Long rowsof columns, adorned with paper lanterns, which arelighted every night, conduct to the entrance of the temple.The English were kindly treated by the people,who begged of them, nevertheless, not to introduce anypadres or priests among them ; fearing, no doubt, arepetition of those religious persecutions of which thePortuguese Jesuits had been the cause.Saris, though well pleased with the success of hisvoyage, does not appear to have been sanguine withrespect to the profits likely to be realised by the Japanesetrade. He entered with difficulty into the views ofAdams regarding its future direction, as he still lookedupon him merely as an English pilot, and as one disposedto over-estimate the advantages that might resultfrom a correspondence with the country to which hehad become attached. Adams died in Japan in l6'31,retaining to the last the favour and esteem of the princeand people. During the revolutions which shortly aftertook place in Japan, the persecutions by which the Portuguesewere expelled, and the contemporaneous troublesin England, the trade with Japan was unaccountablydiscontinued; and it is impossible to ascertain preciselythe date of its cessation. But it happened that in the year1673, some time after our commerce with Japan hadbeen thus intermitted, an English ship arrived at thatcountry : the captain was immediately called upon bythe authorities to explain why his countrymen had everabandoned the Japanese trade, and he of course wasunable to clear up this historical difficulty. He wasthen asked whether Charles, the king of England, hadnot married the daughter of the king of Portugal : towhich he could not help replying in the affirmative ; andon this circumstance was chiefly grounded the emperor'speremptory refusal to admit English merchants into hisdominions : and as an imperial edict in Japan is, by amaxim of state, irreversible, no explanation was allowed200 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.to take place, and thus the Dutch remained sole mastersof the trade of that country.The most profitable trade in Japan is that which iscarried on with China and the Core ; the latter countryhad been often conquered and over-run by the Japanese.When Saris visited these people the popular animosityagainst theorems was at its height, and no regular communicationexisted between the two countries. But in theyear 1653, one of those accidents which have occasionallyso much contributed to enlarge our knowledge of the globemade Europeans acquainted with the Core. In thatyear a Dutch vessel bound to Nangasaki was wrecked onthe island of Quelpaert or Sehesure, which is about twelveleagues to the south of the Core. The Dutchmen weremade prisoners by the natives, who pillaged the wreck ;they were treated, however, with kindness and humanity,though never permitted to go at large. What gratifiedthem most was the meeting with a fellow-countrymannamed Wettevree, a native of Ryp in Holland, who hadbeen shipwrecked on the coast of Core in 1627, andwho was now sent to them from the court, where hewas liberally maintained, to serve as interpreter. TheDutch, after a captivity of some years, were forced toenter the royal life guards, and were much caressed bythe nobility. But the information which we receivefrom them respecting the country and its institutionsis by no means proportioned to the opportunities theyenjoyed. After rising to this degree of favour and independence,their fortune was again chequered by thewars and commotions that agitated the country. Theywere a second time reduced to miserable slavery, anddeemed it a favour to be allowed to beg. At length, in1666, eight of them purchased a bark under pretence ofgathering cotton in the neighbouring islands, and effectedtheir escape to Japan, whence they returned to Holland.The Dutch describe the country of Core as fruitful;but the cold in winter is intense, and the quantity ofsnow that falls so prodigious that passages are madebeneath it to go from house to house. The people are.CHAP. XIII. SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST. 201represented as pusillanimous in the extreme, ignorant,and licentious.The French also followed the general example at thecommencement of the seventeenth century, and endeavouredto seize a share of the Indian trade ; but theirprogress was more slow and faltering than that whichwas made by states in which greater liberty was allowedto individual enterprise.The first East India company established in France,in 1004, never attempted to carry into execution theobjects for which it was incorporated; and the originQf the French East India trade may be dated fromloll, when the royal patents were granted to a companyof merchants, who nevertheless allowed four wholeyears to elapse before they equipped a single vessel forthe voyage. Some spirited individuals, however, of theNorman seaports, had in the mean time ventured to trytheir fortune in the East. In 1 601, a vessel sailed fromSt. Malo, on board of which was Francis Pirard de Laval,a merchant of that port. This ship, it is remarkable,had an English pilot. The voyage was prosperous untilthey reached the Maldives, where the ship struck on areef. Shipwreck was inevitable ; and the seamen, throwingoff all subordination, began to get drunk, in order,as they said, that they might render the approach ofdeath as easy as possible. " This filled me with horror,"says Pirard, " and convinced me that most sailors leavetheir souls and consciences ashore." They contrived,nevertheless, to reach one of the inhabited islands ; andthe narrative of Pirard continues to this day to be thebest account we have of that remarkable archipelago.So long as the Frenchmen were thought to havemoney, they were compelled to buy the provisions fromthe natives at so high a rate that they were at lengthreduced to great extremities. " In the mean time," saysPirard, Ci I made it my business to learn their language ;and, by being able to discourse with them, insinuatedmyself into favour with the governor of the island, whosent me to Male with recommendations to the king : and202 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.both the king and his queens were so well pleased withmy saluting them in their own tongue, and according tothe customs of the country, and with the account I gavethem of the things that were taken out of our ship, themanners of the French ladies, &c, that they took particularcare of me in a fit of sickness that lasted for manydays. In a word, I rose by the king's favour and bountyto a competency ; and having, by virtue of a long stayin the country, an opportunity to inspect their constitutions,customs, and laws, I am now going to gratifythe public with what I have learned upon that subject."These islands, he informs us, are said to amount to12,000 in number ; but many of them are only hillocksof sand without inhabitants. The natives assert thatthe daily increase of the sea-sand diminishes the numberof the cultivated islands and the inhabitants, and thatislands of considerable size are frequently subdivided bychannels gradually worn through them by the sea. TheMaldives, collectively, are surrounded by a great ridgeof rocks, which breaks the shock of the sea, and raises aprodigious surf. The whole group is divided into thirteenprovinces, called attollones, each of which comprehendsa great multitude of small islands. The channelswhich divide the islands of each attollone are so shallow,that they might be waded across at low water, if thesharpness of the rocks did not prevent this mode of communication.Many of the uninhabited islands are coveredover with crabs of great size, and crayfish, or else withpenguins, which are so numerous, that at some seasonsit is impossible to walk without treading on their eggsox young ones. The sand is extremely white and fine,and so hot as to hatch the penguins' eggs. The attollonesare separated from each other by deep channels, or armsof the sea ; but of these there are only four in the wholearchipelago that can be safely navigated by large vessels :and our author assures us that he saw them laid downwith great exactness in the sea-charts of the natives.The cocoa-tree constitutes the real wealth of the Maldives;and of this useful tree, which alone might supplyCHAP. XIII. SETTLEMENTS IN THE EAST. 203all the necessaries of life, our author speaks in the sameterms of commendation as the Arabian travellers eightcenturies before.* But it is remarkable, that althoughthe Maldives are all fertile, and nearly in the same climate,yet the gifts of nature are so unequally distributedamong them, that their productions are generallydifferent, and they feel the necessity of a mutual commerce.This diversity of produce, and the social obligationswhich result from it, are still farther increasedby the native custom which separates the artificers asstrictly as if they belonged to different castes ; theweavers all dwelling in one island, the goldsmiths inanother, and so through the whole list of trades. Theislanders are remarkably ingenious and industrious : theyare all used to the water; few being so poor as not topossess a boat. The women are extremely handsome,and frequently as fair as Europeans. Subsistence beingonce provided (an easy task in those islands), pleasure isthe chief occupation of the people.De Laval had already spent five years in these islands,and despaired of being ever able to escape from them,when, in the month of February, 1607, he dreamedthat he had recovered his liberty. This dream made agreat impression on his mind ; and he vowed to go inpilgrimage to the shrine of St. James of Gallican, if itshould prove true. His vow was heard. The king ofBengal invaded the Maldives shortly after with a fleet ofsixteen sail, and our author, on satisfying the conquerorthat he was not a Portuguese, was kindly treated andbrought back to India, whence, after undergoing somepersecutions from the Jesuits, he effected his return toEurope, and performed his vow.See vol. i. p. 165.204 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.CHAP. XIV.SETTLEMENTS IN NORTH AMERICA.success of the newfoundland fishery. rapid increaseof english shipping. patent granted to sir walterraleigh. voyage of amadis and barlow. theydiscover wooden island. trade with the natives.virginia. colony planted by sir richard greenville.the coast explored. the colonists sufferfrom want. return home with sir francis drake.second colony. its fate. third colony. perishesfrom want. — raleigh's plans of conquest. — el dorado.he takes trinidad. ascends the orinoco. fallsof carol. intercourse with the natives. resultof the expedition. virginia again explored. colonyestablished at james-town. adventures of captainsmith. taken by the indians. his life saved bythe princess pocahontas. — she marries mr. role. —comes to england. her death. lord delaware appointedgovernor. the summers' islands taken possessionof. cultivation of tobacco. new plymouthfounded by the brownish. voyage of carter to thest. lawrence. he ascends the river to montreal.sufferings of his crew. his return. french colonies.It seems to be the destiny of mankind to rise into civilisationby continual struggles with difficulties whichdemand foresight and perseverance, and to nurture itsvirtues by industry and toil. In political experience, aswell as in that of private life, few examples can be adducedof advantages won without labour ever arriving ata happy conclusion. In the history of Spain and Portugalthe commencement of decay seems to be coevalwith the extension of those Indian dominions whichwere supposed to be fountains of inexhaustible wealth.But, on the other hand, the most extraordinary instanceof prosperous colonisation that occurs in the annals ofthe world, is to be seen in the long-neglected and comparativelyunpromising region of North America, whereCHAP. XIV. SETTLEMENTS IN NORTII AMERICA. 205nature's richest treasures could only be unlocked by theexertions of persevering industry.The advantages of the Newfoundland fishery weresoon fully appreciated by European states, and all thosewinch possessed a marine hastened to secure a participationin it. About the year 1578, the English vesselsemployed in this fishery were about fifty in number.Above a hundred Spanish vessels at the same time wereannually employed on those banks : there were fiftyPortuguese, a hundred and fifty French, and twenty orthirty Biscay ships; the last being chiefly engaged inthe whale fishery. Among all these the English had adecided superiority in the equipment of their vessels ;and they seem also to have asserted a sovereignty overthose seas, founded perhaps on the discoveries of SebastianCabot, which was generally acquiesced in by theforeign fishermen.* But the settlement made in Newfoundlandby sir Humphrey Gilbert fixed the title andconfirmed the predominance of the English in that quarter: and towards the close of queen Elizabeth's reign,the English fishing-vessels frequenting the Newfoundlandbanks exceeded two hundred sail, and employedabove eight thousand seamen.The death of that gallant gentleman threatened toput a check to those schemes of settlement which requirednot only ability to conduct, but a romantic imaginationeven to conceive and enter upon them in thefirst instance. But the influence and the projects ofsir Humphrey Gilbert descended upon one not inferiorto him in the ardour or boldness of his genius. Hishalf-brother, sir Walter Raleigh, easily procured in 1584the renewal of his patents, in terms quite as ample ; theterritory granted being any 200 miles in every directionof such " remote, heathen, and barbarous lands" aswere not yet taken possession of by any Christian people.He immediately equipped two ships for the purpose ofdiscovery ; and, being too much engaged in court intriguesto conduct the expedition himself, he entrustedHarris. Collection of Travels, 1753, vol. ii.206 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.it to the command of two experienced officers, captainsAmadis and Barlow. They chose the circuitous courseof the Canaries and West India islands. As they approachedthe coast of Florida, they were delighted withthe odour which was wafted from the land long before itwas in sight. On discovering the continent, they sailedalong the coast forty leagues, till they came to a river,where, going on shore, they took possession of the countryin the name of the queen and of their employers.Ascending the summit of a hill, they found that theyhad landed on an island ( Wooden, on the coast of NewCarolina) of about twenty miles in length, and six inbreadth. They met a native, whom they treated kindly ;and he, to show his gratitude, divided among them aboat-load of fish, the produce of his day's industry.Soon after, they were visited by the king of the country,surrounded by forty or fifty chiefs. His fancy wasparticularly caught by a pewter dish, which he purchasedfor twenty deer-skins; and making a hole in the rim, hesuspended it from his neck as a breastplate, intimatingby signs that it would protect him from the arrows ofhis enemies. For a copper kettle he gave fifty valuableskins. But the articles which he most coveted wereswords, and to procure these he offered to leave a boxof pearls in pledge ; the English, however, cautiouslyavoided furnishing the savages with arms, or discoveringthe value that they attached to pearls before they knewwhence they were procured. They were told of a greatcity, six days' journey in the interior, where the kingresided, but did not attempt to reach it ; and beingsatisfied with the success of their voyage, they returnedto England in September. They represented the countrywhich they had discovered as a perfect paradise,uniting the most romantic scenery with unequalled fertility.The queen, charmed with this description, waspleased to call the newly discovered land Virginia; aname which at that time comprehended nearly all theterritories of North America to which the English madepretensions.CHAP. XIV. SETTLEMENTS IN NORTH AMERICA. 207In the following year, 1585, sir Walter Raleigh sentout a second expedition, under sir Richard Greenville,a man of chivalrous bravery and disinterested character.He landed 108 men at Roenoke, opposite theisland of Wooden; and taking a prize on his return,raised the expectation of his employers still higher bythe prosperous issue of his voyage. The settlers, in themean time, who were left on the American continent,exerted themselves, in conformity with the advice ofRaleigh, in examining the coast ; and followed it 80miles to the south, and 130 to the north, without beingable to find a harbour of any importance. In theseexcursions they ventured too far up the rivers, and exposedthemselves to the ambuscades of the savages : agreat many of them were in consequence cut off. Theyalso neglected, from ignorance of the climate, to gatherfood such as the country supplied, in proper season. Asno provisions arrived from England in the followingyear, they were severely pressed by famine, and reducedto utter despair, when at length they descried a fleet,which proved to be that of sir Francis Drake returningtriumphant from his expedition to the West Indies.They solicited and obtained permission to embark onboardhis fleet ; and precipitately abandoning the settlements,returned to England. Raleigh in the mean timehad not forgotten them, though prevented by unavoidabledelays from sending them timely relief. Sir RichardGreenville arrived at Roenoke immediately after thedeparture of the colony. Though grieved and surprisedto see the place abandoned, he was not deterred fromhis plan of settlement ; and he accordingly left behindhim fifty men, with provisions for two years. This newcolony likewise perished through neglect. In 1587, thebuildings were found all destroyed; and the bones of aman lying exposed upon the ground offered the onlyevidence as to the fate of the unhappy colonists. CaptainWhite, who visited Roenoke in that year, made athird effort to effect a settlement ; but the colonists hadso little industry, their minds were so wholly turned208 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.upon amassing sudden wealth, and their habits were sodissolute and ungovernable, that they soon felt the mostalarming distress; and White was obliged to proceed toEngland to procure provisions. But the nation, at thattime, was so much engrossed by the alarms of the Spanishinvasion, that every other object was regarded withindifference, and two years elapsed before White couldeffect his purpose. At length he sailed, in 1589, withthree ships. On arriving at Roenoke, no traces of anysettlements could be found ; but on the bark of the treeshe saw the word Cretan cut in large letters, whencehe concluded that the colonists had removed to anisland so named, and situated a few leagues to the southof Roenoke. He immediately directed his course toCretan ; but a violent storm arose, which drove him outto sea, and compelled him to return to England withoutmaking any farther attempts to relieve the unhappycolonists. Thus perished the third settlement.Sir Walter Raleigh had equipped seven expeditions,and expended above 40,000/., or nearly his whole fortune,within a few years, to no purpose; but his romantictemper was not to be subdued by ill success : and as helived at court, and entered into all the intrigues of hisday, brilliant exploits were often necessary to him, tocover and redeem the mortifications of his daily life. Ashis fortune diminished, his imagination grew more ardent,despair perhaps lessening the influence of judgment ;and he devoted the latter part of his life to the prosecutionof delusive schemes, which had never alluredhim at a time when he better possessed the means ofaccomplishing whatever he proposed.It is difficult to ascertain with precision the circumstancesor the time which gave birth to the belief in theexistence of a golden country, or El Dorado, in the interiorof South America, where the government of theincas was revived in its ancient splendour, and where theprecious metals existed in such abundance that even theroofs of the temples were made of gold. It circulated asearly as 1531, when Ordaca undertook a luckless expelXIV. SETTLEMENTS IN NOIlTn AMERICA. 209edition to the mouths of the Orinoco, to ascend that river.Gonzalez Pizarro, in his march to the sources of theMaragnon, received a confirmation of the tale ; andOrellana, in descending that great river, collected manymarvellous relations tending to corroborate in his mindthe same gratifying intelligence. But while the Spaniardssought nothing and thought of nothing but gold, it isnot surprising that every picture that haunted their fancyshould be richly adorned with that precious metal. Allthe tales collected by the Spaniards were familiar tosir Walter Raleigh, who, as he wished them to weighwith the public mind, allowed them to operate freely onhis own. He proposed the conquest of Guiana, and thediscovery of El Dorado, or the country of gold; in whichthe natives in their feasts, according to a Spanish writer,having first anointed themselves with a gummy balsam,roll themselves in gold dust, so as to be gilt from headto foot.The plans of sir Walter Raleigh were favourably entertainedby the ministers, and in 1595 he sailed withfive ships for Guiana. He made himself master ofTrinidad; and calling together the natives, explained tothem, by an interpreter whom he brought with him fromEngland, that " he was the servant of a queen who wasthe greatest cacique in the North, and a virgin who hadmore caciques under her command than there were treesin that island ; that she was an enemy to the Spaniards,on account of their tyranny and oppression ; and havingfreed all the coasts of the northern world from their servitude,had sent him to free them also ; and moreoverto defend Guiana from their invasion and conquest."He then prepared to pass over to the continent. Berreo,a Spanish officer who had unsuccessfully attempted toenter Guiana, tried to dissuade Raleigh from the hastyexecution of his plan ; telling him that it would be necessaryto carry provisions for a tedious voyage, that thenavigation of the rivers was rendered difficult by numerousshoals and rapids, and that they were beginning toswell and pour down overwhelming torrents at the very210 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.season when he was preparing to ascend them. Thesefair arguments were construed by the English cavalierinto the suggestions of a rival, who wished to thwarthis plans, and defeat their execution. He attempted toenter the river Orinoco with his ships ; but finding itimpossible to bring them across the bar, he was obligedto undertake the expedition in open boats. A hundredmen, with their arms and provisions for a month, werecrowded into three small boats, exposed to all the extremesof the weather in an unhealthy climate ; they hadadvanced but a short way up the river when they foundthemselves involved in a labyrinth of channels, fromwhich they could not extricate themselves without muchlabour and anxiety. Luckily they surprised an old Indianin a canoe; and being treated kindly, he readily consentedto become their pilot. The Indians inhabitingthe mouth of the Orinoco lived in houses during thesummer, or dry season ; but in the winter months, whenthe country was overflowed, they constructed small hutsin the trees, to which they ascended by means of ladders.Some rumours concerning the Spaniards and the goldencountry were collected as they went on, which inspiredthe men with the same ardour as their chief. WhenRaleigh had ascended the river about 300 miles, he hadan interview with Tapiowary, an Indian chieftain 110years old, who gave him the most ample informationrespecting the political situation of the country, and itsnatural productions.Leaving this old chieftain, Raleigh proceeded westwardto view the falls of the river Carol. From thesummit of a hill overlooking the river they beheld itrolling down in three streams for twenty miles together:the current was so rapid that an eight-oared boat couldnot stem it, in a stream as wide as the Thames at Wool-with.A dozen cataracts, one above the other, rusheddown with such violence that the noise could be heardat a distance of many leagues. The landscape aroundwas the most beautiful that could be imagined : the hillswere richly clothed with wood, the waters winding belowCHAP. XIV. SETTLEMENTS IN NORTH AMERICA. 211-in numerous branches ; the plains clear of brushwood,and covered with fine green turf; deer crossing the scenein every direction ; and multitudes of birds, of endlessvarieties and the most brilliant colours, fluttering amongthe trees or perched along the river banks. Even thespecimens of the mineral world found here had an unusualbrilliancy ; and fragments of stone, supposed to containgold, were carried off by the credulous adventurers.Raleigh had now advanced 400 miles from the coast ;he had been absent from his fleet a month ; the wetseason was coming on, and the river began to rise withfearful rapidity ; it was no longer prudent, therefore, todefer his return. In descending the river he repeatedhis visit to the old chieftain Tapiowary, and consultedhim respecting the possibility of conquering Guiana,and reaching the golden city Manor. The prudent repliesof the old Indian appeared encouraging to onewhose mind was wholly bent on these visionary schemes.But whatever might be thought of the soundness of hiscalculations, the abilities of Raleigh as a leader were advantageouslyshown in this surprising expedition, inwhich there was neither murmuring nor discontent ; andin which, notwithstanding the dangers and privations towhich the men were exposed, not one perished duringthe whole voyage, with the exception of a negro who wasdevoured by a crocodile. Raleigh brought home withhim specimens of the golden ore on which his hopes werefounded. The son of Tapiowary accompanied him toEngland, where he was baptised with much ceremonyby the name of Gualtero. Two Englishmen at the sametime remained with the Indian chieftain : the one a gooddraftsman ; the other a boy, intended to learn the languageof the natives, in which he actually became proficient,but was unfortunately killed and devoured in thewoods by wild beasts. The character of Raleigh had nodoubt been much lowered in popular estimation by the illsuccess of his expeditions to Virginia ; and the fruitlessissue of his voyage to Guiana completed his downfal.His attainder, which followed not long after, by 2212 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.pulling his patent, threw open the West to new projectors.In 1605, captain Weymouth was despatched to Virginia,to examine the coast for the purpose of a settlement.He discovered Long Island, and entered a greatriver, most probably the Hudson, which he ventured tocompare to the Orinoco and the Maragnon. The accountwhich he gave on his return, of the magnificentcountry which he had examined, of its navigable riversand harbours capable of containing all the fleets in theworld, stimulated the slumbering spirit of plantation.Two companies were soon after incorporated for thepurpose of planting Virginia ; the limits assigned by thecharter to the one being from 38° to 43° N. latitude, tothe other from 41 2 to 45°, a space of two degrees beingthus whimsically left in common. The London company,to which the more southerly country was allotted, havingthe largest amount of capital at its disposal, was the firstto begin its operations. A squadron of three vesselsunder the command of captain Newport, with 110 settlers,sailed from London in 1607, and arrived in Aprilat the mouth of Chesapeak Bay. The first greatriver explored by the settlers was the Powhatan, whichthey called James's River. About fifty miles up thestream they found a peninsula connected with the mainlandby an isthmus about thirty yards across. The soilwas fertile, the situation secure ; and here they foundedJames's Town, which still exists, and is the oldest settlementin the United States.Among the leaders of this colony was captain JohnSmith, who was already well known for his adventuresin the Turkish wars. He distinguished himself in theHungarian army; was taken prisoner by the Turks; wasby them sold to the Tatars ; and, after wandering overa great part of the interior of Asia, returned home toencounter new perils and difficulties in the westernworld. The council who undertook the administrationof the new colony, and of whom some were men ofrank and consequence, at first studiously excludedCHAP. XIV. SETTLEMENTS IN NORTH AMERICA. 2 IShim from the share in the management of affairs towhich he was entitled by his talents and experience ;perhaps from envy, or from the dread of his usurpingtoo absolute a rule. But when danger made its appearance,all the authority devolved on the veteran Smith.The bulk of the colonists were persons of dissolute mannersand without industry, who migrated from home inthe hope of escaping from the restraints of law, and ofenriching themselves in a short time by the discovery ofgold. A bright yellow mineral was found in the neighbourhoodof James Town, which was credulously believedto contain the darling metal. But while all wereengaged in these vain researches, distress began to befelt. The Indians, being treated with harshness andindignity, at first refused provisions, and at last brokeout into open hostility.The resolution, activity, and adroitness of captainSmith defeated all their attacks, and taught them to fearthe courage and vigilance of their adversaries. To himthe colony owed its preservation. As soon as he foundleisure from his toils, he proceeded to examine theChesapeak Bay, at the head of which he discovered thePotomac river ; and the sight of that noble stream soencouraged his disorderly and reluctant crews, that theycheerfully volunteered to explore it. This coasting voyageof 3000 miles, in bad weather and in an open boat,was an achievement in which Smith felt an honourablepride. In ascending James's River his prudence forsookhim, and his too great confidence in his personal prowessand the resources of his ingenuity had nearly provedhis destruction. He mounted the stream until the branchesof the trees and the numerous rapids prevented the furtherprogress of the boat : he then prosecuted his voyage inasmall canoe, with two English companions and twoIndian guides. Having ascended about twenty miles inthis way, he went ashore and began to amuse himselfwith shooting in the woods. The Indians in the meantimewere on the watch ; and when Smith returned tothe river he found that his companions had been killed,r 3214 Mother* tOYAoEB OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IVand saw himself surrounded by a host of savage warriorswith their bows bent and ready to overwhelm him witha shower of arrows. But in this alarming situationhe did not lose his wonted intrepidity : he promptlyseized one of his Indian guides, bound him before himso as to serve as a shield against the Indian weapons,and thus prepared to make a vigorous defence. But theIndians were too numerous ; Smith was soon surroundedand made prisoner. He was tied to a tree, and about tobe shot to death, when, showing to the Indians a smallcompass dial, and explaining to them its uses by describingthe motions of the heavenly bodies, he socharmed and astonished his simple auditory, that theydeferred his execution, and unbinding him instantly,led him to Powhatan, the chief who ruled with theauthority of a king over all the country in the neighbourhoodof this river.He foiled the Indian chief surrounded by his principalwarn rs, with the women of his family ranged atthe back of the tent. The fate of Smith was alreadyresolved on ; he was the most formidable enemy of theIndian tribes, and the stern Powhatan condemned himat once to die. A large stone was placed in front ofthe assembly, and Smith was forcibly dragged along andcompelled to lay his head upon it, while a painted warriorstood near brandishing a club with which he wasto dash out his brains at the word of command. Thefatal word was uttered which was to terminate Smith'slife and adventures, when Pocahontas, the eldest daughterof Powhatan, rushed forward, and placing her headupon that of Smith, declared her determination to savehis life at the peril of her own. Savage ferocity wasmelted by this display of female tenderness. The heartof Powhatan relented, and Smith was allowed to departon condition of sending to the Indians those articles ofEuropean manufacture which they chiefly prized.The return of Smith saved the colony from theruin with which it was threatened by the idleness andunruly character of the settlers. Order, and even transXIV. SETTLEMENTS IN NORTH AMERICA. 215quality prevailed while the authority remained in hishands ; but soon after, he suffered so much injury froman accidental explosion of gunpowder, that he was compelledto return to England for his health. The princessPocahontas in the mean time had shown many proofs ofher friendship to him and to the English in general. Shehad stolen through the woods, and risked her life, toreveal to the colonists the danger with which they werethreatened by the secret machinations of the Indian tribes.Her kindness was at last repaid by ingratitude, whichconduced, nevertheless, to an agreeable result. Pocahontaswas taken prisoner, and kept as a hostage for thepacific conduct of her father. In her captivity the Indianprincess grew more attached to the English ; and arespectable young man, John Role, became the objectof her tenderest regards. She married him, and wasbaptised by the name of Rebecca. When the intelligenceof her marriage was conveyed to the ears of Powhatan,it gave him much delight, and he was from thatday forward a steady friend of the settlers. The princessPocahontas, now Mrs. Role, visited England, whereshe was the object of much attention, and even admiration.Her natural good sense and purity of mindsupplied the defects of her education ; and when suddenlytransported from the woods of America to thegiddy scenes of English society, she was found not deficientin just discrimination or in dignity of demeanour.Her first interview with Smith affected her deeply. Sheseemed quite overcome by the pain his presence causedher, and for some hours could not be brought to fix hereyes upon him. He had never returned, perhaps not evensuspected, the warm passion with which he had inspiredher. King James felt alarmed lest Role might aspireto the sovereignty of Virginia in right of his wife ;but his majesty's weak fears were at length subdued, andthe princess with her husband were permitted to depart.She died, however, at Gravesend, when on the point ofreturning to her native country.Pocahontas was accompanied to England by her kins-p 4216 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.man Vitomdtomakkin, an Indian priest and chieftain,who was instructed by Powhatan to make himself wellacquainted with all the circumstances of the country,and particularly to learn the exact number of its tribesand warriors. For this purpose Vitomotomakkin wasprovided with a bundle of sticks, that he might make anotch for every man he saw. The moment he landedat Plymouth, he began patiently to cut notches, thoughevidently astounded at the magnitude of the task beforehim. He continued indefatigably at the same workwhile on the road to London ; but as soon as he enteredPiccadilly he flung away his sticks in despair; and toldPowhatan, on his return, that to know the numbers ofthe English, he must count the leaves of all the trees inthe forest.The English colonies in Virginia, relying more onforeign supplies than on their own industry, supportedwith difficulty, for a few years, a frail and totteringexistence. In 1609, a reinforcement of 500 settlersarrived in nine ships. Lord Delaware was appointedgovernor of the colony ; but as he was unable to proceedhimself to the settlements in that year, he sent threedeputy governors, who, being embarked in the same ship,were all cast away on the islands of Bermudas. Onthose islands, which were at that time uninhabited, theyfound abundance of wood and of provisions. The swineleft there by the Spaniards had increased prodigiously,and proved for the future a grand resource to the needycolonists. The Bermudas were now taken possession offor the crown of England; and from sir George Summers,one of the deputy-governors, they received the name ofthe Summers' Islands. The presence of so many menof rank and consideration supplied in some measure thevigour and authoritative tone of Smith, and maintained asemblance of order and of plenty among the profuse,negligent, and murmuring colonists. But a societyformed of such heterogeneous elements could not easilyacquire stability ; and when lord Delaware, shortly after,arrived in the Chesapeak Bay, to enter upon his office asCHAP. XIV. SETTLEMENTS IN NORTH AMERICA. 217governor, he found the settlers already embarked, and onthe point of returning home. He compelled them, however,to relinquish that design, and to apply themselvesassiduously to the improvement of their fortunes in theNew World. This lucky accident saved the Virginiancolonies from being again totally extinguished. In l6l6,they commenced the cultivation of tobacco, from whichthey soon derived wealth and importance. Tobaccowhen first brought into use in Europe, had much oppositionto encounter : and as bigotry is easily allied withprejudice, those who decried it from mere fantasticalantipathy were its most zealous adversaries, and did notscruple even to allege the authority of religion on theirside. King James openly avowed his aversion to " thisVile and nauseous weed," from which the country hassince derived so large a share of its revenue. There arefew facts in history that so fully illustrate how little theauthority of the sovereign avails against the generalfeeling of the commonalty, than the rapidity with whichtobacco — a luxury not very captivating in the first instance— although denounced by some of the greatestprinces in Europe*, has grown into extensive circulation.While the London company persevered, with apparentlyindifferent success, to colonise the southern partsof Virginia, the Plymouth company, which had beenincorporated at the same time, and to which were allottedthe northern parts of that extensive region calledVirginia, was satisfied to carry on a trade of no greatvalue with the natives. The wanton violence with whichthe Indians had in the first instance been incautiouslytreated, gave birth to such an implacable animosity towardsthe English, that no presents or mild usage couldafterwards appease them. Their unremitting hostilitiesso terrified the settlers, that the attempts to plant a colonyin the country now called New England proved formany years abortive. At length, in 1620, a sect of puri-peterthe Great of Russia, Frederic of Prussia, and Amaranth IV. ofTurkey.218 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.tans called Browriists, hoping to enjoy in the wild forestsof the New World that liberty of conscience which wasnot allowed them in civilised countries, established themselvesat Plymouth in Massachusetts, and thus laid thefoundation of the most industrious and powerful coloniesin the world.The French had preceded the English in the attemptto establish a dominion over the boundless regions ofNorth America; but from want of perseverance theywere soon outstripped by their vigorous competitors. In1534, Jaques Carder sailed from St. Malo to examinethe coast of Newfoundland. He returned in safety, andthe following year set forth again to prosecute his researches.He entered a great gulf, to which he gave thename of St. Lawrence. Here the savages informed himthat the great river Hochelega (the St. Lawrence), whichconducted to Canada, was before him. They affirmedthat it penetrated so far inland, that they had neverheard of any one who had reached its source. Carrierproceeded to ascend the river, and found anchorage nearthe Isle of Orleans; to which, from the beauty, variety,and luxuriance of its vegetation, and particularly for thegreat number of vines, which clustered over it in profusion,he named the Island of Bacchus. He ascended theriver in boats, till he came to the village of Stadacona,(called also by the natives Canada, or the town,) whichstood, he says, upon as fine a piece of ground as couldbe seen in France, surrounded by noble trees, suchas oaks, elms, walnut, maple, and others, loaded withfruit. The Indian chief Donnacona pronounced a longoration to the French, the women at the same timedancing and singing for delight in the water. Whenhe and Cartier pledged mutual friendship to eachother, the Indians who surrounded them gave the war-cry,or three horrible yells, which almost terrified theirvisitors. The French ships were now brought up toStadacona, while Cartier made preparations to explorethe Hochelega in his boats. But he learned that the Indianchief was averse to this attempt. When the French,CHAP. XIV. SETTLEMENTS IN North AMERICA. 219however, still persisted in their intention, the Indiansendeavoured to shake their resolution by a stratagemwhich strongly portrays their superstition and simplicity.They dressed up three men like devils, in black andwhite dog-skins, with their faces blackened, and hornson their heads a yard in length. These men wereplaced in a canoe, in such a situation as to be carriednear the ships by the flowing of the tide. The Indianslay in the woods, watching their appearance. When thecanoe approached the ships, one of the three devils stoodup, and made a long harangue; and as soon as theyreached the land, they fell down as if dead, and werecarried off by the Indians into concealment. Some of the1 indians immediately came on board to Cartier, and, feigningthe greatest consternation, explained to him the meaningof what had been seen. Their god Cudruaigny, theysaid, had spoken in Hochelega, and had sent these threedemons to declare that there was so much ice and snowin that country, that whoever ventured there would surelyperish. Undismayed by their predictions, the Frenchmanmade an excursion up the river, and was charmed as headvanced by the richness and majesty of the landscapesthat opened before him. Whenever he approached theshow e he met with the kindest and most hospitable treat-ment from the natives. For nine days he sailed upthis great river ; and found the country the whole wayas fertile, as well wooded, and as agreeable, as could bedesired. At length he came to a wide lake or enlargementof the river (now called St. Peter's Lake), twelveleagues long and six in breadth, which he called the Lakeof Angoultme. Beyond this he found some difficultyin navigating the river, from its rapids, and the numberof its channels : four days' sail, however, now broughthim to Hochelega, forty-five leagues above the Lake ofAngouleme. The city of Hochelega, as he calls theIndian hamlet, was six miles from the river side, anilthe road to it was as well beaten and as well frequentedas any in France; leading through a country plantedwith noble oaks, the ground being strewed over with220 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.fine acorns. Close to the Indian village was a fertileand cultivated hill, to which Cartier gave the name ofMontreal, and which subsequently became the site of oneaf the principal Canadian colonies. From his descriptionof the dwellings of the Indians and of their ruralindustry, it may be concluded that those simple raceshave woefully degenerated since their acquaintance withEuropeans. In speaking of their ornaments, he relatesa circumstance which has hitherto been thought inexplicable,and too hastily censured as a ridiculous story.That which they hold," he says, " in highest estimationamong all their possessions is a substance which they callesurgny or cornibotz, which is as white as snow, andis procured in the following manner : — When any one isadjudged to death for a crime, or when they have takenany of their enemies in war, having first slain the person,they make deep gashes in the flanks, shoulders, andthighs of the dead body, which is then sunk to thebottom of the river in the place where the esurgnyabounds. After remaining there ten or twelve hours,the body is drawn up, and the esurgny or cornibotz isfound in the gashes. Of this they make beads, whichthey wear about their necks as we do chains of goldand silver, accounting it their most precious riches." Inthis account we find perhaps the earliest allusion to thatpeculiar substance called adipocire or factitious spermof which a manufactory was established a fewyears back in the neighbourhood of Bristol. Cartieror his Indian informants erred only in supposing thatthe esurgny or white substance was not formed by thesubaqueous decomposition of the animal matter, butcollected by it from natural depositions at the bottom ofthe river. In Carder's narrative also we find the firstdescription of tobacco, with a ludicrous caricature of themode of using it. " The Indians," he says, " have acertain herb, of which they lay up a store every summer,having first dried it in the sun. It is used only by themen, who always carry some of it in a small bag hangingfrom their necks, in which they keep also a hollow pieceCnAP. XIV. SETTLEMENTS IN NORTH AMERICA. 221of stone or wood like a pipe. When they use this herb,they bruise it to powder, put it into one end of the pipe,and laying a small piece of burning coal upon it, theysuck at the other end so long that they fill their bodiesfull of smoke till it comes out of their mouth and nostrilsas from the chimney of a house. They allege that thispractice is conducive to health : we tried to use thissmoke, but on putting it into our mouths it seemed ashot as pepper."From the summit of Montreal the eye could trace theriver about fifteen leagues, till it terminated in a broadand glittering rapid. The natives were acquainted withthree more such falls; and said, that after passing these,a man might sail for three months up the river withoutinterruption. They intimated that gold and silverabounded toward the south, and copper in the oppositedirection. They spoke also of three or four great lakes,and an inland sea of fresh water, the end of which hadnever been explored. But the Indians of Hochelegawere an agricultural tribe, who wandered but a shortdistance from their habitations, and chiefly owed theirgeographical knowledge to the hunting tribes of Saguenayin the north. The chief Donnacona, who had travelledmuch when he was young, had visited the country ofSaguenay, which he described as rich and abundant.He had travelled among the Picquemians, who were probablythe Picquagamies dwelling round Lake St. John,at the head of the Saguenay river. He also said thatthere were white men in the country of Saguenay, whosedresses were of woollen cloth like that worn by theFrench. Those who are unwilling to believe that thisrelation was an invention of the old chief (and it has notmuch the internal character of fiction) may be inclinedto suppose that the Corporeal, with their companions, hadfallen into the hands of the Indians of Labrador, bywhom they were conducted into the interior.Cartier and his companions wintered in the St. Lawrence,opposite the Indian town of Stadacona, fromNovember till March. The ship was enclosed by ice222 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.two fathoms in thickness, and the snow lay above fourfeet deep on the decks ; liquors were all frozen ; and,to complete the misery of the crew, the scurvy, a diseasewith which they were wholly unacquainted, brokeout among them. There were not above three soundmen in the whole company. Those who died were buriedin the snow, the survivors wanting strength to diga grave for them in the earth. An Indian at lengthpointed out a tree, with the leaves and bark of whichthey made a decoction, by drinking which they were sooncompletely cured. The ice being at length melted,Cartier put to sea, and arrived at St. Malo in July,1536.In consequence of the favourable account which Cartiergave of the country which he had surveyed, of its magnificentriver, its apparent fertility, and the tractabilityof its inhabitants, an expedition was undertaken to settleand cultivate it. A gentleman named Roberval obtaineda patent, and proceeded, in 1540, to plant a colony inCanada ; but no success attended this and other subsequentweak attempts. It was not till 1608 that Quebecwas founded; and already, in 1629, the English, whowere now rapidly acquiring strength in Virginia, threatenedthe existence of the new settlement. In 1609, theDutch planted their first colony in the Hudson.CHAP. XV. ESTABLISHMENTS IN AFRICA. 223CHAP. XV.ESTABLISHMENTS IN AFRICA.EXCLUSIVE TRADE OF PORTUGAL TO AFRICA. VOYAGES OFBingham AND Lor. SUCCESS OF Lor. ADVENTURES OFANDREW BATTEL.— TAKEN PRISONER BY THE PORTUGUESE.CARRIED TO ANGOLA. TRADES FOR THE GOVERNOR. AttemptsTO ESCAPE. DETECTED AND IMPRISONED. SENT TOMassinger. ESCAPES. HIS JOURNEY. RETAKEN.SENT TO ELAMBO. WOUNDED IN BATTLE. THE PortugueseTRADE WITH THE GIAGAS. FOLLOW THEM UP THECOUNTRY. BATTEL LEFT AS A HOSTAGE. THREATENEDWITH DEATH. ESCAPES TO THE GIAGAS. RETURNS TOMassinger. PEACE WITH ENGLAND. BATTEL'S DismissalREFUSED. HE DESERTS THE THIRD TIME. BETAKESHIMSELF TO THE WOODS. LAKE KASANSA. — HE BUILDS ABOAT, AND REACHES THE SEA. PICKED UP. RETURNSHOME. MISSION TO THE GIAGAS. — THEIR ATROCITIES.ZINGHA EMBRACES CHRISTIANITY. ENGLISH SENEGAL COM-Any. THOMPSON ASCENDS THE GAMBIA. HIS Death. —VOYAGE OF Hobson. CONFERENCE WITH Buckram Sang.ACCOUNTS OF TIMBUCTOO. THE SILENT TRAFFIC. TRENCHCOMPANIES. JANNEQUIN's TRAVELS.— Brie ASCENDS THESENEGAL. RECEIVES INTELLIGENCE OF THE GOLD TRADE.COMPAGNON VISITS Barbour. REMISSNESS OF THE Portuguese.While the Europeans planted their flag and establishedtheir power in the New World, and in the remotest countriesof the East, they made comparatively little progressnearer home, where, nevertheless, they did not neglectto make pretensions of dominion. African discoverieswere not prosecuted with zeal until their difficulty wasfully known, and until curiosity was excited by an appearanceof inscrutable mystery. The Portuguese, havingfirst discovered the coasts of Africa, asserted, by virtueof the pope's grant, an exclusive right to the trade ordominion of that extensive region. The English, at anearly period, attempted to share in this trade. In 1481,224 MODERN Voyage OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IT.two Englishmen were reported to be engaged in equippinga squadron, under the patronage of the duke de MedinaSidon, to sail to the coast of Guinea. Ambassadorswere immediately despatched from the court of Portugalto remonstrate with Edward IV. respecting the invasionof a right sanctioned by the pope, whose authority todispose of kingdoms was not yet called in question, andto prevail on him to prohibit his subjects from interferingwith the Portuguese possessions in Africa. Thisrequest was granted ; and the English traders were formany years compelled to confine themselves within thenarrow limits drawn by bigotry and political usurpation.The chief African possessions of the Portuguese werein the Senegambia, or the country between the riversSenegal and Gambia, on the Gold Coast, and in Congo.Little is known of their proceedings ; and it is evensurprising to reflect how little instruction mankind hasderived from the unwearied activity of the Portugueseduring the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The prevalenceof their language in the country south of theGambia proves that their power was there once widelyestablished ; and it is thought that even Bambouk at onetime owned their sway. Merchants and missionarieswere their travellers : the former attentive to nothingbesides gain; the latter sunk in blind superstition, andviewing every object with the eyes of narrow-mindedbigotry.As the Reformation shook the influence of the popein England, it effectually broke down the barriers opposedto conquest by the pontifical decrees, and theEnglish felt themselves at full liberty to encroach onrights which were founded upon principles no longeracknowledged or respected. In spite of the remonstrancesand threats of the court of Portugal, two ships, wellmanned and armed, under the command, of captainWindham, were despatched to trade on the coast ofGuinea in 1553. Windham was accompanied by aPortuguese named Pinteado, who, having fallen intodisgrace in his own country, transferred his services toCHAP. XV. ESTABLISHMENTS IN AFRICA. 225the English merchants. Windham's pride took offenceat this appointment of a colleague ; and, in consequence,he treated Pinteado with a brutality and contempt whichwere attended with most disastrous effects to the expedition.When Pinteado advised the commander to exchangehis merchandise for gold on the coast of Guinea,and to avoid the unhealthy shores of Benin, Windham,from a spirit of opposition, pursued the very coursewhich he ought to have avoided. Windham and abovetwo thirds of the crew were cut off by the diseases ofthe climate : Pinteado expired on the voyage homethrough grief and vexation.The deplorable termination of this voyage, occasionedmanifestly by the misconduct of the commander, did notdiscourage the merchants of London from making asecond experiment. In 1554, three vessels sailed forGuinea, under the command of captain John Loathesvessels met with no accident or interruption inthe course of their trading voyage along the coast ofGuinea : they brought home above 400 pounds' weightof gold, a large quantity of Guinea pepper, and 250 elephants'teeth of different sizes. Among the objects ofcuriosity found or expected along this strange coast, theelephant seems to have excited the most interest in theEnglish traders. They brought home with them thehead of one, so large, that the skull alone, exclusive ofthe lower jaw and great tusks, weighed above 200 pounds'weight, and was as much as a man could raise from theground. Yet it may be doubted whether the author ofthe narrative (who was also the pilot of the voyage) eversaw an elephant ; since he thinks fit to inform us, thatthe great teeth, or tusks, grow on the upper jaw downward,and not in the lower jaw upwards, as the paintersand arras-workers represent them." Of the natives heobserves, that their princes and noblemen pounce andraise their skins in divers figures, like flowered damask.They expected civility and strict honesty in those whodealt with them, at which the English pilot expressesa rather discreditable surprise. Captain Lok broughtVOL. II. Q226 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.home with him some negro slaves, who, he informs us,were tall and strong men, and well pleased with Englishfare, hut somewhat indisposed with the coldness andmoisture of the climate. The success of this voyagewas so encouraging as to give rise to the establishmentof a regular Guinea trade; which was carried on by privateadventurers for some years, unattended with anyremarkable event, although exposed to the continualhostility of the Portuguese. To the narrative of anEnglish prisoner, however, we owe the first and mostinteresting accounts of the Portuguese settlements inCongo.Andrew Battel sailed from the Thames in 1589, in asmall vessel bound to the La Plata. The pinnace destinedfor this long voyage was of only fifty tons burden: but the boldness of navigators in that age is notto be estimated merely from the smallness of the vesselswith which they ventured across the ocean ; they seemalso in many instances to have neglected the necessaryequipments, and, with the spirit of rovers, to havetrusted to fortune or to force to supply them with thenecessaries of life. The ship in which Battel was embarked,after suffering much from the want of provisions,anchored at the little island of St. Sebastian, on thecoast of Brazil. Here the half-famished crew wentashore, to catch fish or to wander through the woods insearch of fruit. In the mean time a canoe full ofIndians, from the town of Spirit Santo, observingwhat passed, landed on the opposite side of the island,and advancing secretly through the woods, seized five ofthe company, and Battel among the number, and carriedthem off to Rio Janeiro. After four months' imprisonmentin this place, Battel was sent to Angola, andafterwards to a fort on the Coanza 130 miles up thecountry. When he had remained here two months, thepilot of the governor's pinnace died, and Battel wascommanded to steer her down the river to the town ofSt. Paul, on the sea-coast, where he fell sick, and continuedeight months seriously indisposed ; being treatedCHAP. XV. ESTABLISHMENTS IN AFRICA. 227with harshness and neglect as a heretic and an Englishman.He at length recovered, however, and was employedby the governor to trade for him in a smallvessel to the river Zaire, and afterwards to Loango. Inthis task he acquitted himself with ability and success.For one yard of cloth, the Portuguese could purchasefrom the natives three elephants' teeth weighing 120pounds. The governor of Angola, finding Battel avaluable servant, promised him his freedom as the rewardof his zeal and fidelity. He thus continued for twoyears and a half to carry on a trade along the coast, fromAngola to Loango. At the end of that time a Dutchship arrived at St. Paul, the master of which promisedto give Battel a passage home. Accordingly he stoleprivately on board ; but as the ship was about to weighanchor, he was betrayed by the Portuguese seamen, andcarried back to prison, where he lay for two months inheavy irons, expecting every day to be put to death.But the Portuguese, being engaged in perpetual warswith the natives, were unwilling to sacrifice the life of awhite man, to which, in their peculiar situation, anextraordinary value was attached. Battel was banishedto Massangano, where he lived six years, bearing thebrunt of the warfare with the natives, and with littlehope of ever beholding the sea again. In the fort ofMassangano he found some Moors and Egyptians, companionsin misfortune, kept in slavery by the Portuguese,and employed to enslave others. To one of theEgyptians, Battel ventured to hint that it would bebetter for them at once to venture their lives for theirliberty than to wear away existence in such a miserableservitude. The Egyptian liked the proposal, and otherswere soon found to join in the conspiracy. ThreeEgyptians and seven Portuguese, along with Battel, atlength stole off. On the night of their escape, theyseized the best canoe they could meet with, and descendedthe river Coanza. When at a considerabledistance from the fort, they went ashore with their musesets and ammunition, taking care to sink the canoe,Q 2228 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.that the Portuguese might not know where they hadlanded. They travelled the whole night and the nextday without finding water, so that the second night theywere scarcely able to proceed, being obliged to dig upthe roots of plants and suck them to moisten theirmouths. On the third day they met an old negro,whom they compelled to serve as guide to the lake ofKasansa. Fearing pursuit, they travelled during theheat of the day, which in that climate is almost insupportable.They proceeded so far towards the east, thatthey reached the mountains, which on that side formthe boundary of the kingdom of Congo. They nowdiscovered that they were misled by their negro guides ;and had hardly extricated themselves from this difficulty,when they found themselves surrounded by their Portuguesepursuers and a multitude of negroes. Battelcame forward from the thicket where he had concealedhimself, and declared his resolution to sell his lifedearly. The Portuguese officer, engaging that his lifeshould be safe, induced him to surrender. Notwithstandingthis guarantee, he narrowly escaped beinghanged when carried to St. Paul, where he lay for threemonths with a heavy collar of iron on his neck andbolts on his legs.But the necessity which the Portuguese felt of musteringan imposing force of white men, again saved hislife. He was sent up to the country of Elambo with400 Portuguese criminals, condemned to serve for lifein the wars with the negroes. In the course of hismilitary service here he received a wound in the leg, inconsequenceof which he was sent back to the city ofSt. Paul to procure surgical assistance. His skill as apilot was again brought into requisition, and he wasordered to conduct a ship to the Bahia cas Vaccas orthe Bay of Cows, where the Portuguese purchased fromthe natives the cattle with which they supplied theircolonies.In the second voyage made by Battel to this part ofthe coast, when the ship came opposite to the river CoveCHAP. XV. ESTABLISHMENTS IN AFRICA. 229a considerable army was seen encamped along its banks.A boat was sent ashore for intelligence, and broughtback word that these were the Gingas or Indes, whohad marched from Sierra Leone, over-running the countryof Congo. The great Giaga, their chief, came to thewater side to look at the Portuguese, having never seenwhite men before. On hearing that they came to trade,he encouraged them to land and to produce their merchandise.As prisoners were numerous in the Giagas'camp, the Portuguese loaded their ship with slaves,which they procured at an advantageous rate ; " purchasingfor a real apiece slaves which, in the city, wereworth twelve miles." They also assisted the Giagasin crossing the river to the country of Benguela, wherethey intended to continue their devastations. At daybreakthe great Giaga beat his congo, an instrument ofwar sounding like a bell, and in a loud oration declaredthat he would destroy the Benguelas. The Portuguesekindly aided him to fulfil his humane intentions. Assoon as the Giagas had crossed the river, they commencedan indiscriminate slaughter among the inhabitants." The prisoners," says Battel, u were broughtinto the camp alive, and the dead bodies eaten by theGiagas, who are the greatest cannibals in the world,delighting in man's flesh, though they have plenty ofcattle." The Portuguese, from conformity of interestor sentiment, conceived a strong attachment to theseterrific savages, and carried on a brisk trade with themfor five months ; but at the end of that time the Giagasmarched towards Bamballa in the interior. The Portuguese,finding their friends gone, resolved to followthem, and proceeded two days' march up the country,being guided in their course by the desolation that attendedthe march of the Giagas. On arriving at thetown of a native chieftain, they sent to him a negro slavewhom they had purchased of the Giagas, with instructionsto say that he was sent to conduct the chieftainto the Giaga camp. But the crafty negro prince penetratedthis attempt to ensnare him into captivity, andQ 3230 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.he retorted it on its contrivers: for hearing that theGiagas had left the country, he compelled the Portugueseto remain and serve him in his wars ; and having conqueredhis enemies by their assistance, he would notpermit them to depart without leaving a hostage fortheir return.When it came to be decided by the Portuguese whowas to be the devoted person, (for, as they really had nointention of returning, the death of the hostage seemedinevitable,) Battel, as an Englishman, and, consequently,disliked, was at once selected. They left him with amusket and plenty of ammunition, engaging to returnin two months with a reinforcement of a hundred men.As soon as this period had expired without the arrivalof the Portuguese, Battel was led forth for execution ;and though respited by the interference of the prince,yet he was so cruelly treated, and so harassed by the dailyexpectation of his fate, that he gladly seized an opportunityof escaping to the Giagas' camp. He hoped thatthey would travel so far to the west as to arrive at theseaside, where he might have the chance of meetingwith some ship. With them he journeyed through themountains of Kashindkabar, which, he says, are prodigiouslyhigh, and full of great mines of copper. Thecountry round the Gonza he found extremely fruitful,and abounding in wild peacocks : a hundred tame peacockswere there kept at the grave of an old chieftain,and were esteemed sacred, being dedicated to his genius.Having arrived within three days' journey of Massagehe contrived to escape from the Giagas, afterhaving served with them eighteen months, during whichtime he was treated with the greatest honour, on accountof his service with his musket.On his return to the Portuguese colony, Battel waswell received by the new governor, by whom he waspromoted to the rank of sergeant. He served two yearson the river Coanza, where the Portuguese had openedsome silver mines, which were found afterwards to benot worth the trouble of working. At length, in 1602,CHAP. XV. ESTABLISHMENTS IN AFRICA. 231in the twelfth year of Battel's captivity, news wasbrought of the peace ratified between Spain and England.Battel accordingly petitioned for leave to return home :his request was granted at first, but afterwards refused.When the triennial change of governors approached,Battel thought fit to absent himself for some days in thewoods, in order that he might be included in the generalpardon usually granted by a new governor to all fugitives.He stole from the town with his musket andammunition and two negro boys, and concealed himselfin the woods on the wayside for some days, till heshould receive some tidings respecting the arrival of thenew governor. He was informed, however, that nochange was to take place that year ; so that now he hadno alternative left but to continue wandering in thewoods, or else to return and suffer death, for this washis third time of deserting. He travelled to the lake ofKasansa, "where," he says, "is the greatest store of wildbeasts of any place in Angola." Here he lived duringsix months on the flesh of buffaloes, deer, and otheranimals. He dried the flesh as he had seen practised bythe Giagas, on a hurdle raised three feet from the ground,making a great fire underneath, and placing the fleshon green boughs and leaves, which keep down the smokeand heat. He at length grew weary of his solitary life,and exerted his ingenuity to contrive means of escape.In the lake of Kasansa were many small islands full oftrees, called Meniba, the wood of which is as soft and aslight as cork. Of these trees he built a flat-bottomedboat, fastened together with wooden pegs. Of his blankethe made a sail ; and, purchasing a knife from thenegroes for his dried flesh, he fashioned three rude oars.Thus equipped, he embarked on the river Bingo, bywhich the lake discharges itself into the sea. When hereached the bar, the surf had nearly proved fatal to hisill-constructed boat. He escaped this danger, however,got out to sea, and was next day picked up by a pinnace,the master of which proved to be an old friend,with whom he had formerly made a voyage as mate.q 4232 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Battel was left by him at the port of Loango, where heremained three years ; being in great favour with theking, from his expertness in the chase. On his returnto England he lived at Leigh in Essex, the place of hisbirth, and was a near neighbour of Purchas, who publishedthe narrative of his. singular adventures.The Giagas, who are styled by Battel " the greatestcannibals in the world," are described by travellers insuch horrid colours, that it is hard to give credit to thefidelity of the picture, notwithstanding the harmonywhich exists among the principal witnesses. They seemto be a nation living as outlaws, and who have formed intoa sort of religious code the commission of all the atrocitiesmost revolting to human nature. As war is their onlyoccupation, they never rear their children, which are inconsequencemurdered as soon as born. Their tribesare recruited from the youth of the conquered nations,who soon grow enamoured of a wandering life and theindulgence of their fiercest passions.Zingha, sister to the king of Matamba, a kingdompartially tinged with the character of the Giagas, cameto Angola in 1622, to negotiate a treaty between herbrother and the Portuguese government She excitedadmiration, and even astonishment, at the strength ofher understanding, and the dignity of her demeanour.While at Angola, she became, apparently at least, a convertto Christianity : but, on her return home, the dissensionsof her family afforded her an opportunity ofascending the throne of Matamba ; and finding thatan attachment to her new religion would weaken herinfluence over her subjects, she embraced the system ofthe Giagas, whose friendship she cultivated; zealouslyendeavoured to surpass them in barbarity; imposed onthem by a pretence of supernatural powers ; and finallysucceeded in being elected their queen. At the head ofthis fierce nation she was, for eight and twenty years,the terror of western Africa ; yet, during all this time,she assured the missionaries that she was a Christian atheart, and that she conformed to the Giaga customsCHAP. XV. ESTABLISHMENTS IN AFRICA. 233merely from political necessity. At the mature age ofsixty-eight her zeal for Christianity revived ; and in1654, missionaries proceeded to Matamba, at her request,to instruct herself and her subjects in the doctrinesof Christianity. When they were introduced toher presence, the royal penitent fell prostrate on theground before them, and welcomed them with a flood oftears. At the desire of the missionaries she immediatelycommenced the erection of a church. A large proportionof the people followed the example of the queenand her grandees, and allowed themselves to be baptised.Proclamation was made " that no person should invokeor offer sacrifices to the devil or idols of any description ;that infants should no longer be exposed in the woods,to be devoured by wild beasts ; and that no one, underpain of death, should eat human flesh." She gave afarther proof of her obedience to the missionaries, inconsenting to marry at the age of seventy-five. On oneoccasion, the obstinate refusal of the missionaries to burya favourite old warrior in holy ground almost drove herto relapse. She prepared to inter him according to thenative rites, which prescribed that a number of humanbeings should be interred along with him. The timelyappearance of the missionaries hindered the completionof these fatal ceremonies, and spared the queen the painand humiliation of a second repentance. She continuedto profess the Christian religion till her death, whichtook place towards the close of the year 1663.In the infancy of political science, the establishmentof exclusive companies was looked upon to be the encouragementof trade ; and while capital existed onlyin small quantity, this grand error might be supportedby plausible arguments. In 1588, queen Elizabeth,wishing to promote the commerce with Africa, granteda patent to a company of merchants in Exeter to carryon the trade to Senegal and Gambia. The first voyagesof this company appear to have been attended with success.The English reported on their return, ". that onebar of iron would be more welcome to the natives than231 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.forty Portugal." But as monopoly is of a languid constitution,this trade does not appear to have ever grown toconsiderable importance. As the intercourse, however,increased between the traders and the natives, the formerreceived accounts respecting that which in everyrude age is the primary object of research — gold. Theywere told that the Moors, travelling over a great expanseof desert, arrived at the countries of TimbuctooandGago, where gold was abundant. In 1594, an Englishmerchant in Morocco wrote to his friend in London,to inform him that a Moor, employed by the Portugueseas their agent, had just returned from Ago with thirtymules laden with gold. He says also, that the Moorstook Timbuctoo, and imposed on the inhabitants an annualtribute of sixty quintals of gold. " The reportis," says the writer of the letter, " that Mahomet bringethwith him such an infinite treasure as I never heardof: it doth appear that they have more gold than anyother part of the world beside. The king of Moroccois like to be the greatest prince in the world for money,if he keep this country." *Rumours of this kind were sure to give birth to spiritedenterprise ; and at the beginning of the seventeenthcentury some attempts were made to reach the interiorof the African continent. In 1618, a company wasformed for the express purpose of penetrating to thecountry of gold and to Timbuctoo, in which city thewealth of Africa was supposed to be concentrated. GeorgeThompson, a Barbary merchant, was sent with a smallvessel of 120 tons, to carry these views into effect. Hisinstructions were to sail as far as possible up the riverGambia, and leaving the ship in a good harbour, to prosecutehis researches up the river in boats. This heperformed ; but in his absence the Portuguese seized hisship and massacred the crew. Intelligence of these misfortuneshaving reached home, a small vessel was despatchedto the aid of Thompson : but her crew were soweakened by disease and accidents on their arrival at the• HakluytCHAP. XV. ESTABLISHMENTS IX AFRICA. 235Gambia, that Thompson sent them back with letters,and a demand for a second reinforcement. In consequence,two ships were sent out under the command ofcaptain Richard Jobson, a resolute and intelligent man.On his arrival at the river, he found that Thompson hadpenetrated as far as Tenda, much farther than any Europeanwas known to have reached before. His objectin seeking that place was to have an interview withBuckar Sanoo, the principal native merchant of the Senegambia: here he met his death from his own followers ;and as the circumstances which led to it were learnedonly from those who were accessories in the murder, itis not surprising that it should be ascribed to his ownarrogance and misconduct. Jobson left his vessel atCassan, on the Gambia. On ascending the river inboats, he found his merchandise in comparatively littlerequest, and repented that he had not laden his boatswith salt. He met soon after with Brewer, who hadaccompanied Thompson to Tenda, and remained withthe English factory established up the river. He alsofilled Jobson with " golden hopes." Wherever theEnglish stopped, the negro kings, with their wives anddaughters, came down to the river side to buy, or ratherto beg for, trinkets, and still more for brandy. OnChristmas day, the Ferambra, a negro prince, a greatfriend of the English, sent them a load of elephants'flesh. After a navigation in boats of nearly thirtydays, they reached the rapids of Barraconda, the highestpoint to which the tide flows. The stream being nowalways against them, and the channel rocky, they wereunable to proceed by night ; and during the day thescorching heat of the sun rendered it impossible to makegreat exertions. Above Barraconda the country is anuninhabited desert. The river was filled with " a worldof sea horses, whose paths, as they came on shore to feed,were beaten with tracks as large as a London highway."The crocodiles were also so numerous, that the negroesdurst not venture into the water. Elephants grazedamong the sedges on the river side. Great troops ofMODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK. IV.baboons occupied the woods, and threw sticks at thetravellers, seeming at the same time to converse amongthemselves.On the 26th of January, Jobson arrived at Tenda,and despatched a messenger to Buckar Sanoo, who soonafter arrived with a stock of provisions, which he disposedof at a reasonable price. With the exchange ofpresents, and many ridiculous ceremonies, he was proclaimedthe white man's arcade, or mercantile agent.This compliment was repaid afterwards, when Jobsonvisited the king, on which occasion a ceremony was performed,which was interpreted to mean that his majestyceded all his dominions to the English ; " which bounty(observes Jobson) could require no less than two orthree bottles of my best brandy, although the Englishwere not sixpence the better for the grant."At Tenda, as elsewhere, salt was the article in chiefdemand. Iron wares also met with a ready sale, thoughthese were supplied at a cheaper rate by a neighbouringpeople. Buckar Sanoo's sword blade, and the brass braceletsof his wife, appeared to Jobson to be specimens ofas good workmanship as could be seen in England. Ourtraveller cautiously abstained from mentioning gold; butBuckar Sanoo, who knew perhaps what Europeans mostcoveted, told them, that if he continued his trade toTenda, he could dispose of all his cargoes for gold.The negro merchant affirmed that he had been fourtimes at a town in which the houses were all coveredwith gold, and distant a journey of four moons. Jobsonwas informed, that six days' journey from St. John'sMart (as he named the factory at Tenda), was a towncalled Mombar, where there was much trade for gold.Three stages farther was Laye, whence the gold came.A people called Araxes were the travelling merchantsof that country.Jobson wisely adapted his carriage to the negro customs: he danced and sung with them, and gaily enteredinto all their amusements. He remarks that the waterof the Gambia above Barraconda has such a strong scentCHAP. XV. ESTABLISHMENTS IN AFRICA. 237of musk, from the multitude of crocodiles that infest thatpart of the river, as to be unfit for use. The torpedoabounds in the river about Cassan, and at first causedhis crew not a little terror and amazement. Jobson's discoveriesdid not reach as far as those of Thompson, whohad penetrated even to Laye. But many years elapsedbefore travellers passed the limits at which he arrived.He again repeats the story of a silent traffic carried onin the interior between the Moors and a negro nationwho would not allow themselves to be seen. " The reason,"he adds, " why these negroes conceal themselves is,that they have lips of an unnatural size, hanging downhalf way over their breasts, and which they are obligedto rub with salt continually to keep them from putrefaction."Thus even the great salt trade of the interiorof Africa is not wholly untinged with fable. In 1 723captain Stubbs made another attempt to ascend theGambia. The natives were every where disposed tocarry on trade, and in some places sapphic or charmswere hung at the river side to draw white men on shore.Stubbs was not able to penetrate beyond Tenda, whichcontinued for many years to be the limit of geographicaldiscovery in that quarter.The Normans pretend to have carried on a trade ofgreat antiquity with western Africa. It is said that theyvisited the coast as far as Sierra Leone, as early as the year1364. This claim, however, to a trade with the coastof Africa at an age long prior to that in which thoseseas are supposed to have been first navigated by Europeans,rests on documentary evidence, destroyed, it is said,in the fire which consumed the town hall of Dieppein the year l6<)4. These early navigations may thereforebe disregarded, since the proof of them is no longerin existence. But it is certain that the merchants ofDieppe and Rouen long retained exclusive possession ofthe African trade, and that they had settlements at tiremouth of the Senegal in l6'26. In l6'64, was erectedthe first of those royal and exclusive companies, five ofwhich in succession endeavoured to carry on the African238 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.trade, until, by their ruin, it was found to be betterpolicy to leave it perfectly free and unshackled. Butalthough the French companies did not derive muchadvantage from their patents, they entered upon theirspeculations with so much ardour as to add not a littleto the stock of information ; and until the time of theAfrican association, the French held the foremost rankinthe career of African discovery. In 1637, Jannequin,a young man of some rank and fortune, impelled bycuriosity and the love of travel, undertook a voyage upthe Senegal. He advanced no farther up the river thanthe district called the Terrier Rouge. He found thebanks of the river thickly covered with mangoes. Theforests were full of echoes, occasioned by their lengthand profound solitude; " which echoes, on sounding oftheir trumpets, joined to the prospect of the banks rangedwith fair palm-trees, whose shade promoted the refreshingbreeze, was not the smallest pleasure that they tastedin these sun-burnt countries." The principal kings ofthe country, according to Jannequin, are the Darnelking of Lydia, the Break king of the Follies, the Ka-makingchief of the Moors of Barbary, and the grandSamba Lamia king of the Moors and Berbers borderingon Timbuctoo. His geography of the interior restedmore on fantastical theories than on any information hehad received from the natives. " All the kingdoms beforementioned," he says, " are watered by the Niger, which,having crossed the kingdom of Timbuctoo, divides intothree branches. The first passes into Barbary underthe tropic of Cancer (a description which it is not easyto understand) ; the second falls into the sea betweenthe kingdoms of Barbary and Senegal ; the third, whosecourse is longer than that of the other two, enters thesea near the coast of Guinea." The opinion that theNiger and Senegal were identical was prevalent in hisday, and continued in vogue in the beginning of thelast century.Between the years 1 697 and 1715, much informationrespecting the country on the Senegal was procured byCHAP. XV. ESTABLISHMENTS IN AFRICA. 239the activity of True, who, during that period, had alarge share in the administration of the affairs of theFrench African companies. In one of his numerousjourneys he ascended the Senegal as far as Hallam ; andestablished a fort or factory at Dramanet, a populousand commercial town. The inhabitants carried on atrade as far as Timbuctoo, which they described as situated500 leagues in the interior. They imported fromit gold and ivory, and slaves from Barbara, which wasrepresented by them as an extensive region betweenTimbuctoo and Cassan, barren but very populous. Thekingdom of Cassan was said to be formed into a sort ofisland, or rather peninsula, by the branches of the Senegal;gold was so abundant there, that the metal often appearedon the surface of the ground. From these circumstances,it may be concluded that Cassan was in somedegree confounded with Bambquk, which borders iton the south. It had long been the ambition of theFrench to find access to this golden country ; but thejealousy of the native merchants presented an obstaclethat could not be easily surmounted. At length, encouragedby True, a young man named Compagnon venturedto brave the dangers of the journey; he passed thedreaded boundary, and entered Bambouk under the protectionof a native prince, whose favour he had procured.His appearance in that country caused, nevertheless, amingled sensation of terror and amazement. His prudentand conciliatory demeanour at length won thefavour and confidence of the native chiefs ; and Compagnonwas enabled in the course of a year and a halfto travel to the most important districts of Bambouk.He still found it difficult, nevertheless, to procure specimensof the ghingan or golden earth, which he wantedonly, he affirmed, to make a few tobacco pipes. The representationsof Compagnon inflamed the desire of theFrench company to establish their power in the countryof Bambouk. But such a measure required more forcethan they could bring into operation ; and Fort St.240 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Joseph continued to be the farthest limit of the Frenchestablishments on the Senegal.On the south-eastern coast of Africa the Portuguesevery soon established their power ; but as they matteno efforts, or very feeble ones, to reach the interior, geographyhas derived but little benefit from the extensionof their colonies : they overlooked the advantageous positionof the Cape of Good Hope ; and allowed the Dutch,in the beginning of the seventeenth century, to makethat settlement, which, in the hands of the English,promises to become a source of civilisation to the savageinhabitants of southern Africa.In this, and the two preceding chapters, it has beenseen by what steps European nations came to tix themselvespermanently on those portions of the globe withwhich but a few years before they had little or no acquaintance.The sixteenth and seventeenth centuriesproduced a number of eminent travellers, whose writingsmay be still consulted with pleasure and utility. Butto attempt to analyse or review the narratives of eventhose who are considered by the strictest criticism tohold the first rank in merit, would lead us far beyondthe limits prescribed to this work. Besides, to tracethe progress of geographical knowledge in minute detail,to point out what is due to various travellers, and to reconciletheir differences, would be a labour equally difficultand tedious. It is sufficient for our purpose toattend only to those individual exertions and historicalevents which have tended unremittingly to advance andto consolidate our knowledge of the globe.CHAP. XVI. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 241CHAP. XVI.VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA.VOYAGE OF ALCAZAVA. HE SENDS TO EXPLORE THE INTERIOROF patagonia. MUTINY OF THE CREW. FAILURE OF THEEXPEDITION. VOYAGE OF Cargo. PERSEVERANCE OFLADRILLERO. DISCOVERIES OF Villanous. HE ATTEMPTSTO FIX A COLONY AT THE PHILIPPINES. — NEW GUINEA. •»—LEGASPI DESPATCHED TO THE PHILIPPINES. VOYAGE OFURDANETA. DISCOVERIES OF JUAN FERNANDEZ, -t— NEWZEALAND. FIRST VOYAGE OF Zenana. HE DISCOVERSTHE Solomon ISLANDS. — SECOND VOYAGE. THE MarquesasAND QUEEN CHARLOTTE'S ISLES DISCOVERED. SIRFRANCIS DRAKE. HE BEHOLDS THE SOUTH SEA FROM THEISTHMUS OF DARIEN. BOLD ATTEMPT OF JOHN OXNAM.— HISUNFORTUNATE END. DRAKE'S EXPEDITION. THE Patagonians.EXECUTION OF Doughty. VOYAGE THROUGH THESTRAITS OF MAGELLAN. DRAKE DRIVEN FAR TO THE SOUTH.HIS SUCCESSES ON THE COAST OF PERU. TAKES A SHIPLADEN WITH TREASURE. SEEKS A PASSAGE BY THE NORTH.REACHES A HIGH LATITUDE. NEW ALBION. — THECOUNTRY CEDED TO DRAKE. HE SAILS TO THE MOLUCCAS.IS WELL RECEIVED BY THE KING OF TERNATE. — CRABISLAND. NARROW ESCAPE. SAFE RETURN OF DRAKE.—HOW RECEIVED AT HOME. ADVENTURES OF WILLIAM CARVER.The ardour of discovery which had prompted the courtof Spain to despatch the well-prepared armaments-ofMagellan and Loyasa, was much abated by the indifferentsuccess of these expeditions. The embarrassmentsof European politics, and the exhaustion of histreasury, prevented the emperor from taking energeticmeasures to extend or developed his distant possessions ;and notwithstanding the difficulty with which the Spanishsettlements in South America communicated overland,the attempts made by the government to open thenavigation and establish an intercourse by the Straits ofMagellan were few and ineffectual.In 1534, Alcazava with two ships attempted to reachPeru by this course. On arriving at the western entranceof the strait, he saw a cross, supposed to haveVOL. II. n242 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.been erected there by Magellan ; and the remains of awreck, probably of a ship of Loyasa's fleet. The severityof the weather, and the want of water, caused muchdiscontent among the crews; andAlcazava, with a facilitywhich eventually proved fatal to him, yielded to theimportunities of his officers, and returned to the port DeLeones y Lobos (of (sea) Lions and Wolves, ie. seals), onthe coast of Patagonia. To employ the men, he plannedan expedition up the country ; but as the weak stateof his health did not permit him to conduct it himself,he placed it under the command of Roderigo de la Isle.After a march of twenty-five leagues, the exploring partycrossed a fine river, to which they gave the name of theGuadalquivir. When they had penetrated about a hundredleagues into the interior, and had been absent fromthe ships above three weeks, they found their slenderstock of provisions totally consumed. Their Indianguides still tempted them on, assuring them that at nogreat distance was a populous country, the inhabitantsof which wore on their arms large ornaments of gold ;but necessity compelled the Spaniards to return. Themost shocking extremities of famine were now added tothe toils of a wearisome journey. Many perished on theroute ; and when the famished remnant reached theshore, what was their grief and horror, to find that theywere no longer looked upon as friends by those who hadremained in the ships, and who, having mutinied andput their commander to death, were preparing to depart,as soon as the weather would permit, to commence alife of piracy. For three weeks Roderigo de la Isla andhis unhappy comrades had to endure the miseries ofhunger and destitution on shore, at a short distance fromthe ships. But some of the mutineers at length relentedat the sight of so much suffering ; they opened theireyes to the heinousness of their guilt and the danger oftheir situation ; and a reaction of feeling taking placeamong the crews, the ringleaders were given up to Dela Isla, who put them to death, took the command ofthe ships, and returned to Spain. This unfortunate andCHAP. XVI. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 243disgraceful expedition was succeeded, in 1539, by thatof Cargo, who, proceeding from the river La Platawith three ships, attempted to pass through the straitinto the Pacific Ocean. He succeeded with his own vesselin reaching Peru : one of his ships was lost in thestrait ; and the third, after discovering a number ofislands, inlets, and harbours, which delayed her course,was obliged to return to the La Plata. This was thelast attempt made by the Spaniards for many years toexamine and improve the navigation between the Atlanticand Pacific Oceans. In 1557, indeed, Ladrillerosailed from Chili with two ships to survey the straitfrom the east : a mutiny broke out in his crews, whichhe with difficulty quelled ; one of his ships parted companyin a storm, and returned to Chili. He, however,resolutely continued his voyage, and diligently examinedall the windings of the strait, and returned with onlyone Spanish seaman and a negro to manoeuvre his vessel ;the rest of his crew having perished from want, fatigue,and the severity of the climate.The claim of the Spaniards to the Moluccas was definitivelyrenounced by the emperor in 1529, for a sum ofmoney ; but he did not give up his pretensions to thenumerous islands which Spanish navigators had discoveredto the east of the line of demarcation now confirmedto the Portuguese. In consequence, Rui Lopezde Villalobos was despatched in 1542, with six ships,to make a settlement in some of the islands discoveredby Magellan. This voyage was productive of a considerableincrease in the geographical knowledge of thePacific Ocean ; but it is difficult at the present day totrace with certainty and precision the course held bythe Spanish navigator. Villalobos discovered a clusterof islands, which he named Del Coral (Coral Islands),and which are supposed to be a part of the New Philippines.Farther to the west he found Los Jardineor the Garden Islands ; and then the Matalotes and theArrccifes or Reefs, which are probably the Pelew Islandsof modern maps. Arrived at Mindanao, he took posit2244 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.session of it in the name of the emperor, and called itCaesarea Carol ; but he subsequently named the wholegroup of islands to which it belongs, Los Philippines,the Philippines, in honour of prince Philip ; a denominationwhich geography has preserved. In likemanner the group of islands south of the Ladroness,which received in 1 705, when Philip V. was on thethrone of Spain, the name of the New Philippines, hadbeen previously called the Carolines (from Charles Ii),by Lazeano, the original discoverer of part of the group.The expedition of Villalobos failed in its principal object: the natives of the Philippine Islands seemed wellacquainted with the character and intentions of theirvisitors, and obstinately refused to maintain any friendlyintercourse with them. The Spaniards, suffering continuallyfrom want of provisions, were at length compelledto throw themselves on the mercy of the Portuguese.Villalobos died at Amboyna : his companions, aftermany difficulties, reached Goa, whence they returnedto Europe. The St. Juan, the smallest vessel of hisfleet, twice attempted to return to New Spain, but wasdriven back on each occasion by the constancy of theeasterly winds. She touched at many new islands, andsailed several leagues along the coast of a low and fertilecountry, to which the Spaniards, not aware that ithad been previously discovered, gave the name of NewGuinea, which it still retains.The failure of Villalobos, being imputed to mismanagement,did not deter the Spaniards from their intentionof making a settlement at the Philippine Islands. Forthis purpose Miguel Lopez de Legaspi was despatchedfrom the port of Navidad, in New Spain, with fourships, in the year 1564. Andrew de Urdaneta, who,when a young man, had sated with Loyasa, but hadsince retired into monastic life, and whose reputation asan able navigator and cosmographer was very high, wasprevailed on, by the express desire of the king, to accompanythe expedition. It was the wish of Urdaneta toestablish a colony on New Guinea, which he supposedCHAP. XVI. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 243to be a part of a great southern continent stretching,without interruption, from the Indian seas to Tierra delFuego, on the south of Magellan's Straits. The Philippines,however, had been fixed on by the Spanish government.Legaspi had a prosperous voyage, in the courseof which he discovered some islands, which he namedLos Barbados, from the long beards of the inhabitants.He appears also to have fallen in with one of the Mariannes; but the difficulty of following the tracks of theearly navigators, and the inaccuracy of their observationsto determine their geographical position, may be estimatedfrom the circumstance, that the four pilots ofLegaspi's fleet differed from each other in their reckoningsnot less than 400 leagues. Legaspi succeeded inplanting a colony at Zebu, where he took inhuman vengeancefor the violence done to Magellan forty yearsbefore. Some years later he conquered Manilla, whichthenceforth became the capital of the Spanish possessionsin the Philippine Islands. The colony being established,Urdaneta, agreeably to his instructions, set sail acrossthe Pacific for New Spain; an attempt in which everypreceding navigator had been foiled. He had the boldnessand sagacity to hold a northerly course, in order tofall in with westerly winds, and actually reached thelatitude of 43° north. By this masterly navigation hesucceeded, without any struggle, in returning to NewSpain. The year following, a ship sailed to the Philippinesfrom New Spain; and in 1567, two vessels returnedby the course pointed out by Urdaneta. Fromthat time forth voyages across the Pacific were annuallyrepeated by the beaten tracks.A similar discovery in the art of navigation was madeabout the same time in the Southern Pacific. Seamenhad hitherto found it nearly as difficult to sail fromnorth to south along the coast of Peru, as to navigatethe Pacific, between the tropics, from west to east. ButJuan Fernandez discovered, that by running westwardto a great distance from land, southerly winds were to bemet with, which, continuing to the latitude of variabler 3246 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.or of westerly winds, gave the mariner the opportunityof making the land to the south, which he could nothave done had he remained near shore. In the courseof one of his voyages, this enterprising seaman discovered,at the distance of 110 leagues from the coast of Chili,the small island which bears his name, and which hasobtained a pleasing celebrity as the spot inhabited forfour years by the shipwrecked mariner Alexander Selkirk,on whose simple narrative Defoe founded the admirableAdventures of Robinson Crusoe. Juan Fernandez isalso thought by many to have discovered New Zealand ;but the great land, or tierra firma, which he is reportedto have observed, does not appear to have been situatedso far to the west of Chili ; while, at the same time, theSouthern Ocean has not yet been so perfectly exploredas to compel us to refuse credit to his narrative.After the settlement of the Spaniards in the PhilippineIslands, and the consequent increase of navigationin the Pacific Ocean, it might naturally be expectedthat numerous geographical discoveries would be madein a sea so thickly strewed with islands. It is possiblethat voyages of discovery were made by the Spaniards,the accounts of which have never been published; andthere is reason to believe that the name of the SolomonIslands had been applied to some islands in the Pacificprevious to the discovery of the group which at presentbears the name.* In 1567, Avaro de Mendana sailedfrom Callao on a voyage of discovery, which seems tohave had in view the examination of some islands previouslydescried. In the course of this voyage he discoveredthe Salomon Islands, the island of Santa Crux,the group of San Francisco, and several others. Hakluytinforms us " that the isles of Salomon were sonamed by the discoverer, to the end that the Spaniards,supposing them to be those isles from whence Salomonfetched gold, might be the more desirous to go and inhabitthe same." Yet the discoveries made by Mendana inthis voyage do not appear to have excited at first anyCuracy's Voyages in the South Sea, vol L p. 277.CHAP. XVI. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 247uncommon degree of interest or expectation in theminds of the Spaniards in Peru. It is certain that theSalomon Islands were not again visited by Europeanstill two centuries after their discovery, notwithstandingthe romantic ideas entertained respecting their greatriches; and we have but an imperfect acquaintance withthem even at the present day. Nearly thirty yearselapsed before Mendana departed a second time fromPeru to continue his interesting researches. In thisvoyage he discovered the Marquesas, the group of SanBernardo, and that afterwards named by Carteret QueenCharlotte's Islands. He sought in vain the SalomonIslands, but from the errors of his reckoning was unableto find them ; and relinquished the search when notmore than forty leagues distant from San Christian,the island of the group to which his views were chieflydirected. His attempts to plant a colony in Santa Cruzfailed from the tyranny of the Spaniards, and consequenthostility of the natives. Mendana (who ranks high asadiscoverer, but not as a navigator or commander) diedat this island ; and the voyage, though rich in geographicalresults, was otherwise unfortunate.But previous to the second voyage of Mendana theattention of the Spaniards of Peru was diverted fromresearches which had for their object the gratificationof curiosity or the establishment of new settlements, bydangers which threatened them at home. They foundthemselves attacked in a manner most unexpected; andwhile they indulged in dreams of security, their treasureswere carried off from before their eyes. Sir FrancisDrake had entered the Pacific Ocean, which they deemedall their own, by the Straits of Magellan, the navigationof which they had abandoned in despair, and his appearancecaused them no less terror than surprise.This extraordinary man was born of humble parentsat Tavistock in Devonshire. At an early age he wentto sea ; and the master of the bark whom he served,leaving him the little vessel at his death, laid the foundationof his future fortune. Young Drake accompaniedjt 4Q 1 8 M(7»ERK VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.sir John Hawkins in his expedition to the Gulf of Mexicoin 1567. Here he lost all that he was worth, and returnedwith nothing but experience and an implacableanimosity to the Spaniards. In 1573 he took the commandof an expedition of two ships, fitted out to interceptthe treasure which was said to be carried fromPanama across the Isthmus of Darien. In his excursionriver tfye isthmus, " he came," says his historian, "to agoodly and great high tree, in which they had cut andmade divers steps to ascend near to the top, where theyhad made a convenient bower, wherein ten or twelvemen might easily sit, and from thence we might see theAtlantic Ocean, whence we came from, and the SouthAtlantic We so much desired. North and south of thistree they had felled certain trees, that the prospect mightbe clearer." * Though Drake failed in the immediateobject of this expedition, he succeeded in amassing agreat deal of wealth, which he spent with characteristicgenerosity; and is even said to have aided the earl ofEssex, at that time engaged in reducing the Irish toobedience, with three frigates equipped at his own expense.A man of so bold a stamp and so popular atemper was not likely to be long without employment inan age and country in which there at that time existedsuch a thirst for adventure.But before we proceed to relate the exploits of Drakein the South Sea, it will be necessary to give a shortaccount of one who preceded him in that field of adventure.Among those who accompanied Drake to thetree in the Isthmus of Darien above alluded to, in orderto enjoy from it the alluring prospect of the SouthernOcean, was one John Oxnam, or Oxenham, who appearsto have been a favourite of the captain, and who shortlyafter returned to try his fortune in a hazardous schemeof privateering. In 1575, he arrived in the Gulf ofMexico, in a small vessel of 120 tons, and with onlyseventy men. Hearing that, since the attempt of Drake,the treasure of the Spaniards was strongly guarded, heSir F. Drake revived. 165aCHAP. XVI. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 249devised a scheme of action equally bold and original.Drawing the ship on shore, he covered her with boughsof trees, buried all the guns except two small pieces, andleaving one man as a watch, he marched with the restinto the interior. He soon arrived at a river flowingtowards the south, where he built a pinnace forty-fivefeet in length ; and embarking in this little vessel, hewent down the stream into the South Sea. He immediatelydirected Its course to the Pearl Islands, captureda bark containing 60,000 pesos of gold, and anotherfrom Lima with 100,000 pesos of silver. With this spoilhe returned to the river ; but here a tedious dispute aroseamongst his men respecting the division of the treasure.The Spaniards, in the mean time, pursued Oxenham andhis companions with four ships ; and coming to the riverWhich he had ascended, arrived at the place where the treasurehad been buried, which they hastened to carry off,well satisfied with their success. The English, returningto the spot, and finding their treasure gone, followedwith impetuosity, regardless of the inequality of numbers.In consequence they fell into an ambush, andwere totally defeated. A party of Spaniards soon afterdiscovered Oxenham's ship, with the stores and ordnance,which he had taken such pains to conceal. The Englishwho survived this train of misfortunes lived for some timeamong the Indians in the woods, and employed themselvesin building canoes, in which they hoped to effecttheir escape. But they were at length taken by theSpaniards, and carried to Panama; where Oxenham andall his companions, with the exception of five boys, wereput to death. Such was the unfortunate end of thisbold adventurer, who was the first Englishman that evernavigated the Pacific Ocean.But to return to Drake. — His friends equipped forhim a squadron, with which he was to achieve his grandschemes of conquest in the South Sea. The fleet placedunder his command consisted of five vessels, the largestof which, the Pelican, was of only 100 tons burthen.The crews of all the ships amounted to 164 men. It250 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV-wasgiven out that the expedition was bound for Alexandria.On the 13th of December, 1577, Drake sailedon his memorable voyage from Plymouth. BetweenMogadore and Cape Blanc, on the coast of Africa, hecaptured several small vessels, which he dismissed, havingfirst emptied them of every thing that his fleet required.On the 14th of April he arrived in the river La Plata;and anchoring eighteen leagues within its mouth, he employedthe crews in killing seals, " which are found tobe good meat for the present, and provision for thefuture." In the habitations of the natives they founda great quantity of birds dried for food, and among themfifty ostriches, whose legs t( were as large as reasonablelegs of mutton." Here the Swan, a vessel of fifty tons,being found too weak for the voyage, was broken up forfire wood. Respecting the inhabitants of this coast thereis great diversity in the accounts : by some they are saidto be men of mean stature, but well limbed ; while othersrepresent them as giants, " to whom the tallest Englishwere but pygmies." They seemed particularly delightedwith the sound of the trumpet; and, while on terms offriendship with the crews, danced most cheerfully withthe seamen.On the 20th of June the expedition entered Port St.Julian, the harbour in which Magellan's fleet had formerlywintered. A gibbet was seen on the shore, amonument of that commander's severity. It seemedominous of an event which here took place, and whichcasts a shade over Drake's reputation. Mr. ThomasDoughty, a man of eminent abilities, and who wassecond in command in the fleet, was here tried on somevague charges of disaffection, and suffered sentence ofdeath. The inadequate explanation given of this affairby the historians of the voyage leaves room to suspectthat Drake was actuated in his persecution of his ablecolleague by some feelings of personal hostility. Thefleet was now reduced to three vessels; and on the 17thof August, 1578, he left Port St. Julian, where it hadremained in shelter for two months.CHAP. XVI. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 251Drake reached the Straits of Magellan without difficulty,and passed through them in the comparatively shortspace of seventeen days. He found in them numerousgood harbours, with abundance of fresh water ; but, fromthe great depth of the sea, it was hard to meet withcommodious anchorage. The land on both sides washigh, and the cold severe, but nevertheless a multitudeof evergreens and other trees show that the climate isnot adverse to vegetable life. He met in the straitwith Indians of small stature, with canoes beautifullymade of the bark of trees sewed together with thongsof seal-skin. Their houses were constructed with polescovered over with skins. These Indians had formidableknives made of enormous muscle-shells twenty incheslong, with which they were able to cut not only thehardest woods, but even bones. The western mouth ofthe strait was found by Drake to be formed not bycontinuous land, but a close archipelago ; it appeared tohim also difficult to be navigated, not only from thenumber and intricacy of its channels, but also from atempestuous climate, which seems to characterise thatportion of the globe. A violent gale drove his fleet 200leagues to the west, and, according to some accounts, toso high a latitude that the night was of only two hours'duration. The Marigold, a bark of thirty tons, washere parted by the gale, and does not appear to havebeen heard of after. Drake and Winter, the captainsof the two remaining vessels, at length found shelternear the western entrance of the strait, in a bay which,from what afterwards took place, was named The Bayof the Parting of Friends. Here the admiral's cablebroke; and being again driven to sea, he ran still fartherto the south, and " fell in with the uttermost part ofland towards the south pole ; which uttermost cape orheadland of all these islands stands nearly in the fifty-sixthdegree, without which there is no main nor islandto be seen to the southwards, but the Atlantic Oceanand the South Sea meet in a large and free scope."Winter entered the straits, where his men recovered252 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IVtheir health, and returned safely to England. A shallopwith eight men, the fortune of which shall be narratedhereafter, had been despatched home with intelligence ofthe fleet's having passed the straits.To the islands among which Drake found shelter hegave the name of the Elizabethan : here he saw a greatnumber of natives plying across the channels in canoes,the children hanging in skins on their mothers' backs.The storm which had driven him here continued withoutabatement fifty-one days. At length he departede * from the southernmost part of the world known orlikely to be known"* Towards the end of Novemberhe anchored at the island of Mocha, on the coast ofChili. With the assistance of an Indian pilot he enteredthe port of Valparaiso and plundered a large ship, inwhich he found, besides much Chili wine, 60,000 pesosof gold. He then pillaged the town, and carried offJuan Griego, an experienced pilot, to Lima. At thewatering place at Tarapaca, some of the English goingashore found a Spaniard asleep, with silver bars equal invalue to 4000 ducats lying beside him ; farther on aSpaniard and an Indian were taken, driving six lamasladen each with a hundred pounds' weight of silver. Ouradventurers imagined that this country was so rich, thatevery hundred weight of common earth yielded twenty-fiveshillings of pure silver ; and the success with whichthey pillaged certainly corresponded with their extravagantexpectations. Again, at Arica, they seized twoships laden with the precious metals. Messengers hadbeen already despatched from Valparaiso to Peru withan account of what had occurred there; but so imperfectwere the communications by land, that Drake far outstrippedthe couriers. On the 15th of February heentered the port of Callao, in which he found seventeenships, some of them laden with silver ; here also hereceived the important intelligence that the Cacafuego,a large vessel laden with treasure, had sailed about afortnight before for Panama. He immediately set allThe World encompassed.CHAP. XVI. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. XJOthe ships in the harbour adrift, lest any attempt mightbe made to pursue him ; and crowding all sail, proceededtowards the north, his ship being towed whenever thewind fell. The Spaniards in the mean time armed twovessels, and went in pursuit of him with 200 men, buttheir hasty equipment was forced to return for want ofprovisions. At Payta, Drake learned that the Cacafuegowas only two days' sail before him ; and on the 1st ofMarch a sail was seen four leagues ahead : this provedto be the treasure-laden ship, which he soon approached,and captured without trouble.Drake immediately turned his course towards the west,and sailed two whole days from the land before he proceededto rifle his prize. The exulting adventurers thentook from her thirteen chests of reals of plate, eightypounds weight of gold, and twenty-six tons of silver bullion; in all worth about 360,000 pesos, or 150,000/.sterling. Their success was now complete, their thirst ofplunder satisfied, and their hopes were wholly bent on asafe and expeditious voyage home. In this situation,Drake adopted a resolution which vividly represents thevigour of his mind and his intrepid courage. He determinedto seek a passage back to Europe by the northeast,in which direction the imperfect geographical knowledgeof that age allowed him to expect that he mightfind a passage or strait conducting into the Atlantic. Atthe isle of Cannot, in 1 0° north latitude, his ship was laidashore, cleaned, and repaired ; the stores being removedinto a small Spanish vessel which had been opportunelyseized a short time before. In this vessel was found aletter from the king of Spain to the governor of thePhilippine Islands, and, what proved an acquisition ofmuch greater importance, several charts of the courseacross the Pacific Ocean.As soon as our hero's vessel was refitted, he stoodout to sea, and sailed north-west 1400 leagues withoutonce seeing land. On reaching the latitude of 42°north he found the cold so intense that the meat wasall frozen : he persisted nevertheless in his design of254 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IVseeking a north-east passage. In latitude 48° land wasdescried, and our mariners were not a little surprisedto find that the American continent extended so fartowards the west. But as they approached the shore,the cold grew more intolerable ; and Drake was obligedto renounce his hopes of solving the most interestinggeographical problem of that day, respecting a northerncommunication between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans,and to proceed southwards. Between the parallels of48° and 38°, high mountains were seen extendingparallel to the shore and covered with snow. A commodiousharbour was at length found ; and as the shiphad sprung a leak at sea, it was deemed expedient toanchor within it close to the shore, and, landing thestores and men, to make the necessary repairs.The English had not been here many hours when thenatives made their appearance, crowding to the sea-sidewith manifest astonishment to view the strangers. Oneof them even ventured to approach the ship in a canoe ;and while paddling towards it he at the Same time pronouncedan oration with a ludicrous solemnity of manner,and with so vehement a rapidity as to be sometimeswholly out of breath. This he performed twice, returningeach time to the shore : but the ceremony didnot end here, for he made the same speech a third time,approaching the ship closer than before ; and then, bymeans of a long pole, he presented to those on boardneat bunches of black feathers, and a basket containingan herb, which he called tabah. The friendship thuscontracted between the English and the natives wasnever violated, during their subsequent intercourse, bytreachery on the one side or tyrannical violence on theother. The Indians seemed by no means insensible tothe rigours of their climate ; though wrapped in warmfurs, they were always shivering with the cold, andnever allowed an opportunity to escape of shelteringthemselves under English clothing. Their habitationswere dug in the earth, and roofed with boughs of treescovered over with earth-an aperture at the top servingCHAP. XVI. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 255at once as door and chimney. They appeared to haveplenty of food ; were active and well made, and of anopen, friendly disposition. Drake, though he employedno arts to win them, behaved towards them with thefrank kindness of one who is superior to fear and naturallyhumane. On one occasion they showed symptomsof general grief, as if some national calamity hadbefallen them ; and Drake, feeling an honest sympathywith their distress, of which he was unable to comprehendthe cause, commanded his whole company to joinin prayer. The natives, ignorant what this grave proceedingmeant, looked on with wonder and respectfulattention ; but when they heard the men join all theirvoices to sing the psalms, they were unable to containtheir ecstasy, and loudly called for a repetition of thepleasure, with cries of Gnash, gnash ! The high, or kingof the country, after a little time paid a visit to theEnglish. His arrival at their encampment was usheredin by long speeches, delivered with much earnestness bycertain orators ; and at the conclusion of every sentence,the surrounding multitude shouted Oh ! oh ! as if tosignify their concurrence with what had been expressed.The high then approached Drake, and putting on hishead a caul, ornamented with chains of bone such as hewore himself, saluted him high. This ceremony, theEnglish, according to the system of European pride, interpretedto mean the cession of his dominions into theirhands. Drake made a short excursion into the country,during which he saw numerous herds of fat deer, and apeculiar species of rabbit or marmot, with which naturalistsare still but little acquainted. The ship was nowready for sea, and he weighed anchor on the 17th ofJuly, having remained here above a month ; but beforehis departure he erected a column, and fixed a brassplate on it, with an inscription bearing the name andarms of the queen. To this country he gave the nameof New Albion.As the wind blew freshly from the north-west, it wasresolved to steer for the Moluccas ; the danger of MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.ing with the Spaniards, together with the hazards ofthose stormy seas, rendering it less advisable to returnby the Straits of Magellan. For sixty-eight days noland was seen ; at length, on the 30th of September, theship arrived at some islands which, from the pilferingpropensity of the natives, the seamen called the Islandsef Thieves. These are, probably, a part of the PelewIslands. Drake was well received by the king of Ternate,who offered to reserve to the English the exclusiveright of trading with his island. He next visited theeastern coast of Celebes; and finding, in his course southward,a small uninhabited island with a good harbour,he remained there a month to repair the ship. Theisland was one continued wood, the trees being remarkablytall and straight, without any branches, except atthe top : among them were multitudes of bats of enormoussize. The woods were also filled with land-crabs,or, as they are described, " a kind of cray-fish of sucha size that one was sufficient to satisfy four hungry men,and were very good meat : they seem to be utter strangersto the sea ; living always on land, where they workthemselves earths, or rather dig huge caves under theroots of the largest trees, where they lodge by companiestogether."Our adventurers had not left this island long whenthe ship stuck fast upon a sunken rock : all means weretried to get her off without effect ; three tons of clovesand eight guns were thrown overboard to no purpose,and their loss seemed inevitable, when, the wind abating,the ship fell to one side, and instead of sinking, as wasexpected, floated off without injury. No accident occurredduring the remainder of the voyage; and on the26th of September, 1 580, Drake anchored at Plymouth,after an absence of two years and nearly ten months. Aconsiderable portion of the treasure which he broughthome was sequestered by government, at the instance ofthe Spanish ambassador, and restored to its rightfulowners ; but enough remained to satisfy the expectationsef those who had equipped the expedition. Notwith-CHAP. XVI. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 257standing this acknowledgment of the claims of justice,the queen bestowed on Drake many marks of her favourand approbation : she dined on board his ship at Dept-ford,and conferred on him the honour of knighthood.The ship was preserved for many years at Hertford;and when, at last, it seemed impossible to guard its timbersany longer from decay, a chair was made of one ofthe planks, and presented to the university of Oxford.In the chequered scenes of life it is hard to find apicture of success which is not shaded by some traits ofsuffering and hardship. To the account of Drake'striumph may be advantageously subjoined that of themiseries endured by some of his companions. A shallopcontaining eight men, with provisions for only one day,was separated from and soon lost sight of his ship onthe south-west side of Tierra del Fuego. These unhappymen, thus exposed to tempests and famine in an openboat, took shelter in the straits, and afterwards madetheir way along the coast till they came to the north side ofthe mouth of the La Plata. Here they went incautiouslyashore, and four of the party were killed, the rest woundedby the arrows of the savages : the survivors succeeded inreaching an island about three leagues from the shore,where two of them died soon after of their wounds. Theremaining two, Peter Carver and William Pitcher, stayedon this island, which was but a league in compass, twomonths ; during which time they subsisted on small crabs,eels, and fruits ; but the extremities to which they weredriven from want of fresh water are too shocking to bedescribed. At length they found a plank ten feet long,and on this they embarked to reach the main land, havingformed rude paddles of the boughs of trees. Thevoyage, of three leagues, employed them three days andtwo nights : on gaining the shore they found a smallrivulet, at which Pitcher overran himself, and expiredin half an hour. Carver had hardly strengthenough left to bury him in the sand. The next dayhe met with some of the natives, who offered him noinjury ; and after living with them for some time, heVOL. II. s258 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.wandered across the country to the Portuguese settlementsin Brazil, whence, after an absence of nine years,he returned to his native country. *CHAP. XVII.VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA.REMARKS OX DRAKE'S VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. ITS Celerity.DISCOVERIES. SARMIENTO SURVEYS THE STRAITSOF MAGELLAN. PROPOSES TO FORTIFY THEM. EXPEDITIONFOR THAT PURPOSE. ITS SUFFERINGS.— SAN Felice PoundedITS SPEEDY RUIN. EXPEDITION OF SIR THOMAS CAN-dish.HE PASSES THE STRAIT. HIS SUCCESS. CAPTURESTHE ST. ANNE. VOYAGE HOME. HIS OBSERVATIONS. HISDEATH. THE DUTCH TURN THEIR ATTENTION TO THE TRADEWITH INDIA. EXPEDITION OF VAN NOORT. ACCOUNT OF THEMAGELLANIC TRIBES. THE Ladrone. RETURN OF VANNOORT. VOYAGE OF VERHAGEN's FLEET STRUGGLES OF DEWert. — REMARKABLE VOYAGE OF Quires HE DISCOVERSMANY ISLANDS. SAGITTARIA OR OTAHEITE. ISLAND OF HandsomePEOPLE. TAUMACO. INFORMATION RECEIVED FROMTHE NATIVES. HE DISCOVERS AUSTRALIA DEI. Spirit SANTO.HIS EXULTATION. HE APPLIES TO THE KING. — HIS DEATH.DISCOVERIES OF TORRES. HE COASTS NEW GUINEA.—NEW HOLLAND SEEN. EXPEDITION OF Spitsbergen. AccountOF THE Patagonians. HIS SUCCESS. VOYAGE OFSCHOUTEN AND LE Maire. ITS ORIGIN. DISCOVERY OFCAPE HORN. TYRANNY OF THE DUTCH EAST INDIA COM-Any. THE NODALS SURVEY TIERRA DEL Lego, AND COM-Plate THE CIRCUMNAVIGATION OF SOUTH AMERICA.Drake was the first Englishman who passed the Straitsof Magellan, or who sailed under English colours inthe Pacific Ocean. But independent of these strongclaims to national celebrity, there are many circumstancesin his voyage more intrinsically meritorious, andwhich demand, in a peculiar degree, the attention ofthe historian. It is remarkable that he should attempt,with so weak a fleet, to achieve a navigation long since• Purchas, vol. iv.CHAP. XVII. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 259abandoned by the Spaniards on account of its extremedifficulty and danger. He arrived in the tempestuousregions of the Magellanic Straits in the winter season,and yet he effected his passage through them in theshort space of seventeen days ; a much less time thanwas found necessary by any of those who preceded him,or even who followed him in that course.It is likewise to be observed, that he advanced muchfarther towards the south than any of the Spanish discoverers.There is little room to doubt that he actuallydescried the headland afterwards named Cape Horn.Had he himself written the narrative of his expedition,many proofs would unquestionably remain to us of asagacious and penetrating spirit, which cannot be suppliedfrom the vague and discordant narratives of hishistorians. He conjectured that the land to the southof the Straits of Magellan was broken land, or a clusterof islands ; an observation repeated by subsequent voyagers,and which modern researches have gone near toverify. It is true that the merit of having first discoveredCape Horn has been claimed by some for acaptain of Loyasa's fleet, who, being driven from hiscourse by a tempest, descried to the southward what hecalled the " End of the Land." * But it seems moreprobable that the land seen by the Spanish captain wasonly the south-eastern promontory of Staten Island.Drake also penetrated farther on the north-westerncoast of America than any preceding navigator. Hesailed as far as the forty-eighth degree of northern latitude,and took possession of the coast for the crown ofEngland, near the port in which he wintered, in latitude37°. He does not seem to have been aware that Ca-brill,in 1542, had surveyed the whole of that coast asfar north as 43°, with all the perseverance and accuracywhich the nautical science of that age would admit.But on the line of coast between 43° and 48°, Drakehad not been preceded by any of the Spanish navigators.A few years later, in 1582, Francisco Gale, after ,vol. i. p. 360.s 2260 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.eying minutely the islands of Japan, ran to a veryhigh latitude on his return home, and first touched thecoast of America in latitude 57° 30'. From that pointto Acapulco he observed all the headlands of the continent.Drake's design of returning home by sailing northwardsround America is another remarkable proof ofthe boldness of his mind. The novelty of the route didnot seem to him to present any difficulties. Perfect inhis seamanship, relying implicitly on his own resources,and possessing that high courage which is unacquaintedeven with the boding of fear, he was, in all seasonsand latitudes, perfectly at home on the ocean. In theease and certainty with which he shaped his coursethrough unknown seas he bears a resemblance to hiscelebrated countryman captain Cook.Notwithstanding the numerous delays incidental toan expedition which had for its chief object the acquisitionof wealth by the plunder of the Spaniards, Drakesailed round the globe in a shorter time than any previousnavigator. Success and celerity were the consequencesof his prudence and resolution. Magellan'svoyage of circumnavigation employed three years andthirty-seven days ; that of Drake only two years and tenmonths.There is nothing from which the abilities of a navalcommander may be more fairly estimated, than fromthe ascendancy which he possesses over the minds ofhis crew. In this Drake was unrivalled ; no murmursor mutinous discontent destroyed the harmony subsistingbetween him and his companions. His manliness andgenerosity of temper are conspicuous in his treatmentof the simple natives of New Albion. His humane andfearless deportment towards a weak and inoffensivepeople forms a striking contrast with the timid barbaritydisplayed by the Spaniards in his own days, andthe Dutch who succeeded him, in their dealings withthe South Sea islanders.Sir Francis Drake was the first who broke in uponCHAP. XVII. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 2Glthe repose of the Spaniards in the Pacific Ocean. Littledid they expect to encounter foreign and hostile fleetsin those sequestered seas, which they deemed peculiarlytheir own : least of all did they imagine that theirenemies would reach them hy the Straits of Magellan,which had been so wholly forgotten by their own navigators,as even to be supposed by popular opinion tohave been closed up by some dreadful convulsion ofnature. * But the expedition of sir Francis Drakeformed a new and brilliant epoch in the history of navigation.England was at that time awakening to asense of its internal strength, and rising rapidly to thatmaritime superiority which it has since so proudly maintained.The pursuit of fame, and love of chivalrousexploits, suited with the temper of the court in thereign of Elizabeth. Men of fortune and of educationhurried into every path of enterprise which promisedthem honour and distinction. Not a few followed inthe track of sir Francis Drake ; and such was the ardourresulting from the success of his voyage, that in thecourse of sixteen years the English sent no fewer thansix expeditions to the South Seas.The appearance of the English on the coast of Perualarmed the Spaniards for the security of their treasures,and called their attention to the means of preventingsimilar insults. In October, 1579, Pedro Sarmientosailed from Lima, with two large vessels, to examinemore accurately the Straits of Magellan. To the southof Chili, on the western coast of Patagonia, he fell inwith a labyrinth of inlets, harbours, and narrow channels,which he supposed would conduct him to theStraits of Magellan. Ascending a lofty eminence in thisarchipelago, he reckoned no less than eighty-five islands,For malta di pilot o encubiertaCausa quia important? y no sabuda,Esta secreta senza doscubiertaQuedo para nosotros eseondida ;Ora sea ferro de la altera charta,Ora que alguna Islets reinovidaDel tempestuous mar y vifiito airadoEncallando en la boca la ha cerrado.Arcana, part i. canto i. Oct 9.s 3262 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.lying close together, within a short space around him.Having extricated himself with much difficulty from thisintricate navigation, he surveyed the Straits of Magellan,and then proceeded to Spain to report his observations.Sarmiento is said to have made during this voyageobservations in longitude by eclipses, and the distancesof the fixed stars.* In Spain he represented in suchglowing colours the climate and productions of the Magellaniccountry, and spoke so sanguinely of the possibilityof fortifying the straits, so as to prevent intrusionupon the Pacific Ocean, to which he supposed them toafford the only entrance by the west, that the kingordered the equipment of a fleet to carry his scheme ofcolonisation into effect. Twenty-three ships, with 3500men on board, set sail from Cadizz in 1581, under thecommand of Diego Flores Vales : Sarmiento himselfwas appointed general of the colony. But misfortuneshung over this expedition, which was furnishedwith a prodigality proportioned to the ignorance whichplanned it. Some of the ships were dispersed bygales before they reached the strait; others entered it,but were forced back again by bad weather. Flores, disheartenedby adversity, abandoned the enterprise, andreturned to Spain : but Sarmiento himself, though thriceobliged to retire to Brazil, still persevered in his attempt,and at length succeeded in founding a city, which henamed, from the king of Spain, San Felipe. But thenew settlement experienced, in an unusual degree, thehardships of want and malady, which await all coloniesin a strange and rigorous climate. Sarmiento lost thefavour of the king of Spain by his deceitful descriptionof the strait, which he represented to be in many placesso narrow that it could be easily defended by a singlefort. Returning to Spain, in hopes of obtaining succoursfor his infant settlement, the unhappy general wascaptured by the English, and was not ransomed till theobject of his solicitude had ceased to exist. The colonyat San Felipe was quickly reduced by famine and dis-navarre,vol. i. p. 371.CHAP. XVII. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 26*3ease : the ravages of death became at length so great,that the few who remained alive were unable to burytheir deceased companions. A pestilence consequentlyensued, which obliged the survivors, twenty-three innumber, to desert the city, and wander forth to procuresubsistence by hunting or fishing : but, unable to bearthe privations and vicissitudes of a savage life, the greaterpart of them soon perished.The attempt of the Spaniards to fortify the straits,which they believed to form the only entrance into thePacific Ocean, did not deter the English adventurersfrom their bold schemes of hostility. Among the gentlemenin that enterprising age who sought wealth andfame by privateering expeditions against the Spaniardsone of the most distinguished was Thomas Candish, orCavendish, proprietor of a large estate near Ipswich inSuffolk. As soon as he became master of his fortunehe equipped a vessel of 120 tons burden, with whichhe accompanied sir Richard Greenville in his expeditionto Virginia in 1585. Some experience, and aspirationsprompted by the accounts which he heard of sir FrancisDrake's exploits in the western seas, were the sole fruitsof this enterprise : but his ardour was rather promptedthan extinguished by the expensiveness of his voyage; andhe soon after fitted out a small fleet, consisting of threevessels, the largest of which was of 140 tons burden,and having on board 126 officers and sailors, with whichhe intended to follow the footsteps of Drake, and invadethe Spanish possessions in the South Seas. Having providedhimself with maps, and whatever guides the scienceof the age afforded, and having successfully employed hisinfluence at court to obtain a commission from the queento cruise against the Spaniards, he set sail in July, 1586.When Candish arrived in the Straits of Magellan,the ruins of Sarmiento's unfortunate colony were stillin existence. The bastions of the fort had suffered nodilapidation ; some of the houses were still standing, andthe whole presented a melancholy appearance of desolation.One of the surviving Spaniards was found, whos 4264 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.gave to our countrymen an afflicting account of the sufferingswhich terminated in the destruction of the colony.The guns which had been mounted on the batteries, andwhich the Spaniards, foreseeing the fate of the settlement,had taken the precaution to bury in the sand,were dug for by Candish, and all recovered. Withrespect to the natives, he confirms the account given bypreceding navigators of their gigantic stature. The impressionof a foot in the sand, in one instance, measuredeighteen inches. At Penguin Island, which lies withinthe straits, he found such a multitude of those birds,from which the island has its name, that he couldeasily have taken sufficient to serve as provision for hiswhole voyage.Candish at length left the straits, and entered thePacific Ocean, without encountering any of those violenthurricanes or variable winds which have so oftenbaffled the skill of the Spanish seamen both before andafter him. As he proceeded northward along the coast,he entered on his work of war and spoliation. Heburned the town of Payta, and committed the like outrageat Puna, where he sunk a large ship, having first plunderedher valuable cargo. On approaching New Spainhe captured a vessel, on board of which was Sanchez, apilot well acquainted with the South Seas, and fromwhom he first received intelligence of a richly ladenvessel whose arrival was daily expected from the Philippines.At Cape Saint Lucas, in California, wherethe jutting white rocks resemble the Needles in theIsle of Wight, he lay in shelter, awaiting his prey. Atlength the wished-for signal was given. A large vesselwas seen on the horizon, and proved to be the SaintAnne of 700 tons, the admiral of the South Seas, andladen with a cargo which was valued at 122,000 pesos.The division of so rich a prize led to mutinous quarrels,which might have been attended with the mostfatal consequences ; but the generosity of Candish appeasedthe storm which his youth and inexperiencecould not prevent. All were satisfied with the districtXVII. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. c 26bbutton which he made of his wealth, and returned toobedience before discord and alienation had become incurable.Preparations were now made to return home.The prisoners were put on shore, furnished withclothing and provisions to enable them to reach New Spainover land ; and a few only of the crew were retained,whose acquaintance with the Indian seas might be serviceablein the navigation homeward.Candish sailed from the coast of California to theLadroness, a distance which he estimated at 1800 leagues,in the short space of forty-five days. Pursuing a circuitousroute, by the Philippines, Borneo, and theMoluccas, he at length arrived in the Straits of Sunday.Having here refitted, and taken in a new stock of provisions,he put to sea, and after a voyage of nine weeksarrived at the Cape of Good Hope.During this navigation he made numerous observationson winds, tides, and currents, which contributednot a little to improve the nautical science of the day.He remarked that the distance from Java to the Cape ofGood Hope was above 2000 leagues in the Portuguesecharts, while by his reckoning it was only 1850. Hethus made a considerable approximation to geographicalcorrectness in contracting the distance between the Capeof Good Hope and the remote countries of India ; whileat the same time he increased the interval between theSpice Islands and the continent of America. Leavingthe Cape of Good Hope, he touched at Saint Helena,which he describes as a delicious island covered withtrees ; and he was the first British navigator who discoveredthe local advantages of that island, which hadhitherto been resorted to exclusively by the Portuguesefleets. The native forests, with which it was thencovered, were afterwards destroyed with singular rapidityby the introduction of goats and rabbits into theisland ; and this is not the only instance in which themultiplication of these animals has laid bare the mostenchanting scenes in nature. Candish arrived at Plymouthon the 9th of September, 1588.266 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. Boon IV.In this voyage we see another proof of the rapid improvementof maritime science. Drake had circumnavigatedthe globe in three months less time than hadbeen employed in a like navigation by the companions ofMagellan ; but the voyage of Candish round the globewas performed in eight months less than that of Drake.In all the accounts which remain of his voyage may beseen abundant evidence that he surveyed every objectwith the eye of an expert seaman. He examined withgreat care the Straits of Magellan ; his account of the Philippinesis full of valuable information ; and he likewisebrought home with him a map and description of China.His success as a privateer surpassed the anticipationsof the most sanguine. He is said, by contemporarywriters, to have amassed wealth sufficient " to buy a fairearldom." Being young and ardent, he regarded hisearly good fortune as only the prelude to greater acquisitions.But success so eminent was not to be repeated :and Fortune, who had once lavished all her favours onhim, rudely repulsed his future addresses He equippeda second fleet, and sailed once more for the MagellanicStraits. But his progress was now thwarted by all thecalamities that can beset a maritime expedition. Continuedstorms baffled all his attempts to enter the PacificOcean : mutiny broke out among his crews ; his captainsdisobeyed his commands ; and, after sustaining a considerabletime the united pressure of bodily fatigue andmental anxiety, he sunk under his affliction, and diedon the coast of Brazil. The lamentable issue of thisexpedition damped, for a time, the ardour of enterprisewhich existed in England ; and the experienced marinersof Candish's fleet, many of whom had been the companionsof sir Francis Drake, were obliged to seek abroadthat employment which they could not find at home.The union of the crowns of Spain and Portugal underPhilip II. gave a sudden check to the spirit of aggrandisementwith which the latter nation extended its acquisitionsin the East. The loss of national independence,and the interference of a government at once jealous andCHAP. XVII. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 2f>7remiss, paralysed that energy which the Portuguese hadpreviously displayed in mercantile speculation and in conquest.While the Portugal se empire in the East thuslost that vital spirit which had hitherto nourished andsustained it, it was assailed from without by enemiesprovoked by the same genius of encroaching and despoticpolicy. Philip, by attacking the rights of the Hollanders,compelled them to take up arms and to assert their independence.The Dutch, while obedient subjects, wereprohibited from engaging in the lucrative commerce inthe East. They had been compelled to receive all theproductions of the Indies at second hand, through themerchants of Spain and Portugal. But now, when theyfound themselves involved in so unequal a contest, tomaintain which, though they brought the courage offreemen, they were unable to supply the adequate andnecessary funds, they were prompted not only by interest,but by national hatred, to attack the Spanish possessionsin the Indies and South Seas. Their attempts to find apassage by the north-east to India had proved unsuccessful; and they were tempted, by the example of theEnglish, to pursue boldly the beaten tracks by the Capeof Good Hope and the Straits of Magellan.In the beginning of the year 1598, some eminentDutch merchants resolved to equip an expedition forthe purpose of cruising on the coasts of New Spain andPeru, as the English had already done with so muchsuccess. Accordingly four ships were fitted out, andmanned by 240 persons of all ranks. Oliver Van Noortwas appointed to the command of this little fleet. Theofficers were all men of experience; and the pilot, Hellish,had already sailed with Candish in his voyage round theworld. Their voyage was so much retarded by badweather, accidents, sickness, and discord, that fifteenmonths elapsed before they could enter the Straits ofMagellan. While anchored in the straits, they sawsome men on a little island brandishing their weapons atthem in token of defiance. The Dutch, nevertheless,landed, and pursued the savages to a cave, which they26'8 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.stubbornly defended to the last man, dying every oneupon the spot. Their wives and children lay concealedin the dark recesses of the cave, expecting instant deathfrom their inhuman invaders. But the Dutch, satisfiedwith the barbarities they had already committed, onlycarried off six of the children.One of the boys, having learned to speak Dutch, gavethem the following intelligence: — " That the greater ofthese two islands was called Castemme, and the tribethat inhabited it Enoo; that the less island was calledTake; and that both were well stored with penguins,whose flesh was their food, and the skins their clothing:and as for habitations, they had none but these caves.That the adjoining continent abounded with ostriches,which likewise served for food. That the natives weredistinguished into tribes, which resided in different quarters: the Kemenetes inhabited Ramsay; the Kennekindwelt in Faraday ; the Maria's in Marina. Thesetribes were all of the common size, with broad breasts,and painted all over. But there was a fourth tribe,called Tirimemen, inhabiting Coin; and these were ofgigantic stature, being ten or twelve feet high, and continuallyat war with the other tribes." This simple statementgoes far to reconcile the diversities that appear inthe accounts respecting the Patagonians. Though itwas midsummer when the Dutch passed through thestrait, yet they found the ice so thick, that sounding withten fathoms they could not find the bottom of it. Theland seemed to be a heap of broken islands, to whichthe height of the mountains alone gave an appearanceof continuity.They at length reached the South Sea, after strugglingthrough the straits for three months. On the coast ofPeru they captured several Spanish vessels, withoutfinding one valuable prize. But they learned to theirmortification that the captain of one of the vessels whichthey had taken had thrown overboard, when first chased,the whole of his treasure, including 10,200 lbs. weight ofgold, and amounting in value to about 2,000,000 pesos.CHAP. XVII. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 269The Dutch now steered toward the west, and earlyin September arrived at the Ladroness. The islandersimmediately surrounded them in their canoes, crying outvociferously Hero, hero! that is, Iron, iron ! for theyhad already learned the Portuguese name for that metal.Their eagerness to trade was so great that they overturnedone another's canoes in endeavouring to gain theship, where their presence was not coveted, as theyshowed themselves to be singularly expert thieves, divingto the bottom the moment they seized their plunder.In passing to Manilla, the Dutch seized a Japaneseship, the strange form of which caused them some surprise.Her forecastle was raised like a chimney ; andher rigging was as singular as her shape — the sails beingmade of reeds, the anchors of wood, and the cables ofstraw. The Dutch fleet, after touching at Borneo, arrivedsafely at Java towards the end of January ; andin August the same year anchored before the city ofRotterdam, having thus employed nearly three years incircumnavigating the globe. As Van Noort was the firstDutch navigator who achieved that feat, his skill andcourage were loudly extolled by his countrymen on hisreturn : yet his voyage had no success in a mercantilepoint of view ; and, compared with those of Drake andCandish, whose experience served to guide him, it wastedious and unfortunate.About three months before the departure of the expeditionunder Van Noort, a fleet of five large vesselshad been despatched on a voyage of discovery from thecity of Rotterdam, chiefly at the expense and suggestionof an opulent merchant named Verhagen. The admiralof this fleet was James Manu. The smallest of theships was commanded by Sebald de Weert. The pilotupon whom they chiefly depended was William Adams,a man of great experience, and of whose adventures anarrative has been given in another place. The fleet lingeredtoo long on the coast of Africa, and disease brokeout among the crews. The admiral soon after died, andthe changes which in consequence took place among the270 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.officers gave rise to general discontentment. In April theyentered the Straits of Magellan, where they were detainedfor five months by adverse winds. During allthis time, they suffered much from scarcity of food andthe severity of the climate. The keen air made theminordinately hungry. They had nothing to satisfy themselveswith but raw herbs and shell-fish, which produceddiseases, and only added to their misery. At lengththree of the ships effected their passage into the SouthSea, where they were dispersed by storms, as relatedabove in our account of William Adams. De Weert,whose vessel was a bad sailer, and whose crew weredisheartened, remained behind ; nor did he receive anyassistance from Van Noort, who, when passing throughthe strait, found him there in a distressed condition, unableeither to proceed or to return. He struggled for ninemonths with all the difficulties that could beset him inarigorous climate and tempestuous seas ; and at length,contriving to make his way into the Atlantic, reached theManse, after a voyage of six months, with thirty-six mensurviving out of a crew of 105. In leaving the Straits ofMagellan he discovered three small islands to the southeast,which he named the Geraldine Islands : they arethe Falkland Islands of English maps.While the Dutch and English threatened to annihilatethe settlements of the Spaniards in India and Peru, thelast-mentioned nation, guided more in its policy bycovetousness than prudence, was still bent on extendingits colonial dominion in the South. It was not forgottenthat Mendana had attempted, in 1 595, to plant a colonyin Santa Cruz ; and in l6'06, Pedro Fernandez de Quiros,who had accompanied Mendana in that voyage as chiefpilot, was sent with three good ships and a small vesselcalled a zebra, to revisit that island, and make furtherdiscoveries. Quiros engaged cordially in this undertaking; and as he was an able navigator, this voyagecontributed more largely to the stock of geographicalinformation than any other expedition fitted out by theSpaniards since the days of Magellan.CHAP. XVII. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 271He sailed from Callao on the 2 1st of December, 1605.Several islands were discovered by him at the commencementof his voyage, which attracted little attention,as they appeared uninhabited. But at the end ofsix weeks, when* the crews began to feel distressed forfresh provisions, an island was descried, on which numerousfires gave an assurance of human habitations.It was situated in 18° 10' S., and received from Quirosthe name of Sagittaria. No anchorage could be foundnear the shore, nor could a landing be effected from theboats, owing to the violence of the surge. The natives,armed with clubs and lances, stood in numbers on therocks. A young Spaniard, named Francisco Ponce, indignantat the failure of their attempts to reach theshore, stripped off his clothes and swam to the rocks.The natives, filled with admiration at his confidenceand courage, sprang to his assistance, and welcomed himwith affectionate embraces, repeatedly kissing his forehead.Quiros did not remain here long ; but he learnedfrom the natives that he would find a large country inhis route. The Sagittaria of Quiros is generally supposedto be Otaheite; the chief objection to their identitybeing the difficulty experienced by the Spanishnavigator in finding good anchorage.*Leaving this island, the Spaniards soon after arrivedat the Isla de la Gente Hermosa, or Island of HandsomePeople, so named from the remarkable beauty of itsinhabitants. Their courage and audacity correspondedwith their physical vigour. The men approached theships in their canoes, brandishing their javelins, andmaking other demonstrations of open defiance. Theytied a cord to the smallest of the vessels, and endeavoured,by swimming, to draw her on shore, nor did thereport and dreadful execution of fire-arms at once intimidatethem. The women were fair, with gracefuldemeanour, and were thought more attractive than theSpanish ladies. Though Quiros was partial to theSouth Sea islanders in general, and to this handsomeFleurieu, recoveries des Francis, p. 35. Burney, vol. ii. p. 281.2?2 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.race in particular, he was extremely harsh and unskilfulin his mode of dealing with them. Hence he hadoccasion to give to this island the sinister name ofStanza, or Slaughter Island.He next arrived at the island of Taumaco, in 10°south : here he found that the inhabitants, who hadnever seen Europeans before, were yet not unacquaintedwith the effects of fire-arms. They maintained an intercoursewith Santa Cruz, and had heard of Mendana'sproceedings in that island. In Taumaco the Spaniards,as usual, abused the hospitality and provoked the hostilityof the natives. Quiros, however, obtained heresome important information. Tumay, the chief or kingof the island, named to him above sixty islands, at thesame time indicating their sizes and the directions inwhich they lay ; and mentioned also a large countrywhich he called Manifold : to express its dimensions,he opened both his arms without joining them again, toshow that it extended without end. This piece of intelligencefanned the ardour of Quiros ; and as he foundit impossible to maintain a friendly intercourse with thenatives, whom he treated with insolence and cruelty,he did not prolong his stay at Taumaco, but hastenedto the discovery of " the great country" towards thesouth.At length on the 1st of May he approached its shores,and two days after anchored in the port De la VeraCruz, a spacious haven capable of containing 1000ships, and with two fine rivers flowing into it, one ofwhich, according to Quiros, is as large as the Guadalquivirat Seville. As he supposed that the land whichhe had now discovered was part of the long soughtsouthern continent, he named it Australia del SpiritSanto. That region of fancy had been long painted inthe brightest hues that romantic imaginations couldimpart ; and, consequently, " all on board," to use theexpressions of Torquemada, " were overjoyed at havingattained the object of their desires, holding within theirgrasp the most abundant and powerful country whichCHAP. XVII. VOYAGES TO TOE SOUTH SEA. 273had yet been discovered by Spaniards." * But the violenceof the Spaniards, exciting the determined enmityof the inhabitants, defeated all their plans. Quiros,however, took possession of the country in the name ofPhilip III., and acted the formalities of founding a city,which he named New Jerusalem, appointing the alcaldes,restores, and other officers.While Quiros lingered in the port of La Vera Cruz,still hoping to establish a friendly correspondence withthe islanders, a violent storm drove his ship out to sea,thus separating him from the remainder of his fleet.He returned immediately to Mexico, whence he proceededto Spain to entreat permission " to add theAustralia del Spirit Santo to the other possessions ofthe Spanish monarchy." So importunately did he urgehis suit, that he is said to have presented no less thanfifty memorials on the subject to the king. He describedthe newly discovered country as a perfect paradise,abounding of course in the, precious metals. Hiszeal and assiduity at length gained their object, and hewas remanded to the viceroy of Peru to be furnishedwith ships for another expedition ; but he died atPanama on his way to Lima. His Australia is generallybelieved to be the same with the Grandes Cyclades ofBougainville, and New Hebrides of Cook.After the separation of Quiros from his fleet, LuisVas de Torres, the second in command, proceeded onhis voyage to the south-west. He saw enough of Australiato persuade him that it was not a continent, andmentions his intention of circumnavigating it if theseason had permitted. Having reached the latitude of21° without finding land, he stood more to the north,and at length fell in with the eastern extremity of NewGuinea, and followed the southern coast of that greatisland on his way to the Moluccas. He found this sea,which he was the first to explore, to be an archipelagocovered with innumerable islands. It is remarkablealso, that in 1 1° south latitude he saw land to the Indica, lib. v. cap. 68.VOL. II. T274 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.sward, which must have been some part of the greatTerra Australis, at present commonly but incorrectlycalled New Holland. Torres went on shore in differentparts of New Guinea, and took formal possession of thatcountry for the king of Spain.While Portugal maintained an obstinate struggle withHolland for the possession of the Spice Islands and theJapanese trade, the Dutch East India company resolvedto make a vigorous effort to reach the Moluccas by theStraits of Magellan. Six large vessels were equippedfor that purpose, and sailed from the Texel in August,1614, under the command of George Spilbergen. Thecourse which he designed to follow was kept profoundlysecret until he had advanced a long way across theAtlantic ; the crews then breaking out into murmurs,from anxiety to know their destination, he declaredthat he had no other orders than to sail through theStraits of Magellan, inasmuch as no other passage wasknown to him." He effected his passage through thestraits in thirty-four days. Spilbergen adds his testimonyin favour of the existence of Patagonia giants.At first he was inclined to doubt on this point the veracityof previous voyagers. The savages whom heusually saw were rather below the ordinary size ; butone day a man of gigantic stature was observed climbinga hill to look at the fleet : he afterwards approached theshore for the same purpose, and was seen distinctly byall the crews. It was the unanimous opinion that hisstature exceeded that assigned to the Patagonians byMagellan. The fleet entered the South Sea in May,not without encountering one of those violent stormswhich seem to keep perpetual guard at the entrancesof those dangerous straits. The remainder of the voyagewas a continual triumph. No geographical discoveriesindeed were made, but Spilbergen succeeded in theproper object of the expedition. He completely defeatedthe Spanish fleet on the coast of Peru ; he assistedin the reduction of the Spice Islands ; and contributedeffectually to establish the power of the Dutch in theCHAP. XVII. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 275East Indies. He arrived safely in Holland in July, l6'17,having employed two years and eleven months in hisvoyage round the globe. His glory was enhanced bythe contrast of his voyage with those of Van Noort andManu : for he brought back his armament undiminished ;whereas of nine ships that had sailed in the precedingexpeditions, only one returned home.The year after the departure of Spilbergen's expedition,two ships fitted out by private adventurers sailedfrom the Texel on a voyage of discovery. This voyage,which, as far as regarded the projectors, was as unfortunatein its termination as that of Spilbergen's wassuccessful, though far more important in the history ofgeography, had its rise in the following circumstances :The Dutch East India Company claimed, by virtueof their charter, an exclusive right to the trade carriedon with India by the Cape of Good Hope and the Straitsof Magellan ; but the merchants, who felt themselvesoppressed by this monopoly, entertained hopes that theexclusive rights conferred by the charter might be nullifiedby a strict interpretation of the very clause whichconveyed the grant. The states-general, with a viewto encourage navigation, and chiefly, perhaps, to discoverthe long sought north-west passage, had decreed thatthe discoverers of new passages to India should havethe profits of the first four voyages by the newly discoveredroute as their reward. It was concluded, therefore,that if a passage round South America, distinctfrom the Straits of Magellan, were discovered, the oppressiveprivileges of the East India Company might becompletely evaded.An opulent merchant of Amsterdam, named Isaac leMaire, well versed in geography, was disposed to believein the existence of such a passage ; and consulting WilliamCornelison Schouten, of Horn, a man of great nauticalexperience, he was confirmed in his opinion. Theresult of their deliberations was, that such a passagemight probably be found ; that the southern countrieswhich might be reached by it abounded in riches ; and,t 2276 Modern VOYAGES OF DISCOVERT. BOOK IV.finally, that the East India Company could not interfere"with a trade carried on with India by a route distinctfrom those mentioned in their charter. In consequence,it was resolved to despatch an expedition of discovery.Isaac le Maire advanced the greater part of the money ;Schouten was allowed to have the sole direction of thevoyage ; and Jacob le Maire, the eldest son of Isaac,was to accompany him as supercargo. So eager werethey in the prosecution of the design, that their arrangementswere soon completed. Strict secrecy was observedwith respect to their definite object : yet theirintention of exploring the southern seas was generallyknown ; and the terms in which we have seen abovethat Spilbergen expressed the instructions of his voyage,might lead to the conclusion that theories respecting theexistence of a southern passage had been some time inagitation. Sir Francis Drake, though he took no painsto blazon his geographical discoveries, was well awarethat he had nearly circumnavigated the broken landcalled Tierra del Fuego, and that he had seen the southernmostextremity of America. This conviction he hadimparted to sir Richard Hawkins, a man of nauticalexperience and well acquainted with those seas, whoconcurred with him in opinion, and who writes, " thata man with a fair wind may keep the main sea andgo round about the straits to the southward, whichis the shorter way." It is not surprising, therefore,that at a time when the Dutch derived so much assistancefrom English seamen, the hydrographical informationof Drake should have passed traditionally intoHolland, and have reached the ears of those whose interestsmade them eager to embrace it.The two ships, the Unity and the Horn, sailed fromthe Texel in June, lolo. Having provided himselfwith an English gunner and carpenter, Schouten stoodboldly across the Atlantic, resolving to shun those delaysof stopping in port which had proved fatal to many precedingexpeditions. Their destination was hitherto asecret but on crossing the line, the crew were told thatCnAP. XVII. VOYAGES TO THE South SEA. 277they were bound to Terra Australis (Del Spirit Santoof Quiros), and the men, who had never before heard ofthis country, wrote the name in their caps in order toremember it. By the middle of December they reachedPort Desire, at the eastern entrance of the straits, wherethe smaller of the two vessels, the Horn, was accidentallyconsumed by fire, when undergoing some repairs. Proceedingsouthward from this port, they discovered StatenLand ; and passing through the strait which separatesit from Tierra del Fuego, they found a great sea,in which whales and other monsters were so numerousas to embarrass the passage. Sea mews, larger thanswans, with wings stretching a fathom across, flewscreaming round the ship. The wind was adverse, andthey were compelled to tack much : but at length they sawthe southern extremity of the land to which Schouten,from his native town, gave the name of Cape Horn.The strait through which they had just sailed was namedfrom Le Maire, the projector of the voyage. On the3d of February, while struggling with adverse winds,they reached lat. 59° 25', and saw no land ; on the12 th, sailing on the opposite tack, they found themselvesto the west of Magellan's Straits. Nothing couldexceed their joy at this discovery ; but they were sodistressed by the fatigues of their late voyage, that theysteered directly for the island of Juan Fernandez, in orderto indulge there in a short repose. They found the island ;but being unacquainted with its shores, they could notapproach it through the surf, and were obliged to continuetheir voyage. Several small islands were descriedby them, which seemed to have just risen from thewaves. They were, in general, not above the level ofthe sea, the interior being covered with lagoons, and surroundedby a kind of dyke. Some of them appeared to bein a more advanced state of formation, and were furnishedwith a few trees. In one of them, named Fly Islandfrom the circumstance, the flies were so numerous asto appear to the Dutchmen a sort of plague ; the seamenwere covered with them as with another clothing,T 3278 modern voyages op discovery, book it.and some days elapsed before the ship could be freedfrom these disagreeable visitors. Schouten at lengtharrived in Java, where his ship was confiscated by theEast India Company, and instead of receiving the honourwhich was due to his merit as a navigator, he wastreated as an interloper and delinquent. It is to beremarked, that Schouten did not prosecute his design ofexamining the southern regions of the great ocean ; theloss of the Horn, and the distress which he endured inhis voyage by Le Maire's Straits, diverted him from hispurpose, and compelled him to choose the easy navigationin the trade winds near the line, where there were not,however, any discoveries to be made. But this voyagefirst demonstrated that the Straits of Magellan werenot the eastern door of the Pacific ; and it is not theleast merit of this discovery, that it was not purely theresult of chance.The Spaniards thus learned the folly of their presumption,in attempting, four and thirty years before, toexclude other nations from the navigation of the Pacific,by fortifying the Straits of Magellan. On hearing theresult of Schouten 's voyage, they sent, in 16*18, Bartolommeoand Gonzales Nodal, to explore in detail the southerncoasts which the Dutch had just discovered : andit is worth while to observe, that they employed Dutchpilots in this voyage; thus acknowledging themselvesoutstripped in maritime skill by the very people whosespirit of enterprise they had sought to crush by theextinction of their liberties. The Totals executed theirtask with ability; they completely circumnavigated theTierra del Fuego, and thus completed the survey ofSouth America.CHAP. XVIII. VOYAGES IN THE PACIFIC. 279CHAP. XVIII.VOYAGES IN THE PACIFIC, AND DISCOVERY OFAUSTRALIA.THE STRAITS OF ASIAN. DISCOVERIES ASCRIBED TO URDANETA.DEPOSITIONS OF LADRILLERO AND MARTIN Chace. FabulousVOYAGE OF MALDONADO. EXPEDITION OF JUAN DEFusca. VINDICATION OF HIS VOYAGE. VOYAGE OF DEFONTE HE DISCOVERS THE ARCHIPELAGO OF ST. LAZARUS.ENTERS LAKE Vasco. PROCEEDS TO LAKE BELLE.DESCENDS A RIVER. ARRIVES AT THE ATLANTIC. BernardoEXPLORES THE SEA OF Tatar. VISCAYNO SURVEY'SCALIFORNIA. AGl'ILAR ARRIVES AT THE RIVER OF Quiver.SECRECY OF THE SPANIARDS. FIRST DISCOVERY OF NEWHOLLAND. VOYAGE OF Herbage. Eddies, DE NUYTZ, ANDCARPENTER. NEW HOLLAND KNOWN EARLY TO THE Portuguese.EXPEDITION OF ABEL TASMAN. — HE DISCOVERSVAN DIEMEN's LAND. ARRIVES AT NEW ZEALAND. DRIVENAWAY BY THE NATIVES. HE FINDS THE FRIENDLY ISLANDS.AMSTERDAM ISLAND. ROTTERDAM. KINDLY RECEIVEDBY THE NATIVES. DANGEROUS SHOALS. TASMAN RETURNSBT NEW GUINEA.While the geography of South America thus rose intoclear light, the obscurity of fable and uncertainty stillhung over the northern portion of that great continent.When Cortereal returned from the coast of Labrador,where he had probably entered the Gulf of St. Lawrence,he reported that he had discovered the Straits ofAnian, which were supposed at that time, and for agesafterwards, to conduct into the Pacific Ocean. Theorigin of this name is uncertain, but the belief in theexistence of the Straits of Anian gave rise to many a fiction,and communicated a tinge of the fabulous even tovoyages that were actually performed. But as men aremore willing to believe in the activity of their imaginations,than in their liability to become its dupes, accountswhich had so large a mixture of the incredible werelooked upon as mere inventions, and wholly disregarded.The celebrated voyager Andrew de Urdaneta, who act4280 MODERN Voyages OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IT.companied Legaspi on his expedition to the Philippines,and returned to New Spain by the northern Pacific, wasreported to have discovered a northern strait conductingfrom the great ocean into the Atlantic. The high reputationof Urdaneta as a navigator and cosmographer,by representing him as a fit person to solve an interestinggeographical problem, may have conduced, alongwith some speculations found among his papers at hisdeath, to give rise to this report. In 1574, a pilot ofNew Spain, named Juan Fernandez de Ladrillero, publiclydeclared that he had discovered a strait of communicationabout 800 leagues to the north of Compos-tell,in New Spain, and that it disembogued itself into thesea where the English went to kill fish. Another formaldeposition to the same effect, was made in 1579* byMartin Clack, a Portuguese mariner, who stated thatin a small ship, of eighty tons burden, he had found away from the East Indies through the Gulf of Newfoundland,which he believed to be in latitude 59° north.The discovery said to have been made by Lorenzo FerrerMaldonado, who, it was pretended, made a voyagefrom Lisbon to the coast of Labrador, in the year 1598,and found a strait by which the navigation from Spainto China might be performed in three months, is nodoubt as apocryphal as the foregoing.Among the voyages which were for a long timeconsidered as fictitious, and the credit of which is notperfectly established at the present day, one of the first,in the order of time and of importance, is the expeditionof Juan de Fuca. This pilot, whose real namewas Apostles Valerian, was a Greek of the island ofCephalonia, and was employed in the service of Spainfor upwards of forty years. Being at Lemnos, in theyear 1596, on his return from his voyages, he gave anaccount of his last expedition to Mr. Michael Lock, anEnglish gentleman of talent and respectability, by whomthe particulars were communicated to Purchas. Fuca,according to the account that he gave, had been despatchedfrom the harbour of Acapulco, in 1592, by theCHAP. XVIII. Voyages IN THE PACIFIC. 281viceroy of Mexico, with a small caravel and a pinnace,for the purpose of discovering the communication bythe north of America from the Pacific to the AtlanticOcean. Between the parallels of 47° and 48° he foundthat the land trended to the north-east, and presented alarge opening which might possibly be a strait ; he enteredit, and sailed through it for the space of twentydays. The land in some places extended toward thenorth-east, in others toward the north-west : the passagegrew much wider as he advanced, and containedseveral islands. Fuca frequently went on shore, andsaw a number of inhabitants clothed with skins of animals; the country appeared to him to be fertile, and toabound in gold, silver, and pearls. He continued thiscourse till he reached the Atlantic Ocean. He had foundthe strait, through its entire length, to be of a width sufficientfor navigation ; and the mouth by which he hadentered it had appeared to him to be thirty or fortyleagues across. He then resolved to return by the samepassage, for he was satisfied that he had accomplishedthe object of his mission in discovering a communicationof the two seas across the continent of America. Hewas also prevented from advancing by his dread of thesavages, whom he was unable to resist if they thoughtproper to attack him : he therefore returned to Acapulco,where he spent two years in vainly soliciting the reward towhich he thought himself entitled for the discovery thatopened to Spain a new source of wealth and prosperity.The voyage of Fuca was long regarded as a fiction;the discoveries of the English in Hudson's Bay clearlydemonstrating that there does not exist such a communicationwith the western ocean as that which he pretendsto have discovered: but his narrative ought tobe interpreted with all the indulgence which is due towritings of that age. Modern researches have provedthat there exists an inlet near the latitude mentioned byhim, which conducts, not indeed into the Atlantic, butinto a large basin, or interior sea, which separates agreat archipelago from the high lands of the continent.282 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.It is probable that Fuca, having proceed 150 or 160leagues in this basin, felt convinced that it would conducthim into the Atlantic ocean ; and that, under thispresumption, he hastened his return, just as Corterealhad announced his discovery of the Straits of Anian,and as the Dutch voyager Cornelison had turned backfrom the north-eastern seas with a conviction that he hadfound a passage to Tatary and China. But Fuca, byconfounding hypothesis with fact, has incurred the dangerof being wholly disregarded.Towards the beginning of the present century therewas circulated in Europe the account of an expeditionperformed in 16*40, by one admiral Bartolommeo de Fuente,or Fonte, which appeared for the first time in Londonin 1708, in a periodical work entitled Memoirs for theCurious. It long occupied the attention of English,German, and French geographers, but is now deservedlyregarded as a fiction. Yet the names of De Lisle,Buache, and Fleurieu, who condescended to become itsapologists and defenders, may still entitle it to a briefconsideration.The narrative relates that the king of Spain, alarmedat the progress made by Hudson, James, and othernavigators, in the north-west, determined to opposetheir attempts to reach the Pacific Ocean by that course,and for this purpose De Fonte received orders to sailwith four armed ships. Accordingly he put to sea, fromCallao, on the 3d of April, 1640. At the port ofSt. Helena, 200 leagues to the north of the Bay of Guayaquil,they took in a large quantity of bitumen, or mineraltar, which was deemed an excellent remedy for thescurvy. The master of De Fonte's ship informed him,that 200 leagues north from Cape St. Lucas the floodtide from the north met that flowing from the south,and that he was therefore sure that California must beanisland. On this information, don Diego Penelope,a young nobleman of great knowledge in cosmography,undertook to discover whether California were an islandor a peninsula ; and, for that purpose, parted from theCHAP. XVIII. VOYAGES IN THE PACIFIC. 283admiral's fleet with his ship and four small boats. DeFonte, continuing his voyage to the north, sailed about26*0 leagues through crooked channels among islands,which he named the Archipelago of St. Lazarus; theboats keeping always ahead and sounding, to guard againstthe danger of rocks and shoals. Pedro de Bernardo,who was despatched by the admiral to explore a largeriver flowing from the north, ascended it into a greatlake full of islands inhabited by a friendly people. Henamed it Lake Velasco. On this lake he sailed first 140leagues W., and then 436* E.N.E., till he came to 77°of latitude. De Fonte having despatched captain Bernardo,as he informs us, on the discovery of the northeasternpart of the Tatarian Sea, proceeded himself upa large navigable river, which he named Rio los Eyes,running nearly north-east. The admiral received aletter from Bernardo, dated the 17th of June, 1640, inwhich he informed him that he had left his ship in theLake Velasco, between Bernardo Island and the peninsulaConihasset ; that he had ascended the river fromthe lake eighty leagues, and .down three falls or rapids,and entered the Tatarian Sea in lat. 6l°. He foundthe land trending to the north-east : the countryabounded with venison, and the sea and rivers were filledwith excellent fish. De Fonte himself had, in the meantime,arrived at an Indian town called Conosset, on thesouth side of Lake Belle, which, although he entered itby a river, was yet, as it appears from his narrative,reached by the tide. The mullets of Lake Belle are thefinest in the world.On the 1st of July, 1640, he sailed from Lake Belle,down a river, which he named Parmentier, in honourof his friend, the surveyor of the fleet. He passed eightrapids, making a fall of thirty-two feet, and arrived, onthe 6th of July, at a large lake, which he named Lakede Fonte. It was 160 leagues long, from W.S.W. toE.N.E., and sixty broad, and abounded with cod andling : a suspicious circumstance ; as both these fish, andling especially, may be considered as belonging to the284 MODERN Voyages OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.deep and open sea. The woods here were frequentedby the moose deer ; and the vegetation, as described byDe Fonte, is suitable to a northern latitude. Proceedingstill towards the E.N.E., he passed through anotherlake, which he named Estrecho de Ronquillo, thirty-fourleagues long, two or three broad, and with a great depthof water. The country now grew sensibly worse, and theclimate more austere; as might be expected from anorth-eastern progress over the North American continent.At length, on the 17th of July, admiral De Fontearrived at an Indian town, and was informed that agreat ship lay at no great distance, where one had beennever seen before. This ship, as he afterwards learnedfrom its commander, was from Boston, in New England.When captain Shipley assured the Spanish admiral thathis owner was a fine gentleman, and major-general ofthe great colony of Massachusetts, he was graciouslyreceived ; and De Fonte told him, that though he wascommissioned to make prize of any people seeking a westor north-west passage, yet he would look upon them asmerchants, trading with the natives for furs and skins.This interview having terminated amicably, De Fonteascended the river Parmentier on his return, eighty-sixleagues to the first fall; and in five days more arrived onboardhis ship " before the fine town of Conosset."A few days after, an Indian brought him a letterfrom Bernardo, who sent him word that he was returnedfrom his northern expedition, having ascertained thatthere was no communication with the Western Ocean byDavis's Strait; for the natives had conducted one of hisseamen to the head of Davis's Strait, which terminatedin a fresh-water lake, of about eighty miles in circumference,in the eightieth degree of north latitude, andthat there were prodigious mountains to the north of it,besides an immense barrier of ice along the shore. Hereterminate the discoveries of De Fonte and his officers.But it is surprising that, after having descended theriver Parmentier from Lake Belle till he found in thenorth-east a ship arrived from New England, he shouldCHAP. XVIII. VOYAGES IN THE PACIFIC. 285conclude his narrative by declaring " that he had provedthere was no communication with the South Sea throughwhat they call the north-west passage." This account ofDe Fonte's expedition, in which the writer has attemptedto ingraft a vague knowledge of the interior of NorthAmerica on a genuine but obscure voyage, has beengenerally supposed to have had no foundation in reality.Yet we shall not, perhaps, err far from the truth, ifwe admit that a Spanish admiral did actually discover,in 1640, a great archipelago in the latitude of 53°, andwithin it a large inlet or navigable river, which he exploredto no purpose, and thence concluded that therewas no north-west passage; and that the English editorof the voyage has inserted between the proceedings of theSpanish navigator and his conclusion, that monstrousseries of discoveries, the navigations of Lake Velasco andLake Belle ; the descent of rapids by ships of war ; thevoyage of Bernardo from the lakes to lat. 77° N.; thejourney of the seaman to the head of Davis's Strait ; anexpedition of twelve hundred leagues, completed in twomonths; and many other absurdities, which completelythrow into the shade the small portion of useful truthwhich may possibly lurk in the narrative.Sir Francis Drake, who had a second time broken openthe Straits of Magellan to the navigation of Europeans,also recalled the attention of the Spaniards to the northwesterncoast of America, and induced them to renewresearches which had now almost fallen into oblivion.In order to afford some protection to the Spanish galleonsbound from Manilla to Acapulco from the Englishand Dutch cruisers, it was determined to explore theexternal coast of California for some secure haven whichmight be fortified. Sebastian Viscayno was charged withthis mission, and set sail from Acapulco on the 6th of May,1602, with two ships, — a frigate, and decked boat. Hevisited a great number of islands and harbours, and hadto struggle continually against the north-west winds whichprevail upon that coast. At length he succeeded in discovering,towards the lat. of 36° 40', a harbour to which,286 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.in honour of the viceroy, he gave the name of Puerto deMonterey, and which has since become the seat of theprincipal settlement of the Spaniards on the north-westcoast of America. Port San Diego, in 32° 40', did notescape Viscayno's attention; but Monterey was thoughtpreferable, being more easy of access, and nearer to theparallel in which ships return from the Philippine Islands.Later navigators, however, give a less favourable descriptionof this harbour. They represent it as a spaciousand open bay, in which only a few vessels can find shelterand good anchorage. Viscayno afterwards advanced as faras the parallel of Cape Mendocino, in 41° 30', of whichhe got a sight. But sickness increasing on board hisships, he gave over the further prosecution of his researches,and hastened his return to Acapulco. Hewarmly urged the court of Spain to allow him to renewhis discoveries in the north-west, and to fix a colony atPuerto de Monterey. But that dilatory and ungratefulgovernment turned a deaf ear to his importunities; andViscayno died before his requests were granted. It issaid that one of Viscayno's captains in this expedition,named Martin de Aguilar, being separated from thesquadron by the violence of the winds, succeeded indoubling Cape Mendocino, which, till then, had beenonly seen from a distance. Thirty leagues farther to thenorth he discovered a second cape, or point, to whichhe gave the name of Cape Blanc. Beyond this, thecoast declined to the eastward ; and here he discovereda broad and navigable inlet, which he supposed tobe the mouth of a great river leading to the celebratedcity called Quivira. The rapidity of the currentprevented him from ascending the river; and beingforced to relinquish this attempt, and recollecting, besides,that the mission of Viscayno had no object but todiscover a good harbour, which had been accomplished,he thought it more prudent to return, without delay, toAcapulco.recent researches, as we have already had occasion toobserve, have found no traces of the celebrated city ofCHAP. XVIII. DISCOVERY OF AUSTRALIA. 287Quivira ; and had Aguilar pretended to have himself seenit, the truth of his relation might be justly suspected.But the fictions which pervade his account can be easilyexplained from the opinions of his age. However, thesecrecy which the Spanish nation affected to preservewith respect to their discoveries was injurious to thecredit of the Spanish navigators. Mystery naturally givesrise to mistrust; and mankind are disposed to call inquestion claims of discovery which are not placed in themost satisfactory light. The voyages of Quiros, Torres,and others, were by many regarded as mere fictions; andthat of Yiscayno met with so little credit or attention,that even at the end of the seventeenth century it was stilldoubted whether California were an island or a peninsula.The Dutch, however, who felt no inclination to concealfrom the world the fruits of enterprises whichreflected honour on their nation, shone with greatlustre as discoverers during the early half of the seventeenthcentury. In the same year (l606) in whichTorres sailed to the south of New Guinea, and descriedland to the south, which was, no doubt, a part of Australia,a Dutch vessel made a similar discovery. Ayacht, called the Duyfhen, discovered in that year, wearetold, the south and west coasts of New Guinea, fornearly 1000 miles, from 5° to 13^°. This extensivecountry was for the most part desert ; but in someplaces they found it inhabited by wild, cruel, blacksavages, who murdered some of the crew, and preventedthe Dutch from examining the country. Want of provisionscompelled them to return ; and to the farthestpoint of the land that was seen by them they gave thename of Cape Kerr Weer, or Turn-again. As Torressupposed the land which lay to the south of his coursewas a part of the great archipelago through which hesailed, he attached no importance to his discovery ; andthe results of his voyage being but little known, therewas no opportunity of correcting his error. TheDutch, on the other hand, believed the land which theycoasted to be the southern portion of New Guinea, and288 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.by this mistake robbed the discovery of its greatest interest.In consequence, the first discovery of New Hollandhas been generally ascribed to Theodoric Herbage,who, on his passage from Holland to the East Indies, inasmall vessel called the Eendracht, or Concord, fell inwith the western coast of that great continent in about25° S. To the part seen by him he gave the name ofthe Land of Eendracht, which is preserved in modernmaps, with those of Dirk Herbage's Cape and Road.This discovery was zealously followed up by the Dutchin the East Indies. In 1618, Reached discovered thenorthern coast of Australia, in those parts which arenamed the lands of Arnhem and Diemen. Jan Eelsran along the western coast in 16'19> and left his nameto his discoveries. In 1622, was seen that portion ofthe land called Leuwin's Coast. De Nuit examined,in 1627, the southern coast, to which he gave his name ;and in the following year De Witt continued his researches.In the same year, a Dutch commander, namedCarpenter, discovered and gave his name to the coastcalled Carpentaria. Thus the Dutch, within a veryfew years, had made a general survey of the wholewestern and northern coasts of that extensive region,and imposed names on its different portions, whichserved as memorials of their discoveries.But the merit by which the Dutch navigators in theEast Indies so soon eclipsed the Portuguese who hadpreceded them, was much more their enlightenment thantheir enterprise. There is strong reason to suspect thatthe Portuguese had some knowledge of Australia nearlya century before it was visited by the Dutch. Two mapsare preserved in the library of the British Museumwhich tend forcibly to strengthen this opinion. In one ofthese, written in French, and supposed to have beendrawn about 1550, there is placed to the south of Asiaa great island, the position of which exactly correspondswith that of Australia. A narrow passage separates itfrom Java. Timor is placed to the north-east. Tin'slarge country is called Great Java. Among the namesCnAP. XVIII. DISCOVERY OP AUSTRALIA. 289which are written on its coasts, there occurs that ofCote des Herbage, or Botany Coast, somewhat to thenorth of the modern Botany Bay. To the south of thatwe meet with other names at considerable distances,such as Cote des Graal, and a great promontory calledCap de Promise. Still farther to the south is markeda goufre, which means perhaps, not properly a gulf,but a great bay or inlet. The line which bounds themap cuts this great island, and leaves its extent undetermined.The names Graal and Promise occurringhere seem to be Portuguese, and give rise to the suspicionthat this map has been translated from that language.This suspicion is confirmed by the Hydrographyof John Rots, dated in 1 542, which is also preservedin the British Museum. This curious manuscript iswritten in English ; but it is conjectured that its authorwas one cf those Flemings who passed into Englandin 1540 with Anne of Clever. Here Australia, whichis called the Land of Java, is drawn nearly as it was inthe seventeenth century, previous to the voyage of AbelTasman. A comparison of this map with the foregoingleads to the conjecture that the maps of Rots are theoriginals ; for in them are found many Portuguesenames, which in the other are translated into French.In both, Borneo is placed with tolerable correctness ;which at once refutes the supposition that the greatisland is intended for Borneo, named Great Java byMarco Polo. The same indications have been seen inother maps of the same age. When it is considered thatNew Guinea was discovered, according to the Portuguese,by Menses, in 1527, and, according to theSpaniards, a year later, by Saavedra ; when we reflect onthe negligence and illiberality which have obscured all thediscoveries of these two nations, and then turn to considerthe indications detailed above; it will be difficultto avoid concluding that the Spaniards and Portuguesevisited the northern and even eastern coasts of NewHolland nearly a century before that country was discoveredby the Dutch.290 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Hitherto no limits had been set by the discoveries ofthe Dutch to the extension of the Terra Australis towardsthe east and south. But in 1642 the governorand council at Batavia fitted out two ships to prosecutethe discovery of the South Land, as it was still called,principally with a view to ascertain its extent. Thecommand of this expedition was given to captain AbelJansen Tasman ; and the result justified the choice : forfew voyages since that of Magellan contributed more tothe perfection of geography. Tasman sailed first to theMauritius : he left that island on the 8th of October,directing his course generally to the south-east. Onthe 27 th a great deal of duck weed was seen, and itwas resolved to keep a man constantly at the topmast-headto look out for land, and that whoever first discoveredland or shoals should receive a reward of threereals and a pot of arrack. Floating weeds were frequentlyseen in abundance, and awakened the expectationsof the seamen ; yet no land was discovered tillthe 24th of November, when, about four o'clock in theafternoon, high land with mountains, about ten milesdistant, was descried, extending from the north-east towardsthe south. It was resolved immediately to run offto sea for five hours during the night, and then to standin close to land. Tasman found himself in lat. 42° 30'and Ion. 163° 50'. He observed also that near thecoast the variation of the compass suddenly decreased,and the needle pointed true north. To the land whichhe had discovered he gave the name of Antony VanDiemen's Land, in honour of the governor-general, whohad prepared the expedition. Some of his crew wenton shore, but found no inhabitants ; they saw, however,trees, in which steps were cut for people to climb up insearch of birds-nests. The country was furnished alloverwith trees, which stood so thin as never to interruptthe distant prospect. From the ships they couldsee people on shore ; and smoke was observed to risefrom the woods. On the 2d of December they clearedthe southernmost point of the land, and stood for someCHAP. XVIII. DISCOVERY OF AUSTRALIA. 291time to the northward ; but on the 5th they steered tothe east, and soon lost sight of land.Tasman had thus sailed round to the south of Australia,and proved that the South Land did not extendindefinitely to the pole as it was supposed. On the14th; in Ion. 189° 3', land was again descried to theeast. The mountains were concealed in clouds ; butthe ships approached so near to the coast that they couldsee the waves breaking on the shore. No people wereseen, nor fires ; and the country had a barren appearance.The ships sailed along it towards the north, andon the 18th came to anchor in a sheltered bay; aftersunset, lights were seen on the shore, and four vesselswere observed approaching the ships. The islanderscalled to the Dutch in a strong rough voice, and soundedan instrument that resembled a Moorish trumpet. TheDutch blew their trumpets in return ; and this salutationwas repeated several times ; but the natives still kept ata distance from the ship, and as it grew dark returnedto the shore. In the morning they repeated their visit.They called to us several times," says Tasman,but their language had nothing in it like the vocabularyof the Salomon Islands given to us by the generaland council at Batavia. These people, as well as wecould judge, were of our own common stature, strongboned, and of a rough voice. Their colour is betweenbrown and yellow ; their hair black, which they tie uponthe crown of the head like to the Japanese, and weara large white feather upright in it. Their vessels weretwo narrow long canoes fastened together, upon whichboards were fixed to sit on. Their paddles were morethan a fathom long, and were pointed at the end.Their clothing seemed to us to be of mats or of cotton,but most of them went with their breast naked."As the islanders seemed to have friendly intentions,the Dutch prepared to anchor nearer to the shore ; butthey soon discovered their mistake : seven canoes cameoff rapidly from the shore, and stationed themselves nearthe ships ; and observing a boat full of Dutch carryingu 2292 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.orders from one ship to another, the canoes of the nativesmade rapidly towards her, and struck her so violentlywith their beaks as nearly to upset her. Thenc. lives then commenced their attack on the crew withtheir clubs and paddles : three of the Dutch were killed,and one was mortally wounded ; the rest saved their livesby swimming. The natives then returned to the shorewith one of the dead bodies ; but the others, with theboat, they left behind. All hope of friendly intercoursewith the islanders being thus at an end, the Dutch weighedanchor, and stood out to sea : when they were undersail, twenty-two canoes, eleven of which were full ofpeople, advanced rapidly towards them. The Dutch,however, fired their guns at them, and forced them tomake a precipitate retreat. This bay was named byTasman Moordenaares (Murderers') Bay. Of this inhospitableland he observes — " This is the second landdiscovered by us ; we named it Staten Land, in honourof the states-general. It is possible that it may jointhe other Staten Land (of Schouten and Le Maire, to thesouth of Tierra del Fuego), but it is uncertain : it is avery fine country, and we hope it is part of the unknownsouth continent." The Staten Land of Tasman hassince received the name of New Zealand.The Dutch ships continued for several days to runnorthward along the coast, and on the 5th of Januarysaw a small island, which they proceeded to examine insearch of fresh water ; but the surf was so violent thatit was impossible to effect a landing. Several nativeswere seen on the island, armed with staves or clubs, andresembling the other New Zealanders in the hoarsenessof their voices : they appeared to be very tall, and inwalking took great strides. This island was named DrieRoving (Three Kings') Island, from the circumstance ofits being discovered on the day of the epiphany.It was now resolved to sail eastward as far as Ion.220°, and then to steer towards the north. Staten LandorNew Zealand, was soon lost sight of. No land wasseen on this course for twelve days ; but at the end ofCHAP, XVIII. DISCOVERY OF AUSTRALIA. 293that time, a high rocky island, not more than three milesin circumference, was discovered, and called Pylstaart(Tropic Bird) Island, from the multitude of those birdsthat flocked around it. Two days after, in lat. 21° 20' S.and in Ion. 205°. 29' E-, were discovered two islandsabout a mile and a half asunder ; to the northern island,where the Hollanders found plenty of provisions, theygave the name of Amsterdam. This was the principalisland of the group which captain Cook afterwardsnamed the Friendly Islands, and is called by the nativesTonga-tabu. The island which lay to the south (theEooa of the natives) received from the Dutch the nameof Middleburgh. Shortly after, three natives came offto the ships in a canoe : they were of a brown complexionand nearly naked : their stature seemed to exceedthat of Europeans. The Dutch threw to them a pieceof white linen ; and ?s it began to sink, one of theislanders jumped out of his canoe and dived after it.He remained a long time under water, but at lengthcame up with the linen, which he placed several timesupon his head to signify his gratitude. They were thenpresented with two large nails, a string of beads, anda small Chinese looking-glass ; in return for which theygave to the Dutch a fishing line and one of their hooks :the latter was made of shell like a small anchovy. Thelooking-glass and beads they placed upon their heads.The Dutch showed them an old cocoa nut and a fowl,and asked for hogs and for fresh water in the bestterms their vocabularies could supply them with ; butthe islanders did not seem to understand them : however,the friendly correspondence, thus commenced, improvedvery rapidly. In the afternoon, numbers ofpeople were seen running along the shore bearing whiteflags ; and the Dutch, supposing this to be a sign ofpeace, answered it by hoisting white flags at the sterns oftheir ships. This was no sooner done than four largeand handsome men came off to the ships, and boardedTasman's vessel. They brought a present of cloth madeof the bark of a tree ; and from this gift, as well as fromu 3294 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.the appearance of their canoe, it was judged that theywere messengers from the king or chief of the island.The Dutch filled a glass with wine, and drank it to showthem that it was not hurtful ; and then filling the glassagain, offered it to them ; but they threw away the wineand carried off" the glass to shore. Canoes now came offin numbers, loaded with cocoa-nuts, which the Dutchpurchased at an easy rate. An old man, who was understoodto be a chief, also came on board : and a cup ofwater being shown to him, he intimated by signs thatfresh water might be had on shore. About sunset,above twenty canoes stationed themselves in regularorder near the ship. The natives who were in themcried out several times, Woo, woo I on which all thosethat remained on board sat down; and one of the canoescoming close to the vessel, brought a present from theking of a fine large hog and a number of cocoa-nutsand yams. The messenger who brought this receivedin return a plate and some brass wire. The Dutch werepleased to find that this advantageous traffic flourishedrapidly. On the following day the ships were surroundedwith canoes bearing cocoa-nuts, yams, bananas,plantains, hogs, and fowls, which were exchangedfor nails, beads, and linen. Several women, both oldand young, likewise came on board. The elder womenhad the little finger cut off from both hands. One ofthe great guns was fired off, at which the islanders atfirst were not a little frightened ; but seeing that noharm was done, they soon recovered their spirits. Anattempt was made to procure water, but to no purpose,the wells being small and scantily supplied. The menwho went in search of it were conducted by the nativesinto an agreeable valley, where they were seated uponmats, and fresh water presented to them in cocoa-nutshells. The native chief, when he learned the wants ofthe strangers, ordered the wells to be made larger, andentertained his visitors with fruits, fresh fish, and cocoa-nuts." He behaved to us," says Tasman, " with greatfriendship, and enquired of us whence we came andCHAP. XVIII. DISCOVERY OF AUSTRALIA. 295where we intended to go. We told him that we hadbeen more than a hundred days at sea, at which he andthe natives were much astonished. We explained to themthat we came to their country for water and provisions;and they answered that we should have as much as wewished for. These people have no idea of tobacco orof smoking. We saw no arms among them; so that herewas altogether peace and friendship."Fresh provisions were coming in rapidly, and newgratification was expected from the improved acquaintancewith the natives, when one of the Dutch shipswas driven from her anchorage by the strength of thetrade wind, and drifted out to sea. On the followingday the other vessel stood out to join her; and as thestrength of the wind rendered it very difficult to makethe island again, it was resolved to abandon the design,and to proceed on the voyage. It is gratifying to observethat the first intercourse of Europeans with theinhabitants of the Friendly Islands was not sullied byany of those acts of tyranny and violence which inother parts of the South Sea have drawn upon them thedetermined animosity of the natives.Proceeding north-east, Tasman's ships arrived in afew hours at a group of islands, near the largest of whichthey found good anchorage. The Dutch went on shorein search of fresh water, and received the same attentionfrom the natives here which they had received from thoseof Amsterdam Island. They saw several pieces of cultivatedground, or gardens, in which the beds wereregularly laid out into squares and planted with differentvegetables and fruits ; bananas and other trees ranged instraight lines made an agreeable appearance, and spreada fine perfume around them. At this appearance ofhappiness and industry Tasman rather harshly observes,So that among these people, who have the form of thehuman species, but no human manners, you may seetraces of reason and understanding. They know nothingabout religion or divine worship ; they have no idols,relics, or priests, but they have nevertheless superstitions;u 4296 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY, BOOK TV.for I saw a man take up a water-snake which was nearhis boat, a^d put it respectfully on his head, and thenagain into the water. They kill no flies, though theyare very numerous and plague them extremely. Oursteersman accidently killed a fly in the presence of oneof the principal people, who could not conceal his angerat it." To this island, which the natives called Ama-mocha,Tasman gave the name of Rotterdam.The Dutch ships now held their course westward,and in six days arrived at a group of small islands surroundedto a great distance by shoals and dangerousreefs. He named them respectively Prince William'sIslands and Heemskirk's shoals. This group has beenseen but seldom since it was first discovered, navigatorsstudiously avoiding the dangerous reefs which Tasmandescried in their neighbourhood. The islands called byLe Maire Anthony Java, and Marked, were the nextthat occurred. The ship was visited by a canoe full ofnatives from the latter island ; they were much darkerthan the inhabitants of Amsterdam Island, and lessfriendly in their demeanour. Some of them resembledthe New Zealanders, and one had rings through hisnose. The Green Islands of Le Maire, which lay stillfarther to the west, were reached in four days : here theinhabitants were quite black ; their hair was curled, butnot so woolly as that of the negroes, nor were their nosesquite so flat; tbev were quite naked, but wore braceletsapparently made of bone, and some of them had theirfaces painted. The Dutch spoke to them from theirvocabulary of the language of New Guinea, but were notunderstood in any thing except the word lamas, whichsignifies cocoa-nuts. At Fisher's Islands, still nearer toNew Guinea, a number of canoes came off" to the ships :they gave the Dutch a small quantity of sago, which wasthe only article of food they had in their boats. TheHollanders called out to them anieuw, oui, pouaeka,which in the language of the Salomon Islands signifycocoa-nuts, yams, and pork ; and the natives seemed tounderstand them, for they pointed to the land and soonCHAP. XIX. THE BUCCANEERS. 297after departed. These people were as black as Hottentots ;their faces were painted red, their hair was powderedwith lime and ochre, and bones as thick as the littlefinger were stuck through their noses.In a very few days Tasman arrived at the easternextremity of New Guinea, and belt", his course along thenorthern side of that great country, nearly in the sameroute which had formerly been followed by Le Maire. Atthe small islands Grana and Moa he purchased 6000cocoa-nuts and about a hundred bunches of bananas forthe two ships. In order to help thorn in their traffic withthe natives, the Dutch took pieces of iron hoop, whichthey fitted into handles, in the form of knives, andground them till they looked sharp and bright. Thewest point of New Guinea, Tasman informs us, is aremarkably broken hilly land ; the coast is full of turnings,with innumerable bays and islands near it ; andthe currents in many places are as strong as the tidebefore the pier-head at Flushing. The two ships arrivedat Batavia after a prosperous voyage of nine months anda few days.Tasman was an able as Avell as fortunate navigator.By his circumnavigation of New Holland he reducedvery much the limits of the Terra Australis, and therebymade a great step to rid geography of its most importanterrors. He supposed, it is true, that his Staten Land, orNew Zealand, might be connected with the Staten Landof Le Maire at the extremity of America, so that thegreat Terra Australis incognita might hem in the PacificOcean on the south ; but he never insisted on thishypothesis, which could hardly be entertained by seamenwho had doubled Cape Horn. About the year 1662, anew storehouse was built at Amsterdam, the old edificehaving been destroyed by fire. Among the ornamentsof the new building was a map of the world cut in stone,in which was marked the discoveries of Tasman. Threeyears later, the name Nova Hollandia, or New Holland,was given to the western part of Terra Australis by thedirection of the states-general.2<)8 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Some years previous to this, the Dutch had despatcheda strong fleet, consisting of eleven ships of war, underthe command of Jacques l'Hermite, to attack the Spanishpossessions in the South Sea. This armament, themost formidable and best furnished which had yet enteredthe great ocean, met with no success. It failedin all its attempts on the Spanish towns, which, a fewyears afterwards, yielded all their treasures to a handfulof buccaneers. Neither did geography benefit any thingfrom this expedition, which, compared with that of LeMaire, forcibly exhibits the great superiority in skill andconduct which usually distinguishes private from publicenterprises.CHAP. XIX.EXPEDITIONS OP THE BUCCANEERS IN THE SOUTH SEAS.RISE OF THE BUCCANEERS. OPPRESSIVE GOVERNMENT OF THESPANIARDS. THE CRUISERS SUPPLY THEMSELVES WITH THECATTLE OF CUBA. CARIB MODE OF PREPARING THE FLESH.THE NAME OF THE BUCCANEERS. THEIR CUSTOMS. —SETTLEMENT OF ST. CHRISTOPHER'S. THE BUCCANEERS SEIZETORTUGA. ELECT A CHIEF. EXPLOITS OF HENRY MORGAN.HE TAKES PORTO BELLO. MARCHES TO PANAMA. THEBUCCANEERS EMBARK ON THE SOUTH SEA. — THEIR Adventures.LOSE A RICH PRIZE THROUGH IGNORANCE. LEAVEWILLIAM THE INDIAN ON JUAN FERNANDEZ. THEY RETURNROUND CAPE HORN. THE BUCCANEERS UNDER DAVIS.DAMPIER RETURNS HOME IN THE CYGNET. THE FLYINGProws. RECEPTION OF THE BUCCANEERS AT MINDANAO.THE FIVE ISLANDS. THE NATIVES OF NEW HOLLAND Described.WRECK OF THE CYGNET. DAMPIER SENT ONDISCOVERY. COASTS NEW HOLLAND. ROSEMARY ISLAND.PROCEEDS TO NEW GUINEA. DISCOVERS A STRAIT.NEW BRITANNIA. HOMEWARD VOYAGE. THE ROEBUCKWRECKED AT ASCENSION ISLAND. RETURN OF DAMPIER.While the Spanish settlements in the Pacific Oceanwere threatened by great armaments fitted out by rivalCHAP. XIX. THE BUCCANEERS. 299nations, they were at the same time attacked by a singularand more formidable hostility, which originatedin the defects of a severe and contracted policy. Theassociation and the enterprises of the buccaneers, if theydid not in the first instance benefit geography, tendedat least to familiarise European seamen with the navigationof the Pacific Ocean, and gave an air of facilityto undertakings which had before been regarded as difficultin the extreme.The despotic administration of the Spanish coloniesin the West Indies incurred the very evils which itsought to avoid. Even the Spaniards themselves feltoppressed by the numerous restrictions which were placedon trade ; and gave stealthy encouragement to foreigninterlopers, who supplied them at an easier rate witharticles which could not be legally procured withoutpaying enormous exactions. English traders soon madetheir appearance in these seas ; and, as the Spanish authoritieson the one hand treated them as enemies, oreven as pirates, Awhile on the other they were invited bythe profits of a contraband trade, they soon learned toadopt the precaution of going well armed.The cruelties of the Spaniards to the native inhabitantsof Cuba terminated in the depopulation of thatfine island. The cattle at the same time multiplied ingreat numbers, and roved over the deserted tracts of itswestern districts. This, in consequence, became thevictualling place of all the foreign vessels that cruisedupon the Spaniards or disturbed their trade. The preparationof the meat became a regular business. Spanishhunters called mat adores, or slaughterers, killed thecattle ; the flesh was then dried and prepared accordingto the Carib method, on hurdles raised a few feet abovethe fire. This mode of dressing their food was calledby the Indians boocan, — a name which they also appliedto the apparatus used in the process, and to the meatitself: hence the persons who were employed in procuringprovisions for the cruisers, adopting the languagewith the habits of the natives, called themselves buckMODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.careers. A large majority of the adventurers in thoseseas were Englishmen ; and as their smuggling tradequickly degenerated into actual piracy, they took thehonourable designation of freebooters. There was anatural alliance between the freebooters and buccaneers ;they mutually depended on one another ; the avocationsof the one party being at sea, those of the other on land.It is probable that in many instances the pirate curedhis own provisions, and so united both professions inhis own person. But in general the hunters were distinctfrom the seamen ; and, in process of time, a majorityof the hungers or buccaneers were French, while therovers were chiefly English : yet the adventurers of thesetwo nations whimsically thought fit to borrow the nameof their profession from the language of the other, as ifthe respectability of their calling could be enhanced, or itscriminality palliated, by a foreign name ; and the Englishcalled themselves buccaneers, while the French preferredthe title of freebooters, or corruptly, flibustiers. Allthese adventurers, of whatever nation, cruised upon theSpaniards, who were the sole objects of attack. A senseof common interest bound them together, and formedthem into a society which styled itself The brethren ofthe coast. The buccaneers had peculiar customs, whichobtained among them, from necessity or tradition, theauthority of law. Their code of morality was such asmight be expected among men who, while they renounceda friendly intercourse with the rest of mankind, dependedupon each other's fidelity. Every buccaneer hada mate, who was the heir to all his money. In someinstances, a community of property existed amongstthem. Negligence of dress, and even dirtiness, wasprescribed by their fashions, as best befitting a desperado.But when, in case of war between their nationand the Spaniards, they could obtain commissions, theywere always ready to take the name of privateers.The increase of the buccaneers in the Spanish WestIndies was regarded with satisfaction by other Europeanstates ; for they reasoned, with the laxity of politicalCHAP. XIX. THE Buccaneers. SOImorality, that they might profit from illegal proceedings,which at the same time they were not called upon toavow. At length the trade carried on by these adventurersgrew so important as to attract the attention ofFrance and England, which accordingly combined toplant on the same day confederated colonies of eachnation on the island of St. Christopher. Discord soonbroke out between the French and English settlers ; and,as the latter received no succours from home during theagitations of the civil war, the French grew predominantin the colony, and the English were obliged to betakethemselves to sea. Various settlements were now madeby adventurers throughout the West Indian islands, thoseof the same nation generally associating together ; and,as they grew into importance, They were claimed bythat crown of which a majority of the colonists weresubjects.The settlement of St. Christopher's owed its origin tothe successes of the buccaneers. These were regardedby the colonists as friends and powerful allies; for bothunited in their enmity to the Spaniards. The buccaneerswere pleased to find themselves countenanced or connivedat by legal governments, and colonies offered a prospectof an increased market for their trade. Becoming moreconfident in their strength, they seized on the littleisland of Tortuga, situated a few leagues from the easternextremity of Cuba, in a convenient position for trade,and for procuring cattle. This was the first step of thebuccaneers towards forming themselves into an independentsociety ; but the impolitic severity of the Spaniardssoon after forced them to take one of still greaterimportance. A party of Spanish troops surprised Tortuga,while most of the buccaneers were hunting on themain land, or cruising in their vessels; and those surprisedon the island were hanged as pirates withoutmercy or distinction. From this severe blow the buccaneerslearned the necessity of observing some regularityin their proceedings; and, for the first time, they electeda commander. National animosity and the love of gain302 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.have more influence on mankind than terror; and theranks of the buccaneers, after their loss at Tortuga, werespeedily recruited. In 1654; a large party of them ascendeda river of the Mosquito shore in canoes ; and afterstruggling nearly a month against a rapid stream andwaterfalls, they marched across the country to New Segovia,which they plundered, and safely returned downthe river. As they acknowledged no claims to rank butconduct and courage, their leaders were all remarkablefor personal prowess and daring exploits; but they neverfelt the compunctions of humanity, and ferocious crueltiesstained the glory of their successes.Among the most distinguished and fortunate of theseterrible leaders ranks a Welshman, named Henry Morgan,under whose government the affairs of the buccaneers attainedtheir most flourishing condition. In 1664, he beganto be regarded as their chief. His first exploit wasof the boldest character. With a body of 700 men,who placed themselves under his command, he took andplundered the town of Puerto del Principe in Cuba, thecentre of the Spanish forces. His next undertaking wasagainst Porto Bello, one of the principal and best fortifiedports belonging to the Spaniards in the West Indies.He had only 46'0 men under his command; but his advancewas so rapid, that he came on the town by surprise,and found it unprepared. In storming a castlewhich held out, he compelled his prisoners, chiefly religiousof both sexes, to apply the scaling-ladders to thewalls. When the garrison surrendered, he shut them upin the castle, and then, setting fire to the magazine, destroyedthe fort and its defenders together. He afterwardssacked Maracaibo, and the neighbouring town ofGibraltar; and, emboldened by his success, he consultedwith his officers which of the three places, Cartagena,Vera Cruz, and Panama, he should next attack. Panamawas believed to be the richest, and on that city the lotfell. Morgan had at this time under his command no lessthan thirty-seven armed vessels, and above two thousand*men.CHAP. XIX. THE BUCCANEERS. 303This important expedition was not accomplished withoutgreat toil and fatigue. But on the ninth day of theirjourney the buccaneers came in sight of the South Sea,and towards evening they could distinguish the steeplesof Panama. The Spaniards, though superior in numbers,were defeated in a pitched battle, and the buccaneersbecame masters of the city. In their cruelties, no sexnor condition was spared. Many of the inhabitantsescaped with their effects by sea, and sought shelteramong the islands in the Bay of Panama. But Morgan,launching a large boat, and filling it with a numerousand well-armed crew, sent it in pursuit of them. Thesemade prizes of several vessels, one of which was welladapted for cruising. Here a new prospect was opened;and some of the buccaneers began to consult how theymight quit Morgan, and seek their fortunes on the SouthSea, whence they might sail, with the plunder they shouldobtain, by the East Indies to Europe. But Morgan tookeffectual measures to prevent this defection, and returnedsafely from Panama, taking with him 6'00 prisoners,some of them carrying burdens, and 175 mules ladenwith spoil. A few years afterwards he was knighted,and made deputy-governor of Jamaica; in which officehe displayed unusual severity towards his old associates.The authority of Morgan deferred, but did not defeataltogether, the design of the buccaneers. On the 5th ofApril, l()80, a party of 331, mostly English, commencedtheir march across the Isthmus of Darien ; eachman provided with four cakes of bread, called doughboys,with a fusil, a pistol, and a hanger. Among theseadventurers were William Dampier, who does not appearto have been distinguished at that time for the talentswhich afterwards procured him so much celebrity, andLionel Wafer, so well known for his excellent descriptionof Darien. At Santa Maria they embarked in canoes, anda small vessel, which was found anchored near the town,and commenced their courses in the South Sea. Theysoon captured several vessels, richly laden, and abandoningtheir canoes, they embarked in their prizes. After scoursMODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.ing the coast near Panama, they steered southward forPeru. They touched at the island of Gorgonaa, and afterwardsat that of Juan Fernandez : here they found theshore covered with seals and sea-lions ; innumerable seabirdshad their nests among the rocks ; cray-fish andlobsters were in abundance; and, on the island itself,goats were in such plenty that, beside what they ate duringtheir stay, they killed about 100 for salting, and tookaway as many alive. While lying here, three sail, believedto be Spanish ships of war, were descried at adistance ; all hands were immediately called on board,the cable was slipped, and the ship put to sea. But inthis hurry it happened that William, a Mosquito Indian,who accompanied the buccaneers, being absent in thewoods hunting goats, and lea iivj nothing of the alarm,was left behind ; nor is this, perhaps, the first instanceof a solitary individual being left to inhabit Juan Fernandez.The buccaneers pursued their course to thesouth, with indifferent success : they took a ship, namedthe San Rosario, from Callao, laden with wine, brandy,oil, and fruit, and with as much money in her as yieldedninety-four dollars to each buccaneer. But beside thelading already mentioned, the San Rosario contained700 pigs of plate, which the buccaneers supposed tobe tin, and therefore neglected : only one pig was takenfor the purpose of making bullets ; the rest was leftbehind in the Rosario, which was turned adrift. Buton their arrival at Antigua, the buccaneers showed aspecimen of this metal to a goldsmith, who immediatelyknew it to be pure silver, and sold it in Englandfor 70/. sterling. Thus they lost their richest booty bytheir ignorance and impatience.In their progress to the south of the coast of Chili, theyreconnoitred the islands of the archipelago which had beenpreviously surveyed by Sarmiento, and named them theDuke of York's Islands. They took a young Indian here,who could open large muscles with his fingers which thebuccaneers could scarcely manage with their knives. Tothis young prisoner, who was very wild and insensible,CHAP. XIX. THE BUCCANEERS. 305they gave the name of Arson. They doubled Cape Hornat a great distance from land, and fell in with largemasses of floating ice. On their arrival in the WestIndies, their commander, Sharpe, and a few others, weretried for piracy in the South Sea, at the instance of theSpanish ambassador, but were acquitted for want of evidence.Thus terminated this most extraordinary expedition,which was begun in canoes and finished in goodships.The next expedition of the buccaneers into the SouthSeas was made from the Atlantic, and with better equipments.About seventy adventurers, among whom wereWilliam Dampier, Edward Davis, Lionel Wafer, andAmbrose Cowley, commanded by John Cook, sailed fromthe Chesapeake in August, 1683, in an eighteen gunship which they had captured not long before. Theyfirst steered to the coast of Guinea; at Sierra Leone theycaptured by an ingenious stratagem a Danish ship,mounting thirty-six guns, victualled and stored for along voyage. They all embarked in the new ship, whichthey named the Bachelor's Delight ; and setting theirprisoners on shore to shift for themselves as they could,they burnt their old vessel " that she might tell notales." In their run towards the Straits of Magellanthey saw an island, to which Cowley gave the name ofPepys' Island. Not far from it he saw another, " whichmade me," he says, " to think them the Nibble D' wards"(Sebald de Weerts), — a conjecture which might havespared him the trouble of giving him a new title to thismany-named group. In rounding Cape Horn " theship was tossed about like an egg-shell." She soonafter joined company with the Nicholas of London,commanded by John Eaton, a ship fitted out in theThames on pretence of trading, but in reality for a piraticalvoyage. At the Straits of Magellan the Nicholas hadmet the Cygnet, a trading vessel commanded by captainSwan, who had a license from the duke of York,the lord high admiral of England, but they were afterwardsseparated by bad weather. Many of the buccalMODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.needs in the Bachelor's Delight had accompanied theformer expedition in 1680, when William the MosquitoIndian had been left behind in Juan Fernandez. Onarriving at this island now a second time, they immediatelylowered a boat, and hastened to the shore to trywhether they could find any traces of their former comrade.A Mosquito Indian named Robin, and Dampier,were in the boat. As they drew near the land theywere delighted to see William at the water's edge, waitingto receive them. Dampier gives the following affectingaccount of their meeting : — " Robin, his countryman,was the first who leaped ashore from the boats ; andrunning to his brother Mosquito man, threw himselfflat on his face at his feet, who, helping him up, andembracing him, fell flat with his face on the ground atRobin's feet, and was by him taken up also. We stoodwith pleasure to behold the surprise, tenderness, andsolemnity of this interview, which was exceedinglyaffectionate on both sides ; and when their ceremonieswere over, we also, that stood gazing at them, drewnear, each of us embracing him we had found here,who was overjoyed to see so many of his old friendscome hither, as he thought, purposely to fetch him."William had lived in solitude on Juan Fernandez abovethree years. The clothes with which he had landedwere worn out, and his only covering was a goat-skinround his waist. He had built himself a hut, whichhe lined with goat-skins, about half a mile from theshore. When first left on the island he had with him'his musket, a knife, a small horn of powder, and someshot : " but when his ammunition was expended, hecontrived by notching his knife to saw the barrel of hisgun into small pieces, wherewith he made harpoons,lances, hooks, and a long knife ; heating the pieces ofiron first in the fire, and then hammering them out ashepleased with stones. This may seem strange tothose who are not acquainted with the sagacity of theIndians ; but it is no more than what the Mosquitomen are accustomed to do in their own country." HeCHAP. XIX. THE BUCCANEERS. 307saw the two ships the day before they cast anchor; andfrom their manoeuvring, believing them to be English,he killed three goats, which he dressed with vegetables,thus preparing a banquet for his friends.At the Galapagos the buccaneers found abundanceof the large green turtle, which have given their nameto those islands. Here they built storehouses, in whichthey lodged a large quantity of their prize flour to servefor future occasions. The chart of the Galapagos madeby Cowley during this visit is still valued by navigators.Soon after, John Cook died, and was succeeded in thecommand by Edward Davis. He was joined on thecoast of Peru by the Cygnet, for captain Swan found itimpossible to dispose of his goods on account of thesuspicion with which the Spaniards regarded him; andas he allowed on board a number of buccaneers (who a%this time rushed in crowds to the South Sea), he waseasily persuaded to join in their pursuits.About this time Eaton, in the Nicholas, left the buccaneersunder Davis, and sailed for the East Indies.Ambrose Cowley, the historian of his voyage, accompaniedhim. On their arrival at the Ladroness, theyimmediately quarrelled with the natives, and killed anumber of them. The Spanish governor in a conferenceexpressed a wish that he had killed them all. Onthis, Cowley, who writes in the spirit of a buccaneer,observes, " We then made wars with these infidels, andwent on shore every day, fetching provisions, and firingupon them wherever we saw them ; so that the greatestpart of them left the island. The whole land is agarden." He relates in the same vein of brutal jocularitythe behaviour of his companions to the Indiansassembled peaceably on the shore. " Our people thatwere in the boat let go in amongst the thickest of them,and killed a great many of their number. The others,seeing their mates fall, ran away. Our other men whowere on shore, meeting them, saluted them also bymaking holes in their hides." The Nicholas reachedEngland without any accident.x 2308 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.The buccaneers under Davis in the mean timescoured the South Sea, and took a great number ofprizes. They mustered above a thousand men, distributedin nine or ten vessels. They were foiled, however,in their attack on a Spanish fleet that was sentagainst them ; the towns along the coast were no longerto be surprised ; so that, finding the profit by no meansproportioned to the great risks they ran, after cruisingthree years in the South Seas they determined to returnhome. Leaving their retreat at the Galapagos accordingly,the squadron under Davis steered southward,and in lat. 27° 20' S. discovered a low island, which isgenerally supposed to be Easter Island. In this partof their course they felt a dreadful shock, as if the shiphad struck on a rock ; but they found no soundings,and seeing the sea turn white as if mixed with sand,they concluded it to be an earthquake, — a conjecturewhich they afterwards found to be correct. When theyfelt this shock they were 1 50 leagues from the main landof America, where Lima experienced its fatal effects.When Davis and his companions arrived at the WestIndia Islands, in 16*88, a proclamation had been recentlyissued, offering the king's pardon to all the buccaneerswho would abandon that course of life and claim thebenefit of the proclamation. Our adventurers, who werenot without money, availed themselves of this opportunityof enjoying some repose. Davis returned to England,and was always regarded by his old companionswith the esteem and respect due to the generosity of histemper and his ability as a seaman.Captain Swan, in the Cygnet, accompanied by manyveteran buccaneers, and by Dampier among the rest,had parted from Davis in 1685, and sailed towards thenorth-west, along the coast of New Spain, in hopes ofintercepting some ships from Manilla, and of obtaininga rich pillage on land. At St. Pecaque, while carryingoff the provisions from the town, a large body of Spaniardscame suddenly upon them, and gave them the most signaldefeat which the buccaneers had yet received in theCHAP. XIX. THE BUCCANEERS. 309South Sea. Above fifty Englishmen and a few blackswere killed ; nearly half their force. Dampier tells usthat " Captain Swan had been informed by his astrologerof the great danger they were in ; and several men, whowent in the first party, opposed the division of theirforce : some of them foreboded their misfortune, andheard, as they lay down in the church at night, grievousgroaning, which kept them from sleep."On the 31st of March, 1686, they sailed westward fromthe American coast ; and they seem to have commencedtheir voyage across the Pacific with a short allowance ofprovisions. " The kettle," Dampier tells us, " was boiledbut once a-day, and there was no occasion to call themen to victuals. All hands came up to see the quartermastershare it, and he had need to be exact. We hadtwo dogs and two cats on board, and they likewise hada small allowance given them ; and they waited with asmuch eagerness to see it shared as we did." The firstland they made was at the Ladroness, where they anchoredon the west side of Guahan, about a mile fromthe shore. The Acapulco ship arrived here shortly after;and it was with difficulty that Swan could dissuade hisheroes from attacking her. Dampier praises the ingenuityof the natives of the Ladroness, and gives a minutedescription of their fast-sailing canoes, called flyingpross. " I have been particular," he says, " in describingthese canoes, because I believe they sail thebest of any boats in the world. I tried the swiftness ofone of them with our log ; we had twelve knots on ourreel, and she ran it all out before the half-minute glasswas half out. I believe she would run twenty-fourmiles in the hour. It was very pleasant to see the littleboat running so swiftly by the other's side. I was toldthat one of these pross, being sent express from GuarantyManilla (a distance of about 480 leagues), performedthe voyage in four days." At Mindanao the buccaneerswere well received. Being frank in manners, and regardlessof their money, they became great favouriteswith the natives, who were surprised to see Europeansx 3310 MODERN Voyages OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.so free from pride and griping avarice. Each of themhad a native comrade, who exchanged names with him,according to the usage of the South Sea ; and they wereallowed also to have pag allies, or friends of the fair sex,with whom they might share the tender happiness ofPlatonic attachment. But these were dangerous familiaritiesamong a people deadly in their resentments.While the Cygnet lay at Mindanao, sixteen of her crewdied, in consequence, it was supposed, of poison : manymore suffered tedious illness from the same cause.As they wished for a secure retreat to repair theirvessel, they steered for five small islands that weremarked in the chart between Laconia and Formosa, andwhich they hoped to find uninhabited. They had nosooner anchored near one of these islands, than the shipwas surrounded by canoes : the natives came on board,welcomed the strangers with a drink called basle, andsold them a fat hog for an old iron hoop. The fiveislands now received severally the names of Grafton,Monmouth's, Orange, Goat, and Basle Island. " Theeasternmost," says Dampier, "at which we careened,our men unanimously called Basle Island, because ofthe quantity of that liquor which we drank there everyday.This drink, called basle, the natives make withthe juice of the sugar-cane, to which they put somesmall black berries. It is well boiled, and then put intogreat jars, in which it stands three or four days to ferment.Then it settles clear, and is presently fit to drink.This is an excellent liquor, and I believe wholesome, andmuch like our English beer both in colour and taste.Our men drank briskly of it during several weeks, andwere frequently drunk with it, and never sick in consequence."The inhabitants of these rocky islands werefound to be a gentle, cleanly, and industrious people.They resembled the Chinese in features, but were darkercoloured, and had larger eyes. No trace of superstitionor of government was observed among them by theEnglish ; all seemed to be on an equality : yet, whilethe Cygnet lay here, a young man was buried alive forCHAP. XIX. THE BUCCANEERS. 311some offence. When his grave was dug, his friendstook their last farewell of him, and he quietly resignedhimself to his fate. The ship being suddenly driven tosea by a heavy wind, six seamen were left behind on theisland : but in a few days she returned to her anchorage;and the men, when they came on board, related, thatwhen the ship was out of sight the natives redoubledtheir kindness towards them, and tried to persuade themto cut their hair short, according to the fashion of theislands, promising to each of them, in case of compliance,a young woman to wife, a piece of ground, and agriculturalimplements. These offers were declined ; but onthe return of the ship, the natives received for theirkindness three whole bars of iron.The Cygnet, on leaving the five islands, steered asoutherly course, by Celebes and Timor, till she arrivedat the north-west coast of New Holland, in 16° 50'. Aparty went ashore to search for water, and surprisedsome of the natives. Pains were taken to calm theirfears, and to induce them to lend their assistance infilling the water-casks and conveying them to the boat.But all the signs we could make," says Dampier,were to no purpose ; for they stood like statues, staringat one another, and grinning like so many monkeys.These poor creatures seem not accustomed to carryburdens ; and I believe one of our ship's boys, of tenyears old, would carry as much as one of their men."His general description of the natives of New Hollandis accurate and just. " The inhabitants of this country,"he says, " are the most miserable people in the world :the Hottentots, compared with them, are gentlemen.They have no houses, animals, or poultry ; their personsare tall, straight bodied, thin, with long limbs ; theyhave great heads, round foreheads, and great brows;their eyelids are always half closed, to keep the flies outof their eyes (for they are so troublesome here that nofanning will keep them from one's face), so that, fromtheir infancy, they never open their eyes as other peopledo, and therefore they cannot see far unless they holdx 4312 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.up their heads as if they were looking at something overthem. They have great bottle noses, full lips, widemouths ; the two fore teeth of the upper jaw are wantingin all of them ; neither have they any beard. Theirhair is short, black, and curled; and their skins coalblack, like that of the negroes in Guinea. Their onlyfood is fish, and they consequently search for them atlow water; and they make little weirs, or dams withstones, across little coves of the sea. At one time, ourboat being among the islands seeking for game, espied adrove of these people swimming from one island to another,for they have neither boats, canoes, nor bark logs."Dampier quitted the Cygnet at the Nicobar Islands,and reached England in I69I. The captain and a largeparty continued their piratical cruising in the Indianseas, till, after a variety of adventures, they put into St.Augustine's Bay, in Madagascar, where their worn-outvessel sunk at her anchors. Some of the men embarkedin European ships, and others engaged in the service ofthe petty kings of the island.The association of the buccaneers gave rise to a greaternumber of bold navigations than had ever yet proceededin an equal space of time from the rival states of Europe.Those who commanded in the South Sea were almostall Englishmen ; and many of them were evidently ableseamen, and, in other respects, men of ability. In thenarratives of Dampier and of Cowley, the toils and dangersof a roving life were shown combined with muchto exhilarate and delight, and a voyage round the worldwas no longer looked upon as a wonderful achievement.Mariners grew more daring, and ceased to associate theideas of danger and of distance. Since the time of sirFrancis Drake, England rose steadily in maritimepower, and continued to send forth the most skilful andintrepid seamen ; and it redounds not a little to herhonour, that the first expedition equipped solely for thepurpose of making geographical discoveries, and withoutany ulterior objects of political or commercial gain, wasdespatched from her shores.THE BUCCANEERS.In the year I699, Great Britain being at peace withthe other maritime states of Europe, king William orderedan expedition for the discovery of new countries,and for the examination of some of those before discovered,particularly New Holland and New Guinea.Dampier had recommended himself to public attention,by the agreeable narrative which he had written of hisbuccaneering voyages ; and the earl of Pembroke madechoice of him to conduct the expedition. The Roebuck, aship belonging to the royal navy, was equipped for the purpose,and supplied with provisions for a long voyage. AsNew Holland was approached, the sea was found coveredto a great distance with weeds, and whales were seen inunusual numbers. Dampier made the land after a voyageof six months, in lat. 26° S. and anchored, a few daysafter, in the very bay to which Dirk Herbage, the firstdiscoverer of the country, gave his name. Here he sawkangaroos, of which he gives the following strange account: — " The land animals we saw here were only asort of racoons, but different from those of the WestIndies, chiefly as to their legs; for these have very shortfore legs, but go jumping, and, like the racoons, are verygood meat." Sailing towards the north, he found anarchipelago stretching above twenty leagues in length,which has been more recently examined by captainKing. Dampier, hoping to find a passage throughthem to the main land, advanced a short way throughintricate channels. To one of the islands, on which helanded to look for water, he gave the name of RosemaryIsland. He then stood out to sea from the islands, andheld his course toward the north. Having cleared thearchipelago, he again approached the main land, wherehe searched in vain for water ; he met, however, withinhabitants, and was obliged to discharge his musket inorder to intimidate them. But they, finding that thereport was not attended with any mischief, advancedwith greater boldness, holding up their arms and sayingPooh, pooh ! in contemptuous mimicry of the noise of themusket ; nor would they retire till one of them was314 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.killed. " Among these New Hollanders," says Dampier,one who seemed to be a kind of prince, or captain,was painted with a circle of white about his eyes, anddown his nose, which added much to his natural deformity;for they were all of them the most unpleasantlooking and the worst featured of any people I eversaw."He now left the shores of New Holland, and havingrefitted and furnished himself with fresh provisions atTimor, he stood towards New Guinea, which he firstdescried on New Year's day, 1700. He doubled CapeMaso, the western extremity of that country, on the 9thof February ; and then holding an easterly course at adistance from the main land, he saw land on the 27th,which he supposed to be the eastern part of New Guinea.On approaching the shore, some plantations and patchesof clear ground were distinctly seen. The natives approachedwith an air of friendship, but the treachery oftheir intentions was suspected and defeated. The islandof Gerrit Denies, as the Dutch call it, was found to beextremely populous, and the sides of the hills werethickly set with plantations. " The natives," saysDampier, " are very black ; their short curled hair isdyed of various colours, as red, white, and yellow : theyhave broad round faces, with great bottle noses, yetagreeable enough, except that they disfigure themselvesby painting, and wearing great things through theirnoses, as big as a man's thumb, and about four incheslong. They have also great holes in their ears, whereinthey stuff such ornaments as in their noses. Theirspeech is clear and distinct ; the words they used mostwhen near us were, Vacousee allamais, pointing then tothe shore." They probably invited him to purchasetheir cocoa-nuts, which are called lamas in the languageof New Guinea. Dampier followed the coast of themain land to south-south-west and west, giving namesto the chief havens and headlands, until, leaving PortMontague, he discovered an open sea to the north, whilesomething like land appeared towards the south-west.CHAP. XIX. THE BUCCANEERS. 315He thus found that he had circumnavigated the land,which he had supposed to be New Guinea, and that hewas now sailing in the strait which separated the twocountries. " The east land," he says, " afforded a verypleasant and agreeable prospect. We saw smoke, butdid not strive to anchor there, choosing rather to getunder one of the islands, where I thought we should findfew or no inhabitants. We looked out well to the north,and seeing no land that way, I was well assured that theeast land was not joined to New Guinea ; therefore Inamed it A T ova Britannia."Dampier's homeward voyage was prosperous, until hereached the Island of Ascension, where the ship sprunga leak, and it was found impossible to preserve her.Great part of the provision was saved, and the sails werebrought ashore to make tents. Fresh water and turtlewere in abundance, so that there was no danger of immediatedistress. Ten weeks after the occurrence of thisaccident, three English ships of war anchored at Ascension,with which Dampier and his men returned to England.The Roebuck was an old and worn-out vessel,quite unfit for the voyage ; and it does not appear thatDampier can be justly blamed for the misfortune thattook place. He accomplished the object of his mission,by making an important discovery, and by writing anaccount of it in an able manner.316 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERT. BOOK IV.CHAP. XX.VOYAGES OF PRIVATEERS AND OTHERS TO THE SOUTHSEA.PRIVATEERS UNDER Dampier. DISCORDS IN THE EXPEDITION.STRADLING AND DAMPIER SEPARATE. ALEXANDER SelkirkLEFT ON JUAN FERNANDEZ. FATE OF StraddlingClipperton LEAVES DAMPIER. HE CROSSES THE PACIFICOCEAN IN A SMALL BARK. — DAMPIER DESERTED BY FUNNELAND OTHERS. HIS ADVERSITY. HK PREVAILS ON THEMERCHANTS TO EQUIP ANOTHER EXPEDITION. VOYAGE OFWoods ROGERS. ARRIVAL AT JUAN FERNANDEZ. AdventuresOF ALEXANDER SELKIRK ON THAT ISLAND. SUCCESSOF ROGERS. UNFORTUNATE VOYAGES OF SHELVOCKE ANDCLIPPERTON. FRENCH PRIVATEERS. THEIR RAPID INCREASE.THE DUTCH. ROGGEWEIN's EXPEDITION. Belgian AUSTRAL.EASTER ISLAND. DANGEROUS SHOALS. VERQUIKKUNGISLAND. DISPUTES BETWEEN GREAT BRITAIN AND SPAIN.ANSON'S EXPEDITION. HIS SQUADRON MANNED BY INVALIDS.UNHAPPY CONSEQUENCES OF THAT MEASURE. VOYAGEROUND CAPE HORN. DISTRESS OF THE SHIPS. THE AcapulcoGallon TAKEN. ANSON RETURNS. FATE OF THEOTHER SHIPS.The buccaneers were now suppressed indeed, buttheir daring and successful exploits in the South Seaswere by no means forgotten. On the breaking out of thegeneral war at the commencement of the last century,some merchants were induced to believe that with a wellfitted armament a profitable expedition might be madeinto those seas, where the buccaneers, ill provided asthey were, had met with such extraordinary success.They equipped in consequence two vessels, the St.George, of twenty-six, and the Cinque Ports, of sixteenguns, for this expedition. Dampier, whose character asaseaman was not lowered in the general estimation bythe loss of his ship in his last voyage, was appointedto command the St. George; but this choice provedCHAP. XX. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 317singularly unfortunate. Dampier, although a good seaman,appears to have been a bad commander. He hadlived too long with the buccaneers to be able to assumethat dignity of carriage which is necessary to insurerespect ; while, by his too great familiarity, he impartedto his crew that tone of lawless equality which he hadlearned in his early years. He at the same time endeavouredto maintain discipline by an injudicious severity,and his temper was so bad that it was impossible tocontinue long on terms of intimacy with him. The ships,too, with which he sailed, were ill fitted for the expedition.The crew was mutinous and disorderly, and noharmony existed among the officers.When the two ships arrived at the island of JuanFernandez in the South Sea, a dispute arose betweencaptain Stradling, the commander of the Cinque Ports,and his crew ; and the latter absolutely refused to allowhim to come on board. These differences were hardlyreconciled by the mediation of Dampier, when a largeship was seen at a distance ; on which our privateersstood out to sea in such haste that Stradling left behindhim on the island five of his men, with a great proportionof his stores. The strange ship proved to be French,and of superior force, so that the chase was soon relinquished.Soon after, on the coast of Peru, our Englishprivateers seized a prize, which gave birth to fresh altercations,and in consequence Dampier and Stradling partedcompany. The latter of these touched again at JuanFernandez, where he found two of the men whom hehad left there on his former visit to that island. Butwhile the Cinque Ports lay here he had some disagreementwith Alexander Selkirk, the master of the ship,who, in the heat of his dissatisfaction, and dreading theleaky state of the ship, chose to remain alone on theisland, rather than to continue any longer under thecommand of Stradling. His desire was complied with;and he was set on shore, with his clothes, bedding, afirelock, one pound of gunpowder, a hatchet, cookingutensils, some tobacco, and his books. Before the ship318 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.departed, however, Selkirk changed his mind, and wishedto return on board, but the captain would not receivehim. Stradling afterwards cruised on the coast of Perutill his vessel, already in a sinking state, ran ashore onthe island Gorgonaa, where the captain and seven men,all that remained of the crew, were obliged to surrenderto the Spaniards. The St. George was not more fortunate.Dampier quarrelled with his chief mate, Mr.Clipperton, who, having induced one and twenty of themen to join him, seized the small prize bark of aboutten tons, which contained all their ammunition and thegreatest part of their provisions. Clipperton cruisedsuccessfully on the coasts of New Spain, and afterwardscrossed the Pacific in his little vessel to Macao, — one ofthe most extraordinary voyages ever performed. Afterthe desertion of Clipperton, Dampier attacked the Manillagalleon, but without success ; and its failure added to thediscontents of his crew, who now felt alarmed at the badcondition of the crazy vessel. Dampier wished to continuein the South Sea, but the majority of the crewwere otherwise inclined. A prize bark of about seventytons burden was fitted up for those who wished to gotoIndia. In this little vessel embarked thirty-sevenmen, and among them William Funnel, who afterwardswrote the history of the voyage. On their arrival atAmboyna, they were taken prisoners by the Dutch, whoat first treated them with some severity, but afterwardssent them home in their fleet to England. Dampier inthe mean time remained in the St. George, with onlynine and twenty men. He plundered the town of Puna,and cruised along the coast of Peru till his ship was nolonger able to keep the sea. They then embarked in abrigantine which had been taken from the Spaniards; andstripping the St. George of every thing that might proveuseful on their voyage, they left her riding at anchornear a small island on the coast. "Alien Dampierarrived in the East Indies he was unable to produce hiscommission, which had probably been stolen from himby some of his discontented followers; his ship andCHAP. XX. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH gEA. 319goods were therefore seized by the Dutch, and he wasfor some time detained in custody.The miserable failure of this expedition was sufficientto discourage any speculations of a privateering nature ;and it came to be admitted as a principle, that althoughcruising might be a gainful trade for buccaneers, yetthat there could be no hopes of realising large profits byexpeditions fitted out by merchants, and in the ultimatesuccess of which every individual on board did not feelan immediate interest. But the indefatigable Dampier,unused to any industry but that of pillaging the Spaniardsin the South Seas, addressed himself to the merchantsof Bristol so earnestly and repeatedly, flatteringtheir hopes with the rich plunder to be obtained in theSpanish settlements, that he at length prevailed uponthem to fit out an expedition. They accordingly equippedtwo stout ships for the purpose, the one of thirty, andthe other of twenty-six guns, and with crews amountingjointly to 321 men. Great care was taken in the choiceof the officers. Captain Woodes Rogers was appointedto the command in chief; and Dampier, whose characteras a skilful seaman was still high, and whose circumstanceswere reduced, engaged himself as his pilot.Their voyage to the Pacific was prosperous ; and theysteered directly to that grand resort of privateers, theisland of Juan Fernandez. But on approaching theisland, they had cause to suspect that the Spaniards hadestablished a garrison upon it, as a fire was distinctlyseen during the night ; and accordingly a small boatwas sent to reconnoitre. As the boat drew near, a manwas seen on the shore waving a white flag ; and on hernearer approach he called to the people in the boat inthe English language, and directed them to a landingplace. As the boat did not return so soon as was expected,the pinnace was sent in search of her. The circumstancewhich caused the delay is thus narrated by captain"Woodes Rogers : — " The pinnace came back immediatelyfrom the shore, and brought abundance of crayfish ;and with a man clothed in goat-skins, who looked more320 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.wild than the first owners of them He had been onthe island four years and four months. His name wasAlexander Selkirk, a Scotchman, who had been masterof the Cinque Ports galley, a ship which came herewithcaptain Dampier, who told me he was the best manin her ; so I immediately agreed with him to be a mateon board our ship. It was he who made the fire lastnight, judging our ships to be English."During the first eight months of his residence on theisland, Selkirk found it difficult to bear up against melancholyand the tediousness of his solitary life. He builthimself two huts with pimento-trees, covered them withlong grass, and lined them with the skins of goats, whichhe killed with his gun so long as his pound of powderlasted. Just as that was expended he found the methodof kindling fire by rubbing together two pieces of pimentowood. He employed himself by praying and singingpsalms. At first his appetite quite failed him ; he couldnot relish his food, from dejection and want of salt; norused he to go to bed till he was no longer able to watch.Pimento wood served him for both fire and candle, burningvery clearly, and with a fragrant refreshing smell.When his powder was all expended, he was obliged tocatch the goats by running them down; and he grew soactive as to be able to outstrip a good dog. On one occasionhis agility had nearly cost him his life. He pursueda goat at full speed to the edge of a precipice whichthe bushes had concealed from his view : he fell, in consequence,a great height, and was so bruised and stunnedby the fall that he narrowly escaped with his life. Whenhe came to his senses, he found the goat lying dead underhim. He lay in this situation about four and twentyhours, and then crawled with difficulty to his hut, whichwas a mile distant; nor did he recover from the effectsof this accident for several days. Goats and cats, whichhad been brought to the island, — the former by the Spaniards,the latter by the buccaneers and cruisers, — hadmultiplied exceedingly : of the former, he had killedabove 500 while dwelling here; and had caught as manyCHAP. XX. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 321more, which he dismissed, after marking them in theear. He had tamed a number of kids; and, in order toamuse himself, he used sometimes to sing and dancewith them and with his cats.His clothes and shoes were soon worn out by runningthrough the woods; but his feet grew so hard by exercise,that he could run over the roughest ground withoutinconvenience, and found it difficult afterwards to reconcilehimself to the use of shoes. When his clothes wereworn to rags, he made himself a coat and cap of goatskin,which he sewed together with thongs of the samematerial. His only needle was a nail ; and when hisknife was completely worn out, he made a new one ofsome iron hoops that were left on shore. As he hadsome linen cloth among his stores, he made himself someshirts of it, sewing them together with the yarn of hisworsted stockings.In the proper season he had plenty of good turnips,which had been sown there by Dampier's men, and increasedso as to overspread some acres of ground. Thecabbage-trees also furnished him with good nourishment.He made excellent goat-soup, and seasoned it withthe fruit of the pimento, which is the same as Jamaicapepper. His last shirt was nearly worn out when captainRogers arrived here ; and he had forgotten hislanguage, or lost the power of articulation so much bydisuse as to be hardly intelligible.Alexander Selkirk always remembered with pleasurehis abode on Juan Fernandez. He was only thirty yearsof age when first left there; and when the pains of lonelinesshad worn off, and his health was improved by exercise,temperance, and a fine climate, he became sensiblyattached to his wild but tranquil life. His countenanceretained ever after the traits that mark the hunter inhis solitary occupation. In the streets of London hewent along with an air of complete abstraction, andoften ran at full speed, totally regardless and unawareof the crowds that stood wondering at him.* The ad-king'sAnecdotes.VOL. II. Y322 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.ventures of Alexander Selkirk formed the groundwork ofDefoe's novel of " Robinson Crusoe."The voyage of Woodes Rogers was crowned withcomplete success. He captured the Acapulco galleon,and returned safely to England by the East Indies, havingsailed round the globe in three years and three months.This expedition was not productive of any immediateadvantage to geography, but it tended much to strip distantand tedious navigations of those terrors which hadbecome attached to them through mismanagement orthe incapability of their commanders. The merchantswere so much encouraged by its result, that in 1718 theyagain fitted out two ships for the South Sea. CaptainsShelvocke and Clipperton were appointed to commandthem ; but they soon separated ; and the success of theundertaking vanished, as might be expected, with theunity of those Engaged to conduct it.Clipperton was deposed from his command by hiscrew in the East Indies; and died, soon after his returnto England, of a broken heart. Shelvocke took manyprizes, and brought back his ship; but his conduct towardshis owners and his ship's company was the subjectof severe animadversion; and this expedition was, onthe whole, ill-conducted and unfortunate. Yet these commandersall published accounts of their voyages, in which,if they could not boast of any new discoveries, they atleast added many amusing particulars respecting countriesstill but imperfectly known. It is surprising to considerwhat spirit and vigour were infused into maritimeenterprise by the example of the buccaneers. Within thecomparatively short space of thirty-six years (from 1686to 1722), no less than six expeditions had circumnavigatedthe globe under the command of Englishmen ; andthe voyage across the great Pacific Ocean, which, an agebefore, was looked upon as a stupendous enterprise, wasvoluntarily undertaken and successfully accomplished byClipperton, in a slender bark of only ten tons burden.The French had acquired in the same school a tastefor roving over the ocean. The first French ship thatCHAP. XX. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 323navigated the South Sea, of which any account exists,was that commanded by J. Baptiste de laFollade, in 1667.But in 1 7 1 2, eight or nine privateers of that nation cruisedon the coasts of Chili and Peru. When war appearedready to break out, in 1719> between Great Britain andSpain, the Spaniards in the South Sea gave great encouragementto the French. In 1720, a ship of St. Malo,named ths Solomon, was allowed to sell her cargo at Ylowithout interruption. The success of the Solomon hadsuch an effect on the St. Malo merchants, that they immediatelyfitted out fourteen sail, which all arrived inthe South Sea in the beginning of the year 1721; mostof them large ships ; and one, named the Fleur de Lys,capable of mounting seventy guns. In the same year aFrench ship sailed from China to New Spain ; and byrunning well to the northward, arrived in the Bay ofWanders in less than fifty days, — a much shorter timethan had been hitherto required to cross the PacificOcean from the west.The Dutch also joined in attacking the Spanish possessions; and in the West Indies their exertions wereattended with brilliant success. The Spanish flotillawas captured at the Savannah, and prizes taken to animmense amount. But privateers are bad accountants.The individuals, or companies of merchants who fittedout these armaments derived no profit from them ; andthe Dutch West India company, notwithstanding alltheir triumphs over the Spaniards, found their ownaffairs in a ruinous condition. They offered to sell theirprivileges to the East India company for a sum ofmoney, or of stock, so as virtually to unite the twocompanies ; but this proposal was rejected, and the WestIndia merchants were forced upon some other expedientto retrieve their affairs. In 1721, a memorial was presentedto them by Jacob Roggewein, who had amasseda great deal of money in the East in the service of theEast India company, containing proposals for the discoveryof southern lands. The father of Jacob, fifty-twoyears before, had presented a similar project to they2324 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.same company ; and when dying, exhorted his son notto lose sight of so important a design. The applicationof Jacob Roggewein was successful. The companyordered three vessels to be equipped, to go in search ofunknown countries, and gave the chief command of themto the author of the scheme. Discovery was the professedobject of this expedition ; but it is probable thatthe West India company had trade also in view, andthat they were willing, under the protection of theirown charter, to encroach on the privileges of the rivalcompany.The three ships sailed from the Tex el on the 21st ofAugust, 1721. They were ill provided with journalists,and few voyages of discovery have been more imperfectlyand obscurely related. As they approached the Straitsof Magellan, " they looked for the island of Hawkins'sMaiden Land, but could not find it." They saw, however,a great island of about 200 leagues in circumference,to which they gave the name of Belgia Austral.Commodore Roggewein, in his zeal to make new discoveries,was often unable to find, or unwilling to recognise,lands which had been seen before. The landwhich he called Belgia Austral had been previouslyfound by the French to be a group of islands, to whichthey gave the name of Malouines. Captain Strong, thecommander of an English privateer, had discoveredamong these islands, in I69O, a large opening, to whichhe gave the name of Falkland Sound ; and hence theislands, in English maps, are at present called theFalkland Islands. They were at first called from theirdiscoverer, John David's South Land. Sir RichardHawkins soon after, in 1593, named them Hawkins'sMaiden Land. They afterwards received successivelythe names of the Geraldine, or Sebald de Weert's Islands;the Malouines, or Isles de St. Louis; theFalklandIsles; and Belgia Austral. From this single instanceof confused nomenclature, it may be conjectured howdifficult it is to recognise the course of early navigatorsthrough the Pacific Ocean.CHAP. XX. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 325After leaving Juan Fernandez, the Dutch, steeringW.N.W., endeavoured to find Edward Davis's Island.They thought that they missed it, but nevertheless theyarrived at the island ; and being willing to regard it as anew discovery, they named it Paaschen, or Easter Island.A native came on board, to whom they gave a glass ofwine ; but, instead of drinking it, he threw it into hiseyes. Here they procured fresh provisions, and continuedtheir voyage to the west. After a month's run,one of the vessels was wrecked on the shoals among acluster of low islands, which were called from this accidentthe Verschaadelyk, or Pernicious Isles. Theyare probably the Palliser's Isles of English maps. Abouttwenty-five German leagues to the west of these werefound the Origen, or Labyrinth Isles, extremely numerous,and all of beautiful appearance. Shortly after,the Dutch ships arrived at Verquikkung, or RecreationIsland, probably one of the Society Islands, where theywere hospitably treated by the natives. When Roguesreached Batavia, he experienced the most sterntreatment from the Dutch East India company. Hisships and cargoes were condemned as forfeited to thecompany, and sold by public auction. Geography gainedlittle by his voyage, which, considering the liberalitywith which the expedition was equipped, cannot beconsidered as successful.The suppression of the buccaneers did not by anymeans lead to the extinction of the contraband trade thatexisted in the West Indies ; and the Spaniards, whowere the chief sufferers by it, resorted to measures whichcould not be tolerated by foreign courts. They assumedthe power of searching all British merchant vessels whichshould be found near their settlements ; and directionswere given to the guard costs to detain and incommode,as much as possible, all ships that fell under theirexamination, so as to deter foreigners, and the Englishespecially, from engaging in that trade. These haughtyand injurious proceedings gave rise to many complaints ;and, after much mutual remonstrance, the British goy3326 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCO VERY. BOOK IV.government peremptorily demanded that Spain should relinquishall claim to a right of visiting British ships,except in her own ports. These requisitions were notattended to ; and, in 1 739* these disputes ran so # high,that letters of reprisal were issued by both parties, anddeclarations of war very soon followed.It was immediately determined by the British administrationto attack the Spanish trade and settlementsin the South Sea. A squadron of ships destined forthis service was placed under the command of captainGeorge Anson, in November, 1 739 ; but delays wereimprudently allowed to take place in fitting out thearmament, and the ships remained nine months in portfor want of men. But at length orders were issued forcollecting 500 invalids from among the out-pensionersof Chelsea college, to complete the manning of thesquadron. The most unhappy consequences attendedupon this singularly harsh and unjust proceeding. Agreat number of the invalids deserted : of those whoremained, the majority were above sixty, and manyabove seventy years of age. A more moving spectaclecould not be imagined than the embarkation of theseunhappy old men. And to complete the picture of thiscruel measure, it is only requisite to add, that of allthose veteran warriors who entered the South Sea, notone lived to revisit his native land.The squadron was at length ready for sea, and sailedfrom St. Helen's road in the beginning of September,1740. They consisted of six ships of war, mountingin all 236 guns, and two store ships. The Centurion,in which the commodore embarked, was a fine ship ofsixty guns; the Gloucester and Severn had fifty each.But this remarkable voyage, of which an excellentaccount was written by the chaplain to the Centurion,did not extend the limits of geographical knowledge ;and is mentioned here only as forming a part of thatseries of expeditions to the South Sea, which, thoughthey had not maritime discovery for their object, yettended collaterally to promote it, by the range and freedomCHAP. XX. VOYAGES TO THE SOUTH SEA. 327which they gave to voyages through the ocean. The terrorsof the passage round Cape Horn are vividly portrayedby the historian of the expedition. Barren and desolateas the Tierra del Fuego appears, yet Staten Land, on theother side of Le Maire's Strait, far surpasses it in thewildness and horror of its appearance. It seems entirelyto be composed of inaccessible rocks, terminating in avast number of sharp points, which tower to a prodigiousheight, and are most of them covered with everlastingsnow. The hills are divided by deep chasms, nearlyperpendicular, as if the country had been torn asunderby earthquakes : and every outline contributes to thesavage and gloomy character of the coast.They had scarcely cleared the Straits of Le Maire,when a storm ushered in such a succession of tempestuousweather as surprised the oldest and most experiencedmariners on board, and raised such a prodigious sea asfilled them with continual terror. " The Centurion wasnothing on the raging waves, and was tossed and bandiedabout as if she had been a small wherry." Manyof the men were hurt, and all sickened by the tossing ofthe ships ; the crews were also dreadfully afflicted withthe scurvy: so that the history of this squadron, whilelabouring to get round Cape Horn, presents a long andmelancholy scene of extreme affliction and distress. Theold men died rapidly ; wounds which they had receivedin their early days, and which had been healed, many ofthem forty, and in one instance fifty years, now brokeout afresh in consequence of the scurvy, and appearedas if they had never been healed. Two of the armedvessels were unable to effect their passage into the SouthSea ; the other ships were separated by the storm, anddid not again join company till they arrived at JuanFernandez. The Gloucester did not reach the anchorageof that island till the 23d of July ; having been continuallyunder sail in a stormy ocean 146 days, or fivemonths, from the time of her quitting Port St. Julian, —a circumstance unparalleled in the history of navigation.All the veterans on board the Gloucester had died duringy 4328 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.this distressing voyage ; and while landing the sick menfrom the Centurion at Juan Fernandez, no less thantwelve died in the boats.Notwithstanding the reduction effected in the strengthof the squadron by sickness and bad weather, it cruisedagainst the Spaniards with perfect success. The townof Payta was plundered ; a number of valuable prizestaken ; and, at last, Anson, lying near Manilla, engagedand captured the galleon of Acapulco, having on boardan immense treasure in merchandise and specie. TheCenturion lay some time at Titian, one of the Ladroness,which is celebrated in the narrative of the voyage as aterrestrial paradise.At length, after an absence of three years and ninemonths, the Centurion returned alone to England, havingcircumnavigated the earth. Two of the armed ships,as has been already observed, never entered the SouthSea. Two others, and a victualler, which effected thepassage, were afterwards broken up as being no longerserviceable. The other victualler had been dismissed inthe Atlantic ; and the Wager frigate, being parted fromthe commodore by a gale of wind on first entering theSouth Sea, was wrecked on the coast of Chili : and itis not compatible with the plan, nor does it he withinthe limits, of this work, to recount the singular adventuresof the crew, many of whom perished ; while theremainder, after a long series of sufferings, crimes, andunparalleled exertions, returned to their native country.CHAP. XXI. DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS. 329CHAP. XXI.DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS.FIRST INTERCOURSE BETWEEN RUSSIA AND SIBERIA. THEPROMYSHLENI. TRADE CARRIED ON BY STROGONOFF. AdventuresOF YERMAC. HE DEFEATS KUTCHAM KHAN.BECOMES MASTER OF SIBERIA. OFFERS HIS DOMINIONS TOTHE CZAR. HIS PROPOSALS WELL RECEIVED. YERMACDEFEATED AND SLAIN. SIBERIA LOST. RECOVERED BY THERUSSIANS. THEY APPROACH THE AMUR. EXPEDITION OPFOJARKOF. FIRST COLLISION WITH THE CHINESE. HostilitiesBETWEEN THE TWO EMPIRES. TREATY OF Merchants.RUSSIAN EMBASSY TO PEKIN. MISCONDUCT OFTHE RUSSIANS. THEY ARE EXPELLED FROM CHINA.TREATY' OF KIACHTA. INTELLIGENCE OBTAINED BY MICHAELSTADUCHIN. THE TSHUKTZKI DISCOVERED. REMARKABLEVOYAGE OF Simon DESHNIEW. HE PASSES FROM THE ICYSEA TO BEHRING's STRAITS. SUFFERS SHIPWRECK. EstablishesA TRADE ON THE COAST. FATE OF HIS Companions.CONQUEST OF KAMTSCHATKA. TARAS STADUCHIN.EXPEDITION OF POPOW AGAINST THE TSHUKTZKI. — HERECEIVES INTELLIGENCE RESPECTING AMERICA.Russia in the beginning of the sixteenth century waslittle better than an inland kingdom ; the small extentof sea-coast which it had upon the north offering atthat time no means of intercourse with foreign nations.The arrival of Richard Chancelor at Archangel waslooked upon in Russia as a wonderful event ; and thecommercial privileges accorded by the czar to the Englishseaman were intended as a reward for his havingdiscovered a communication between the North Sea andthe Atlantic Ocean. The solution of the question respectinga north-east passage would have been of thegreatest importance to Russia, if that empire had beenin a condition to carry on foreign commerce ; but theRussian empire, at present so powerful, was too feebletwo centuries ago to support or feel an interest in massMODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.time expeditions. Even in the beginning of theseventeenth century, nothing was known of the northerncoast of Siberia beyond the river Yenisei. The countrywas unquestionably often traversed by private huntersand adventurers ; but their local information was neverdrawn together or concentrated in such a way as to servematerially the interests of geography.In a country where population is thin and society illorganised, conquest is sure to follow discovery. TheRussians seem to have had the same advantage overthe wild tribes or nations dwelling to the east of them,which the Spaniards possessed over the natives of America.In 1558, the czar of Muscovy assumed the titleof lord of Siberia; but this name did not then embraceso wide an extent of dominion as at present. The firstRussian conquerors were private hunters and merchants,who usually reduced to subjection the feeble tribes withwhom they traded for furs. As justice can hardly existwhere there is no equality, the Russian adventurers neverdreamed of right in their dealings with the Siberiansavages ; their principles of action were uniformly asselfish as they were cruel. The Promyshleni, as theseadventurers were called, are styled in a national proverbthe harbingers of the Cossacks.About the middle of the sixteenth century, a merchantof Archangel, named Anima StrogonofF, carried on a tradeof barter with the inhabitants of the remote parts ofSiberia, who brought every year to the above-mentionedtown large quantities of the choicest furs : on their returnthey were accompanied by Russian agents, who tradedwith the natives. This traffic was carried on for severalyears, during which StrogonofF amassed a considerablefortune. The czar, perceiving the advantage that mightaccrue to the empire from extending this commerce, determinedon enlarging the communication already openedwith Siberia. He accordingly sent troops into thatcountry, by the routes which had hitherto been followedby the Russian merchants. These troops do not seemto have penetrated farther than the western branch of theCHAP. XXI. DISCOVERIES OP THE RUSSIANS. 331river Toby; and the chief result of the expedition wasthe extorting from some Tatar tribes an annual tributeof sables. StrogonofF in the mean time obtained fromthe czar large grants of land, on which he founded colonies; and one of these, not long afterwards, affordedrefuge to the celebrated adventurer to whom Russiaowes the subjection of Siberia.The czar Ivan Basilievitz extended his dominions tothe Caspian Sea, and established a commercial intercoursewith Persia and Bulgaria. His merchants, however,were frequently pillaged by the predatory tribes inhabitingthe banks of the Don and the Volga. Troops were accordinglysent against these robbers, who were attacked androuted; part of them were slain, the rest escaped byflight. Among the latter were a corps of 6000 Cossacksunder the command of Yermac Timovief. This daringadventurer, driven from his usual haunts, retired withhis followers to Oral, one of the Russian settlementsrecently planted by StrogonofF; and being hospitablyentertained by the merchants, he behaved himself witha moderation which could hardly have been expectedfrom his previous habits.The restlessness of his genius, however, and the necessityof employing his retainers, made him cast hiseyes about for a proper object of attack; and he at lengthresolved to fall upon Kutcham Khan, a powerful Tatarprince, whose principal residence was at Sibi, a smallfortress on the river Irish, not far from the presenttown of Tobolsk. His first attempt was unsuccessful ;but in 1579 he set out upon a second expedition : hisfollowers amounted to 5000 men, adventurers inuredto hardships and regardless of danger. They had beensupplied by the Russians with ammunition and firearms;but before Yermac reached his enemies, a tediousmarch of eighteen months had reduced his army to 1 500active men. With this handful he did not hesitate toattack Kutcham Khan, whom he routed in successiveengagements ; and the Tatars were so :truck with thegallant intrepidity and brilliant exploits of the Cossack,332 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.that they submitted to his authority without hesitation,and acquiesced in the payment of the usual tribute.Thus he was suddenly exalted from the station of a chiefof banditti to the rank of a sovereign prince.But Yermac soon became convinced of the precariousnessof his situation ; his followers were few, the Tatarswere turbulent and rebellious, and it was absolutelynecessary for him to relinquish his dominion or to callin foreign assistance. He chose the latter alternative,and offered his new acquisitions to the czar of Muscovy,upon condition of receiving immediate and effectualsupport. The application was accompanied with a presentof the choicest and most valuable furs. His ambassadorwas received at Moscow with the strongestmarks of satisfaction. The czar extolled the servicesof Yermac, pardoned all his former offences, and asatestimony of his former favour sent to him a furrobe that he had worn himself, which was the greatestmark of distinction that could be bestowed upona subject. To these were added a sum of money,and a promise of a speedy and effectual assistance.When the promised reinforcements arrived, Yermac followedup bis plans of aggrandisement with increasedactivity, and gained many bloody victories over theneighbouring princes. But at length Kutcham Khancontrived to fall upon him in the dead of night, whenhis Russian auxiliaries, fatigued with a long march,negligently reposed without suspicion of danger. TheRussians were cut to pieces almost without opposition ;and Yermac, in his flight, perished in the river Irish.On his death the Russians evacuated Siberia, but neverthelesshe must be looked upon as the founder of theirempire in that vast country. He discovered new andpracticable routes through those uncultivated regions; heproved that the Tatars were an easy prey, and that a bandof well-armed troops could easily master their scatteredand unorganised population. Three hundred Russianswere soon after sent into Siberia, who erected the fortressesof Tobolsk, Sungur, and Tara, and easily reco-CHAP. XXI. DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS. 333vere the whole territory which had acknowledged theauthority of Yermac. This success was only the forerunnerof still greater acquisitions : the Russians pushedtheir conquests far and wide. Wherever they appeared,the Tatars were either reduced or exterminated, newtowns were built, and colonies were planted on all sides.Before a century had well elapsed, that vast tract ofcountry, now called Siberia, which stretches from theconfines of Europe to the Eastern Ocean, and from theFrozen Sea to the frontiers of China, was annexed tothe Russian dominions. A greater extent of territorywould, perhaps, have been added towards the south, ifthe power of China had not interposed.The great river Amur, which rises in the heart ofTatary, and, flowing eastward above thirty degrees inlongitude, discharges itself in the sea in about 53° northlatitude, was first heard of by the Russians about theyear l6'3J)- In that year a Russian or Cossack, namedKupilof, is said to have obtained a sight of the easternsea-coast. Four years later, the Russians attempted torender tributary the Tatar nations inhabiting its banks.Wailed Pojarkof, who commanded this expedition, departedfrom Jakutzk, a town lately built on the banksof the Lena, in July, l6'43, with a force not exceeding132 men. The Tatars, not suspecting hostile intentions,received the strangers with their accustomed hospitality; but on hearing their insolent demands, theyceased to supply them with provisions, and many of theRussians perished in consequence. Pojarkof neverthelesspersevered in his undertaking, and followed thecourse of the Amur to the place where it enters theeastern sea; thence he went northward along the seacoast;and in the year l6'46 returned to Jakutzk, by aroute very different from that which he had pursued ingoing. In the report which he made of his expedition,he stated that the whole country near the Amur couldcertainly be reduced under the dominion of Russia,provided the government would employ 300 men forthat purpose, and build three ostrogs, or forts. Hence it834 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.may be concluded that the midland regions of Asia wereat that time as thinly peopled as its northern parts. Inconformitywith the advice of Pojarkof, the Russiangovernment despatched, in 1651, a force of about 300men, who, having taken the town of Basin situatedon the Amur, embarked in boats to descend the river.They had not proceeded far before they met with afortified place belonging to the Auri, a Tatar tribe.The Russians captured the place with little loss ; andhere it was that in their encroachments on Tatary theyfirst came in contact with the Chinese. Some merchantsof that nation were in the fort; and the day afterit was taken, a Chinese officer, habited in a silken robe,came to pay his respects to the Russian commander ; hemade a long harangue, the purport of which seemed tobe, that the Chinese desired to live in peace and amitywith the Russians. The Chinese, however, also hadtheir designs on the tribes inhabiting the Amur, andhostilities soon broke out between the rival empires. Inthe first conflicts the Chinese were worsted ; but asthey became better acquainted with the use of fire-armsthey obtained a manifest superiority over the Russians,who opposed them with feeble forces. The great valueof the trade with China, where the Siberian furs areheld in extraordinary estimation, together with the difficultyof carrying on a war in so remote a quarter oftheir empire, disposed the Russians to accommodatedifferences with the Chinese. Negotiations were accordinglyentered into, to fix the common boundary of thetwo empires, and to establish their commercial intercourseon a firm basis. The conferences were heldunder tents in an open plain near the town of Merchants,where the treaty was signed and sealed by the plenipotentiariesof the two courts. By the first and secondarticles of this treaty, which first checked the progressof the Russian arms in those parts, the south-easternboundaries of the Russian empire were formed by aridge of mountains stretching north of the Amur, fromthe Sea of Ochotsk, to the source of a small river calledCHAP. XXI. DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS. 335Gorbitza ; then by that river to its influx into the Amur;and lastly, by the Argue, from its junction with theShilka up to its source. The Russians proposed theriver Amur for a common boundary; and, had this pointbeen conceded, the deep windings of that river wouldhave brought them close upon the northern provinces ofChina. By the fifth article, reciprocity of trade wasgranted to the subjects of the two empires, who wereprovided with passports from their respective courts.By this treaty, which was signed on the 27th ofAugust, l689, the Russians lost the navigation of theriver Amur ; the entrance to which, with a large territoryon its northern banks, was ceded to the Chinese.The importance of this loss was not at that time understood,and has only been felt since the discovery ofKamtschatka and the islands between Asia and America,the produce of which might have easily been transportedby means of that river to the interior and westernparts of Siberia. Matters being thus accommodated withthe Chinese, the trade carried on by the Russians withthat people rapidly increased. Peter the Great, with aview of enlarging this advantageous commerce, sent, inI692, Island Ides, a Dutchman in his service, to Pekin,who requested and obtained that the liberty of trading toChina, which by the late treaty had been granted toindividuals, should be extended to caravans. In consequenceof this arrangement, a caravanseray was allottedin Pekin for the reception of the Russians, and all theirexpenses during their continuance in that capital weredefrayed by the emperor of China. Private merchantswere allowed at the same time not only at Pekin, butalso at the head quarters of the Mongols. A kind ofannual fair was held in their camp by the Russian andChinese merchants. This rendezvous soon became ascene of riot and confusion, and repeated complaintswere transmitted to the Chinese emperor of the drunkennessand misconduct of the Russians. The disorderlyconduct for which the Russians in Pekin had becomenotorious added weight to these complaints. Other336 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.circumstances contributed to increase the displeasure ofthe Chinese; and at length an order was issued, in 1722,for the total expulsion of the Russians from the Chineseand Mongol territories : these orders were rigorouslyexecuted, and all intercourse between the two nationsimmediately ceased. Affairs continued in this state till1727, when Ragusinski was despatched as envoy toPekin to adjust the existing differences between the twocourts. He succeeded in his mission ; and by the treatyof Kiachta, which he concluded, the boundary of thetwo nations was confirmed and continued. With respectto commerce, the most important regulations were asfollows : — A caravan was allowed to go to Pekin everythree years, on condition of its not consisting of morethan 200 persons; during their residence in that capitaltheir expenses were no longer to be defrayed by theemperor of China ; notice was to be sent to the Chineseimmediately on their arrival at the frontiers,where an officer was to meet and accompany them toPekin. The Russians at the same time obtained permissionto build a church in that city, and to send afew scholars to reside there for the purpose of learningthe Chinese tongue, — a valuable privilege, from whichEuropean learning has derived less advantage than mighthave been expected. This treaty, called the Treaty ofKiachta, was, on the 14th of June, 1728, concluded andratified by count Ragusinski and three Chinese plenipotentiaries,upon the spot where Kiachta was afterwardsbuilt.The progress of the Russians in the north of Siberiawas more gradual, and not marked by any events whichserve as epochs in the history of conquest. Their firstestablishment on the Lena was formed in 1636. Therivers Jena, Indigirka, Alaska, and Kolyma, were successivelydiscovered. In 16'44, a Cossack, named MichaelStaduchin, built a fort on the last-named river. On hisreturn to Jakutzk he brought back the report, that in theicy sea there was a large island, extending along thehorizon from the river Jena to the Kolyma, part ofCHAP. XXI. DISCOVERIES OP THE RUSSIANS. 837which land might be seen in clear weather from thecontinent ; and that the people who inhabited that partof the coast passed over the ice in the winter time tothis land in one day with rein-deer. He also said thathe had heard of a great river named Pogitsha, threeor four days' sail to the east of the Kolyma. The firstvoyage eastward from this river was made in 1646 bya company of adventurers ; they found a clear channelbetween the land and the ice, which was firmlygrounded on the shelving coast. After two days' sail theyanchored in a bay, where they met a people calledTshuktzki, with whom they entered into traffic. Neitherparty could understand the other, except by signs, andthey were mutually suspicious. The mode in whichthey carried on their traffic resembles that which hasbeen related from the time of Herodotus to the presentday respecting some nations of the interior of Africa,The Russians placed their merchandise on the strand,and then retreated: the Tshuktzki then took what pleasedthem, and in return left sea-horse teeth, both whole andin carved pieces. From this place the Russians returnedhome.The sea-horse teeth obtained in this adventure werea sufficient inducement to prosecute discoveries to thenorth-east. In the year 1648 seven vessels departedfrom the Kolyma, under the command of the CossackSemen Deshniew. One of the chief objects of this expeditionwas to discover the river Anadir, which theRussians were informed flowed through a well-peopledcountry. Of the seven vessels fitted out for this expedition,four were soon after wrecked. The voyages ofthe other three are among the most remarkable whichoccur in the history of geography. It appears that theyactually passed from the Kolyma through Bearing'sStraits to the mouth of the Anadir ; but the journal ofthe voyage is imperfect, and it is not manifest whetherthey circumnavigated the north-eastern portion of Siberia,or drew their vessels overland across that greatpromontory, the delineation of which is left imperfect in338 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.all modern charts. Thus the most interesting part ofthe voyage is still involved in mystery. Deshniew'snarrative begins at the Great Cape of the Tshuktzki,which is evidently Cape East in Bearing's Strait. " Itis situated' he says, "between the north and northeast,and turns circularly towards the river Anadir. Overagainst the cape are two islands, upon which were seensome men of the Tshuktzki nation, who had holes piercedin their lips, through which were stuck pieces of theteeth of the sea-horse." It is now known that the mendistinguished by these ornaments were Americans.Deshniew's vessel arrived alone in the Bay of Anadir,where it was cast on shore and wrecked a little to thesouth of the river. His company consisted of onlytwenty-five men. They wandered ten weeks through acountry destitute of wood and inhabitants before theyarrived at the banks of a river. On ascending it theymet with a tribe called Anauli, whom, with little or noprovocation, they exterminated; an act of barbarismwhich added to their distress.Staduchin in the mean time ascertained that thePogitsha River was also called the Anadir, and that theshortest and most certain route to it from the Kolymawas by land. Accordingly, in the spring of 1650, heset forward on this journey ; and in April arrived on thebanks of the Anadir, where, to the surprise and pleasureof both parties, he found Deshniew and his company.The discovery of this route by land put an end to theattempts to sail round the country of the Tshuktzki.Deshniew was active in bringing to light all the advantagesof his discoveries. He descended the Anadirin boats, and discovered a korea, or great sand bank,extending in the sea opposite to its mouth. It was theresting-place of multitudes of sea-horses, and thus furnishedhim with the means of carrying on a very profitablecommerce. He built a ship to carry to Jakutzkthe tribute and the ivory which he had collected ; andthis circumstance tends strongly to confirm the beliefthat he had actually navigated the whole way from theCHAP. XXI. DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS. 33QKolyma to the Anadir. In his expeditions to the korea,he became acquainted with the tribes of the Korjaki,who dwell on the south side of the river ; and he foundamong them a woman of Jakutzk, who had belonged tohis former associate, Jedot Alexis. From her helearned that his companions had died of the scurvy, orindisputes among themselves and with the natives.The Russians were at first held in great veneration, andWere almost deified by the inhabitants ; who thoughtthat no human power could hurt them, until they quarrelledamong themselves, and blood was seen to flowfrom the wounds which they gave each other.It is probable that the Russians received accounts ofKamtschatka as soon as they had established themselveson the Anadir. But it was not till the year I696 thata troop of sixteen Cossacks penetrated so far as the riversince called the River of Kamtschatka. They plunderedthe villages under the pretence of exacting tribute ; and,among the articles they carried off from the Kamtscha-dales, were some writings in an unknown language,afterwards ascertained to be Japanese. In the followingyear a Cossack officer named Wolodimer Atlassow undertookto conquer Kamtschatka. From Jakutzk hetravelled overland to the Anadir. He seems to haveproceeded by a circuitous route, and remarks, that betweenthe Kolyma and the Anadir there are two greatcapes or promontories ; the first, or most western ofwhich, can never be doubled by any vessel, from thequantity of ice that lines its shore at every season ofthe year. The Kamtschadales were unable to offer anyresistance to the Russians. They are described to be ofsmaller stature than the nations who dwell to the northof them, having great beards and small faces : theylived underground in winter ; and during the summermonths in cabins elevated above the ground on posts,to which they ascended by ladders. To preserve theiranimal food they buried it in the earth, wrapped inleaves, until it was quite putrid : they cooked it in waterin earthen or wooden vessels, which they heated byz 2340 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.throwing in red-hot stones : " and their cookery," saysAtlassow, " smelt so strong, that a Russian could notsupport the odour of it."From the Kamtschadales the Russians received intelligencerespecting the Kurili Islands, to the south ofKamtschatka. They learned that beyond the islandsseen from the continent there were others, the inhabitantsof which were reported to live in walled towns ;and that vessels had come from them with people clothedin silks and cottons, and having porcelain ware. Therewas also found living among the Kamtschadales a nativeof a southern country, who had been shipwrecked onthe coast of Kamtschatka two years before. This manhad small mustachios, black hair, and his countenancewas thought to resemble that of a Greek. He brokeout into tears and lamentations on seeing images withthe Russians, as they brought to his mind recollectionsof his native country. From all these circumstancesit was concluded he was an Indian, or a Japanese. Thefirst influence of the Russians on the Kamtschadales, likethat of the Europeans on the Americans, was of an unhappykind. The feeble remnant of those simple tribeswho survived the conquest of the country appear tohave degenerated rapidly.Some years after the expedition of Deshniew, a merchantnamed Taras Staduchin followed in his trackround the northern coast. He sailed from the riverKolyma in a small vessel to make discovery round theGreat Cape of theTshuktzki ; being unable to double it,he crossed over on foot to the opposite side, where hebuilt other vessels : the isthmus which he crossed isrepresented as being extremely narrow. Of the navigatorswho pretend to have examined the north-easternportion of Siberia, Staduchin gives the most clear andcomplete account of the course he pursued ; but it isevident that he left unsurveyed a neck of land runningnorthward, of which he did not know the termination.The Russians at length turned their arms towards thecountry of the Tshuktzki, which it had been found im-chap.XXI. DISCOVERIES OP THE RUSSIANS. 341possible to circumnavigate, and dangerous to cross fromthe ferocity of its inhabitants. Their assistance was imploredby the tributary tribes against that warlike nation :they bravely faced the Russians, whom nevertheless theywere unable to resist; and when taken prisoners, killedone another, preferring death to ignominious captivity.The first conflicts with these bold savages took placein 1 701 ; but ten years afterwards a Cossack named PeterSin Popow, with two attendants, was dispatched to visittheir country, to exhort them to submission, and to prevailon them, if possible, to deliver hostages. He was unableto succeed in the chief object of his mission ; but on hisreturn he gave the following account of the country andits inhabitants : —The Tshuktzki Nos was destitute of trees. On theshores near the Nos were found sea horse teeth in greatnumbers : the Tshuktzki, in their solemn engagements,invoked the sun to guarantee their performance. Someamong them have flocks of tame rein-deer, which obligesthem often to change their place of residence ; but thosewho have no rein-deer inhabit the coasts on both sides ofthe Nos, near banks where the sea-horses are used tocome, on which and on fish they mostly subsist. Theyhave habitations hollowed in the earth. Opposite to theNos an island, it is said, may be seen at a great distance,which is called, by the Tshuktzki, the Great Country.(This is unquestionably a reference to America.) Theinhabitants of that land pierce holes through their cheeks,in which they insert large ornaments made of pieces cutfrom the teeth of the sea-horse. These people have a differentlanguage from the Tshuktzki, with whom they havebeen at war from time immemorial. They use bows andarrows, as do the Tshuktzki. Popow saw ten men of thiscountry with their cheeks pierced who were prisoners tothe Tshuktzki. In summer they can go to this land inone day in their boats or bazars, which are framed ofwhalebone and covered with seal-skins. In winter theycan cross over in one day in their sledges with good reindeer.On the Nos were seen no other wild animals thanz 3342 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.red foxes and wolves ; and, from the scarcity of wood,these were not numerous. But in the other land (theGreat Country) were said to be many animals, as sables,martens, and foxes of various kinds, bears, sea-otters,and others. The inhabitants there also have large herdsof tame deer." According to the computation of Popow,the number of theTshuktzki inhabiting the Nos, reckoningthose who have rein-deer and those who live on thecoast, was at least 2000 men. The people of the GreatCountry were thought to be three times as numerous.To go from the fort of the Anadir to the Nos with ladenrein-deer, and consequently travelling slow, was reckonedby theTshuktzki a journey of ten weeks ; but this supposesthat they are not detained in the way by storms,which are frequently accompanied with whirlwinds ofsnow." — A few years after Popow's journey (in 1718),some Tshuktzki of the Nos went to the fort of Anadir tomake their submission, and added a few particulars tothe information which he had collected. Opposite tothe Nos (they said) is an island of a moderate size, andwithout trees: in their bazars they go in half a day tothis island; and beyond it is a great continent, whichmay be seen from the island in clear weather. In thatcountry are large forests abounding in game.CHAP. XXII. DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS. 34s3CHAP. XXII.DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS.DESIRE OF RUSSIA TO COMMUNICATE WITH AMERICA. ExpeditionDESIGNED BY THE CZAR PETER. HIS INSTRUCTIONS.FIRST VOYAGE OF BEHRING. ITS RESULT. AMERICAMARKED IN RUSSIAN MAPS. EXPEDITION OF SCHESTAKOFF.—HIS FATE. EXTRAORDINARY MARCH OF PAULUTSKI.- VOYAGE OF KRUPISHEF. HE DISCOVERS AMERICA.—EFFECTS OF THE DISCOVERY. ATTEMPTS TO NAVIGATE THEICY SEA. JAPANESE VESSEL WRECKED ON KAMTSCHATKA.SPANGBERG VISITS YEDZO. BEHAVIOUR OF THE JAPANESETO WALTON. SECOND VOYAGE OF BEHRING AND TSCHIRIKOF.THEY ARE SEPARATED. BEHRING REACHES AMERICA.INTERCOURSE WITH THE NATIVES. DISTRESS OF THE Russians.THE SHIP CAST AWAY. THEY WINTER ON A DesertISLAND. DEATH OF BEHRING. THE REMAINS OF HISCOMPANY ESCAPE. VOYAGE OF TSCHIRIKOF. DISCOVERTOF THE ALEUTIAN ISLANDS. SETTLEMENTS OF THE Russians.CONCLUSION. 5Russia, continually endeavouring to enlarge towardsthe east an empire already too extensive, pushed her discoverieson that side as far as the extreme frontier of Asia;and did not relinquish the hope of one day adding to hervast dominions in the old world some portion of thenew continent. Nor did these hopes appear destitute offoundation. Her Cossack emissaries could not in the endfail to reach America : for whether the two continentswere united to the north and formed a continued landorwere separated by a strait, no obstacles could be imaginedcapable of forming an insuperable barrier to theprogress of these hardy and intrepid adventurers.Yet it could not be expected that hunters wholly unacquaintedwith the art of navigation, and who onlytempted fortune at sea, from time to time, merely forz 4344 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.the purpose of hunting on the islands near the coast ofKamtschatka, would be able to procure such intelligenceas should leave no doubt respecting the relative situationof Asia and America. An ignorant hunter might easilyland on the latter continent, and, finding there the sameanimals and productions as on the opposite shores ofAsia and the intermediate islands, might return withoutbeing aware of his discovery. No certain informationcould be obtained in this respect but by a concerted expedition,entrusted to the direction of an experiencedseaman. Peter the Great, to whose ambition the halfof a great continent did not seem sufficient, and whoengaged warmly in every grand and liberal project, drewup with his own hand, a few days before his death, theinstructions for a voyage, whose object was to ascertainwhether Asia was separated from America by a strait.The instructions of the emperor were expressed as follows: —1. To construct at Kamschatka, or other commodiousplace on the Eastern Ocean, one or two vessels.2. With them to examine the coasts towards thenorth and towards the east, to see whether they werenot contiguous with America, since their end was notknown.3. To see whether there was any harbour belongingto Europeans in those parts. To keep an exact journalof all that should be discovered, with which the commanderwas to return to St. Petersburg.The czar was at first desirous that the whole of thenavigation along the north coast of Asia should at thesame time be ascertained : for which purpose twovessels were ordered to sail from Archangel to the IcySea. But this attempt was not successful : one of thevessels was hemmed in by the ice, and thereby hinderedfrom advancing ; the other was never heard of afterwards.The officers selected to command the easternexpedition were, captain Vitus Bearing, a Dane by birth,and Alexoi Tshirikof, a Russian officer. Bearing was acaptain commandant, or commodore, in the RussianCHAP. XXII. DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS. 345navy, and had given many proofs of his zeal and abilityin the service of the czar.Bearing departed from Petersburghh as soon as he hadreceived his orders. The officers and mariners whowere to serve under him, with the shipwrights and otherartificers, had likewise to travel from Petersburghh to theremotest parts of Siberia. It was proposed to build onevessel at Ochotzk, in which to transport the whole companyand their stores to Kamtschatka, where anothervessel was to be constructed, so that they might proceedon their voyage of discovery with two vessels in company.These preparations required much time as wellas labour, so that above three years elapsed before theywere completed.On the 14th of July, 1728, the expedition sailed fromthe river of Kamtschatka. In about three weeks theyreached the latitude 6*4° 30', where eight men camerowing towards the vessels in a leathern boat, and demandedof the Russians whence they came and whatwas their object. One of them swam to the ship, uponseal-skins filled with wind. They said that they wereTshuktzki, and were conversed with by means of a Kor-jak interpreter. They pointed out a small island to thenorth, which the Russians afterwards named the Isle ofSt. Lawrence. Bearing did not proceed beyond lat.67° 18', because, as no land was discernible to the northor east, he conceived that he had ascertained the separationof Asia and America, which was the sole object ofhis mission. He had, in reality, advanced about a degreeand a quarter beyond the most eastern point ofAsia, and, without knowing it, had sailed through thestrait which separates the old and new worlds. Posterityhas since equitably imposed upon it the name ofBearing's Strait. The same navigators undertook asecond voyage the following year, but without being ableto obtain any new information.It is remarkable that Bearing, in these voyages, didnot once discern the coast of America ; nor does heseem to have shaped his course for discoveries towards34:6 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.the east. Yet the existence of land in that direction wasnot an obscure tradition ; it was marked even-in manymaps drawn according to the best information whichcould be at that time procured. A colonel of Cossacks,named Schestakoff, published a chart at Petersburghh, in1626, in which was placed an island in the Icy Sea,two days' journey distant from the mouth of the riverKolyma ; and beyond this island, two days' journeyfarther to the north, was placed a coast designated bythe name of the Large Country. Another chart, madeby an inhabitant of Jakutzk, represented two islands tothe east of the Tshuktzki country, the farthest of themabove two days' journey from the main land : and beyondthese islands was marked a large country full offorests and abounding in game ; and whose inhabitants,it is noticed, were called by the Tshuktzki KitchinEljoet.While Bearing was on his northern voyage, colonelSchestakoff proposed to the Russian government " to reducethe Tshuktzki people ; to discover the extent oftheir country ; and to examine the Schantarian Isles."His views coincided with those of the government, andin 1727 he was appointed to the command of the forceswhich were thought sufficient to carry his designs intoexecution. Dmitri Paulutski, a captain of dragoons,was joined with him in independent command, and 400Cossacks were placed at their disposal, besides the garrisonsthat lay within the jurisdiction of Jakutsk.Schestakoff marched to the head of the Gulf ofPushing, where he met the whole force of the Tshuktzkination. His little troop did not exceed 150 men ; neverthelesshe resolved on giving battle. He was killed by anarrow in the engagement that ensued, and his troopswere totally routed. Paulutski had in the mean time collecteda force of 215 Russians and 220 friendly Siberians,for an expedition into the country of the Tshuktzki.He departed from the fort on the Anadir on the 12thof March, 1731 ; proceeding first north-east, then east,and afterwards directly to the north, till, at the end ofClap. XXII. DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS. 347two months, he arrived at the Icy Sea, near the mouthof a considerable river. Again setting forward, he proceededfor fifteen days along the sea-coast ; the greaterpart of the time upon the ice, and sometimes at so greata distance from the land that the mouths of the riverswere not discernible. At length, on the 7th of June,he met a large army of the Tshuktzki. He summonedthem to submit themselves to the Russian empire. Theyrefused, were attacked and defeated. The Russiansrested for eight days after the battle, and then continuedtheir march eastward. They passed two rivers flowinginto the Icy Sea, and fought two more battles with theTschuktzki with the like success. The last of theseengagements took place on the 14th of July. Amongthe slain was found a man whose upper lip was piercedthrough for the purpose of inserting carved pieces ofsea-horses' teeth. From this ornament, it may be conjecturedthat he was an American. Paulutski and hismen crossed overland from the Icy Sea to the shores ofthe Eastern Ocean, not at a narrow isthmus, but at aconsiderable distance from the sea; leaving to the lefthand a projection of the continent of indefinite extent.When they came near that cape which was supposed tobe the most northerly part of the continent seen byBearing, they turned inland, and reached the fort on theAnadir on the 21st of October. This extraordinarymarch, round the remotest corner of Siberia, partly onthe Icy Sea, and partly through the country of a courageousand determined enemy, occupied six months. Thepatience and hardihood of Russians alone could haveaccomplished such an undertaking.In the mean time a Cossack named Krupishef had receivedorders to equip a vessel, and to sail round Kamt-schatka to the country of the Tshuktzki, in order to cooperatewith the land forces of Schestakoff and Paulutski.Krupishef sailed accordingly, and stayed some time onthe coast of the Tshuktzki without receiving any intelligencerespecting the Russian commanders. " A gale ofwind forced him from the point of land at which348 MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.Bearing's voyage had terminated: he steered towardsthe east, and found, first an island, and afterwards acountry of great extent. As soon as they had sight ofthis land, a man came to them in a canoe like to thoseof the Greenlanders. They could only understand fromhim that he was an inhabitant of a large country wherethere were many animals and forests. The Russiansfollowed the coast of this land two whole days withoutbeing able to approach it, when a storm came on, andthey returned to Kamtschatka."This voyage of Krupishef completed the discovery ofBearing's Strait, and proved the proximity of the Asiaticand American continents. It encouraged the Russiangovernment to continue those researches. Bearing, andthe officers who had served under him in his northernvoyage, received marks of distinction, and a variety ofplans were formed for expeditions and enterprises bysea. One object proposed was to ascertain, if possible,an entire navigation from Archangel to Kamtschatka :another, of which Bearing himself was to undertakethe execution, was to discover the exact distance betweenKamtschatka and the coast of America in the sameparallel. The first of these objects was never attained.Many expeditions were fitted out to examine the northerncoast of Siberia, but they all had an unfortunate result.The navigation from the Yenisei to the Lena has neverbeen accomplished : many brave men have perished inthe attempt to effect it ; but the Taimura promontory,which stretches to the seventy-eighth degree of latitude,and is always environed by an immense barrier of ice,seems to interpose an insurmountable obstacle to navigation.About the time when these various plans were inagitation, an extraordinary accident gave a fresh impulseto the geographical ardour of the Russian government.A Japanese vessel, laden with silks, cotton, rice, andpepper, was forced by stress of weather to a distancefrom the land ; and after being tossed for some months,it is said, at sea, was wrecked on the exterior or easternCHAP. XXII. DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS. 349coast of Kamtschatka. The crew got to land, and savedthe most valuable part of the cargo. The Cossacks, stationednear the place, soon came to the wreck ; but theirexpectations not being satisfied with the presents theyreceived, they fell upon the Japanese, and murderedthem all but two — an old man and a boy of eleven yearsold. The Cossack officer was afterwards punished forthis crime ; and the two surviving Japanese arrived inPetersburghh in 1732. This affair drew the attention ofthe government towards Japan, an intercourse with whichcountry had long been coveted by the Russians ; butnow it occurred to them, for the first time, that it wouldbe advisable to ascertain the relative geographical positionof the two countries.In 173J), captain Martin Spangberg, who had accompaniedBearing in his voyage to the north, and lieutenant"William "Walton, sailed on an expedition, the chief purposeof which was to ascertain the exact situation ofJapan with respect to Siberia. On leaving the KuriliIslands, they were separated by tempestuous weather.Spangberg arrived at the coast of Japan, in latitude38° 41' N. Great numbers of Japanese vessels wereseen sailing along the coast ; the country seemed wellcultivated, and crowded with villages. The Russianswere afraid to go on shore, and continued to keep undersail. On one day seventy-nine fishing-boats werecounted near Spangberg's vessel. It was remarked that,instead of iron, the Japanese use brass and copper inbuilding their boats. There came at length to the Russianvessel a large boat, in which, besides the rowers,were four men in embroidered habits, who appeared likepersons of distinction. They were invited into the cabin,and on entering it bowed low, with their hands overtheir heads, and remained in that position till the captaindesired them to rise. A globe and sea chart were presentedthem, and they readily pointed to their owncountry, which they call Siphon. Spangberg believedthat he had fulfilled the object of his voyage, and accordinglyset sail to return. In latitude 43° 50' he350 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.arrived at a great island, near which he anchored. Theinhabitants wore leathern boots, like those of the Kamt-schedules and Kurili islanders. They spoke the samelanguage as the latter, but differed from them in havinglong hair all over their bodies. On seeing a cock onboard,they fell on their knees as if to worship it.Walton reached the coast of Japan in lat. 38° 1 7'-By following a fleet of fishing-boats, he was conductedto a port in front of a large town or city. A Japanesevessel approached the ship, and with great civility, bysigns, invited the Russians to land. A boat was sent,accordingly, with two empty water-casks, and some articlesto bestow as presents. The shore was lined withJapanese, who crowded to view the strangers; and themoment the boat arrived they kindly offered their servicesto fill the casks with fresh water. The town seemedto contain about 1500 houses, some of stone, others ofwood, and extended nearly two miles along the shore.One of the inhabitants politely invited Kasimerof, whocommanded the boat, to take refreshments at his house.Wine, fruits, and sweetmeats, were presented in vesselsof porcelain. Shops were numerous in the streets, andthe country around was richly cultivated with grain andpeas. The Japanese afterwards visited the ship, andcarried on some traffic with the Russian crew on deck.Walton sailed about ninety leagues to the south, alongthe east side of Japan. The inhabitants were everywherewilling to enter into an intercourse with the Russians; but an officer at length interfered, and prohibitedthe people from visiting the ship. Walton, in consequence,returned to Kamtschatka. The voyage of Spang-bergand Walton was the first in which the Russianscrossed the tracks of other Europeans in the South Sea.It was not till the 4th of June, 1741, that Bearingand Tshirikof, for the third time, set sail from Kamt-schatka, with the intention, when they reached the latitudeof 50° N., to direct their course to the east till theymet with the continent of America. On the 20th of thesame month the ships were separated in a gale of wind;CHAP. XXII. DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS. 351and hazy weather coming on after the storm they werenever able to rejoin each other.On the 18th of July, Bearing discovered the continentof America, in the latitude of 58° 28', and, according tohis reckoning, fifty degrees east from the meridian ofPetropawlowska, or St. Peter and St. Paul. The appearanceof the land was exceedingly grand, but gloomy.Mountains of great elevation, covered with snow, extendedfar inland ; and one summit rose to a toweringheight above the rest. Steller, the German naturalistand physician, who accompanied the expedition, saysthat he had never seen a higher mountain in Siberia ;he named it Mount St. Elias. The two nearest headlandswere called Cape St. Elias and Cape Heroines.On the 20th, Bearing dropped anchor at a small islandnot far from the continent. Some huts were found onthe main land, but the inhabitants had fled : the Russianstook away some dried fish, and other provisions, leavingknives, tobacco, and trinkets in their stead. On puttingto sea again, and trying to sail northward, Bearing foundthat the shore of the continent ran south-west. Hemade his way, with difficulty, through the string ofislands which skirt the great peninsula of Alaska. Oneisland, or perhaps small cluster, received the name ofSchumagin, from a Russian sailor who was buried there.In one of these islands some men were seen fishing,and the Russians approached them in a boat, takingwith them a Korjak, in the hope that he might serve asan interpreter. Nine Americans were on the shore, andas many canoes, but no women or habitations could beseen. They were unable to understand the Korjak; butimmediately perceived that he was different from theRussians, and more like those of their own country.Three Russians landed with the Korjak, and the boatwas made fast to a rock. To return this confidence,an American, who appeared to be the oldest of the party,entered the boat. He was presented with a glass ofbrandy; but, on putting it to his mouth, the strength ofit so astonished and alarmed him that he thought MODERN VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.self betrayed, and, to allay his fears, it was found necessaryto set him upon land. The Russians then retiredhastily to their boat, but the Korjak was detained by theAmericans, who had taken a fancy to him. He calledout piteously to the Russians not to abandon him; andthey at length fired two shots in the air, which producedthe desired effect. The report, echoed from the islandsround and the high hills on the main, seemed to comefrom every side; and the Americans, terrified beyondmeasure, fell flat on their faces, whereupon the Korjakmade his escape. The next day the Americans camealongside the ship in their canoes, bearing a rod withfeathers, as a calumet or ensign of peace. They offeredpresents, and seemed disposed to cultivate the acquaintanceof the strangers; but the anchor was heaved, thewind freshened, and they were obliged to hasten back toshore. As the ship sailed from them, they saluted herwith loud and repeated cheers.At the close of September, when the ship quitted theAleutian Islands, the wind blew constantly from thewest, and the weather was damp and foggy. The greaterpart of the crew also were disabled by the scurvy; sothat, in a tempestuous season and unknown seas, thevessel was driven along almost at the mercy of thewind.Bearing himself had for some time been in such astate of indisposition and decline, as no longer permittedhim to concern himself about the management of theship.On the 4th of November, in lat. 50° N., land was seenbefore them; and on the following day it was resolvedto run for it, the ship being now in a shattered condition,and the scurvy making dreadful ravages amongthe crew. The sea ran high as the ship approached theshore, and she struck upon a rock. A great wave fortunatelythrew her over the reef into smooth water; butthe condition of the ship, of the ship's company, andthe season of the year, made it evident that it would benecessary to remain at this island all the winter. ThoseCHAP. XXII. DISCOVERIES OF THE RUSSIANS. 353who were able to labour immediately went on shore, toprepare lodging for the sick, .which they did by diggingpits in some sand-hills near a brook which ran from amountain into the sea, and sails were used for theirpresent covering. Some of the men proceeded to explorethe island : they found neither tree nor trace of inhabitants.The interior of the island swarmed with foxes,both blue and white; but their fur was not so fine asthat of the Siberian fox. They were not at all frightenedat the sight of men. Sea-otters were numerousalong the shores. Their flesh was so tough that it couldscarcely be torn to pieces with the teeth; but Steller thephysician considered it a specific against the scurvy.The intestines were reserved for the use of the sick.The otters were killed not only for food, but also fortheir skins, which constitute a chief article of the tradebetween the Russians and Chinese. Nine hundred ofthese skins were collected on the island by the crew;and of these Steller brought away one third as his ownshare, having received them from the sailors as fees forhis attention to them while sick. A dead whale, thatwas thrown on the coast, was called by them their magazine,as it offered them a resource when nothing betterwas to be procured.Thirty of the crew died on the island. Poor Bearingexpired on the 8th of December. It might be said, thathe was almost buried alive ; for as the sand rolled downfrom the pit in which he lay, and covered his feet, hewould not suffer it to be removed, believing that it kepthim warm: and it thus increased upon him till he wasmore than half covered ; so that, when he was dead, itwas necessary to unearth him, in order to inter himproperly.On the Cth of May the survivors of the crew, innumber forty-five persons, commenced building a vesselfrom the timbers that remained of the wreck, in orderto return to Kamtschatka. The carpenters were all dead;but a Cossack named Starodubzof, who had workedsome time as a shipwright at Ochotsk, undertook tovol. ir. A A354> MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.superintend the work. The new vessel was launched onthe 10th of August, and they sailed on the loth; butowing to adverse winds did not make the coast ofKamtschatka till the 25th. On the 27th they castanchor in the bay of St. Peter and St. Paul. This vesselperformed so well in the passage, that the CossackStarodubzof was promoted, for his good service, to therank of sinbojarski, which is a degree of Siberian nobility.Bearing left his name to the island on which hedied.It is now time to return to Tshirikof, whose voyage,though less unfortunate than that of his commander,was hardly attended with less hardship and distress.After his separation from Bearing, on the 20th of June,he ran for the American continent, which he made inlat. 55° 36'. The coast which presented itself beforehim was steep and barren, guarded by rocks, and withouta single island that could afford him shelter. Heanchored off the coast, and sent his long boat withorders to put on shore wherever she could land. Severaldays elapsed without her re-appearing: he despatchedhis other boat to learn the cause of this delay ; but thelatter experienced, no doubt, the same fate as the preceding;and it is unknown what became of either.Some canoes, manned by Americans, came off from theshore a few days after, to survey the ship ; but theyfeared to approach it closely; and Tshirikof, despairingto see his men again, resolved to quit the coast, andreached Kamtschatka in the beginning of October.Soon after the return of Bearing's crew from theisland on which he was shipwrecked and died, andwhich is called after his name, the inhabitants of Kamaventured over to that island, to which the sea-ottersand other sea animals were accustomed to resortin great numbers. Mednoi Ostroff, or Copper Island,which takes that appellation from large masses of nativecopper found upon the beach, and which lies full insightof Bearing's Isle, was an easy and speedy discovery.These two small uninhabited spots were for someCHAP. XXI. DISCOVERIES OP THE RUSSIANS. 355time the only islands that were known, until the scarcityof land and sea animals, whose numbers were greatlydiminished by the Russian hunters, occasioned otherexpeditions. Several of the vessels that were sent outupon these voyages were driven by stormy weather tothe south-east, and thus obtained a knowledge of theAleutian Isles, which abound in furred animals, and arebut thinly peopled. From the year 1745, when theseislands were first visited, until 1750, when the firsttribute of furs was brought from them to Ochotsk, thegovernment appears not to have been fully informed oftheir discovery. In 1760, the governor of Tobolskturned his attention to those islands ; and until thattime all the discoveries subsequent to Bearing's voyagewere made, without the interposition of the court, byprivate merchants, in vessels fitted out at their own expense.It is on these Aleutian Islands, and on upwardsof 300 leagues of coast which extend beyond the polarcircle, that the indefatigable Russians have establishedthose settlements and factories that support die greatand advantageous fur trade carried on with China bythe Russian empire.In this volume a rapid view has been taken of theprogress of geography from the commencement of thesixteenth to the middle of the eighteenth century. Wehave seen with what hasty strides Europeans proceededto establish themselves in the most distant regions ofthe globe. Ambition, the love of gold and of adventure,were the motives that prompted their indefatigable exertions.Yet the impulse arising from the discoveries ofColumbus was not confined to the ambitious, the covetous,or romantic alone ; the studious and speculative likewisefelt its influence. Geography, in the beginning ofthe sixteenth century, was the favourite study of thegreatest scholars. The attention of learned men seemedfor a time engrossed by the light recently thrown on the356 MODERN VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. BOOK IV.form and structure of the globe ; and many mathematiciansand philosophers zealously applied themselves tothe perfection of geographical science. Yet geographycan hardly be said to have been cultivated generally,or to have been designedly promoted, apart fromviews of political or mercantile interest, prior to theperiod at which we have now arrived in the course ofthis work. The curiosity of mankind is now more liberaland exalted ; and, among civilised nations, not even waris allowed to obstruct the progress of geographical researches.Our reflections on the growth of geographicalscience are, therefore, reserved for the volume that is tofollow.END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.London :Printed by A. & R. SpottUwoodc,New. Street Square.