THE HISTORYOFMARITIME AND INLAND DISCOVERY.VOL. I.LONDON:PRINTED FORHangman, Trees, ORME, BROWN, AND GREEN,P.\ TI'.RMisTKR-ROW ;AND JOHN TAYLOR,I Paper l.m\ III STREET.1830.THECABINET OF GEOGRAPHY.CONDUCTED BY THEREV. DIONYSIUS Larder, LL.D. F.R.S. L. & E.M.K.I. A. Fils. F.Z.S. Hon. F.C.P.S. Masts. &c. inc.ASSISTED BYEMINENT LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC MEN.THEHISTORYOFMARITIME AND INLAND DISCOVERY.VOL. I.LONDON:PRINTED FORHangman, Trees, ORME, BROWN, AND GREEN,Paternoster-row ;AND JOHN TAYLOR,f"PPE!t COWER STREET1830.London :Printed by A. & It. Spottiswoocie,New-Street-SquareWcCONTENTS.BOOK I.GEOGRAPHY OF THE Ancients.CHAP. I.Introduction. — Wandering Propensity of primitive Man. — Slow Growthof Geography. — The Hebrews. — The Mosaic Genesis. — Simple Cosmology.— The Phoenicians. — Antiquity of their Navigations. — TheirObscurity. - - Page 1CHAP. II.THE CHEEKS. — HOMERIC AGE.The first Navigators Pirates. — Slave Trade in Antiquity. — HomersKnowledge of Greece. — Of the Scythianss. — Of Egypt and the Ethiopians.— The Ships of the Homeric Age. — The Mythic Regions of theWest. — Voyage of Ulysses. — The Cyclops. — Isles of Circe and of.Solus. — Ends of the Ocean and Land of Darkness — The wanderingIsles. — Scylla, Charybdis, and the Sirens. — Sieuli and Sicani. — Trinacria.— Homer actually ignorant of the West. — Hesiod. — KingLatins. — The Eridanus. — Argonautic Expedition. — Its Authenticity.The Euxine known early to the Pelasgians. — The Golden Fleece. —Return of Jason variously related. — The Orphic Account. — Iernismentioned. — The Cimmerian of the West. — Explanation of the Mythology.— Elysium and Happy Islands of the West. — Summary. - IdCHAP. III.(JRF.EKS CONTINUED. — HISTORIC AGE.Systems of early Greek Philosophers. — Herodotus. — His literary Ardourand Success. — His Travels. — Describes the Scythianss. — Received Intelligencerespecting the Arimasps and Griffons. — In vain sought theHyperboreans. — Effect of Climate on the Growth of Horns. — Extent o!the Knowledge he acquired from the Scythianss. — The Cimmerian of theBosphorus. — Their Origin conjectured. — The Caspian Sea. — Herodotusacquainted with the Ractrians, and with India — Eastern .Ethiopians. —The great Ants of India which guard the Gold. — Egypt. — The Auto,moles or Exiles. — Route up the Nile, and to Bornou. — Tourney of theNasamones to the Niger. — Alleged Circumnavigation of Africa underKing Echos. — Voyage of Sataspes. — Herodotus ignorant of the West.A 3191.06101 CONTENTS.The River Eridanus and the Riphsean Mountains. — Commercial Enterpriseof the Greeks. — Summary. - . Page 26THE GREEKS CONTINUED.Scarcity of Books in Antiquity. — Herodotus ignorant of the CarthaginianDiscoveries. — Voyage of Hanno to the Negro Country. — Sees Crocodilesand Hippotami. — Nocturnal Fires. — Gorilla, or Orang Outing. —Ilimilco explores the Northern Seas. — Finds the Tin Country. — Albionand Herne. — Scylax of Caryanda the first Greek who mentions Rome. —Pytheas of Marseilles. — Visits Britain. — Discovers Thule. — Describesthe Amber Coast in the Baltic. — Was an acute Observer. — Xenophondescribes the Retreat of the Ten Thousand. — The Curds. — The ArmenianMountaineers. — Ctesias. — Resides in Persia. — Mixes OrientalFables with his Relations. — Men with the Heads and Tails of Dogs. —The magic Pool of Silas — Speaks of the Kermes Insect. — Greek Philosophers.— Aristotle. — Mentions the Hercynian Mountains or theHarts. — The Britannic Islands and Taprobane. — Thought that Indiamight be reached by the West. - - 45CHAP. V.CREEKS CONTINUED.Expedition of Alexander. — Policy of that Conqueror. — Enters India. —Resolves to explore the Persian Gulf. — The March down the Indus. —Ncearchus embarks. — Suffers great Hardships. — Imagines himself atthe Equator. — The Greeks dismayed at the Appearance of a Whale. —Famished in the midst of Turtle. — Successful Termination of theVoyage. — Preparations made to explore the Coasts of Arabia. — Arrestedby the Death of Alexander. — Grand Views of that Prince. — Remarksof the Macedonians in India. — Division of the People into Castes. —Honey made without Bees. — Elephants. — Use of Umbrellas. — TheBanyan Trees. — The Fairs. — Self-devotion to the Flames. — City ofPalibothra. — Its Situation. — Indian Fables. — Respect paid to Monkeys.— The Greeks distorted foreign Names. — Voyage of Jambolo toCeylon. — His Remarks on the People. — Taprobane or Ceylon variouslydescribed. — Accounts of the Ancients reconciled. — The Names of thatIsland. — Commerce between Egypt and the East. — Geography flourishedin the commercial City of Alexandria. — Eratosthenes mentionsThinae. — Agatharchidcs. — Describes Abyssinia. — Wealth of the Sa-beans.— Eudoxus of Cyzicus. — Sails to India. — Driven to the Coast ofAfrica. — Finds the supposed Wreck of a Ship from Gades. — Banishedfrom Egypt. — Resolves to reach India by the Ocean. — Sails from Gades.His Misfortunes. — Repeats the Attempt. — His Fate and Character.- - - - ■'>!CHAP. VI.THE GREEKS CONTINUED.The Roman Conquests. — Strabo. — His Knowledge of the West. — TheTurdctani in Spain. — Anthropophagi in Ireland The Sarmatiansns. —CONTENTS. VUThe Sinds or Indians on the Bosphorus. — The Sigyni. — The Gipsies. —Indians in Lycia. — Nations of the Caucasus. — The Caspian Sea supposedto join the Ocean. — Expeditions of Elias Gallus into Arabia and ethiopia.— Habitable and uninhabitable Zones. — Obstinate Incredulity ofStrabo. — Britain visited by Caesar. — Its Population. — The Romansreach the Baltic. — The Cimbri. — Scandinavia and Norway mentionedby Pliny. — Tacitus names the Swedes. — The Arimpha?i. — Grand Characteristicsof the Northern Nations. — March of Cornelius Balbus intothe Interior of Africa. — And of Suetonius Paulinus across Mount Atlas.King Juba's Account of the Nile and Niger. — The Fortunate Isles. —Various Statements reconciled. Page 78CHAP. VII.DISCOVERY OF THE MONSOONS.Hippalus. — Increased Trade with India. — Course pursued. — Periplus ofArrian. — His accurate Account of the Indian Peninsula. - - 100CHAP. VIII.PTOLEMY.Increased Intercourse of Nations under the Romans. — Advantages enjoyedby Ptolemy. — Applies the Measures of Longitude and Latitude. — HisErrors. — Displays an Acquaintance with the Caspian Steppes. — ProgressWestward of the Scythian Nations. — Their Origin. — Towns on theRiver Niger. — Ptolemy's Acquaintance with the East. — His frequentRepetitions. — Supposed the Continents of Asia and Africa to unite in theSouthern Ocean. — The Sin; and the Seres must have been the Chinese.The Silk Trade. — Allusion to the Tatars. —The Stone Tower in thelielurtag. — Testimonies of the. Chinese Writers. — Roman Embassy toC hint. — The Name of Silk. — Of China. — Antiquity of the Trade withChina. — Merits of Ptolemy. — Conclusion. - - 105CHAP. IX.ON THE COMMERCE OF THE ANCIENTS.Connection between Commerce and Geography. — Trade with India in theHands of the Arabians. — Their Wealth and Luxury. — Cinnamon. —Ignorance as to the Country which produced it. — Known to Moses. —Supposed to grow in Arabia and in Africa. — Pliny's Account. — Antiquityof Trade in the Eastern Seas. — Pirate Nations of the East. — Productionsof the Moluccas mentioned by Plautus. — Early Commerce ofthe Phoenicians examined. — Tin brought to Egypt from India. — TheCassiterides — Never known. — Direct Trade between Phoenicia and theWest improbable. — Carthage — Never aimed at a distant carrying Trade.Amber. — Brought to f> recte from the Adriatic. — Mythical Connectionof the Eridanus and Amber. — Trade in Europe. — Conclusion. 123(HAP. X.MYTHIC GEOGRAPHY OF Till. HINDOOS, AND ITS CONNECTION WITHGRK( IAN MYTHS.Mount Meru. — The Seven Dwipas or Islands. — The Quarters of theHeavens, how named. — The White Island of the West: its tripleIll CONTENTS.Nature. — Gold, Silver, and Iron Mountains. — The Country of the Sunand Moon. — Auspicious Epithets. — Wide Diffusion of this Belief. —Numerous White Seas. — White Islands of the Greeks. — Trinacrias andIslands of the Happy. — Hecate and triple Divinities of the West. — Hesperia.— The Hyperboreans. — Known generally among the Indo-TeutonicNations. — Tradition of an Atlantis or Western Island. — Hindoo Geographyof the East. — Lands of Gold, Silver, and Brass : misled Ptolemy.Panchsea. — These Legends still preserved in India and in the West.Their Influence. . - - - Page 138BOOK II.GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES.CHAP. I.THE ARABIANS.Itineraries of the Romans. — Peutingerian Table. — Cosmas Indicopleustes.The W T words Sint and Hindoo. — The Tsinitzae. — The Arabians. — TheirConquests — and Commerce. — Early Travellers into China. — Educationof the Chinese. — Regulations of their Ports. — First Mention made ofTea. — Chinese eat human Flesh. — Strangers in China. — Canfu. — Usesof the Cocoa-nut Tree. — Kings of India. — The Unicorn. — Sogdiana. —The Alas. — Khazars. — The Fossil Ivory ofBulgar. — Commerce of theArabians with the North of Europe. — The Interior of Africa colonisedby Arabians. — Kingdoms of Ghana and Tocrur. — Lamlam. — The Tingesand Wacwac. — The Perpetual Islands. — Other Islands in the Sea ofDarkness. — Voyage of the Almegrurim. . - 154CHAP. II.TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA.Ibn Batuta sets out on the Pilgrimage. — Ascends the Nile. — Returns toGaza. — The Baths of Tiberias. — The Mosque of the Foot. — Miraclesat Meshid Ali. — Shiraz. — Bagdad. — Mecca. — Visits Yemen — andAbyssinia. — The Berbers. — The Zunuj. — Zafar. — The FrankincenseTree. — Ormuz. — Farss. — Second Pilgrimage. — Goes through UpperEgypt to Cairo — Jerusalem — Anatolia. — The Turkomans. — Societycalled the Brotherhood. — Erzerum. — Fall of Aerolites. — Showers ofFishes. — The Ottoman Princes. — Ibn Batuta goes to Crim. — Desert ofKipjak. — Tatar Camp. — City ofBulgar. — Shortness of the Nights. —Siberian Travelling. — Singular Mode of Traffic. — The Russians. — IbnBatuta accompanies a Greek Princess to Constantinople. — The Procession.—His Reception. — Account of that City. —Historical Difficulties..greek Customs imitated by the Turks. — Pious W T wish of El Harawi. 17+CHAP III.TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA CONTINUED.Ibn Batuta returns to Tatary. — Proceeds to Chorasm. — Singular Custom.Bokhara. — Its Mosque. — Balkh. — Hindoo Cush. — The Father ofCONTENTS. IXthe Saints. — The Afghans. — Sind. — Ruins near Lahari. — Mode oflevying Troops. — Delhi. — Character of the Emperor. — Ibn Batuta appointedJudge. — Expedient to raise Money. — Narrowly escapes beingput to Death. — Turns Faquir. — Chosen Ambassador to China. — Negotiationsbetween the Courts of Pekin and Delhi. — The Embassage setsout — Attacked by Robbers. — Ibn Batuta taken Prisoner. — His Sufferingsand Escape. — City of Baron infested by Yogees. — The Mortars. —Ordeals in India. — Journey to Calicut. — Chinese Junks. — ImperialTreasures lost by Shipwreck. — Ibn Batuta goes to the Maldives. Ismade Judge. — Marries three Wives. — Proceeds to Ceylon. — AscendsAdam's Peak. — King of the Monkeys. — Embarks at Coulan. — Capturedby Pirates. — Returns to the Maldives. — Visits Bengal, Sumatra,Tawalisi. — Arrives in China. — Paper Money. — Gog and Magog. — ElKhans. — Tatar Funeral. — Returns to Persia. — Mecca. — RevisitsTangier. — Travels in Spain. — Proceeds to Soudan. — Hagar. — AbuLatin. — Mali. — The Niger. — Hippopotami. — Cannibals. — Timbuctoo.Kakaw. — Barbara. — Nakda. — Returns, and takes up his Residencein Fez. - - . . . p age 190BOOK III.PROGRESS OF GEOGRAPHY IK THE MIDDLE AGES.DISCOVERIES OF THE NORTHMEN.Antiquity of the Scandinavians. — The Fins. — Northern Crusades.—Turks, Saracens, and Amazons in the North. — Voyage of Other. —Whale Fishery. — Walter describes the Funerals of the Russians. TheiNorthmen invade Ireland. — Occupy the Western Isles. — The White-man'sLand. — Voyage of Madoc. — Welsh Indians. — Iceland discovered.Relics found there. — Greenland discovered and colonised. — Journeyof Collar Get. — Old Greenland lost. — Vinland. — Skra?lingues or Esquimaux.— Map of the two Zeni. — Friesland. — Grolandia. — Thewarm Springs and Houses built of Lava. — Canoes of the Esquimaux.—Estotiland and Droceo. — The New World. — Cannibals. — The preciousMetals. . . . .209CHAP. II.MAPS OF THE MIDDLE AGES.General Ignorance. — Missionaries. — Pilgrims. — Adam of Bremen. — GiraldusCambrensis. — Love of the Marvellous. — Icelandic Sagas. — Surveys.Old Maps of the British Islands. — Effects of the feudal System.Doomsday Book. — Maps of the Middle Ages. — Tables of Charlemagne.— Map preserved in Turin. — The Geographer of Ravenna.—Sanudo's Map. — Genoese Navigators. — Isle of Inferno. — The MadeiraIslands and the Azores. — Bianco's Map. — Islands of Stokafixa, Attila,and Man. — Satanaxio. — The Seven Cities. — Benjamin of Tela. —Caravan Routes through Armenia and Bokhara. - - £26X CONTENTS.CHAP. III.Journey OF Carping INTO Tatar.Rise of the Mongol Empire. — Zingis Khan. — Mongols invade Europe. —Over-run Hungary. — Thought to be Demons. — Their Threats. Attackthe Saracens. — Mission of Ascelin. — Its ill Success. — Letter tothe Pope. — Mission of Carpini. — The Camp of Baatu. —Journey to theResidence of the Grand Khan. — Great Hungary. — The Country of theAlas. — The Kangitta?. — Bernini. — Election of a Grand Khan.The Ceremonies. — The golden Tent. — Appearance of the Emperor.Reception of the Friars. — The Hardships they endured. — Descriptionof the Mongols. — Their Character. — Superstitions. — Worship theMoon. — Tribes of the Mongols. — Climate of Mongolia. — ProdigiousShowers of Hail. — Christianity among the Chinese. — Prester John.Combustibles used in War. . Page 241CHAP. IV.TRAVELS OF RLBRIQUIS.Rumoured Conversion of the Mongol Princes. — Letter from Erkaltay toSt. Louis. — The King of France sends holy Relics to the Mongols.Despatches Rubruquis to Sarah. — Germans dwelling on the Black Sea.Tatar Encampments. — Journey to the Volga. — Desert of Kipjak. —The Alas. — Court of Sarah. — Houses on Carts. — Sarah not a Christian.— Friars sent forward to Baatu Khan. — Obliged to proceed to Cara-coram. — The Land of Organum. — Description of the Yak. — Cannibalismin Tibet. — The Court of Man;:u Khan. — Europeans in Caraco-rum.— The Fountain made by William Bouchier. — Christianity amongthe Uigurs. — Christian Ceremonies imitate 1 in the East. — ChineseWriting. — Islands in the Eastern Sea. — Prester John. — Knowledge ofTatary. — Brigands in the Caucasus. — Journey Home. — Haitho theArmenian. — TheTarsae. — Tribes of the Mongols. - . 259CHAP. V.TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO.'the two Poli visit Bolgar. — Go to Bokhara. — Proceed to tile Court of theGrand Khan. — Return Home. — Marco Polo travels to China. — HisSuccess. — Favour at Court. — Embassage from Persia. — The Poli permittedto leave China. — Navigate the Indian Seas. — Pass through Armenia.— Their Arrival at Venice. — Expedient to display their Wealth.War with Genoa. — Marco Polo taken Prisoner. — Writes his Narrative.— Released from Captivity. — Returns Home. — His Account ofAsia. — Balkh. — Balaxia. — Cashmeer. — Satan. — Desert of Lop.Haunted by evil Spirits. — Their malicious Arts. — Tangut. — Mannersof the Tatars. — Interment of the Khans. — The Yak. — Pavilion of theKhan. — His white Horses. — Splendour of his Court. — City of Cam.ball. — Its Form and Size. — Palace of the Khan. — Its Parks andGardens. . . 276CONTENTS. XICHAP. VI.TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO Continued.Manji or Southern China. — King Fanfur. — His Overthrow. — Predictionfulfilled. — Marco Polo made Governor of a City. — Siege of Sa-yan-fu. —Services of the Poli. — Great Trade of Sin-gui. — The River Kiang. —City of Kin-sai. — Its Size. — Markets, Canals, and Bridges. — Population.— Police. — Sale of Children. — Port of Zaitun. — Manufacture ofPorcelain. — Cannibals in China. — Tibet. — Method of frighteningwild Beasts. — Sorcerers. — Salt used as Money. — Musk Gazelles. —Description of Crocodiles. — Superstition in Caravan. — Custom of gildingthe Teeth. — Japan famous for its Wealth. — The Tatars fail to conquerit — The Generals punished. — Country of Ciampa. — Greater Java. —Lesser Java. — The Rhinoceros. — Sago. — Ceylon. — The King's Ruby.Manners of the Hindoos. — St. Thomas. — Arabian Ports. — Madagascar,— The Rokh. — Abyssinia. — The North of Europe. — Merits ofMarco Polo. — The Missionaries. — John de Montecorvino visits Persiaand India. — Proceeds to China. — Thwarted by the Nestorianss. — HisSuccess. — Converts a Mongol Prince. — His great Labours. — CreatedArchbishop of Cambalu. - - • - Page £93CHAP. VII.ODERIC OF Portent.Itinerary of Pegoletti. — Caravan Journeys. — Gintarchan. — Sara. — Sara-canto.— Organcici. — Oltrarra. — Armalecco. — Camexu. — Gamalecco. —Oderic of Portenau. — Trebizond. — Mount Ararat. — Tower of Babel. —Chaldeans. — Martyrdom of four Friars. — Oderic collects their Bones. —Works Miracles. — Forest of Pepper. — Fair of Ja^'gemaut. — VoluntaryTortures. — Cannibals in Lamouri. — Wealth of Java. — Sago Trees. —Amulets found in Canes. — Shoals of Fish. — Characteristics of the Chinese.— Mode of fishing in China. — Feasts of the Idols. — Valley of theDead. — The Grand Lama. — Sir John Mandeville. — His Travels fabulous.— Rivers of Rocks. — Islands of Giants. — Lambs of Tatary. —Growth of Diamonds. — Palace of Prester John. - - 314CHAP. VIII.EMBASSY OF CLAVIJO.Clavijo appointed Ambassador to the Court of Timur. — Journey throughArmenia. — Calmar. — Tebriz. — Destruction of the Palace. Privilegesof the Genoese. — Sultania. — Commercial Route. — Domghaun.Towers built of human Skulls. — Tatar Mode of posting. — Ambassadorsintroduced. — The Festivals at Court. — Samarcand. — How peopled.Its Trade. — Departure of the Embassy. —Death of Timur. — Scheldttaken Prisoner by the Turks, and subsequently by the Tatars. —His Wanderings. — Expedition to Issibur. — Shah Rokh sends Ambassadorsto China. — Journey through the Desert. — Civilisation of theChinese. — Telegraphs in China. — Turning Towers. — The ImperialCourt. — Musical Skill. —Dismissal of the Embassy. - - SiCONTENTS.EARLY DISCOVERIES OF THE PORTUGUESE.The Italian Republics. — Their naval Superiority in the Middle Ages. —Improvements in nautical Affairs. — Mariner's Compass discovered. —The Chinese supposed to have been acquainted with it — And the Arabians.— First Mention of it by a European. — The Spaniards imbibe aTaste for the Luxuries of the East — Their Wars with the Moors.—Motives to seek a Passage by Sea to India. — The Portuguese commencethe Attempt. — Don Henry. — Discovery of Puerto Santo and Madeira.Story of Macham. — The Canary Islands colonised. — Cape Bojadordoubled. — Captives ransomed for Gold Dust — Voyages of Cada Most.The native Canadians. — The Moors of the Desert. — The Ships believedto be Spirits. — The Salt Trade of the Negroes. — The Senegal. —King Budomel. — His religious Opinions. — Description of the Countrynear Cape Verd. — Death of Don Henry. — His great Merits. Page 345CHAP. X.THE PASSAGE BY THE CAPE DISCOVERED.The Portuguese erect a Fort on the Gold Coast. — Their Interview with thenative Prince. — The Pope's Grant — Voyage of Diego Cam. — VisitsCongo. — Brings home Natives. — King of Congo favours the ChristianFaith. — The King of Benin desires Missionaries. — Prince Ogane. —Prester John in Africa. — Origin of this Belief explained. — New Expeditions.— Bartholomew Diazz discovers the Cape of Good Hope. — Cavilsand Payva despatched to India. — Covilham visits Sofala. — Ascertainsthe Practicability of the Passage. — Detained in Abyssinia. —Vasco de Gama. — Arrival at Mozambique. — Quiloa. — Melinda. — IndianPilot. — Reaches Calicut — The Comorin. — Arts of the Moors. —Danger of Gama. — Escapes. — Arrives at Lisbon.— His Reception. 363CHAP. XI.COLUMBUS.Parentage of Columbus. — His Education. — Early Voyages. — Settles inLisbon. — Marries the Daughter of Perestrello. — Considers the Practicabilityof sailing to India by the West. — Opinions of his Age. — His Reasonings.— Becomes convinced. — Proposes his Plans to Genoa. — Seeksthe Patronage of the King of portugal. — Flies to Spain. — Applies to theSpanish Court. — Sends his Brother to the Court of England. — His Disappointments.— Despairs of Success. — Is favoured by Isabella. — TheExpedition resolved on. — Sails from Palos. — Particulars of the Voyage.Land discovered. — Fleet visits Cuba. — St. Domingo. — The Shipof Columbus wrecked. — Kindness of the Cacique. — A Fort erected. —The Fleet returns homewards. — Dreadful Storm. — Means taken byColumbus to preserve the Memory of his Discovery. — Arrives in Safetyat the Azores. — Reaches Palos. — Received with Enthusiasm. — Proceedsto Court. — Honours conferred on him by Ferdinand. - 381THE HISTORYOFMARITIME AND INLANDDISCOVERY.BOOK I.GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS.CHAP. I.INTRODUCTION. WANDERING PROPENSITY OF PRIMITIVE MAN.SLOW GROWTH OF GEOGRAPHY THE HEBREWS. THEMOSAIC GENESIS. SIMPLE COSMOLOGY. THE PHOENICIANS.ANTIQUITY OF THEIR NAVIGATIONS. — THEIR OBSCURITY.JL he history of the progress of geographical knowledgeis calculated more than that of any other branch oflearning to illustrate the progressive civilisation of mankind.It has for its object, in some measure, the diffusionof the species, but is more immediately connectedwith the advancement of navigation and commercial enterprise.Instead of confining the attention to thefortunes of a particular community, it carries the eye ofthe enquirer continually abroad, to survey all the nationsof the earth, to mark the knowledge they obtained of oneanother, and the extent of their mutual acquaintance.The principal charm of savage life arises from theunlimited range which it allows over the face of nature.VOL. I. u2 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.Those who have once tasted the pleasure of roving atlarge through woods and mountains, can never afterwardsfeel happy under the restraints of society. Curiosityand the love of action, no less than their wants,must have continually urged the earliest inhabitants ofthe globe to explore all the varieties of its surface. Pastoraltribes feel an interest in learning the nature of thecountry in the vicinity of their encampments, the extentof its pastures, and the rivers which flow through andrefresh it. But the observations of a rude age are seldomaccumulated beyond the wants of the present moment.The movements by which those nomades acquire theknowledge along with the possession of new regions,generally lead to a total forgetfulness of their old habitations; little correspondence is maintained by those whomigrate with those who remain behind : so that in ashort time the geographical knowledge of migratorynations is reduced to obscure and fading traditions.When men in the progress of their migrations reachthe sea coast, the love of gain as well as of adventuresoon impel them to launch upon the waves, and directtheir course to distant countries. But the complicatedart of navigation requires many ages to bring it to perfection.Science alone can give certainty to the observationsof the mariner ; and the discoveries of the earlynavigators were as perishable as they were vaguely described.Besides, in proportion as the spirit of adventureprevailed among the motives of the earliest expeditions,a corresponding desire to indulge in exaggerationand romantic fiction disfigured all the relations whichremain of them, Wonder and credulity, however, arethe natural characteristics of an early age, and we mustnot regard as wholly fabulous those accounts of antiquity,in which we find a few threads of consistent fact,interwoven with much that is absolutely incredible.Geography of the Hebrews.The earliest geographical records which remain to usare those of the sacred scriptures. The Hebrews them-chap.I. THE HEBREWS. Jselves, an inland and pastoral nation, had probably butlittle direct acquaintance with distant countries. Fortheir knowledge of commerce, and of the nations withwhich it opened a correspondence, they were perhapschiefly indebted to the Egyptians and Phoenicians : butthe account which Moses gives of the first progenitorsof mankind, and of the nations which sprung from themisunquestionably derived from peculiar sources.All the nations of the old world distinctly known tothe sacred historian, are reduced by him to the familiesof Shem, Ham, and Japhet. The children of these patriarchsare also enumerated by him, and each of themappears as the founder of a nation ; but in those earlyages it is impossible to affix with certainty to any regiona name which properly belongs to a wandering horde.The Mosaic account (Genesis x. ), however, is a preciousrecord of the manner in which the knowledge of theearth was enlarged by the dispersion of the humanspecies.The family of Shem comprised the pastoral nationswhich were spread over the plains between the Euphratesand the shores of the Mediterranean, from Ararat toArabia. The Hebrews themselves were of this stock,and the resemblance of their language with the Arabianor ancient Syriac, and with Arabic, sufficiently provesthe identity in race of what are called the Semitic nations.There is no difficulty in assigning to each of thesons of Shem his proper situation. Elam founded thekingdom of Elymeis, Assure that of Assyria, and Aramthe kingdom of Syria or Armada, a name still clearlypreserved in that of Armenia. From Arphacsad weredescended the Hebrews themselves, and the varioustribes of Arabia; and this close affinity of origin wasalways manifest in the language and in the intimatecorrespondence of these two nations. Some of the namesgiven by Moses to the children of Shem are still usedin Arabia as local designations : thus there is still adistrict in that country called Havilah; and Ural, theb 24 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.name given to Sana by the sacred historian, is not yetquite obsolete.The descendants of Ham constituted the most civilizedand industrious nations of the Mosaic age. Thesons of that patriarch were Cush, Mizraim, Phut, andCanaan. The name of Ham is identical with that ofCham or Lamia, by which Egypt has in all ages beencalled by its native inhabitants, and Mir or Mizraimisthe name by which the same country, or more properlythe Delta, is known to Turks and Arabians. The landof Phut appears to signify Libya in general; and thename Cush, though sometimes used vaguely, is obviouslyapplied to the southern and eastern parts ofArabia. The names of Saba, Sabtah, Raamah, andSheba, children of Cush, long survived in the geographyof Arabia.The posterity of Canaan rivalled the children of Miz-rain in the early splendour of arts and cultivation.Though the Canaanites, properly speaking, and the Phoenicianswere separated from each other by Mount Carmel,yet as the same spirit of industry animated both, theymay here, in a general sense, be considered as onepeople. The Phoenicians possessed the knowledge ofthe Egyptians, free from the superstitious reluctance ofthe latter to venture upon the sea. Their local positionnaturally engaged them in commercial enterprise: —and the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, asthou gocst to Gerard unto Gaza." Their chief cities,Tyre and Sidon, had reached the highest degree of commercialopulence when the first dawn of social politywas only commencing in Greece. Damascus, one of theoldest cities in the world, remains as a monument of thefirst inhabitants. The great superiority of the people onthat coast above the Hebrews in the time of Moses, isclearly shown in the language of holy writ. WhenJoshua and the other chiefs, who were sent by the prophetto observe and report on the land of Canaan, returned,they said, " We came unto the land whitherthou contest us, and surely it flowers with milk andCHAP. I. THE HEBREWS. Ohoney. Nevertheless, the people be strong that dwell inthe land, and the cities are walled and very great." Infine, they conclude, " We be not able to go up againstthis people, for they are very great." While the Canaanitesinhabited walled and populous cities, the Hebrewsdwelt in tents like the brethren of Joseph, who declaredto Pharaoh, " Thy servants are shepherds, both we andalso our fathers."The warlike children of Japhet, the Laetus of theGreeks, have far surpassed the other posterity of Noahin the extent of their possessions. All the Indo-teutonicnations, stretching without interruption from the extremityof western Europe through the peninsula of Indiato the island of Ceylon, may be considered as derivedfrom this common ancestor. The Turkish nation also,occupying the elevated countries of central Asia, boastthe same descent. Their own traditions accord in thisrespect with the Mosaic history ; and indeed the affinitiesof language, which are still evident among all thenations of the Japetian family, fully confirm the relationof the sacred writer. The meaning of Japhet's namein the Sanscrit language, Yapdti, or lord of the earth,bears a sense which is well adapted to the numbers andthe eminence of his descendants.The eldest of Japhet's sons was Comer, who, Josephustells us, was the father of the Celts. Magog, wemust be contented to suppose, was the founder of someScythian nation. In Madam we may recognize the ancestorof the Medes. The posterity of Javan and Tubaland Meshech and Tires may be traced from Ararat,always called Music by its inhabitants, through Phrygiainto Europe. Tubal and Meshech left their names tothe Tibareni and Moschi, Armenian tribes, whose earlymigrations appear to have extended into Mcesia. In likemanner the Thracianss may have owed their origin toTires.Ashkenaz, the son of Comer, is thought to be thatAscanius whose name so frequently occurs in the ancienttopography of Phrygia, and from whom, probably, thea3O GEOGRAPHY OP THE ANCIENTS. BOOK T.Euxine, at first the Axine sea, derived its appellation.In Togarmah we see the proper ancestor of the Armeniannations, and it is even asserted of the Turks.Javan was the Ion of the Greeks, the father of theIonian. In the names of his sons we find fresh proofsof the consistency of the Mosaic history. In Elishawe see the origin of Elis or Hellas. The name of Tarshishis supposed, with little foundation, to refer toTarsus in Cilicia. Kitten means Cyprus, and Dodanimor Romani is understood to apply to the island Rhodes." By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided intheir lands." It is impossible to read this ethnographicalsketch of the sacred historian, who ascends to the firstorigin of mankind, without admiring its comprehensivenessand consistency.It is impossible to fix with precision the eastern limitof Moses's geographical knowledge. " The dwellings ofthe sons of Joctan," he says, " were from Mesh, asthou goes unto Sephar, a mount of the East." ThisSephar may possibly be the first range of the snowymountains of Paropamisus , called also Sepyrrus by theancients. But that the accurate knowledge of Mosesdid not extend to the confines of India is evident fromthe gloss which he adds, "a. mountain of the East," whichis, in fact, the signification of the word. Sephar is appliedin general to the East, while Ophir, on the otherhand, means the West, of Africa.The institutions of the Hebrews were calculated todiscourage an intercourse with strangers. The brilliantcommercial enterprises in which Solomon engaged werediscontinued by his successors, and even the fleets ofthat prince were navigated by the servants of the kingof Tyre. This restricted communication with foreignnations rendered it, of course, impossible to acquire anyenlarged or correct knowledge of the earth ; and we donot find in the prophetic writings any trace of geographicalinformation much exceeding that which waspossessed by Moses. Some, indeed, have imagined theOphir of scripture to mean Peru; and the Tarshish fromCHAP. I. THE HEBREWS. iwhich the fleets of Solomon returned every three years,bringing gold, and silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks,"has given rise to innumerable learned disquisitions.Tarsus in Cilicia (which, by the way, was not a seaport),as well as Tartessus in Spain, are out of thequestion ; for the ships of Solomon were launched fromEziongeber in the Red Sea, and ivory, apes, and peacocksare obviously Indian produce. Many eminent scholarshave supposed the word Tarshish to be a Phoenicianepithet of the sea in general ; but though this interpretationserves very well to explain the expression " shipsof Tarshish," it only increases the difficulty of a threeyears' voyage to Tarshish. Others have imagined twoplaces of the same name, one in the East and the otherin the West. But the most ingenious of the conjecturesoffered to clear up these difficulties is that which explainsthe name Tarshish as an epithet derived from theSanscrit language, in which Tar-des signifies the silvercountry. The languages of India, owing to the greattrade and civilization of the people who spoke them, areknown to have contributed many terms to the Arabic andHebrew tongues ; and as the Indian legends make frequentmention of a silver country beyond the sea, it isnot very improbable that the Arabians adopted from themthis vague and wandering appellation. Tarshish, then,to the Phoenicians (who received the language as well asmerchandize of the East through the Arabians) was anexpression of extreme latitude, and applicable with equaljustice to opposite quarters of the globe.Towards the north the geographical knowledge of theHebrews never extended beyond the Caucasus ; and inthe north-east it was confined within equally narrowlimits. The Chaldeans, who appear to have descendedfrom the further shores of the Caspian Sea, are describedby the prophet Jeremiah as coming from the ends of thenorth and the sides of the earth. With Egypt andArabia the early Hebrews were well acquainted ; buttowards the West their knowledge hardly reached as faras the shores of Greece.b 4O GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.The cosmological ideas scattered through the scripturesare few in number, and of extreme simplicity. Inthe prophetic writings many traces may be found of anopinion that heaven, or the " mount of the Lord," wasin the North.* The earth was evidently considered tobe a plain, surrounded, perhaps, by the ocean, which wasagain enclosed by the clouds of heaven. Such are theopinions expressed by Job, the sublimest of all poets.He hath compassed the waters with bounds, until (inthe places where) the day and night come to an end : "and again he says, " Whereupon are the foundationsof the earth fastened ? or, who laid the corner-stonethereof? or, who shut up the sea with doors (boundaries);when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of thewomb ; when I made the cloud the garment thereof ? " tThe general allusions which occur in scripture to theearth and its creation, are not more remarkable for thesublime language in which they are conveyed, than fortheir perfect freedom from fanciful and subtle speculations.The Phoenicians, the greatest maritime people of antiquity,have, unfortunately, not transmitted to us anywritings whatever. We know of their enterprises onlyfrom scripture, and from the scattered notices of Greekand Latin authors. We have seen that they were thepilots of Solomon's fleet ; and, as often as Egyptian shipsare mentioned by ancient authors, we are sure to findthem manned and guided by Phoenicians. This peoplewere, in fact, the merchants of the Egyptians, whoselaws and religion were at all times unfavourable to maritimeadventure : they were, in fact, the foreign merchantsof Egypt in the flourishing days of the hundred-gateThebes ; and the astonishing monuments whichremain to prove the ancient wealth and grandeur of thatkingdom may render us less incredulous with respect tothe naval proficiency of a kindred people. The surveyof Egypt made by Joseph, the storing of corn in theseveral districts, to meet the exigencies of impendingIsaiah, xiv. f Job, xxvi. xxxviii.CHAP. I. THE PHOENICIANS. Qfamine, and the general use of money in that country,all bespeak a degree of social order and economy, and afamiliarity with the routine of commercial dealing, whichis truly astonishing at so early an age. Seven hundredyears later, at the siege of Troy, the Greeks were unacquaintedwith the use of money.The Phoenicians participated in the civilization of theEgyptians: they profited by supplying that luxurious andwealthy nation with foreign commodities ; and, unitingto the knowledge which flourished in Thebes and Memphisa disposition to naval enterprise, we may easilyconceive that they soon attained a considerable proficiencyin all the arts of navigation. The numerouscolonies which they planted on the shores of the Euxine,the Mediterranean, and the Atlantic, beyond the Straitsof Gibraltar, attest the extent of their early voyages.This enterprising nation may in like manner have occasionallyreached India from the Red Sea. Phoenicianspiloted the ships of Solomon in their three years' voyagesto Tarshish. The great length of time required forthese voyages betrays the timid progress of early navigation,and may, perhaps, have prevented their frequentrepetition ; but the regular communication with Indiawas certainly maintained through the Arabs, Who, whenthey saw strange nations circumnavigating their peninsula,were not slow to learn the advantages of their intermediateposition.The Phoenician colonies, Utica, Carthage, and Gates,or Cadi, were founded between the twelfth and eighthcenturies before the Christian era ; but the seas of theWest were probably explored for ages before settlementswere formed at such a distance from the parent state.Thus we find that the Phoenicians had, at least a thousandyears before the birth of Christ, explored the westernocean, and at the same time navigated the Euxine Seaand the Arabian Gulf. Their geographical knowledgemust, therefore, have been extensive ; yet the illiberaljealousy which induced them to conceal their discoverieshas thrown a deep shade upon their fame. The arts,10 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. Look I.refinement, and commercial wealth of the Phoenicians inremote ages can be now but imperfectly estimated by therecords which remain of them. The pyramids andcolossal ruins of Egypt visibly demonstrate the greatnessof that kingdom to remote posterity : the commercialenterprise and maritime skill of the Phoenicians haveleft behind no such adequate or durable memorials.Vicissitudes in the arts and in the enlightenment ofmankind often occurred in the ancient world, from thedifficulty and expense of multiplying books ; and it isinteresting to observe in the present instance that thegeographical knowledge of the Phoenicians in the fabuloustimes of Greece may probably have embraced aslarge a portion of the earth as that of the Romans inthe flourishing age of Augustus.CHAP. II.THE GREEKS. HOMERIC AGE.THE FIRST NAVIGATORS PIRATES. SLAVE TRADE IN Antiquity.IIOMER's KNOWLEDGE OF GREECE. OF THE ScythianOF EGYPT AND THE .ethiopians. THE SHIPS OFTHE HOMERIC AGE. THE MYTHIC REGIONS OF THE WEST.VOYAGE OF ULYSSES. THE CYCLOPS. ISLES OF CIRCE ANDOF Aeolus. ENDS OF THE OCEAN AND LAND OF DARKNESS.THE WANDERING ISLES SCYLLA, CHARYBDIS, AND THESIRENS. SICULI AND SICANI. TRINACRIA. HOMER ActuallyIGNORANT OF THE WEST. HESIOD. KING Latins.THE ERIDANUS. Argonauts EXPEDITION. ITSAUTHENTICITY. THE EUXINE KNOWN EARLY TO THE Pelagian.THE GOLDEN 7 FLEECE. RETURN 7 OF JASONVARIOUSLY RELATED. THE ORPHIC ACCOUNT. IERNISMENTIONED. THE Cimmerian OF THE WEST. ExplainAction OF THE MYTHOLOGY. ELYSIUM AND HAPPY ISLANDSOF THE WEST. SUMMARY.The trade of the Phoenicians necessarily brought themsoon into correspondence with the Greeks who werescattered over the islands and the shores of the Aegean.CHAP. I. THE GREEKS. 1 1Their manufactured merchandize, which awakened theadmiration of a rude people, was bartered for the naturalproductions of the land, and, perhaps, more frequentlyfor slaves. Thus the prophet Ezekiel mentionsthe blue and purple from the isles of Elisha ; and at thesame time he says, " Javan, Tubal, and Meshech werethy merchants : they traded the persons of men and vesselsof brass in thy market." The nature of the motiveswhich actuated the Greeks in their earliest naval enterprisesis sufficiently manifest from the first paragraph ofHerodotus, who ascribes the origin of the wars betweenthe Greeks and barbarians to a series of piratical abductions.Io, daughter of the king of Argus, was carriedaway by the Phoenicians. Europa was then taken offfrom Tyre by the Cretan : Jason eloped with Medea ;and when her father, the king of Colchis, demandedcompensation, it was refused, says the historian, becausethe complaints of Inches, the father of Io, had beenneglected by her ravishers. Then followed reprisalsand the rape of Helen.War is the only art exercised by fierce and uncivilizednations, and captives are their only merchandize. ThePhoenicians, no doubt, fomented the feuds by whichtheir markets were supplied : the morality of their dealingssunk to the level of their iniquitous traffic. Thelove of gain has never been very scrupulous ; and wemay safely conclude, that the merchants of Sidon imposedupon the Greeks by the same fraudulent artswhich Christian nations practised so many centurieslater upon the simple inhabitants of the new world.Hence it is that Homer, who so often celebrates the excellenceof Ionian artists, reproaches the nation in astrain approaching to acrimony, with insatiable covetousnessand base dishonesty : he paints them, indeed, as theenemies of the human race, " doing all manner of iniquityto men."The knowledge of letters, however, which the Greeksreceived from the Phoenicians, will probably compensate,in the opinion of posterity, for all the injuries which1 2 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.may have been committed in the incipient correspondenceof the two nations. The Greeks possessed a livelycuriosity, a boldness and force of intellect, well fitted toopen all the recesses of unexplored nature. They wereequal to other nations of antiquity in the vividness oftheir imaginations, and were much superior to them inthe spirit of philosophical observation. Unlike thePhoenicians, who grudged the world the participation oftheir knowledge, the Greeks were as communicative asthey were curious, and preferred fame to the profits of asordid policy.There was a splendour in the first dawn of Grecianliterature which announced the glory of its meridianbeams. Homer united all the learning of his time to allthe vigour of poetic genius. There is little connectedwith the manners or enlightenment of his age which maynot be learned from his writings ; and he was the first,to use the weighty testimony of Strabo, who was wellversed in geography. The task will be as agreeable asit is essential to our purpose, to collect from the pages ofthe venerable poet the extent of his acquaintance withthe surface of the earth.The ocean was regarded by Homer as a great riverwhich visited in its course every portion of the earth.In the centre of the shield made by Vulcan for Achilleswas described the habitable earth, and beyond that, alongthe margin of the disc, ran " the strength of the floodsof ocean." Whether Homer believed that Greece wasin the centre of the earth, is a particular of his cosmographywhich he has not disclosed to us; but it certainlywas not in the centre of the portion which was knownto him.In the enumeration of the allied forces assembled beforeTroy, the poet names all the states of Greece withinteresting minuteness. Thebes, Athens, Corinth, andLacedaemon were already distinguished. He displays apartial knowledge of Macedonia, and a perfect acquaintancewith the Cyclades and larger islands. The auxiliariesof the Trojans were the Tribes of the I 3 ela*yia)is ;CHAP. II. THE GREEKS. 13the Mteoniana ; the Marian, speaking a strange language; the Lycian and Solymi, to the south of these ;then the Animi or Ramsey, stretching from Cilicia intoSyria ; the Phrygian came from Arcana, an inlanddistrict. From the shores of the Black Sea there cameto the aid of Priam the Patagonians who dwelt onthe banks of the Parthenon, and the Caledonians " fromAlba, afar, where the earth produces silver." Theselast were the Chalices inhabiting the mountains roundTrebizond, the mineral riches of which are not yet exhausted.The Seams, Cromna, and Chorus of Homerwere afterwards included in the territory of Matris,the modern Asia ; and the hills of Cytoro, crownedwith superb forests, supplied with naval timber the dockyardsof Sinope.On the western side of the Black Sea Homer wasacquainted with the Situations, the Mansions, and theHippomolgi, living on mares' milk, the justest of men,long-lived, and exempt from care." These were the inhabitantsof the country afterwards possessed by theSarmatiansns. They were evidently nomadic; and it isremarkable, that the reputation of virtue and justicewhich later writers generally gave the Scythianss (as thewandering nations on the shores of the Euxine were longvaguely designated) were already ascribed to them bythe oldest of the Greek poets. It might be supposed,indeed, from the hint of spotless innocence, that Homerhere touched the verge of his knowledge; but as he is,perhaps, the most carefully minute of all poets, and hasusually a reason for every thing he says, it is much morelikely that there was something in the religious habitsand doctrines of those Asiatic tribes which compelled theveneration of the Greeks.The fame of Egypt offered the poet a fertile theme.He celebrates the wealth of Thebes and its hundred gates,from each of which it could send forth 200 armed men.In a spirit of simplicity he mentions the rankness andaromatic character of Egyptian vegetation ; the skill ofthe people in the use of drugs ; and the nepenthes, GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.bably opium, by which they cured even the pains ofgrief. With the mention of Egypt he couples that ofLibya and of the Erembi, the name of the Arabs in theEast. " In Libya," says the poet, " no man feels want,neither the king nor the shepherd ; sheep yean three timesin the year, and the lambs have horns at their birth."These latter facts are correct, as well as the custom ofthe Africans, from which the Lotophagi or lotus-eatersobtained their designation. Though Homer did not knowIndia, locally or by name, yet he seems to have beenaware that there were black men to the east of that partof the earth with which he was acquainted. Thus,he says, Neptune visited the ethiopians, " the farthestof men, who are divided in two, some under the risingand some under the setting sun." When Homer makesMenelaus visit, in the course of his voyage, the Sicilians,Libyans and Erembi, he appears to be ignorant that theMediterranean and Red Seas are separated from eachother by the Isthmus of Suez ; neither was he acquaintedwith the seven mouths of the Nile. His ignorance onthese points was admitted by his warmest admirers inancient times.Menelaus, while relating in the Odyssey the historyof his voyages, boasts on several occasions of the wealthhe accumulated by piratical depredations. Indeed, it ismanifest that piracy was a common, perhaps an honourable,profession in those days. Naval warfare was by nomeans unknown to the Greeks, as appears by Homer'smaking mention of boarding pikes. Yet their vessels,such at least as were built by Ulysses at the island ofCirce, were nothing more than large boats with one mastand sail, and with a small fore deck on which the cablewas coiled : on or below this deck the chief of the crewtook his rest when circumstances prevented his landing.These slight vessels of the Homeric age were painted redwith minium, procured, most probably, from Sinope.Homer seems to have thought a voyage across the seafrom Crete to Egypt a singularly bold adventure.Though the gods of Homer and other early GrecianCHAP. II. THE GREEKS. 1 6poets frequently resorted to ethiopia to celebrate theirfestivities, yet neither the South nor the East can be lookedupon as the region of fable in the primitive geographyof the Greeks. When we turn to the West and North,we find a much larger share mythic story mingling itselfwith the slender materials of certain information. Thestraits which separate Italy and Sicily are the portalswhich conduct Homer to the regions of fable ; all beyondthem is marvellous, and it is in this quarter alone thatthe pictures of the poet lose the colour of reality. OfSicily he had some faint ■ knowledge ; the names of theSicani and Siculi had reached him, and the account ofthe Cyclops .is too true a picture of savage life to allowus to suppose it a mere sketch of fancy. The pictureof men who, " relying on the gods for subsistence,neither sow nor reap ; who live in caves on the tops ofmountains, without laws or a chief, and not caring forone another ; and who are ignorant of the use of ships,by which the luxuries of life are diffused ;" such a picture,it is evident, is drawn with fidelity from the rudestcondition of savage life.From Sicily Ulysses is conducted by the poet to theisles of aeolus, from whom the hero obtains a bag containingthe winds : with this present he sets sail, and iswafted gently homewards. On the tenth day Ithaca isalready in sight, when, overcome with fatigue, he unluckilyfalls asleep, and his companions cut the bag, supposingit to be filled with treasures. Instantly the windsrush forth, and a hurricane arises, which drives the shipback to the isle of aeolus. The next place which Ulyssesreaches is the country of the Lcestrygons, a race of cannibals; and it is historically important to observe, thatHomer places these fairly in the region of the miraculous.He next arrives at JEcea, the island of Circe, from whichhe appears to lose sight altogether of the land of certainty.The hero, receiving the instructions of Circe,crosses the ocean to the shores of Proserpine, to the placewhere the Acheron, Periphlegcthon, and other tributaryrivers flow into the Styx. Sailing the whole day, heJ G GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.comes at last to the ends of the ocean, where the Cimmeriandwell, wrapped in profound gloom ; for theysee neither the rising nor the setting sun, but the veil ofnight is constantly spread above them. Having herevisited the infernal regions, he re-embarks, quits theocean, and reaches the isle of Circe in the smooth sea atthe first appearance of Aurora. On his voyage homewardafterwards he passes the Plantae, or wanderingrocks, escapes the Sirens, with the dangers of Scylla andCharybdis, and thus returns once more within the circleof probability.It is in vain that commentators and scholiast haveendeavoured to give precision to Homer's geography ofthe West. In vain they exhaust their learning to provethat Ulysses did not really sail into the Atlantic ; yetthe poet expressly says that he reached even the uttermostbounds of the ocean. But what business havechart and compass in the ocean of the early Grecian poets?It is true that Ulysses made but one day's sail fromthe isle of Circe ; but then it must be observed, that inthat island were the choirs of Aurora and the rising ofthe sun, so that the ends of the ocean could not be faroff; besides, it is unreasonable to limit the speed of themariner who profited from the counsels of a goddess,and who could occasionally freight his ship with thewinds of aeolus. Some learned scholars have fixed onthe promontory of Circle, once nearly insulated by thePontine marshes, as the island of the nymph ; and at asuitable distance they have found the Styx and descentof Avernus. They thus inadvertently bring Cimmerianand its perpetual darkness into the smiling clime of Italy.The same system finds in Strongly the once wanderingrocks, and in Lipari the domain of Eolus. But in factthe old bard's geographical information beyond thenearest shores of Italy is purely Hesperian ; that is tosay, it is wholly derived from myths and traditions,without the slightest reference to distance or local details.Homer had heard of the ocean and Cimmeria in thewest, but he knew not how far off they were. HeCHAP. II. THE GREEKS. 1 7never purposely alloys the truth, or postpones it to fiction;but, on the other hand, he relates mythical traditions asreadily as facts ; and we shall find, as we proceed, thatthe bulk of these traditions always pointed to the WesternOcean.When the stream of mankind was flowing constantlytowards the West, it is no wonder that the weak refluxof positive information from that quarter should exhibitonly the impulses of hope and superstition. Greece wasnearly on the western verge of the world, as it was knownto Homer, and it was natural for him to give wing tohis imagination as he turned towards the dim prospectswhich spread beyond ; but that his fables, far frombeing arbitrary, were founded on very ancient andwidely-diffused myths, will clearly appear when wecome to treat of the geography of the Hindoos.Among the strange nations with which Ulysses becameacquainted in his wanderings, the Pkaacians deservea moment's attention. It appears that they weremuch more refined and industrious than the Greeks ;that they were better informed in the arts, more skilfulnavigators, and more addicted to commerce. Theyinhabited the island of Siberia, supposed to be the sameas Corcyra, having been forced to leave their formerabode in Hyperaemia, from the troublesome neighbourhoodof the Cyclops. This mention of a retrograde movementfrom west to east, and of a people more cultivated thanthe Greeks, is extremely remarkable at so early an age.Homer names likewise the Siculi and Sicani, historicnames ; but yet his island Trinacria is rather mythicthan real ; he places in it, with mythical propriety, theflocks and herds of the sun. It is remarkable, too, thathe calls it Thrinakia, from which it is manifest that theword was strange to him, and not of Greek derivation.Indeed, it is more probable that Sicily had its name ofTrinacria, or three-peaked, from superstition, than fromany acquaintance with its figure, which could hardly beknown in the infancy of navigation.voi . r. c18 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.Homer s knowledge, it is evident, hardly extendedwestward beyond Greece ; but Hesiod, who lived perhapsa century later (750 B. C), surprises us by hismention of " King Latins, who ruled over all theTyrseni." His acquaintance with the west, indeed,appears to have reached beyond Italy ; for, in conjunctionwith the Scythianss and Ethiopians, he mentionsthe Lygurians, who at that time probably occupiedthe whole length of coast from Spain to the Alps.Hesiod also names the Ister, or Danube, the Phases,and the Eridanus, a name, however, which was sovaguely employed by the early Greek writers, that itwould be hazardous to suppose it in this instance appliedto the river Po. The Nile, known to Homer as theJEgyptus, received from Hesiod its proper designation,along with its seven mouths.Ulysses never boasts of being the first who navigatedthe Western Ocean ; but he was the first who escapedthe dangers of the Plantae, with the exception of Jason,to whom propitious Juno kindly lent her assistance toguide the Argo through the rocks. This mention ofthe chief Argonaut by the father of Grecian poetry iscalculated to awaken regret at the imperfect accountswhich remain of an expedition so important in the historyof primitive geography. Many able scholars, indeed,have assented to the opinion of Gesner, that thepoem of the Argonauts which bears the name of Orpheusis at least as ancient as the time of Homer; but a preponderatingweight of internal evidence and of authorityassigns it to a much later age. It appears, however, tohave been really compiled from old current traditions,and may, on that account, be employed to illustrate theprimitive geography of the Greeks.Jason and the Argonaut ic Expedition.As to the reality of the Argonautic expedition therecannot be any reasonable doubt. Like all other eventsCHAP. II. THE GREEKS. 19of remote antiquity, it comes to us mixed with muchthat is fabulous ; but yet the enterprise which formsthe basis of the story has nothing in it of an improbablecharacter. Ancient writers unanimously state, thatJason built a ship of unusual size ; manned a fleet withthe bravest warriors of Greece ; and directed his courseto Colchis in the Euxine Sea. The date usually assignedto this expedition is the year 1263 before theChristian era. Traditions remain which prove thatJason was not the first Greek who attempted this navigation.Sinope is supposed to have been founded bysome of the followers of that Apis or Paphos who migratedfrom Argos into Egypt in the year 1866 B. C.Phryxus and Helle, whose story is almost lost in fable,preceded Jason by perhaps a century. Corns, mentionedby Homer, was founded by the son of Phryxus ;and a temple built by him at Thence, to the east ofTrebizond, is said by Pausanias to have served as amodel to the Dioscuri, for that which they founded ontheir return home. The tradition of Jason's expeditionwas preserved in Colchis and Armenia, where hewas said to have founded cities ; nay, he was eventhought to have penetrated into Media. The river Parthenonflowing into the Euxine, and the Halizones whoinhabited the shores of that sea, suggest, at once, Boeotiaand Samos, where the same names occur. As a generalproof, however, of the early acquaintance of the Greekswith the Euxine, it may be sufficient to observe thatthe Grecian colonies in that sea, which acquired historicalimportance, preceded, by more than two centuries,those of Sicily and the West.The local traditions regarding Jason, and the monumentsof his progress along the shores of the Euxine,were too numerous and positive in antiquity to allow ofany doubts as to the existence of that hero. All authorsconduct him to the city of iEc-tcs. That heshould carry off the king's daughter is consistent withthe manners of the age ; that the proposed object ofthe enterprise should, at this distance of time, be, or20 , GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.appear to be, a fable, is not less to be expected. A duemixture of fable, in a case like this, is a proof of genuineantiquity ; yet, as many fables in antiquity unquestionablyarose from the ambiguities of language,some attention is due to the ingenious conjecture whichsupposes that the story of the golden fleece had itsorigin in a miscomprehension or a play of words : theword which signifies wealth or a treasure in the Phoenicianlanguage (melon), resembling that which, inGreek, means a fleece (gallon). Phoenicians probablyhad a share in the expedition ; and the pilot Acresis. said to have been of that nation.Of the return of Jason there existed no local traditionsor monuments of a permanent nature, and allthe accounts remaining to us of his expedition werewritten many centuries later than the achievements towhich they refer. Hence it is that the hero of theArgonauts, like the Ulysses of Homer, is made to exploreall the wonders of the poetic world ; and the storyof his wanderings becomes the vehicle by which the relaterpours abroad the full measure of his geographicknowledge.The Euxine Sea, as it appears from Minerals, wasanciently thought to be the ocean ; its eastern andnorthern shores were evidently unknown to Homer.Those who first celebrated the adventures of Jason,therefore, naturally extended his wanderings into aquarter where the ignorance of the age opposed no obstaclesto fiction, and succeeding ages were taught tobelieve that the Argonauts returned to Greece, not bythe Hellespont, but through the ocean. As the increaseof geographical knowledge, however, gradually disclosedthe impossibility of such a voyage, various fictions wereadded in detail to support the grand outlines of hisstory. The incongruities which, in the course of centuries,were thus heaped together by poetic ingenuitydo not in the least affect the authenticity of the Argonauticexpedition.The author of the Orphic Argonauts appears to haveCHAP. II. THE GREEKS. 21had much vague information respecting the nationsround the Euxine Sea. In conducting his hero northwardsfrom Colchis, he mentions the Auri, Lcelii.Nomads, and the Caspian nation ; in the Palus Mantishe finds, besides the bowed Scythianss, the Mceotians,Sauromatians, Gates, Gymni, and the Arimaspes, apeople with the deformity of Cyclops, but rich in flocks.The fabulous navigation commences with propriety at theremotest extremity of this inland sea, and at the termof the writer's positive knowledge. The Argonauts,having crossed the Palus Maeotis, enter a great gulfleading into the Cronian Ocean. They row unceasinglyfor nine days and nights, and reach on the tenththe Cronian Sea beyond the Riphcean mountains. Beinghere in danger, they disembark, by the advice of Anciens,and haul the ship along the shore with a rope. Continuingthe voyage for six days, they reach the Macedonians(so named from their longevity), the People of Dreams,and afterwards the Cimmerian. Our adventurers nextapproach the Aeherontian shores, Hermione, and thedwellings of the justest men, near which is the approachto the infernal regions. Leaving these, they embark onthe Western Ocean with the breeze of Zephyr ; but beforethey proceed far, the ship Argo utters a warning speech,and foretels the punishment of their crimes. With difficultythey pass the Iernis or the Iernidcs (for the poetat one time employs the singular and at another the pluralnumber), and a storm arises which drives them foreleven days through the wide ocean quite ignorant oftheir course. At length Anciens descries the Isle of Ceres,which is known by its tall fir trees; but as it proves inaccessible,he is obliged to steer for the Isle of Circe,which is reached in three days. Thence the Argonautsarrive at the shores of Tartessus and the pillars of Hercules,cross the Sardinian and Tuscan Seas, and are opportunelyrescued from the flames of Etna. by the aid ofThetis.The mention which occurs in this poem of the Caspiannation, of the Gates and of Iernis (Hibernia),c S12 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.uliows a considerable store of vague information; and eventhe idea, of sailing round Europe from the Euxine, bythe Cronian Sea and the land of the Cimmerian, is ofgreat importance in a historic survey of the progress ofgeographical discovery. But the Orphan Argonauts,as they are called, are as little distinguished by accuracyas by poetic beauties. The geographical errors of theancient poets, however, who gleaned their knowledgechiefly from oral traditions, cause us no surprise ; butit is truly astonishing to see how modern critics overlookthe rights of ignorance and of the poetic character,and in vain attempt to force their authors into literalprecision. The same desire to fill up the vacancies ofknowledge, and to exhibit every thing complete, whichconstantly led astray the writers of antiquity, still actuatesthe scholars who interpret them, to reject every expressionas spurious which cannot be forced into acorrespondence with the knowledge of the present day-theauthor of the Argonauts makes the Tanais andthe Phasis branches of the Araxes ; an error of suchmagnitude as to show that he had no actual knowledgeof the regions he describes. Yet these names are, originally,all general terms meaning a river, and may haveoften changed their application. Homer places theCimmerian at the end of the ocean ; in the Argonautsthey are situated between the Western Ocean and theCronian Sea. The old bard mentions in general termsthe gloom of the Cimmerian land, which never enjoysthe beams of day ; the poet of the Argonauts venturesto explain the cause of this privation, and thus gives anopportunity to learned scholars to examine where theCimmeria of antiquity was actually situated ; but howis it possible to determine the position of a countrywhich was shaded from the sun by Calpe and theRiphaean Mountains on the east, by Fhlegra on thesouth, and by the Alps on the west ? Such gross errorswith regard to distances and positions serve only toshow how little the knowledge of the author extendedbeyond an acquaintance with names alone.CHAP. II. - THE GREEKS. 23But perhaps it may be asked, who were the Cimmerian? to this the answer must be, that they were theinhabitants of Cimmeria ; for in truth they make nofigure in the poets ; they are merely the implied possessorsof Cimmeria, the land of darkness, which is the proper subjectof the myth. But the early disappearance of this fabulousland and of its melancholy occupants from Grecianpoetry, immediately suggests that its existence was notvouched by the national mythology. And indeed thePhoenician language explains at once the origin of thelegend. The word cimrire, (nuns) signifying deep darkness,occurs in Job, iii. 5. " Let darkness and the shadowof death stain it ; let a cloud dwell upon it ; let the blacknessof the day terrify it." But why, it may again beasked, did the Phoenicians suppose a land of darknessin the west ? This is a question which admits only ofa conjectural solution. They may have confoundedlegends by the ambiguity of language ; they may havelearned from the Indians with whom they traded thatthe Goddess Caumdri presides over the west; or theymay have been informed from the same source;, that thewest is the country of the moon, in Arabic Tamar. Butperhaps the mythical Cimmeria had an origin nearerhome; in Job, xxxviii. £). we find that a thick darknesswas the swaddling band of the ocean. Whatever was theorigin of this belief, it is certain, that the Arabs retained itin the middle ages; and the navigators of that nation,who ventured far into the Atlantic, were generallyforced back again, as they reported, by the deep darknesswhich lowered over the Avert.*Some writers of eminence, finding the western Cimmerianfabulous, have ventured to consider their namesakeson the Euxine as members of the same spuriousfamily ; but these last belong to authentic history]: theyleft monuments behind them, and are doubly precious inthe eyes of the enquirer, from the combined circumstancesof their antiquity and their local situation. tIbn el Vardi, Koticeset Extraitsdes MSS. dc la Bibliotheca du Roi, II.f Tile Acheron, or river that bounds the infernal region*, and the Ely.lum, or abode of gladness, both connected in mythology with the CimexI24' GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.It was not without reason that the author of theOrphic Argonauts placed a city called Hermione nearthe Acherontian shores. The obscurity of this passageis cleared up on reflecting that at Hermione in Argoliswas a temple dedicated to the triple Hecate, or, as itwas vulgarly understood, to Juno, Proserpine, and Ceres.Near this temple there was also a fabled descent to Hades.As the voyage of Jason from Colchis to the oceanwas always handed down as an essential part of his history,it is no wonder that many should have supposedhim to have ascended the Tanais, the sources of whichwere still unknown. Pindar dares even to transport theArgonauts to the Erythraean or Southern Ocean ; and ashehad no knowledge, probably, of the Arabian Gulf,he lets them reach the Mediterranean by dragging theirvessel for twelve days over the Libyan continent. He-catalansthought to improve on this idea, when he supposedthat Jason sailed through the Phasis into theocean, and from the ocean into the Nile, thus betrayingwithin what narrow limits his knowledge was boundedon the east. The idea, too, which was entertained of aconnection existing between the sources of rivers andthe ocean shows how little the first principles of physicalgeography had hitherto engaged the attention of philosophers.In a later age, when the Athenian and Milesiancolonies in the Euxine had completely exploredits shores, and found no egress to the ocean, the poetswho sung the adventures of Jason were obliged to conducttheir hero up the Danube and Save, and overlandinto the Adriatic ; and industriously laboured to embellishand confound the traditions of antiquity.The voyage of a single day, in which Ulysses reachedthe ends of the ocean ; the intricate circumnavigation ofEurope performed by Jason in less than a month, thoughdriven from his course by violent tempests ; the maria,or land of darkness, were also both derived from the same Phoeniciansource ; Each-ron in Hebrew signifying the last (Swelling or end ; and Alixim,the shut or happy. See Chart. These foreign additions to the pelagianmythology never made a deep impression on the Greeks ; they were soonresigned wholly to the poets.CHAP. II. THE GREEKS. 25nceuvre of the Argonauts in dragging their ship alongthe shore with a rope, to avoid the perils of the deep ;and Pindar's account of their crossing the continent ofLibya in twelve days, all combine to illustrate the inadequateideas entertained by the early Greeks of themagnitude of the earth's surface and of the ocean.The accurate geographical knowledge of the Greeks,in Homer's time and the ages immediately succeeding,may, without much injustice, be stated as not extendingfar beyond Greece, Egypt, Asia Minor, and the islandsBeyond these limits all objects appear in the prismatichues of wonder and enchantment ; we find nothing butmonsters, nations of dreams, and the abodes of bliss.These delusive forms were chiefly gathered in the westernor rather north-western quarter of the hemisphere.All the early writers in Greece believed in the existenceof certain regions situated in thebes beyond the boundsof their actual knowledge, and, as it appears, of toofugitive a nature to be ever fixed within the circle ofauthentic geography. Homer describes at the extremityof the Ocean the Elysian plain, " where, under a serenesky, the favourites of Jove, exempt from the commonlot of mortals, enjoy eternal felicity." Hesiod, in likemanner, sets the Happy Isles, the abode of departedheroes, beyond the deep ocean. The Hesperia of theGreeks continually fled before them as their knowledgeadvanced, and they saw the terrestrial paradise still disappearingin the West.26 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.CHAP. III.GREEKS CONTINUED. HISTORIC AGE.SYSTEMS OF EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHERS. HERODOTUS. HISLITERARY ARDOUR AND SUCCESS. HIS TRAVELS. DescribesTHE Scythian. RECEIVED INTELLIGENCE RE-Speaking THE ARIMASPS AND GRIFFONS. IN VAIN SOUGHTTHE Hyperborean. EFFECT OF CLIMATE ON THE GROWTHOF HORNS. EXTENT OF THE KNOWLEDGE HE ACQUIREDFROM THE Scythian. THE Cimmerian OF THE Bosphorus.THEIR ORIGIN CONJECTURED. THE CASPIAN SEA.HERODOTUS ACQUAINTED WITH THE Bactria, AND WITHINDIA. EASTERN ethiopians. THE GREAT ANTS OFINDIA WHICH GUARD THE GOLD. Egypt. THE AUTO-molesOR EXILES. ROUTE UP THE NILE, AND TO BORNOU.JOURNEY OF THE NASAMONES TO THE NIGER. ALLEGEDCIRCUMNAVIGATION OF AFRICA UNDER KING NF.CHOS.VOYAGE OF SATASPES. HERODOTUS IGNORANT OF THE WEST.THE RIVER ERIDANUS AND THE RIPH.SAN MOUNTAINS.COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE OF THE GREEKS. SUMMARY.While the poets of Greece perpetuated the memory ofthose happy regions of the West where innocence andcontentment were supposed still to exist unalloyed, itwas the occupation of Grecian philosophers to devisecosmological systems equally remote from truth andreality, and not unfrequently drawn, perhaps, from thesame ample stores of Indian mythology. Brilliant fictionsand daring hypotheses are, perhaps, the naturalprecursors of successful investigation : they serve at leastto awaken curiosity ; and where the freedom of the humanmind is not fettered by the arts of an interestedpriesthood, even the fancies and extravagances of activeintellect make some progress towards the discovery oftruth.Thales (600 B. C.) taught the sphericity of theearth ; but Anaximander, his disciple, compared it to acylinder ; Leucippus gave it the shape of a drum ; otherspreferred the cubic form ; and some, following Xeno-CHAP. III. THE GREEKS. 2?thanes and Anaximenes, believed it to be a high mountain,the base of which has an infinite extension, whilethe stars float round its summit. Heraclitus, again, differingfrom the others, taught that the earth has thefigure of a ship. These doctrines are all but repetitionsof those taught by the different Indian sects, who assignto the earth the figure, or rather figures, of Mount Meru,and that of the mysterious ship Argue. The Greeksmay be excused for believing absurdities taught with somuch solemnity, and surrounded with such an apparatusof learning. Intellectual natures are always prone tobelieve, from the love they bear to knowledge ; but whenonce stored with ideas, they are sure to exercise an independentjudgment. Anaximander is said also to havebeen the first to draw a map of the world. The mapsof Sesostris, and those which the Colchians, instructedby that conqueror, are said to have inscribed on stonepillars, may safely be regarded as fabulous.While science was thus engaged in fixing the knowledgeof the earth, which had been chiefly collected bycommercial voyages, there appeared in Greece one ofthose extraordinary men who, though themselves calledforth, perhaps, by the spirit of the age in which they live,seem to be self-created agents of a new order of things.Herodotus read his books, which were named from theMuses, before the senate at Athens, in the year 445B. C. ; and the volumes of the Father of Historymay even at the present day be read with profit anddelight. He cannot be too much admired, whether weconsider the zeal with which he sought for information,the success which attended his exertions, or the elegancewith which he knew how to impart what he had acquired.As our knowledge of the globe has increased, thestatements of Herodotus have been more and more confirmed; the wonderful stories which he relates fromhearsay have become so many proofs of his veracity ;and if he occasionally betrays a credulity which cannotbe justified, it must certainly be excused by those who28 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.consider what a value attached even to fictions in thefirst days of authentic history.Herodotus was a native of Halicarnassus, a commerciallittle city in Caria. He appears to have been of adistinguished family, and probably imbibed the love oflearning from his uncle Panyasis, a celebrated epic poet,whom the critics of antiquity ranked next to Homer.His rank, and perhaps some commercial engagements,procured him facility of intercourse with the variousnations which he visited in his travels. These extendedto every quarter of the then known world. Herodotuspenetrated in the West afar as Pceonia, the modern Servia;he visited the Greek colonies in the Euxine, and eventravelled over a considerable portion of Southern Russia :in the East his journeys reached as far as Babylon andSusa : Tyre also detained him for a while j but Egypt,then the seat of arts and learning, was a chief object ofhis attention ; and the singularly complete descriptionwhich he has transmitted of that country proves thathe resided in it for a longer period. The Greek coloniesof Cyrene were also visited by him ; and the vivid pictureswhich he has drawn of the plains of Thessaly andof the pass of Thermopylae prove that he had examined indetail the peninsula of Greece. Herodotus first read hishistories at the Olympic games, where he received theunbounded applause of his nation. Twelve years laterhe read them again (probably enlarged and amended)before the senate at Athens. The gratitude of theAthenians to the father of history was not confined toapplause alone ; they even voted him a gift of tentalents. Yet he did not fix his residence in the city ofthe Muses, but preferred accompanying the Atheniancolony which settled a few years afterwards at Thrum,near Sybaris, in the south of Italy ; and there he is supposedto have ended his days, at a very advanced age.Herodotus made great accessions to the knowledge ofEastern Europe. The Ister (Danube) rises, he says, inthe country of the Celts, near a place called Pyrene ; sixrivers flow into it from the North, and ten from theCHAP. III. THE GREEKS. 29South. Among these tributaries may be distinguishedthe Theirs, flowing through the great plain of Hungary.The ancients appear to have long considered the Saveas the chief branch of the Danube; and the Pyrene, nearwhich Herodotus says this river rises, is a general Celticnamefor high mountains, still preserved, with a slight modification,in the Brenner Alps, among which the Save hasits sources. The Scythianss, spread over the countrynear the Tanais or Don, were attentively surveyed bythe inquisitive Grecian. He distinguishes three greathordes : viz. the Royal Scythianss, who dwelt on thebanks of the Tanais ; the Nomadic or wandering Scythian,who spread their tents in the great steppes to thenorth of the Crimea ; and the agricultural Scythianss,whose possessions extended towards the fertile banks ofthe Bog and Dnieper. The Scythianss, he tells us, originallydwelt on the eastern side of the Caspian Sea. Intheir migration westward they crossed the great riverAraxes ; and arriving in the neighbourhood of the PalusMaeotis, they expelled the Cimmerian from their possessionsin that country. This event took place, accordingto Scythian tradition, exactly one thousand years beforethe time of Darius, or fifteen centuries before the Christianera.The country beyond the Ister, a vast and boundlessspace, was inhabited, as far as he could learn, by theSigynte, who reached on the other side to the Veneti, onthe Adriatic. The horses of that people were verysmall, and long haired. They were unable to carrymen, but when yoked to carriages were remarkablyswift. This answers the description of the Swedishponies, which are still found wild in the woods of Goth-land.The islands in the Gulf of Venice have also preservedthe same breed. The name of the Sigynce wasused by their neighbours as equivalent to merchant.The GcttE are described by Herodotus as the bravestand most upright of the Thracianss. " They pretend,"he says, " to immortality : whenever any one dies, theybelieve him to be received into the presence of their god30 GEOGRAPHY OP THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.Zamolxis. Each man has several wives, who, when hedies, are emulous to sacrifice themselves on the tomb oftheir husband." To the north-east of the Scythianss werethe Argippcei, who shaved their heads. They passed theirlives under trees, never took up arms, and being thoughtsacred characters, suffered no molestation ; vegetablesand milk, with a beverage called ashy, or ask, weretheir only nourishment. Here we have a picture of theIndian faquir. To the east of the Argippcei dwelt theIssedones, among whom the women enjoyed morethan ordinary consideration. From this people Aristaeusthe poet had received some intelligence respecting theArimasps and Griffons, whom Herodotus anxiously wishedto see. He learned that the latter possessed golden treasures,of which it was the occupation of the former todespoil them. The Hyperboreans also seemed to flycontinually before the friendly enquiries, of our traveller,who was at last informed that they dwelt to the northof the Argippcei, and that their possessions extended tothe sea. Among the nations dwelling to the north of theScythianss were the Androphagi, and the Mclanehlceni orblack-mantled, of whom the latter alone were cannibals.A people, called by Herodotus Jyrcce, and situated to theeast of the Tanais, have probably left their name to theriver Yrgis.The Scythianss did not appear to the discriminatingGreek as barbarians ; on the contrary, he commendsthem as an upright and civilised nation, though, as hecharacteristically observes, " there are none among themof eminent learning or genius." It is not surprisingthat when Herodotus reached the bounds of authenticinformation in his enquiries after the Hyperboreans, heshould positively affirm, " that in the north of Europethere are many wonderful things, and a prodigiousquantity of gold." He had heard of the long winters'nights of the North, but could not believe that thepeople who lived beyond thaMassagetce slept six monthsin the year. The cold of winter, he says, was so severein the country north of the Euxine, that the ScythianssCHAP. III. THE Cheeks. 31could cross the Cimmerian Bosphorus with their loadedwaggons to the country of the Indians. By these hemeans the people called by Strabo Sindi, and who formerlyoccupied the plains at the mouth of the Cuban.Having learned from Homer that lambs in Libya havehorns at their birth, and seeing that sheep in Scythiaremained hornless all their lives, he concluded that awarm climate is especially favourable to the growth ofhorns. This was the error of a too narrow experience ;had he seen the four and six-home sheep of the Baltic,he would have immediately discarded his frail theory.The observation, however, that horses are much betterable to endure the rigours of a northern climate thanasses, was just and valuable.It is impossible to ascertain, with perfect precision,the regions occupied by the various nations which Herodotusenumerates ; and the geographers, who have undertakento expound him, have taken such liberties withthe text, that their deductions, however ingenious, canseldom be relied on. In a primitive state of society,nations are usually divided into many different tribes, sothat a geographical nomenclature, obtained from a Nomadicpeople, seldom reaches to a great distance. Intercourse,or mutual acquaintance, rarely exists amongthose simple communities, where there is not some originalaffinity of race and language. How then is itpossible to credit the opinion, that the Issedones, withwhom terminates the knowledge of Herodotus towardsthe East, were the inhabitants of Chinese Tartary ?How much more probable is it that they were the Ash,or Asian (perhaps Asi-t<ini}, who descended, a fewcenturies later, from the northern valleys of the Belurtag,to destroy the Greek kingdom of Bactria, and who aremanifestly the Issedones of Ptolemy. The civilisationof the Asi, and their respectful demeanour towards females,is remarked by the early Chinese historians, inlanguage similar to that employed by Herodotus whenhe speaks of the Issedones. The remnant of the greatnation of the Asi, at present inhabiting the Caucasus, are32 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.still called by the Russians Ossetinzi. It is not so surprisingthat the Scythianss, themselves wanderers fromthe plains of Inner Asia, should have maintained a connectionwith a nation belonging to the same great familyof mankind.But it may be asked, who were the Scythianss ? Canthe Scythian words preserved by Herodotus, arimasp,one-eyed, and oiarpata, a man-killer, or Amazon, be nowexplained from any known language ? * The positivetestimony of Herodotus, however, that the Scythianss wereoriginally connected with the Surrogate, is quite sufficientto overbalance the weight of this objection, and toprove that they belonged to the Indo-Teutonic race.But the Cimmerian of the Bosphorus, that ancientpeople, some monuments of whom were still visible inthe time of Herodotus, and who, unlike the Cimmerianof the West, gave their name to the country, instead oftaking one from it ; how are their race and derivationto be discovered ? In order to investigate this point, onprinciples drawn from the general experience of historyand the philosophy of language, it will be necessary tocommence by asking, in what tongue does the name ofthe Cimmerian signify a man ? for a great majority ofthe primitive national designations known in historyhave had originally the simple meaning of men or people A'Now it appears that in the Georgian language marisignifies a man; and that word hardly differs in soundfrom the Greek word kimmerioi. Hence it might beconcluded that the Cimmerian were a branch of theGeorgian nation, who, like other Caucasian tribes, advancedto the Tanais, and were driven back again. TheThe learned are disposed to decide this question in the negative ; butit would be disingenuous in me not to confess, that I feel inclined to maintainthe affirmative. The Scythian word arimasp, formed from aria, one(or single rather, for it is evidently compound and spu, an eye, may be translatedinto Greek by tremors. The Greek eremos, which passed from thesense of single to that of soli/art/ and wretched 'alike one, alone, lone), is representedin the last signification by the German arm [Walter's gloss.)The Scythian spu may be the root of the word spy. Oiarpata y an Amazon,is compounded ofoiar, Scythe. a man, neri, Hung fir, Lat. air, Armed. ; andpath, Scythe. to kill, batten goth. (whence' batialum ,hattuo, Lat. sphatto,(jT.■)■ For examples, see Adeline's " Attested Gesch. dcr Deutsche."CHAP. III. THE GREEKS. 33Thracian goddess Cimmerian* might be supposed to bethetutelar deity of the nation ; but these conjecturesmust not be implicitly adopted. The tribes of thePoniard or Comani (for these names are constantlyconfounded) held a distinguished place among the restlesswarrior tribes of the Indian Caucasus; they also werecalled Sacre, and might have preceded the Getic Scythianof Herodotus in their course to the Tanais, as aforemost wave of the same great tide. The Cameraand Caumdri, the young man and maiden, or Mars andBellona of the Hindoo pantheon, have found their wayinto the languages and superstitions of many nations ;and conspicuous names of this sort, when adopted asnational designations, are apt to suggest a proximateconnection where it never really existed. But in orderto estimate fairly the merits of the first conjecture, itmust be remembered that the Cimmerian, when drivenby the Scythianss from their possessions on the Bosphorus,instead of retiring into Europe, crossed the Euxine intoPontus, whence they afterwards made some formidableirruptions into the neighbouring states ; that the worshipof Romana (a variation of Contra), a Bellona, surroundedby six thousand priests, appears to have hadits origin in Pontus ; and, finally, that the Georgian countrieshave been always called Comania by the orientals.Herodotus obtained information of a very correct naturerespecting the Caspian Sea : " The sea," he observes,which the Greeks navigate (the Mediterranean); and thatbeyond the Pillars of Hercules, which is called the Atlantic;and the Erythraean, are all supposed to be but parts of thesame ocean ; but the Caspian is itself a distinct sea : itslength is such that a vessel may be rowed from one end tothe other in fifteen days ; and in the broadest part the passagemay be made in eight." These measures are believedto be perfectly exact. The geographers of a later age, andStrabo among the number, while they drew their mapsof the world in conformity with arbitrary hypotheses,rejected the authority of Herodotus, and made the CasHesych'ms.Vois. i. D31 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.pian communicate with the northern ocean by a longchannel half a mile wide : this fanciful arrangement wasagain rejected by Ptolemy, who was constrained, however,by his system to neglect the measures of Herodotus;and it was not till the eighteenth century that the CaspianSea resumed in our maps the oblong form whichwas accurately given to it by the father of history.In Asia, the knowledge of Herodotus reached but alittle way, although it extended far beyond that of hiscountrymen. The country between the Erythraean, orsouthern sea, and the Euxine, was divided between fournations, viz. the Persians ,Medes,Sapirs, (Surpass, whosename remains to Sherman,) and Colchians. " Thecountry beyond these is bounded," he says, " on the eastby the Erythraean, and on the north by the Caspian Seaand the Araxes, which flows towards the east. Asia isinhabited as far as India ; but farther to the east thereis nothing but desert, and nobody is acquainted with it."The peninsulas of Asia Minor and Arabia he makesmuch too narrow ; an error in which he w r as followed byPliny, who compares the peninsula of Arabia to that ofItaly. Among the tributaries of the Persian empire,Herodotus enumerates the Parthian, Chorasmiuns, theUti (Uzes?), and Sogdians: he also mentions the Bac-trans,the farthest limit of his knowledge in that quarter,and the Massagetce to the east of the Caspian, who devouredtheir parents worn out with age and infirmity.India was but a recent discovery in the time of Herodotus; it is no wonder, therefore, that his knowledge ofit should be extremely limited: indeed, he knew nothingof that country beyond the river Indus. " The greaterpart of Asia," he tells us, " was discovered by Darius.That prince wishing to know into what part of the seathe river Indus falls (the only river besides the Nile inwhich crocodiles are found), sent intelligent men to examineits course. They descended the river towards theeast, and afterwards, turning to the west, arrived intwo years and a half at the same port from which thePhoenicians embarked, who circumnavigated Libya byCHAP. III. THE GREEKS. 35order of the king of Egypt." When Herodotus speaksof the Indus flowing towards the east, it is evident thathis knowledge of that river did not extend beyond theborders of Cashmeer ; but respecting the Indians hecollected many interesting particulars. The .ethiopians,he informs us, served with the Indians in the Persianarmies : the former (by whom are meant the dark racesof the Meckran, as distinguished from the genuineHindoo) differed from the ethiopians of Africa by thesmoothness of their hair. This distinction of eastern andwestern ethiopians, of which some trace is to be foundin Homer, was continued till comparatively recent times.Herodotus remarks that the Indians were the mostnumerous people known ; that they wore cotton, andmade their bows and arrows of reeds, that is, of bamboo :some tribes of them lived on fish, and constructed boatsof reeds, a single joint of the reed being sufficient to makea boat. In the Persian army were Indians who worethe skins of horses' heads for helmets, the ears and maneremaining on as decorations. These appear to be theasva-muchas or horse-faces of the Indian historians. Theabstinence of the Hindoos from animal food did notescape the notice of our author, nor the dissolute mannersand cruelty into which they are misled in many instancesby their wanton superstitions. Herodotus has been censuredfor credulity and want of science, because he saysthat the sun is vertical in India before mid-day ; butthe passage which has incurred this censure will, if examinedliberally, afford new proofs of his well-directedspirit of enquiry. " The Indians," he says, " differ fromother nations, inasmuch as their greatest heat is not atmid-day, but in the morning : they have the heat of avertical sun at the hour when we withdraw from theforum." Here it is evident that he received his intelligencefrom the inhabitants of the coast, where the heatis most intense from sunrise in the morning till theforenoon, when the sea breezes set in.The East is rich in fables, and the great wealth ofIndia is the subject of many a strange fiction. Herod286 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.totus is the first who reports the tale of the enormousants, as large as foxes, that burrow in the golden sandsof India. They are supposed to be extremely formidable,and it is not without great danger that the soilthrown up from their excavations is collected and carriedoff. This story was afterwards repeated by everyGreek who visited the East, and is perhaps a popularPersian tale. The Arabian travellers related it in theeleventh and twelfth centuries ; and even in the sixteenthcentury, Busbequius, who resided some time at thecourt of Solyman the Great, enumerates, among the presentssent by the king of Persia to the sultan, " theskins of ants which are said to be as large as dogs."The knowledge which Herodotus acquired of Africawas relatively very great, and along the course of theNile his information reached as far perhaps as thatwhich we possess at the present day. Egypt he madehis particular study ; he examined it in its whole lengthas far as the cataracts of the Nile, and corrects hiscountrymen, who gave the name of Egypt to the Deltaalone. Although he appears to make Egypt a part ofAfrica, yet he carefully distinguishes between Africansand Egyptians. What were the physical characteristicsof the latter people it is difficult to make out with certainty.The Colchians, it appears, resembled Egyptiansby their dark colour and frizzled hair ; yet that thesewere not negroes may be concluded by the steadiness withwhich he applies the name of Ethiopian to the latter race.Herodotus describes at great length all the wondersand peculiarities of Egypt, and details the positions whichoccur in a four months' voyage up the Nile. " In navigatingthis river," he says, " above Elephantine, thecurrent is so strong, that the boat must be drawn along byropes from both sides : after voyaging four days in thisway a great plain is reached, and an island formed by thebranches of the Nile, of which the ethiopians occupy theone half, the Egyptians the other. Near this island, whichis called Tachompso*, is a great lake, beyond which theIn Coptic, the island of crocodiles.CHAT. III. THE GREEKS. 37navigation of the river is so much impeded by sharp rocks,that a journey of forty days by land must be accomplishedbefore the traveller can again embark with safety ; but 'having gained the deep channel, he arrives in twelve daysat Mere, the great capital of Ethiopia. From thisplace it requires as many days to reach the country ofthe Automoks as it did to arrive here from Elephantine.These Automoles are the descendants of Egyptian soldiers,who left their own country in the reign of Psammetichus,and settled in ethiopia."It is evident that Herodotus speaks of the true Nile,or Bahr-al-abiad, which comes from the south-west.The position of Mere is generally understood to be atthe junction of the Tacazze and Blue river, or Nile ofAbyssinia : here it was that Bruce saw ruins correspondingwith the reputed greatness of the ancient capital ofethiopia. Modern travellers have pushed their enquiriesup the river, in the hopes of discovering some traces of theAutomoles, and they have found that in the very placeindicated by Herodotus there is a people who speak apeculiar language, practise circumcision, have numeroussuperstitions, and call themselves the Exiles, and whoare in all probability an Egyptian colony, although theybelieve themselves to be descended from the Jews.Among the nations inhabiting the coasts of Libya, asfar as the lesser Syrtis, Herodotus found much to engagehis curiosity. The Adyrmachides dressed their food inthe sand heated by the sun's rays. The Nasamones,when they swore to an engagement, drank water out ofeach other's hands ; a custom still observed by the algerinein their marriage ceremonies. The Psylli possessedthe secret of charming or teaching serpents, anart which survives, though the Psylli appear to be extinct.The Lotophagi lived on the fruit of the lotusshrub, as in the days of Homer. As far westward asthe territory of Tripoli his knowledge of the country istolerably accurate ; but beyond that point some vaguemention of Carthage, Mount Atlas, the Pillars of Herd338 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.rules, and Cape Solis, is all that we have to fill up theoutline to the Atlantic.With respect to the route into the interior, our authorcollected some interesting particulars from the Egyptianpriests. The temple of Jupiter Ammon was situated inan oasis at the distance of ten days' journey to the westof Thebes in Upper Egypt : at an equal distance beyondthe temple of Ammon was Augila, another oasis aboundingin springs and date trees : another journey of tendays brought the traveller to the country of the Garamantes,who, mounted on chariots, relentlessly pursuedthe wretched ethiopians. The oasis of Augila still preservesits name and its fertility unchanged after thelapse of so many centuries, and is still the chief haltingplace for the caravans to Bornou, where a large body ofcavalry is constantly employed by the sultan of the countryin capturing slaves for the Egyptian market. Atthe distance of ten days' journey from the Garamantes,Herodotus places the Atarantes, of whom, he observes,that they were the only people in the world who did notknow the use of proper names ; and, in fact, this peculiarityis still met with in the interior of Africa. Anotherten days' march brings us to Mount Atlas, beyondwhich, the ingenuous Grecian confesses that he does notknow the names of any nations ; " but I know," he adds,that the sandy desert extends from Thebes to thepillars of Hercules, and that at the distance of ten days'journey (it is not evident from what point) there is amine of salt with which the people build their houses."He relates an anecdote to prove that the Nile flowsfrom the west, which derives an interest from its relationto that which has proved the most difficult of all geographicalproblems. Five young Nasamones, travellinginto the interior, arrived first at a country filled withwild beasts ; they then directed their march towards thewest, and after wandering a long time through thedesert, at length reached a fertile plain, where, whilethey were engaged in gathering fruits, a party of black'men of diminutive stature rushed from their concealmentCHAP. III. THE GREEKS. 39and seized them. They were then conducted across amarshy country until they at length reached a great cityinhabited by blacks : a great river, in which there werecrocodiles, flowed through the city from west to east.There is no reason to doubt that this river was theNiger ; but who can suppose, with major Kennel andothers, that the great city to which the Nasamones wereconducted was Timbuctoo ? or who will believe that acity of mud hovels, inhabited by a people who have madebut little progress in the arts of social life, can boast anantiquity of two thousand years ?Herodotus relates that the Carthaginians carried on atrade with an African people beyond the Straits of Gibraltar,with whom, nevertheless, they had no personalcommunication. Having arrived at the place, they arrangedtheir goods in a number of small heaps, andretired ; the natives then came forward, and placed oppositeto those heaps the wares which they were willingto give for them in exchange : if the merchant wassatisfied with the bargain, he took away the offered commodities,and left his own ; if not, he carried away thelatter, and the traffick was, for that turn, at an end.This singular story, it is remarkable, has been repeatedby almost all the Arabian geographers ; only that theyremove the scene of this dumb commerce from the coastto the remotest parts of the interior. At the presentday the Moors who trade across the desert give the samerelation; and when we consider that a similar mode ofdealing existed for ages on the borders of China, thestory must not be rejected as altogether incredible.With respect to the southern part of the African continent,Herodotus informs us that the .ethiopians, atthe extremities of the earth, are Macrobii or long-lived,and that they have enormous quantities of gold, insomuchthat captives are loaded with fetters made of thatprecious metal. He does not appear to have believedthat Africa stretches as far southward as Arabia, andstates explicitly, that it is surrounded by the ocean on allsides, except at the isthmus of Suez. This persuasionu 440 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.was founded on the circumnavigation of Africa, said tohave been performed by the orders of Echos king ofEgypt, two centuries before our author's time: Whenthat king had finished his canal from the Nile to theArabian Gulf, he despatched some Phoenicians from itwith orders to return to Egypt by the Pillars of Herculesand the Mediterranean Sea. They accordingly sailedinto the southern ocean. When the autumn was come,they landed on the part of Libya which was nearest tothem, and sowed some grain; and when the harvest wasgathered, they put to sea again. In this way they continuedthe voyage for two years : in the third year theydoubled the Pillars of Hercules and arrived in Egypt.They related, that, while sailing round Libya, they hadthe sun on the right hand, " which to me," says Herodotus," does not appear credible, however it mayseem to others." As the geographical knowledge ofHerodotus reached far beyond Syene on the Nile, andtherefore within the tropic, he could not have been ignorantthat the sun might be for a season to the north,or on the right hand of one whose face was directed tothe west ; but he was not prepared to believe that itcould be so throughout the whole year, " while they sailedround Libya." The science of Greece was not yet sufficientlymatured, to enable the philosopher to foreseethe phenomena which the heavens might present beyondthe line.The most able modern geographers, in examining minutelythe particulars of this account, have rejected thealleged circumnavigation as wholly fabulous. And indeedit must be admitted, that so naked a relation, one so destituteof all the interesting particulars of the great achievementit pretends to record, ought to be rejected for itsinherent improbability. As to the air of likelihoodthrown over the story by describing the path of the sunas on the right hand, or towards the north, it is obviousthat that appearance is familiar to all who live below thetropic ; and, besides, in all the authentic accounts remainingto us of ancient navigators, fabrications of thisCHAP. III. THE GREEKS. 41kind recur without number ; the discoveries of expectationbeing unhesitatingly added to those of experience.In the reign of Xerxes also, one Sataspes, a Persiannoble in disgrace, undertook to sail round Africa ; butafter he had passed the Pillars of Hercules, and steered forseveral months to the south without seeing any probabletermination of his labours, his resolution forsook him,and he returned home without accomplishing his purpose.Of western Europe Herodotus knew but little. ThePhocjeans, he says, had discovered the Adriatic *, ,Iberia, and Tartessus. The Cynetce, (Canadians,probably,) lived at the extremity beyond the Celts. Heknew that tin and amber were brought from the remotestparts of Europe, but had no idea of the local situationof the countries which supplied them. He doubted theexistence of a river flowing into the northern sea, andcalled Eridanus ; nor was he inclined to acquiesce inthe opinion prevailing in his day, that Europe is encompassedby the ocean on the north and west. It isremarkable that Hecatseus, half a century earlier, hadmentioned in his writings a great island opposite toGaul, and a great river, Paropamisus, flowing into thenorthern ocean. The name Eridanus, it must be observed,is one of those general designations which, incapableof being fixed, plagues the geographer by itserratic nature. The word duna was the Median namefor a river, and was carried into Europe by the tribesmigrating from inner Asia.t Thus it makes its appearancein the names Tan-ais, or Don, Dnieper and Denis(upper and lower rivers), Dan-tube, Rha-danus,Rho-duns, and Eridanus (probably distant river), fromthe shores of the Euxine to the country of the Celts.Hesiod speaks of an Eridanus, without assigning it anyposition. Aeschylus places a river of that name in Iberiaand Gaul; Euripides in Italy, where Grecian geographersThe name of the Ad. ia, or Adriatic sea, appears to be derived from theword adreh, water or sea, brought thither perhaps by the Veneti. Thisword belongs to the great Japhetian family of languages [udra in Sanscritsignifying water , and is still used by the Abates, a Caucasian people.f It is still retained by the Assets in the Caucasus, a remnant of theA 1 ;ais, who belong properly to the German family of nations.42 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.at length confined the name to the Po. To Herodotusthe name Eridanus appeared so manifestly Greek, thathe could not believe that shifting stream to have anyexistence but in the imagination of the poets.As often as general expressions occurred in ancientgeography, a fabulous original was sure to be afterwardsassigned to them by writers unacquainted with theirmeaning. When a country is known in detail, genera]names vanish, and particular designations supply theirplaces. The migrations also which took place so frequentlyin ancient times must have caused great confusionin the language of topography. The Riphceanmountains are among those ramblers which incurred thereputation of being merely fabulous. Originally inThrace, to the westward of Hcemus, they were afterwardstranslated northwards to the site of the Italianchain, and were at length considered as having no existence.But the word ripha signified a mountain ingeneral ; and the circumstance of its being used in Thraceand in Scythia proves an approximation in race andlanguage of the nations which possessed those countries.*Herodotus hardly notices Massilia or Marseilles, acolony of Phocseans founded a century and a half beforehis time ; and the name of Rome, whose rising fortuneshad been obscurely increasing for three hundred years,does not once occur in his pages. His account of Italycomprises only the southern portion of the peninsula ofMagna Grecian, nor is there any ground for the opinionthat he makes incidental mention of Corona. tPara or parvat, in Sanscrit, signifies a mountain. The Sclavonian HorsHriuat, Carpet, and Cravats, are, perhaps, not so much corruptions asold and cutaneous forms of the same word. From aima, snow, in Sanscrit,the Greeks had their Tenus and Indus (Himalaya; or sncnu;/ regions :from para and aima combined, was derived the name of the paropa-nisus or snoivg mountains of the Hindoo Coosh.■f Herodotus (lib. i. c. 5.) endeavours to prove that the Pelasgians were barbarians,i. e. that they did not speak the Greek language. For, as he argues,the Crestoniates (which some would read Carbonates and the Plains, theremnants of that nation, although they speak one and the same language,are not intelligible to those who live around them." Must it not then be inferredthat those who lived around them were Greeks, and not Tuscan ? Itis remarkable that Niebuhr (Rom. Hist. I. 2.9.), who maintains that byPreston Herodotus meant Corona, and Muller (die Etrusker. I. Pa.)who holds the contrary opinion, have both overlooked the author's argument,and have consequently lost the force of the passage in dispute.CHAP. III. THE GREEKS. 43The work of Herodotus forms the most precious giftwhich has ever been conferred on the literature and philosophyof any country in their age of adolescence. Itembodies a great deal of historical information, with amultitude of remarks on manners and natural objects,written with singular liveliness and candour, and collectedfrom all the nations with which the Greeks atthat time had any acquaintance. The communicativeardour of the father of history was not damped by anysceptical misgivings ; what he had gathered laboriouslyhe poured abroad freely for the consideration of riperages ; and if he sometimes relates with too much gravitywhat common sense cannot credit, it must be rememberedthat the hardihood of credulity is best fitted to pioneerthe road of knowledge, and that the cautious tread ofcritical discrimination can follow only in a beaten path.It is remarkable, that an author whose informationreached into the heart of Russia, to the Ural mountainsand the sea of Aral, to the confines of Tartary and ofIndia, to the negro nations inhabiting the banks of theNile, and even to that mysterious river which watersan almost hidden world beyond the great desert, shouldhave scarcely any knowledge of the nations in the westof Europe, and should speak even of the neighbouringpeninsula of Italy in obscurer terms than of that ofArabia. But as civilisation advanced towards the West,the train of light which marked its progress still shonein the opposite direction; and the Greeks naturally turnedtheir eyes to that quarter of the globe where the maturityof the social state, and the astonishing monumentswhich existed of human power and ingenuity, offered anendless source of gratification to their curiosity.In the age of Herodotus the commercial character ofthe Greeks was already fully developed : they had establishedthemselves in all the shores of the Euxine ; theyhad penetrated even into the country of the Burdensomehundred miles up the Tanais, where, in the midstof nomad tribes, they had built themselves a great cityentirely of wood ; they maintained an occasional intereaGEOGRAPHY OP THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.course with the people bordering on the Caspian ; andpassed through so many different nations in these commercialvisits, that they were obliged to employ, we aretold, no less than seven interpreters in their course. InPersia a colony of Greeks had been established byXerxes, and was cherished by him as the only fruit ofhis expedition. In Lower Egypt they were numerousfrom an early age. Thus the lively and enterprisingspirit of his countrymen offered great facilities to Herodotusin pursuing his researches in various quarters :they probably served him as interpreters ; and it is onlyby supposing the absence of such aids that we can explainhis total silence respecting Jerusalem, and thescantiness of his remarks on Tyre and Carthage. Theforbidding temper of the Jewish religion, the jealousy ofcommercial monopoly, and the difficulties of a strangelanguage, could alone have veiled from his view objectsso well deserving his attention.It is natural that one who sought so zealously forfacts should be extremely mistrustful of arbitrary hypotheses.Herodotus called in question many long-receivedopinions. He did not deny that the earth was asphere, as his commentators have erroneously imagined :but he ridiculed the idea of its being a circular disk, encompassedby the ocean, as it was described by thegeographers of his day. He was persuaded that theearth was not a circle ; and as to the existence of " thefloods of ocean," he was far from being satisfied withthe authority of the poets. He thought the divisioninto three continents extremely unreasonable, and believedthat Europe (to which, indeed, he could not affixany limits towards the east), was greater than the othertwo continents taken together, being equal to them inlength, and much exceeding them in breadth. For thisopinion he has been much and unreservedly censured,for even his mistakes prove the justness and independenceof his mind. It was natural for him to magnify that ofwhich he had only an obscure perception ; but his beliefthat Africa might be circumnavigated, which had theCHAP. IV. THE GREEKS. 45effect of diminishing that continent in his estimation,and his hesitation to admit such an outline of Europe assystem alone would delineate, are equally to his credit.Into whatever errors Herodotus may have run when hehimself ventured to speculate, he was seldom led astrayby the theories of others ; and he not only laid beforehis countrymen the most valuable accumulation of factswhich the world had to that age received, but he alsotaught them the useful lesson how to doubt and discuss.CHAP. IV.THE GREEKS CONTINUED.SCARCITY OF BOOKS IN ANTIQUITY. HERODOTUS IGNORANT OFTHE CARTHAGINIAN DISCOVERIES. VOYAGE OF Anno TOTHE NEGRO COUNTRY. — SEES CROCODILES AND Hippopotamus.NOCTURNAL FIRES. GORILLA, OR Orang Outing.HIMILCO EXPLORES THE NORTHERN SEAS. FINDS THE TINCOUNTRY. ALBION AND Herne. SCYLAX OF CARYANDATHE FIRST GREEK WHO MENTIONS ROME. Pythias OF Marseilles.VISITS BRITAIN. DISCOVERS THULE. DESCRIBESTHE AMBER COAST IN THE BALTIC. WAS AN ACUTE Observer.XENOPHON DESCRIBES THE RETREAT OF THE TENTHOUSAND. THE CURDS. THE ARMENIAN MOUNTAINEERS.CTESIAS. RESIDES IN PERSIA. MIXES ORIENTAL FABLESWITH HIS RELATIONS. MEN WITH THE HEADS AND TAILSOF DOGS. THE MAGIC POOL OF SILAS. STEAKS OF THEKERMES INSECT. GREEK PHILOSOPHERS. ARISTOTLE.MENTIONS THE HERCVNIAN MOUNTAINS OR THE Harts. THEBRITANNIC ISLANDS AND TAPROBANE. THOUGHT THAT INDIAMIGHT BE REACHED BY THE WEST.The progress of geographical knowledge dependsmore on the general intercourse subsisting between nationsthan on the exertions of individual travellers. Suchan intercourse existed but imperfectly in ancient times ;and this circumstance, together with the scarcity ofbooks (in consequence of which contemporary authors46 GEOGRAPHY OF THE Ancients. BOOK I.were often ignorant of one another's labours), preventedthe geography of the Greeks from reaching the perfectionwhich might have been expected from the diffusionand enlightenment of that enquiring people. The voyagesof the Carthaginian admirals, Hanno and Himilco,in the western ocean, along the coasts of Africa and ofEurope, were unknown to Herodotus, although performed,apparently, long before his time. Yet amongthe early attempts at maritime discovery, of which wehave any authentic accounts, these were, unquestionably,the most important.Hanno was despatched by the senate of Carthage toestablish some colonies on the western coast of Africa.The fleet which he commanded was composed of sixtylarge vessels, and had on board no less than thirty thousandpersons of both sexes. After sailing for two daysbeyond the columns of Hercules, the fleet anchored oppositeto a great plain, where a town called Thymiate-lion was built, and a settlement effected. Still sailingwestward, the expedition next arrived at the promontoryof Sole (perhaps Cape Canton), covered with thickwoods. Having doubled this cape, they built five othertowns on the sea side, and at no great distance from oneanother. They continued their southerly course, and atlength reached the great river Lixus, flowing from Libya: some wandering shepherd tribes inhabited itsbanks. Beyond this people, in the interior, ethiopian(negro) savages inhabited a hilly country, overrun withwild beasts. The Carthaginians, taking with them someof the friendly Limited as interpreters, continued theirvoyage to the south, along a desert shore. Two days'sail brought them to an inlet, at the bottom of whichwas an island about five stadia in circumference, to whichthey gave the name Cerne: here they calculated thereckonings of their voyage, and found that Cerne wasas far from the Pillars of Hercules as the latter placewas from Carthage. The next remarkable object whichoccurred was the great river Creates : this they entered,and found that it opened within into a wide haven,, con-chap.IV. THE GREEKS. 47training several large islands. The hills in the neighbourhoodwere inhabited by black savages clothed in theskins of wild beasts, who drove away our voyagers withstones and other missiles. Not far from this was anothergreat river filled with crocodiles and hippopotami.After sailing twelve days to the south from Cerne, theCarthaginians came to a hilly country, covered with avariety of odoriferous trees and shrubs. The Ethiopiansor negroes of this coast were a timid race, who fledfrom the strangers, and whose language was quite unintelligibleto the LLrite interpreters. Seven days' sailfrom this coast brought the expedition to a great bay,to which they gave the name of Western Horn. In thisbay was an island, on which they landed to repose themselvesfor a little after the hardships of the sea. Duringthe day all was calm; but at night strange appearancespresented themselves ; the mountains seemed to be all onfire, and the sound of flutes, drums, and cymbals wasmingled with wild screams and piercing cries. Ourvoyagers, terrified at what they saw and heard, immediatelytook to flight. As they continued their course tothe south, the odoriferous vegetation of the coast perfumedthe air ; but still columns of flame illuminatedthe midnight sky, and the ground was so hot that it wasimpossible to walk upon it for a moderate distance.Sailing seven days along this coast, they came to a bay,which they called South Horn, and found within it anisland with a lake, and in the middle of this lake anotherisland filled with savages of a peculiar description, probablysome species of orang outing. The females werecovered with hair, and were called by the interpretersGorilla. The males fled across the precipices, and defendedthemselves obstinately with stones ; but the Carthaginiansscaptured three females : these, however, broketheir cords, and fought so furiously with tooth and nail,that it was found necessary to kill them : their skins werestuffed and brought to Carthage. The want of provisionsprevented our voyagers from proceeding any fartherto the south.48 GEOGRAPHY OP THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.It is impossible to read the narrative of Hanno's expeditionwithout being struck with the simplicity andgenuineness of the relation, or without being astonishedat the immutability of manners among savage nations ;for the stillness by day, the nocturnal fires, the clang ofmusical instruments, and wild merriment in the cool ofnight, are the same now on the coast of Africa as theywere five-and-twenty centuries ago. The imperfectmanner in which the details of this voyage, relating totime and distance, have been transmitted to us by theGreeks, render it impossible to ascertain with precisionhow far it extended. The wild negroes, the hairy Go-rills,the great rivers filled with crocodiles, and the fragranceof the woods, all seem to point out the Senegambiaas the country where the progress of the expeditionterminated. Some great authorities, indeed, have extendedit to Guinea, while others confine it within thelimits of Cape Non, on the southern confines of Morocco.Many of these geographers have erred continually intheir calculations, by mistaking the meaning of the expression,eras {a horn, which the Greeks generally appliedto inlets of the sea, rather than to promontories.These who restrict the voyage of Hanno to the coastnorth of the Senegal, insist on the unlikelihood of hispassing such remarkable headlands as Cape Blancoo andCape Verd, without making particular mention of them ;but to this it may be answered, that we do not possessthe original journal of the Carthaginian admiral, andthat the deficiencies of an extract made from it by aGreek, apparently of a much later age, ought not to beweighed against the positive indications it contains."While Hanno explored the coasts of Africa to thesouth, Himilco held his course in the opposite direction.Unhappily but a few scattered details remain of his discoveries.On the coasts of Spain he found the Ostrym-nians, who gave their name to a promontory of themainland, to a bay, and to some islands adjacent, whichabounded in tin. These are supposed to be the Cantharides.The Ostrymnians were wealthy and industrious;CHAP. IV. THE GREEKS. 49it appears, therefore, that the tin trade existed on thosewestern shores before they were visited by the Carthaginian.Himilco mentioned also the British islands,Al-finn and the sacred island, herne. It is remarkable,however, that Ireland is never mentioned by the ancientsunder a native name : the relative designation Pier-nye,or Western Isle, was evidently taken from the Celts ofGaul or Britain.*Scylax, of Caryanda, who wrote a few years later thanHerodotus, was the first who made known to the Greeksthe discoveries of the Carthaginians. The work of hiswhich remains to us describes the coasts of the Euxine,of the Mediterranean, and those of western Africa, as faras the isle of Cerne : he is the earliest Greek writer whomentions the name of Rome. Of the western coasts ofthe Mediterranean he knew much more than Herodotus,and enumerates many cities, among which Massilia, themodern Marseilles, was already distinguished for itswealth and commerce.This Greek colony must, from its situation, have soonbecome acquainted with the maritime enterprises of theCarthaginians; and was, perhaps, as much incited by aspirit of rivalry as by the adventurous disposition nurturedby commercial pursuits, to engage in the career ofdiscovery. Pytheas of Marseilles was a man eminentlyqualified, by his courage and scientific acquirements, toopen new routes of commerce across unknown seas, andpromote the interests of geography. The date of hisvoyage cannot be fixed with precision, but it is certainthat his writings were known in Greece in the time ofAlexander the Great ; and as the circulation of bookswas not very rapid in antiquity, it is likely that he belongedto the preceding age. Sailing along the coasts ofSpain and Gaul, Pytheas reached Great Britain, calledAlbion, or Al-finn, that is, the White-land, by the in—Unless we suppose the Mictis of Tima?us (see Pliny) to mean Ireland,sn ancient native appellation of which was Mute. The description of acountry situated six days' sail within Albion, suits better with IrelandTian with the Scilly islands. As to the account of tin being brought fromit is of little consequence, as the Greeks adopted every supposition thatcould solve the enigma of the tin islands.50 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.habitants. Here he appears to have followed the southernand eastern-shores, and from the length of those to havecalculated the circuit of the island, which he estimates atforty thousand stadia. Of Ireland he makes no mention ;but says that steering northward from the coast of Britain,he arrived in six days at Thule, whose uninvitingshores were covered with perpetual fogs, and presentedthe chaotic appearance of earth, sea, and air, all jumbledtogether in disorder. Few geographical problems haveever perplexed the learned so much as that of determiningthe position of Thule. Some suppose that the Greeknavigator designed by that name Jutland, where a districtat the present day bears the name of Thy-land, and wasanciently called Thiu-Iand; others think it more likelythat he reached the coasts of Norway, a portion of whichstill retains the name of Thelemark; and in the IcelandicSagas is named Thulemark. But from this diversity ofopinion all we can conclude with certainty is, that thename Thule was of true Scandinavian origin, and that itAlas applied successively to different places. It is notunlikely, indeed, that the word was originally synonymouswith the epithet Ultima, which was afterwardsattached to it.Pytheas is reported to have said that in Thule at thesummer solstice the sun did not set for four-and-twentyhours. As this, however, is not true of any country beyondthe arctic circle, we may, perhaps, be warranted insuspecting that the Greek navigator picked up some informationon the coasts of Britain respecting seme countryto the north, and that he then ventured to describe thatcountry as exhibiting the phenomena, which experiencetaught him were to be expected on approaching the pole.How naturally the bright nights of a northern summermay have given rise to such an exaggeration, is evidentfrom the language employed by Tacitus some centurieslater. " In the farthest part of Britain," says that writer,the nights are so clear that you can hardly tell whendaylight begins or ends ; and when the sky is not overcastwith clouds, you may see all night long the light of theCHAP. IV. THE GREEKS. 51sun, which does not rise, or go down, but moves quiteround."The calmness and sluggish heaviness of the northernseas, which the ship's prow could hardly cleave, wereremarked hy Pytheas, as they Averse said to have been byhis predecessor Himilco ; and the same strange opinionswere afterwards repeated by all the geographers of antiquity: perhaps the strength and complexity of our tides,which oppose serious difficulties to navigation along anindented coast, may have lent some countenance to prejudicesfounded in fable.Of the voyage of Pytheas in the Baltic only a fragmentremains, which proves in a striking manner the authenticityof his account. He relates that on the shores of acertain bay, called Mentonomon, lived a people namedButtons, and at the distance of a day's voyage fromtheir habitations was the island Abalus (called by othersBaltic), on which the sea threw the amber in great quantities: the people used it for fuel instead of wood, and soldit to their neighbours the Teutonic. When Pytheas saysthat amber was used as fuel, he appears to confound thatprecious article with jet, and the latter with lignite or fossilwood : but the remainder of his relation is remarkablyaccurate. The bay alluded to is the Frisch and FrischHaaf, and the name Mentonomon appears to be derivedfrom Mendanivmi, the Promontory of Fir-trees. Theprovinces Nadrauen and Schalavonia are still calledGutta, and the inhabitants Gitddai, in the Lithuaniandialect. The spot in Garland which yielded most amberbore formerly the name of Wieland, which in Lithuanianis Baltikke, from baltos, white.Pytheas was not merely a bold mariner ; he was alsoa man of science and observation. He fixed the latitudeof his native city Massilia with an accuracy which hasbeen acknowledged by modern astronomers. The phenomenaof tides particularly caught his attention ; andhe appears to have been the first who ascribed them tothe influence of the moon, but we are ignorant of thereasonings by which he supported his theory. He52 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.knew that the pole-star in the tail of the lesser bear didnot mark the place of the true pole. It is to be regrettedthat so little remains to us of the writings of this sagaciousobserver : his description of the northern nations atthat early period could not fail to be interesting; and thathe had formed some acquaintance with them may beconcluded from the mention he makes of mead, their favouritebeverage, and other peculiarities of the Gothiclife.In the same age with Pytheas, or a little later, flourishedXenophon (400 B. C), who, if he did not extendthe limits of geographical knowledge, at least added toitmany valuable details. Retreating with the ten thousandGreeks from Canada on the banks of the Euphrates,he traversed a wild and unknown country. TheCarduchii harassed the retreating army in the very mountainswhich are now occupied by the Curds. The Taochi,when pressed by the Greeks, precipitated themselvesfrom the cliffs with their wives and children rather thansubmit to captivity.The habits of the people in the elevated regions ofArmenia have undergone no change from the time ofXenophon to the present day. His accounts of theirhabitations might be supposed to be taken from a modernbook of travels. " Their houses," he says, " are underground,with a mouth resembling that of a well. Anentrance is dug for the cattle, but the inhabitants descendby ladders. In these houses are goats, sheep, cows, andfowls, all under the same roof with the family." TheGreeks encountered numberless hardships from the severityof the climate and the incessant attacks of thefierce mountaineers. They at length entered the countryof the Scythian, (a wandering tribe, perhaps, like themodern Turcomans,) and there, from a mountain calledThcehcs (and still named Take), they, with infinite joy,descried the sea. After halting some time at the friendlycity of Trapezus (Trebizond), they continued their routeto Corpora, and saw in their march the Mosynceci, nakedsavages, whose bodies were tattooed all over, and whoseCHAP. IV. THE GREEKS. 53manners, described by Xenophon, suggest a comparisonwith the most barbarous tribes of North America.A contemporary of Xenophon, named Ctesias, enteredinto the service of the Persian king, and visited India ;but the accounts which he transmitted to Greece of thatrich country were so alloyed with fables, that little regardwas eventually paid to the truth which they contained.Yet, though it must be admitted that the early Greektravellers were prone to exaggeration, a candid critic willmake large allowances for the romantic fictions so oftenmingled with their descriptions of the East. It deserves,indeed, to be remarked that whatever accounts we havefrom ancient writers respecting western nations, are, ingeneral, of a sober and veracious character, while theopposite quarter of the globe is peopled by them withmonsters of all descriptions. The fables of the ancients,which related to the West, were chiefly mythological, andhad an air of antiquity'; but their eastern fictions wereevidently the wild freaks of eastern imagination. TheGreeks, we may therefore conclude, Averse not the authorsof those extravagances, but only related what they heardfrom the natives; with less caution and discrimination,indeed, than the taste and sentiments of a maturer agewould require.If the accounts of Ctesias, then, be interpreted withthe same latitude as those of a Hindoo, they will befound to contain not a little information. Thus, indescribing the inhabitants of Button, he says that theyare black, with the head and nails of a dog, and withtails ; now they are actually called by the HindoosCulyxtiri or Dog-faced, but the tail is certainly a Grecianembellishment. They live, he says, on flesh dried inthe sun, and never bathe, but rub their bodies with oil.These practices are still followed in Tibet, only thatbutter is the unguent used instead of oil. His informationreached as far as Nepaul, which he calls Ottoracora.or the North. Among the wonders related by Ctesias,the fountain Sides, or Silas, in which liquid gold sprungup from a rock of pure iron, deserves to be separated5-i GEOGRAPHY OF THE AXCIEXTS. BOOK I.from the vulgar fictions of pygmies and griffons. Theiron which formed the basin was more precious than thegold it contained ; for a sword made of it, if stuck inthe ground, had the virtue to avert the wrath of thunderbolts.Some have been led by this glittering tale tovindicate, for the Persians, the credit of being the earliestelectricians. Ctcsias gave good descriptions of the monkeys,parrots, and rich chintz of India; and what ismore remarkable, he appears to have known the lac andkermes insects, and to have confounded them together;for he describes an insect inhabiting the amber whichgrows on trees (a mode of describing gum lac which probablyincurred the censure of fabrication), and yieldinga rich scarlet dye used to colour the splendid shawlswhich were offered as presents to the king of Persia.The elegant history which Xenophon wrote of the retreatof the ten thousand, (a retreat which was conducted,in the latter part of it, by himself;) and the writings ofhis celebrated contemporary Hippocrates, who travelledthrough Scythia, Colchis, Asia Minor, and perhaps Egypt,to study the diversities of climate ; added much to theknowledge both of nature and of human society. Theincrease of information favoured the speculative temperof the Greek philosophers. Epirus of Cumae, whoflourished about 350 years before our era, appears tohave been the first writer who conceived the division ofmankind into distinct races. According to him, theGreeks occupied the centre of the earth ; and round themwere disposed, in the four quarters, the Indians, ethiopians,Celts, and Scythianss. The idea that his owncountry was in the middle was common to Epirus withthe early geographers of many distant nations ; for theIndian Midyama, the Scandinavian Niggard, and theChinese Chung-quo, all signifying the middle kingdom,have their origin in a similar opinion.But the benefits which accrued to science from theactivity of its followers were not confined to the inventionof these vague theories. The discoveries and observationsof Herodotus, of Scylax, of Hippocrates, andCHAP. IV. THE GREEKS. 55of Pytheas, were weighed by one of those master mindson whom nature seems to confer the right to theorise ;for Aristotle was among the number of those extraordinarymen, who by the strength and universality oftheir genius are fitted to be the architects rather thanthe builders of the edifice of knowledge. The boldnessand variety of his speculations recommended him to thesubtle temper of the Arabians, by whom he was firstmade known to modern Europe ; and as the features ofa deified hero are deformed in the idol fashioned by hisrude adorers, so the fame of Aristotle has hardly yetrecovered from the multiplied perversions to which hiswritings were subjected by the ignorance of past ages.Aristotle possessed a great fund of geographical knowledge.He maintained that the earth is a sphere, havinga circumference of 400,000 stadia, a calculation whichmay be correct; but the uncertainty, as to the stadiumemployed renders it impossible to appreciate its merit.Reasoning firmly on the hypothesis that the earth is aglobe, Aristotle appears to have suggested the voyageacross the Atlantic eighteen centuries before Columbus;for he observes, that the coasts of Spain cannot be veryfar distant from those of India. The happy boldness ofthis thought was all his own, the errors of calculationbelonged to his age. In his nomenclature, too, we seeevidence of a juster geographical conception than waspossessed by many writers of a much later age. Hisknowledge of the earth was bounded by the Gallic andIndian gulfs on the West and East, by the Ripheeanmountains on the North, and on the South by the greatriver Creates, " which, having its source in the samemountain as the Nile, flows westward into the ocean."This great river must be the Senegal. Aristotle knewbut little of the north of Europe, yet he is the first whomentions \heHercynian mountains; a designation which,probably, extended over the lofty ranges on the westand north of Bohemia, but which is at present retainedonly by the insulated mountains of the Harts. He alsomakes express mention of two large islands, Albion ande 456 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.Herne, situated to the north of Celtic (and he is thefirst writer who mentions them together, and with thecommon name Brittanicee) ; but he adds, that they arenot by any means so large as Taprobane beyond India,or Phebol in the Arabian sea. Here we have a proofof his extensive information in this early mention ofTaprobane or Ceylon, and Phebol, which is generallysupposed to be Madagascar ; but which, as Cabala is anIndian name, ought, perhaps, to be looked for more towardsthe east.Aristotle had many scholars who devoted themselvesto geographical studies, and some of whom, as Dicaear-chus and Theophrastus, obtained distinction by theirwritings ; but he had the singular honour of infusingthe love of knowledge into the future conqueror of Asia.The spirit of the royal pupil corresponded with the intellectualeminence of the great teacher ; and the expeditionof Alexander produced a greater revolution in the knowledgeof the globe, than almost any other event recordedin ancient history ; and more designedly, perhaps, thanis generally imagined.CHAP. V. THE GREEKS. 57CHAP. V.GREEKS CONTINUED.EXPEDITION OF ALEXANDER. POLICY OF THAT ConquerorsENTERS INDIA. RESOLVES TO EXPLORE THE PERSIAN GULF.THE MARCH DOWN THE INDUS. NjF.ARCHUS EMBARKS.SUFFERS GREAT HARDSHIPS. IMAGINES HIMSELF AT THEEQUATOR. THE GREEKS DISMAYED AT THE APPEARANCE OFA WHALE FAMISHED IN THE MIDST OF TURTLE. — SuccessfulTERMINATION OF THE VOYAGE. PREPARATIONSMADE TO EXPLORE THE COASTS OF ARABIA. ARRESTED BYTHE DEATH OF ALEXANDER. GRAND VIEWS OF THATPRINCE. REMARKS OF THE MACEDONIANS IN INDIA.DIVISION OF THE PEOPLE INTO CASTES. HONEY MADEWITHOUT BEES. ELEPHANTS. USE OF UMBRELLAS. —THE BANYAN TREES. THE Fairs. Self-devotion TOTHE FLAMES. CITY OF PALIBOTHRA. ITS SITUATION.INDIAN FABLES. RESPECT PAID TO MONKEYS. THE GREEKSDISTORTED FOREIGN NAMES. VOYAGE OF Bamboo TOCEYLON. HIS REMARKS ON THE PEOPLE. TAPROBANE ORCEYLON VARIOUSLY DESCRIBED. ACCOUNTS OF THE ANCIENTSRECONCILED. THE NAMES OF THAT ISLAND. COMMERCEBETWEEN EGYPT AND THE EAST. GEOGRAPHY FLOURISHEDIN THE COMMERCIAL CITY OF ALEXANDRIA. ERATOSTHENESMENTIONS THINiF AG ATHARCHIDES. DESCRIBES ABYSSINIA.WEALTH OF THE SAB^EANS. EUDOXUS OF CYZICUS. SAILSTO INDIA. DRIVEN TO THE COAST OF AFRICA. FINDS THESupposed WRECK OF A SHIP FROM Gates. BANISHED FROMEgypt. RESOLVES TO REACH INDIA BY THE OCEAN. SAILSFROM Gates. HIS MISFORTUNES. REPEATS THE ATTEMPT.HIS KATE AND CHARACTER.The march of Alexander was not attended with theruin and desolation which usually mark the progress ofeastern conquerors : he aimed at establishing a dominionpermanent as well as universal, and, consequently, soughtto gain the affections of his newly-conquered subjects.The success which attended all his measures was theresult of deliberate policy and calculation. The powerwhich waits on knowledge did not escape his notice ;and he led in his train men of science, whose duty it58 GEOGRAPHY OP THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.was to make themselves acquainted with every thingworthy of notice in the subjugated countries.The fate of Persia being decided by the flight ofDarius, the conqueror conducted his army to Bactriaand the country on the Oxus ; in short, to the easternextremity of the world as it was known to Grecian geographers.But he had higher objects in view than themere glory of subduing barbarous nations : curiosity andambition both drew his regards to India ; of which Herodotushad said, " that it was undoubtedly the richestand most populous country in the world." In consequence,when he had arranged the government of Persia,he marched into Kandahar by the same route which wasafterwards followed by the conquering armies of Tamerlaneand Nadir Shah, and which had been long troddenby the Indo-scythian, or warlike mountain tribes of theIndian frontiers. Crossing the Indus at Taxila (thecity of the Tact), by some supposed to be the modernAttack, he shortly after entered the country of thePens-ab, or Five Rivers, so called from the tributarywaters which flow through it to the Indus. But on thebanks of the first of these rivers, the Hydaspes, he foundPorus, an Indian prince, prepared to dispute its passage.The true name of this chieftain, Pear or Power, is stillpreserved among the noble Rajpoots : it is one of the veryfew noble names which have survived the revolutions towhich India has been exposed. The Macedonians, however,were the victors in the engagement which ensued,and continued their march through one of the richestcountries in the world ; yet the Pens-ab yields in wealthand fertility to the countries situated on the banks of theGanges. The fame of this celebrated river must havereached Alexander, and it was unquestionably his intentionto embrace it within the boundaries of his empire ;but when he had reached the Emphasis, and before hehad completely crossed the Pens-ab, the discontentment ofhis troops was so loudly declared, that he was obliged torelinquish the design of proceeding any further ; and,indeed, when wc remember that lie entered India in theCHAP. V. THE GREEKS. 59rainy season, we can readily conceive the sufferingswhich checked the ardour and provoked the disobedienceof the hardy Macedonians. This important error aloneis sufficient to show how little acquaintance the Greekshad with India : but it is also related, that when Alexandersaw crocodiles in the Indus, he conceived a notionthat this river was connected with the Nile, and that itsnavigation downwards would conduct into Egypt. Thisanecdote, however, is hardly credible, though frequentlyrepeated. Herodotus long before had expressly statedthat the Indus was the only river besides the Nile inwhich crocodiles were found ; and the general arrangementof Alexander's plans, both in Egypt and India,bespeak a share of geographical information totally irreconcilablewith such a blunder.It may even be suspected that Alexander contemplatedfrom the beginning the establishment of a commercialintercourse between Egypt and India. The carehe took to examine the navigation of the Persian Gulfand of the Indus ; the cities founded by him in commandingsituations on the branches of this river ; thewell-chosen site of Alexandria, which afterwards continuedfor many centuries the centre of the India trade,and his boasting that his fleets should sail round Africa ;all these circumstances unite to point put some plans ofmore than ordinary magnitude. But whatever mayhave been the immediate designs of the Macedonianconqueror, it is certain that we may date from his easternexpedition the first growth of that Indian trade,which afterwards enriched for many ages his successorsin Egypt, and which continues to this day an object ofparamount importance to European nations.The navigation of the Indus and of the coasts westwardtowards Persia being resolved upon, a fleet of eighthundred vessels was collected and entrusted to the commandof Na?archus. Niccea, on the Hydaspes, about800 miles from the sea, was the point from which theexpedition departed : the army, divided into two bodies,marched on both sides of the river to protect the fleet,60 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.and the whole had the lively air of a triumphal procession.The Macedonians entered the country of theMall (Mountain), and afterwards received the submissionof the Oxydraca (people of Outche), who were remarkablethen as at present for being divided into cantons.Indeed, the feudal system exists in general on the Indianfrontiers. On reaching the mouth of the Indus, Alexander,who always set the example of encounteringdifficulties, undertook himself to examine the easternside of the Delta, and his vanity even impelled him tosail a short distance from land, that he might boast ofbeing the first who went beyond the Indies. In this excursion,the fleet under his command sustained greatdamage from the bore, or rushing tide, a phenomenonwith which the Greeks were wholly unacquainted, althoughthey were not ignorant of the ordinary tides ;and which, though common to the mouths of most greatrivers, rages with peculiar violence in that of the Indus.Four months had been consumed in the progress downthe river, and six or seven more were requisite to surveythe Delta, and to complete the preparations for thevoyage round the coast. At length, when every thingwas ready, Alexander marched with his army towardsthe country of the Arabic, and Nsearchus with the galleysdropped down the river to proceed towards the west.The pompous ceremonies which preceded this voyage,and the preparations, inadequately great, which weremade for it, instead of provoking ridicule, will enhanceits merit in the eyes of the candid critic, since they showthe importance attached to an enterprise, at that timeconsidered as one of the most perilous nature, and theresolution with which it was undertaken. Indeed thiswas the first naval enterprise of any moment, conductedin such a manner as to have permanent and beneficialconsequences.Nsearchus set sail in October, when the trade windsset in from the north-east. He was aware that theEtesian winds, as he called the monsoons, did not blowon the coasts of India as in the Mediterranean. ButCHAP. V. THE GREEKS. 6lthough he had learned the periods of those winds, hewas not yet practically acquainted with the manner oftheir variations, and had started in fact a month beforethe winter monsoon had commenced blowing steadily.In consequence of this mistake he made but little way,accomplishing not more than eighty miles in the firstforty days of his voyage. His course, during all thistime, lay along the coast of the Arabic, the modernBlotches, a fierce and predatory nation. The menwere reduced, in the mean time, to the greatest distressfor want of water and provisions, being compelled tosubsist, in a great measure, on the shell-fish they pickedup on the shore. As the eastern monsoon, however,grew steady, they had the satisfaction of advancingmore rapidly along the coast of the Oritte, whose nameis still preserved in that of Hour, the modern capital ofthe province.Naearchus relates, that when in this part of hisvoyage, he stood out to sea a considerable way to thesouth, the sun was vertical, and cast no shadow. Thiswas really a fiction, for Na;archus was never within lessthan twenty-five degrees of the equator; but, like thefables of Pytheas, it serves to show how speculation maysometimes outstrip experience in the discovery of truth,since we find that the most striking celestial phenomenaof the arctic and equatorial regions were justly describedby Grecian navigators, long before they had ever seen them.The Greeks now continued their voyage along thecoast of the Icthyophagi, or Fish-eaters, a tribe sunk inthe extreme of savage wretchedness. They were cladin the skins of fish; their huts were built with fish-bones,and covered with large shells ; their bread was made ofpounded fish ; and even their cattle subsisted on thesame food. The barrenness of the land, and the productivenessof the sea on this coast, being equally adverseto industry, have perpetuated the savage conditionof the inhabitants to the present day. The natives,paddling in their canoes, appeared to the Macedoniansto be digging the water with a spade. But Greek pride62 GEOGRAPHY OV THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.was humbled for a moment by an accident which occurredin this part of the voyage : the sea was seen tospout up at no great distance, and when the pilot wasasked to explain this singular appearance, he ascribed itto the blowing of a whale. The greatest consternationimmediately prevailed throughout the whole fleet, at thethought of encountering so formidable a monster ; nor didthe alarm cease till the whale, assailed with shouts and thesounds of clashing arms, sunk quietly below the surface.Famine still pressed the expedition : no meat or cornwas to be procured, and but little water. Fish, indeed,and fine turtle, were in abundance ; but to be reduced tosuch fare, appeared to the companions of Nsearchus aproof of deep distress. The Greeks had no idea offeasting on turtle : they looked upon it, perhaps, with asmuch abhorrence as a Virginian does on mutton ; acamel would have appeared to them preferable food.It is not wonderful, therefore, that when they reached alittle town called Barn, where date-trees covered theshore, and nature wore a more smiling countenance,they should signalise their joy with the characteristicelegance of their nation, and weave themselves garlandsof flowers.A little farther on, the fleet having doubled Basis, orCape Task, anchored at the river Ananias, in the provinceof Armozcia, a name which subsequently passedto the little island of Ormuz, at that time called Organa.Here they learned the agreeable intelligence that Alexanderwas encamped with the army at the distance ofonly five days' journey from the shore. Nrcarchushastened to meet the king, now almost in despair at nothaving heard any tidings of his fleet. The unexpectedarrival of the admiral, whose appearance was so muchaltered by the hardships of the voyage that he couldhardly be recognised, caused Alexander the most livelytransports of joy : his glory was untarnished by failure,and an enterprise was accomplished under his auspicesof a bold and original character, and from whichhe hoped to derive important consequences. The diffV. THE GREEKS. 63faculties of the voyage were now over : the remainderof the navigation to the mouth of the Euphrates layalong the friendly coasts of Carman and Persis, fromwhich the fleet received supplies in abundance, andwhere it was enabled to maintain in its progress a constantcommunication with the army.The voyage from the mouth of the Indus to that ofthe Euphrates, which, at the present day, would be performedin about three weeks, occupied Nscarchus one-and-twenty.But we must not undervalue the merit ofa first attempt. Great caution was requisite at first toprevent discouraging accidents ; but as the Macedoniansproceeded in their navigation, their skill as well as courageincreased : they weighed anchor at night, tookadvantage of the land and sea breezes, and employedthe services of native pilots. ■ The success of this experimentencouraged Alexander to look forward to thecompletion of his schemes. Arrangements were madefor the examination of the southern coasts of the PersianGulf; a detachment of the army was sent forwardinto Arabia to protect the fleet from insults ; andNtc-archus was already embarked to commence the enterprise,when the untimely death of Alexander put asudden stop to its further prosecution. The career ofthat great man was arrested while he was engaged inaccomplishing those schemes, the mere conception ofwhich alone, perhaps, constitute his chief glory. Heopened the world to the knowledge of mankind ; andwhen we reflect on the enlarged policy which characterisedall his measures, and on the advantages whichhis successors knew how to derive from his expeditionto India, it is hard to refuse him the merit of foreseeingall the consequences of an undertaking which he prosecutedwith more than usual ardour. The whole countrythrough which the Macedonian army marched from theIndus to Susan is said to have been accurately surveyedand measured by linton and Diognetus ; but the writingsof these, as well as of the other men of science who accompaniedthe expedition, are unfortunately lost ; nothing64 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.remaining of the numerous volumes written on thatoccasion but the journal of Nacarchus and a few fragmentspreserved by later writers.There could not be a stronger proof of the wisdomwith which Alexander had arranged the internal governmentof his great empire, than the tranquillity withwhich it submitted to his generals, who partitioned itamong them at his death. Seleucus having obtained theportion which was contiguous to India, was under thenecessity of keeping up an intercourse with that country;and about twenty years after the death of Alexander, heledan army to the banks of the Ganges, to punish thehostilities of Sandracotta, king of the Prasii. This expeditionappears to have advanced a considerable way, andto have been crowned with complete success, but, unfortunately,no accounts of it remain. Seleucus, being obliged towithdraw his army from this field of action, in order tomeet Antigonus, a more dangerous enemy, commissionedMegasthenes to negotiate a peace with Sandracotta, andfrom him the Greeks derived much information relativeto the interior of India. No further attempts were madeby the Macedonian princes to penetrate into that country;and although the Greek kingdom of Bactria subsistedtwo centuries longer, and maintained some correspondencewith the neighbouring states of India, no advantagesappear to have accrued to science from the proximity ofthe Greeks to so interesting a region.Notwithstanding that the writings of all the Greeks(Searches excepted) who accompanied Alexander inIndia have perished, the fragments which remain aresufficient to convince us that the Macedonians were attentiveand sagacious observers. Their remarks derivea peculiar interest from the way in which they illustratehow little change the lapse of twenty centuries haswrought on the manners, or even on the languages, ofIndian nations. It also deserves to be noticed, that theGreeks soon became acquainted with those articles of produceor manufacture which have ever since continued tobe the staple articles of the Indian trade. Na?archusCHAP. V. THE GREEKS. 0'5observed the sugar, or honey, as he termed it, made fromcanes, without the assistance of bees. He also mentionedthe fine-flowered cottons, rice, and perhaps silk. TheGreeks became acquainted with the mode of planting ricein water, and of distilling from it the strong spirit called bythe natives arrack. They knew that gold was collected inthe rivers, and they learned the manner of hunting and tamingthe elephant. The chief peculiarities of Indian governmentand society appear to have been all revealed to theirobservation. They were aware of the division of the peopleinto castes, that there were no intermarriages betweenthe castes, and that trades descended from father to son.The names of the castes are not mentioned expressly byany Greek writer, but it is likely that the Cliaturi ofArrian, who occupied the country possessed by the Raj-poetsat the present day, were the military caste ofK'hatrees. The pillars made of rice, on which thepeople chiefly subsisted, the custom of shampooing, thatof dying the beard, the perforation of the nose, lips, andears, the cotton turbans, the use of umbrellas, the greatbanyan or Indian fig-tree, under the branches of whicha thousand persons may assemble, the devotion of widowsto the flames, the delicate form and constitution of thenatives, these, with a multitude of other particularities,amused the curious spirit of the Greeks. The philosophyof the Brahmins, and the eccentric piety of theSqueers or Jogees, appear to have been the same thenas they are now. The latter were privileged to enterevery house, and even the women's apartments ; theywere attended by females, without the suspicion of impropriety; lived on vegetable food under banyan trees ;subjected themselves to fanatical penances and disgustingtortures ; and when they had at length palled theinsane appetite for pain, heroically abandoned on thefuneral pile the life in which they could no longer sufficientlyafflict themselves. These and a thousand otherextravagances, successfully employed then as well asnow to win the admiration of the multitude, were viewed6b' GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.with mingled astonishment and contempt by the companionsof Alexander.Megasthenes beheld all the riches and magnificenceof India at the court of Sandracotta, or, as it is writtenby others, Sandracoptus, a corruption of Chandra-Gupta,one of the most distinguished names in Indian history.That prince had awakened a spirit of resistance to foreignsway, and had completely overturned the enfeebled dynastyof the Salis or the Palis, in South Bazar, wholeft, however, their name to the great capital of theirdominions. Pliny informs us that the city Palibothra,as he calls it, far exceeded in wealth and magnitude theother great capitals of India, and he adds, that the samename was not only common to the city and the people,but was also given to the prince. This important observationhas not met with the attention it deserves. Thosewho are acquainted with the East will perceive at oncethat a name borne alike by the city, the nation, and theruler, must have been the name of the reigning family.The Palibothra then of the Greeks was unquestionablyso called from the dynasty of the Pali-petra, that is, thesons or tribe of Bali, whose splendour belongs to theheroic age of India. The city Palibothra was situated,according to some, at the junction of the Sonne and theGanges, while others remove it to the point where theCusa joins the latter river a little to the east of Boglipur.It was two miles broad, and extended no less than tenmiles along the river, according to Megasthenes. Herethe Macedonian enjoyed the best opportunities for studyingthe country and the people ; but, unfortunately,nothing of his has been preserved except his fables, andthese are obviously taken from the natives. He repeatsthe stories of the Cynocephali and of Pygmies, by which,no doubt, we are to understand the monkeys ; for theseanimals, in some parts of India, frequent the pagodas ingreat numbers ; and being protected from molestation bythe superstitious opinions of the natives, they familiarlyexhibit all the liveliness and ingenuity of their nature.It is not surprising that Greeks, conversing with Hin-chap.V. THE GREEKS. 67does, should be led into the belief that apes are but aninferior variety of man. The monkey tribe has goodreason to complain of being calumniated as well as harshlytreated by mankind. Kept in solitary confinement, towhich their passionate and social temper is peculiarly illadapted ; pining away with grief and malady, they areaccused of being peevish and malevolent, as if the naturaldisposition of the animal could be developed in so unnaturala situation. In the pagodas of Upper India,however, the monkeys are regarded not merely withindulgence but with respect. Nor is it wonderful thatthey should be confounded with the human species in acountry, the gravest histories of which inform us, thatthe first great saint converted to Buddhism was the kingof the monkeys, and that a mimic army, composed of ahundred millions of the same nimble animals, gamboledafter the great Ram to the conquest of Ceylon.One fertile source of fable among the Greeks was theliberty they took with foreign words, which they alwaysaltered, as the Turks do at present, so as to make themsignificant in their own language. The significationsthus arbitrarily attached to names naturally gave birthto many errors. Thus the Atshami, a powerful tribe onthe hills near the Ganges, are called by Megasthenes theAston, or Mouthlcss, and then to explain the subsistenceof these monsters he is compelled to add that they arenourished by the smell of fragrant flowers. In like mannerthe Greeks converted the name of Cut Burrucu, a highpeak in the Indian Caucasus into Kite Boreou, i. c. thebed of Boreas ; and the mountain of Devanishi they supposedto be the birth-place of Dionysus the GrecianBacchus.To Onesicratus, a companion of Megasthenes, wasdue the first circumstantial account of Tuprobanc, orCeylon; and the dimensions which he assigned to thatisland were much nearer the truth than those of Ptolemy,400 years later, when it was annually visited by fleetsfrom Egypt. lie remarked, that it was rich in gold andpearls; that the elephants there were of a superior def26S Geographic OF THE AXCIEXTS. BOOK I.scription, and were trained to war, while those of thecontinent were employed only in labour; and that theinhabitants were called Talaogoni. This name, thoughit appears to mean indigenous, was unquestionably atranslation of Pali-petra, the sons of Bali * ; for Onesi-crates, receiving his accounts from the Indians, couldnot fail to have heard of the Persian emigrations, whichtook place from the peninsula to Ceylon, not more thanacentury before his time.Diodorus relates the story of one Jambolo, a Greekmerchant, who, while trading to Arabia, was takenprisoner by the ethiopians, and after being stripped bythem of all that he possessed, was placed in a boaton the coast of Africa, and turned out to sea. The windcarried him to Taprobane, where he remained sevenyears. It is impossible to fix the date of Jambolo's adventure,which, indeed, is generally looked upon as afiction ; but it matters not whether his relation be regardedas a novel or a history ; it certainly evinces anacquaintance with the country. Jambolo remarks theslender figure of the natives, and the flexibility of theirjoints ; their attachment to astronomy ; their worship ofthe elements, particularly of the sun and moon ; and,above all, he notes the custom of many men having onewife in common, the children being entitled to the benefitof the partnership ; a custom still preserved by theAirs of Malabar, and which, if we may believe the accountsof Pauline, existed not long since on the coastsof Ceylon. He further tells us, that the people spoketwo languages ; that they wrote perpendicularly, as sometribes in Sumatra do at this day ; and that their writtencharacters were only seven, but might be combined insuch a way as to form twenty-eight. From the natureof these observations we are inclined to think, that howeverfabulous may have been the residence of Jambolo ineylon,his information was derived from genuine sources.The chief argument urged against the truth of Jam-liemight have adhered more accurately to the sense as well as soundof the original, by translating it Ti.a/.a.^r.r^,, Paliphetra, the tribe of Bali.CHAP. V. THE GREEKS. 6*9bolo's statement, that he resided seven years in Ceylon,is that he makes no mention of cinnamon, at present thechief produce of that island. * But with what justicecan this objection be made to Jambolo's relation in particular,since all the writers of antiquity are silent on thesame head ? and, indeed, there seems good reason to believe,that cinnamon was not grown in Ceylon so earlyas the second century.The island of Taprobane (Ceylon) has been describedwith so many errors and diversities by ancient authors,that doubts have arisen even as to the country to whichthat name was applied. Some geographers maintain thatthe Decan, or southern peninsula of India, which wasbut little known to the Gangetic nations, was vaguelydescribed to the Greeks as a distant island, and is thetrue Taprobane. But this monstrous supposition isoverturned by the remark, that the Greeks who first visitedIndia, and who derived all their knowledge of thecountry from the northern nations, erred less in theirstatements respecting Taprobane, than the geographerswho wrote when that island was annually visited byfleets from Egypt. The magnitude of Taprobane wasstated with tolerable correctness by Onesicratus ; but hismeasures were continually increased by every succeedingwriter, until at length, in the map of Ptolemy, wholived 400 years later than the Macedonian, the islandhad swelled to nearly twenty times its true dimensions.Taprobane is also generally represented as at a great distancefrom the shores of India : a distance of six days'sail is mentioned by Arrian, who probably meant toreckon from Xelkynda, the great shipping port of Malabar; but all other ancient writers extend the voyageto a much greater length.These incongruities are, for the most part, capable ofsatisfactory explanation. It is known that Ceylon wasinvaded by the Gangetic nations about two centuries beforethe Macedonians entered India • and that it wassubsequently colonised by the Prunii from Bazar, a partVincent's Pcriplus of the Ervthrxan.F 370 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.of the great empire of the Pali-petra. The Pali-petra,therefore, or Palceogoni as Megasthenes calls them, ofthat island, naturally maintained a connection with theparent state, while yet wholly unacquainted with thenations of the Decan. Hence it was, that the Macedonians,at the court of Sandracotta, could learn manygenuine particulars of Taprobane, while later writers,collecting their information from Arabian merchants andignorant navigators, were constantly duped with grossfabrications. A comparison of the names of places onthe northern coast of Ceylon, with those at the mouthof the Kistna (the Moesolus of the ancients), will makeit evident that this tract of country formed the channelof communication between the kindred tribes of theGanges and of Taprobane. In the reign of the emperorClaudius, the king of Taprobane sent ambassadorsto Rome, the chief of whom was Pachas (perhaps aRaja). He stated that his country was situated at thedistance of twenty days' sail from the country of thePiasii on the Ganges. While the natives thus continuedto reckon their distance only from that part of thecontinent with which they maintained an intercourse,the geographers of the west remained ignorant of thecircumstance, that a boat may be rowed from the northwesternpoint of Ceylon to the mainland in five or sixhours. The trade of Taprobane appears to have beenconsiderable. The vessels destined for the golden Chersonese,or Sumatra, rendezvoused in its ports. The exportationof elephants to the Salinas, was carried on inthe first century in precisely the same manner as at thepresent day. ^*ay, those southern islanders, whom theGreeks called Antichthones, or antipodes, took a parteven in the trade carried on with the Seres through thenorth of India. The father of Pachas had accompaniedone of those caravans, and had particularly noticeda race of men inhabiting the valleys of the Paropamisus,who were of great size, with fair complexions and blueeyes. * Later travellers have likewise had glimpses, onPliny.CHAP. V. THE GREEKS. 71the northern frontiers of India, of those German features,but there is nothing yet known with certainty of thetribe to which they properly belong.*With respect to the ancient names of Ceylon, it appearsthat the title Inhale, the land of lions, fromwhich the modern name is derived, was known innorthern India at least six centuries before our era. "t"The origin of the name Taprobane is not so evident. Inancient Pali writings, however, the island is calledTdmbapannaya, a word corresponding with the SanscritTdmbaparna, the betel-leaf; of this last expression tnoGreeks may possibly have made Taprobane. The nextname, in order of time, by which Ceylon was known to theGreeks, was Palcesimundus, which appears to have beenin use in the time of Arrian. Ptolemy, however, venturingwith the shallow expertness of Greek etymologiesto interpret the name, has diminished it by two syllables: for as the dissyllable Palais is, in Greek, an adverb,signifying formerly, he confidently states thatTaprobane (in his time called Alike, an evident approximationto Ceylon) was formerly called Simiindus. Thisgross error of the Alexandrian has nevertheless beenadopted by some eminent modern writers. \The advantages which Alexander proposed to derivefrom a communication with India were not lost sight ofby his successors in Egypt. The commerce of thiscountry soon began to flourish under the enlightenedadministration of the Polemics : ships, trading with theEast, landed their cargoes at the port of Terence in theRed Sea ; the goods were then transported by caravansto Copts on the banks of the Nile, whence, by the aidof canals, they arrived at Alexandria, which thus became,and continued for ages to be, the centre of a mostlucrative trade.The progress of geographical knowledge is intimatelyMatch. Roscius, de Christ, expect. apud Sins. Colon. Agrippa. lfiSIp. fits!.t Wilson's Hist, of Cashmeer, As. Res. xv.X Burnouf. Journ. Asiatt. viii. Compare Mercians Heraclea amiArrian in Hudson. Pliny. The name Pala'simundus admits of a naturalthough only conjectural, explanation.F 472 GEOGRAPHY OF THE Ancien TS. BOOK X.connected with the interests of commerce. The love ofgain can overcome the strongest impediments that existto the intercourse of nations, and effects more than conqueringarmies can do by the permanence of its operation.The great concourse of strangers who resorted toAlexandria for the sake of traffic, prompted the study ofgeography. The great library of that city contained thewritings of the Phoenicians, which had been brought fromTyre, and the journals of the Macedonian officers whoaccompanied Alexander ; so that it is not surprising thatamong the men of science of whom the ancient Alexandriacould boast, the geographers should have been themost distinguished. The writings, indeed, of very fewof them have been preserved, but the fragments whichremain are sufficient to prove the unremitting advancementof the knowledge of the earth.Eratosthenes, the president of the Alexandrian library,who died in the year 194 Bec., was honoured by hiscontemporaries with the title of Surveyor of the Earth,and was held in the highest estimation by all succeedinggeographers. His knowledge of the Nile reached as faras that of Herodotus, and was much more accurate, forhe distinguishes clearly the Bahr al Abiad or true Nilecoming from the west, the Astapus or Abawi, which isthe Nile of Abyssinia, and the Astaboras or Tacazze.Eratosthenes had collected some information respectingthe eastern coast of Africa from one Demosthenes, whosevoyages extended as far as Cerne, an island of which itis impossible to fix the position. He also mentionedIndia and Thine, and thought the latter ill placed onformer maps. But the great merit of Eratosthenes wasthat he introduced into geography a uniform system, andthe art of fixing positions. He held that the earth wasa sphere, and that the great extent of the western oceanalone could hinder ships from sailing to India by thewest. He was the first who used parallels, and fixedthe latitude of places in his maps.While Eratosthenes devoted himself to the science ofCHAP. V. THE GREEKS. 73geography, Agatharchides (who was about twenty yearsyounger) cultivated with no less success the descriptivedepartment of that branch of knowledge. He also wasa president of the Alexandrian library, and knew so wellhow to employ the rich materials contained in that noblecollection, that his writings appear to have been the chiefsource from which succeeding geographers drew theirinformation till the age of Ptolemy. From Agatharchideswe have the first authentic account of the countries tothe south of Egypt. He describes the Abyssinian customsof hamstringing wild elephants, and of eating theraw flesh cut from them while alive. He mentions thestinging fly, the scourge of the country ; the locusts usedas food, the troglodytes, the rhinoceros, the camclopard,the hyaena, and a multitude of other particulars whichshow how little those countries have changed in moralor physical circumstances for the last two thousand years.Agatharchides gives also a curious account of the goldmints worked by the Polemics on the coast of the liedSea ; of the sufferings of the miners, and of the coppertools found in deep galleries supposed to have been openedby the ancient Egyptians. This last circumstance mustrecall to mind the antiquities found in the mines of Irelandand Wales, in situations, too, where they were leastto be expected, as, for example, in the coal mine ofFair Head, at the north-eastern extremity of Ireland.The trade which Egypt, under the Polemics, carriedon with Southern Africa was confined to the importationof elephants, and reached but a little way along thecoast. The communication with India, on the otherhand, was growing every day more frequent and moreprofitable ; but it appears to have been chiefly carried onby the intervention of the Arabians. Agatharchidespaints in glowing colours the wealth and luxury of theSabcean-s (the inhabitants of the modern Yemen); andthe account which he gives of the riches accruing tothem from the carrying trade between Egypt and Indiais heightened rather than moderated by succeeding7-i GEOGRAPHY OP THE Ancients. BOOK I.writers. The Arabians sailed in large vessels ; plantedcolonies in eligible situations for trade, and fortified theirestablishments, as was done by the Portuguese manycenturies later. The robustness of the Sabscans is noticedby Agatharchides, who thus justifies that expressionof the prophet Isaiah, — " The Saba^ans, men of stature."On the South-eastern coast of Africa the Arabian geographersplaced an island called Cerne, just as the Carthaginiansshad a Cerne on the western side, and for thesame reason, because it was the end (in Phoenician Cherub*) of their discoveries. This double island of Cernewas by some thought fabulous, and was instrumental increating a belief that Africa had been circumnavigated.Thus, when Eudoxus was said to have sailed from Gadesto Cerne, inattentive observers might have confoundedthe western with the eastern island of that name, andthus be misled into the opinion that he had actuallyreached the eastern seas.tIndia and Arabia were looked upon by the ancients ascountries overflowing with riches.* The only communicationwith those happy regions was through Alexandria,which was become the seat of learning as well as the centreof a great commerce; so that every enterprising spirit, all,in short, who longed. for adventure or for gain, naturallyresorted to the capital of the Polemics. Nor in themidst of the activity created by by the eastern tradewas the circumnavigation of Africa wholly forgotten.The traditions which attested that achievement were stillbelieved by many, notwithstanding that the men ofscience and systematic geographers smiled at the credulityof those who thought it possible to approach theburning regions of the torrid zone. Strabo, who believedthat the equator was unapproachable, from its excessiveheat, while citing the arguments of Poisonous of Rhodes,an advocate of the contrary opinion, relates, from thatChart. f Pliny. Meta.% Intact opulentiorThesaurus Arabum ct civitas India?.Horace, Lib. iii. Od. xxiv.Ici, baths nunc Arabum invites gazi-*. Id. Lib. i. Od. xxixCI1AP. V. THE GREEKS. / i>writer, the courageous efforts of an adventurer of noordinary stamp.Eudoxus of Cyzicus, a man of some learning, andenthusiastically devoted to geographical researches,visited Egypt in the reign of Euergetes II. (146 — 117B. C), and had some conferences with that prince andhis ministers respecting the navigation of the Nile towardsits source. It happened, about the same time,that an Indian was found expiring with hunger in a boaton the shores of the Red Sea : he was brought to courtand carefully treated ; and, having learned a little Greek,he related how he had set sail from India, lost sight ofland, and not knowing whither the wind was drivinghim, arrived at last at the spot where he had been found,after all his companions had perished with famine. Healso promised, if a vessel were equipped to carry himback to India, to pilot it himself, and to teach thecourse to persons appointed for that purpose. The offerwas accepted: — Eudoxus was one of those appointed toreceive the instructions of the Indian pilot ; and hemanaged matters so well that he returned to Egyptwith a rich cargo of spices and precious stones : allwhich, however, the king seized, not from an unjustcaprice, apparently, but as the legal monopolise of theeastern trade.The successor of Euergetes despatched Eudoxus on asecond adventure with a freight of valuable commodities.On his return, he was forced by the winds to the coastof ethiopia, where he found on the shore, among otherfragments of ship-timber brought together by the waves,the prow of a vessel with the figure of a horse, carvedas a cutwater, upon it; this he took with him as a curiosity,believing it to have come from the West.On bis arrival in Egypt, Eudoxus was again strippedof all his gains, and what was worse, he was utterly disgraced,being convicted of an attempt to convert to hisown profit the merchandise committed to bis charge.The ship-timbers found on the coast of ethiopia wereexposed in the market-place of Alexandria, and were76 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.recognised by the pilots collected there as belonging toa vessel from Gades. The great merchants of that cityhad large ships, but the poorer sort had small barkswhich they called horses, from the figure of a horsecarved upon the prow : these were employed in the fisheriesalong the coasts of Mauritania as far as the riverLixus. Some of the pilots even thought that they couldrecognise in those fragments the remains of a particularvessel, which having ventured beyond the Lixus wasnever afterwards heard of.Eudoxus concluded, from all these circumstances, thatit was possible to make the circuit of Africa by sea ;but having no further hope of finding encouragement atthe court of Alexandria, he embarked with all that hepossessed ; visiting all the towns on the coasts of theMediterranean, from Dicearchia near Naples to Marseilles,and thence to Gades, proclaiming every wherehis project of sailing to India by the ocean, and collectingmoney or associates among those whose imaginationswere captivated by the boldness of the enterprize.Having at length succeeded in equipping three vessels,one large and two of smaller size, and in embarking alarge company, comprising slaves skilled in music, physicians,and artisans of every description, he set sail forIndia with favourable winds. But he had not sailed farbefore his companions grew weary of the sea, and forcedhim to run ashore, Here the accident occurred whichEudoxus had foreseen : the large vessel was left agroundwhen the tide retired, and in such a situation as to sustainirreparable injury : the cargo, however, was saved,and with the timbers of the wreck they built a third barkas large as a fifty-oared galley. Eudoxus then resumedhis course, and came at length to a coast, the inhabitantsof which appeared to him to speak the same languageas the ethiopians on the eastern side of Africa.Renouncing for this time his intention of reachingIndia, he returned to Mauritania, sold his vessels andrepaired to the court of king Bacchus, whom he wishedto prevail upon to send a fleet to the countries of theCHAP. V. THE GREEKS. 77southern .ethiopians. But that prince prudently declinedcultivating the acquaintance of barbarous nations,whose neighbourhood might prove troublesome if theyonce found their way into his dominions.Eudoxus having learned, moreover, that it was thedesign of the Mauritanians, under the pretence of enteringinto his plan, to leave him to perish on some desertisland, made his escape into the Roman province, whencehe returned to Spain. Here he contrived to fit outanother armament consisting of two vessels, one of fiftyoars, the other smaller and flat-bottomed to examine theshores. He embarked instruments of agriculture, seedsand grain of various kinds, and once more put to sea,resolved to winter on some island along the coast, sowthe grain, and having gathered the harvest, to pursue hisvoyage till he reached India. This is all that Poisonouscould learn of the adventures cf Eudoxus, who probablyperished the victim of his hardihood ; for as to his sailinground Africa from the Arabian Gulf to Gades, asrelated by Mela, this is obviously a fiction.Some of the learned refuse to give any credit to thevoyages of Eudoxus : they regard him as a madman andan impostor, and appeal, rather unadvisedly, in supportof their opinion, to the authority of Strabo and otherancient writers, who looked upon the circumnavigation ofAfrica as absolutely impossible. There are some, on theother hand, who magnify his merits with as little reserve: they affect to consider him as a philosopher andhero, struggling against the rapacity of kings, the prejudicesof his age, and the obstacles opposed by natureto the extension of knowledge. But, perhaps, the justestimation of his character lies between those extremes.He was evidently a man who possessed more couragethan probity, and little scrupulous as to the manner inwhich he was embarked in the enterprises towards whichhe was impelled by the restless activity of his spirit. Hehad tasted the advantages of the trade with India, andwhen forced to leave Egypt, in consequence of his misconduct,he resolved to attain his ends without the consGEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.sent of the Polemics, and to arrive at the East by thecircumnavigation of Africa. When in the fifteenthcentury the communication with India through theLevant was interrupted by the Turks, European nationsrepeated the efforts of Eudoxus under the influence ofsimilar motives; and adventurers, not inferior to theGreek in levity and boldness, sported in the same mannerwith the avidity of human nature, and equippednew expeditions at the expense of the credulous in searchof western Extrados.CHAP. VI.THE GREEKS CONTINUED.THE ROMAN CONQUESTS. STRABO HIS KNOWLEDGE OF THEWEST. THE TURDETANI IN SPAIN. ANTHROFAPHAGI INIRELAND. THE Sarmatia. THE Sins OR INDIANSON THE BOSPHORUS. THE SIGYNI. THE GIPSIES. INDIANS INI.YCIA. NATIONS OF THE CAUCASUS. THE CASPIAN SEA SupposedTO JOIN THE OCEAN. EXPEDITIONS OF .ffiLIUS Gall'sINTO ARABIA AND ETHIOPIA. HABITABLE AND UninhabitableZONES. OBSTINATE INCREDULITY OF STRABO, BRITAINVISITED BY CAESAR. ITS POPULATION THE ROMANS REACHTHE BALTIC. THE CIMBRI. SCANDINAVIA AND NORWAYMENTIONED BY PLINY. TACITUS NAMES THE SWEDES. THEARIMPHjEI. GRAND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NORTHERNNATIONS. MARCH OF CORNELIUS Albus INTO THE INTERIOROF AFRICA. AND OF SUETONIUS PAULINUS ACROSS MOUNTATLAS. KING JUBa's Account OF THE NILE AND NIGER.THE FORTUNATE ISLES. VARIOUS STATEMENTS RECONCILED.But the schemes of Eudoxus might have been renewed ;the monopoly enjoyed by Egypt might have incited citiesand not individuals to attempt opening the passagethrough the ocean to the East ; and the discovery ofVasco de Gama might have been anticipated many centuriesbefore by some citizen of Gades, if the course ofpolitical events had not put an end to all clashing ofinterests among the civilised states of the western world.The conquests of the Romans expended nearly overCHAP. VI. THE GREEKS. ( 9every country of which they had any knowledge: — fromthe Atlantic to the Persian Gulf, from Britain to Egypt,no sway was acknowledged but that of the imperial city.The jealousies engendered by separate interests weresoon forgotten in the security of the empire ; and theactive cares of an enlightened government left the provinceslittle room to regret their turbulent independence.Egypt, the seat of the rich India trade, was made animperial province ; that is to say, it was administeredunder the immediate control of the emperor, withoutwhose permission no Roman was allowed to enter thatcountry, to hold property in land within it, or in anywayto interfere with the rights of the natives. Thiscautious system saved that rich country from the spoliationsto be apprehended from a succession of greedygovernors, and from disturbances which might havediverted into other channels the trade with India. Themonopoly, so carefully guarded by the emperors, wasthe more easily acquiesced in by the Roman world, as itwas freed from the capricious vexations of delegated power.If the magnitude of Roman dominion, absorbingwithin its vortex all national rivalries, tended, in somemeasure, to repress the spirit of maritime enterprise; thearmies of Rome, on the other hand, often opened countriesto the knowledge of the geographer, which the unprotectedmerchant could hardly have dared to penetrate.The campaigns of the Scipio and of Scares, in Spainand in Numidia ; the expeditions of Julius Gallus intoArabia and ethiopia; the war with Mithridates, inwhich Pompey led the Roman legions to the Caspian Sea,and ascended, we are told, the very summit of the Caucasus,which had witnessed the punishment of Prometheus; these expeditions led to an intimate acquaintancewith countries previously but little known. But themost important accessions made by the Romans to geographywere in the North: Julius Caesar totally subduedGaul, advanced a considerable way into Britain, and wrotea perspicuous account of those countries, which has fortunatelyremained to posterity.80 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.Yet, although some progress was certainly made inexploring this quarter of the world (for neither Gaulnor Britain appear to have been known to Herodotus),geography gained more in certainty than extent fromdie victories of the Romans. The limits which circumscribedthe obscure indications ot early writerswere examined and freed from fable, but little advancementwas made beyond them. The cautious temper resultingfrom the rapid influx of accurate information isstrikingly manifest in the Roman writers. To Strabo weareindebted for a work which enables us to appreciatethe geography of the Augustan age: a brief review of thatwork will suffice to show how little the knowledge of theearth had been improved by the most polished nationsof antiquity in the course of four hundred years.Strabo supposed the Pyrenees to run north andsouth, and the coast of Spain, commencing at CapeSt. Vincent, to form nearly a right line with that of Gaul.From this latter country he cut off the projecting provinceof Britain, so as to diminish the whole by at leastone third of its just dimensions. Britain is describedby him as a triangle, one angle of which approachesGaul, while another points towards Spain. This accountof Britain is borrowed from Caesar ; but it is not easy toexplain why Strabo should reject the same excellent authorityin speaking of Ireland, which he places not to thewest but to the north of Britain. The Cassiterides, ortin islands, he says, are in the sea to the north of the Arta-hri, that is, of the western Magicians. There is reason tosuspect that Strabo, whose nationality is apparent, wasdisposed to under-rate the value of Latin writers ; howcould he otherwise have described Britain as not worththe conquest, and Ireland as a barren country, wrappedin eternal snows, and inhabited by Anthropophagi.His account of the Tutti or Turdetani, the ancient inhabitantsof Andalusia, in the south of Spain, is in thehighest degree curious and instructive: they were truly theCartesian people ; for the territorial name Tartessus wasevidently of older date than the settlements of the Car-chap.VI. THE GREEKS. 8 ivirginians on the coasts of Spain. When first visited bythis latter people, their wealth was so great that eventheir commonest utensils were said to be made of silver.In the time of Strabo, the Turdetani were a polishedpeople : they had generally adopted the Latin tongue ;and their own language, in which they possessed not onlysome literature, but also a code of laws written in verse,and said to be 6000 years old, was gradually falling intooblivion.* The religious opinions of the Turdetani appearto have differed essentially from those of the Greeksand Romans ; for we are informed by an old writer thatthe inhabitants, although educated like the Greeks, yetdiffered from all other men in regarding life as a calamity,and rejoicing in death as the termination of a trial.This character of their superstition may very naturallysuggest an eastern origin T ; an opinion which is alsosupported by the historical tradition of the Carthaginian,that Medes, Persians, and Armenians (a generalmode, perhaps, of describing the race of mankind thatdwelt beyond Assyria,) had been conducted into Spain byHercules, whence some of them passed over to the neighbouringcontinent of AfricansIreland is the most northern country in Strabo's mapof the world. His information on the continent of Europeappears to terminate at the Elbe : the countries tothe north of that river are not noticed by him. As heapproaches the civilised nations in the south of Europe,his details become more accurate and more interesting ;yet it is ridiculous to find in the midst of much historicaland antiquarian learning some discussions as to whetherItaly be a square or a triangle. Greece, he takes occasionto tell us, was in his time comparatively a waste :yet much wealth and magnificence still existed amongthe Greek cities of Asia Minor ; in the description ofStrabo, 157. + Pisistratus in Potius.t The Baron W. von Humboldt, in his essay on the original inhabitantsof Spain, maintains that the Turdetani were an Iberian people, and thattheir language was the same as that of the other inhabitants of the peninsula.In this he is contradicted by Strabo, who says that their language wasdistinct. If the names Hispania and Manila be correctly translated in themodern names Seville and Honda !a vena, it would seem more probable thatthe language of the Turdetani belonged to the Japhetian family.VOL. I. O82 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.these, and particularly of his native city Asia, he islearnedly and laudably copious.In Strabo's account of eastern Europe we see thefruits of past and seed of future revolutions. Immediatelyto the north of Hacmus were the Thracianss andthe Celts. Beyond these, spreading from Germany tothe Tanais, were the Basternae (including the Romani)to the north and east ; the Liii or Lygii, probably theHeches or Poles of modern Europe ; the Getee or David,another Sclavonran tribe ; and, lastly, the Sarmatiansns,who had crossed the Tanais at the instigation of Mithridates,and totally destroyed or dispersed the Scythiansswho were settled round the Crimea in the time ofHerodotus.The population round the Palus Maeotis (or Gaieties,as Herodotus more accurately writes it, the mother of thePontus,) described by ancient geographers, offers a fieldof curious and interesting discussion. Herodotus, it hasbeen seen, related that the Scythianss, when the CimmerianBosphorus was frozen over in severe winters, usedto cross it on the ice with their loaded waggons to thecountry of the Indians. These India of the old historianare mentioned by later writers under the name of Sint,or Sindi* In vain have the commentators, startled atthis mention of Indians settled on the frontiers of Europe,endeavoured to get rid altogether of the obnoxiousexpression. The names Sinus and Indus (Sindrndlndoo),though, perhaps, radically distinct, are yet, in point offact, very intimately connected in geography ; and nodifficulty is removed by the substitution of the one termfor the other. Besides, it is expressly affirmed by awell-informed writer, that the Sindi were an Indian nation,t But even if no such direct testimony had beengiven, the hints that remain to us concerning their characterand manners, the peculiar object of their worship,and their dissolute religious rites, would leave no doubtas to the country from which they were derived.*Scylax peril. in Hudson. Apologies Methodius. Strabo.t Ilusychius. J Step. Bys.CHAP. VI. THE GREEKS. 83The territory occupied by those Sinds or Indians wasthe fertile country round the mouth of the Cuban ; aname which, originating in a harsh pronunciation of theIndian expression Hypanis, bears testimony to the existenceof those ancient colonists. That the Sindi inhabitedthe country of the Hypanis, and that this rivercould be no other than the Cuban, is all rendered manifestby the evidence of Strabo. But the Hypanis ofHerodotus (who makes no mention of the modern Cuban)was much farther to the westward : it was a westerntributary of the river Dnieper ; and a third river of thesame name flowed into the Euxine not far from theCrimea.* The fourth Hypanis is better known in ancientgeography : it is the Bias of our present maps ;one of the great rivers of the Pens-ab (five rivers) whichflow into the Indus on the western frontiers of India.The chief town of the Sindi was Patagonia, on theprincipal branch of the river. The haven, or Indicaparts, is now called Sindjik, not far from Anapa, tBut as a Hypanis, a true Indian name, occurs also inancient geography to the westward of the Borysfhenes,it is requisite to examine whether there be any traces ofthe Sindi or a kindred tribe having spread themselves inthat direction. It is impossible, in pursuing this enquiry,to avoid throwing a momentary glance on theSigynce of Herodotus, " a people resembling the Medesin apparel, and inhabiting a wild, uncultivated countryto the north of the Danube. They are the only inhabitants,"he continues, " of whom I have been able toreceive any intelligence. Their territories extend as faras the Veneti on the Adriatic. It is said that they arethe descendants of the Medes, which I cannot comprehend,although every thing is possible in the lapse oftime. By the word Signa, the Lygurians understandPliny.f Uy-panis signifies sacred river. The modem name Bias or Boa meanssacred. The Persians also used to prefix to their names of rivers the syllablevel, which had the same signification ; hence the Oxus was called vch.The Hy-panis of the Pens-ab was al-o called Hy-phasis (Arrian). The wordspawnee and phnsee or pathee, both signifying river, are still in use among theGipsies and Hindoos. Saracen. Archa;ol. vii.G 2■84 GEOGRAPHY OF THE AXCIEXTS. BOOK I.a travelling merchant." * The supposed descent of thispeople from the Medes is, in some measure, explainedby the appearance of a people named Sigynnii, inhabitingthe mountains of Hyrcania near the Caspian SeatSigynnee are also placed in the kingdom of Pontus, andat the mouth of the Danube That those travellingmerchants, the Sigynce of Herodotus, maintained an intercoursewith the tribes on the Mentis, may be safelyconcluded from the circumstance that he could tracethem westward much beyond the other neighbours of theScythianss ; and such an intercourse affords a fair presumptionof original affinity. All that remains of theSinds in history, or in local names, proves them to havebeen of Indian origin.It is impossible, however, to view in conjunction thenames of Sindi and Signs without recalling to mindthat extraordinary people, who, under the two generaldenominations of Sints and Zigani, (the former used inLithuania, the other in Poland, and with slight variationsin all the neighbouring countries,) constitute sonumerous a body in the eastern states of Europe. TheGipsies, in short, whose derivation from Western Indiais now no longer disputed, and whose language, corruptedas it is, and alloyed with foreign admixture,would still be not wholly unintelligible in some provincesof Hindostan. The Persians also name them SisechHindoo, or Black Indians. It is impossible, indeed, toconnect this people, historically, with the ancient Indiancolony of the Maeotis. Their own traditions (which areindeed of little value), and the late date of their appearancein Europe, are both repugnant to such an affiliation.But while mystery still enwraps the problem of their origin,it is allowable to canvass every means of its solution.It may, however, be affirmed with confidence, that the Indianmerchants who were shipwrecked in the Baltic, andpresented by the king of the Suevi to Q. Met. Celer, theproconsul of Gaul, were not carried round from Indiato the north of Europe by the ocean, as the ancientsHerod. + Strabo. t poll. Rod. Argon, iv. Orph. Argon. 754.CHAP. VI. THE GREEKS. 85imagined, but were voyagers from the Boeotian colony.*Whether the Sinds or Indians of the Bosphorus everadvanced southwards along the Euxine is a question impossibleto determine. There were Sints and a Sinticregion in Macedonia, and Indian men, speaking a strangelanguage, who inhabited Lemnos in the time of Homer.But, except their addiction to the labours of the smithy(for Lemnos, was sacred to Vulcan), there is not anypositive indication remaining by which they can beconnected with the Sints of Lithuania. But in examininground the shores of the Euxine those most durableand veracious monuments of ancient history, the remnantsof language preserved in local names, the Phasis,or as it is at present called, the Fash, must necessarilyarrest the attention. This river, famous for its connectionwith Grecian fable and traditionary golden sands,flowed through the country of the Colchis. The wordPhasis, signifying a river, and the name Colchis, are bothproperly of Indian origin, and stand at no great distancefrom each other in Ptolemy's map of India. When aGreek poet describes the Coachman Phasis as mixing itswaters with the Tanais, it is evident at once that theHypanis or some other river in that quarter may havebeen also called Phasis by the Sinds of the Maeotis, sothat we here again detect that grand source of geographicalerrors, the employment of general terms. + TheColchians were supposed by the Greeks to be a colonyof Egyptians. They practised rites, and possessed arts,which, unavoidably, led a people unacquainted with theinterior of Asia to arise at that conclusion. Their darkcomplexion, also, which is noticed by Pindar, seemed tolend confirmation to the popular belief. But though thefiction of a colony planted by Sesostris on the shores ofthe Euxine was readily countenanced by the Egyptianpriests, it is contradicted by traditions of equivalent authority.The religion of the Colchians, besides, does notseem to have been Egyptian. Their superiority aboveMela, iii. and l'lin. ii. t Orph, Argon.80 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK Ithe Greeks in civilisation in the + ime of the Argonautsand the poetic age is evinced by the reputation they enjoyedas magicians. In the mai fracture of fine linenthey far surpassed the Egyptians; and we know thatfrom them the Greeks derived their names of linen clothsin commerce, Sardinian and Siddons*That a colony of Hindoos (of profligate manners, and,perhaps, ignoble caste,) was settled on the CimmerianBosphorus in the age of Herodotus, appears incontestablyestablished ; when, or how, they were dispersed, it is notso easy to conjecture. That the Gipsies are descendedfrom them is a conclusion resting wholly on naked probabilities.But whence have these wandering outcaststhe tradition that they have come from Egypt ?. Is itnot possible that the ancient Colchians, who, there isgood reason to believe, were themselves from the westof India t, assented at length to the general opinion ofantiquity respecting their Egyptian origin, and whendriven, perhaps, from their ancient possessions by theIberian tribes, spread abroad among their swarthy brethrenof the North the same erroneous belief?Beyond the territory of the Sinds, on the Bosphorus,extended the Asian country, properly so called, inhabitedby the Aspurgitani, or people of As-pure, and fromthis little Asia ( which extended, perhaps, from the Cubanto the Don,) the modern name of Asoph is supposed tobe derived. Besides these Hindoos of the North, (who,it is said, are distinctly mentioned by the Armenianhistorians,) there appears to have been also a tribe of thesame overflowing nation established in Asia Minor.Xenophon is the earliest writer who makes any allusionto them; but Pliny, who says that the river Indus descendsfrom the mountains of the Cibyratee alone affords anymeans of determining their exact position. They occupieda district in Lycia, apparently at no great distancefrom the banks of the XanthusThe Caucasian isthmus appears to have been theHesychius. Sardinian quasi Scrindion.f Hitter's Vorhalle Europ. Geseh.X Compare 1 Maccabees, viii. 8. Xcncph. Crop. v. ii. in. Pliny v.CHAP. VI. THE GREEKS. 87receptacle from the earliest times of many minglednations. The great tide of migration westward flowedthrough it along the shores of the Caspian Sea; and asthe stragglers of the wandering hordes coveted the possessionof the rich vallies near the plains, the old possessorsof them were forced to retire farther into therecesses of the mountains. Hence it is that few mountainranges can vie with the Caucasus in the number,and none in the motley character of its population.The Mithridates war brought the Roman legions intothe neighbourhood of these wild tribes, and from theofficers of Pompey, Strabo probably procured his abundantinformation. The Zyges of Strabo are supposedto be the Jiki of the present day ; but as the word Zygsignifies a man in the language of the Cherkes or Circassians,it is possible that they may have been a tribe ofthat nation whom he appears to design also by the nameof Corvette. The Soanes are the Son (or mountaineers),a wretched people inhabiting the highest vallies of Elbruz.The Iberians, divided into castes, possessed the modernGeorgia ; and their mountain neighbours, the fierceLege, resembled in manners, as much as in name andsituation, the Lesgce of the present day.Strabo supposes the Caspian Sea to join the northernocean by a narrow channel; and this error seems themore unaccountable since the armies of Alexander andof Pompey had reached the shores of that sea, andmight have added much information to the correctaccount already given of it by Herodotus. In the ageof Strabo, also, there was a great trade in peltry carriedon by the Romans with the nations inhabiting the CaspianSteppes. But though it is impossible to vindicateStrabo's opinion, we are justified in suspecting that thecorrectness of the measures assigned by Herodotus tothe Caspian (which are not far from the truth at thepresent day) is, in a great measure, accidental ; for itis the opinion of the ablest geographers that that sea issinking rapidly ; that it was formerly united to lakeAral (which the ancients are commonly supposed tog488 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.have confounded with it), and that it may have extendedto the north above 125 leagues beyond itspresent limits.The greatest length of Asia, according to Strabo, is45,000 stadia, measured from Rhodes to Thince, theremotest point knoAvn to him in the East. But he appearsto have known nothing of it but the name. Ifwe make the most indulgent allowances to the length ofhis stadium, the measure which he assigns to Asia willnot yet lead us beyond the commencement of the desertof Gobi, or half way across the continent. His informationwith regard to India was derived wholly fromthe writings of Nsearchus, Onesicratus, and other Macedoniansof Alexander's age. He does not even appearto have seen the history of Seleucus's expedition into thecountry of the Ganges. The attempt made by JuliusGallus, in the reign of Augustus, to penetrate into thepeninsula of Arabia, and to reduce its wandering tribesto obedience, contributed nothing to geography. Thatill-devised and ill-executed enterprise terminated in adisgraceful retreat, in which the greater part of theRoman army perished, not by the sword, but by thehardships of the desert. The same general, who was anintimate friend of Strabo, also sent an army into .ethiopia,but no detailed account of its marches or proceedingsremains to us. The knowledge of the interior ofAfrica had not increased since the time of Herodotus ;at least Strabo observes that the Romans possessed nearlyall of that continent that was not either desert or uninhabitableby reason of the excessive heat.Thus it appears that Strabo disbelieved the relationsof Pytheas, Hanno, and Eudoxus, and rejected in agreat measure the authority of Herodotus. He remainedconsequently in wilful ignorance of the countries nearthe Baltic ; of the western coast of Africa, beyond theLixus, where his information terminates; and of the interiorof the same continent. Nor was this wary mistrustof preceding writers so much the result of acautious spirit as of an attachment to system. Strabowas one of those who maintained that the earth wasCHAP. VI. THE GREEKS. 8<)divided into five zones, of which the torrid zone, placedunder the equator and extending on both sides to thetropics, was burned up by unremitting heats, insupportableto the human constitution. The frigid zones,situated near the poles, were equally desolate, from theopposite extreme of cold ; in the temperate zones alone,occupying the space between the frigid zones and thetropics, were the ardours of summer and chills of wintersufficiently mitigated or blended, to admit of the existenceof man and the grateful luxuriance of vegetation. Withinthe temperate zone, therefore, the attention of therational geographer was confined by the laws of nature.Though this system presented itself naturally enoughto the Greek or Italian who saw on one hand the perpetualsnows of Hacmus and the Alps, and on the otherthe burning sands of Libya, yet those limits once passed,it was obviously untenable ; nor must we suppose thata doctrine so ill founded ever obtained such a currencyin antiquity as to operate in repressing the spirit ofenquiry, however it might be favoured by those weakand timid spirits, who labour unceasingly to fix limitsto legitimate curiosity.The extent of the earth embraced in the geography ofStrabo does not materially exceed that which was knownto Herodotus four centuries earlier. In some quarters,as in Africa and beyond the Caspian, the early Greekhistorian is superior ; but in the minuteness of his detailsthe writer of the Augustan age has greatly theadvantage. The Roman power had opened the way intocountries hitherto inaccessible. But this partial improvementcannot prevent our surprise when we contrastthe geography of that age with its literary cultivation,or compare the polish and fine taste of Horaceand Virgil with their ignorance of the earth. The formerof these speaks of Britain and of the Tanais as ofthe ends of the earth; but the learned Virgil * commitsa more positive error, when he supposes the Nile to flowfrom India. When the literary cultivation of RomeVir. Gcorg. iv. 2'J3. " Usque coloration amnis ilevcxus ab Iudis." Seealso Lucan x. v, W2,f)0 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.was at its greatest height, it was thought to constitute aright to fame to have travelled to the remote boundariesof the empire. But the increased intercourse of theRomans, under the first Caesar, with the nations of theNorth, opened to view a new and attractive spectacle.The antiquarian humour of Strabo, minute in treatingof monuments, and superficial when he spoke of nations,gave way to minds of a grandeur better proportioned tothe objects of consideration. The writings of DionysiusPerseveres, and of Pompous Mela, who both flourishedin the first century of our era, may be passed in silence:they copied from others, and added nothing new to theinformation already possessed. The learning of Plinyand the philosophy of Tacitus are more worthy-of ourattention.The expedition of Julius Caesar had made known onlythe extremity of Britain. Under the emperor Claudiusthat island was effectually subdued by the legions which,at first, reluctantly permitted themselves to be led towhat they designated a new world. Thirty years later,Pliny was acquainted with the Eludes, or western islesof Scotland, and even with the names of several of thegroup. At length Agricola extended the Roman conqueststo the Grampian hills, and a fleet, by his orders,sailed northwards, to discover how far the land extendedin that direction. " This fleet," says Tacitus, " firstascertained that Britain is an island ; it discovered alsoand subjected the Arcades, a cluster of islands not knownbefore, and saw Thule, hitherto concealed by snow andwinter." The Romans regarded Britain as we do NewHolland ; its remoteness, its immense size, so far exceedingthat of any island with which they were distinctlyacquainted, and the great ocean which washed itsshores, forcibly struck their imaginations. They had,however, a very inaccurate idea of its geographical position.Tacitus, the son-in-law of Agricola, describes itas having Germany on the east, Gaul on the south, andSpain on the west. Ireland is placed, by the samewriter, midway between Spain and Britain. AgricolaCHAP. VI. THE GREEKS. 91was preparing to invade that island, which some of thenatives assured him might be effectually subdued witha single legion, when the jealousy of Domitian arrestedhis operations, and Ireland was unfortunately rescuedfrom the civilising yoke of Roman dominion.When Julius Caesar first visited Britain, he found themaritime provinces possessed by a people of Germanicrace, whom he supposed, and, perhaps, not without reason,to be Belgians. The population was remarkablydense ; the dwellings of the people were strewed thicklyover the face of the country, and cattle were abundant.Merchants in numbers visited the island ; but so greatin those days was insular jealousy in Britain, thatstrangers durst not venture thither who had not evidentlythe excuse of traffic. The Gauls, it appears, hadbut little acquaintance with the island ; whence it maybeconcluded that the merchants were chiefly of theBelgian or German race. To the inaccuracy of reports,in the dictation of which the superstition of the Gaulsmay have had some share, ought, perhaps, to be attributedthe error of Caesar in describing Great Britainas an island of a triangular form. Tacitus remarkedthe close resemblance that existed between the dialect ofthe Stones on the shore of the Baltic and that of theBritish islanders. The Caledonians also were known tobe of German descent, by their great size, their floridcomplexions, and keen grey eyes. The same vigilantobserver remarked, that the inhabitants of the southwesternangle of the island (the Silures had dark, adustvisages, with curled hair ; but instead of concluding thatthe emigration of a stronger race from the East hadforced the prior inhabitants of the island into the recessesof its western mountains, he adopted the weak hypothesis,so often repeated since by modern writers uponIreland, of a colony direct from Spain.From Tacitus also we learn that merchants frequentedthe j.'orts of Ireland, the superiority of'whichwas already known. But with whom did the merchantscarry on a trade? Was the Celtic population sufficiently92 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.civilised to feel the wants and benefits of commerce?This is hardly credible ; but when the historian proceedsto observe that Hibernia differs but little from Britain insoil or population, the inference is natural, that longbefore his time a colony of the German race had alsoforced its way into that island. There is not, however,any direct evidence to support this conjecture, besidesthat of the native historians. Ptolemy, it is true, abouthalf a century later, places a Belgian colony (the Menai)in Ireland ; but the statement of the geographer affordsno means of ascertaining the date of their arrival. Thusmuch, however, may be affirmed with safety, that so farback as authentic history lends its light, the Germanicrace has predominated in the British islands.*The journey of the Roman knight Julian from Pannoniato the country of the yellow amber made known tothe Romans the coasts of the Baltic, in the neighbourhoodof the Vistula, while they as yet remained in ignoranceof the Oder and other rivers westward as far as the Elbe.The Gustavus of Pliny appears to be the Pregel, andtook its name probably from the Guddai, the ancientinhabitants of Prussia, and the Guddones of Pytheas.Beyond this Tacitus places the Fenny, who are alsomentioned by Strabo under the name of Zoumi; a namenot differing much from that of Some, which the Fensgive themselves. The philosophic historian describeswith brevity, but emphatically, the utter barbarism ofthis people, " without arms, without horses, and withouthousehold gods; their food, herbs ; skins, their clothing;their bed, the ground : men and women alike supportedby the chase ; the children, for shelter and security,hidden in the boughs of trees ; which are at once thecradle of the young and the resting-place of the old."On the eastern shore of the Baltic Sea were the JEatyi,If the Belgians translated (as it is natural to suppose they did) theAlbion or Allons of the Celts ; if, in short, the Ji^ravuxxi of the Greeksbe the Brehtan-egge or Brc/itan-eye, Bright islands of the German colonists,then there is reason to conclude that the connection of the Belgians withthe British islands ascends to the time of Aristotle, or the author of thebook l)c Munilo, ascribed to him, in which that name for the first timeoccurs. Britannia;, in the plural, as used by Catullus, would, if this etymologybe adopted, be the more correct expression. Pliny also (iv. 1C.) intimatesas much.CHAP. VI. THE GREEKS. 9$in manners like the Germans, but speaking a languageresembling that of Britain : they worshipped the motherof the gods, in honour of whom they carried on their personsthe image of a boar ; a symbol so much respectedas to insure the safety of its wearer, even among hostiletribes. In this account it appears that Freya, the ScandinavianVenus, to whom the boar (in Sanscrit Varia)was dedicated, is confounded with Frigga, the motherof the gods, in the same mythology ; or, perhaps,the authority of Tacitus may serve to prove that thosedivinities were originally the same. The JEstyi collectedamber, to which they gave the name of glesum (theshining), but of which, barbarian like, observes the philosophicRoman, they were unable to explain the origin.With more poetic fancy than knowledge of nature, hesupposes that precious substance to exude from trees inremote western islands, being liquefied by excessive heatin the immediate vicinity of the setting sun. The Cimbri,established in Jutland, or the Cimbrian peninsula, werereduced to a very inconsiderable tribe in the age ofTacitus, who recalls with enthusiasm the memory oftheir ancient victories ; but they still retained theirmartial fame, and prided themselves in the monumentsof their former glory. The name Timber, we are informed,signified a warrior* The country which thesewarriors occupied was called by them Carries. On thewestern coast of Jutland was an island called Glessaria,or the amber island; whence it may be inferred that theRomans obtained some supplies of that precious commodityfrom the shores of the Cimbrian peninsula.Pliny is the first writer who mentions Scandinavia :it appeared to him to be an island of unknown extent.The arm of the sea which separates that country fromthe Cimbrian peninsula, and which resembles " a greatriver divided into many branches," was named by himPlutarch and Festus. Latroves, that is to say, Moss-troopers, or in theScottish dialect, damper. In the modern Danish, Temper means awarrior. The word timber, there is reason to believe, was originallySimmer. The Cimmerian of the Bosphorus, by a natural incorrectness ofpronunciation, were also called Cambrian.9i GEOGRAPHY OF THE AXCIEXTS. BOOK I.Sinus Romanus, that is, the gulf of the Goth-dane, orGoths of the plain. The island Patris appears to havebeen the modern Zealand, where Lethra was the ancientseat of the Danish kings. The mountain called Svoby Pliny, and which marked the entrance of the SinusRomanus, opposite to the promontory of the Cimbri, iseasily recognised in Mount Svo near Gothenburg. Butwhen we cross the gulf, the knowledge of the Romanauthor, though it reaches a considerable way, is extremelyinaccurate and indistinct. When he tells us that theHelleviones, a Scandinavian nation, considered theircountry as a separate quarter of the globe, we recognisethe authenticity of his information in the coincidence ofthis anecdote with the language of the Icelandic sagas,which frequently call Sweden the northern half of theworld. But when he enumerates the four islands ofCandia, Dunno, Berg, and Nerigon, we are nolonger able to distinguish objects so vaguely described.It may be safely concluded, however, that by Nerigon,a great island, the inhabitants of which sailed as faras Thule," we are to understand the modern Norway ;and this is the northern limit of Pliny's geographicalknowledge.Tacitus, however, who studied rather the moral characteristicsof nations than their local situations, mentionsthe Sviones (Sea-men) (a name preserved by theSwedes till the middle ages) as a nation in the ocean,strong by sea as well as by land, comparatively rich, andobeying an absolute monarch. He also takes notice ofthe peculiar form of their boats, resembling the northernyawls of the present day, sharp at both ends, and solight as to be easily impelled through the waves by asingle pair of oars. Beyond the Sviones, he tells us,is another sea, languid and nearly motionless; and, that itembraces the earth may be collected from the circumstancethat the light of the setting sun continues till thedawn of day with a lustre that eclipses all the stars.Moreover it is said that the noise of that luminary in itspath below the ocean can be heard, and that the figuresCHAP. VI. THE GREEKS. Q5of the gods can be distinguished, crowned with beams oflight. These poetical relations of Tacitus are no ambiguousnotices of the frozen ocean, and the most strikingphenomena of the Aurora Borealis.The Arimphcei of Pliny, a tribe inhabiting the Uralmountains, devoted to religious austerities, and lookedupon as sacred by their neighbours, are evidently theArgippcei of Herodotus. They agree also in every circumstanceof character with the Agrispcei, a peopledwelling in Persia, according to Ctesias ; nor is there anydifference in the names reported by the two Greekwriters, but that required by the analogy of Greek andPersian forms.Whenever the Scythianss are mentioned in the pagesof an ancient writer, they are sure to be celebrated fortheir singular piety as much as for their numbers andmartial disposition. The purity of their lives, theirfrequent hastings, and their tenderness towards the loweranimals, were all observed with attention and respect.*The frequent occurrence of religious celibacy among theGetae could hardly find credit among those Grecianswho believed that religious practices are seldom cultivatedwithout the encouragement of the 'female sex, andthat these are not likely to recommend a life of singlenessto the males. + The Scythianss asserted the immortalityof the soul, not as a philosophical speculation, butas a fundamental doctrine of religion. These grandtraits of national character distinguished the populationof the North from that of Greece and Italy, and provedthe primitive integrity of 'ts constitution. For the fertilestems of Greek and Roman civilisation sprung fromthe ruins of ancient systems. This characteristic pietyof the Scythianss is as old as Grecian history. It isloudly extolled by later writers ; it is implied in the historyof the Scythian Zamolxis, the friend and companionof Pythagoras ; it is alluded to by Homer ; and it comesforward to explain, in some measure, the character ofthe thrice-born Aristteus, who stands on the threshold ofScymni Xliii. fmgm. f Strabo.96 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.the age of fable. The praise of exemplary piety, uniformlybestowed by the Greek writers, from the remotestages, on all the wandering tribes to which they gave thename of Scythianss, serves to prove the original relationshipof those nomad nations, and to carry back theircivilisation, the simple and stationary civility, indeed, ofpatriarchal society, to an age anterior to that of Greece.The Scythianss were also remarked by the Greeks for thefineness of their habiliments, for their loose robes,either figured or pure white, and their ornaments ofgold and silver.The knowledge of the ancients never reached sufficientlyfar in the North to enable them to correct theirerroneous supposition regarding the insularity of Scandinavia.Ptolemy, who wrote a century later thanPliny, appears to describe the north of Europe fromsources anterior to the latter writer, and makes no mentioneither of the Sviones or of the island of Nerigon.The acquaintance, however, of the Romans with thenumerous tribes of the German nation, was daily growingmore intimate : they learned to respect the determinedvalour of those whom they regarded as barbarians andfrom the contemplation of a social system, differingwidely from their own, they derived lessons far moreimportant than mere geographical details. To becomeacquainted with the earth is to open a volume of variedinstruction. The Greeks, in the flourishing period oftheir republics, contrasted with their own vigour theimpotent magnificence of the Persian king : the Romans,on the other hand, when their liberty was gone, whentheir annals were stained by repeated examples of imperialcruelty and excess, viewed with eager admirationthe uncorrupted manners of a free people. The grandfeatures which distinguished the character and constitutionof the German nation are delineated by Tacituswith the hand of a master; but these details lie beyondthe compass of the present volume.All the important acquisitions made to geography bythe Roman arms were in the North ; their victoriousCHAP. VI. THE GREEKS. 97generals, indeed, penetrated in other directions beyondthe boundaries of the empire ; but the accounts whichremain to us of those expeditions contain but a barrencatalogue of names, or descriptions totally devoid ofmoral interest. Of this nature is the account transmittedto us by Pliny of the march of Cornelius Balbusinto the interior of Africa, an enterprise so bold andhazardous in itself, as to awaken our regret that ouronly knowledge of it should be derived from so inadequatea notice.That general appears to have commenced his marchfrom the territory of Tripoli ; directing his course southward,he crossed the desert into Phazania, the modernFezzan. " We have subdued," says Pliny, " Phazaniaand its two cities Alee and Cillaba (Selbat), as well asCydnus (Adams). From Cydnus, a chain of mountainsruns eastward, called the Black Mountains : beyondthese are deserts, and afterwards Matelgce or Taiga,a town of the Garamantes ; the celebrated fountainDebris, and Grana the capital of the nation. All thesecountries have been conquered by the Roman armies :Cornelius Balbus triumphed over them." The Granaof the Romans is evidently Germa to the south-east ofFezzan, and Alee probably occupied the same site asMorzouk at the present day. The Tabidium of Balbus,his Tapsagum and Discern, all coincide nearly with theTaboo or Tibedoo, the Tagazi and Djezr of moderntravellers. The village of Negligently, in which thehouses were built of salt, was probably in the salt desertof Bilma ; the name itself is evidently the Arabic expressionNedged-al-maila, or country of salt. In thesame manner the river Nathabur of the Romans may besupposed to have been the Nar-Thabou, or river of Taboo.Having crossed the Black Mountains, at presentcalled the Mountains of Tibet, Balbus entered the countryof Tube or Tibboo. Farther on, the names of Bornand Dannagi seem to suggest to us (but with very faintprobability) the countries of Bornou and Dongola.On the western confines of these countries terminated.98 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.the discoveries of Cornelius Balbus, who, it is evident,never crossed the desert which ' separates the Ribbonsfrom the country of the Niger. Pliny also briefly alludesto the expedition of Suetonius Paulinus, who, settingout from Lixus, the limit of the Roman empire on thewestern coast of Africa, reached Mount Atlas in tendays' march, and advancing a few miles beyond it, in adesert of dark-coloured sand met a river which he supposedto be the Niger. This river was, probably, theGyr of Segelmessa ; but so great was the ignorance ofthe ancients with regard to the true dimensions of Africa,that they could easily suppose a connection between theNiger and the streams running southwards from MountAtlas, which were separated from that river by the wholebreadth of the Great Desert.The very unsatisfactory account which Pliny, on theauthority of king Juba, gives of the courses of the Nileand Niger, makes us regret that we do not possess theoriginal volume of that learned Mauritanian, or ratherthose valuable documents from which he professed toderive his information, the Carthaginian annals. Butthe errors of the Roman author are not without instruction: for when Pliny informs us that the lake Nimis,abounding in crocodiles like the Nile, is situated not farfrom the Western Ocean ; that the river flowing from ittowards the east sinks into the desert, and runs formany days' journey under ground ; that after emerging,and hiding itself a second time in a subterranean course,it rises at length from the source called Tigris, and dividingAfrica from ethiopia, takes the name of Astapus,one of the chief branches of the Nile : when he makesthis ill-arranged statement, it is easy to perceive that therelations of the Carthaginians, who probably maintainedsome correspondence with the nations inhabiting thecountry of the Niger, were perverted by those who hadno such authentic sources of information. The riversof the interior were known to Pliny from the Carthaginianwriters ; but the violent hypotheses which connectedthem with the Nile were evidently the fruits ofChap. VI. THE GREEKS. 99a later age, when theoretical speculations predominated,and direct intercourse with the interior was at an end.It is obviously an error, therefore, to suppose with manywriters, that the Roman armies penetrated to the Niger, orthat they ever advanced so far southwards as the sources ofthe Astapus, or Nile of Abyssinia, which Pliny, by a singularmistake, connects with the rivers of western Africa.It was not till a comparatively late period thatthe Roman geographers obtained any certain knowledgeof islands in the Atlantic. Sertorius, while anexile in Spain, received an account of two islands tothe west of Libya, of great fertility, and formed by natureto be the refuge of the unfortunate. In the distressfulsituation of his affairs such a belief was easilyentertained. About twenty years later, Statius Sensuscollected at Gades all the information he could obtainrespecting those western isles. King Juba, also, madeenquiries respecting them, and learned the names of six.It is, at first sight, difficult to reconcile the accounts ofthe Roman and the Mauritanian with one another, orwith that of Ptolemy; but there is still such a trace ofagreement between them in their mode of arranging theislands, as leads to a complete explanation of all difficulties.The concurrence of their statements may beseen in the following table, in which the names of theislands are arranged in the order observed by the respectiveauthors : —Sebosls. Juba. Ptolemy. Modern Name.Aprositos AllegianceJunonia Junonia para Junonia ClaraPlutalia Umbras Pluitalia LancelotJunonia LoboCarrara Carrara Hesperia Forteventura.Beyond the Fortunate Inks," says Pliny, " thereare others;" and of these he mentions two, Bavaria andCanada, Teneriffe and Canary, which had been previouslynamed by Juba, and were doubtless the Cornwallisand Linaria of Sensus.100 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.Thus it appears that the Hesperides, or FortunateIsles, of the ancient geographers, were the most easterlyof the group now called the Canaries. They are rangedin a line running parallel to the coast of Africa, and aresituated about half way between the continent and thegreat islands, Canary and TenerifFe, which, althoughnamed, were probably never visited by the ancients.CHAP. VII.DISCOVERY OP THE MONSOONS.HIPPALUS. INCREASED TRADE WITH INDIA. — COURSE Pursued.Perils OF Arran-this ACCURATE ACCOUNT OFTHE INDIAN PENINSULA.But, towards the East, a discovery was made in theage of Pliny, by an obscure individual, of far greaterimportance to geography and commerce than the temporaryroutes laid open into barbarous countries by thehardihood and ambition of the Roman generals. Theregularity of the monsoons, or periodical winds, which,in the seas between Africa and India blow during onehalf of the year from the south-west, and during theother from the south-east, with little deviation, couldnot have long escaped the attention of the Arabian navigators.No advantage, however, was taken of thisstriking phenomenon ; for among an uncultivated peopletime operates slowly in maturing the details of partialexperience into acknowledged principles. The Greeks,however, soon learned to estimate its importance. Wehave seen that the voyage of Eudoxus to India originatedin the circumstance of an Indian vessel beingdriven upon the coast of Africa by the prevalence of theeasterly monsoon : Eudoxus himself, on his return toEgypt, was forced too far to the west by the sameCHAP. VII. DISCOVERY OP THE MONSOONS. 101wind. Jambolo, on the other hand, was said to havebeen carried by the westerly monsoon from Africa toCeylon ; and again in the reign of the emperor Claudius,a freed-man of Annius Plocamus, employed in collectingthe revenues of Arabia, was driven in like manner to thesame island. It appears to have been about the sametime, or perhaps a little later (A.D. 50), that Hippalus,an enlightened navigator, considering the steadiness ofthe periodical wind to be an invariable law of nature,ventured boldly to quit sight of land, to track an unknowncourse across the ocean, and confide in the steadfastfavour of a rude and proverbially fickle element.The success of this experiment soon effected a completerevolution in the course of the Indian trade, which Plinyassures us was only in its infancy in his time. Vesselsfrom Terence, in the Red Sea, now reached Carta, onthe southern coast of Arabia, in thirty days ; and thensteering across the ocean, in forty days more arrived atMuziris, or some other port of India, whence they setsail to return as soon as the wind shifted, so as to completethe voyage to India and back again within thetwelvemonth. The gratitude of the Greeks, by a judiciouscompliment, gave the name of Hippalus to thesummer, or south-western, monsoon.The particulars of the trade with the East, and thecourse followed by the vessels engaged in it, are preservedto us in a short but valuable work, the Periplusof the Erythrean sea, written by one Arrian, supposedto have been a merchant of Alexandria. The age ofthis work cannot be positively fixed; but some of theablest scholars are inclined to consider Arrian as a contemporaryof Pliny ; the Periplus, therefore, on thissupposition, must be assigned to the second half of thefirst century of our era.The fleets bound to India from Egypt, having passedthe straits of Babelmandel, first touched at Aden, a placeof commercial importance from the earliest ages. Theythen coasted Arabia Felix, as far as Carta, the positionof which is fixed by Danville, merely from resemblanceii 3102 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.of sound, at Cava Canis. It was the capital of theChatramotites, the inhabitants of Adamant, and probablystood immediately to the west of Cape Fantasy, abold projection, likely to have been the limit of the coastnavigation, and to have determined the lingering marinerto stretch at once across the ocean. The ships thensailed to Dachanabades, (the city of the Decan, or Southeya name given by the Greeks to the whole peninsula ofthe Decan. The Mekran, or coast west of the Indus,does not appear to have been visited by strangers fromthe time of Alexander till the discoveries of the Portuguese: but the Greeks were well acquainted with therich and populous countries to the south of that river.They knew the Gulf of the Cant, at present the bay ofCutch ; the Sanscrit word cant, and the modern expressioncutch, both signifying the coast. Among thechief emporia mentioned by Arrian were Barygaza(Broach), in the Gulf of Cambay ; Ozone, now calledOugein, in Malwa ; and Tagara, the ancient and reveredcity of Dcoghir (the hill of God), the ruins of which arenear those of Lore, within about four coss of the modernAurungabad. The fine muslins and chintz ofTugara were conveyed, by a journey of ten days, toPlataea (at present Pultaneh), and thence, in twentydays more, to Barygaza, by difficult roads over steepand lofty mountains. In the account of these mountainroads we have a distinct notice of the Balagauts.Proceeding to the south, Arrian mentions, amongother places, Kalliene, or the island of Bombay, whichbut a few centuries ago was still called Gallia. Fartherto the south, the coast of Canara was infested withpirates ; and this local characteristic continued unchanged,from the time of Arrian, till the middle of thelast century, when the extension of the British poweralong the coasts of Malabar completely put an end tothose maritime depredations. On the pirate coast theGreeks place Palaipatmai, or Balepatna, the great town,or town of Bali, and some other places, the names ofwhich are still preserved. Muziris, the great mart toCHAP. VII. DISCOVERY OF THE Monsoons. 103which the Greek fleets steered direct from Cape Garde-fid,is supposed by some to have occupied the site of themodern Mangalore, while others place it at Mizzouh.The name of the Aii, the ancient inhabitants of Malabar,is still preserved in that of Alcott, near Cranganoor.Pliny places on this coast the mountain Males ; henceit might be concluded that the indigenous race werenamed Mal-ayes, or Mountaineers, in ancient times, asthey are at the present day.At Muziris the Greek merchants met the traders fromthe East, and not having any occasion to proceed furtheralong the coast, the minute accuracy of their informationterminates at this point. Yet some may have occasionallyventured to navigate the seas to the eastward of thepeninsula ; and the reports of these, added to the relationsof the natives, extended the geography of the Greeksas far as commercial intercourse existed in the East, thatis, to China ; for the error of those commentators mustbe carefully avoided, who studiously confine the knowledgeof the Greeks to the countries which they actuallyvisited, and make no allowances for hearsay information.Yet their picture of the East grows gradually more vagueand imperfect as we advance from Muziris, until it atlength terminates in names of places obviously learnedat second-hand, and accompanied with such palpablyerroneous indications of position as do not merit theslightest attention.Arrian mentions Cape Comer (Comorin), so calledfrom Calmar, the Virgin, and beyond it were the Colchis,or Colic. As these occupied a coast rendered importantby the pearl-fishery, it is evident that they weresituated near Ramana-Koil, or the temple of Ram,where the richest pearl-fishery in the world is carriedon. Taprobane, or Ceylon, is described by our authoras being at a distance of six days' sail from the mainland; an error which proves how little that island wasresorted to by the Greeks.Following the coast of Coromandel, we find obscurityincreasing at every step ; yet the Greeks were acquaintedii 4L04 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.with the river Chabaris, the Cover y of the present day, andthe Mcesolus, or Kistnah, the ancient name of which isstill preserved in that of Masulipatam, a town situated atits mouth. Farther to the north were the Hippioprosopoi,or horse-faced people (theAswa-muc'has of the Hindoos),the Macrocepluili and other monsters : these occupiedthe coast of Orissa, which has been in all ages the leastcivilised part of India. The Ganges, the greatest riverof India, is next mentioned, and the Indian name Putala,or, as Ptolemy writes it, Upsala, that is, the lower region,is correctly applied to the country round its mouth.Beyond this point Arrian gives no topographical details ;but we are not justified on that account in limiting thestretch of his hearsay information. Arrian always speakslike a merchant, and carefully notes an island, situatedbeyond the golden Chersonese, under the rising sun, andproducing the finest tortoise-shell in the world.His account of the trade with the Chinese will berelated farther on.CHAP. VIII. PTOLEMY. 105CHAP. VIII.PTOLEMY.INCREASED INTERCOURSE OF NATIONS UNDER THE ROMANS. —ADVANTAGES ENJOYED EY PTOLEMY. APPLIES THE MEASURESOF LONGITUDE AND LATITUDE. HIS ERRORS. DISPLAYSAN ACQUAINTANCE WITH THE CASPIAN STEPPES. PROGRESSWESTWARD OF THE SCYTHIAN NATIONS. THEIR ORIGIN.TOWNS ON THE RIVER NIGER. PTOLEMY's ACQUAINTANCEWITH THE EAST. HIS FREQUENT REPETITIONS. SUPPOSEDTHE CONTINENTS OF ASIA AND AFRICA TO UNITE IN THESOUTHERN OCEAN. THE S1NJE AND THE Sees MUSTHAVE BEEN THE CHINESE. THE SILK TRADE. ALLUSIONTO THE TATARS. THE STONE TOWER IN THE BEI.LRTAG.TESTIMONIES OF THE CHINESE WRITERS. ROMAN EMBASSY"TO CHINA. THE NAME OF SILK. OF CHINA. AntiquityOF THE TRADE WITH CHINA. MERITS OF PTOLEMY.CONCLUSION.The victories of the Romans achieved the grand projectwhich had been first conceived by the genius of Alexander.The numerous and distant nations comprehendedwithin the wide limits of the Roman empirecommunicated together as members of the same greatbody, and learned to estimate the advantages of mutualintercourse. The work of union was promoted by thecares of a vigilant and liberal administration. Greatroads were constructed traversing the empire in all directions; a common language was diffused ; and, in short,the chief obstacles, both natural and moral, to the easyand intimate correspondence of foreign nations, wereeither totally broken down or rendered much less insurmountable.How far the growth of the imperial powerand the gradual extinction of liberty in the Romanworld, was connected with the decline of literature andthe arts, or whether the extension of the Roman powerwas conducive to the civilisation of mankind, are questionswhich lie beyond the compass of this work. Butcertain it is that the causes, whatever they were, to whichwe must ascribe the general declension of taste, did notGEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS.at all impede the progress of geography. This science,depending for its growth almost wholly on the accumulationof facts,, continually profited from experience,unaffected by the sinister influence of political corruption; and its progress appears to have been particularlyrapid between the Augustan age, when Strabo wrote, andthat of the Antoninus, in which Ptolemy flourished, andwhen the Roman empire was already on the verge ofdecay.Ptolemy was born at Elysium in Egypt in the seventiethyear of the Christian era, and lived till the middleof the following century : his residence in Alexandria,at that time the centre of an immense commerce, contributed,with the other circumstances of his age, to procurehim that abundance of topographical information whichis so conspicuous in his writings. He professes to derivehis details chiefly from the itineraries of merchants ;but it is difficult at the present day to form an adequateidea of the copiousness of his materials from the fewgeographical treatises which have escaped the wreck ofantiquity. The Romans were by no means remiss in acquiringa local knowledge or in profiting from the tradeof their subject nations. It is an error to believe thatthat haughty people were averse to mercantile pursuits.The Latin classics make frequent allusion to the enormouswealth of the Roman merchants, and history bearstestimony to their spirit of adventure. The multitudeof Romans, or Italics generis homines, taken by Jugurthain Zama ; the hundred thousand put to death by Mithridatesin Asia Minor; and the Italian merchants massacredin Gaul at Gentium (Orleans) a few years later, evincethat the Romans were impelled abroad by the love ofgain as well as of conquest.The opportunities thus offered of acquiring geographicalinformation were zealously cultivated by thelearned of the age; and many valuable works were consultedby Ptolemy of which we must deplore the loss.A complete survey of the Roman empire was executed byorder of Agrippa, the son-in-law of Augustus. PlinyCHAP. VIII. PTOLEMY. 107wrote a history of Germany; Seneca an account of India,in which (if we may judge of it from the fragments preservedin Pliny) he entered into very minute statisticaldetails. The writings of king Juba also appear to havebeen rich in the fruits of geographical as well as antiquarianresearch. But the course of events continuallyopened the world more and more to examination : thewars of Trajan with the Dace ; his expeditions intoParthia and Arabia, were all attended with the explorationof countries but little known before. Then the peacefulreigns of Adrian and of the Antoninus, whose wiseadministrations reaped all the benefits of Trajan's activity.Ptolemy, whose manhood commenced with the reign ofthis great prince, and whose life closed in the tenth yearof Antoninus Pius, had the good fortune to live in thatage, which, if we were to confine bur attention to thegeneral spread of information and the activity of commerce,might, perhaps, be deemed the most prosperousand flourishing of Roman history. It is no wonder,therefore, that his geographical writings should bearabundant evidence of a more intimate acquaintance withforeign countries.Yet it is not to his more perfect acquaintance withthe earth that Ptolemy owes his reputation as a geographer,so much as to his having been the first to adopt ageneral system of fixing the position of places. He introducedthe measures of longitude and latitude, or atleast he was the first to give them celebrity and universalapplication. By thus fixing the multitudinous andunconnected details of geography on the basis of mathematics,he gave to the former science a unity and asolidity which it was incapable of ever attaining withoutthat fortunate alliance. But his invention (if, toavoid discussion, we allow it to have been his,) was not oneof those which startle mankind by its boldness, or whichseem to anticipate the ordinary progress of ages to come.On the contrary, it was, perhaps in a higher degree thanany other valuable discovery, the fruit of long experience,gathered with little effort, at the last stage of a lingering108 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.maturity, protracted far beyond what might have beenexpected from the vigour of its first bloom. Tbe scarcityof books in ancient times presented a great impedimentto the advancement of science. The accumulation ofknowledge was far more difficult then than at the presentday. Contemporary authors were often ignorant of oneanother's labours, and this observation applies even to theAugustan age, and to the Alexandrian writers. Hence theextremely slow development, or the suspended vitality, asit were, so often observable in the germs of importanttruths among the ancients. Thales taught the sphericityof the earth, yet centuries elapsed before Eratosthenesthought of determining the relative situation of placesby means of latitudes ; and after that step was gained,three centuries more passed over, centuries of cultivationand general improvement, before Ptolemy made the obviousand the requisite addition of measures of longitude.The geography of Ptolemy contains only an enumerationor catalogue of places, with the longitudes andlatitudes affixed : some observations on his general method,and on the sources of his information, precede thework. Thus he furnishes materials for the constructionof a map, which deserves a critical examination, notmore on account of its intrinsic merits, than for the greatauthority it enjoyed during a long succession of ages.As Ptolemy derived his information with respect to distanceschiefly from itinerary measures, and as these fromobvious causes usually exceed the truth, it is no wonderthat his map of the world should exhibit enormous errors,swelling into disproportionate dimensions as we advanceto the north, the south, and particularly the east. Thegeneral shape of shores is in like manner but imperfectlyknown to coasting navigators. The mariner who steersby the land pays little attention to the heavens : the numberof curves and sinuosities which he servilely followsbewilder his calculations ; and he judges of the generalcontour of the coast only by the relative position of thetwo points which mark the beginning and terminationof his voyage. Hence the flatness and compression ofCHAP. VIII. PTOLEMY. 1 09the coasts in the ancient maps, the reduction of projectinglands, and the corresponding gulfs; and this circumstance,as it extended into a straight line the measuresof a winding course, contributed in like manner tolengthen hydrographical distances. Ptolemy was misled,therefore, by fallacies inherent in the nature of his information;and it is not necessary to suppose, with someof the learned, in order to explain his errors, that hecopied maps constructed on principles of projectionwhich he did not understand. Indeed it is hard to conceivehow projected maps could be drawn without theuse of parallels and meridians ; and if these were employed,then there was no possibility of his committingsuch gross mistakes.These observations on the general character of Ptolemy'sgeography will supersede the necessity of examininghis details at any great length. It will suffice, inorder to estimate the progress of the science, to cast asummary glance over his map, to mark the extent of hisinformation and the magnitude of his errors. Beginningat the north-west, we find Great Britain extended byPtolemy three degrees too far to the north, althoughScotland is depressed in his map, so as to run from westto east in a direction parallel with the coast of Germany.But a great number of places are laid down byhim in the British islands with a tolerable relative correctness.The principal towns, the chief rivers andheadlands, are almost all mentioned by their true indigenousappellations.In the north of Europe the knowledge of Ptolemydoes not extend beyond that of his predecessors ; it appearseven to have been wholly derived from authoritiesanterior to the times of Tacitus and Pliny. lie doesnot mention the Sviones or Swedes; but to the cast ofJutland, or the Cimbrian Chersonese, he places fourislands, the largest and most remote of which, calledScania, is evidently intended to represent Sweden; buthis particulars are as usual abundant. lie mentions theDanes by the name of Daukioncs, softened from their110 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.ancient appellation of Daunskir or Daunshion. He isalso the first ancient writer who names the Saxons.The course of the Ria or Volga is described by Ptolemywith remarkable precision. The windings of theTanais, also, a river which Strabo supposed to flow fromnorth to south, were well understood by the Alexandriangeographer. By correcting the erroneous opinion whichsupposed a communication between the ocean and theCaspian Sea, he offers another proof of the progress ofgeography; but instead of following Herodotus in givingthis sea its greatest dimensions from north to south, helengthens it from west to east ; and this error, togetherwith that of removing it several degrees too far to theeastward, remained on our maps till the beginning of thelast century.From the map of Ptolemy we learn the westwardmarch of those great nations, inaccurately combinedunder the general name of Scythianssss. The Scythianssssof Herodotus were driven from the field of history ;and the Sarmatiansns, (noble Medes, or 3fe»,) who dwelt,in his time, to the east of the Tanais, now stretched, insway and name at least, from that river to the Carpathianmountains. The Alanni inhabited the northernshores of the Euxine. These were a branch of the Asi,called also Arian, who descended from the northernvalleys of the Belurtag to overturn the Greek kingdomof Bactria, and some centuries later pressed onwards tothe north. The Getce, and the Dance or David, occupiedthe country on the lower Danube. The original seatsof these latter nations were the confines of Persia, and thehigh lands of Bokhara. In the maps of Ptolemy theirnames are found to the south-eastward of the CaspianSea. In Europe, they have disappeared in the collectivebody of the Sclavonian nations. Nor in the most ancientaccounts of the Scythian emigrations does thereappear the name of a single tribe entitled, on validgrounds, to rank as the ancestors of the Germans. TheAlanni may indeed have had an original affinity with thatrace, but only a small portion of them penetrated intoCHAP. VIII. PTOLEMY. IllEurope beyond the Borysthenes. The Agathyrsi, also,who inhabited the mountains of Transylvania in the timeof Herodotus, and who are distinguished by him for theirlight hair, blue eyes, and apparently for their wealth, seemproperly to belong to the German family; and the coloniesof Saxon miners, which have been successively plantedin the Carpathian mountains by the Sclavonian and Hungarianpossessors of the country, favour the conjecturethat the difficult and ingenious labour of mining had beenalways carried on there by a German people.But the Sclavonians have always regarded the Germannations as forming an allied, though separate, branch ofthe same great family. If, therefore, the Sclavoniantribes have flowed from the country beyond the Oxus,whence have proceeded their masculine precursors ?Must their origin be sought farther back in situation asin time ? Were they branches of the Comari and Comani,the Warriors and Men of the Indian Caucasus,who, together with the Catti, one of the six-and-thirtyroyal tribes of the Hindoos, have descended from theiroriginal mountain dwellings, and still preserve theirancient Scythian habits in the peninsula of Cattiwar ?Were they the Asi, that giant nation of antiquity, whosedim shade seems to reach from Ceylon to Scandinavia ?Were they the Sauce, in fine, or the Its or Yates, thosenomad soldiers of the Indian frontiers, whose names areequally familiar in the East and West ? *To affirm these hypothetical conjectures would be aspresumptuous as to deny them. The general resemblanceof language among what are called the Indo-teutonicnations, the identity of the feudal system, as itexisted in its elemental freedom among the Germans andthe military mountain tribes of India, the chivalrousrespect shown to the female sex, a leading characteristicof the German nation, which now distinguishes the nobleRajpoots in the East t, — these and other resemblancesKlaproth (Table. Hist. <!c l'Asic) scorns disposed to believe that the an.editors of the Germans were situated farther to the east, in the country afterwardsoccupied by the Mongols.+ Tod's Hist, of Kahjiston.112 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.in sentiments and constitution naturally induce the suppositionthat the Germans were originally numberedamong the Indo-scythian, or warrior tribes of the Hindooss,at a time, perhaps, when the ruling castes of thisgreat nation had not yet descended from their mountaindwellings to the Ganges. But can the researches of thelearned establish, on a historic basis, a relationship obscuredby the lapse of three thousand years ? Thekindred origin of the Germans and noble tribes of Indianeither is nor is likely to be authenticated : but a supposedaffinity, recalling to mind the indelible nature ofsome social impressions, which seem, by their resemblance,to link together nations so widely separated inspace and time, is in itself an instructive and agreeablecontemplation.Some particulars of the interior of Africa were distinctlyknown to Ptolemy : he is the first of the ancientswho announces with certainty the existence of the riverNiger. On the banks of this river, which he describesas flowing from west to east till it terminates in a lake,he places the towns of Tucabath, Nigra, Cana, andTanagra : these two appear to be the Ganah and Wan-garbof modern travellers : the claims of the two formerto be Timbuctoo and Cashnah are much more questionable.The northern coast of Africa is represented by Ptolemynearly as a straight line ; the Gulfs of the Greatand Lesser Syrtis almost totally disappearing in his map.This arose from the imperfect nature of observationsmade by coasting navigators alluded to above. Anothermore important error, proceeding from the same cause,was the lengthening the Mediterranean Sea no less thantwenty degrees beyond its true measure ; and it deservesto be remarked, that this gross incorrectness also remainedin all our maps till the middle of the last century.But Ptolemy's longitudinal measures continuallystretched out into egregious excess in advancing towardsthe East, so that he places the mouth of the Gangesforty-six degrees to the eastward of its true position, andCHAP. VIII. PTOLEMY. 113thus commits an error of distance amounting to morethan a thousand leagues, or the eighth part of the circumferenceof the globe. A voyage to India was consideredby him in no other sense than as a voyage to theEast ; and he appears to have thought that a ship, sailingfrom the Indus to Cape Comorin, and thence to theGanges, held a uniform easterly course. Hence theerror of removing the mouth of the Ganges so far fromits true place was naturally accompanied by the othererror of totally suppressing the Indian peninsula; in placeof which we find, in the map of Ptolemy, a line of coastrunning nearly west and east, and sufficiently indentedto afford room for the indication of the numerous localpositions with which he was provided.But the most remarkable portion of Ptolemy's geographyis that which treats of the countries lying to theeast of the Ganges. He gives, as usual, a copious list oftowns, rivers, and headlands ; but it would be tedious torepeat after him the names of places, of whose positionwe are unable to offer a satisfactory explanation. HisGolden Chersonese stretches to the equator; and thepirate country, which he places there, as well as the cityof Malayucolon, (or Western Malays, in the modern languageof the Indian seas,) render it probable that heintended to represent by it the island of Sumatra, thesouthern portion of which is the original country of thatmaritime people. Beyond this golden country he placesthe Magnus Sinus, or Great Gulf, which ascends as highas the latitude of the Ganges. On the eastern side of thisgulf he fixes the city of Thince, immediately under theequator, and 180 degrees to the east of the FortunateIsles : Cattigara, the port of Thinae, situated eight degreesto the south of the equator, is the limit of hisknowledge in this quarter ; but he supposed the land torun still further to the south, and then turning westwardto form a junction with the African continent, so thatthe known world of Ptolemy terminated towards theeast and south in a terra incognita of indefinite extent.This idea of uniting Africa with the remote part of AsiaVOL. I. 1114 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.appears to have been borrowed from Indian geographers,who are fertile in absurdities ; and the name Hippados,by which Ptolemy designates the sea thus inclosed, isapparently the Indian expression Up'abdhi, the inferioror inner sea.But, notwithstanding the grossness of his errors, thereputation of Ptolemy as a geographer is vindicated bythe abundance and general correctness of his particulars.It is quite astonishing, indeed, what a multitude of placeshe was acquainted with in every part of the world, and(what is more important, as indicating the sources of hisinformation, and the brisk communication existing betweenforeign nations in his time,) with what accuracyhe was enabled to report in general the native names :his improvement in this respect, as far as regards thenames in Indian geography, is very remarkable. Thus,for example, the rivers of the Punjab, called by Arrianthe Emphasis and Hydaspes, are changed by Ptolemyinto Basis and Bidaspes, so as to resemble more closelythe Sanscrit names Beypasha and Bidasta. The Hydrateand Strange of other Greek writers he altersinto Rhuadis and Zadadrus, in Sanscrit Irawutti andShatter. Similar corrections are manifest in his nomenclatureof the interior and even on the coast, whereforexample, he changes the Palaipatmai of Arrian intoBalepatna, a true Indian name. Yet it is evident thatfor information respecting the shores and islands, hesometimes relied too exclusively on the local knowledgeof Arabian mariners. Thus, the mountain Alibi inTaprobane, like the Calpe of the West, may be suspectedof being a general expression {Gebel, a mountain, inArabic,) not properly applied to any mountain in particular.The Sabadiva also are obviously eastern islands, ofwhich it is impossible to determine the precise situation.The Jabadiva, however, can hardly be any other thanJava : his islands of satyrs and of anthrophagi meritlittle attention ; but the precision with which he affectsto fix the number of the Maldives and Laccadives at1378 deserves to be remarked. The copious materialsCHAP. VIII. PTOLEMY. 11 Jwhich he appears to have possessed for the geography ofthe Indian seas, contrasted with his grossly erroneousdelineation of that quarter of the globe, illustrate theactivity of commerce and navigation in the East, as comparedwith the progress of geographical science in thewestern world.It must be admitted that the geographical work ofPtolemy, notwithstanding the reputation it enjoyed forcenturies, bears few marks of ability : it is, in fact, anextremely full compilation, evidently made from authenticsources, and collecting in one view the experience of ages ;but the want of acuteness in the compiler, or his disingenuousdesire to hide his ignorance at the expense oftruth, is discoverable in the frequent repetitions of whichhe is guilty. Thus, by mentioning many places twiceover, he appears to be acquainted with a great extent ofcountry on the western coast of Africa. The nations ofNumidia, in like manner, all re-appear on the banks ofthe Niger : many of the Scythian nations, as the ,Comari or Comani, Tapuri, &c. appear double in hismap ; and in the Indian seas we find his silver andgolden regions, or peninsulas, accompanied by silver andgolden islands, so as to satisfy in the fullest manner theambiguous Arabic expression, (for Gezirah, in Arabic, signifiesboth a peninsula and an island,) through which heprobably received his information. By the side of hisTricadibu, or Trinity island, he places a Tricanesia,which is but a translation of the former ; and, in general,his Greek names, when found beyond the just domainsof the Greek language, must be looked upon with suspicionas unnecessary intruders.The least defensible portion of Ptolemy's geographyis that which relates to the south-eastern extremity ofAsia; yet it is the portion which modern learning andingenuity have been at most pains to justify and apply.He placed Thince, as we have seen, at the borders of hishemisphere, 180 degrees from the Fortunate Islands, andimmediately under the equator; the port Cattigara, ori 2116'GEOGRAPHY OF Tile AXCIEXTS.Caita-ghur* , lay eight degrees farther to the south. Ifthose positions be sought in our maps, they will be foundin the Pacific Ocean, near the group called Solomon'sIslands. Yet it has been maintained, that by Thince weareto understand Tenaserim, according to some, or Siam,according to others. Mergui, the most northern portof the Malayan peninsula, is, at the same time, supposedto be the Cattigara of Ptolemy. The eminent geographers+ who thus labour to contract the knowledge ofPtolemy within a narrow compass, and to cut him offfrom any acquaintance with the Chinese in the south,also endeavour to prove that the Seres of the north, fromwhose country silk was procured, were the inhabitantsof Tibet. The xci se offered for his error in makingAfrica unite with eastern Asia, that his information terminatedat points where these continents had a directiontowards each other, is too frivolous to deserve attention.Ptolemy was evidently imbued with the love of system :like ingenious moderns, he was unable to leave any questionundecided, and found it easier to adopt a Hindoodogma than to confess his ignorance.A review of the geographical writers who precededPtolemy, and of the events of his age, will clearly evincethat he must have been acquainted with the Chinese,and that we must recognise as such the Seres and theSince, who occupy in his map the remotest countries ofthe East. The earliest mention of the city Thinceby aGreek writer occurs in a work ascribed to Aristotle, butevidently of a posterior age. Eratosthenes (B. C. 250)placed Think; at the end of the earth, on the easternocean; and it is manifest, from the context, that hisknowledge of that city (or nation more properly) reachedhim over-land, and not through the Indian seas. Butthe clear, unequivocal mention of China by Arrian, theplain and sensible author of the Periplus, deserves to begiven in his own words.Beyond the Ganges is an island in the ocean calledThe Nubian geographer uses this name,f Danville. Gosselin. Malte Brun.CHAP. VIII. PTOLEMY. 117Chryse or the Golden, under the rising sun, and at thefarthest extremities of the East ; it produces the finesttortoise-shell in the world. Still farther on, and towardsthe north, beyond the sea which bounds the country ofthe Site, is the great inland city Thince, from whichraw and manufactured silk is brought to Barygaza, byBactria and the Ganges. It is extremely difficult toreach Thince, and few go there, for it lies a great wayoff, immediately beneath the constellation of the LesserBear ; and its territories are said to extend to the remotesides of the Pontus and the Caspian Sea. On the frontiersof the Since, however, an annual fair is held ; forthe Senate (the Tha-tas or Tatars), a wild and uncivilisedtribe, assemble there with their wives and children.This is a race of men remarkably short and clumsy, withbroad faces and depressed noses. They bring for trafficbulky articles packed up in mats ; and having assembledmidway between their own frontiers and those of theSince, they spread out their mats and make a greatfeast."This brief relation presents some important particulars.First, the country of the Since was bounded bythe sea turning towards the north ; secondly, the cityThince, the capital of this maritime country, could alsobe reached from the interior ; next, the country of theSince was also the Erica, or country from which silk wasbrought ; and, lastly, the trade with the Since was carriedon by means of the Senate, who were evidently ofthe Mongol race. There can be no doubt, then, thatChina was the subject of Arrian's narrative. That heshould represent it as immensely distant, and even at thearctic pole, may be excused, from the considerationthat the silk merchants from Barygaza must have travelleddue north, at least 1 500 miles, a great part of theroad lying through mountains, before they reached thepoint whence the caravans turned westward into LittleBokhara.The Indian merchants trading with the Seres (andGreeks also from Cilicia joined those caravans) render3118 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.roused at a station in the mountains called the StoneTower* From this place to the capital of the Seres,was a journey of seven months, a length of time whichindicates with sufficient precision, that the route musthave reached at least to the orders of China. TheStone Tower is still, at the present day, a grand caravanstation, as well as a general resort for pilgrims. It standsin a narrow pass of the Blur-tag, not far from the placewhere the sources of the Gihon and the Yerghien, flowingin opposite directions from this great chain of mountains,approach each other. The pass is ascended fromthe north-west : and on the left side of the road, theface of the mountain, a massy rock, is hewn into a regularform, with two rows of twenty columns each ;hence the modern name of the Stone Tower is Chasten,or the Forty Columns. It is an object of wonder andveneration through all the East, where it is regarded asthe work of Sins or demons. The name, however,which this station generally bears among the merchants,is that of Tact Soliman, the throne of Solomon.But as great nations feel a reciprocal interest in theirfirst intercourse with one another, the question of theknowledge which the Romans had of the Chinesemay receive some elucidation from the annals of thelatter people. By thus shifting the point of view, andinverting the process of investigation, results may frequentlybe obtained, which could not have rewarded thelabours of a partial enquiry.The acquaintance of the Chinese with western Asiacan hardly be traced back farther than the third centurybefore the commencement of the Christian era. Weknow, however, from authentic history that the city ofKhotan, a Hindoo colony in Little Bokhara, paid tributeto the celestial empire in the year 130 B. Cet ; andthat about ten years later a Chinese general over-ran thecountries of Balkh or Bactria, andChorasan,and observedparticularly the three roads into India. It. was at thistime, perhaps, (in the time of the Wouti, 187 — 4-0 Bec.)ptolemy. -f Abel-refusal. Hist, tie la Ville de Khotan.CHAP. VIII. PTOLEMY. 119that officers or governors were first sent into the countryof Yu-then, or Khotan. Again, Tai-thou (104 B. C.)marched into Wan, or Sogdiana, where fine horses werebred from the celestial horse, whose dwelling is on themountains. This wonderful horse is the theme of manya wild and spirited story ; but the observations of theancient Chinese historians on the Asi, or inhabitants ofWan, merit more attention. The Asi, it appears, wereaddicted to commerce, and education was much attendedto among them, so that their children could read at fiveyears old : the men wore beards, and paid great respectto the female sex. * The Parthian or Gan-sie werealso remarked for their singular custom (for so it appearedto the Chinese) of writing horizontally.In the 94th year of our era, Pan-tchao sent an officerto the Caspian Sea, with orders to attack the nations thatoccupied its western shores, and to open a communicationwith the people of Ta-thin. The peculiar title ofChina, Ta-thin, or the Great Empire, is here given toRome. The Chinese officer, however, returned withoutexecuting his commission ; for being assured by thepeople that it would require from three to twelvemonths,according to the winds, to cross the Caspian Sea, he retreatedin dismay from the dangers of so great a navigation.It is probable that this expedition is alluded tobythose Chinese historians who relate, that ambassadorswere sent to Ta-thin in the time of the second Handynasty (from 89 to 104 P. C). No notice is taken ofthe result of this embassy ; but it appears that the ambassadorsreported on their return, that beyond thecountry of the Tao-chi (Tadjicks or Persians) thereextended a great sea, and that those who sailed on itdue west arrived in one hundred days at the placewhere the sun sets.t From this brief review of the militaryexpeditions of the Chinese at the commencementof our era, it appears that the author of the Peripluswas justified in asserting that the empire of the Sinceextended to the shores of the Caspian Sea.Abcl-Rcmusat. Nov. Mel. Asiatt. + Ibid.i 41 20 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK -But the most remarkable circumstance in the historyof the first direct intercourse between the two GreatEmpires of the East and West belongs to a somewhatlater period. The Chinese historians relate, that in theninth year of Yau-hi (166 P. C.) ambassadors arrivedin their country from Ta-thin, sent by An-thun, orMarcus Aurelius Antoninus. * This embassy, it appears,arrived in China by sea. The jealousy of theinland Asiatics, the engrossers of the great caravan-trade,rendered it perhaps dangerous foi the Romans toattempt reaching that country by land. The intimatecorrespondence existing between the Chinese and theBactrian nations for centuries before the time of Ptolemy,and the fact of a Roman embassy to China, which tookplace only sixteen years after his death, a fact implyinga long previous acquaintance with that empire, render itin the highest degree improbable that Ptolemy shouldhave been ignorant of its existence, or that he shouldhave refused it a place in his map.But philology as well as history lends arguments toprove that the country of the Seres, or silk Worms, is to besoughtnot in Tibet or Tartary, but in China itself.Silk, in correct Chinese, is called sc, or su ; but, by anordinary vice of pronunciation, a final r is added,so that, on the frontiers, se is changed into ser, the identicalword adopted by the Greeks. In Tibet, the nameof the silk-worm is darkou, that of silk gotchanghi. Itfollows of necessity that the frontier provinces of Chinawere the country of the Seres. The name of the nationitself deserves a brief remark. The dynasty of the Thin,who gave their name to the empire, began in the thirdcentury before Christ. The word Thin was altered byneighbouring nations according to the peculiarities oftheir alphabets or habits of pronunciation. The Hindoospronounce it Thin, the Arabs Sin, a difference whichimmediately explains why we find that in the ancientgeographers the city of Thinae was always in the interior,while the Sense were towards the sea. Finally, the mari-desGuineas. Mem. de l'Acad. des Ins. xxxii.CHAP. VIII. PTOLEMY. 121time activity of the Malays has rendered their pronunciationof the word Chin the prevailing one amongEuropeans.*As the existence of a trade between China and westernAsia, in the beginning of our era, is clearly established,it may be interesting to examine in what age itcommenced. Silken garments were worn in India tenortwelve centuries before that time: they are mentionedin the most ancient Sanscrit poems The medical vestsof Alexander's age were made of silk; and metaxa, or silk,was subsequently transmitted to Italy through AssyriansBut which was the nation by whose agency the valuableproduce of China was carried into India or to the West,in the age of Alexander, or in more ancient times ? Afragment which remains to us of Ctesias (380 B. C.)clears up this difficulty in a satisfactory manner. Heinforms us, " that the Indians, the neighbours of theBactria, make journies in the golden deserts (thedesert of Cobi) in troops of one or two thousand, andit is said that they do not return home from these journiestill the third or fourth year." § The desert of Cobicould have merited its epithet of golden only from itsopening an avenue to wealth. The Indians alluded towere probably those inhabiting the country of Khotan,(properly Koustana, breast of the earth,) a colony, perhaps,of very ancient date : that their caravans weredirected to China admits of very little doubt, so that thetrade between India and that country existed five centuriesat least before the age of Ptolemy.Thus the work of Ptolemy proves that geography hadmade great advances from the time of Strabo, but wasstill very imperfect in relation to the opportunities whichexisted for its improvement. The author himself owedhis great reputation to his industry, and still more to hisfortunate situation as successor to the labours of MarinusTyphus and other eminent geographers, whose works havewholly perished. But although it is impossible to allowKlajiroth. Journ. Asiatt. ii. t Kamayuna II.♦ .^uiiUis in v. Series. \ A p. Elias. Hist. An. iv.122 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.Ptolemy the praise of superior genius, yet it must beadmitted that his work was one of great practical importance,and that geography owes more to him for introducinga method of fixing positions than it couldpossibly have lost by the too implicit deference thatwas paid to his frequently erroneous statements.Thus we have observed the uniform progress bywhich the light of mutual acquaintance spread abroadamong the nations of the earth. A thousand years intervenedbetween the ages of Homer and of Ptolemy ; betweenthe time in which the imagination of the venerablebard placed the gates of death, the elysian paradise, andthe whole mythic world, apparently at no great distancefrom the actual site of Italy ; to that in which the geographerof Alexandria stated, in longitudes and latitudes,the position of almost every place of importance fromthe western extremity of Europe to the borders of China.But a vast extent of territory, to the east and north ofAsia and of Europe still remained unexplored, peopledby fierce, unsettled hordes, and pregnant with danger tothe decaying empire. As the historians and geographersof the later age of Rome gradually raise the veil whichcovered the stern features of northern society, it is impossiblenot to foresee the dangers likely to ensue fromthe mature strength of so vigorous a frame. The stormat length broke : desolating myriads, from the northand east, poured in upon the Roman empire ; the unityof power and civilisation was at an end ; the intercourseof commerce was broken up and suspended, the light ofletters became gradually extinct, and darkness oncemore overspread the western world.CHAP. IX. THE COMMERCE OF THE ANCIENTS. 123CHAP. IX.ON THE COMMERCE OF THE ANCIENTS.CONNECTION BETWEEN COMMERCE AND GEOGRAPHY. TRADEWITH INDIA IN THE HANDS OF THE ARABIANS. THEIRWEALTH AND LUXURY. CINNAMON. IGNORANCE AS TOTHE COUNTRY WHICH PRODUCED IT. KNOWN TO MOSES.SUPPOSED TO GROW IN ARABIA AND IN AFRICA. Pains'sACCOUNT. ANTIQUITY OF TRADE IN THE EASTERN SEAS.PIRATE NATIONS OF THE EAST. PRODUCTIONS OF, THE MoluccasMENTIONED BY PLAUTUS. ' EARLY COMMERCEOF THE PHOENICIANS EXAMINED. TIN BROUGHT TO EGYPTFROM INDIA. THE CASSITERIDES — NEVER KNOWN.DIRECT TRADE BETWEEN PHOENICIA AND THE WEST Improbable.CARTHAGE. NEVER AIMED AT A DISTANT CarryingTRADE. AMBER. BROUGHT TO GREECE FROM THEADRIATIC. MYTHICAL CONNECTION OF THE ERIDANUS ANDAMBER. TRADE IN EUROPE. CONCLUSION.The history of commerce is intimately connected withthat of geography ; for the wants and desires of mankind,which require the agency of the merchant, are themost uniform and efficient incentives to the correspondenceof nations. The traffic carried on between distantcountries in early times, the commodities of use or luxuryimported or sent abroad, are often much more easilydetected than the extent of geographical knowledge possessedby either of the parties. In a scientific age theacquaintance with the earth's surface possesses aninterest independent of its practical advantages ; but inthe early stages of society the different regions of theglobe attracted attention chiefly as they promised toyield a quick harvest of wealth and treasure. The mostimportant commerce in ancient times was that carriedon with India ; and it is that also which has been mostfrequently mentioned in the course of the precedingpages. If all the authentic circumstances of that greattrade be minutely traced backward, they will be foundrich in results calculated to elucidate the progress of Geography OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.cover in the East, and may lend even some light toassist as in investigating the more dubious intercourse ofwestern nations.Pliny informs us, that in his time the navigation toIndia was only in its infancy; and a comparison of allthe accounts remaining to us respecting the commerceof the ancients with the East leads to the conclusion,that before the discovery of the monsoons by Hippalusthe direct trade with India was wholly in the hands ofthe Arabians. The fleets of the Polemics sailed to theports of Arabia Felix, where they met the Arabian shipsladen with the precious cargoes of the East. Single Greekvessels may, indeed, have occasionally visited the countrywhence so much wealth was poured into Europe ; butthat a direct trade did not exist between India andEgypt until the discovery of the monsoons obviated thenecessity of proceeding by the Arabian coast : that theArabians enjoyed a monopoly with respect to Egypt,and Egypt with respect to Europe, are facts proved byindisputable evidenceThat the Greeks of Egypt should so long permit thepetty princes of Arabia to intercept a large portion oftheir profit was the necessary consequence of the imperfectnavigation of antiquity. The navigator, so long asfrom the imperfection of his art he is afraid to ventureout of sight of laud, is constantly at the mercy of thosewhose coast he follows. Obliged frequently to land inorder to procure provisions, to rest his crew impatient ofconfinement, or to draw his frail vessels into a place ofshelter, he finds it impossible to pursue his course withoutsecuring the amicable feelings of the natives. Hencethe impossibility cf distant trading voyages in ancienttimes. The commodities of countries remote from oneanother were interchanged by repeated transfer fromhand to hand, each intermediate link in the chain sharingin the advantages of the communication. But anyattempt to disturb this system, by establishing a directcorrespondence between the extreme points, naturallyawakened the hostility of the intermediate states whoseCHAP IX. THE COMMERCE OF THE ANCIENTS. 125agency was dispensed with ; and as commerce cannotlong exist without security, mercantile adventure wasobliged to confine itself within narrow bounds, and toseek the nearest ports rather than the largest profits.The Arabians, however, in their trade with India,appear to have been in some measure exempted from therestrictions necessarily attendant on the coasting system.The superstitious aversion of the Hindoos to the seapermitted the carrying trade of their coasts to be exercisedby a strange people. Foreign trade appears tohave been known to the Hindoos from very remoteages. In the laws of Menu are found provisions relatingto the insurance of ships at sea ; and as the Hindoosthemselves, though excellent merchants, are never seamen,it is probable that the Arabians were always employedby them in the latter capacity. Indeed as farback as authentic history conducts us, we can discerntraces of Arabian navigation in the Indian seas. Arabiannames, as for example, Gezirah, the Promontory, are metwith in the voyage of Nsearchus, and the people called arabic,whom he found on the coast not far from the Indus,were probably settlers from the opposite side of the gulf.It is no wonder that the Arabian merchants, possessingthe lucrative monopoly of the Indian trade, shouldbe distinguished in antiquity by their luxury and enormouswealth : they are spoken of by the Greek and Latinwriters nearly in the language applied by the prophetIsaiah to the inhabitants of Tyre, " whose merchantsare princes, and whose traffickers are the honourable ofthe earth." * All the precious commodities, the gold,the gums, and spices imported to the West from thesouthern parts of Arabia, were once supposed to be theproduce of that country ; and there are some who stilldefend that opinion, from a pertinacious attachment toancient errors. The delusion was, however, beginningto vanish in the time of Pliny, who questions the rightof Arabia Felix to bear that title ; a pestilential climate,with a soil barren in many places, and unprovided withPisa. xxiii. 8.12() GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.the precious metals, seemed to him to afford but slenderclaims to the epithet of Happy.According to Herodotus, frankincense, myrrh, cassia,cinnamon, and ladanum, were all peculiar to Arabia.Cassia is supposed to have been the pipe-cinnamon ofmodern commerce : the cinnamon of the ancients wasthe tender shoot of the plant, and an article of such highprice, as to be a fit present for kings : to offer to the godscrowns of cinnamon, tipped with gold, was a refinementof imperial prodigality worthy of the wealthiest age ofRome. The frankincense, Herodotus tells us, wasguarded by winged serpents : the value of cassia wasenhanced by dangers still more formidable : the treeson which it grew gave shelter to great birds, resemblingbats, so fierce and strong as to be vanquished with extremedifficulty. But with respect to cinnamon, theArabians, he says, could not distinctly explain the originof that precious commodity : they pretended that it wasbrought to them by birds from the country (India) inwhich Bacchus was reared : these birds built their nestsamong inaccessible rocks, and on the tops of mountains:the Arabians, unable to reach them, strewed the limbs ofasses and oxen at no great distance ; and these beingquickly carried off by the birds, and proving too heavyfor the nests, fell to the ground with the cinnamon adheringto them, as the reward of the artifice. Thus theArabians sought to dignify or to screen their monopolyby the mists of fable.Now cassia and cinnamon were imported into Egyptand to Tyre in very early ages : they are distinctly andrepeatedly named by Moses. * In the time of Ezekiel,the men of Dan and Javan (the eastern Javan) goingto and fro, brought cassia, calamus, and bright iron."The merchants of Sheba and Raameh were occupiedwith the chief of all spices, with gold and precious stones."Thus we see that the productions of India were broughtto Tyre both by caravans from the Persian Gulf and byPhoenician vessels, probably from the ports of ArabiaExodus, xxx. 23.CHAP. IX. THE COMMERCE OF THE ANCIENTS. 127Felix. These productions were imported by the Arabiansfrom Malabar, whither some of them (and cinnamonamong others) were probably brought from remotercountries by the Malays or native navigators of theIndian seas.Yet it was still believed in the Augustan age thatcinnamon, cassia, and other spices were the produce ofthe Happy Arabia ; a clear proof that the Greeks of Egypthad not yet established a direct trade with India, andthat the ports of Arabia continued to be the emporia ofeastern produce. Some years later, the sensible Arrian,the author of the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, thoughwell acquainted with the native regions and chief marketsof the other spices, was still totally in the dark withregard to cinnamon ; whence it may be inferred that itdid not grow in his time either in Malabar or Ceylon, butprobably constituted a branch of the regular trade whichwas carried on with Sumatra by the Indian ships.When Arrian says that cinnamon grows in Azania, onthe western coast of Africa, he commits an error far toowide of the truth to allow of palliation or support ; buthis positive assertion seems to countenance the opinionof those who, believing that the south-western coasts ofAfrica received in early times an Indian colony, think itlikely that advantage was taken of the circumstance toescape the rapacious monopoly of the Arabs, and thatprecious cargoes were often carried across the ocean fromIndia to Azania, whence they were brought direct toEgypt. Some communication of this sort must certainlyhave given rise to the belief of Indian geographers, partiallyadmitted by Arrian, and adopted in all its rigour byPtolemy, that the Indian islands are at no great distancefrom the western coast of Africa. It is worthy of remark,that though Arrian believed that cinnamon wasderived from Africa, he nevertheless does not mentionit among the articles exported from that country. Plinyappears still to have thought that cinnamon was the produceof Africa ; yet he relates a story which, thoughmingled with fable, throws not a little light upon the*! 8128 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.truth. "Cinnamon," he says, "grows in ethiopia amongthe Troglodytes ; the ethiopians, buying it from theirneighbours, transport it through the vast sea in vesselswithout sails or rudders. They put to sea in winter,when Eurus (the east wind) blows, and go to Oculis.The spice is gathered by the consent of Jupiter, whomthey call Assabinum (Siva). These merchants returnto Arabia hardly once in five years." This relationmakes it evident that cinnamon arrived in Arabia fromthe south-east in vessels coming from a great distance,and crossing the ocean by favour of the trade-winds.The mention of Ethiopians and Troglodytes is but arecurrence of the expressions of Hindoo geography,which unites Africa with the Indian Archipelago. Infine, it is impossible to avoid concluding that cassia andcinnamon, the golden spices of the Hindoos (for such isthe import of its Indian names), which were known at soearly an age to the Egyptians, and were deemed worthyto be used as ingredients in the holy anointing oil ofthe tabernacle, were derived from Sumatra by nativemerchants, and disposed cf by them to the Arabians.The country from which they came remained for manycenturies a secret.In the time of Agatharchides (nearly two centuriesbefore the Christian era), the Greeks had still but anobscure knowledge of the Eastern seas. The carryingtrade of the Arabians existed unimpaired. That writerdescribes, in terms of admiration, the wealth and luxuryof the Sabaeans. They sailed to distant countries inlargevessels, (larger, we may conclude, than Greek ships,)and founded colonies. Vessels also of great size frequentedtheir ports from Indus, Petals, Persis, andCaramania* Two centuries and a half later, whenArrian wrote, the island of Scotia was inhabited by amixed population of Arabs, Greeks, and Hindoos, allestablished there for purposes of trade. The Arabianswere evidently numerous on the Malabar coast, and evenin the island of Ceylon, where their dress and religionAgatharch. in Photiu?.CHAP. IX. THE COMMERCE OF THE ANCIENTS. 129appear to have predominated among the lower classes.*Hindoo merchants, or banyans, on the other hand, wereprobably as numerous in Sabaea then as at the presentday, when they are the principal merchants of thatcountry.Thus it appears from the Greek and Roman writers,that when, after the conquests of Alexander, the merchantsof Europe endeavoured to penetrate into theIndian seas, they found a great trade already carried onin them, fully developed, and which had apparentlyexisted for many centuries. This conclusion is borneout by the testimony of the Hindoo writings. But anarrow inspection of Arrian's Periplus will suffice toestablish the maturity of commerce in the Indian seas.He depicts the exact routine of trade ; the relative estimationof the markets ; the great demand for specie,which has always characterised India as a country independentof foreign produce and manufacture ; the activehome trade carried on in country ships, and many otherparticulars indicative of long-established practice, as wellas of great opulence and civilisation. He mentions fivedifferent kinds of vessels used by the Indians; viz.Madratce, or boats sewn together ; Trappaga and ,long vessels used. by pilots and fishermen, or aslighters at the mouths of rivers ; Samara (era boats),like double canoes, or Malay pross ; and Kolandiophonta,ships of a great size, or wanting, as they are called, which,with the former, were employed in the trade of theGolden Chersonese. The vessels engaged in this traderesorted chiefly to Taprobane, whence they sailed to themouth of the Mcesolus, or Kistna, and from that pointstood eastward across the Bay of Bengal. But as theGreeks, and apparently the Arabs, had no share in thisnavigation, our information respecting it terminates withthis brief hint of Arrian's.The existence of pirate nations is a sure indication ofa commerce carried on by sea. A nation of pirates wasfound by Alexander not far from the river Indus ;Pliny.VOL. I. K130 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK Ipiratical tribes infested the coasts of Arabia, and attackedships as they passed, from rafts supported by blownskins ; a contrivance which shows that the ordinarytrack of merchant vessels was not far from the shore.On the coast of Canara was another pirate nation ; anda country of pirates is placed by Ptolemy to the east ofthe Bay of Bengal, near the Golden Chersonese. Howfar the trade of India extended towards the East, it isimpossible to determine with precision : that an uninterruptedcommunication was not maintained with theSpice Islands is plain, from the circumstance that Arrianmakes no mention of the nutmeg ; yet the pomatum ofTheophrastus is supposed to be the nutmeg ; and, whatis liable to less discussion, mace is expressly mentionedby Plautus ; so that the aromatic productions of theMoluccas must have been known in Rome at least twocenturies before the Christian era.The antiquity of trade and navigation in the Indianseas is incontestably established ; and the influence exercisedin the course of trade by the language of thecountry which exported, is evident from the Sanscritwords Eastern, tin ; Barbara, cotton; Pipali, pepper, &c.which were adopted by the nations of the West.* Butgeography profits little from a commerce carried on bythe successive agency of numerous nations ; each takingno interest beyond the transit in which it is engaged, sothat the slow and tortuous channel of communication is,from a singe point of view, but partially and obscurelyvisible. The commodities of India were transmittedfrom the Arabians to the Phoenicians, from whose handsthey passed to the nations of Europe. These last stillremained in ignorance of the countries whence this preciousmerchandise originally came. The spices andother natural productions were supposed to be the growthof Arabia ; the credit of art and fine workmanship, ofthe stained ivory, of figured or embroidered stuffs, wasgiven to the Sicilians.The Phoenicians, the carrying merchants of the Le-schlegel.Berliner Taschenbuch, 1829.CHAP. IX. THE Commerce OF THE ANCIENTS. 131want, were as much distinguished for wealth and luxuryin the days of Homer, as the Sabaeans were in those ofAgatharchides. Their navigations extended unquestionablyto a great distance in the West, but they appearin that quarter much less in the character of regularmerchants than of roving adventurers. It is remarkablehow rapidly the Phoenician colonies disappeared beforethe Greeks, and how soon the maritime pre-eminence ofthat nation appears in history as a mere tradition. Itdoes not belong to the limits or to the object of thiswork to discuss why the Phoenician colonies had so weaka vitality ; but it is necessary to observe, that of thegreat number of settlements made by Phoenicians inAfrica and the west of Europe, Carthage alone, whichappears to have been an integral portion of the parentstate, ever attained to any political consequence. Thesettlers of that nation, indeed, seem to have been marinersof low character, without the spirit or the ties of nationality,and easily melting away in the original populationof the country which received them.The commerce carried on by the Phoenicians withthe west of Europe in early ages is admitted by thelearned chiefly in order to explain the importation of tinand amber into the Levant. Now, with respect to thefirst of these articles, it is noticed by Moses, at an agelong anterior to any record of Phoenician establishmentsin the West. But there can be no difficulty in determiningthe country from which tin first arrived in Egypt.That metal has been, in all ages, a principal export ofIndia; it is enumerated as such by Arrian, who foundit abundant in the ports of Arabia, at a time when thesupplies of Rome flowed chiefly through that channel.The tin mines of Barca are, probably, the richest in theworld. But tin was also unquestionably brought fromthe West at a later period: for in that quarter ancientgeographers have unanimously placed the Cassiterides, ortin islands, which the rashness of modern criticism hasidentified with the Scilly Islands, though these neitherproduce tin nor answer in any respect to the descriptionk 2132 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK Iof the ancients. An enquiry concerning the existence orsituation of those islands will assist us in judging of theextent of the Phoenician navigations.The Greek name for tin (cashiers) was derived, ithas been supposed, from the Phoenicians, who originallyusurped the whole trade of the Mediterranean. It isnot of importance to controvert this opinion, which,however, evidently rests on the erroneous supposition,that the word Kasdira was a primary and original termof the Phoenician language. The name Cassiterides(tin islands) is evidently but an epithet, implying thewant of particular acquaintance with the countries thusvaguely denominated. But as geographers feel peculiarpleasure in fixing the position of every wandering name,the title of tin islands was inconsiderately bestowed byGreek and Roman writers, at one time on real islands inwhich there was no tin, at another on imaginary islandsnear the coasts abounding in that metal. Almost allthese accounts refer the Cassiterides to the coast of Spain.Some writers place them many days' sail in the WesternOcean ; others, nearly opposite to Corunna ; but theyare never mentioned by ancient authors (with a singleexception) with respect to their distance from the coastof Britain ; a circumstance which, to these acquaintedwith the ancient system of navigation, must be a convincingargument that the Cassiterides were not theScilly Islands. Caesar and Tacitus, though they mentionthe gold, silver, iron, and pearls of Britain, take hardlyany notice of its tin mines. Pliny, moreover, after discussingall the accounts relating to the Cassiterides, concludesthat these islands had but a fabulous existence,and observes, that in his time tin was brought fromAlicia.The only conclusion that can be safely drawn fromthese conflicting statements is, that tin was brought indeedat an early age from the West, but not by a directchannel, or by the single agency of either Greeks orPhoenicians. The Phoenician adventurers scatteredthrough the West may perhaps have stimulated theCHAP. IX. THE Commerce OF THE AXCIEXTS. 1 33working of the mines, and made known their produce ;but the tin, whether from Alicia or from Britain, wasprobably carried through Gaul to Marseilles, before, aswell as after, the voyage of Pytheas : for the effect ofa sea voyage could hardly be to open a communicationby land, although it might increase the agents, andrender the traffic more considerable. Thus the Greeksand Romans still continued to receive tin from theWest, and still remained ignorant of the country whichproduced it, long after the Phoenicians had ceased to betheimmediate suppliers of their wants. The expressiontin islands, indeed, perhaps had its origin in that defectof the Semitic language which confounds peninsulas andislands, or rather in that idiom which employs the latterterm to signify, in general, remote countries ; for in thissense we must understand the expressions of Scripture,the isles of Africa," and " the isles of the Gentiles."Although the Phoenicians who settled in Spain mayhave maintained, for a short time, some communicationwith the parent state (a supposition, however, for whichthere is little historical foundation), yet the hypothesisof a direct commerce carried on by Tyre with the westof Europe is at variance with all the authentic informationwe possess respecting the trade and navigation ofthe ancients. Those who believe that such a commerceever existed, must admit, however, that it ceased beforethe historic age began. The voyages of the Carthaginiangenerals, Han no and Himilco, sufficiently prove how newthe Western World was to their nation; and the coloniessubsequently planted by Carthage on the western coastof Africa show the limits and the nature of her commerce.That the Carthaginians carried on a great anda direct trade with Britain, and even with the Baltic, is aproposition but slenderly supported by historic testimony,and irreconcilable with all we know with certainty ofthe ancient commercial system ; that they studiously andeffectually concealed their navigations from other nations,and that their mariners even frequently devoted themselvesto death, and ran their vessels aground, in orderk 31 34 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.to decoy into destruction the ships that too narrowly observedtheir course, are puerilities deserving notice onlyfor the avowal of ignorance they contain.The commercial treaties between Rome and Carthageare among the most curious documents of ancient history.The earliest of these treaties, ratified in the yearof Rome 245, or 509 B. C, is drawn up with the precisionand foresight of modern diplomacy : it warrantsthe safety of Romans trading in the markets of Carthage,but binds their freedom of navigation, and of makingsettlements on the coast of Africa. It contains, also,some remarkable stipulations respecting the right ofreleasing captives, or cargoes of slaves, when the shipsof the one state were driven by stress of weather intothe ports of the other. From this treaty it may be collected,that the contracting parties were chiefly broughtinto collision by the situation of Sicily, which lay betweenthem ; that their navigation lay along the shores, andthat a principal object of their maritime courses was tocollect slaves. The treaty entered into after the firstPunic war (242 B. C.) displays the same jealous careon the part of Carthage to guard against encroachments ;but it is also remarkable for its omissions, for it makesno mention either of Alexandria or of the Straits of Gades.May we not therefore conclude that the Carthaginianstate never dreamt of possessing an exclusive tradewithin such extensive limits ; that the increase of itsown colonies was the favourite object of that ambitiousrepublic, and that a foreign carrying-trade in the East,or in the West, was never regarded by it as essentiallyconnected with its prosperity ?The problem of the Cassiterides, or tin islands, statedwith so many variations by ancient writers, and remainingunsolved when the Romans were masters of, andperfectly acquainted with, the "West, makes it evidentthat tin did not reach the Mediterranean by a directtrade, but passed immediately to the Greeks and Latins,from those who knew but little of the countries whenceit came. But whatever may be the difficulties withCHAP. IX. THE COMMERCE OF THE ANCIENTS. 135respect to tin, the question is simple as far as relates toamber. This article, in the time of Pliny, was broughtfrom the Baltic to Italy, through Pannonia. It wasextremely common in the north of Italy, where thewomen wore it in necklaces as an amulet to preventgoitres. It was also collected on the western shores ofJutland, and carried to Italy, probably through Gaul.Now there is reason to believe that it reached the southof Europe by the same routes at least six centuries beforethe time of Pliny.The existence of a trade across Europe at a very earlyage is attested by the tradition of a sacred road over theAlps, leading from Italy through Celtic and CeltsThere was also a tradition, supported by manycollateral indications, of a trade between the Adriaticand Euxine seas. We know from Greek writers thatthere was a safe road from Illyria into Italy. Thefabulous connection of electron, or amber, with the riverEridanus occurs at an early age in Grecian poetry : whetherthat stream be transferred by aeschylus to Gaul orIberia, or be conducted by Euripides into the Adriatic,the Heliades, weeping for the lost Phaeton, still shedtears of amber on its billows. Whence, then, this poeticconnection of amber with the river Po ? It admits of aneasy and natural explanation. Eridanus, it has beenseen, was a general term signifying, very probably, thedistant river, or river beyond. Herodotus had heardthat it flowed into the northern ocean. The Venetidwelt not far from this northern Eridanus, which is bysome supposed, on slender grounds however, to be theIlhadune that flows near Riga. The amber collected nearthe mouth of this river was carried by those Veneti tothe Veneti of the Adriatic, from whom it passed forwardto the Greeks. These, therefore, considered the countryof the latter people to be that which produced the amber;and having connected the name of that article, electron,with the name Eridanus, they consequently conferredthis foreign title on the Po. As far back, then, as thelegendary connection between the Eridanus and thek 4136 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK!.sisters of Phaeton, we may conclude that the amber tradewas carried on through the head of the Adriatic. Hencethe early geographers of Greece placed the Electrodes, oramber islands, at the mouth of the Po ; that the roadthrough Liguria reached Marseilles, and diverted from itaportion of the tin trade also, may be collected from thetradition which placed a Cashiers, or tin island, amongthe amber islands of the Po. The share which the Li-germanshad in the amber trade may be conjectured fromthe name Lyncurion borne by that substance. Theophrastusrelated that Lyncurion, or amber, was dug fromthe earth in Liguria ; and observed that it attracted notmerely light bodies but even brass and iron. The Romansfirst explored the route over-land from Pannoniato the Baltic in the reign of Nero ; but the amber tradehad evidently long before that time flowed through regularchannels. The Germans, who collected the amber,told the Roman merchants that the Greeks esteemedmost highly the kind called Macao, by which we areprobably to understand that they valued it for its size,in Greek, megathos. Pytheas, about four centuries beforePliny, bears testimony to the existence of an ambertrade in the Baltic ; and as he was said to have extendedhis voyage eastward to the Tanais, it is not unreasonableto suppose that a communication was opened in his timewith the north by the Greek settlers in the Euxine, whoin the days of Herodotus had already penetrated a longway into the interior. But this great historian himselfgives weighty evidence in favour of the land-trade ofEurope, when he tells us expressly that tin and amberare brought from the remotest countries of the north,while at the same time he questions the existence of awestern ocean, and emphatically declares that he nevermet with a person who had seen it. *Hence it appears that commerce and geography aremuch less indebted to the Phoenicians than is generallyimagined : the navigators of that nation are looked uponas forming in early times the only bands of communicated,iii. c. 115.CHAP. IX. THE COMMERCE OP THE ANCIENTS. 137tion in Europe, and as the authors of every ancientgeographical tradition. But although the Phoenicians longpreceded the Greeks in the arts of navigation and in commercialenterprise, yet their system of trade must havebeen necessarily moulded by those circumstances of thetimes which even in later ages, when comparative securityexisted, checked the long voyages of coasting navigators.The richly-laden merchant ships of the Homeric age musthave met with Cyclops and Leestrygons at every anchorage.The adventurous spirit of a nation of mariners sooncarried the Phoenicians abroad through the West ; butit would be hazardous to maintain that the coloniessettled by them ever formed the links of a continuouschain of correspondence. It is possible that they mayhave stimulated the trade of the West ; but there is noreason to believe them its creators or sole upholders. Infine, the existence of a direct trade between Phoeniciaand the western shores of Europe is not only withouthistorical evidence, but when examined narrowly is alsowithout likelihood.Yet few opinions so intrinsically weak have been sogenerally and so fully adopted as that of a great tradeonce carried on by the Phoenicians in the Western Ocean.The want of evidence is supposed to be explained by thejealousy with which that people concealed the state secretof their navigations, as if it were not as difficult to concealthe truth as to discover it. The favour which this opinionenjoys is not hard to be accounted for : the interpositionof a nation so mysterious in their movements isoften useful to solve the difficulties and to fill up thechasms of historical information. Besides, all seemsdark in antiquity beyond the circle partially illuminedby the light of letters ; and the agency of a tradingpeople like the Phoenicians was naturally magnified, becauseit was supposed to operate singly and unassisted.The supposition of some traffic and communicationbetween the various tribes scattered over Europe in theearliest ages, however natural and even inevitable such intercoursemay have been, is too little imposing and too1 38 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.purely rational to contend with the hypothesis of earlyproficiency in the Phoenicians. The human mind prefersthe contemplation of visible agents associated withthe ideas of power, magnitude, and antiquity, to thebelief of obscure movements, detected only by thescrutiny of reason.CHAP. X.MYTHIC GEOGRAPHY OF THE HINDOOS, AND ITS ConnectionWITH GRECIAN 31YTHS.MOUNT Mere THE SEVEN DWIPAS OR ISLANDS. THE QuartersOF THE HEAVENS, HOW NAMED. THE WHITE ISLANDOF THE WEST : ITS TRIPLE NATURE. GOLD, SILVER, ANDIRON MOUNTAINS. THE COUNTRY OF THE SUN AND MOON.AUSPICIOUS EPITHETS. WIDE DIFFUSION" OF THIS BELIEF.NUMEROUS WHITE SEAS. WHITE ISLANDS OF THE GREEKS.TRINACRIAS AND ISLANDS OF THE HAPPY. HECATE ANDTRIPLE DIVINITIES OF THE WEST. HESPERIA. THE HyperboreanKNOWN GENERALLY AMONG THE INDO-teutonicNATIONS. TRADITION OF AN ATLANTIS OR WESTERNISLAND. HINDOO GEOGRAPHY OF THE EAST. LANDS OFGOLD, SILVER, AND BRASS : MISLED PTOLEMY. PANCH^EA.THESE LEGENDS STILL PRESERVED IN INDIA AND IN THEWEST. THEIR INFLUENCE.Though the Hindoos possess some treatises on geography,yet their language, it is said, does not possess aterm to express that useful branch of knowledge. Thetemper of the Brahminical religion is opposed to everykind of mental acquirement of too practical a characterto be wholly appropriated by the religious caste. In thePuranas, or Hindoo sacred poems, there occur manywild systems of cosmology mingled with partial noticesof neighbouring nations, alike intrinsically worthless :for what instruction can be derived, in the history ofgeography, from systems which represent the earth as alotus flower floating on the surface of the ocean, withMount Meru rising from the centre as an umbel ; orfrom those which describe it as composed of seven, eight,CHAP. X. MYTHIC GEOGRAPHY OF THE HINDOOS. 139or nine concentric circles (for these differ in number inthe doctrines of different sects) placed round that holymountain, while the sea between them, mysteriouslyconnected, flows in a spiral line, like the Styx of Grecianmythology ?But among those extravagances of superstitious fancy,some occasional gleams of an acquaintance with Europe,and still further, numerous allusions to an abode of blissor imaginary land of peace and happiness, deserve amoment's attention. That myths of this kind shouldbe common to India with Greece and other western nationswill not surprise those who reflect on the affinityexisting between the languages of India and those ofEurope. A derivation from a common stock, no matterhow remote, will suffice to explain a resemblance betweenthe most widely separated nations in matters so adhesiveas the legends of superstition. But independent of allthe evidence which may be collected by the philologerand antiquarian to illustrate the migrations which havetaken place from Asia into Europe, it is obvious that thecommerce carried on from the earliest ages between Europeand the East would be necessarily attended withan influx of myths from India, a country as prolific ofreligious reveries as it is overflowing with riches andpopulation.All the Hindoo geographical systems place MountMeru in the centre of the earth : this wonderful mountainis described to be 84,000 yojans high, 32,000 wideat the top, and only 16,000 at the bottom. Some sects,however, believe it to resemble an erect pyramid ; somemake it cubical, and others drum-shaped. At equal distancesfrom Mount Meru, to the north and south, areusually ranged chains of mountains (from seven to ninein number) all glittering with the gorgeous embellishmentsof Indian fancy ; some are of gold : others ofprecious gems, and shining like 10,000 suns. But thesedescriptions belong only to the central portion of the earthwhich is surrounded by the salt sea. The Dwipas orisland* (literally between two waters), which lie beyond140 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.the salt sea, are not formally recognised as habitable bythe human species. But as consistency is not to beexpected in theories of so fanciful a nature, the seasinterposed between those concentric islands are oftenoverlooked, and the historical legends relating to distantcountries appear frequently jumbled with the cosmologicalsystem of the Dwipas. These must now beenumerated.I. Jamba-dwipa, or the island of Jambs, is thecentral portion of the earth, containing Mount Meru.It is India, in short, and in ordinary language (when theabsurd system of the Dwipas is forgotten), the whole ofthe old world. It is also called the Isle of the Virgin,Ila, Ida, or the earth. Jambu-dwipa is surrounded bythe salt sea ; for the framers of the system found it impossibleto depart from sober reality, while so near to home.II. Cusa-dwipa is so called from the Cusa, or grass,bearing fruit like a great melon. It is surrounded bythe sea of Syra, or intoxicating liquors. This Dwipa issupposed to have relation to the country extending fromIndia to the Caspian Sea.III. Next comes the dwipa of Plash, or thee fig-tree,bounded by the sea of Icshu, or juice of the sugar-cane.IV. Salmali-dwipa, or the island of the willow, standsnext in order, girt by the sea of Carpi Ghrita, or clarifiedbutter.V. Crauncha-dwipa, with the Dad' hi Sahara, or sea ofcurds.VI. Saca-dwipa, with the Cshirabd'hi, sea of milk, orwhite sea ; called also Amritabd'ki, the sea of Amrita orAmbrosia.VII. Pushcara, beyond which is the sea Su-aduda, orof fresh water, completes the system. Pushcara isexpressly declared to be at the furthest extremity of the"West, and in the same climate with Uttaracuru, or thecountry immediately adjoining the northern ocean ; so itwould appear that the Brahminists aimed more particularlyat representing the regions of the north-west ;hence those who have succeeded to them in the practiceCHAP. X. MYTHIC GEOGRAPHY OF THE HINDOOS. 141of building theories have endeavoured to prove, that bythe dwipas of Cusa, Plash, Alkali, Crauncha, Sack,and Pushcara respectively, we are to understand thecountry from India to the Caspian, Asia Minor, thecountry between the Euxine and the Baltic, Germany,the British islands, and Iceland. That they had somepositive knowledge of the countries in that direction ismanifest from numerous passages in the Puranas.What lies between Pushcara and Mala Megha mountains,about 100 yojans long and 60 broad, is as flat asthe palm of the hand. The soil is hard and tenacious,without any grass : there are few living creatures, andthe inhabitants have no fixed dwellings. This desert isso dreary as to make the traveller's hair stand up ; thewhole country is called Cana or Conan. There areseveral large lakes, great trees and groves called Cant.The smaller lakes, pools, trees and orchards producingdelightful juices, are innumerable. There arc caves alsoin the mountains, most dreary, dark, and difficult ofaccess. In this country are Sidd'has or prophets withthe gifts of miracles, learned and famous Brahmins,bright like fire ; thousands of them are in this country."This land of Canada appears to be Syria taken in itswidest signification; and the mention of the Sidd'has orsaints indicates an acquaintance with the Jewish people.In designating the points of the compass the Hindoossuppose themselves standing so as to face the rising sun,and then name the quarters of the heavens from theirrelative position. Thus the east is called in Sanscritpara or pra, before; and the west, in like manner, iscalled apart, or that which is behind. Among the derivativesfrom the latter expression in old dialects are thewords apareya and africa, the latter of which is stillused in Ceylon to signify western, and may be regarded,with some probability, as the identical word from whichthe continent of Africa derived its name. The southbeing on the right hand is called dashing (the Greekdexioix), whence the peninsula of India still retains thename of Decan, the right hand, or south, originally given14<2 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.to it by the Gangetic nations. The north is denominatedin Sanscrit duc or uttara, but as the holy mountainMeru is supposed to be to the north of India, thatquarter of the heavens receives also the respectful titlesof Senis-tiram or Aras-tram, the quarter of Sends, or ofAral.But independent of the dwipas or islands which are themere offspring of system, the Panic legends make constantallusion to a sort of fairy land, an imaginary abode ofhappiness and joy, floating as free as the hopes to whichit owes its creation. This is the Sweta-dwipa, or whiteisland of the west, situated beyond the Cdlodabd'hi orsea of Cala, the black, or Pluto. Hither the Dies andDevas, the multiform deities of the Hindoo pantheon,resort as to a more genial dwelling, from the state andsplendour of Meru. Here, by the authority of all thelegends, is the Isd-pura or Is'pura, the abode of the gods ;perhaps the Hesperia of the western classics. The Persiansadopted the same belief, and the same mode ofexpression. In their romances, the hero Cai-caus goesto the mountain Az-bury, at the foot of which the sunsets,to fight the Dio Sefid, or white devil, whose dwellingis on the seventh stage of the world. The Germanic nations,whose languages present so many resemblances with theancient languages of India and of Persia, had also theirAsburg or Asgard (for these terms are equivalent) ; butas no terrestrial paradise was met with by those nationsin their progress towards the west, they very wiselytransferred to the heavens the true Asgard, or abode ofthe gods in Scandinavian mythology.As Mount Meru has three peaks of gold, silver, andiron, which are the seats respectively of Branch, Siva,and Vishnu, the Hindoo trinity, so the White Islandhas the same merit of being a trikhetra, that is, of havingthree peaks, or else it may be considered as of atriple nature, and composed of three islands. Theseare Miranda or Suvarnya, the golden, Aryateya thesilver, and Ayeya, the iron island. The first of thesepeaks or islands is also called Suryacanta, the mountainChap. X. MYTHIC GEOGRAPHY OF THE HINDOOS. 143of the sun ; the silver mountain is entitled Chancre cant,the mountain of the moon. In the Cumarica Chance,the zone from east to west, forming an arch roundMount Meru, is divided into nine parts, of which thatforming the western extremity (the Apprentice, or endof the west,) is declared to be the country of the moon.The White Island of the west, the land of the sun, theparadise of the moon, is lavishly decked in the Hindoolegends with all the propitiatory epithets of a copious language.That blessed land enjoys the Su-bhransu, or mildbeams of ten thousand moons. It is named not onlySweta, the white, but also Ghrita, the bright ; Tea, thesplendid ; Cant, the brilliant; Cinna, the effulgent ;Cshira, the milk white; Padma, the flower, &c. Theseappellations of the happy island in the West bear a strongresemblance to the names of the islands in the GrecianArchipelago ; and if the active philological researches ofthe present age shall succeed in throwing any new lighton primitive Greece, that resemblance may be proved tobe not merely the result of accident.The Chinese philosopher, Confucius, taught thatparadise is in the West ; the same belief prevails inTibet and in all the countries professing the religion ofBuddha or Fo. The Jews expected from the West theestablishment of their new kingdom ; it is not extraordinary,therefore, that the nations of Europe, whose languagesbear positive evidence of a derivation from thesame family of mankind as the Hindoos, should retainin popular superstition the same opinion, couched uniformlyin similar expressions. Wherever the Indo-teutonicnations, as they are called, have fixed themselves,we find white islands still looming in the West,and surrounded by white seas. Thus, to the westwardof the Samoyeds, adjoining the Northern Ocean, is awhite sea, so named, perhaps, in the first instance, bythe Jots, a race of giants, as tradition testifies, of kindredorigin with the Scandinavian Asi. They were totallyexterminated by pestilence and famine. The Caspianhas been always called the White Sea by the nations in-144 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.habiting its eastern shores, and it bears among them atpresent the Turkish name Akdingis, which has thatauspicious signification. The Turks also, from theirfirst entrance into Asia Minor, gave the name of WhiteSea to the aegean. The word Baltic, likewise, in theLithuanian tongue, signifies the white sea ; and it deservesto be remarked, that the Sarmatia nations, while occupyinga position between it and the Euxine, gave to thelatter the natural correlative name of Mor-rnori, or theBlack Sea. This designation has been subsequentlytranslated and adopted by other European nations, aswell as by the Turks, the original Sclavonian expressionbeing at present confined to the Propontis, or, as it iscorruptly called, the Sea of Marmara. The names ofWieland and of Helgoland, the white and holy land, wereprofusely spread through the north-west of Europe. Holyislands were numerous in the German Seas. Britainwas Al-finn, or the white island; and the ancient nameof Ireland, Muic-inis, according to the soberest critics,bears the same interpretation. Our antiquaries have allobserved (and those who turn with contempt from fablesgraced with the style of history by blind national attachmenthave acknowledged themselves unable to explainthe circumstance), that Ireland enjoyed the reputationof sanctity at a very early age.* Yet, as far back ashistory throws a transient light on the internal conditionof that country, it appears to have been always the seatof anarchy and barbarism. t But does not the remotegeographical position of Ireland with respect to Europe(hernia, emphatically the "Western Isle,) sufficientlyaccount for its mythical reputation ? and indeed Bane,or the Happy Island, a title which it could have derivedfrom superstition alone, is one of its most ancient appellations.The consolatory tale of a land of happiness unalloyedSharon Turner's Hist, of Engl. vol. ii.+ The learning of Ireland in the ninth and tenth centuries was an exoticof unstable growth. It belonged not to the people, but to the monasteries ;and as soon as these were destroyed by the invasion of the Danes, everysymptom of cultivation immediately vanished, and Ireland was againbarbarous.CHAP. X. MYTHIC GEOGRAPHY OF THE HINDOOS. 145found its way also at a very early period into the mythologyof Greece. The first white island of the Greeks orPelasgians was probably Crete, called in remote ages theIsland of the Happy, an expression which later writersvainly endeavoured to justify by the riches and salubrityof that island. We may rest satisfied, however, thatCrete nursed the Idaean Jove, and was the habitation ofthe blessed, long before it could boast the wealth andpopulation of its hundred cities. When that island wasunfitted by the multiplication of men to be any longerthe abode of deities, it was still remembered in mythicstory, that the true birth-place of Jupiter was not thelocality of Mount Ida, but in those wandering dwellingsof the ocean, the islands of the happy* In like manner,although Delos, that is, the bright island, was honouredas the abode of Latona and birth-place of Apollo, yet theoriginal intention of the myth to which it owed its celebritywas still preserved, and the homes of those deitieswere always acknowledged to be in the West. Deloswas said to have originally floated, a legend in strictconformity with the myth. It is possible that tales werefabricated in later ages to maintain its reputation. Lucianderides the belief that Delos was a piece broken off fromSicily ; but by using the word Sicily, he confounds thereal with the mythical Trinacria, from which Delosmight have been said to be detached The triquetralnature of the white island is its essential characteristic.Hence the Trinacria of Homer, or Tlirinakia, as hecalls it, (for the word was strange to him, and not ofIonian growth,) in which he, very properly, places theherds and flocks of the sun. His Leucas petra also, orwhite rock, which he places beyond the ocean, in thesame line with his Hades and Cimmeria, is a remarkableinstance of his mythological exactness. The islandRhodes bore also in ancient times the titles of Triquetraand Mar/iria, or the happy. Deuce, the wltitc island ofthe Euxine, was in like manner believed to be triangular.Lycophron. t Lucian. Dialogue Marine.vol. i. r.146" GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.Many other instances could be added of this prevalentsuperstition.It is needless to mention the Gorgon, the Hesperides,the triple Hecate, the three-headed Cerberus, with numerousother tenants of the mythic West, ranged by thepoets in triple order, and placed beyond that mysteriousflood, the ocean. Nor is it necessary to examine theTrophonian visions of Timarchus, who saw the islands ofthe departed in the eighth division of the ocean, that is,beyond the Dwipas. In the ocean, it is evident, theearly Grecian poets placed their Trinacria, and theirDeuce, or white island : their Ogygia, JEcea, Erythema,Siberia, and other oceanic islands, were probably, atfirst, but epithets of those, and afterwards obtained aseparate existence from the same causes which havecaused so much confusion in every part of the Greekmythology. *In Hesperia, or the West, was the peaceful reign ofSaturn, the Elysian Fields of Homer, and the HappyIsles of Hesiod. A minute examination of classicalmythology would furnish innumerable proofs, that popularbelief among the Greeks placed paradise beyond theWestern Ocean, and that those fabled regions of blissdid not owe their creation to the glow and fertilityof Grecian imagination. The myth of a land of happinessin the West was evidently one of the fragmentsoriginally gathered into the jumbled mass of Grecianmythology. Geographers might, therefore, have sparedthemselves the trouble of fixing the locality of theFortunate Isles : to apply epithets of this kind is to pervertthem, and to suppose them originating in the discoveriesof the Phoenicians is to mistake their nature :the tradition created the island, and not the island thetradition.The word Ogygia itself seems to mean oceanic. From ogha, Sans. water,was derived Ogtinus, the god of the waters, whence the Greeks formed theirOceanus. The Pelasgian word pigeon (a word still used in Iceland), thecollection of waters or sea, was soon forgotten in Greece in its general sense,though it enters into the composition of many Greek words. The connectionof Ogyges with the deluge is manifest in Ills name; or, in otherwords, it is evident that the name was made for the legend.CHAP. X. MYTHIC GEOGRAPHY OF THE HINDOOS. 147The site of the mysterious people called Hyperboreans,who were supposed to be the tenants of a sort of earthlyparadise (and their name apparently implies as much),puzzled the geographers of antiquity, no less than theposition of those coy fugitives, the Happy Islands. Thegreat majority, indeed, of ancient writers, agree inplacing the Hyperboreans to the* north or north-west ;in that direction, therefore, we ought probably to lookfor a people who cultivated religious reveries moreearnestly than the Greeks, and who were naturally supposedto possess the happiness they preached ; just asArabia was thought to be the native country of thespices which she exported. Mention is made of theHyperboreans in the Homeric hymns, as well as in Pindar,and in both cases they figure as a people beyond theocean. Hecatombs, who wrote their history, says " thatthey inhabit a great island in the sea, opposite to Gaul,and under the north pole. The climate of that arcticisland is delicious. Latona was born there; and the peopleconsider themselves as Apollo's priests. The Hyperboreanssuse their own language, but arc friendly to theGreeks, especially to Delos and to Athens, Greeks hadpassed over to them, and left some monuments in theircountry ; and Abaris, the Hyperborean priest, on theother hand, had travelled into Greece, to make a leaguewith the Belgians. Indeed it appears that offerings ofthe Hyperboreans were frequently transmitted to Delosfrom the Adriatic, and through Epirus."In this relation of Hecataeus, and these friendly missionsfrom the West, so fondly ascribed to a sacredpeople, it is easy to discern the wide extension of themyth, and the usual error of endeavouring to convert itinto reality. Herodotus sought in vain, among theScythianss, some tidings of that happy and long-livednation ; but in order to supply the deficiency of his owninvestigations, he informs us, that Aristucus the pof%who was conveyed by Apollo to the country of the isse-tones, received there the intelligence that the Hyperboreanssdwelt on the Northern Ocean, beyond thei.2148 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.Arimasps. This Aristseus is a most important personagein the history of early Grecian civilisation : he is saidto have been Homer's instructor : he visited the countriesbeyond the Euxine; and with the doctrine of transmigration(for he himself was born three times), heprobably introduced into Greece many an Oriental legend.But although Herodotus fruitlessly enquired amongthe Scythianss for some account of a people much happierthan themselves, the Greeks who visited India met withmore success. Onesicratus related that concerning theHyperboreans, who live 1000 years, the Indians repeatedprecisely the same stories as Simonides and Pindar.Indeed their Sidd'hapoor, or country of saints, " in whichmen falling from heaven are born again, and live 1300or 1500 years," is placed, in all their systems, at theextremity of the North. " But some affirm," says theauthor of the Ayeen Akbar, " that beyond the oceanthere is a blessed land of gold inhabited by mortals,who invariably live 1000 years, and never suffer bysickness or by sorrow." The Hindoos placed the Hyperboreanin Uttara-Curu, that is, the North, an expressionwhich was understood in too confined a sense byPtolemy and other ancient geographers. Pliny confoundsthem with the Attacori, from the resemblanceof this word, perhaps, to Attaracori, the inhabitants ofUttara-Curu : but as the Attacori (the Etha-Guri ofPtolemy, from At-Ghur, the eight forts or rajaships,)were also to the north of the Ganges, the error is not verymaterial.The accounts received from the Indians, and from theIssedones by Aristoeus, induced the later Roman andGreek writers to waver in assigning the position of theHyperboreans, or to prefer fixing them in the northeasternor central regions of Asia. Nevertheless, whenall the statements respecting this fabulous people arecandidly compared, they will be found to differ butlittle from each other ; for the informants, in every case,placed the Hyperboreans in the North ; and when thisCHAP. X. MYTHIC GEOGRAPHY OF THE HINDOOS. 149expression was interpreted in the narrow sense of localdescription, it only shared in the fate of every mythwhich fell into the hands of the geographers. Thus it isevident that the story of the Hyperboreans (fundamentallythe same with the Millenarian legends of the presentday), as well as that of the White or Happy Islandsof the West, was not a dream of Grecian poets, but aprimitive myth of very extensive diffusion ; and it is interestingto observe how zealously the Greeks, amongwhom the speculative doctrines of religion remained oilyin the faint shadows of tradition, sought to collect fromthe original sources some corroboration of a belief sogratifying to the aspirations of human nature. It islikewise worthy of remark, that the Cimmeria, theAcheron, and Elysium of the early Greeks, which appearto have been borrowed from Phoenician sources, werealmost wholly yielded up to the poets as ornaments oftheir compositions, while the belief in Hyperboreans andoceanic islands of contentment, supported by nationaltraditions, seems to have suffered no decay from literarycultivations.The division of the earth into seven dwipas, orislands, was made, according to the Hindoo system, byPriyauratta, who at first intended to share his dominionsamong his ten sons, but three of these retired from theworld. The Puranas also speak of deluges which destroyedall the dwipas but that of Bamboo. Theselegends accord sufficiently well with the stories of Atlasand of his seven daughters, or ten sons, according toothers. But the relation of Marcellus is more to thepurpose ; for, according to him, there existed in earlytimes seven islands (the dwipas) in the Atlantic Ocean,sacred to Proserpine, together with three others (thetri-cutadri) of an immense magnitude, sacred to Pluto,to Ammon, and to Neptune. Plato's account, also, of anAtlantic island bears all the internal marks, not, indeed,of a historical tradition, but of a genuine primitivelegend. The search for the extremity of the west wasnatural in those who imagined that paradise was situs3150 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.acted in that quarter of the globe ; and when the expectedisland was not found, it was easier to believe it swallowedup by the sea than to admit that it never had any butafabled existence.In the accounts which the writings of the Hindoosgive of the Indian seas, the same tendency to disposeevery thing according to the symmetry of a religioussystem prevails over the simplicity of truth. In thisquarter, also, there is a tra-nate, or group of threeislands, composed respectively of gold, silver, and iron.Co-existing with these, there is a mysterious assemblageof seven islands ; and when Jambolo stated that theIndian islands were seven in number, he only repeatedthe language of the natives ; for the expression YaiiLances s or the seven lances, is still in use at the presentday. It is obvious that these legends were all understoodliterally by the Greek geographers, and particularly byPtolemy, who derived an unusually large share of informationfrom India, and was careful to turn everyatom of it to account. Accordingly, we find in his mapa Heptanesia nests, or Septuple island, which it is impossibleto assign to any known position ; and also aTricadiba, or Trinity island, with a Tricanesia nests,or translation of the former name, after his custom. Hisislands of satyrs, of monkeys, &c. all stand ranged intriple order. Then the countries of gold, of silver, andof brass, (this last being substituted for iron, accordingto the Greek notions of precedence among metals,) allbelong evidently to the domains of fable, althoughposterity, always credulous when gold is in question,has never ventured to dispute the reality of their existence.But Ptolemy committed a graver error when headopted the opinion of Hindoo geography, which unitesthe eastern peninsula of India with the African continent.Arrian, the author of the Periplus, although hebelieved it possible to sail round Africa into the Atlantic,was yet evidently impressed with the Hindoo notions,for he says, "it is believed that Taprobane approachesCHAP. X. MYTHIC GEOGRAPHY OP THE HINDOOS. 1 £1very close to the coast of Africa." The south-easterncoast of Africa is named in Hindoo writings Sanc'ha-dwipa (Zanguebar), that is, the island of shells, anexpression equivalent to the country of the Troglodytes; and as this Troglodytic region is supposed toextend round to the south-eastern extremity of India,many errors arose from the use of this equivocal language,which have found their way into the writings ofthe Greek and Latin geographers. With Anga-dwipa,or China, the ancient writings of the Hindoos show butlittle acquaintance. " No great men, famous and learnedamong Bipeds, ever visited the island called Bhadrasva,where there is a wondrous Canada tree, with flowerslike great water-pots." Yet silk, the peculiar productionof China, found its way into India at a very early period.Silken garments worn by the queens at a time of festaldisplay, are mentioned in the Ramdyuna, of Valmeeki, apoem written one thousand years at least before the commencementof our era.There still remains a story transmitted to us by aGreek writer, which, from the indulgence shown to it bysome eminent modern geographers, deserves to be comparedwith the legends of the Hindoos. Evemerus, aMacedonian, is said to have discovered, to the south cfArabia, a group of islands, three in number.* Thelargest of them, called Panacea, was inhabited by fournations, one of which was ruled by three kings, whowere nevertheless controlled by the college of priests. Amagnificent temple there was covered with Egyptianhieroglyphics and inscriptions. Three cities adorned thisterrestrial paradise. One of the lesser islands producedfrankincense enough to supply the altars of all the godsin the world. In fine, Panacea was the country of thePhoenix, and the island of the Triphyllian Jove. It isobvious that Evemerus derived this relation from theEgyptian priests, who debased the mythic tri-cut ofthe Hindoos by attempting to unite it to facts. Just asHecatacus placed the Hyperboreans in Britain (an islandDiodorus.h i<152 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ANCIENTS. BOOK I.opposite to Gaul) amidst memorials of the Greeks, sothe Egyptians appear to have fixed the wandering islandsof the East, and to have added to the general principleof a triple Elysium the hieroglyphics and other particularitiesderived from their peculiar modes of thinking.There seems but little reason, therefore, to hope, as someof the learned have done*, that these blissful islands maybeagain discovered on the coasts of Africa or Arabia.The persuasion that the dwelling-place of happinessis in the West, may have exercised an important influenceon the early migrations of mankind. The existenceand the wide diffusion of such an opinion are clearlyestablished; nor is there any reason to believe that it wasgrounded in positive tradition. But then it will beasked, why was Paradise supposed to be in the West?An answer to this question may be found in the constitutionof the human being, who is always more disposedto receive profound impressions at the hour when thenatural day is coming to a close, and contemplates withthe finest sensibilities that most glorious of celestial phenomena,the setting sun. t The Hindoos retain to thepresent day their old belief. The chalk with which theBrahmins mark their foreheads is from the West : theyeven pretend that it is brought over land from Britain.Yogees, followed by their trains of pilgrims, have attemptedin modern times to reach the Hyperboreanregions across Europe, and have even advanced as faras Russia ; but the importunate curiosity by which theywere assailed effectually subdued in every instance theirpiety and courage.In the West the primitive tradition is still remembered.The lakes and seas of Scotland and of Ireland haveall their floating and holy islands. The Ins Wen, orwhite island of the Gaels, and the Ynys y Cedeirn, orisland of the mighty ones of the Welsh, are still objects ofhope and veneration. The most westerly group of theMalte-Brun, Geog. vol. i, Gosselin.+ The first hints on the natural principles of mythology are to be foundin Heine's Opuscula Academics.Clap. X. MYTHIC GEOGRAPHY OF THE HINDOOS. 153Hebrides, the Flannel islands, which are devoutly believedto be seven in number, and are even laid down asseven in our maps, though only six are visible to the eyesof the sceptical *, are said to have the virtue of disposingto prayer and religious meditation all who land uponthem, t The Arran islands, on the west of Ireland, areentitled the isles of the living, that is to say, of those whohave returned to life ; but the language of this generalsuperstition was carried far beyond the shores of Europe.It is found among the Indians of North America, whofervently believe in the existence of a land of happinessin the West beyond the ocean ; but whether this traditionbelongs to them originally, or was introduced amongthem by the Scandinavian adventurers of the eleventh andtwelfth centuries, it is impossible to determine.5Iacculloch's Western Isles. f Martin's account of the Hebrides.BOOK II.GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES.CHAP. I.THE ARABIANS.ITINERARIES OF THE ROMANS. PEUTINGERIAN TABLE. CommasINDICOPLEUSTES. THE WORDS SINT AND HINDOO. THETSINITZJE. THE ARABIANS. THEIR CONQUESTS ANDCOMMERCE. EARLY TRAVELLERS INTO CHINA. EDUCATIONOF THE CHINESE. REGULATIONS OF THEIR PORTS. FIRSTMENTION MADE OF TEA. CHINESE EAT HUMAN FLESH.STRANGERS IN CHINA. Canal. USES OF THE COCOA-NUTTREE. KINGS OF INDIA. THE UNICORN. SOGDIANA. THBALANS. Hazard. THE FOSSIL IVORY OF BULGAR. COM-Mere OF THF. ARABIANS WITH THE NORTH OF EUROPE. THEINTERIOR OF AFRICA COLONISED BY ARABIANS. KINGDOMSOF Grana AND TOCRUR. LAMLAM. THE Tinges AND .THE PERPETUAL ISLANDS. — OTHER ISLANDS IN THE SEAOF DARKNESS. VOYAGE OF THE ALMEGRURIM.The geography of the ancients may be considered ashaving attained its greatest accuracy and comprehensivenessin the age of Ptolemy. The disorders which soonafter followed in the Roman empire, the frequent migrationsof the northern nations, and the invasions ofthe Goths and Huns, completely changed the geographyof Europe, and rendered it difficult to procure any positivedetails amidst the disorders of so many revolutions.Yet geography was still cultivated in the Romanworld, and several treatises and itineraries remain, interestingto the critic, but of little importance in a generalview. Of the itineraries the Romans had two kinds,the Picta and Annotated, or the drawn and written: thelatter contained the names of the stations and chief places,with their distances from one another, without enteringinto any detail. In the Itinerary Picta, which weremuch more complete, all the great roads were drawn, thename and extent of the different provinces added, withTHE ARABIANS.the number of the inhabitants, the mountains, rivers,and neighbouring seas. But in all those monumentsof Roman industry there is no trace of mathematicalgeography ; no scientific measurement ; the distancesof places were ascertained merely by itinerary measures,or occasionally by observations of latitude. Plinycomplains bitterly of the inaccuracy of those measures.Of the former kind of itinerary the most remarkablethat remain to us are that called the Itinerary of Antoine,the age of which it is difficult to ascertain ; and theItinerary of Jerusalem, a fragment which points out ingreat detail the whole route from Bordeaux to that city.Of the painted itineraries, a fine specimen is still preservedin the imperial library of Vienna, and has beenengraved and published under the name of the TabulaPeutingeriana. Some have assigned its composition tothe end of the fourth century ; while others, with perhapsa preponderance of argument, have endeavoured todemonstrate that its origin ascends to the time of thEemperor Severus, in the year 230 A. D. It is probablethat it was frequently published with changes and additions,so that it cannot be correctly assumed to representthe geography of any one age. The copy which at presentexists is thought to be the work of a monk of thethirteenth century: it owes its name to Conrad Peutinger,a citizen of Augsburg, to whom it formerly belonged,and by whom it was illustrated in a learned commentary.The commencement of the Tabula Peutingeriana hasbeen lost ; in consequence, Portugal, Spain, and thewestern part of Africa arc wanting, and only the southeasterncorner of England remains : in recompense, itcontains Asia and the East as far as the knowledge ofdie Romans extended in that quarter. The country ofthe Seres, the mouth of the Ganges, the island of Ceylon,lengthened from west to east, according to the ancientopinion, are all depicted in it, with the roads traced evenin the heart of India. But the countries marked on thismap are not placed in it according to their geographicalposition, their respective limits, and their real size; they156 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.are ranged arbitrarily, one after the other from west toeast, without any regard to the figure, or their longitudeand latitude, as determined by geographical writers.This table or picture is about twenty-two feet long, andonly one broad. Besides the roads, which appear tohave been the principal objects of the author's industry,he has also marked the great mountains, the course ofthe chief rivers, the lakes, the outline of the coasts, thenames of the provinces, and those of the principal nations.The increase of commerce must necessarily producea more active navigation. The luxury and profusionof the Romans continued to augment long after politicaldecay was manifest in the empire, and, in consequence,their acquaintance with India, whence the most preciousarticles were imported, was every year enlarged.This is manifest from the Topography of the ChristianWorld, written in the beginning of the sixth century byCosmas, an Egyptian monk, whose work has procuredhim the surname of Indicopleustes , or the voyager inIndia, though it is much doubted whether he ever actuallymade the journey.Cosmas wrote principally with a view to refute the impiousdoctrines (as he deemed them) of those who taughtthat the earth was a globe. According to him, it is a plainoblong, surrounded by an immense wall, which supportsthe firmament or azure vault of heaven : the successionof day and night is the effect of a great mountain in thenorthern part of the earth, behind which the sun concealsitself every evening. In support of these opinionsCosmas, like other framers of systems, is able to bringforward an abundance of authority, and fairly demonstratesthat his system alone is reconcilable with the languageof the sacred Scriptures, or of the old Greek poets.From the details of the Egyptian monk, it may becollected that in his time these voyages of the Romans,or of the Greek merchants, extended beyond the coastof Malabar. Ceylon was called by the Indians Sieladiba,or the island of Siena, — a close approach to the namewhich it bears at the present day. " India," he says,CHAP. I. THE ARABIANS. 157is divided from Persia by the river Indus or Prison."This latter name he may have borrowed from the Arabians,who apply it to rivers in general ; but it isoriginally Indian, and the same as Phasis, or Fash, ariver, which we find occurring in Ceylon, in Colchis, inArmenia, and in the country of the Gihon or Oxus.The river Indus, it may be proper to observe, is calledby the Hindoos the Sint, which also signifies the river;Sindia, the name of the country round the mouths of theSint or Indus, signifies, in like manner, the Delta, orriver country. The accidental resemblance between thename of the river Sint and that of the Hindoos led to acorruption of the former name, which has occasionallygiven birth to errors in historical investigations. TheHindoos or Indoors derive their national designation fromthe word hindoo, the moon, as if they were descended fromthat heavenly body : however singular such a designationas that of the people of the moon may seem in the presentage, it was anciently assumed not only by the Hindoosbut by all the principal nations of central Asia. ThePindus (the Passions of the Roman writers) andChandras, who were among the most ancient and distinguishedof the Indian dynasties, were respectively, astheir names imply, the children of the sun and moon.Cosmas observes that Hindostan was peopled bytwo races ; that of the north being comparatively faircomplexioned : but instead of calling the darker raceethiopians, as was generally done, he gives to the fair-complexionand ruling nation in the north the name ofHnnni, an expression for which it is not easy to find asatisfactory explanation. Among other proofs which hefurnishes of an extended navigation in the East, is his ofthe Txinitzce or Chinese, whose country, at the extremityof the East, was as far by sea from Ceylon as this islandwas from Egypt.Put the commerce of the Romans or Egyptian Greekswith India did not long continue : a power arose in theseventh century which cut off" the nations of Europe fromall direct communication with the East ; the successors158 GEOGRAPHY OP THE 3IIDDDE AGES. BOOK II.of Mahomet extended their religion and their sway overas wide a portion of the globe as that embraced by theRoman empire in its most prosperous period, and evenmade themselves sole masters of almost all the civilisationthat remained.Geography naturally becomes a fashionable studyunder an extensive empire ; and was cultivated accordinglywith uncommon ardour by the Arabians. Theconquests of that people extended at one time from Spainto India ; and from the interior of Africa to the shores ofthe Caspian Sea. The pilgrimage to Mecca, prescribedby their religion, gave an impulse to the love of travel,which they had in common with all mankind. Theirsuperiority in arms and civilisation during some centuries,united to the wide extension of their empire, renderedthem masters of an immense trade. But their navigationappears to have been generally timid, and their voyageswere confined to the coasts. Maritime commerce amongthe Arabians was far from possessing the same importanceas that which was carried on by caravans over-land.The grand branches of this land-trade were those communicatingwith the interior of Africa, from Egypt andfrom Barbary across the Great Desert : slaves, ivory, andgold dust were purchased from the negroes, with a profitequivalent to the perils of the journey ; other caravanroutes led through Persia to Cashmeer and India ; orover the great steppes of Tartary to the borders of China:a third principal channel directed its course northwards,and passing from Armenia, by Derbend and the westernshores of the Caspian Sea, conducted to Astracan andthe countries of the Bulgarians, Russians, and other nationsof the north of Europe.The geographical writings of the Arabians betray thesame want of masculine taste and philosophic spiritwhich characterises in so singular a manner all the otherproductions of a people, who for some centuries ardentlydevoted themselves to the cultivation of letters. Massed,who wrote, in the year <H7, a general history, with thetitle of The Golden Meadows and the Mines of PreciousCHAP. I. THE ARABIANS. 159Stones, commences with comparing the earth to a birchof which Mecca and Medina form the head, Persia andIndia the right wing, the land of Gog the left wing, andAfrica the tail. He supposes the existence of an earthanterior to this, and situated elsewhere : he believes alsothat the earth which we now inhabit has been successivelycovered with waters, which have passed off sometimeson the one side, sometimes on the other.The geography of the Arabians cannot be traced withthe same degree of precision as that of which the Greekand Roman writers is susceptible : the singular incoherenceof the oriental maimer of writing, and thepredilection of the Arabians to works in the form ofdictionaries, to which they generally consigned their geographicaldetails, render it extremely difficult to give achronological history of their knowledge. The object,therefore, of this chapter must be, to give a general outlineof the geographical knowledge of a people, who forsome centuries were the chief agents of that intercoursebetween distant nations, which, however it may occasionallyescape the notice of history, never ceases to operateimportant political effects.The most eminent of the Arabian geographers isEdrisi, or Eldrisi, an individual, every circumstance ofwhose life is a subject of controversy to the learned.At the court of Roger the First, king of Sicily, in 1 153,he composed his work, which he entitled, " The goingabroad of a curious Man to explore all the Wonders of theWorld." An imperfect translation of it exists under thename of Geographic Nubiensis. The work of Edrisicontains a full description of the whole world, as far asit was known to the author, with its countries, cities,and all its features, physical and political. These arearranged, not according to any of the methods to whichwe are accustomed, but in a manner peculiar to itself.The world is divided into seven climates, commencing atthe equinoctial line, and extending northwards to thelimit at winch the earth is supposed to be rendered uninhabitableby the cold. Each climate is then divided16'0 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.by perpendicular lines into eleven equal parts, beginningwith the western coast of Africa, and ending with theeastern coast of Asia. The whole world is thus dividedinto seventy-seven equal square compartments, resemblingthose upon a chess-board, or those formed upon aplain map, by the intersecting lines of longitude and latitude.The geographer begins with the first part of the firstclimate, including the western part of central Africa,and proceeds eastward through the different divisions ofthis climate, till he finds its termination in the seaof China. He then returns to the first part of the secondclimate, and so proceeds till he reaches the eleventhpart of the seventh climate, which terminates in thenorth-eastern extremity of Asia.The inconvenience of such an arrangement must beabundantly obvious. Instead of each country, or atleast each region of similar physical character, beingdescribed by itself, it is severed by these mechanical sectionsinto fragments, which are described in differentand distant parts of the work, and no connected view isgiven of any great country.In drawing the general outlines of cosmography,Edrisi describes the earth as globular, the regularity of thatfigure being interrupted only by the variety of mountainsand vallies on its surface. He adheres to the doctrineof those ancient schools which supposed an inhabited torridzone ; but as his knowledge extended to populouscountries south of the tropic, he placed the commencementof this zone, with very little propriety, at theequinoctial line. " Beyond this," he says, " there areneither plants nor animals, all being uninhabitable onaccount of the heat." Again, the habitable world extends,according to him, only to the sixty-fourth degreeof north latitude, beyond which all is frozen with iceand perpetual winter.The circumference of the earth he estimates at 1 1,000leagues, and he refers also to a measurement made byHermes, which found it to be 1 2,000. He divides theCHAP. I. THE ARABIANS. l6lwhole according to the established system into 360 degrees; observing, however, that in consequence of theimpossibility of passing the equinoctial line, the knownworld consists only of one hemisphere ; of this one halfis land and the other sea, which last consists chiefly ofthe great ambient sea, surrounding the earth in a continuedcircuit like a zone, and in which the earthfloats like an egg in a basin of water." The onlyportion of it concerning which any thing was knownwas the Atlantic Ocean, called " the Sea of Darkness."That part which rolled along the north-eastern extremityof Asia was named " the Sea of Pitchy Darkness," thegloom of the climate here increasing the obscurity whichthe Arabians thought to be connected with the ocean.Besides the great sea or ocean, Edrisi reckons sevensmaller ones, viz. the Red Sea or Arabian Gulf, theGreen Sea or Persian Gulf, the sea of Damascus or theMediterranean, the sea of the Venetians or the Adriatic,the sea of Pontus or the Black Sea, and the sea ofGeorgian or Dailem, by which he meant the Caspian.The Arabians have the merit of preserving someprecious fragments of the ancients : the following passagein Caswini contains an allusion to a universal principleof attraction, which, though not the gravitation of Newton,must be considered as a fortunate as well as boldstep in speculative philosophy. Among the ancients,he says, some of the disciples of Pythagoras maintainedthat it was the earth that turned unceasingly, and thatthe movement of the stars was but apparent, and producedonly by the rotation of the globe ; others supposedthat the earth was suspended in the universe equallydistant from all points, and that the firmament attractedit on all sides so as to maintain it in a perfect equilibrium; and that in the same manner as the magnethas naturally the power of attracting iron, so the firmamenthas the property of attracting the terrestrial globe,which being thus acted on by equivalent attractive forcesin every direction, remains suspended in the centre. Itis strange that the Arabians, who read with interestlf)2 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.speculations of this kind, made themselves but littleprogress in philosophic reasoning.China was visited by Arabian merchants and ambassadorsat an early age. Already, in the reign of Valid(704 — 715), Arabian envoys, bearing rich presents,arrived in China, through Cashier and the plains ofTartary. After that time, the route from Samarcand tothe city of Canfu was much frequented ; but in theninth century, China was visited by two travellers,whose narratives merit a particular consideration. Theseadventurers were Wahab and Abuzaid, the former ofwhom wrote the account of his travels, in 851. Abuzaidappears to have been about thirty years younger. *These travellers represent the Chinese as a remarkablyhandsome people, superior in beauty to the Indians,with fine dark hair, regular features, and very like theArabians. They observe, that the Chinese wear silkgarments in winter and summer. Among other particularitiesnoted by Wahab is the general education of theChinese, who, whatever be their condition of life, he assuresus, learn to read and write. Schools for this purposeare maintained at the public charge. Yet he alsoaffirms, that the Chinese had no sciences ; that theirreligion, and even their laws, were derived from theIndians ; nay, he says, they are of opinion that theylearned the worship of idols from the Indians, whomthey look upon as a most religious nation.The regulations of the ports appeared to our Mahometana singular novelty. When merchants enteredChina by sea, their cargoes were seized, and conveyed towarehouses, where the imperial officers deducted a certainper centage off the goods ; this transaction, whichresembles so closely the arrangements of our custom-houses,was never attended with injustice.It is assumed that Abuzaid visited China in the ninth century: the date877 occurring in his narrative is thought to mark the time of the author'sjourney. (See Renaudot Relation deux Voyageurs, &c. and Sprengel. Went.deckungen, p. 14fi.) But is there not reason to believe that Abuzaid is thesame as the Abuyezid mentioned by Massed (not. and extra. p. 99.\ andwho went to China in 915 ? The name Abuyezid occurs in l)e Guignes'sextract, very near the mention of that massacre in Canfu which is relatedmore at length by the Abuzaid of Renaudot.CHAP. I. THE ARABIANS. letheemperor reserved to himself the revenues arisingfrom the salt mines, and from a certain herb, which thepeople drank with hot water, and of which such quantitieswere sold in all the cities as produced enormoussums. This shrub, called Sal by the Chinese, was morebushy than the pomegranate tree, and of a more agreeableperfume. The people poured boiling water on theleaf of the Sal, and drank the decoction, which wasthought to be efficacious in curing all sorts of diseases.Here we have a distinct notice of the use of tea.It is remarkable, that these old Mahometan travellersagree in stating that the Chinese were in the habit ofeating all criminals who were put to death. Their cannibalism,indeed, does not seem to have resembled thatof savage nations, who devour their enemies in order togratify revenge, or to indulge in the excesses of ferocity;among the Chinese, apparently, the bodies of those whowere publicly executed were left to be eaten by the poorand hungry. However incredible this account mayappear, the Chinese annals lend it some confirmation;for they state, that when famines have occurred in thatkingdom, human flesh has been sold in the markets ; andthat it was dangerous at those periods to go abroad aftersunset, men being constantly on the watch to seize andbutcher all whom they could lay their hands upon.The Arabians, while they relate without a censurethis barbarous practice, are loud in extolling the solemnand impartial administration of justice in China. AMahometan cadi resided in Canfu, whence we might bejustified in concluding, that the Arabian merchants, evenso early as the ninth century, formed a pretty numerouscommunity in that city. But this fact is fully establishedby a very remarkable passage in the narrative of Abuzeid; from which we learn, that when a rebel chieftainbesieged and took Canfu, in the year of our era 877, heput to death, along with the rest of the inhabitants, onehundred and twenty thousand Mahometanss, Jews,Christians, and Passers, who resided there for the sakeof traffic. Our traveller likewise adds, that " the num.m 21 6*4- GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK IT.ber of the professors of these four religions is exactlyknown ; because the Chinese are extremely nice in theaccounts they keep of strangers." The Christians mentionedhere are generally supposed to have been derivedfrom what are called the Christians of St. Thomas,settled on the coast of Malabar ; but there is good reasonto believe, that the first Christians known in China wereNestorianss, who reached that country through Persiaand the desert.The Canfu of the Arabian and Chinese writers wasformerly one of the greatest foreign ports of China ; it issituated on the north side of a bay or basin at the mouthof the Che Kiang. It has long since lost its commercialimportance, on account of its harbour being choked upby sand.The early Arabian voyagers mention the Andamanislands and their savage inhabitants, who devoured humanflesh quite raw. They also describe Sumatra, it issupposed, under the names of Lamely and Rami. Thesame island is called Sonora by Edrisi, whose isle ofMala is probably the peninsula of Malacca. Al AuthorJava, was known for its valuable spices, and for itsvolcanoes, which, after a quiescence of many ages, brokeout afresh in the middle of the last century. Serendib,or Ceylon, was known more familiarly : the Arabiantravellers of the ninth century enlarge on its mines ofprecious stones, on the idols of solid gold, on the assembliesof learned men occupied in writing the lives oftheir prophets, and expositions of the sacred laws. Agreat number of Jews and Manichaeans resided at thattime in Ceylon. " Here," says Abuzeid, " travellers staytwo months, allured by the beauty of the country, whichis decked with trees and verdure, water and meads, andblessed with wholesome air. Here you may buy a sheepfor half a drachm, and for the same money, as much drinkas will suffice for many persons. This drink is made ofpalm honey, boiled and prepared with the tari (toddy),or juice which runs from the tree."The same writer adverts, in simple but accurate Ian-clap.I. THE ARABIANS. leogage, to the variety of uses to which that invaluablegift of nature, the cocoa-nut tree, is converted in the IndianArchipelago. " There are people," he says, " atOman, who cross over to the islands (the Laccadives),that produce the cocoa-nut, carrying with them carpenters'and all such tools ; and having felled as much woodas they want, they let it dry, strip off the leaves, andwith the bark of the tree they spin a yarn, wherewiththey sew the planks together, and so build a ship. Ofthe same wood they cut and round away a mast ; of theleaves they weave their sails, and the bark they workinto cordage. Having thus completed their vessel, theyload her with cocoa-nuts, which they bring and sell atOman. Thus from the cocoa-nut tree alone so manyarticles are convertible to use as suffice not only to buildand rig out a vessel, but to load her when she is completedand in trim to sail."Among the kingdoms of India enumerated by theearly Arabian geographers, the most remarkable was thatof the Balhara, or Great Lord : the other Indian princesacknowledged, we are told, the pre-eminence of the Balhara.The dominions of the dynasty which bore thistitle appears to have been on the western side of thepeninsula, embracing the countries of the Nizam and ofGuzerat. Yet the territories of the king of kings, as theBalhara was also styled, are said to have extended fromKamkam (Conan), as far as the frontiers of China.He was surpassed, nevertheless, in military strength, bythe king of Burst (Bear), who kept on foot fourarmies, each of 700,000 men ; and by the king ofRami, who could take the field at the head of 50,000elephants. These calculations are evidently exaggerated.The apparently hyperbolical praises bestowed on the finefabrics of India rest on a better foundation. Cottonstuffs were manufactured there of such exquisite delicacy,that a garment made of them could be easily drawnthrough a ring of moderate size.But among all the curiosities of India, none seizedmore firmly on the imagination of the Arabians thanm 3166' GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II."the famous Kardandan, or unicorn, which has but onehorn on his forehead, and thereon a round spot-with therepresentation of a man." This wondrous animal is describedby them as less than the elephant, and resemblingthe buffalo from the neck downwards. " Hishoof," says Wahab, "is not cloven, and from his hoofto his shoulder he is all of a piece. His flesh is not forbidden,and we have eaten of it : on the horns are seenthe figures of men, peacocks, fishes, and other resemblances.The Chinese adorn their girdles with those figures ; so thatsome of those girdles are worth two or three thousandpieces of gold in China, or even more, the price augmentingwith the beauty of the figure." Such is the apparentlyveracious account given of an animal which hasnever yet been seen by an intelligent European, but theexistence of which is still said to be affirmed in India.The descriptions which are transmitted to us by theArabian geographers of the states of central Asia arestill in many respects the most complete accounts whichwe possess of those interesting countries. Mawarelndhr,or the country of the great waters, was the most northernprovince subdued by the successors of Mahomet. Itcomprised the countries which are watered by the Sionand Gihon, or Oxus and Jaxartes, and is described by allthe writers of the East as an earthly paradise ; surpassingevery other country on earth in beauty and fertility,in the density of its population, and the salubrity of itsclimate. " You may travel in Al Sold," says IbnHaukal, " and find the country presenting for eight daystogether the appearance o*" one delicious garden : on allsides are villages, rich fields of corn, orchards loadedwith fruit ; meadows and clear streams ; with canalsand reservoirs, which complete the picture of industryand happiness." That country, according to the samewriter, is as remarkable for the hospitality of its inhabitantsas for its natural attractions. In every town, andeven in every little village, were inns and caravansaries,provided with all that is necessary for the accommodationof travellers.CHAP. I. THE ARABIANS. l67The Arabians very soon extended their conquests tothe Caucasus ; and although at first they mingled a largeshare of fable with their accounts of that region, wherenature seems to rear such formidable obstacles to theprogress of man, yet they soon learned to carry on avery extensive commerce with the nations to the westand north of the Caspian Sea. Caswini says that theCaucasian isthmus contained 800 districts, in each ofwhich the inhabitants spoke a different language. Thecountry of the Alas he describes as extensive and singularlyfertile : it was covered with gardens and villages :figs, dates, and chestnuts grew there in incredible profusion,and were transported to all parts of the world.The Alas were not governed by a national chief orking; but every little tribe had its own ruler.Abuzeid, who travelled into China in the ninth century,seems to have believed that the Caspian Sea was unitedon the one side with the Northern Ocean, and on theother with the Mediterranean ; but Caswini knew that itwas an inland sea, supplied as he says, by great riverswhich never decrease. He reports at the same time thecommon opinion, that it has a subterranean communicationwith the Black Sea. " The Ate or Volga," saysYacout, " comes from the extremities of the North : itcrosses Bulgaria, Russia, Khazaria, and flows into thesea of Mercian. Merchants ascend it as far as Wa'isou(the White Sea), whence they bring back the skins ofmartens and ermines and other valuable furs."The country round the Volga was called by the ArabiansKhazaria, from the Khazars who dwelt in the greatplains to the north of the Caucasus and Caspian Sea, andwho had reached the height of their power in the ninthcentury. Although a formidable nation they had notemerged from the rude simplicity of the nomadic state.They dwelt in tents covered with felt, like the Tartarichordes who inhabit at the present day the southernprovinces of Russia. The house in which their kingresided was, according to Bacui, the only stone edificein the country.m 416*8 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.To the east of the Khazars dwelt the Ghuz or Uses,and beyond these again were a people called Alodcosh,who are described as having broad faces, small eyes,and bushy hair. To the north of the Khazars werethe Vulgar, or Bulgarians. This people inhabited thecountry between the Don and Volga, where these riversapproach to within a little distance of one another:their capital, called Bulgar, was on the left bank of theVolga : its ruins, consisting of towers, mosques, andother monuments, are still visible at a little distancefrom the modern Simbirsk. " The country of the Bulgarians,"says Caswini, " extends very far towards thenorth : the winter's day is but five hours long : some saythat it is not long enough to admit of the four regularprayers, and the ceremonies which attend them." Yacoutdescribes the city of Bulgar as built of fir, the externalwalls alone being of oak : it was a journey of two monthsfrom Constantinople. The country was excessively cold,and covered with snow during the whole winter. Tusks,like those of the elephant's, were found in the ground,and were as white as ivory. Thus it appears that thefossil ivory of Siberia was an article of trade many centuriesago.The Russians are described by the Arabian geographersas an abominably filthy people : they bathed themselvesevery morning in the dirtiest water they couldfind. They were addicted to drunkenness : spent wholedays and nights in carousing and drinking wine ; andnot unfrequently died with the cups in their hands, fromexcess and intoxication. They always burned their dead ;and at the funeral of a man of rank one of his favouritewomen was sacrificed on his tomb. The Arabians hadsome knowledge of the northern kingdoms of Europe :they speak of England (Antharcai), Ireland, Denmark,and other countries of the North, in brief but correctterms ; but they appear to have had a more intimateacquaintance with the Sclavonian nations. They describethe country of the Sclavonians as rich and populous, filledwith numerous and commercial towns. It is remark-chap.I. THE ARABIANS. 1 6*9able, also, that the Arabian geographers mention theBohemians and Hungarians by their proper appellations,Czechs and Madgyars. From these circumstances itmay be conjectured, that the Sclavonians maintainedsome commercial correspondence with the Arabians inthe east of Europe, and bartered with them the productionsof the North.There is no doubt that Arabians frequented in greatnumbers the cities of Bulgar and Ate, or Astrachan :their own accounts tend to confirm the proofs affordedby the ancient monuments of those cities. There isreason to believe also that their commerce extendedacross Russia to the Baltic, and to Scandinavia : theyexchanged the rich productions of the East for the fishand peltry of the North. Arabian coins are found inmany parts of Russia, along the Volga, and northwardseven as far as the White Sea ; but in no part of Europehave they been met with in such abundance as in Prussia,Pomerania, and the other countries near the Baltic. Andwhat is more remarkable, all the Arabian coins found inthe North are of a date anterior to 1010, and belong tothe califs of Bagdad, to Irakk, or Khorasan, or to thecountries of Balkh, Bokhara, Samarcand, or some otherof the rich commercial countries of Inner Asia. Not asingle coin has been found near the Baltic belonging toPalestine, Egypt, Barbary, or any other country fromwhich the crusaders might have brought them.* It is,therefore, highly probable that the nations of the northof Europe carried on, during the middle ages, a considerablecommerce with the Arabs in the East, throughthe agency of the Sclavonians.The successors of Mahomet soon extended their dominionover Africa : they over-ran that continent as far asSofala, on the south-eastern coast, and to the Niger inthe interior. Along the western shore their knowledgeextended not far beyond Cape Boyador. The richcountry of the interior attracted a multitude of settlers :perhaps, from the remoteness of its situation, cut off asKasmussen. Journ. Asiatt. vi.170 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK I».it is from an easy access by the surrounding deserts, itseemed to offer a secure retreat to all who had any thingto fear from political convulsions ; and it probably receivedall those who fled from the intestine divisions ofthe Chalifate. Certain it is, however, that before theeleventh century several kingdoms were erected on thebanks of the Niger, in which Mahometanss formed anumerous and the ruling part of the population. Thegreatest of all these kingdoms was that of Ghana, situatedon the eastern part of the Niger, or, as the Arabianscall it, the Nile of the negroes. The king was absoluteover his own subjects, though he acknowledged the supremacyof the Abasside calif.The magnificence of this sovereign's court, the numberof tame elephants, and camelopards, which formedpart of his train, and the masses of native gold whichadorned his throne, are all mentioned by the Arabianwriters in terms of admiration. But this splendourseems to have belonged wholly to the prince ; and theArabian population, the mass of the people, were stillclad in the skins of beasts, and possessed neither industrynor civilisation. To the king of Ghana belongedalso Angora, or the land of gold. To the west ofGhana was situated the kingdom of Tocrur, in whichwas a city of the same name, together with those ofSala and Melissa. The Nile of the Negroes flowed alsothrough Tocrur, and at a distance of sixteen days'journey from Sala fell into the sea. At some distancefrom the shore was the island of Ulil, from which thestates of Nigritia were supplied with salt. The kingdomof Tocrur, which appears to have been situatednear the gulf of Benin, though enriched by an activecommerce, was yet considered inferior to that of Ghana.The kingdom of Timbuctoo is of comparatively recentorigin.To the south of these kingdoms lay the extensivecountry called Lamlam, the savage inhabitants of whichwere hunted by the nations on the Niger, and sold tothe slave merchants of Barbary and Egypt. The sameCHAP. I. THE ARABIANS. 1?1practice still continues : slaves are a staple merchandiseof central Africa; and the defenceless negroes are pursuedas unrelentingly at present as in the days of Herodotus.Beyond Lamlam the Arabians had no knowledgeof any inhabited countries ; and influenced by theusual pride of science, they doubted, in consequence,whether any existed. They were acquainted, however,with the kingdoms of Sahara, Kane, and Kuku,which are probably comprised in the Bornou of moderntravellers. The king of Kuku kept a splendid court,and maintained a numerous, well-appointed army: themerchants and nobility wore superb dresses, with ornamentsof gold ; but the lower orders Were as poor andill clad as in the other negro states.The Arabians had but a limited acquaintance withNubia and Abyssinia, in which the Christian religionfirmly resisted the doctrines of Mahomet ; the necessitiesof trade, however, induced the merchants of both regionsto acquiesce in respecting a neutral frontier, and theymet accordingly, near the cataracts of Syene, for thepurpose of exchanging their commodities.Eastern Africa, from Egypt to Cape Corrientes, wasfrequented by the Arabians in the tenth century: theysoon established, in that quarter, their faith and theirdominion. The names which they gave to the nationsof that country are retained at the present day. Thecities of Melinda, Mombaza, and Sofala, were alreadyflourishing in the twelfth century. The country inwhich these cities were situated was called Zanguebar,or the country of the Zinges. The Arabian geographersalso placed in the peninsula of India a people calledZinges, who were distinguished from the Hindoos bythe darkness of their complexion. Thus the Zinges ofthe Arabians correspond with the Ethiopians of theGreeks, as well as with the Sancho, or Troglodytes, ofthe Hindoo geographers. Like these latter also, theArabians believed that the continents of Africa andAsia were united in the Southern Ocean. Madagascar,there is reason to believe, was known and even colonised172 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.by the Arabians in an early age. To the south of was the country called Wac-wac, which seems tobe the Makooa country of modern maps.In the West the knowledge of the Arabian geographerswas, perhaps, as extensive, if not so correct, asthose of the Romans. The Fortunate Islands wereknown to them by the name of Chalet, or the PerpetualIslands. On these islands were said to be colossalstatues, pointing towards the West, so as to indicateto mariners the danger or impossibility of continuingthe voyage in that direction. The erection of thesestatues was attributed to Dhou'lkara'in, or the Two-horned,as Alexander the Great is called in the East.He is adopted by Oriental writers, as Hercules, Bacchus,and Sesostris were adopted by the Greeks, as the founderof every monument, the origin of which is not historicallyknown. The Atlantic, or the Sea of Darkness,as the ocean is generally called by them, was but littleknown to the Arabians. Much fable is mixed with allthat they relate concerning it. The island of Mistake-filled with serpents, recalls to mind the Ophiusa ofthe Carthaginians; and perhaps it owed its existence toan ancient tradition, like the Cimmerian darkness of theocean. The inhabitants of the isle of Kulkan had theheads of marine monsters. Lake abounded with odoriferouswoods. The Arabians, in omitting to state distances,have left an open field for conjectures ; and therehave not been wanting some who maintain, that bythose lands of monsters and of perfumes we ought tounderstand the continent of America, or at least theislands of the West Indies.There is very little reason, however, to believe thatthe Arabians were accustomed to make distant voyageson the ocean or Sea of Darkness. The only evidencethat they ever attempted such a navigation is found inthe remarkable story of the Almagrurim related in nearlythe same words by Ibn el Vardi and Edrisi. The formerof these writers, after describing Lisbon, adds, thateight persons from that city, curious to know what wasCHAP. II. THE ARABIANS. 173beyond the sea, equipped a vessel with all necessaryprovisions for a long voyage, and swore not to returntill they had found the end of the sea and the land atthe west. They advanced eleven days in the open sea,and the twelve days more in a sea of unfathomabledepth with immense waves. The winds carried themto the south, and they at last arrived at an island towhich they gave the name of Ganam, or the island ofsheep ; but the flesh of the sheep which they found therewas too bitter to be eaten. They took water, however,and continuing their voyage towards the south, on thetwelfth day discovered an inhabited island. The menwere large and red. At the end of three days an Arabianinterpreter came to them in order to learn the purposeof their voyage. The king being made acquainted withtheir intentions, told them that he had sent persons toexplore the ocean, who, having sailed westward for amonth, were surprised with a thick darkness and forcedto return. The adventurers from Lisbon, hearing thatthey were a month's sail from home, hastened to return ;and in memory of that event a quarter of the city receivedthe name of Almagrurim, the Wanderers, a namewhich it retained in the time of Ibn el Vardi, who diedin 1358. This attempt to reach the end of the oceanwas made in 1147, and was probably not the only enterpriseof the kind : in 1291 a similar attempt wasmade by two Genoese, of whose fate or success, however,no account remains.Some have supposed, and De Guignes among the rest,that the red men mentioned in this account must havebeen Americans ; but it is much more likely that theywere Normans, who are not unfrequently called red meninthe East. As there was an Arabian interpreter onthe island, and the distance from Lisbon was known,the coast of Africa was probably not far off; and infine, the Almagrurim seem not to have sailed beyondthe Canary islands.17* GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.CHAP. II.TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA.IBN BATUTA SETS OUT ON THE PILGRIMAGE. ASCENDS THE NILE.RETURNS TO GAZA. THE BATHS OF TIBERIAS. THE MOSQUEOF THE FOOT. MIRACLES AT MESHID ALL SHIRAZ.BAGDAD. MECCA. — VISITS YEMEN AND ABYSSINIA.THE BERBERS. THE ZUNUJ. Afar. THE FRANKINCENSETREE. ORMUZ. Far. SECOND PILGRIMAGE. GOESTHROUGH UPPER EGYPT TO CAIRO JERUSALEM ANATOLIA.THE TURKOMANS. SOCIETY CALLED THE BROTHERHOOD.Rerum. FALL OF ^KROLITES. SHOWERS OF FISHES.—THE OTTOMAN PRINCES. IBN BATUTA GOES TO CRIM.DESERT OF KIPJAK. TATAR CAMP. CITY OF BULGAR. — —SHORTNESS OF THE NIGHTS. SIBERIAN TRAVELLING. SingularMODE OF TRAFFIC. THE RUSSIANS. IBN BATUTAACCOMPANIES A GREEK PRINCESS TO CONSTANTINOPLE. THEPROCESSION. HIS RECEPTION. ACCOUNT OF THAT CITY. HistoricalDIFFICULTIES. GREEK CUSTOMS IMITATED BY THETURKS. PIOUS WISH OF EL HARAWI.Although, as has been already observed, the greaterpart of the geographical works transmitted to us by theArabians are quite divested of the interest of a personalnarrative, yet a few volumes of Arabian travels havebeen preserved, which are worthy objects of curiousattention, if it were merely for the strong contrast theyexhibit between the Oriental and European modes ofthinking and viewing the same object. Among thesethe travels of the Sheikh Ibn Batuta hold a foremostrank : they embrace all the countries which may beconsidered as peculiarly belonging to Arabian geography ;they adduce some very singular instances of the widediffusion of the Arabs through the East, and are stronglymarked with all the national characteristics. Ibn Batutamay be fairly numbered among the most remarkabletravellers of any age or country. The only account ofhis manifold peregrinations which is known to exist isunfortunately but an extract from an epitome ; and byCHAP. II. TRAVELS OF IBX BATUTA. 175this twofold abridgment it is but "just to suppose thatthe original has lost not a little of its interest. Hastyand superficial notices of the most important places, drycatalogues of names, and the enumeration of the tombsof saints, occupy too large a portion of the volume ; butyet these travels are interesting and important, whetherconsidered critically or in a general view. They belongto the fourteenth century, and are consequently posteriorin order of time to the narratives of several importanttravellers from the West, whose writings must occupyour attention further on ; but yet, from the Oriental peculiaritywhich pervades them, they will be found toanticipate but seldom the observations of European travellers,while they form an excellent supplement to anoutline of the Arabian geography.The theologian Aim Abd Mohammed Ibn Abd AllahEl Lawati, known by the surname of Ibn Batuta, lefthis native city, Tangier, for the purpose of performingthe pilgrimage, in the 725th year of the Hegira. (A. D.1324—5.) As he set forth with pious intentions, heseems to have been particularly anxious, wherever hearrived, to seek out all the saints, whether among theliving or the dead. One of the greatest saints in Alexandria,when he arrived there, was the learned and piousImam, Borhan Oddin El Aaraj, a man who had thepower of working miracles. When Ibn Batuta paidhim a visit one day, the Imam said to him, I perceiveyou are fond of visiting distant countries ; to this theother replied in the affirmative, although he had nointention at that time of travelling into distant countries.The Imam then said, " You must visit my brother FaredOddin in India, and my brother Roan Oddin Ibn Za-kara in Sindia, and also my brother Borhan Oddin inChina, and when you see them, present my complimentsto them." Our pilgrim was astonished at this discourse,and determined with himself to visit those countries ;nor did he give up his purpose till he had met all thethree persons mentioned, and presented the Imam'scompliments to them.1"() GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.Ibn Batuta, after travelling for some time throughthe cities of the Delta, at length arrived at Cairo. Inalluding to the Nile, he makes a short digression, whichdisplays his geographical knowledge. " The Nile," hesays, " which runs through this country, excels, bymuch, all other rivers in the sweetness of its taste, thelength of its course, and the extent of the benefits itconfers. It is one of the five great rivers of the world,which are the Nile itself, the Euphrates, the Tigris, theShun, and the Jaihun, or Gihon. Five others rivers alsomay be compared with these, namely, the river of Sindia(the Indus), which is called the Pens-ab, or five waters;the river of India, which is called the Hung (or Ganges),to which the Indians perform their pilgrimages, andinto which they throw the ashes of their dead whenburnt : they say it descends from Paradise ; also theriver Jun (or Jumna), the river Athil (Volga), in thedeserts of Kipjack, and the river Caro in Tartary, uponthe bank of which is the city of Khan Baliol (Pekin,)and which flows from that place to El Kansas, andthence to the city of Zaitun in China. The course ofthe Nile, moreover, is from south to north, contrary tothat of all other rivers.From Cairo Ibn Batuta proceeded through Egypt tothe borders of Nubia ; but the disturbances that existedin that country prevented his continuing his journeytowards the south, so he returned down the Nile, andwent on to Gaza, where he found the graves of Abraham,Isaac, and Jacob, and of their wives. Every learnedman he met with considered it a fact, that those patriarchsand their wives lay buried there ; " nor does anyone,"says our traveller, " think of contradicting accountsso generally received from the ancients, but theheretics." From Tyre, which he found a wonderfullystrong place, surrounded on three sides by water, hehastened to Tiberias, which he particularly wished tosee ; but he found there nothing but the warm springsand ruins of great extent.The baths of Tiberias, which were perhaps the objectsCHAP. II. TRAVELS OF IBX BATT7TA 177of his curiosity, are described at greater length by ElHarawi : — " The baths of Tiberias' says this writer,which are accounted among the wonders of the world,are not those situated near the gates of Tiberias and uponthe side of the lake, for many such as these are to beseen elsewhere ; but the wonderful baths are in a valleyto the east of the city called El Hosainiya. The structurein which they are embraced is evidently of greatantiquity, and is said to have been built by Solomon.It consists of a pile of building, from the front of whichissues water. The water came formerly from twelveplaces, each of which was appropriated to the cure ofsome disease ; so that when any one thus afflicted washedhimself, he was cured by divine permission. Thiswater is excessively hot, and is very pure and sweet,both to the taste and smell. The fountains run into alarge and handsome reservoir, in which the people bathe.The advantages of these baths are evident, nor have weelsewhere seen any thing like them, except the There,which are in the neighbourhood of Constantinople."Our traveller next proceeded through the fortresses ofthe Fidelia or Ismailiah, who are more commonly knownby the name of the Assassins ; then to Mount Linus,the most fruitful mountain in the world, abounding withvarious fruits, with springs of water and leafy shades,and covered with the cells of hermits retired from theworld ; from this place he went by Baalbeck to Damascus,but unfortunately his epitomater has refused us a circumstantialaccount of those remarkable cities. The anecdotesof saints, however, and of holy relics, are carefullypreserved. Among these the following is singular : —Outside of Damascus," says Ibn Batuta, " on the wayof the pilgrimage, is the Mosque of the Foot, which isheld in great estimation, and in which is preserved astone, having upon it the print of the foot of Moses. Inthis mosque they offer up prayers in times of distress.I myself was present at this mosque in the year 746(A. D. 1345), when the people were assembled for thepurpose of prayer against the plague, which ceased onvol i. N178 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.that very day. The number that died daily in Damascushad been two thousand ; but the whole daily numberwhen I was present amounted to twenty-four thousand.After prayers, however, the plague entirelyceased." The mortality here mentioned is, perhaps, lesscredible than the miracle. But the stone bearing theimpression of a foot merits some consideration. Monumentsof this kind are generally supposed to be remainsof Buddhism, yet it is possible, although they seemat present to belong properly to that religion, that theymay have claims to a much higher antiquity. Themark 6f a foot, seen by Herodotus near the river Tyres,was ascribed to Hercules. A similar impression inCeylon, or among the Burmese, would be called thefoot of Buddha : in Damascus it was thought to be thefoot of Moses. The great distance between the countriesin which this singular sort of monument has beenfound, and its existence at Damascus, tend equally toprove its great antiquity. It is remarkable that thosedruidical monuments, as they are commonly thought tobe, which are called Cairns, are to be found in Judea,and at no great distance from' Jerusalem.From Damascus, Ibn Batuta set out on his pilgrimageto the tomb of the prophet at Medina. On his wayhe passed through the town of Meshed Ali ; a placerendered opulent by the offerings of pilgrims. In thisresort of enthusiasts miracles were common. " On the17th of the month Rajah," says our traveller, " cripplescame from the countries of Farss, Room, Khorasan, andIrakk, and assembled in parties of from twenty to thirtyin number. They are placed over the grave of AH soonafter sunset. People then, some praying, some recitingthe Koran, and others prostrating themselves, wait expectingtheir recovery, and rising when about night,they all get up sound and well. This is a matter wellknown among them: I heard it from creditable persons."This miracle is called in the East " the night of revival."Our traveller appears to have, for this time, abandonedCHAP. II. TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA. 17,0his intention of visiting Medina. He went to Bassa orBassorah, and then made the tour of Irakk ; in whichcountry he was treated with honour, receiving from theprince a present of money to defray his travelling expensesfor himself and his companions. The restlessMusulman, " having finished the districts belonging tothe king of Irakk on the tenth day," entered those of Is-pagan.Respecting this city or Shiraz, which he nextarrived at, he states no particulars. He avows, indeed,that his sole object in visiting the latter was to see thesheikh Maid Oddin — the paragon of saints and workerof miracles. In Shiraz, also, was the tomb of the ImamAbu Abd Allah, respecting whom our author remarks, thathe was the person who made known the way from Indiato the mountain of Serendib, and who wandered aboutthe mountains in the island of Ceylon. By this we areperhaps to understand that it was he who first broughtthat pilgrimage into vogue among the Mahometanss.While the Imam wandered through the mountains ofCeylon, in company with about thirty fairs, his companions,suffering exceedingly from hunger, ventured,contrary to his advice, to kill and eat an elephant. Whenthey had all gone to sleep, the elephants came in a body,and smelling one of them, put him to death ; then theycame to the sheikh, but, having smelled him, they didhim no injury. One of them, however, took him upwith his trunk, and carried him to some houses, wherehe layed him down gently, and then marched off. Thisaffair procured the sheikh great honour among the peopleof Ceylon. I bn Batuta went next to Bagdad, which,notwithstanding all the injuries it had lately sustained,was still a city of the first importance. From that placehe paid a visit to Terris) travelled among the Curds, andimmediately afterwards set out for Medina and Mecca,where he remained three years.From Mecca our unwearied traveller set out with themerchants who were going to Yemen : here he visitedall the chief cities, and then crossed from Aden to Zaila,a port of Abyssinia. " This," he says, " is a city of then2180 Geography OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.Berbers, a people of Soudan, of the Shafia sect : theircountry is a desert of two months' extent. The firstpart is called Zaila, the last Makdashu." This is the Ma-garciaof the Portuguese. The food of the people wasearners flesh and fish : the stench of the country was insupportable,from the smell of the fish and the blood ofthe camels slaughtered in the streets. At Makdashu orMagadocia, fifteen days' sail from Zaila, the luxuries ofthe table appear to have been in abundance; and ourauthor speaks in complacent terms of the Elkushan, orfricassee, the plantains boiled in new milk, the preservedlemon, pepper-pods, and green ginger : these delicacieswere not touched till the unrefined cravings of hungerwere subdued, and moderated by a meal of rice. " Thepeople of Makdashu," he observes, "are very corpulent:they are enormous eaters ; one of them eating as muchas a congregation ought to do."From Makdashu he proceeded by sea to the countryof the Zanuj (the Zinges or inhabitants of Zanguebar),thence to the island of Mammas or Mombas, and returningto Kulvca on the coast of the Zunuj, he sailedfrom that place to Zafar, " the farthest city of Yemen,and situated on the shore of the Indian sea :" he foundit to be a filthy though a much frequented place, and fullof flies, on recount of the great quantity of fish and datesexposed there for sale. The people fed their cattle andflocks also with fish, a custom which he observed nowhereelse. From Zafar horses were exported to India,and with a fair wind the passage was made in a month :in the present day it would hardly occupy ten days.Half a day's journey beyond Zafar he found the city ofEl Ahkaf, in the neighbourhood of which were richgardens, crowned with the luxuriance of Indian vegetation; the betel-tree twining round the stem of thecocoa-nut. Proceeding along the Arabian coast towardsAmman or Oman, he first saw the incense-tree at Hasik:when this tree is scarified, a fluid like milk runs from it,which hardens in a short time, and is then called lobun,or frankincense. The houses here were built of theCHAP. II. TRAVELS OE IBN" BATUTA. 181bones of fish, and covered with the skins of camels. Inthe cities of Oman the flesh of the domestic ass waseaten, and sold in the streets as lawful food.From Arabia our traveller crossed to Hormuz, or Ormuz,a city on the sea-shore ; " but opposite to this," headds, " is new Hormuz, an island, the capital of which iscalled Hurauna." Thus it appears that the island calledOrgana by the ancients received a colony from Ormuzor Armozeia, and gradually changed its name. HereIbn Batuta saw the strangest sight he had ever beheld ;this was the head of a fish, " that might be comparedto a hill : its eyes were like two doors, so that peoplecould go in at one eye and out at the other." This is amoderate statement when compared with that of theGreeks under Ntearchus ; who, towards the end of theirvoyage up the Persian Gulf, had an opportunity of measuringa whale that had gone aground near Mesambria,perhaps on the strands at Chill point. Those of tail*party who approached near enough to examine themonster reported it to be fifty cubits long, with a hidea cubit in thickness ; beset with shell-fish, barnacles, andsea-weeds, and attended by dolphins larger than thoseseen in the Mediterranean. From the reports of ancientwriters it would appear that the whale was formerly afrequent visitor of the Persian Gulf.Leaving Ormuz, Ibn Batuta spent some time in thePersian province of Farss, and visited the pearl fisheries;passed from Siraf, one of the chief shipping ports of thePersian Gulf, to Bahrein, where the houses are oftenoverwhelmed with the sand of the desert; then to Kotaif,where dates are so abundant as to constitute the chieffood of the cattle ; and shortly after set out on a secondpilgrimage to Mecca, where he arrived in the year 733of the Hegira (A. D. 1332), three years after his formervisit.The pilgrimage being performed, our traveller againset forward, and directed his way to Judea, intending tocross the sea from Yemen to India ; but unfavourablewinds forced him back to a port called Ras Dawair; andn 31 82 GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.as it appears to have been of little moment with him inwhat direction his journey lay, he joined the companyof some Between Arabs, and crossing a desert filledwith ostriches and gazelles, passed into Upper Egypt,and so on to Cairo. After resting a few days at Cairo,he hastened forwards to Syria, Jerusalem, Tripoli, andso on by sea to the country of Room, and the district ofAnatolia.Among the Turkomans in Anatolia there appears tohave existed a form of primitive hospitality which ourMoorish traveller did not perfectly understand ; for sucha practice as the following can hardly have arisen in theEast from voluntary association : — " In all the Turkomantowns," he relates, " there is a Brotherhood of Youths, oneof whom in particular is styled, my Brother. No peopleare more courteous to strangers, more readily supplythem with food and other necessaries, or are more opposedto oppressors than they are. The person styledthe Brother is one about whom individuals of the same occupation,or even friendless strangers, collect and constitutehim their president. He then builds a cell, andputs into it a horse, saddle, and whatever else may benecessary ; he also attends on his companions, and inthe evening they all meet together, bringing whateverthey may have collected for the use of the cell. Shoulda stranger arrive among them, they cheerfully maintainhim till he leaves the country. The members of thisassociation are styled the Youths, and the president theBrother." Ibn Batuta experienced the kindness of thissociety as soon as he arrived in Anatolia. A man cameto him, in order to invite him and his companions to afeast. Our traveller was astonished that one who lookedso poor should think of feasting so many ; but was informed,that this man was one of the brotherhood, acompany of two hundred silk merchants, who had a cellof their own ; he therefore consented, and witnessed theirextraordinary kindness and liberality. Scenes of thiskind occurred to him frequently among the Turkomans.On one occasion, when entering a town, he found himselfCHAP. II. TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA. 183suddenly surrounded by a number of persons, who seisedthe reins of his horse, and caused him great alarm ; butsome one, who could speak Arabic, coming up, saidthat they were contending as to who should entertainhim, as they belonged to the Society of Youths. Uponthis he felt safe : the young men cast hosts ; and IbnBatuta with his party proceeded to the mansion of thewinners.Visiting all the chief cities of Anatolia or Asia Minor,he at length came to Erzeroum. There the king enquiredof him one day whether he had ever seen a stone thathad fallen from heaven ; he answered in the negative.Such a stone, continued the king, has fallen in the environ?of our city ; he then ordered some men to bringit in : it was a black, shining, and exceedingly hard substance,not yielding to the hammer, and weighing abovea talent. This is not the only mention of the fall ofrerolites which occurs in Arabian writers. They tellof a shower of stones, which fell in the province ofAfrica Proper, and killed all who were beneath it. Theyalso relate that a stone was one day brought to the CalifMotawekkel, which had fallen from the air in Samaritan; it weighed 840 roth * : the noise it made in fallingwas heard at a distance of four para sangs in all directions,and it buried itself in the ground five cubits deep.Many other similar instances are mentioned by them ;and the observations of modern philosophers leaves noroom to doubt the correctness of their accounts. ButJahedh relates a meteoric phenomenon of a much moreextraordinary kind. At Ai'dhadj, a city between Ispahanand Kuzistan, as he narrates it, there was seen a dense,black cloud, so close to the earth that it might be almosttouched with the head : there issued from it noises likethe cries of a male camel. The cloud at last broke, andthere fell from it so terrible a rain, that it seemed as ifthe earth were about to suffer from a second deluge.After this the cloud threw forth frogs and shabbuts (asort of fish) of great size These were eaten by theGJOlbs. avoirdupois.x 484 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.people, or laid up in store. It is an incontestable factthat the volcanoes of the Cordilleras throw up immensequantities of fish; and although a shower of fish is notvery easily explained without the agency of a volcano,yet nature is so full of wonders, that even in the presentenlarged state of knowledge, it would be perhaps presumptuousto deny the fact altogether.Ibn Batuta appears to have visited all the principaltowns and Turkish rulers in Anatolia ; and it is to beregretted that he has left us so brief a notice of one ofthe ablest and most successful princes of the Ottomanfamily, which in his time was rapidly rising into ascendency." I went," he says, " to the city of Brusa, which isa large place, and governed by Ikhtiyar Oddin UrkhanBeg, son of Othman Juk. This is one of the greatest,richest, and most extensive in rule, and commandingthe greatest army of all the Turkoman kings : his practiceis to be constantly visiting his fortresses and districts,and to be enquiring into their circumstances. It is saidthat he never remains a month in any one place."From Castemooni Batuta crossed the Black Sea toCrim. The desert of Kipjak he describes as green andproductive, but without tree, mountain, hill, or wood init. It was usually travelled over in a sort of cart calledaria, the journey being one of six months. Our travellerhired one of these carts to proceed to the city of ElKara, which belonged to Mohammed Uzbek Khan. Thekhan was at that time encamped with his retinue in aplace called Bi&h Tag, or Five Mountains, where Batutaarrived on the first of the month Ramadan. He wasstruck with the spectacle of a moving city presented bythe camp with its mosques and cooking-houses, the smokefrom which trained behind as they moved along. Thesultan received horn graciously, and sent him a sheep,a horse, and a leathern bag of koomis, or mares' milk,the favourite Tatar beverage.Batuta had heard of the city of Bulgar, and had conceiveda strong desire to see it, in order that he mighthave an opportunity of observing how far the reportedCHAP. II. TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA. 1 S5severity of its climate, and the inequality of its nightsand days, were truth or fiction. It was situated at. adistance of ten days' journey from the Tatar camp. Heset out with a guide appointed by the sultan, and foundon his arrival that the accounts of former travellers wereperfectly correct. It was summer-time when he visitedBulgar; and the nights were then so short, that beforehe had finished the prayer of sunset, the time of eveningprayer came on, which he hastily ran over ; he thensaid the prayer of midnight, and that called El With;but before he had ended he was overtaken by the dawn.In Bulgar," says Batuta, " I was told of the land ofdarkness, and certainly had a great desire to go to it fromthat place. The distance was a journey of forty days.I was diverted, therefore, from the undertaking, both onaccount of its great danger and the little good to bederived from it. I was told that there was no travellingthither except upon little sledges, which are drawn bylarge dogs ; and that during the whole of the journeythe roads are covered with ice, upon which neither thefeet of man nor the hoofs of beasts can take any hold.These dogs, however, have nails by which their feet takefirm hold on the ice. No one enters these parts exceptpowerful merchants, each of whom has, perhaps, a hundredsuch sledges as these, which they load with provisions,drinks, and wood ; for neither trees, stones, norhouses are met with there. The guide in this countryis the dog, who has gone the journey several times, theprice of which will amount to about a thousand dinars.The sledge is harnessed to his neck, and with him threeother dogs are joined, he, however, being the leader.The others then follow him with the sledge, and whenhe stops they stop. The master never strikes or reprimandsthis dog ; and when he proceeds to take his mealsthe dogs are fed first ; for if this were not done theywould become enraged, and perhaps run away, and leavetheir master to perish. When the travellers have completedtheir forty days or stages through this desert, theyarrive at the land of darkness, and each man leaving18(> GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.what he has brought with him, goes back to his appointedstation. On the morrow they return to look for theirgoods, and find, instead of them, sable, ermine, and thefur of the sinjab. If, then, the merchant likes what hefinds, he takes it away ; if not, he leaves it, and more isadded to it. Upon some occasions, however, these peoplewill take back their own goods, and leave those of themerchants. In this way is their buying and selling carriedon ; for the merchants know not whether it is withmankind or demons that they have to do, not a soul beingseen during the transaction. It is one of the propertiesof these furs that no vermin ever enters them."He returned from this tour to the camp of the sultan,whom he accompanied to Astrachan, situated on theAthil, or Volga, one of the greatest rivers of the world.Here the sultan always resided during the very coldweather; and when the Volga and adjoining rivers werefrozen over, the Tatars spread some thousand bundles ofhay upon the ice, and on this they travelled.It appears that one of the wives of the Tatar khanwas a daughter of the emperor of Constantinople : thisprincess obtained leave to pay a visit to her father, andour author also was permitted to accompany her. Thequeen, who is here named Bailun, was attended in herjourney by five thousand of the khan's army, about fivehundred of whom were cavalry. " At the distance ofone day from El Sarai," says our author, " are themountains of the Russians, who are Christians, with redhair and blue eyes, an ugly and perfidious people. Theyhave mines of silver; and from their country are theswam or pieces of silver bullion brought, each pieceweighing five ounces."When the cavalcade reached the fortress of Mahtuli,on the frontiers of the empire, (which still extended, asit appears, a distance of two-and-twenty days' journeyto the north,) the emperor, attended by the ladies of hiscourt, set out with a large army to meet the princess.She had brought with her a mosque, which she set up atevery stage during the former part of her journey ; butCHAP. II. TRAVELS OF IBX Baptista. 187she left it behind at Mahtuli, the office of nucezzimceased, she drank wine, and ate swine's flesh ; in short,she returned to Christianity, as soon as she entered herfather's territories. She carefully enjoined, however,the officers who came out to meet her, to pay every attentionto our learned theologian.When the princess approached Constantinople, thegreatest part of its inhabitants, men, women, and children,came out, attired in their finest clothes, eitherwalking or riding, beating drums and shouting as theyproceeded. When the parties mixed the pressure wasso great, that it was at the peril of his life, our travellerdeclares, that he caught a glimpse of the meeting of theprincess and her relations. They entered Constantinopleabout sunset, and the bells were then ringing at such arate, " that the very horizon shook with the noise."Soon after the arrival of the princess at Constantinople,Ibn Batuta, who appears to have already excitedsome interest as a remarkable traveller, was introducedat court : but his relation, which, though probably correct,yet presents some historic difficulties, shall be givenin his own words. " On the fourth day after our arrival,"he says, " I was introduced to the sultan Takfur,son of George king of Constantinople. His father,George, was still living, but had retired from the world,become a monk, and given up the kingdom to his son.When I arrived at the fifth gate of the palace, whichwas guarded by soldiers, I was searched, lest I shouldcarry any weapon with me ; which is submitted to byevery citizen as well as stranger, who wishes to beintroduced to the king. The same is observed by theemperors of India. I was introduced, therefore, and didhomage. The emperor was sitting upon his throne,with his queen and daughter, our mistress ; her brotherswere seated beneath the throne. I was kindly received,and asked as to my circumstances and arrival; alsoabout Jerusalem, the Temple of the Resurrection, thecradle of Jesus, Bethlehem, and the city of Abraham£or Hebron), then of Damascus, Egypt, Irakk, and the188 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.country of Room ; to all of which I gave suitable replies.A Jew was our interpreter. The king wasmuch surprised at my tale relating to the extent of histravels perhaps], and said to his sons, ' Let this man betreated honourably, and give him a letter of safe conduct.'He then put a dress of honour on me, andordered a saddled horse to be given me, with one of hisown umbrellas, which with them is a mark of protection.I then requested that he would appoint some oneto ride with me through the different quarters of thecity, that I might see them. He made the appointmentaccordingly, and I rode about with the officer for somedays, witnessing the wonders of the place. Its largestchurch is that of Sancta Sophia : I saw its outside only.Its interior I could not see, because just within thedoor there was a cross which every one who entered wasobliged to worship. It is said that this church is one ofthe foundations of Asa, the son of Brachia, andnephew of Solomon. The churches, monasteries, andother places of worship within the city, are innumerable."It is not easy to explain why our traveller shouldgive the name of Takfur to the emperor Andronicus II.who was at this time (between 1332 and 1341) on thethrone of Constantinople. * His assertion that the fatherof that prince was still living in retirement is also atvariance with other accounts. That the Byzantine historiansshould pass over in silence those humiliatingalliances of marriage between the imperial house and theTatar princes is not very extraordinary, but it is knownthat Andronicus the elder offered his daughter in marriage,in 1302, to the Grand Khan of the Moguls; andmany indications occur, in the early travellers, of amuch more intimate correspondence existing betweenthe courts of Constantinople and of the East than ismanifested in the page of history.Some copies instead of Takfur read Xakfur, which might be supposedto mean Xiccphorus. But this adds fresh chronological difficulties.The elder Andronicus died in 1332, according to Gibbon, the year in whichIbn Batuta performed his first pilgrimage to Mecca, See the Travels ofIbn Batuta, translated by professor Lee, 1829. p. 82.CHAP. II. TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA. 189The Turks, when they became masters of Constantinople,borrowed from the Greeks many of their customsand formalities, and even the fashion of their dress.The pomp of the Ottoman court was arranged, in agreat measure, in imitation of that of the Greek emperors; and it is curious to observe, that the odiouscustom of searching the persons of those who areadmitted to the imperial presence (a custom stillpartially retained at the Porte, even in the case of ambassadors,)appears to be among those which the Turkshave only copied from the Greeks. It is also singular,that in the fourteenth century the popular belief of theGreeks should refer the foundation of their principalchurch to Asa, the nephew of Solomon.As the brief mention which Ibn Batuta makes of thechurch of Sancta Sophia is confined merely to its exterior,it may not be unacceptable to the reader to hear the accountwhich is given of it by another Arabian writer. El Ha-raw,who visited Constantinople in the thirteenth century,writes as follows: — "In this place are statues ofbrass and marble, pillars, wonderful talismans, and othermonuments of greatness, to which no equal can be foundin the habitable world. Here is also Asia (Sancta) Sophia,the greatest church they have. I was told by YakutIbn Abd Allah, that he had entered it, and that it wasjust as I had described it. Within it are Soo doors,and they say that one of the angels resides there. Roundabouthis place they have made fences of gold ; and thestory which they relate of him is very strange." El Ha-rawthen promises to speak, in another place, " of the arrangementof this church, its size, height, doors, and thepillars that are in it ; also of the wonders of the city, itsorder, the sort of fish found in it, the gate of gold, thetowers of marble, the brazen elephants, and all its monumentsand wonders." And in conclusion, he exclaims,■'' This city, which is greater than its fame, may Godof his bounty and grace make the capital of Islamism ! "150 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.CHAP. III.travels of ibx batuta continued.ibn batuta returns to tatar. proceeds to chorus.singular custom. bokhara. its mosque. balkh.hindoo cush. — the father of the saints. the afghans.sind. ruins near lahari. mode of levying troops.delhi. character of the emperor. ibn batuta appointedjudge. expedient to raise money. narrowlyescapes being put to death. turns faquir. chosenambassador to china. negotiations between the courtsof pekin and delhi. the embassage sets out. attackedby' robbers. ibn batuta taken prisoner. his sufferingsand escape. city of baron infested by* y'ogees.the mortars. ordeals in india. journey' to calicut.chinese junks. imperial treasures lost by shipwreck.ibn batuta goes to the maldives. is made judge.marries three wives. proceeds to ceylon. ascendsadam's peak. — king of the monkeys. — embarks at coulan.captured by pirates. returns to the maldives.visits bengal, sumatra, tawalisi. arrives in china.paper money'. gog and magog. el khans. tatarfuneral. returns to persia. mecca. revisits tangier.travels in spain. proceeds to soudan. hagar.abu latin. mali. the niger. hippopotami. cannibals.timbuctoo. kakaw. barbara. nakda. returns,and takes up his residence in fez.After a stay of one month and six days in Constantinople,Ibn Batuta returned to Astrachan, where he remaineda little time. Leaving Tatary he now pursuedhis journey into Khavaresm or Chorasm, through adesert ill supplied with herbage or water. But in thispart of his narrative there is such a deficiency of detail,either from the haste of the traveller himself, or thefault of his abbreviator, that no interest can be found intracing his route, except that which is excited by hisindefatigable love of locomotion. Chorasm was a populouscity, and appeared to him to be the largest in thepossession of the Turks. The people were polite andhospitable. One singular custom, however, prevailedCHAP. III. TRAVELS OP IBX BATUTA. 191among them ; those who absented themselves from publicworship were flogged by the priest in presence of the congregation,and fined, moreover, in a sum of five dinars.A whip was hung up in every mosque for the punishmentof the neglectful. This custom is still retained inBokhara, where the people are driven to worship withthe whip. The most numerous sect in Chorasm werethe Schismatics, or those who rejected predestination ;but they did not care to spread abroad their heresy.From Chorasm, Batuta went to Bokhara, which hefound but imperfectly restored from the desolation pouredupon it by Jengis Khan. He proceeded next to Samar-cant,a rich and beautiful city, sanctified, in the devouttheologian's eyes, by the tombs of numerous saintswhich it contained. Crossing the Gihon, he enteredKhorasan, and travelling a day and night, through adesert without a habitation, arrived at Balkh, once agreat city, but now in ruins. Jengis Khan had sototally destroyed it, that though the site of the townwas evident enough, it was impossible to trace the arrangementof its buildings. The mosque, the Mahometanaffirms, was one of the greatest in the world ; itspillars were incomparable. But these were destroyedby the barbarian conqueror, in consequence of a popularbelief, that a great treasure was buried beneath them forthe repair of the edifice.From Balkh, the journey lay for seven days throughthe mountains of Kuhistan. This hilly country wasthickly strewed with villages. Ibn Batuta came nextto Herat, the largest city in Khorasan after the ravagesof Jengis Khan. Thence to Barwan ; " in the road towhich is a high mountain covered with snow, calledHindoo Cush," that is, as our author whimsically translatesit, " the Hindoo slayer, because most of the slavesbrought thither from India die from the intenseness ofthe cold." In the mountain called Bashan was a cellinhabited by an old man, called Data Evlia, that is, theFather of the Saints. He was said to be three hundredand fifty years old. To Batuta, indeed, he did not GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.pear to be above fifty. He said that every hundredthyear he had a new growth of hair and teeth, and that hehad been once the Rajah Ba Rahim Ratan of India,who had been buried at Multan, in the province of Sindia.These tales and reveries, however, found little toencourage them in the superstition of the Musulman,who proved rather sceptical on this occasion : he wantedthe boldness of Hindoo credulity.Kandahar and Cabal were both in a ruined state whenvisited by our traveller. " This last is inhabited," hesays, " by a people from Persia, whom they call Afghans."His testimony here, with respect to the descentof this people, is of some importance. The Afghansthemselves pretend that they are descended from theJews ; and although all that is known in Europe respectingtheir language contradicts their assertion, yet thereare learned Orientalis who are still willing to submit tothe authority of the Afghan histories. These histories,however, have so little of intrinsic merit, and are of somodern a date, that the asseveration of a well-informedOriental traveller of the fourteenth century preponderatesagainst them. Batuta describes them as a violent andpowerful people, exercising, in general, the profession ofhighway robbery.Our indefatigable traveller now embarked on the Sind,which he calls the greatest river in the world, and descendedto Lahari (perhaps Larry Under), a town situatedat its mouth. At the distance of a few miles fromthis city were the ruins of another, in which stones inthe shape of men and beasts, almost innumerable, wereto be found. It was the general opinion of the country,that a great city formerly stood there, but that the inhabitantsof it became so utterly lost to all piety andvirtue, that God transformed them, their beasts, theirherbs, and even their very seeds, into stones. He travellednext to Multan, the capital of Sindia, where hewitnessed the Indian mode of levying soldiers.On the day of the levy or review, the emir had anumber of bows of various sizes placed before him, andCHAP. III. TRAVELS OF IBX BATUTA. 193when any one offered himself to enlist as a bowman, hewas obliged to draw one of these bows with all hismight; a rank was then assigned him proportioned tohis strength. In like manner those who presentedthemselves as horsemen ran their horses at full speedtowards a drum which was suspended as a mark, andaccording to the effect done by their spears was theirplace decided.Delhi he describes as the greatest city of Islamism inthe East, combining at once body beauty and strength :it was composed, indeed, of four cities, which becomingcontiguous, formed one ; yet he observes that thegreatest city in the world had the fewest inhabitants.Delhi., when he entered it, was a desert : the inhabitantshad fled from their houses to escape the cruelty of theemperor, nor could the encouragement which was heldout to new settlers restore its population.This terrific ruler was the emperor Mohammed, sonof Hath Oddin Toglik, descended of the Turks whowere settled in the mountains of Sindia. " This emperor,"according to our author, <e was one of the mostbountiful and splendidly munificent men where hetook, but in other cases one of the most impetuous andinexorable, and very seldom indeed did it happen thatpardon followed his anger." This was a dangerouskind of patron to approach ; but the learned theologian,Ibn Batuta, was received with singular favour, reapedthe benefits of the emperor's generosity, and fortunatelyescaped from his displeasure. When he was called intothe imperial presence, and had done homage, thevizier said to him, ' The lord of the world appoints youto the office of judge in Delhi ; he gives you, at the sametime, a dress of honour, with a saddled horse and alsotwelve thousand dinars for your present support ; hehas, moreover, appointed you a yearly salary of twelvethousand dinars, and a portion of lands in the villageswhich will produce annually an equal sum.' The traveller,on receiving this unexpected appointment, didhomage according to custom, and withdrew. But the194 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.emperor's munificence did not stop here. The newly-appointedjudge of Delhi received another present oftwelve thousand dinars, and a cell, or endowed mansion,was likewise placed at his command. Yet so greatwere the expenses incurred by his following the courtin the expeditions of the emperor, that he shortly foundhimself involved in debts to the amount of fifty-fivethousand dinars. • This embarrassment he contrived toget rid of by an Oriental artifice. " About this time,"he says, " I composed in Arabic a panegyric in praiseof the emperor, and read it to him. He translated itfor himself, and was wonderfully pleased with it ; forthe Indians are fond of Arabian poetry, and are veryglad to be recorded in it. I then informed him of thedebt I had incurred, which he ordered to be dischargedfrom his own treasury, and added, ' Take care in futurenot to exceed the extent of your income.' "Shortly after this, our traveller and judge experiencedthe anxiety of depending on the patronage of a capricioustyrant. A sheikh who had been honoured with theconfidence of the emperor, for some unknown cause, hadincurred his displeasure ; enquiries were then made asto those who had kept company with the obnoxiousindividual. The judge Ibn Batuta was among the numberinformed against. For four days together the accusedattended at the gate of the palace, while a councilwithin sat deliberating on their fate. This was a painfulsituation for our judge, who had seen the victims of theemperor's suspicion shot from Balistac, and trodden uponby elephants whose feet were cased with knives. Hebetook himself, however, to continued fasting, and tastednothing but water. On the first day he repeated thesentence, " God is our support, and the most excellentpatron," three-and-thirty thousand times, and after thefourth day he was delivered ; but the sheikh and allthe others who had visited him were put to death.Terror-struck at this stern act of despotism, IbnBatuta resigned the office of judge, gave all he possessedto the fairs, and putting on the tunic of that order,CHAP. III. TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA. 19-5passed the various grades of mystical probation till hewas able to keep a continued fast of five days ; he thenbreakfasted on a little rice.After this he assent for by the emperor, and, goingto the palace in his coarse tunic, was received moregraciously than ever. Mohammed said to him, " I wishto send you as ambassador to the emperor of China,for I know you love travelling in foreign countries."To this proposition lie gladly consented ; and dresses ofhonour, horses, money, and every thing necessary, wereimmediately supplied him for the journey.The emperor of China, it appears, had at this timesent presents of great value to the sultan, and requestedfrom him permission to rebuild an idol temple in thecountry about the mountain of Nora, on the inaccessibleheights of which there was said to be a plain ofthree months' journey in extent. " Here," says ourauthor, " there resided many infidel Hindoo kings. Theextremities of these parts extend to the mountains ofTibet, where the musk gazelles are found. There arealso mines of gold on these mountains, and poisonousgrass growing, such that when the rains fall upon itand run in torrents to the neighbouring rivers, no onedares to drink of the water during the time of theirrising ; should any one drink of it, he dies immediately.The idol temple was called Bur Khuna (Buddha Khan) :it stood at the foot of the mountain, and was destroyedby the Mahometanss, who at the same time made themselvesmasters of the level country. But as the peopleof the mountains depended wholly for subsistence onthe possession of the plain, they procured the Emperorof China to intercede in their favour with the king ofIndia. Besides, the people of China were accustomedto make pilgrimages to this idol temple, which wassituated in a place called Seminal." It is easy to understandthat the idol temple, or Budkhana here referredto, was situated on the frontiers of Button, the pestiferousair of which country, arising from the rankness196 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.and superabundance of its vegetation, might easily givebirth to the story of poisonous rivers.To this request the emperor of Delhi replied, thatno church whatsoever could be permitted to exist in acountry subject to Mahometanss, unless where tributewas paid ; on this condition only could the temple berebuilt. Ibn Batuta was appointed ambassador to carrythis harsh answer ; at the same time presents also ofgreat value were prepared and entrusted to two favouritesof the emperor. A body of a thousand cavalryattended the embassage to conduct it to the place ofshipping.The expedition, while proceeding towards the coast,passed through a country which was in a very disturbedstate ; they met with and totally routed a party of theinsurgents, but one of the officers who had charge ofthe presents lost his life in the conflict. A few daysafter, the alarm was given that the Hindoos were attackinga Mahometan village in the neighbourhood ;and Ibn Batuta and his friends immediately rode off todefend the Moslems. The Hindoos were put to flightat the first onset ; but afterwards perceiving our lucklessambassador left behind with only five companions, theyreturned to the charge, and succeeded completely incutting off his retreat. He fled as fast as his horse couldcarry him ; but finding himself at length in a valleyclosely interwoven with trees, and from which there wasno escape, he alighted from his horse and gave himselfup as a prisoner.The robbers then stripped him of every thing he had,bound him, and carried him with them for two days,intending to kill him. Of their language he was quiteignorant. They at length let him go, and he directedhis course he knew not whither. Fearing that theymight change their purpose and return to take his life,he hid himself in a forest thickly interwoven with treesand thorns, and there remained some time in close concealment.Whenever he ventured upon the roads, theyseemed to lead him either to the villages of the Hindoos orCHAP. III. TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA. J 97to melancholy ruins : he was always, therefore, under thenecessity of returning ; and thus he passed seven wholedays in a state of the greatest horror. His food wasthe fruit and leaves of the mountain trees. At length,on the seventh day, he caught sight of a black man,who had with him a small water-vessel, and a walkingstaff shod with iron. After mutual salutations, theblack man enquired his name. He answered, Mohammed.To a similar interrogation, the black manreplied, El Kalb El Karih (the wounded heart). Hethen gave our wretched traveller some pulse and somewater to drink, and asked him to accompany him on hisjourney. Ibn Batuta made the effort, but found himselfunable to move, and sunk on the earth. The blackmanthen took him on his shoulders, and as he walkedalong his exhausted companion fell asleep. About dawnnext morning Ibn Batuta awoke, and found himself atthe emperor's palace gate.A courier had already brought to Delhi an accountof all that had happened. The emperor endeavouredto repair with kindness the misfortunes of hisambassador : he gave him twelve thousand dinars ; appointedanother officer to take charge of the presents inthe room of him who had been killed, and shortly afterthe expedition again set forward. They passed by Nul,where so many accidents had previously taken place, toRange, Merwa, and Gwalior, a fortress of India, remarkablein all ages, and of which our author gives anentertaining history ; thence they came to the city ofBaron.In the neighbourhood of Baron (a small city inhabitedby Moslems) were infidel districts, infested bywild beasts, which frequently entered the town and torethe inhabitants. It was reported, nevertheless, thatsuch as entered the streets of the town were not reallywild beasts, but some of those magicians called yo&ees,who have the power of assuming what shapes theyplease. Ibn Batuta repeats the story told by Ctesiasseventeen centuries before, when he affirms that theo 31 98 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.yogees are able to abstain totally from food for manymonths together. " Many of them' he says, " dighouses for themselves under ground, over which any onemay build, leaving them only a place for the air to passthrough. In this the yogee will reside for months withouteating or drinking any thing. I have heard of onewho remained thus for a whole year. They have alsothe power of foretelling events."Among other miraculous qualities ascribed to theseyogees by our author, is that of being able to kill a manwith a look. This power, however, was more frequentlypossessed by women, who were in that casecalled mortars. The cruelties practised in India uponthose wretches who had the misfortune to become theobjects of superstitious apprehension, were precisely thesame as the ordeals of European witches. While Ba-totawas judge of Delhi, a supposed goftar was broughtbefore him, charged with having killed a child by herlooks. The judge sent her to the vizier, who orderedher to be thrown into the river Jumna, with four largewater-vessels tied to her. She floated nevertheless, andaccordingly the vizier ordered her to be burnt. Thepeople distributed her ashes among them, believing thatwhoever fumigated himself with them would be securefrom the fascinations of a goftar for the following year.The Arabian travellers of the ninth century, Wahab andAbu Said, also remarked, in the the north of India, theordeal by fire, practised precisely in the same manner asin Europe. The accused person carried a bar of heatediron a certain distance : his hand was then bound up,and the covering was sealed by the magistrate. If atthe expiration of a few day the marks of the fire had disappeared,the accused was declared innocent ; if not, hisguilt was considered as established.Our traveller's route was now directed towards thecountry of Malabar. The whole of the way by landlay under the shade of trees ; and at the distanceof every half mile was a house made of wood, withchambers fitted up for the reception of the wayfaring.CHAP. III. Travels OF IBN BATUTA. 199In the city of Menjarun, he found four thousand Mahometanmerchants. In Patten, on the contrary, inhabitedby Brahmins, there was not a single Mahometan.Having arrived at Calicut, a great port frequented bywealthy merchants from all parts, Batuta waited threemonths for the season to set sail for China. He givesan accurate description of the great Chinese ships calledjunks : — f< The sails of these vessels are made of canereeds, woven together like a mat ; which, when they putinto port, they leave standing in the wind. In some ofthese vessels there will be a thousand men, six hundredof them sailors, and the remainder soldiers. Each ofthe larger vessels is followed by three others of inferiorsizes. These vessels are no where built except inthe farthest ports of China. They are rowed with largeoars, which may be compared to great masts, over someof which five and twenty men will be stationed, whowork standing. The commander of each vessel is agreat emir. In the large ships, too, they sow gardenherbs and ginger, which they cultivate in cisterns rangedalong the side. In these also are houses constructed ofwood, in which the higher officers reside with theirwives : every vessel is, therefore, like an independentcity. Of such ships as these Chinese individuals willsometimes have large numbers, and, generally speaking,the Chinese are the richest people in the world."The time of the voyage at length arrived. Therewere thirteen large junks in the port, and one of thesewas appointed for the reception of the embassage. Theimperial presents were already embarked ; and Batuta,who preferred the accommodation of one of the smallervessels, had sent all his property on board, remaininghimself on shore to attend prayers in the mosque. Thefleet was to set sail on the morrow ; but during the nighta violent hurricane came on, the sea rose and destroyedmost of the great vessels in the harbour, among others,the junk containing the treasure : the crew and imperialofficers all perished, and the wealth was lost. The shipin which Batuta had embarked his effects had succeededo 4200 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.in getting off to sea. Nothing remained to him now buthis prostration carpet and ten dinars which were givenhim by some holy men.After this misfortune our traveller was afraid to returnto the court of Delhi ; he sought, therefore, andobtained the protection of the king of Hinaur, withwhom he remained for a little time, and then proceededto the Maldive islands. " These islands," he says,are about two thousand in number, and constituteone of the wonders of the world." He describes thepeople as extremely neat, but weak and delicate in theirpersons. The principal islands were governed by awoman ; a remark made also by the Arabian travellersof the ninth century. Their chief trade consisted in asort of thread made of the fibres of the cocoa-nut : thenut is macerated in water, and afterwards beaten with amallet till it grows quite soft ; the fibre is then spun outand twisted into ropes. This thread is used to sewtogether the ships of Yemen and of India.Ibn Batuta rose into great consideration in the islandof Moll, from the name of which he supposes the wholeof the cluster to have been called the Maldives* Heaccepted the office of judge, married three wives, androde on horseback ; an honour which he alone was allowedto share with the vizier. But this great personage,who was also the queen's husband, at length grew jealousof his increasing influence ; Batuta in consequence, whowas, perhaps, tired also of remaining so long in one place,thought it prudent to retire from the island, and havingdivorced two of his wives he set sail for Maabar, a namewhich the Arabians give to the southern portion of theCarnatic and Coromandel coast : it must not, therefore,be confounded with Malabar, to which it bears so close aresemblance.The wind shifted in the commencement of the voyage,rose to a dangerous degree of violence, and forced theBut there is more likelihood in the conjecture of those who suppose thename of the Maldives as well as that of the Laccadives to signify the thousandisles ; the word Mai, in the dialects, and Lucca, in the Sanscrit, bothsignifying a thousand. Dib or Dips is an island.CHAP. III. TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA. 201vessel to Ceylon. The great mountain Serendib, ourauthor affirms, was visible at a distance of nine days'sail : it looked like a pillar of smoke, the clouds rollingat its feet. When the ship entered the harbour, it wasnot without difficulty that the Mahometanss were permittedto land ; but as Ibn Batuta represented himselfto be related to the king of Maabar, he was treated withrespect. When admitted to the king's presence, he statedthe object of his coming to the island to be, " to visitthe blessed footstep of our forefather Adam." To thispilgrimage the king gave his permission ; appointedj ogles and Brahmins to accompany the Mahometan,with servants to carry provisions. The mountain ofSerendib, or Adam's Peak, might be ascended by tworoads: the one, called by the natives "the way of Baba,"or Adam ; the other, " the way of Mama," or Eve. Thelatter was much the more practicable of the two ; but themerit of the pilgrimage was enhanced by the roughnessof the road : the way of Baba was accordingly preferred.The precipice immediately below the sacred summit isclimbed by means of iron chains, fixed to pins driven inthe rock. Of these chains there are ten in number, oneabove the other ; the last of them is called the " chain ofwitness," because those who have arrived at it and lookdown are seized with a strong apprehension that theyshall fall. At the tenth chain is the cave of Khizr, aspacious cavern in which pilgrims leave their provisions,and then ascend about two miles to the top of the mountainto the rock on which is the impression, called thefoot of Buddha" by the Hindoos, and "Adam's foot"by Mahometanss, " The length of this impression,"says Batuta, " is eleven spans. The Chinese came hereatsome former time and cut out from this stone theplace of the great toe, together with the stone about it,and placed it in a temple in the city of Zaitun. Pilgrimagesare made to it from the most distant parts of China.In the rock containing the impression have been cutnine small excavations, into which infidel pilgrims putgold, rubies, and other jewels : hence you will s;ce the202 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.fairs, who have come as pilgrims to the cave ofKhizr, racing to get first to these excavations, in orderto secure whatever may be in them." In one particularthe account which Ibn Batuta gives of " Adam's foot"differs essentially from that of Wahab in the ninth century,who had not made the pilgrimage himself, butreceived the description, perhaps, only from the natives.Wahab says, that the print of the foot is not ninespans, but seventy cubits in length ; and he adds thecurious circumstance, that while Adam placed one footon the mountain he stood with the other in the sea.In the woods round the foot of Adam's Peak he sawgreat multitudes of monkeys, of a dark colour, and withbeards like men. Like the Greeks of antiquity, he appearsto have been nearly forced into a belief that theseanimals are but a variety of the human species. Thesheikh Othman and his son, two pious and credible persons,assured him that the monkeys have a chief, whomthey treat as if he were a king : he wears on his head a turbancomposed of the leaves of trees : four monkeys, withrods in their hands, constantly wait upon him and supplyhis table with nuts, lemons, and other mountain fruit.Our traveller saw here a white elephant in the possessionerf the king.From Ceylon the restless Mahometan set sail for thecoast of Coromandel. In the middle of the voyage aviolent tempest came on, and the vessel was nearly lost.From Coromandel he crossed through the interior toMalabar ; and after a little time embarked at Coulan toreturn to Hinaur. New calamities beset him ; the shipin which he sailed was captured by pirates : he wasrobbed of all that he possessed, and put ashore strippednearly naked. In this plight he arrived at Calicut,where he took refuge in a mosque, till some of the merchantswho had known him in Delhi learned his situationand came to his relief. Having again visited the Maldiveislands, he proceeded to Bengal, which appeared tohim the cheapest and most plentiful country he had everseen. His chief object in coming hither was to visit aCHAP. III. TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA. 203great saint who dwelt in the mountains of Kamru, whichadjoin the mountains of Tibet, and are frequented bythe musk gazelles. The sheikh Jalap Oddin, the saintin question, treated our pilgrim with attention, andplaced on him at parting the fine goats' hair garmentwhich he wore himself.Returning to the sea-side, Batuta found a junk preparingto set sail for Sumatra. Unable to resist thetemptation of the voyage, he accordingly embarked, andafter a voyage of fifty days, arrived at the country ofBarahnakar (apparently one of the Nicobar islands),where the men have mouths like dogs. Their houseswere made of reeds along the shore. In fifteen days hearrived at the island of Sumatra, the king of which atthat time was a generous prince, and a great lover of theprofessors of Mahometan law. Ibn Batuta, in consequence,met with a kind reception at his court. Heremained here but fifteen days; and the king fitted himout for his voyage to China with provisions, fruit, andmoney. After a voyage of four and thirty days, he cameinto what is called " the Calm Sea." This sea has a redcolour, and is without either wind, wave, or motion*The Chinese junks, when they arrive in it, are obligedto be towed by the smaller vessels.After navigating for seven and thirty days these tranquilwaters, which resemble, in some measure, that portionof the Atlantic called " the Lady's Bay," ourtraveller arrived at a country named from its king Ta-walsh,and of whose situation it is impossible to formany probable conjecture. The king, he says, was sufficientlypowerful to oppose the emperor of China. Thepeople were idolaters, handsome in. appearance, and resemblingTurks : they were of a copper colour, possessinggreat strength and bravery. The women rode onhorseback, excelled in throwing the javelin, and foughtlike men in battle. One of the chief towns, Kailuka,the port at which the ship put in, was governed by theking's daughter. She sent for our traveller, welcomedhim politely in Turkish, and calling for ink and paper,204f GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.wrote the bismillah in his presence. Leaving this country,Batuta arrived in seven days at the first of theChinese provinces. He describes in terms of highadmiration the industry, wealth, cultivation, and goodorder of China.He also observes that the dealings of the Chinese arecarried on with paper. They do not buy or sell, he says,either with the dirhem or the dinar ; but should any oneget these coins into his possession he would melt themdown immediately. As to the paper, every piece of it isin extent about the measure of the palm of the hand, andis marked with the king's stamp. When these papershappen to be torn or worn out with use, they are carriedto a house which is just like the mint with us, and newones are given in place of them by the king. This isdone without interest, the profit arising from their circulationaccruing to the king.The people of China were in his estimation the mostskilful artificers on the face of the earth. In paintingnone came near them. In proof of this he relates aa pleasant anecdote: — "I one day entered into one oftheir cities for a moment ; some time after I had occasionagain to visit it, and what should I see upon itswalls, and upon papers stuck up in its streets, but picturesof myself and my companions ! This is constantlydone with all who pass through their towns. Andshould a stranger do any thing to make a flight necessary,they would send out his picture to all the provinces,and he would be in consequence detected."The first city he came to in China was El Zaitun.*The port appeared to him to be the finest in the world.He saw in it about a hundred of the largest sized junks ;the small vessels were innumerable. The Mahometanmerchants here were numerous and wealthy ; and whenThe Arabians supposed that Zaitun was so named from the word which,in their language, signifies an olive, although they at the same time remarkedwith surprize that no olives grew there. This city, by many consideredto be the same as Canton, is the Thsiuan chcu fu of the Chinese,and is situated above a hundred and twenty leagues to the north-west ofthat city, and a little to the north of Nankin. It was formerly called Seutilling, of which the Arabians made Zaitun and Marco Polo Zaithoum. —Klaproth, Jour. Asiatt. vol. v p. 41.CHAP. III. TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA. 205any stranger of their own persuasion happened to arrive,they treated him with such such unsparing liberality,that they very soon made him as wealthy as themselves.From Zaitun, Ibn Batuta made a voyage of twenty-sevendays to Sin Milan, one of the largest cities inChina. Here also he found a mosque and Mahometanjudge; and indeed he affirms, that in every great townof China there were Mahometan merchants, with ajudge and sheikh El Islam to settle their disputes. Helearned that beyond El Zaitun there was no town ofany consequence. " Between it and the obstruction ofGog and Magog there is, as I was told, a distance ofsixty days : the people who inhabit that place eat allthe men they can overcome, and hence it is that no onegoes to those parts." By this obstruction of Gog andMagog, it has been supposed that we are to understandthe great wall ; but as Batuta takes care to inform usthat he had neither seen it himself, nor received an accountof it from any one who had, it seems likely thathe doubted the truth of this part of his information. InFanjanfur he met an acquaintance of his youth, a nativeof Ceuta. This man had also held an office in thepalace of Delhi, but coming to China he had amassedgreat wealth. Ibn Batuta remarks, that he met thebrother of the same person a short time after in Soudan,and exclaims, " What a distance between these twobrothers ! " But in Ibn Batuta's days the Mahometanmerchants appear to have frequently extended theirnegotiations from China to the Atlantic.A river navigation of ten days brought our travellernext to El Khans (perhaps Chensi), which he describesas the largest city on the face of the earth. As everyhouse is surrounded by a garden, the length of the cityextends a journey of three days. The city of ElKhans was divided into six cities, each of these beingsurrounded by a wall. In the first-were the guards,twelve thousand in number. In the second city, whichwas the most beautiful, resided the Jews, Christians,206* GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II.and Turks, who adored the sun : the Christians mentionedhere were probably some Nestorianss, who penetratedinto China either through Persia or from theChristians of St. Thomas, in Malabar. The third divisionwas chiefly occupied by the officers of government.The fourth appears to have been the quarter of thewealthy. The fifth and largest city was inhabited bythe common Chinese people. Among the curious manufactureswhich Batuta saw in this place he mentionsparticularly the dishes composed of reeds, glued togetherand painted over with brilliant and permanent colours.The population of the sixth city was composed of sailors,fishermen, ship caulkers, and carpenters.Some troubles at this time broke out among the membersof the reigning family, which led to a civil war andthe death of the khan. The deceased monarch wasburied with great pomp, after the Tatar custom. Alarge excavation was dug in the earth, in which a beautifulcouch was spread and the khan with his arms andrich apparel were laid upon it. All the gold and silvervessels of his house, four female slaves, and six of hisfavourite Mameluke, were buried with him. The earthwas then heaped upon them to the height of a large hill,and on this hill four horses were impaled. In consequenceof these disturbances, Batuta hastened to quit thecountry.From El Zaitun he sailed to Sumatra, and thence toCalicut and Ormuz. He then made the tour of Persiaand Syria, and at length made the pilgrimage of Meccafor the third time, in the year 749 (AD. 1348). Hereturned to Tangier the following year, and visited hisnative country. But his passion for travelling wasnot yet subdued. He set out soon after for Spain; andafter wandering through the southern portion of thatcountry, he returned to Morocco, on his way to Soudan,or the country of the Niger. After leaving Segelmessa,a journey of five and twenty days brought him toThagari,a village in which," he observes, " there is nothinggood; for its houses and mosques are built with stones ofMap. III. TRAVELS OF IBN BATUTA. 207salt, and covered with the hides of camels." The peopleof Soudan purchased this salt, cut into regular masses,which with them passed for money.Having crossed the Great Desert he came to Abu Latin,the first district of Soudan. The inhabitants werechiefly merchants. Their clothing was brought fromEgypt. The women appeared to our traveller extremelybeautiful. " No one here," he observes, " is namedafter his father but after his maternal uncle. The sister'sson always succeeds to the property in preference to theson ; a custom which I witnessed no where else, exceptamong the infidel Hindoos of Malabar."Proceeding from Abu Latin to Mali, he found theroads shaded by trees of so great a size that a caravanmight shade itself under one of them : as he passed byone of those trees, he saw* a weaver working at his loom,in the hollow of the trunk. Happening while at Mali tomeet the king one day at a feast, he rose up and said,1 have travelled the world over, and have seen itskings ; and now I have been four months in thy territories,but no present, or even provision, from thee hasyet reached me ; now what shall I say of thee, wheninterrogated on this subject hereafter?" In consequenceof this remonstrance, the sultan appointed him a housewith suitable provisions.Travelling along the Niger, which he calls the Nile,Batuta saw on the banks of a great gulf or lake a greatnumber of Hippopotami. He was here informed, thatin some parts of Soudan the infidels eat men ; but thatthey eat none but blacks, the flesh of white men beingunwholesome, because not properly matured. After afew days he arrived at Timbuctoo, regarding which herelates no particulars. The town of Kakaw, farther on,was thought to be the most beautiful in Soudan. Hecame then to Barbara, and afterwards to Nakda, ahandsome town built with stone of a red colour. Itchcopper mines were in its immediate vicinity. From thisplace he returned to Fez, where he took up his residencein the year 754 (A.D. 135.3), eight and twenty years208 GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.after he had first set out upon his travels. He had inthe mean time discharged all the obligations which hehad imposed upon himself in the course of his wanderings: he had visited the three brothers of the sheikhBorhan Oddin El Aaraj, who respectively resided inPersia, in India, and in China ; and to the brother ofthe sheikh Kawam Oddin, whom he had met in the lastnamed country, he brought tidings of his relative in theheart of Soudan.BOOK III.PROGRESS OP GEOGRAPHY IN THE MIDDLE AGES.CHAP. I.DISCOVERIES OF THE NORTHMEN.ANTIQUITY OF THE SCANDINAVIANS. —THE FINS. NORTHERNCRUSADES. TURKS, SARACENS, AND AMAZONS IN THENORTH. VOYAGE OF OTHER. WHALE FISHERY. WasteDESCRIBES THE FUNERALS OF THE RUSSIANS. THE NorthmenINVADE IRELAND. OCCUPY THE WESTERN ISLES. THEWhitman's LAND. VOYAGE OF MADOC. WELSH INDIANS.ICELAND DISCOVERED. RELICS FOUND THERE. GREENLANDDISCOVERED AND COLONISED. JOURNEY" OF Collar Get.OLD GREENLAND LOST. VINLAND. SKR.EI.INGUES OR Esquimaux.MAP OF THE TWO Beni. Friesland. GrogTHE WARM SPRINGS AND HOUSES BUILT OF LAVA.CANOES OF THE ESQUIMAUX. Scotland AND DROCEO.THE NEW WORLD. CANNIBALS. THE PRECIOUS METALS.The nations of the North, however rude and barbarousthey might appear in the eyes of the luxuriousRomans, were yet raised far above the abject conditionof an utter indifference to knowledge. The kindredraces of the German and Sclavonian nations were veryextensively diffused : their free polity and restless dispositionmaintained a perpetual intercourse between them ;and even the nature of the country which they occupiedseems to warrant the conclusion, that the geographicalknowledge possessed by the northern nations was nevercircumscribed within such narrow limits as those whichconfined the views of the early inhabitants of Greeceand Italy. xIn all the accounts that remain to us of Scandinavia,from the age of Pytheas to that of Alfred, wevol. i. p210 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.meet with none but Gothic names. Again, the Scandinavianmythology preserved in the Edda presents onlythose physical traits which properly belong to northernclimates, and those usages which are found only among awarlike and a maritime people. Thus, a northern godinvents the art of skating, and the mortal remains of adeified hero are consumed on a vessel launched out tosea. Even in Valhalla, the clashing of arms is heardamid the festivities, and mead takes the place of nectarat the table of Odin. All these circumstances, poetical,geographical, and mythological, combine to prove thatfrom the remotest times Scandinavia, properly so called,has been in the occupation of a single people.But to the east of these hereditary possessions of theGoths wandered the nomad tribes of Scythianss and Sar-matins.Much information respecting these resultedfrom the Scandinavian expeditions of the tenth andtwelfth centuries. Till the year 1157 Finland was theresort of savages, who lived by piracy, and who wereknown by the names of Fins and Trials. The Finswho in the first century, as it appears from the descriptionof Tacitus, were established in the north of Poland,had fixed themselves before the sixteenth century in thecountry which at present bears their name. It appears,indeed, that colonies of that people penetrated even intosome districts of Scandinavia. In the tenth and eleventhcenturies the Gulf of Finland was called Kyriala Both :it was a principal theatre of action to the Scandinavianpirates.The Swedes, being converted to Christianity, turnedtheir arms in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries againstthe inhabitants of Finland and the north of Russia.These zealous crusaders, by a blunder suited to the ignoranceof the age, gave to the savages, who were theobjects of their warfare, the name of Saracens. Conrad,duke of Masonic, in a letter written in 123,9, summonedthe German knights to war against his pagan neighbours,whom he calls the Prussians and other Saracens. Thisname occurs again, torn completely from the claims ofCHAP. I. Discoveries OF THE NORTHMEN. 211geography, in an old romance on the birth and adventuresof the enchanter Merlin, in which even the Anglo-saxonsare called Saracens.* It appears to have beenduring this period that the city of Abo was founded inthe middle of Finland : it was called in Finnish Turks,from the Swedish word torn, which signifies a marketplace.The sound of this name misled Adam of Bremeninto the belief that there were Turks in Finland.The intrepid seamen of the North, harassed by theirpiracies the shores of Armorica, and defied the power ofthe Roman empire. The earliest account of the servicesrendered to geography by those hardy adventurershas been preserved to us by king Alfred, whose reign extendedfrom 872 to 901- That great prince translatedinto the Anglo-saxon tongue the geography of Grotius,a Spanish monk who flourished in the beginning of thefifth century ; but Alfred, in order that the work mightbe more complete, added to the translation the narrativesof two contemporary travellers in the north of Europe.One of these was Other, a Norwegian nobleman, whosought a refuge at the court of Alfred from the civil warsand disturbances of his native country : he was esteemedin his own country a man of great wealth, and possessedsix hundred tame deer, besides six decoy deer, and twentyhead of cattle. He also received an annual tribute fromthe Fins, which was paid in valuable furs, feathers, whalebone,and ship cables made of the skins of seals. Thusit appears that the manners of the North were nearly thesame a thousand years ago as they are at present.Other dwelt in Heligoland (the most northern part ofNorway), on the shores of the Western Sea. The countryto the north of his habitation was waste and uninhabited,with the exception of a few spots to which the Fins resortedin the summer season to hunt or fish. Beingdesirous to know how far that uninhabited country extendedtowards the north, he sailed northwards along thecoast, keeping the open sea always on the larboard orleft hand of his course. Three days' sail brought himPercy, Relics of ancient Poctrv, iii. p. 27.p 2212 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.as far to the north as the whale-fishers were used to go :he continued his voyage, however, for three days longer,and then found that the coast, instead of running to thenorth as hitherto, turned towards the east. Followingthis coast for four days, he found it again bending tothe south ; and sailing due south for five days, he cameto the country of the Georgians or Permians, who appearedto him to speak the same language as the Fins.Thus it appears that Other sailed round the north ofEurope into the White Sea, on the eastern side of whichwas the country of the Permians, at present possessedby the Samoyeds. Curiosity was not the only motiveof his voyage : he had also in view the pursuit of thewalrus or horse-whale, as king Alfred correctly translatesit, which were extremely valuable not only on account oftheir tusks, which made fine ivory, but also for theirstrong and pliant skins. In the White Sea he foundthese animals so numerous, that his party succeeded inkilling threescore in three days.Other was also acquainted with the navigation of theBaltic. He mentions Selon-eg or Scania, and Being-egor Blekingia, with the countries of the Angles, Saxons,and Vends. Welland, or the country of the Owens,was situated between the White Sea and the Gulf ofBothnia. The resemblance of that national designationto the Scandinavian word quean, which signifies awoman, led many writers of the middle ages to believethat there was a country of Amazons in the North.Thus ignorance and the resemblance of names peopled theNorth with Amazons, with Saracens, and Turks.Wulfsten, the other Norman whose travels are relatedby king Alfred, visited more particularly the easternshores of the Baltic. To the east of VSeonodland , or thecountry of the Vends, and Wieland or Prussia, was theriver Wisla or Vistula, and all beyond that was called bythe general nameof-E^um or Stand. Icelandic sagasmention, besides, Pouring-land or Poland, and Tartaric,or the empire of the city, the proud title once borne byNovgorod. The Don is named by the oldest IcelandicCHAP. I. DISCOVERIES OF THE NORTHMEN. 213writers Vanquish, which probably signifies the river ofthe Steppes or Desert.In Extant, or modern Russia, there were, accordingto Wulfsten, a great number of towns, in each of whichthere was a king. The country abounded in honey, andhad plenty of fish. The kings and nobility drankmares' milk, while the slaves and poor people used onlymead ; for they brewed no ale, but had mead inprofusion. Among the singular customs of the islanders,observed by the Norman, was that of distributingthe effects of those who died, not to the relations of thedeceased, but among the best riders at his funeral. Afterthe body was placed upon the pile, all the property ofthe deceased was divided into heaps, five, six, or morein number, according to its value : these heaps wereplaced at equal intervals from each other, and regularlyincreased in size, so that the largest and most valuablewas at the greatest distance from the tow r n. Then allwho had fleet horses were invited to attend and strivefor the prizes. The heaps were won by the swiftest inthe race.Ireland was discovered by the Northmen so early asthe seventh century : such at least is the account givenby the northern historians; but it is hard to avoid suspectingin this, as in other similar cases, that many distantvoyages were undertaken, and geographical discoveriesmade, long before those of which the memory is preserved.It is certain, however, that in the seventh century,the northern pirates made frequent descents on the coastof Ireland for the sake of pillage : they even establishedtheir authority in the island, and exacted tribute.At a later period (A.D. 964), the Northmen tookpossession of the isles of Shetland, Zetland or Holland,which constituted for some time a part of the earldomof the Orkneys. These pirates, obtained a perfect acquaintancewith this Archipelago : they hunted downand exterminated the original inhabitants, called Pet orPnpce, who were probably the Picts of the ancients.They added to this insular dominion a considerable port3214 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.tion of the north of Scotland; and their monuments arestill among the most conspicuous in the highlands of thatkingdom.The Northmen made the conquest of the Hebrides,in the year 893, and gave them the name of the Suder-Eyer or Southern Isles, in relation to the Orkneys.The Sunder-Eyer were united with the Isle of Man inthe same kingdom, and under the same ecclesiasticalauthority ; hence the bishopric of Sodom has been sincealways nominally united with that of Man. All theseconquests made among the British islands remaineddependent on the kingdom of Norway till the latter halfof the thirteenth century.But the old Icelandic chronicles relate, moreover, thatthe Northmen discovered in the ninth century, to thewest of Ireland, a great country, to which they gave thename of Great Ireland, or the Whitman's Land. Thisalleged discovery is generally ranged by critics amongfabulous traditions. But these surprising accounts ofthe early Scandinavian voyages have, after all, so littlepoetic decoration in their circumstances, they are soperfectly free in their general design from any admixtureof the monstrous or absurd, that it is much more easyto believe the reality of the achievement than the inventionof the story. It is not the character or the tasteof a rude age to compose fictions with the air of truth.In the Landnama Bok, one of the oldest of the Icelandichistories, occurs the following sober reference to thisgreat discovery in the West : —Ari was the son of Mar of Reikholar, and of ,daughter of Perils Hrappson. He was cast onthe shore of the Whitman's Land, which others call theGreat Ireland. It is situated in the Western Ocean,near the good Vinland. Here Ari, not being permittedto return, was detained and baptized. This was relatedby Rain, the Limerick merchant, who had resided manyyears in Limerick ; and besides this, Thorkil Geetsonsaid he had heard several Icelanders relate the same, whohad been present when Therein, earl of Orkneys, assert-chap.I. DISCOVERIES OF THE NORTHMEN". 215eil, that Ari had been seen in the Whitens Land ; andalthough he did not get leave to return, was very muchesteemed." Thus it appears that the Northmen carriedon a trade with the west of Ireland, which will appearless surprising when it is considered that they were inpossession of all the islands on that coast.Of the same doubtful character, but of a later age,is the voyage of the Welsh prince Madoc, the son ofOwen Gwynedd, who is stated in the Triads to havegone to sea, in ten ships, with three hundred men, toavoid the dissensions of his brothers respecting the successionto the throne. This expedition was planned byMadoc and his brother Rhiryd, in consequence of aprior one in 1 1 70, wherein he discovered land in theocean a great way to the west. No tidings were everafterwards received of him ; and this expedition was inconsequenceunited in Welsh story with the voyages ofGaoran and Meridian, under the title of the Three Disappearances.The Meridian named here belonged to thefifth century. He went to sea in a house of glass, astradition states it, accompanied by nine Welsh bards.It can hardly be credited that Madoc should have sailed,in the twelfth century, across the widest part of the Atlantic(for he left Ireland to the north). Yet Mr. Owen,the biographer of Wales, affirms, " that he has collecteda multitude of evidences, to prove that Madoc must haveactually reached the American continent, for the descendantsof that prince and his followers exist there asanation to this day ; and their present dwelling is onthe southern branches of the Missouri river, where theyare known under the appellations of Padoucas, whiteIndians, civilised Indians, and Welsh Indians I" Thislast name, it may be presumed, they have received fromthe Cambrian antiquarians.About the year 8ft' 1, accident, conducted some Scandinavianpirates to the Feroe islands ; and immediatelyafterwards some adventurers of the same nation, whileendeavouring to make their way to this newly discoveredcountry, were thrown by a tempest on the eastern coastp 4GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK HI.of Iceland, or as it was at first called, Snip-land. In864 one Garter circumnavigated the island, to which,in order to commemorate his labour, he gave the nameof Gardarsholm. He stated with perfect correctness,that it had a circumference of about 670 nauticalmiles. A few years later Flore, a Norwegian, venturedto winter on the northern coast, where he remainedtwo years. This experiment led to the colonisation ofIceland, to which the political troubles of Norway atthat time furnished additional motives ; and Ingolph, oneof the discontented party at home, set sail with a numerousretinue in 874, and settled in one of the greenvalleys on the south-western coast of that island.The first settlers in Iceland found extensive districtsof that dreary country covered with forests of birch andfir. They were also able, notwithstanding the severityof the climate, to cultivate some barley and other grain.At present the whole island is a naked desert, the nativewoods having totally disappeared ; and the Icelandershave long since relinquished, for good reasons itmay be presumed, the practice of growing corn : but itis not manifest whether these changes are to be ascribedto an alteration in the climate, or whether they oughtnot rather to be considered as the natural consequencesof the multiplication of cattle.One of the most remarkable circumstances attendingthe discovery of Iceland, is, that relics were found there,which showed that it had been previously inhabited.The nature of these relics, which consisted of bells,wooden crosses, and books in the Irish character, inducedthe Norwegians to believe, that those prior visitants wereChristians, either from Scotland or from Ireland. Manyauthors have endeavoured to throw discredit on this account,influenced, perhaps, by the ordinary unwillingnessof men to admit facts which they are unable to explain.There is not any inherent improbability in the opinion,that the Scandinavians, and the inhabitant's of the Britishislands, navigated the northern seas for ages before theirproceedings were known to history. But the most an-chap.I. DISCOVERIES OF THE NORTHMEN. 217cent of the Icelandic chronicles are not contented withmentioning the vestiges of former inhabitants, they distinctlystate that there were actual settlements on theisland previous to the Norwegian emigration. Theyname Kirkiubui, one of the warm and fertile valleysthat occur on the southern coast, as the residence ofthose pace, as they call the strangers, who deserted theisland, it is added, from their aversion to the pagan colonists.*The colonisation of Iceland, by the bold and adventurousNorthmen, was soon followed by further discoveriesin the West One Eric Cauda, or red head, the sonof Thorwald, a Norwegian noble, quarrelled with, andkilled his neighbour Eyolf. For this and other offenceshe was condemned to a banishment of three years. Heknew that a man, named Gunbiorn, had previously discoveredsome banks to the west of Iceland, from himcalled Gunbiorn s schwerin, or Gunbiorn's banks, andlikewise a country of great extent still farther to thewest : he determined to employ the time of his exile inmaking a voyage of discovery to that country. Settingsail, therefore, from Iceland, he soon fell in with a pointof land, which he called Hirjalfs-ness, and continuinghis voyage to the south-west, he entered a deep inlet, towhich he gave the name of Erics-sund, and passed thewinter on a pleasant island in the neighbourhood. Inthe following year he explored the continent, and returningto Iceland in the third year, he represented hisnew discovery in the most favourable light, enlargingin his praises of its fine woods, rich meadows, andabundant fisheries ; and the better to confirm the impressionmade by these embellished accounts, he gave tothe newly discovered country the alluring name ofGreenland. By these arts he contrived to draw togethera considerable company, who embarked under his guidance,carrying with them household furniture, implementsof all kinds, cattle for breeding, and whateverelse is necessary for the establishment of a colony. ButLanclnama look, lib. iv. c. 11. Ilafn. 1774.218 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.of twenty-five ships which set sail, not more than fourteenarrived in safety. These first adventurers were soonfollowed by many more from Iceland and Norway.Greenland, according to most of the Icelandic histories,was discovered in 982, and peopled four yearslater. Some, however, carry back the discovery to 932.Nay, there exists letters patent of Lewis the Debonairin 834, and a bull of Gregory IV. in 835, whichconfer on the church of Hamburgh, among other privileges,that of converting the heathen in Iceland andin Greenland.* Are we to suppose, then, that the enterprisingmariners of Hamburgh had already, in thebeginning of the ninth century, scoured the northernocean, but that their discoveries, which held out butlittle temptation to the merchant, soon fell into oblivion ?Or, is it not likely that they still frequented the fisheriesof those seas, but that the Icelanders, who cultivatedliterature in peace, and preserved the history of theirsettlements, appear from this circumstance alone as theprincipal discoverers in the North ? Many, it is true,consider the patents of the church of Hamburgh to beeither forged or interpolated ; but when criticism assumesso arbitrary a character, it cannot escape the suspicionof injustice.The new settlers in Greenland had their bishops fromEurope, and continued their intercourse with the parentstate of Norway till the year 1418. The colony paidto the pope an annual tribute of 2600 pounds' weightof walrus teeth, as tithe and Peter's pence. Therewere two towns, Garda and Hrattalid, yet the wholecommunity did not equal the number of the smallestparish in Norway. The voyage to Greenland and backagain sometimes occupied no less than five years. Inthe year 1383, a ship arrived in Norway, bringing thefirst intelligence of the death of the bishop of Greenland,which had taken place six years before. Thus it appears,that however intrepid the northern seamen mayhave been, they were still but very imperfectly skilled inLambec. Orig. Lamb. p. 33.CHAP. I. DISCOVERIES OF THE NORTHMEN. 219the arts of navigation. Greenland in the tenth centurywore the same dreary appearance as at the present day.It seemed like a disordered accumulation of naked rocksand immense glaciers. Enormous icebergs, such as theNorthmen had never seen in their original habitations,floated along the coast, and filled every inlet. The sternaspect of nature in this inhospitable land, added to itsextreme remoteness and the dangers of the boisterousseas through which it was reached, soon converted it, inthe popular belief, into a land of wonders. The seaaround was said to be inhabited by marine giants ofboth sexes ; and the mountainous icebergs, as theymoved along, were thought to be guided by invisiblehands. It was said, too, that one Hollur Get walkedfrom Norway to Greenland on the ice, conducted by agoat.The dreadful pestilence called the black death, which,in the middle of the fourteenth century, depopulated allEurope, and the North in particular, extended itsravages even as far as Greenland. The colony was,from this and other causes, much enfeebled, when in1418 a hostile fleet arrived, no one could tell fromwhat country it came, and destroyed every thing withtire and sword. Soon after this event, the colony ofGreenland disappeared totally from history. Some fruitlessattempts were made in the sixteenth century toreach the ancient settlement ; but the great barriers ofice that had formed along the coast rendered it impossibleto attain the desired object; nor was it till theyear 1721 that the Danish colony at present existingin Greenland was established. The ruins of the oldcolony are still to be seen near the southern point of thepeninsula.*When the Northmen had crossed the tempestuousseas between Norway and Iceland, and from Iceland toGreenland, it might easily be conjectured that theywould prosecute their discoveries still further to thewestward In the year 1001, an Icelander namedGicsecke, Trans, of the Roy. Irish Acad. vol. xiv.220 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.Born, sailing to Greenland to visit his father, was drivenby a tempest far away to the south-west : he there sawa level country covered with wood ; the wind abating,he steered north-west, and reached his destination. Hisaccount inflamed the ambition of Leif, the son of thatEric Cauda who had founded the colony of Greenland.A vessel was soon equipped : Leif and Born set sail together,and arrived at the country which the latter haddescried. The first land they reached was a rockyisland, to which they gave the name of Hieland ; alow country, thickly wooded, was called Maryland. Afew days afterwards they found a river, on the banks ofwhich were trees loaded with agreeable fruits. Thetemperature appeared delicious, the soil seemed fertile,and the river yielded abundance of fine salmon. Havingreached the lake from which the river issued, ourGreenlanders resolved to winter in the country. Theyfound that on the shortest day the sun remained eighthours above the horizon ; from which observation it resultsthat they were not far from the forty-ninth degreeof latitude.A German, who made one of the party, found somewild grapes, and having explained to his companions theuse to which that fruit was generally converted, it wasagreed among them to give the newly-discovered countrythe name of Vinland, or the land of wine. The relationsof Lief made several voyages to Vinland. The thirdsummer after the Normans landed there, they saw arrive,in canoes covered with leather, a number of natives ofdiminutive stature, to whom they gave the name ofSkrcelingues, or dwarfs. They massacred those comparativelyfeeble creatures without mercy, and were inconsequencefuriously attacked by the whole tribe.Some years afterwards, the Scandinavian colony carriedon an advantageous fur trade with the savages, who appearfrom these accounts to have been Esquimaux. Thevaluable fur trade which rewarded their enterprise inducednumbers to follow their example ; but we are veryimperfectly informed with respect to the circumstancesCHAP. I. DISCOVERIES OF THE NORTHMEN. 221of the Scandinavian colonies established in Vinland ; weonly know that Eric, bishop of Greenland, made a voyageto that country in 1121, in order to convert toChristianity his countrymen settled there, and who stillcontinued pagans.It is impossible to shake the authenticity of theseplain and circumstantial accounts ; and it is likewisedifficult, if not impossible, to acknowledge their genuinecharacter, without admitting at the same time that Vinlandwas in Newfoundland, or else on the continent ofNorth America, which was consequently discovered byEuropeans, nearly five centuries before Christopher Columbus; in whose age, perhaps, some traditions werestill preserved amongst seamen of those early discoveriesin the North.In the year 1380, two noble Venetians, name Zeni,entered into the service of a prince of the Feroe islands,and visited anew all the countries discovered by theScandinavians, or at least they collected a circumstantialdescription of them, which confirms, in every materialpoint, the Icelandic accounts, and which could hardlyhave been unknown to Columbus.In the map drawn by the Zeni to illustrate the accountof their navigations, Iceland is represented with thetwo towns of Saladin and Lenses, or Scalholt and Hold,which were, in fact, the two bishopricks. To the southof Iceland, and to the north-east of Scotland, is a greatisland, surrounded by many small ones : the whole groupbears the name of Friesland, and is evidently intendedfor the Feroe's land, or Feroe islands. This natural interpretation,however, of the Italian voyagers, did notoccur to our early navigators, who long sought in vainfor the Friesland of the Zeni. Frobisher thought he hadfound it, when he first descried the southern point ofGreenland, to which he accordingly gave the name ofFriesland.To the north of Iceland the Zeni place a great peninsula,in shape resembling Greenland, but joined on theeast with Norway ; the junction, however, is marked as222 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.merely conjectural. It is the same stated in the accountof the navigation that Nicoloo Zeno, going from Iceland,found a c entry, in the map called Engroniland, but inthe text Engronelandt, and Grolandia ; but the namesof the places given in this country have no correspondencewith those which occur in the Scandinavian topographyof Greenland ; so that there is good reason todoubt the accuracy of the Zeni.But in this country, which he calls Grolandia, NicolooZeno found a monastery of friar preachers, and a churchdedicated to St. Thomas, not far from a mountain whichthrew out flames like .aetna and Vesuvius. In the sameplace there was a spring of boiling water with which themonks warmed the church, the monastery, and their ownapartments. They irrigated their gardens from thesehot sources, and thus contrived to preserve a perpetualverdure, while all the country round was frozen to agreat depth. Their monastery was built with lava, androofed with a vault constructed of the light scoria,cemented with pozzuolana, or decayed basalt.During the summer-time, as the Zeni relate, a greatnumber of vessels arrived at Grolandia from Norwayand the islands to trade with the friars, who, in exchangefor their furs and fish, received corn, woollen cloth, woodfor fuel, and utensils of every description. With someof these articles the friars maintained a trade with thepeople of the country. Monks from Sweden, Norway,and principally from Iceland, resorted to this monastery;and during the winter season there was always a numberof vessels in the harbour shut up by the ice, and waitingfor the return of spring.The boats used by the fishermen of Grolandia haddie shape of a weaver's shuttle, and were made of thebones of marine animals, covered with the skins of fish,sewed one over the other. These boats were so strongand so water-tight, that the fishermen ventured fearlesslyto launch with them into the roughest seas, satisfiedthat even if they were thrown upon a rock they wouldsustain no injury.CHAP. I. DISCOVERIES OF THE NORTHMEN. 223In all these particulars there is evidently a good dealof truth, incorrectly and fantastically combined. Thevolcanoes and boiling springs of Iceland, the fertile valleyof Ileikiavik watered from tepid fountains, the well-endowedclergy of that island, are all transferred to acountry in the West, where they are joined with thewhale-skin canoes of the Esquimaux. The situationwhich the Zeni assign to Grolandia in their map doesnot correspond with the actual position of the colony inGreenland which was on the southern and not on theeastern coast of that country. We must, therefore, suppose,either that the map of the Zeni was ill constructed,or that their narrative is but a confused medley ofhearsay accounts ; or, finally, which is most probable,that the descendant of Nicoloo Zeno, who published themanuscript at Venice in 1558, attempted to embellishthe origin al, and thus destroyed its circumstantial simplicity.But the most remarkable part of the map of the Zenistill remains to be examined. More than a thousand milesto the west of Friesland, or the Feroe islands, and to thesouth of Greenland, the Venetian voyagers place twolines of coast, the one named Estotiland, the otherDroceo. These countries are said to have been discoveredin the following manner. A fishing vessel fromthe Feroe islands, driven by a tempest far to the west,at length ran aground on the island called Estotiland.The inhabitants conducted the shipwrecked fishermeninto a town well built and peopled, in which the chief orking resided. An interpreter who spoke Latin, andwho, it appears, had also been shipwrecked on the island,was the first to communicate with them : they soon,however, learnt the language of the country. The countryappeared to them of less extent than Iceland, but infinitelymore fertile : in the centre was a high mountain,from which four rivers descended. The inhabitantswrote in a character which the Northmen did not understand.Some Latin books were in the library of theking.224 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.The people of Estotiland carried on some trade withGrolandia, whence they procured pitch, furs, and sulphur.They sowed corn, made beer, dwelt in housesbuilt of stone, and were good seamen, although still unacquaintedwith the use of the compass. The Fries-lancersbeing provided with this instrument, wereintrusted by the king with the conduct of an expeditiondirected towards a country situated farther to thesouth, and called Droceo. They had the misfortune,however, to fall into the hands of a nation of cannibals.The Frieslanders were all eaten save one, whose life wasspared on account of his dexterity in the art of fishing:the savages contended for the possession of so valuable aslave. Being handed over continually from one masterto another, he had an opportunity of seeing thewhole country. He affirmed that it was of unboundedextent, and, in fact, a new world. The savage nativeswore no covering. They were engaged in continualcontests among themselves, the conqueror always feastingon his vanquished foe. Farther to the south-west were apeople much more civilised, who were acquainted with theuse of the precious metals, built large cities and temples,but nevertheless offered up human victims to their idols.Such was the account given by the fisherman of theFeroe islands, when after a lapse of many years he returnedto his country. An attempt was immediatelymade by the prince who reigned there at the time toreach these countries of Drogeo and Estotiland, butstorms drove his fleet into the seas of Greenland. Whetherhe repeated his efforts, and with what success, arealike unknown to us, the history of those voyages remainingincomplete.The narrative of the Zeni has been regarded by manyas a mere fabrication ; and the occurrence in it of suchnames as Daedalus and Icarus, which are evidently fabulous,seems to countenance that opinion. Yet theproportion of the miraculous and of palpable fable whichis mingled with their relation does not exceed, perhaps,that which is found in the most authentic narratives ofCHAP. I. DISCOVERT 2S OF THE NORTHMEN. 225the middle ages. If the accounts of Estotiland andDroceo be merely fictions, they are fictions of a veryplain and unattractive character: but, in reality, fictionsof this kind are extremely rare ; for there are few personswho are capable of doing more than adding theadornments of fancy to a ground-work furnished by experience.But there is reason to believe that the Scandinaviansnever remitted their navigations in the northernseas ; and if the inhabitants of the Feroe islands hadwritten histories like those of Iceland, we might fromthem also have received authentic accounts of lands discoveredin the West, and lost again in the course of ages.The name Estotiland appears to be Scandinavian, andto mean the East Out-land, as Newfoundland might bejustly called with respect to the American continent.Those who are willing to believe the Zeni, may supposethe inhabitants of Estotiland to have been descendedfrom the Scandinavian settlers in Vinland ; nor will theirtotal disappearance at a later period seem surprising tothose who reflect on the fate of the ancient colony ofGreenland. The country called Droceo, according tothe same course of reasoning, will be the coast of NovaScotia, or of New England, and the more civilised peopleto the south, who possessed the precious metals, andoffered up human sacrifices in magnificent temples, canbe no other than the inhabitants of Florida, or, perhaps,the Mexicans, with whose wealth and power the huntersavages of the North were probably well acquainted.However this may be, it is certain that the Zeni, inthe fourteenth century, recalled to notice the well-authenticateddiscoveries made by the Scandinavians inthe tenth ; and added a relation which, whether true orfalse, contained the positive assertion of a continentexisting to the west of the Atlantic Ocean. This relationwas unquestionably known to Columbus, who may thushave derived not a little encouragement and instructionfrom the hardy navigations of the Northmen.226 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES.CHAP. II.MAPS OF THE MIDDLE AGES.GENERAL IGNORANCE. MISSIONARIES. PILGRIMS. ADAMOF BREMEN. GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS. LOVE OF THE Marvellous.ICELANDIC SAGAS. SURVEYS OLD MAPS OF THEBRITISH ISLANDS. EFFECTS OF THE FEUDAL SYSTEM. DoomsdayBOOK. MAPS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. TABLES OF Charlemagne.MAP PRESERVED IN TURIN. THE GEOGRAPHER OFRAVENNA. SANUDO's MAP. GENOESE NAVIGATORS. ISLEOF Inferno. THE MADEIRA ISLANDS AND THE AZORES.Banco's MAP. ISLANDS OF STOKAFIXA, Attila, AND MAN.Satanic. THE SEVEN CITIES. BENJAMIN OF TL Delay.CARAVAN ROUTES THROUGH ARMENIA AND BOKHARA.The discoveries of the Arabians and Scandinavians inthose parts of the earth which were unknown to theancients remained long concealed from the learned ofEurope. Nevertheless the geographical ignorance of themiddle ages was not so great as might be concluded fromthe well-known anecdote of the abbot of Cluny inBurgundy : to him the neighbourhood of Paris seemeda country so remote, and so little known, that be refusedto comply with the request of the count de Bourcard,who wished to establish a monastery of his order atSt. Mar, near that city.* In like manner some monksof Tournai, about the close of the twelfth century, soughtin vain to discover the abbey of Terriers. Thus it appearsthat the knowledge of the monks sometimes did notextend far beyond the walls of their monasteries.Yet the monks were almost the only historians of themiddle ages; and geography, on the whole, is not a littleindebted to their labours. The darkest times and themost barbarous nations of Europe had their treatises ofgeography, or their chronicles, in which were inserted theIt is surprising that Wieland, in his celebrated poem of Oberon (Ages.ix. 4i> ), should place Montmartre on the road to Marseilles, or to the southof Paris. Under all the circumstances of their respective ages, the faultof Wieland is perhaps quite as inexcusable as that of the abbot of Cluny.C1IAP. II. MAPS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 227descriptions of some countries whether neighbouring orremote. The chronicle of Mon, abbot of Alterum, inGroningen, contains on the subject of a crusade (A. D.1217) a detailed account of the whole march, with adescription of all the countries between Palestine andHolland.But still greater benefits resulted from the labours ofthe missionaries, who carried the faith to pagan nations,and travelled through countries but little known. SaintBoniface preached to the Sclavonians, and obeyed theinjunctions of the pope in giving a written descriptionof those barbarous nations. It was probably from hisaccounts that king Alfred derived his knowledge of thatpart of Europe. Saint Otho, bishop of Bamberg, preachedto the pagans on the coasts of Stettin, Regard, and Col-berg,and tried even to instruct them in the cultivationof the vine : those savages used at that time to driveaway strangers from their shores, just as the inhabitantsof New Zealand would do at the present day.Before he made this journey, Otho, the bishop of Bamberg,had never heard of the Baltic Sea ! He was surprisedbeyond measure at finding it so broad, that fromthe middle of it the opposite shores seemed just likeclouds in the horizon. In the reign of Louis the debonaira monk of Corvay, named Anscaire, filled withthe same pious resolution, ventured even into the countryof the formidable Northmen, and travelled over thekingdoms of Sweden and Denmark, at that time butlittle known. The journal of this monk, which duringthe middle ages was the chief source of informationrespecting the northern nations, is not at present knownto exist.The pilgrimages also of the Christians began already inthe seventh century to awaken a spirit of observation.Adamant, abbot of Iona, wrote a description of Jerusalemand the Holland from the oral narrative of Saint Arculf.Willibald, the first bishop of Eichstadt, has left us adetailed account of his pilgrimage to the Holy Land in730: his route lay through Italy and the island of 2228 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.pres. These pilgrims, who frequently had commercialspeculations in view as well as the atonement of theirsins, generally brought back with them from Palestine someaccount of India and the other countries of the infidels.Adam of Bremen, who lived two centuries later thanAnscaire, drew from his work, and followed his examplein giving a detailed description of the kingdoms of theNorth. He treats of Jutland with great minuteness,and names many islands in the Baltic which had escapedthe notice of his predecessors. He is also the first todescribe the interior of Sweden as well as Russia, ofWhich nothing was as yet known beside the name.When Adam of Bremen speaks of the British islands,which he had never visited, he adopts, without hesitation,all the fables of antiquity. But the propensity to relatethe marvellous, which characterises the writers of themiddle ages, ought not, perhaps, to be ascribed so muchto the credulity of the writer as to the want of a cultivatedtaste. As the marvellous generally gives pleasure,it easily comes to be looked upon as a rhetorical ornamentin a rude age ; and this vein was often indulgedin by authors who possessed the soundest and most piercingunderstandings. Giraldus Cambrensis was one ofthose whose writings furnish an illustration of the aboveremark. In his accounts of Ireland and Wales, thereare abundant proofs of an independent spirit not proneto credulity, yet he has carefully collected in his pagesevery wonder that could amuse his readers. That hiswork was composed in a style well suited to the taste ofthe age, is evident from the enthusiasm with which itwas received. Three days running he was obliged toread in public, at Oxford, his description of Ireland.The first day he read to the poor ; the second, to thedoctors, clerks, and students ; and the third day, to thecitizens.Indeed, during the middle ages the term geographyalmost wholly gave way to what was deemed an equivalentexpression, the wonders of the world. Nearly all theearly narratives of travels and geographical relations holdCHAP. II. MAPS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 229out, in their titles, the promise of something marvellous.Among the regulations made by William of Wickham,for the regulation of the College which he had justfounded at Oxford, is the following provision : —When, in the winter, on the occasion of any holyday,a fire is lighted for the fellows in the great hall, thefellows and the scholars may, after their dinner or theirsupper, amuse themselves in a suitable manner, in thegreat hall, with singing or reciting poetry, or with thechronicles of different kingdoms, and the wonders of theworld, and every thing that befits the character of theclergy."But the Scandinavians and the Arabians are, perhaps,the only people among whom the reading or recital ofhistories ever became the ordinary amusement. TheIcelandic sagas were, in the middle ages, familiar to thememories of the Northmen. They were recited at everyfestival, and read aloud in private : they beguiled thetedious length of northern evenings. The most ancientof these historic tales are supposed to have been writtenin the eleventh century ; but a candid and discerningcriticism can trace in them traditions, apparently veracious,as far back as the third century before the Christianera. The custom of repeating the sagas is still retainedin Iceland. In the remoter vallies of that island, andwherever the manners of the people have not been contaminatedby an association with the Danes, the eveningamusements of the assembled family are the reading oftheir histories or the recital of their poems. In the precedingchapter it has been seen what valuable materialsthe Icelandic sagas can furnish to the history of geographicaldiscoveries.Some princes of the middle ages knew the value of ascience which enables sovereigns to estimate the strengthof their dominions. Had the Scandinavian princesbeen acquainted with the mariner's compass they wouldsoon have made the circuit of the earth. In 1231, WaldemarII. King of Denmark, had a general survey madeof his dominions, and a topographical table framed acts3230 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.accordingly : a wonderful work for the thirteenth century.The kings of England were animated with the same spirit,and have left behind still more striking proofs of theirattention to statistics. Notwithstanding the general destructionof the ancient monastic collections in the reignof Henry VIII. there still remain several maps of theBritish islands made in the course of the twelfth century,and which serve, in no small degree, to illustrate the oldhistorians. In some of these maps, which are very rudein design as well as execution, Scotland is representedas an island, separated from England by an arm of thesea. Ireland is also divided in two by the river Boyne,which is represented as a canal connecting the Irishchannel with the Atlantic* The towns are drawn inthem of a disproportionate size ; and the abbeys, withtheir walls, gates, and belfry, occupy so great a space,as to leave little room for the rivers, boundary lines, orplaces of less seeming importance.In the East, where the revenues of the provinces aregenerally farmed out, or bestowed on the favourites atcourt, and where the coffers of the prince are usuallyreplenished by confiscations and other acts of despotism,the head of the empire has no immediate interest in thecondition of the countries which acknowledge his authority.The feudal system, on the other hand, as itwas developed in Europe in the middle ages, created sucha multiplicity of rights, and departed so widely from thesimple mechanism of despotic governments, that themonarch, in order to enjoy all the fiscal prerogatives ofhis crown, was obliged to be well acquainted with thelocal particulars of his dominions.The tendency of the feudal system to bring about thecollection of statistical details, was manifested in Englandon the first introduction of the Norman law. Williamthe Conqueror caused surveys to be made of theseveral counties, in which were marked the waste and thecultivated lands ; the villages, with the numbers of theirCough's Brit. Top. i.CHAP. II. MAPS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 231inhabitants, and the amount of the taxes which theypaid. This is the work known by the name of ,begun in 1080, and finished in 108fi, andcontaining a circumstantial description of all England,with the exception of the counties of Northumberland,Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Durham. The landsin tillage, the waste and inhabited districts, the populationboth free and in village, with the nature of theservices in which these last were bound ; every circumstance,in short, even the number of the cattle, and thebee-hives in each county, is detailed in Doomsday-bookwith scrupulous exactness.A survey of a kingdom, executed in detail during theeleventh century, is evidently an event of great importancein the history of geography. It set an exampleof accuracy, suggested many observations, and createdan interest in territorial details, which could not failto exert an influence beyond the limits in which theyfirst had birth. There exists a similar geographicalrecord with respect to a part of Germany : this is a description,in Latin, of the March of Brandenburg, madeon the plan of Doomsday-book, and executed in 1377,by order of the emperor Charles IV.Maps do not appear to have been very uncommon evenin the darkest ages : however erroneous they may havebeen in their construction, they are often referred to bythe monkish writers. Saint Gal, the founder of thecelebrated abbey which bears his name (a name whichhas been subsequently transmitted to a Swiss canton),and who lived in the seventh century, possessed a mapwhich is said, by the historian of that abbey, to havebeen of " curious workmanship." Charlemagne hadthree tables of silver, on which were severally representedthe earth, the cities of Rome and Constantinople.His grandson Lothair, in the war which he waged withthe other Carlovingian princes, broke the first of thesetables in pieces, and distributed the fragments amonghis soldiers.But the most curious geographical monument of theq 4232 GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.middle ages is a map preserved in the library of Turin,attached to a manuscript commentary on the Apocalypse,which was written in the year 787- It represents theearth as a plane bounded by a circular line, and dividedinto three unequal parts. To the south, Africa is separatedby the ocean from a land called the fourth division of theworld, where the antipodes dwell, and which the excessiveheat of the torrid zone has hitherto prevented from beingvisited. At the four sides of the world are represented thefigures of the four winds, each astride upon a pair of bellows,which he labours, and at the same time has a conchshell applied to his mouth, from which he blows hurricanes,as may be conjectured from his distended cheeks.At the top of the map (which is the East) are Adam andEve, the serpent, and the tree of forbidden fruit. Attheir right hand is Asia, with two high mountains, andthe words Mount Caucasus and Armenia. From thesemountains descends the river Eusis, (Phasis?) and fallsinto a sea which unites with the ocean, and separatesEurope from Asia. Thus the author returned, in thispart of his map, to the geography of the primitiveGreeks. In the middle of the map is Mount Carmel,Mount Sinai, Judea, and some other names belongingto the Holy Land. Near a river, which seems intendedto represent the Euphrates, are the words Abicusia, comp de Sera. In India are the islands Crizaand Allure, the Chryse and Argue, or gold and silverislands of the ancients. The Nile is also represented,and a note appended to intimate that it flows from distantmountains, and over sands of gold. Thus the obscuritywhich involves the origin of the Nile has beenin all ages a subject of observation and source of fable.To the north of this map is the island Tile. In fine,beyond Africa, to the south, are written these words, —Besides these three parts of the world, there is beyondthe ocean a fourth, which the extreme heat of the sunprohibits our being acquainted with, and on the confinesof which is the country of the fabulous antipodes."This map may have been useful to illustrate a workCHAP. II. MAPS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 233of the same age, and of considerable merit, written bysome Goth, whose name is unknown, but who is commonlystyled the Geographer of Ravenna. It is surprisingwhat a number of geographers this writer cites,whose names, but for him, would have shared the fateof their writings, and remained totally unknown. Herefers to Castors and Lothians, Roman geographers ;Hylas and Sardonic, Greeks ; Aphrodisianus andAratus, Persians, who had written in Greek a Pictureof the World ; Cyachoris and Phantasms, Egyptians,who had travelled to the south of their native country ;Probusand Meridians, Africans; Aithanarid, Marcomir,and Edelwald, Goths.The maps of the middle ages erred as often from thelove of systematical arrangement as from the want ofinformation. They may be generally divided into twoclasses ; one, in which the ideas of Ptolemy and otherancient writers were implicitly followed, and the otherin which were inserted newly discovered lands, or thoseof which the existence was either suspected or popularlybelieved.Many maps of the first class exist in which the oldworld is represented as one great island, Africa beingterminated to the north of the equator. This opinionof Strabo and Eratosthenes very naturally found morefavour with the enquiring than Ptolemy's doctrine ofan indefinite extent of terra incognita; a doctrine which,as it has the internal characteristics of fiction, could notfail to excite suspicion. Among the geographers whoadopted this opinion, was Martin Sanudo, who endeavoured,about the year 1321, to excite a new crusadefor the purpose of taking from the sultans of Egypt thetrade with India, and accompanied his project with amap of those countries towards which he invited theattention of Europe. All the nations of Europe aremarked in Ins map ; but the Scandinavian kingdoms arejoined to Russia by a narrow tongue of land inhabitedby the Carelians (Palecarlians), a pagan nation. Thesouth of Africa is open to navigation, but the interior of234 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.that continent is still represented as uninhabitable fromthe excessive heat. Sanudo was wholly unacquaintedwith the figure of Asia and of the Indian isles : like theArabians, he places Gog and Magog in the north-eastof Asia ; the Tatars occupy the northern regions of thatcontinent.Among the maps of the second class, the most remarkableare those which seem to point out some importantdiscoveries to the west of Europe and of Africa,in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The Scandinavians,it has been seen, were acquainted with, or evensettled in Newfoundland, or some part of the continentof North America, as early as the eleventh century.But these navigations in the north-west were little thoughtof by the inhabitants of the south of Europe, and havenothing in common with certain discoveries towards thesouth-west, indicated merely by the maps of those ages,and without any support from the evidence of history.A Spanish map, composed in 1346, presents CapeBoyador as a point already known, and which had beendoubled by navigators. A ship is said to have sailed inthe same year from Genoa for a river named Enamel,or Rui Laura, probably Rio do Ouroo, and was neverafterwards heard of. The Genoese historians assert,moreover, that two of their countrymen, Tedisio Doriaand Ugolino Vivaldi, embarked in the year 1291 with theintention of sailing to India by the West ; but no allusionis made to the fate of these adventurers. TheCanary islands were never totally lost sight of: theArabian geographers, from whom the Spaniards andPortuguese derived a good deal of information, frequentlydescribed them : they make their appearance in theSpanish map above referred to, in which TenerifFe bearsthe name of Inferno, or the Isle of Hades; for it appearsthat the ancient mythic tales respecting the kingdomof the blessed and the dwellings of the dead remainedfirmly attached to the Western Ocean.The island of Madeira appears on a map made in1384, under the name of Isola di Legate, or Isle ofCHAP. II. MAPS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 235Wood, which is actually the signification of its presentname, yet the discovery of this island is generally supposedto have been made in the year 1419* or five-and-thirtyyears later than the construction of this map ; butseamen, perhaps, were acquainted with it for ages before ;and the first discovery, in this as in many other instances,is dated from the time when policy and learning beganto give attention to the information of the mariner.Many a hardy navigator, possessing all the courageand determination of Columbus, may, probably, haveperished in the attempt to sail to India by the West ;many a one may have made important discoveries whichwere subsequently forgotten. The dark ages, thoughthey wanted an enlightened observation of passing events,did not want for active and enterprising spirits. Thenames of the Isles of Brazil, or fire, of Corvus Marines,and of Sunt Jorzi, which occur in maps of the fourteenthcentury, prove that the Azores were already obscurelyknown before the year 1380; and, indeed, thereare some who wish to attribute the honour of their discoveryto the Moorish inhabitants of Spain.None of these discoveries interferes in the least withthat made by Columbus ; but one remains to be considered,which, if its reality were fully proved, wouldreduce the merit of that great navigator to the mererediscovery of countries which were known, perhaps, acentury before his time. This supposed discovery isindicated in a map constructed by Andrea Bianco in1436", and preserved in the public library of Venice.In this map the old world is represented as one greatcontinent, nearly divided into two unequal portions bythe Mediterranean, and by the Indian Ocean, which runsfrom west to east, and includes a multitude of islands.Africa stretches from west to east in a line parallel withEurope and Asia ; ethiopia towards the east, and thekingdom of Prester John, are extended towards its southernextremity : like the Africa of the ancients, it stillterminates to the north of the equator ; the deep gulfwhich is formed by the sea on the western side is,236 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.consequently, omitted. The shape given to Asia is quiteas erroneous ; the southern coast runs direct from westto east ; the peninsulas of India and the Bay of Bengalare of course suppressed. The eastern side of Asia runsout into two great promontories, separated by an immensegulf; on that which is towards the north areplaced Gog and Magog ; the southern promontory isParadise, with its four great rivers, two of which runinto the Caspian Sea. To the west of these regions succeedthe kingdoms of Cathay and Cocobalich, or Cambalu,then the city of Samarcand and northern India, Withsome cities of which the names (such as Udexi, Omin-dan, Legate, &c.) are not easily interpreted; after thesefollow Persia and Syria. The nations of Europe areall mentioned with the exception of Poland and Hungary.Tatary is placed immediately at the east ofEurope, and Russia occupies nearly all the north ; it isseparated from Sweden and Norway by a great mountain.Thus far Bianco's map exhibits more ignorance thanfiction : the chief errors which it commits in the outlinesof Africa and Asia are copied servilely from ancientwriters. But in the north and west it contains someindications of a more positive character. It exhibitsIceland, and the island called Friesland, as described bythe Zeni, and besides these, another island in the northwestwhich bears the name of Scorafixa or Stokafixa.This word is supposed to be intended for Stockfisch (asthe cod-fish is called in northern languages), and to behere applied to Newfoundland, where the cod fishery iscarried on most extensively.However, it must be observed, that Iceland was atthat time remarkable for its great fisheries ; and NicolooZeno remarked, in his account of Friesland, that thefisheries of that country were capable of supplyingFlanders, England, Denmark, and many other countries.It is possible, therefore, that the word Stokafixa, orStockjiftch, in Bianco's map, may not be designed to representany particular island, but may be intendedCHAP. II. MAPS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 237merely to incorporate, after the custom of the middleages, the mirabilia or wonders of this quarter of theworld.But the island Stokafixa is not the only singularitywhich occurs in the map of Andrea Bianco. To thewest of the Canary islands he places a country of greatlength, and of a quadrilateral form, to which he givesthe name of Antilia. This country, in the same situationand with the same name, is also formed on the globemade hy Martin Behaim at the close of the fifteenthcentury. Many believe that the Antilia of Biancocould be no other than the continent of South America;while others maintain that it owed its existence whollyto the author's imagination. Whatever may be the difficultiesattending the former hypothesis, it must beconfessed that the latter is far from being satisfactory ;for the imagination of man is by no means endowed withsuch a degree of spontaneous fertility as to spare the criticthe trouble of enquiring into the sources of its apparentcreations. But as the map of Bianco was certainly notso sceptically considered by his contemporaries, his indicationof the island Antilia is not without importancein the hi story of geography.But Bianco was not the first who placed the islandAntilia in the Atlantic : it is found in maps drawn byPicigano in 1 367, so early was the attention of Europeannavigators turned towards the western seas.* The mapsof Bianco contain much to interest, independent of theirintrinsic merit : in the first sheet of his collection is representedthe mariner's compass ; together with somenautical tables, which show that mariners were already inthe habit of calculating their course ; but it is also evidentthat they only measured by the log, and paid no attentionto longitudes and latitudes.Popular tradition still favoured the belief in the existenceof certain islands in the West. It was said thatwhen Spain was conquered by the Arabs, a number ofChristians embarked with all their property, and tookBuachc, Mem. dc l'lnstit. tour. vi.238 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.refuge in an island, in which they had built sevencities. Thus it appears that in the time of Columbusthe people gave the name of Sette Cottage, the SevenCities, to the same supposed country of the West, whichthe learned called Antilia ; and after Columbus haddiscovered the islands to which he gave the latter name,the Spaniards for a long time continued anxiously tosearch among them for the Seven Cities of their exiledcountrymen.To the north of Antilia, in a situation correspondingwith the actual position of Newfoundland, the map ofBianco places another great island, called Isola de laMan Satanaxio-, or the Island of the Devil's Hand. Thisname appears to have owed its origin to the union of anArabian tale with the popular belief which sets thedwelling of the dead in the western ocean. The Arabiansrelate, that in the Indian Sea there is an islandnear which a great hand rises every night from the sea,and grasping the inhabitants, plunges them into theocean. Many maps of the sixteenth century place inthe north-west an island of devils, a name which wasconsequently given by some of the earliest navigators toa small island on the coast of Labrador.The chief progress of geography in the middle ageswas due to the great revolutions which took place inAsia, and which, by bringing forward strange and formidablenations into view, gave rise to an intercoursebetween the East and West. But previous to the considerationof these revolutions, and the continued correspondenceresulting from them, it will be necessary tocast a momentary glance at some other sources ofinformation not so susceptible of methodical arrangement.The Rabbi Benjamin of Tela, in Navarre, wrote in1 1 60 a description of whatever appeared to him mostcurious in the south of Europe, in Palestine, Mesopotamia,in India, ethiopia, and in Egypt. He does notpositively say that he has visited all those countries ; onthe contrary, he often cites authorities for what heCHAP. II. MAPS OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 239avers : whence it may be concluded that his descriptionswere drawn more from books than from experience.The dryness of his narrative and numerous geographicalblunders, indeed, seem to prove that he wrote from scantyhearsay materials, particularly as far as regards thecountries out of Europe. His chief object was to describethe situation of the Jews, and the cities in whichthey constituted numerous communities. In speakingof Persia, he turns, all of a sudden, to Samarcand, inwhich city, he affirms, there were fifty thousand Israelites: he then mentions Tibet, and the animal whichyields the musk. He also names China ; but the fableswhich he relates respecting the dangers of the journeythither show his extreme credulity. Some supposethat his work contains indications of a journey to India;in truth, he speaks at some length of Bassoon, of itsflourishing trade, of the black Jews of India, of the cultivationof pepper, and of the origin of pearls. Some ofthe names which he mentions are incapable of explanation,such as the island of Necrosis, in the PersianGulf, the kingdom of Oulem, the island of Cinrag, andthe city of Cinga/a. Some of the cities which he ascribesto India are really on the coast of Arabia ; as, for example,Ratify (El Katie), and Rabid on the Red Sea,where he embarked for Africa.The spirit of trade in the middle ages, as well as the zealof religion, directed attention to the East. Merchants ofBremen, thrown by a tempest on the coast of Livonia,completed the hitherto imperfect knowledge of the BalticSea ; but the merchants of the Hanse Towns venturedmuch farther, and, following the traces of the Permiansand Varieties, penetrated, perhaps, even into Tatary.During the course of two centuries, the Genoese andVenetians, like the Romans of old, carried on, by caravans,a trade with India and with China. They setout from the shores of Syria, and of the Black Sea,because Egypt, whither the merchandise of the Eastarrived by the Red Sea, was closed against them as longas the hostility of the crusades continued between240 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.the Christians and Mahometanss. Egypt, it is probable,was not again opened as a channel of trade betweenEurope and India, until after the year 1260, when theGenoese had restored the Greeks to the empire of Constantinople.In recompense for this service, they obtainedfrom the Greek emperors exclusive commercialprivileges. The Venetians, when they found themselvesshut out from the trade of the Black Sea, concluded atreaty with the Sultan of Egypt, in consequence of whichAlexandria again became the emporium of Indian produce,and so continued to be, till the time when the Portuguesediscovered the passage by the Cape of GoodHope, and opened a direct commerce with the SpiceIslands.Previous to this commercial revolution, the Genoeseand Venetians received their merchandise from Indiaand China by Cassa, Tana, and Ajazzo. It arrived bytwo different routes. A part of it was brought to Bas-sora,at the mouth of the Tigris, in the Persian Gulf,whence it was conveyed by the river, and across Persiato Tebriz or Tauris, from which place it was sent forwardby the Caspian Sea, through Armenia and Georgia,to Tana, at the mouth of the Tanais or Don. Themore precious and less bulky commodities were transporteddirect from Tauris over the mountains to Ajazzoor Alas, on the Mediterranean Sea.The merchandise conveyed by the other chief commercialroute made a great circuit before its arrival atthe Black Sea. It was conveyed up the river Indus asfar as that river is navigable ; and then carried on camelsthrough Bokhara to the Gihon, whence it was despatchedover-land to the Caspian Sea. From Astrachan theroute to Asoph lay along the foot of Caucasus. Thiswas the course that was followed also by the caravans toChina from the Black Sea, which were sometimes, it issaid, twelve months upon the journey. The countriestraversed by these caravans were, in a great measure,deserts, inhabited only by nomadic tribes, without citiesor cultivation, or other objects calculated to attract theCHAP. III. JOURNEY OF Carping INTO TATARY. 211attention of the traveller : the journeys themselves wereattended with both danger and fatigue : it is not surprising,therefore, that few relations of them remain, andthat these in general bear the marks of being writtenunder unfavourable circumstances. It is now time toreturn to the revolutions of Asia.CHAP. III.JOURNEY OF Carping INTO TATARY.RISE OF THE MONGOL EMPIRE. Sings KHAN. MONGOLS IN-VADE EUROPE. Over RUN HUNGARY. THOUGHT TO BE Demons.THEIR THREATS ATTACK THE SARACENS MISSIONOF Ascetic. ITS ILL SUCCESS. LETTER TO THE POPE. MissionOF Carping. THE CAMP OF Baal. JOURNEY TO THERESIDENCE OF THE GRAND KHAN GREAT HUNGARY. THECOUNTRY OF THE ALANS. THE KANGITT^E. BLSF.RMINI.ELECTION OF A GRAND KHAN. THE CEREMONIES. THE GoldenTENT. APPEARANCE OF THE EMPEROR. RECEPTION OFTHE FRIARS. THE HARDSHIPS THEY ENDURED. DESCRIPTIONOF THE MONGOLS. THEIR CHARACTER. SUPERSTITIONS.WORSHIP THE MOON. TRIBES OF THE MONGOLS. CLIMATE OFMONGOLIA. PRODIGIOUS SHOWERS OF HAIL. — CHRISTIANITYAMONG THE CHINESE PRESTER JOHN. Combe STIBI.ZS USEDIN WAR.The events which, in the course of the thirteenth century,brought together nations hitherto separated by thewhole extent of the old world are almost without examplein the history of the human race. The greatnessof the Mongols, which seemed to embrace the universe,was created in less time than is ordinarily required tofound and people a single city. The chief of a pettytribe, hardly distinguished among the tributaries of theLou-chi, a principal Mongol nation, courageously resistedthe attacks of some neighbours as unimportant as himself.The continuance of these struggles gradually ledto bolder efforts directed against his superiors. Hisgood fortune, and indefatigable spirit, made his horde orvol. i. it242 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.camp the refuge of every discontented or unquiet character.His rivals are quickly humbled and his enemiesdestroyed. The country at the sources of the riversNon, Keroulan, and Toula, was the first theatre of therevolutions which shortly after spread through all Asiaand a part of Europe. At length, in the year 1206", theheroic Mongol prince assumed the title of Clings orZingis Khan, and established the centre of his empireat Cara-corum, an ancient city of the Turks, situatedbetween the Toula, the Organ, and Smiling, nearly inthe same latitude as Paris.From this epoch in the history of the Mongols followsa series of uninterrupted victories. Each year anew kingdom was added to the empire. The successorsof Zingis Khan, not contented with the immense extentof empire which that conqueror had bequeathed them,still acted under that impulse of ambition which he hadcommunicated to the nation. OgadaY, his immediatesuccessor, having extended the Mongol dominion to thevery centre of China, levied an army of fifteen hundredthousand men, destined to act at the same time at theopposite extremities of Asia, in the Core, and beyondthe Caspian Sea. Baatu Khan, under whom were manygenerals and princes of the royal blood, commanded theexpedition which was directed against Europe. Heover-ran the country of the Bashkirs, penetrated intoRussia, and took the city of Moscow, with the otherchief places of the principality. The grand dukes ofRussia became in consequence the tributaries of theGrand Khan. At the same time another Tatar armyravaged the countries of Armenia and Georgia, wherethey met with a stubborn but ineffectual resistance. Atthe termination of the destructive campaign of J23.9 ; aGeorgian prince, named Ava, accompanied by his sisterThamtha, ventured in person to make his submissionsto Ogoda'i, who received him favourably, and gave hima letter to the Mongolian general Charlatan, commandingthe restitution of his estates. The success of thisjourney encouraged many other princes of the West toCHAP. III. JOURNEY OF Carping INTO TATARY. 243visit Cara-corum, and to obtain from the Grand Khanhimself the redress of the injuries committed by hisofficers Many obtained from him their suits ; and theimperial tent of Cara-corum, like the papal throne, becamethe tribunal before which were determined the appealsof kings.In the North, the Mongols again showed themselvesin a more threatening array. In the year 1240, Baatutook Kiow and Kaminiek, and sent one of his generals tomake the conquest of Poland. The army of this latter.divided into several bodies, crossed the Vistula, advancedto Cracow, took and destroyed that celebrated city, collectedan immense booty, and spread the utmost terrorthrough all the surrounding countries. The troops ofPoland, Moravia, and Silesia, posted at Waldstadt, weredefeated in a great battle ; after which the Tatars joinedthe army of Baatu in Hungary. This prince, with fivehundred thousand men under his command, had routedthe count palatine of Saxony, and scouring the countrywithout resistance, destroyed every thing with fire andsword.The alarm spread throughout Europe by these destructiveirruptions is strongly manifested in the writingsof that age. The people of Friesland, it is said, werereduced to great distress, having lost the season of theherring fishery from the fear of a Tatar invasion. QueenBlanche of France was unable to conceal her apprehensionsfrom St. Louis : — " This terrible irruption of theTatars," she exclaimed, " seems to threaten us with atotal ruin, ourselves, and our holy church." — " Mother,"replied that brave and pious prince, " let us look toHeaven for consolation. If these Tatars come, eitherwe will make them return to the Tartarus whence theyhave issued forth, or else we ourselves will go to find inheaven the happiness of the elect." The equivocationwhich is here attributed to the king of France is strictlyin harmony with the opinions of those times, when theexpression Tartar imo Tartar was in general favour.In fact, an opinion very generally prevailed that tin:n 2241 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.Mongols were demons sent for the punishment of manorat least that they had an intercourse with demons :this latter opinion received some support from the fireand whirlwinds of smoke which they had the art, it wassaid, of raising in the midst of battle. This is supposedto have reference to some species of artillery and inflammablepowders, which the Mongols, according to the allegedtestimony of the Chinese historians, were alreadyacquainted with in that age.* Against those demoniacalinvaders, succour was sought by solemn prayers andgeneral hastings. They nevertheless still continued theirsuccessful progress. Hungary was totally reduced :the emperor Frederic was summoned to do homage forhis kingdom, and he was offered in recompense whateveroffice he was pleased to hold in the court of theGrand Khan. This, according to the Tatar usages, wasan honourable offer, and well proportioned to the rankand dignity of the first of Christian potentates.In their negotiations with the Hungarians, the Tatarsemployed as interpreter an Englishman, who lived sometimeamong them, and who wrote some account of theircharacter and manners in the year 1243. Imprudencehad made him an exile from his country : he had dissipatedall his property in gaming, and careless of lifewandered as a beggar through Palestine and Syria. Heatlength became master of several Eastern languages,and thus recommended himself to the notice of the Tatargenerals. The account which this adventurer givesof the Mongols is far from flattering, and perhaps notvery unjust. Yet he does not say that they feasted onthe dead bodies of their enemies ; or that " they devoureddead carcasses like delicious cates, while the very greedyand ravenous vultures disdained to eat the relics ; " butit may be concluded from these expressions of Hakluyt,that such an opinion was entertained at the time. Thepleasure which the Tatars took in spreading alarm amongthe Christians is quaintly described by the English adventurer: —• Abel Itemuiat. Mem. del' Acad, cs Inscr. vi. 1S2.I.CHAP. III. JOURNEY OF Carping INTO TATARY. 245Sometimes they say that they will make a voyage toCohen (the West), to fetch home the three wise kingsinto their owne countrey ; sometimes to punish the avariceand pride of the Romans, Who oppressed them in timespast ; sometimes to conquer northern and barbarous nations; sometimes to moderate the furie of the Germansby their owne meekemildnesse; sometimes to learned warlikefeats and stratagems of the French ; sometimes forthe finding out of fertile ground, to suffice their hugemultitudes ; sometimes, again, in derision, they say, thatthey intend to goe on pilgrimage to St. James of Alicia."The Mongols being now masters of Georgia and Armenia,were determined to add Syria also to theirdominions. In that quarter they had to encounter thekings of the race of Saladin, and other princes, withwhom the Christians also were engaged in war. TheFranks, therefore, and Mongols had here a common interest.This political interest being united apparentlywith that of religion could not fail to attract the attentionof the popes, who immediately sent missionaries tothe camps of the Tatar generals, charged to spreadabroad the true faith, and preach the spiritual supremacyof Rome. The enterprise, though great, appeared topromise success. It was rumoured that a great number ofChristians lived among the Tatars. The story of PresterJohn, founded on the imperfectly understood accountsof Syrian Christians, was then current in Europe. Besidesthe Mongols, far from acknowledging Mahomet,waged unrelenting war with the Mahometanss, and in anignorant age this was thought to be a step towardsChristianity. In short, the Tatars, who were first takenfor sorcerers and incarnate demons when they attackedthe Christians of Hungary and Poland, were nowlooked upon as almost converted, when they turned theirarms against the Turks and Saracens.The persons selected by Innocent the Fourth to executethese important missions, were, as might be expected,all taken from the cloisters ; well disciplined churchmen,indeed, but wholly unacquainted with the business ofr 3246 GEOGRAPHY OF THE ilLDDLE AGES. BOOK III.life. They were in their own persons objects of derisionto the Tatars, and their whole demeanour was calculatedto bring contempt on the court which theyrepresented. The ambassadors appointed to proceed tothe head quarters of the Mongols were Ascelin, Simonde St. Question, Alexandre, and Albert, all monks of theFranciscan order. They were all deeply impressed witha sense of the pope's pre-eminence, and fondly imaginedthat the mere announcement of his commands would befollowed by a general and immediate submission.These holy legates travelled through Syria, Mesopotamia,and Persia ; and at length, after a journey offifty-nine days, found the Tatar encampment of Baioth-noy Khan, on the frontiers of Chowaresm or Chorasmia.The observations made by Ascelin on the countriesthrough which they passed are extremely brief and unimportant,so that geography gained but little from themission. When the friars were seen approaching theMongol camp, the officers advanced to meet them, in orderto learn their business, and whence they came. Ascelinreplied, that he was an ambassador from the pope, whowas the head of the Christian world. The exterior ofthe friars did not bespeak so high a commission ; andthe Tatars proceeded to enquire of them, whether thepope, their master and head of the Christian world,Knew that the Grand Khan was the Son of God, (or ofHeaven, as the Mongol expression might be more correctlytranslated,) and that the dominion of the wholeearth belonged to him of right?" To this the astonishedFranciscan very imprudently replied, " that thepope had never heard of the Grand Khan, or of his representativesj all that he knew was that there was astrange and barbarous people, called Tatars, who cameravaging and destroying all whom they met, particularlyChristians ; and his purpose was to exhort them to repentof their past wickedness, and cease to destroy thepeople of God."The displeasure of the Tatars at this ungraciousspeech was, perhaps, moderated in some measure by theirCHAP. III. JOURNEY OF Carping INTO TATARY. 247astonishment at the figure of the barefooted friars. Theynext demanded, according to the Eastern custom, whatpresents the legates brought from the pope to the khan,their master. The friars, filled with ill-timed zeal, andignorant of the forms which courtesy requires in the East,replied, " that the pope was accustomed to receive presentsfrom all men, but never to give any to his bestfriends, far less to strangers and infidels." This insultinglanguage was patiently listened to by the Tatars ;who informed our legates that they might have an audience,provided they would conform to the usual ceremonies,and make three profound genuflexions, whenadmitted into the presence of the khan. The friars,after carefully deliberating on this offer, came to a decisionthat it would be a shame to themselves, and ascandal to all Christendom, if they were to perform suchan act of idolatry to the heathen ; they declared, however,that if the khan and his subjects would becomeChristians, and acknowledge the supremacy of the pope,they would willingly make the required genuflexions,for the honour of the chv./-ch." The Tatars werenaturally enraged at this proposition : they called outthat the Christians were dogs ; nay, they proceeded tothe impious length of calling the pope himself a dog ;and the horror-struck ambassadors were overwhelmedwith threats anil reproaches. But the rudeness of theirbehaviour had nearly incurred worse consequences thanthe menaces of the vulgar. It was seriously deliberatedin the Tatar council, whether they ought not to be putto death : some advised that the friars should be flayedalive, and that their skins, stuffed with hay, should besent to the pope ; but the fear of reprisals, and the timelyinterposition of Baiothnoy's mother, finally prevented theperpetration of these inhumanities. The unhappy ambassadors,however, were treated with every indignity andmark of contempt: they were taunted with kneeling beforethe crucifix, and worshipping wood and stone, whilethey refused to bow to the Son of Heaven and ruler ofmankind. They were supplied with provisions of ther4248 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK lit.coarsest quality, and in such small quantities as barelysufficed for the support of nature ; and to complete themeasure of their annoyances, they were frequently interrogatedrespecting the military prowess of the pope, hisarmies, victories, and conquests, and insultingly asked,how one who possessed but a spiritual dominion (thenature of which the Tatars could hardly comprehend)could dare to send ambassadors to the Grand Khan, whosevictorious armies had subdued all the kingdoms of theearth from East to West.At length Baiothnoy Khan consented to dismiss thefriars ; and a letter was given them to deliver to thepope, which contained the following unceremonious language: — " Know, Pope, that your messengers have cometo us, and have delivered your letters, and have utteredthe strangest discourses that were ever heard. We knownot whether you gave them authority to speak as theyhave done ; but we send you the firm commandment andordinance of God, which is, that if you wish to remainseated in your land and heritage, you, Pope, must cometo us in your proper person, and do homage to him whoholds just sway over the whole earth. And if you donot obey this firm command of God and of him whoholds just sway over the whole earth, God only knowswhat may be the consequence." With this haughtymessage, the ambassadors got permission to depart, andwere glad to escape from the Tatar camp. They hastenedto the nearest port of Syria, whence they immediatelyembarked for France.While Ascelin travelled into Persia, another missionwas despatched to the Mongol princes in the north-east,at the head of which was John de Piano Carpini, aMinorite friar. Setting forward on their journey tothe Tatars, as they call the Mongolian tribes, " lestthere might arise some danger from their proximity tothe church of God," our holy envoys passed throughBohemia, Silesia, and Poland, in their way to Kiow, atthat time the capital of Russia. They were treated withmuch attention in all the Christian states through whichCHAP. III. JOURNEY OF Carping INTO Tatar. 249they passed, the nations of eastern Europe being deeplyinterested in the success of their embassage. Skinsand furs to be distributed in presents to the Mongolchiefs were given them by the duchess and nobility ofCracow. They were advised also not to take theirEuropean horses into Tatary, as they would inevitablyperish by the way, not being used to dig under the snowin search of grass like the Tatar horses ; and hay, straw,or other provender never being stored in that country tomeet the exigencies of winter."NVTien the friars approached the frontiers of the Tatars,the purpose of their journey was demanded : theyreplied, " that they were messengers from their lordthe pope to the emperor of the Tatar nation, to desirepeace and friendship between the Tatars and Christians.Their lord the pope admonished the Tatars to embracethe faith of Christ, without which they could not besaved : he was astonished to hear of their monstrous andguilty slaughter of mankind, particularly of the Hungarians,Mountaineers, and Planters, who were hissubjects, and who had neither injured nor attempted toinjure the Tatars ; and as God is sore offended at suchproceedings, the pope admonished them to refrain infuture, and to repent of what they had done ; and herequested an answer as to their future intentions." Aftermaking this declaration, the monks found means to proceedto the duke Corrensa, a Mongolian general, whowas stationed with an army of 60,000 men on thebanks of the Dnieper. Being arrived, they were conductedto the orde, horde or tent of this chieftain, instructedto bend the left knee thrice before his door,and carefully to avoid setting their feet on the threshold.These ceremonies being performed, post horses and anescort of Tatars were immediately appointed to conductthem to Baatu Khan, a prince of the imperial blood.When the monks arrived at the residence of Baatu,in the land of Comania, or the country beyond the Cuban,they were commanded to pitch their tent a full leaguefrom his station ; and they received, moreover, the fearsGEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.fill intimation, that before their introduction at his courtit would be necessary to pass between two fires. Thisprecautionary ordeal, however, which was intended tocharm or nullify their evil intentions, was gone throughwithout any disagreeable consequences. They werepresented, made the usual obeisance, and delivered theletters to Baatu, who read them with great attention.This prince carried himself with much magnificence ;had a court arranged like that of the emperor ; and whenhe gave audience sat on an elevated throne along withone of his wives. He had some beautiful and largelinen tents which formerly belonged to the king of Hungary.When he rode abroad, a small tent, as Carpinicalls it, or umbrella, was carried above his head on thepoint of a spear.It appears to be the ordinary policy in the East, andparticularly among what are vaguely styled the Tatarnations, to parade foreign ambassadors about until theyhave seen all the strength and magnificence of the state.In conformity with this custom, the envoys of the popewere ordered to proceed from the court of Baatu to thatof the emperor or Grand Khan of the Mongols. Themonks, however, had hardly strength or spirit enoughremaining to enable them to encounter the fatigues ofthis new journey ; for they had observed a strict fastduring Lent, their only food being millet boiled in water,and their only drink melted snow.The geographical notices which occur in this part ofCarpini's narrative do not all admit of an easy interpretation.On the north of Comania, immediately beyondRussia, were a people called Morrlui/in-Byleri, inGreat Bulgaria, and the Bastard (Bashkirs) in GreatHungary, that is, in the country between the Volga andthe Jenisei. Beyond these were the Parasite and theSamogetce (Samoyeds) ; and beyond these last, he says,on the desert shores of the ocean were a people said tohave the faces of dogs. On the south of Comania werethe Asi, as Carpini justly calls the Alas, although manyof his interpreters have wished to alter the expression ;CHAP. III. JOURNEY OF Carping INTO TATARY. 251the Regis, Cherkes or Circassians ; the Catti, perhapsthe Georgians of the province Kachetia, with othertribes whose names are not so easily explained.From Comania the monks entered the country of theKangittce, who seem to be the Pechenegues of Russianhistory. This region, which was probably the desert to theeast of the Caspian, had but few inhabitants, owing tothe great scarcity of water. But human bones andskulls in large heaps were scattered through the plains,the awful monuments of Tatarian warfare. The Companionsand Kangittce were pagans, dwelling in tents, subsistingon the produce of their flocks and herds, andtotally unacquainted with the arts of tillage.From the country of the Kangittae, Carpini enteredthat of the Bernini, who spoke the Companion language,and observed the laws of Mahomet. This country,which comprised the northern portion of Sogdiana, presenteda melancholy picture of ruined castles and desolatedlands. A portion of that fine country, which isdescribed by Oriental writers as a terrestrial paradise,was reduced to utter desolation by the victorious marchof Zingis Khan.When our ambassadors arrived at the residence of theGreat Khan they were provided with a tent, and weretreated with more kindness and attention than they seemto have hitherto experienced. Their arrival at this posthappened at a very singular and interesting conjuncture.Auk Khan, or Cuyne as they call him, had not yet beenformally elected and invested with the insignia of empire,so that our travellers had an opportunity of witnessingthe state and magnificence of that great nationalceremony. They saw an immense tent, large enough,as they imagined, to contain two thousand men, andround it was an enclosure of wooden boards, paintedwith a variety of devices. All the Tatar nobility wereassembled, with their retinues, near this inclosure, andamused themselves in galloping their horses over thehills and valleys. On the first day they were all clad inwhite ; on the second, when Cuyne came to the great252 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.tent, they were dressed in scarlet ; on the third day theyappeared in blue, and on the fourth they wore rich robesof Baldachin, or figured cloth of Bagdad.In the wooden enclosure encircling the great tentthere were two gates, through one of which the emperoralone was allowed to enter. At the other gate wereguards, who discharged their arrows at those who presumedto pass the proper limits. The saddles, bridles,and other trappings of the horses, were decked with preciousstones and ornaments of massive gold.The Tatar nobles at length assembled in the greattent, as if to consult respecting the election of an emperor.The rest of the people collected outside began todrink koomis or mare's milk in amazing quantities ;Carpini and his companions were kindly entertained andtreated with ale, as they were unable to drink koomis.At the outside of the tent were standing, Jeroslaus dukeof Susdal in Russia ; a great many princes of theKithayans and Slang ; the two sons of the king ofGeorgia ; the envoy of the calif of Bagdad, himself asultan, and above ten other Mahometan princes. Ourambassadors were informed that there were above fourthousand messengers present, some bearing tribute andsome presents from the neighbouring states ; otherswere sent to offer submission, or to represent the governorsand chief authorities of the distant provinces. Allthese envoys were placed round the enclosure of the greattent, and supplied with drink.After remaining in this place about a month, the wholeassemblage moved to a fine plain a few miles distant,where another tent was erected, called the Golden Orde,or horde. This tent was erected on pillars covered withplates of gold, and the cross-beams were joined to thepillars with golden nails ; the whole was superbly coveredover with baldachin, having rich cloth hanging down onthe outside. The close of the ceremonies at length arrived:on a certain day all the people assembled, standingwith their faces to the south. Some, at a littledistance from the rest of the multitude, were continuallyCHAP. III. JOURNEY OF Carping INTO TATARY. 253employed in making prayers and genuflexions, fromwhich the catholic monks concluded that they werepractising incantations. After these formalities hadbeen continued some time, the nobles returned to thetent, and Cuyne was at length placed on the imperialthrone. The grandees immediately fell on their kneesbefore him, and the multitude outside followed their example.Soon after his inauguration the newly elected emperorgave an audience to all the strangers assembled athis court. All who approached his throne bore himsome costly presents : jewels, purple garments, embroideredstuffs, horses richly caparisoned and armed,with other offerings, were heaped round the tent.At length our poor ambassadors from the pope, afterbeing first carefully examined lest they might carrysome weapons concealed about their persons, werebrought into the imperial presence : on being askedwhat gifts they had to offer, they humbly replied thattheir whole substance was already consumed. Theirappearance, no doubt, sufficiently declared their poverty,and the Tatars overlooked their omission of the mostfirmly established of Eastern usages, that of offeringpresents to the throne. At no great distance fromthe great tent there stood in sight above five hundredcarts filled with gold, silver, and silken garments :these riches were divided between the emperor and thegrandees, who again distributed them among their severalfollowers.From the grave and imposing demeanour of thenewly-elected emperor, who was never known to laugh,Carpini was inclined to believe him a Christian in hisheart : several Christian priests resided at his court, andwere permitted to strike the hours on bells and to practiseother religious observances, which are contrary tothe usages of the East; but the emperor, with all thistoleration, never intimated any desire to change his faith.After some time the legates were again called in to delivertheir messages : they were asked if there was any254 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.one at the papal court who understood the Russian,Arabic, or Tatarian languages. Being unable to answerpositively in the affirmative, the letter of theemperor to the pope was explained to them, and theywere made to translate it into Latin : great pains weretaken by the Tatar officers to ascertain the fidelityof the translation. They then received their passportsand a letter sealed with the imperial seal. Themother of the emperor gave each of them a linen garmentand a pelisse of foxes' skins with the hair outwards,and so they departed. Their journey homeward wasperformed amidst all the rigours of a Siberian winter.In the steppes or desert they often slept all night on thesnow, unless where they could clear a piece of groundwith their feet ; and frequently they found themselvesin the morning quite covered with snow which haddrifted on them during the night. Through all thesehardships they at length reached Kiow, where the peoplecame out joyfully to receive them, congratulating themas men who had returned from death to life. Carpinihad the merit of being the first to publish in Europea rational description of the Mongol nation : thoughignorant, bigoted, and credulous, he was not altogetherdestitute of talent and observation ; and his prudentdeportment procured him opportunities which the monasticausterity of Ascelin and his companions couldnever have expected.The Mongols, or Tatars, he observes, differ totallyin appearance from all other nations, being much broaderbetween the eyes and cheeks: they have prominent cheekbones,with small flat noses, and small eyes, the uppereyelids being opened up to the eyebrows. The crownsof their heads are shaven on each side in the mannerof priests, some hair being allowed to grow long in themiddle, and the remainder twisted into two tails or locks,which are tied together behind their ears.In speaking of their character, he candidly weighstheir good qualities against their bad ones. They aremore obedient to their lords, he says, than any otherCHAP. III. JOURNEY OF Carping INTO TATARY. 255people, giving them vast reverence, and never deceivingthem in word or action. They seldom quarrel ; andbrawls, wounds, or manslaughter, hardly ever occur.Thieves and robbers are no where found, so that theirhouses and waggons, in which all their treasure is kept,are never locked or barred. If any animal go astray, thefinder either leaves it or drives it to those who are ap "pointed to seek for strays, and the owner gets it backwithout difficulty. They are very courteous ; andthough victuals are scarce among them, they communicatefreely to each other. They are patient under privations; and though they may have fasted for a day ortwo, will sing and make merry as if they were perfectlysatisfied. In journeying, they bear heat and cold withgreat fortitude. They never fall out ; and though oftendrunk, never quarrel in their cups. No individualdespises another ; but every one assists his neighbour tothe utmost.Having seen here the favourable side of their character,it will be necessary now to consider the reverse.The Tatars, says Carpini, are proud and overbearing toall other people, looking upon foreigners, however noble,with contempt. They are irritable and disdainfultowards strangers, and deceitful beyond belief, alwaysspeaking fair at first, but afterwards stinging like scorpions.They are crafty and fraudulent, and cheat ailmen if they can. Drunkenness is honourable amongthem : they arc filthy in their meat and chink, and in alltheir actions. They are importunate beggars, niggardlygivers; and, finally, they consider the slaughter of otherpeople as nothing.In consequence of their superstitious traditions, manyactions in themselves innocent were accounted, criminal,and punished accordingly. To touch or even to approachthe fire with a knife or any instrument made ofiron, to lean upon a whip, to strike a horse with a bridle,to kill young birds, or to break one bone upon another,were all considered actions of a most unlucky nature.If any one had the misfortune to tread inadvertently on256 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.the threshold of one of the great men's houses, he waspunished with death. But while they are so scrupulous,observes our friar, with respect to actions in themselvesindifferent, they do not consider it a crime to slay men,to invade the territories of others, to take away theirgoods, and to act contrary to the commands of God :they know nothing of the life to come, or of eternaldamnation. " Yet," he adds, " that they believe in afuture state, in which they shall tend flocks, eat, drink,and do the very same things which employ them in thislife. They begin every great enterprise at new moon,or when the moon is full : they call the moon the greatemperor, and worship that luminary on their knees ;"indeed, it is conjectured that Ay, the great ancestor ofthe Mongol nations, is the same with You the moon.The information which Carpini's journal contains relativeto the tribes of the Mongols is far from being ascomplete as his description of their character and customs.He says, that the land of Mongolia was formerlydivided among four different tribes or nations. One ofthese was the Yeka- Mongol, or the Great Mongols ; thesecond was the tribe of the Su-Mongol, or Water Mongols,who called themselves also Tatars from a river ofthat name in their territories ; the third was namedMerkat, and the fourth Merit. All these resembledeach other in figure and complexion, but were dividedinto distinct provinces under separate princes. Thenames which Carpini mentions here were evidently notarbitrary inventions ; but he appears to have mistakensome petty hordes for the principal tribes of the nation.The enumerations of the Mongolian tribes which occurin the travels of Haitho and of Marco Polo neither agreewith one another nor with that offered by our friar.The geographical knowledge of Carpini appears tohave been extremely limited, and his descriptions of thecountries through which he passed are much involved inerror and obscurity. He sometimes even confounds theBlack Sea with the Caspian. " The land of Mongoliaor Tatary is in the east part of the world," such is hisCHAP. III. JOURNEY OF Carping INTO TATARY. 257vague language, '• where the east and north are believedto unite : it has the country of Cathay and the peoplecalled Slang on the east ; on the south the country ofthe Saracens ; the land of the Huini on the south-east ;the province of Madman on the west, and the ocean onthe north. In some parts it is full of mountains, inothers quite plain, but every where interspersed withsandy deserts, not a hundredth part of the whole beingfertile, as it cannot be cultivated except where it is wateredby rivers, which are very rare. Hence there areno towns or cities except one named Cracurim (Cara-coram), which is said to be tolerably good ; we did notsee that place, although within half a day's journey ofit when we were at the horde of the Syra, or court ofthe Great Emperor."To the south of Care Cathay (the Black Desert), andsouth-west of Mongolia, Carpini says there is a vastdesert, in which there are said to be certain wild menwho are unable to speak, and have no joints in their legs ;yet they have ingenuity enough to make felt of camels'hair for garments ta protect themselves from the weather.The climate of Mongolia is described by him as unequaland tempestuous in the extreme. In the middleof summer terrible storms of thunder and lightning occur,by which numbers of people are killed, and even in thatseason there are occasionally heavy falls of snow, andcold northern winds blow with such violence that a mancan hardly sit on horseback. During these gales greatclouds of sand are whirled through the atmosphere ; andCarpini relates, that one of these storms coming on suddenlyat the time of the grand ceremonies at the SyraHorde, he and his companions were obliged to throwthemselves prostrate on the ground, every object aroundthem being concealed by the prodigious dust. It neverrains in winter, but frequently in summer; yet so gentlyas scarcely to lay the dust, or to moisten the roots ofthe parched herbage : but prodigious showers of hailnot unfrequently fall, of the violence of which someestimation may be formed from the fact alleged by ourvol. i. s258 GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK II f.author, that while he was at the imperial court, at thetime when the emperor elect was about to be placed onthe imperial throne, above a hundred and sixty personswere drowned by the sudden melting of one of theseshowers, and many habitations and much property wereswept away. In summer, sudden and intolerable heatsare quickly followed by intense cold.Carpini was almost induced to believe that the Chinesewere Christians : he mixed together and confounded,perhaps, the exaggerated statements of the Nestorianssand the information which he received concerning thedoctrines and rites of Shamanism as it exists in China.The people of Cathay," he says, " are pagans, havinga peculiar mode of writing, in which they are reportedto possess the scriptures of the Old and NewTestament. They have also Lives of the Fathers, andhouses in which they pray at stated times, built exactlylike churches ; they are even said to have saints, to worshipone God, to venerate the Lord Jesus Christ, andto believe in eternal life ; but then they are not baptized :they have no beards, and much resemble the Mongolsin features."It is singular that Carpini, while he listened withsuch easy credulity to the accounts of Christianity inChina, should have gathered such an erroneous and imperfecthistory of the celebrated Christian potentate,Prester John ; whose dominions, as far as history cantrace them out, were at no great distance from thecountry which our friar visited. lie transports thatdoubtful character into India, and unites to his mentionof him some other singular circumstances. " WhenZingis Khan," he relates, " had finished the conquestof Cathay or China, he sent one of his sons with anarmy into India ; that prince subdued the people ofLesser India, who are black Saracens, and are also calledethiopians. The Mongol army then marched againstthe Christians dwelling in the Greater India ; and theking of that country, known by the name of Prester John,came forth with his army to meet them. This PresterCHAP. IV. TRAVELS OF RVBRUQUIS. 25yJohn caused a number of hollow copper figures to bemade, resembling men, which were stuffed with combustiblesand set upon horses, each having a man behindon the horse with a pair of bellows to stir up thefire. At the first onset of the battle, these mountedfigures were sent forward to the charge ; the men whorode behind them set fire to the combustibles and thenblew strongly with the bellows ; immediately the Mongolmen and horses were burnt with wild-fire, and the airwas darkened with smoke. Then the Indians fell uponthe Mongols, who were thrown into confusion by thisnew mode of warfare, and routed them with greatslaughter." It is impossible to find the origin of a talewhich supposed the existence of a Christian prince inIndia ; but the story related by Carpini, as it will beseen further on, may have been productive of very importantconsequences.CHAP. IV.TRAVELS OF RUBRUQUIS.KL'MOL'KED CONVERSION OF THE MONGOL Trances. LETTER FROMERKALTAY TO ST. LOUIS. THE KING OF FRANCE SENDS HOLYRELICS TO THE MONGOLS. DESPATCHES RUBRUQUIS TO Sarah.GERMANS DWELLING ON THE BLACK SEA. TATAR Encampments.JOURNEY TO THE VOLGA. DESERT OF KIPJACK — THEALANS. COURT OF Sarah. HOUSES ON CARTS. — SarahNOT A CHRISTIAN. FRIARS SENT FORWARD TO ISAATU KHAN.OBLIGED TO PROCEED TO CARACORU.M THE LAND OF ORCA-num.DESCRIPTION OF THE YAK. CANNIBALISM IN Tibet.THE COURT OF Manu KHAN. EUROPEANS IN C ARACORU M .THE FOUNTAIN MADE BY WILLIAM Boucher ChristianityAMONG THE UIGURS. CHRISTIAN CEREMONIES ImitatedIN THE EAST. CHINESE WRITING. ISLANDS IN 111!EASTERN SEA. PRESTER JOHN. KNOWLEDGE OF TATARY. —BRIGANDS IN THE CAUCASUS. JOURNEY HOME. MAITHOTHE ARMENIAN. THE Tarsi. TRIBES OF THE MONGOLS.The papal missions to the Tatars failed wholly in producingthe effects expected from them ; but they brought2bO GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.home some valuable information ; and by making theEuropean nations better acquainted with the character ofthe Mongols, tended, perhaps, not a little to moderatethe apprehensions entertained of those formidable invaders.Although the austere and narrow-minded ecclesiastics,selected for those embassies, were little qualifiedby the habits of monastic life to succeed in such delicatenegotiations, it would yet, perhaps, have been difficult tofind persons better fitted by their zeal, fidelity, and patientresolution to break first the path of communicationbetween the Christians and the Tatar conquerors : theirsacred character met also with some respect, and servedundoubtedly to protect them from the violent treatmentto which, from their stubborn inattention to Easternusages, they were frequently exposed.The successors of Zingis Khan were remarkable forthe indifference they manifested to religious creeds .they entertained the national belief in the existence otone God ; but were wholly unacquainted with any collateraldoctrines or ceremonies of religion. Yet they werenot exempt from superstitious weakness, and gave a favourablereception to priests of every sect and persuasion,in order that by engaging in their interest every solemnrite and every mode of prayer, they might moresurely propitiate the will of heaven. Among otherministers of religion who flocked about them were manyNestorian Christians, who, willing to magnify their ownefficiency and importance, and unable to comprehendthe light in which they were considered by the Mongolprinces, spread abroad the rumour that these latter wereactually become converts to Christianity. This wasmore distinctly announced with respect to Sarah, aprince of the royal family, and son of Baatu Khan,who commanded the Tatar armies to the north of theCaspian.It happened at the very time when this rumour prevailed,and while Saint Louis was engaged in hiscrusade against the Saracens in Syria, that Erkaltay, theMongol prince who was attacking the same power fromCHAP. IV. TRAVELS OF RUBRUQUIS. 2t)lthe side of Persia, sent an embassage to the French king,in order to cement more closely an alliance founded incommon interest. The tenour of his letter is variouslyreported : according to some, the ambassadors declaredthat the khan had embraced Christianity, and made warwith no other intention than that of spreading abroadthe true faith ; but it is certain that they went to massand conformed to all the catholic ceremonies. In consequenceSaint Louis sent an embassy to Erkaltay, witha present consisting of a portion of the wood of the truecross, and bearing a letter in which he invited the khanto embrace the true faith, and acknowledge the spiritualsupremacy of the pope. The answer given to thisletter, which must have caused not a little surprise atthe court of Caracorum, is not known. At the sametime a deputation was sent to Sarah. whose territorieswere between the Don and the Volga, in order to confirmand instruct him in his newly-adopted faith. Atthe head of this mission was William de Rubruquis, or,more properly, Van Ruysbroeck, a Minorite friar, from avillage of that name near Brussels. He was charged,among other things, to observe narrowly what was thereligion of the Tatar prince ; from which circumstanceit may be concluded that the king of France did notgive implicit credit to the stories that were circulatedrespecting Sarah's conversion.Our friar and his companions set out in June, l!253,on their journey towards the Don. " Towards the mouthof this river," observes Rubruquis, " there are many loftypromontories; and between Kersovaand Soklaia (Sudak)there are forty castles, at almost each of which a distinctlanguage is spoken : in this place are many Goths, whospeak the Teutonic language." These were the descendantsof the German tribes who migrated towards theshores of the Black Sea in the fourth century, and whostill preserved their language in the middle of the sixteenthcentury, when Busbequius conversed with severalof them in Constantinople.As soon as the friars came among the Tatars theys 3262 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.were placed under " the shade of certain black carts,"and surrounded by a number of horsemen. Their wineand provisions were taken from them ; and they werekept in continual alarm by the rude menaces of the fierceMahometanss. At length, having showed some letterswhich they bore to one Zagathai, a nobleman in thatprovince, who was related to the khan, they were furnishedwith horses and oxen to enable them to proceedto their destination.Next morning our travellers met the carts of Zagathailaden with houses ; " and I thought," says Rubruquis,a great city was travelling towards us. I was astonishedat the prodigious droves of oxen and horses, andthe immense flocks of sheep, though I saw very few mento guide them, which made me enquire how many menhe had under his command, and I was informed that hehad not five hundred in all, half of whom had passed ontoanother station." In the course of the day they wereintroduced to Zagathai, who asked them if they woulddrink cosmos, (koomis, a drink made of mares' milk,) towhich they gave an evasive answer ; for it appears thatthe Greek, Russian, and other Christians, who mixedwith the Tatars, made it a point to abstain from drinkingthat infidel beverage. They do not appear to have-experiencedhere a very generous hospitality, or perhapstheir stomachs were not yet reconciled to Tatar fare :so that, " if it had not been for the grace of God," saysthe pious friar, " and the biscuit which we broughtwith us, we had surely perished." They remained inthe horde of Zagathai for ten days, and then set out ontheir journey, travelling due north till they reached thehead of the Sea of Asoph ; they then turned towards theeast, having the sea on their right hand and a vastdesert on the left, which, they were told, was in someplaces twenty days in breadth, without mountain, tree,or even stones. In this great plain the Comani, calledCupchat (Kipjak), fed their cattle. The region beyondthe Don appeared to Rubruquis extremely beautiful, especially towards the north, where there were greatCHAP. IV. TRAVELS OF RUBRVQUIS. 263livers and extensive forests. " In the course of ourjourney," says he, " we left to the south certain greatmountains, on whose side, towards the desert, dwell theCergis (Cherkes or Circassians), and the Alan or Acts,who are Christians, and still carry on war with theTatars." These Alas, or Acts, were the ancestors ofthe Ossi, who at present inhabit the broad valleys of theCaucasus.After a painful journey of two months, during allwhich time he never once enjoyed the shelter of a house ortent, but was obliged to pass the nights in his cart in theopen air, he reached the encampments of Sarah Khanupon the Volga. This prince maintained a splendidcourt. He had six wives, and each of these ladies hada great house besides smaller ones of the ordinary kind,and a train of two hundred travelling carts. " Theirhouses," says our traveller, " are made of wicker, plaitedtogether and placed on carts, some of which are so large,that measuring once the breadth between the wheel-rutsof one of their carts, I found it to be twenty feet across,and when the house was upon the cart it reached overthe wheels on each side five feet at least. I reckonedtwenty-two oxen in one team, drawing a house upon acart, eleven abreast. The axle of the cart was of ahuge bigness, like the mast of a ship. The men thatdrove the cart stood before the door of the house.They go at a slow rate ; and when they come to anyplace where they intend to make some stay, they takedown the houses from the carts, turning the door towardsthe south, and placing the master's bed at thenorth end of the house."When the friars were introduced to Sarah, Ilubru-quis commenced an apology for appearing in his presenceempty handed, and excused himself on account ofthe poverty of his order : to this the Mongol politelyanswered, that it was creditable in a monk to observehis vow ; that he himself did not need the gift of anyone,but was willing to give his visitors whatever theymight need. He then made the monks recite a bereft426'4 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.diction for him, and asked some questions respectingthe king of France.In the morning our travellers were ordered to appearat court with the king's letters, and with all their booksvestments, and other curiosities. " We were commanded,"says Rubruquis, " to array ourselves in oursacred vestments to appear in them before the prince.Putting on, therefore, our most precious ornaments, Itook a rich cushion in my arms, together with the Biblewhich I had from the king of France, and the beautifulPsalter, ornamented with fine paintings, which the queenbestowed upon me ; my companion at the same timecarried the missal and a crucifix ; and the clerk, clothedin his surplice, bore a censer in his hand. In this orderwe presented ourselves ; and the felt hanging before thelord's door being withdrawn, we appeared in his presence.Then the clerk and interpreter were ordered tomake three genuflexions, a humiliation from which wewere exempted ; but they admonished us to be exceedinglycareful not to touch the threshold of the door ; wewere desired also to sing a benediction or prayer forthe lord, and so we entered in singing the Salve Regina."After Sarah and his wives had regaled their eyes withthis strange spectacle, they narrowly examined the censer,Psalter, and Bible ; and after a little time the friars weredismissed ; the prince graciously permitting them tocarry back their books and sacred vestments, which werecoveted "exceedingly by the attendants.The curiosity of Sarah being sufficiently gratified,Rubruquis and his companions received orders to proceedto the court of Baatu Khan ; their mission beingconsidered one of such importance, that the prince darednot determine respecting it without the advice and consentof the khan his father. When Rubruquis venturedto make enquiries respecting the religious conversion ofSarah, he was warned to be careful what language heused on that subject, and told in angry terms that theprince was not a Christian but a Mongol. This employmentof the word Christian, as a mere national(HAP. IV. TRAVELS OF RUBRUQUIS. 265designation, must have disconcerted not a little ourzealous Minorities.In the deserts between the Don and Volga were apagan people, to whom he gives the name of Model ;and beyond them were the Mergus or Medias, aMahometan tribe, whose possessions extended to theVolga. These latter were evidently the Cherishes,who call themselves Mori ; and the others were theMordant, who are named in their own language Mocha.When the friars reached the encampment of Baatu onthe Volga, they were again obliged to display all thepomp of their religious habiliments, to gratify the curiosityof the Mongols. — " We entered the tent barefooted,"says Rubruquis, " and with our heads uncovered,forming a strange spectacle in their eyes ; for thoughfriar John de Piano Carpini had been there before me,yet, being a messenger from the pope, he changed hishabit, that he might not be despised. We were broughtforward into the middle of the tent, without beingobliged to bow the knee, as is the case with other messengers.Baatu was seated on a broad couch like a bed,gilt all over ; one of his ladies sat beside him."Silence was kept for some time, " while one mightrehearse the Miserere." The friars were then commandedto kneel ; and having declared the friendly purposeof their mission, were treated with koomis, anddismissed. They shortly after received orders to proceedto the court of Mangu Khan at C'aracorum. Inthe course of this journey, Rubruquis crossed the Jack,or Aral, and the country of the Bashkirs, whom he callsPascatirs, and who spoke, as he affirms, the same languageas the Hungarians. Farther on, he reached thecity of Penchant, in the neighbourhood of which werevineyards, and crossed a great river, the name of whichhe was unable to learn, or that of the country throughwhich it flowed. At the city of Talach, which nextoccurred, he found a number of Germans dwellingamongst the Mongols. After enduring unspeakable fatigues,he arrived at the city of Equius, the inhabitants266 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.of which spoke the Persian language, though so far removedfrom Persia. The great river was probably theSir, or Jaxartes, and the city called Talach may havebeen some place on the river Talas ; but geographershave never been able to discover the situation of the cityEquius. He says, that the inhabitants spoke Persian ;and if he had a smattering of that tongue, it is possiblethat he may have ventured to translate the name of theircity, which was probably an Ispahan, Ispakc, or somesimilar name, in which the word asp, a horse, is theprincipal root.The ambassadors advanced next to Cailac, a commercialcity in the land of Organum, a country rich in pasturageand cattle, and containing a lake of fifteen days'journey in circumference. This country took its name,according to Rubruquis, from the skill of the inhabitantsin playing on the organ ; but it is more probable that heought to have written Irgonekon, the name of a fertilevalley, not far from lake Ballast. The next nationamong whom he arrived were the Uigurs, in whosecountry was the city of Caracorum. This city wasenclosed with mud walls ; had four gates, two mosques,and one church for Christians, though most of the inhabitantswere Tuinians or idolaters. The Chineseinhabited a street to themselves. This was the terminationof the journey.The city of Caracorum, according to Rubruquis, issituated on the confines of the Jugurs, or Uigurs, whoseterritories extend to the north and west. The Tonguesoccupied the mountains to the east of them. " Amongthe Tongues," he says, " there are oxen of great strength,having flowing tails like horses, and their backs andbellies covered with long hair. They are shorter leggedthan other oxen, but much fiercer, having long, straight,and sharp-pointed horns. They are much used fordrawing the great houses of the Morals ; but they willnot allow themselves to be yoked unless they are sung toat the same time." This is a correct description of theSarluk, or Tatarian ox, better known by the Thibetianname of Yak.CHAP. IV. TRAVELS OF Rl'BlU'QUIS. 2t>7Beyond these people, to the east, lay Great Cathay, theinhabitants of which our traveller asserts are the Seres ofthe ancients. He was told that in that country therewas a town, the walls of which were made of silver, andthe towers of gold. The inhabitants of Tibet, accordingto Itubruquis, had once the habit of eating thedead bodies of their parents, from a motive of piety,believing that to be the most honourable sepulture ; butinhis time they had abandoned that custom, which waslooked upon as abominable by all other nations. Theystill, however, continued to make handsome drinking-cupsof the skulls of their parents, that they might callthem to remembrance even in their mirth. This is preciselywhat Herodotus relates of the Massagetae, anddoes not differ materially from what he states respectingthe Padcei, who were probably the Thibetian followersof Buddha, or Buddha, in Tibet. The same customof putting the aged and infirm to death exists at thepresent day among the Battas in Sumatra ; who, like thePassages and Thibetians of old, act under the influenceof religious opinions, and deem a man guilty of thebasest dereliction of filial duty who refuses to eat hisfather.From Caracorum the travellers were conducted somedays' journey over the mountains towards the northto the residence of Mangu Khan. The day aftertheir arrival there they went to court barefooted, an adherenceto the strict rules of their order which did notserve to exalt them in the eyes of the people ; but theirtoes were so severely frostbitten on the following day,that they were obliged to abandon their pious resolution.People from the court compassionately brought themram-skin coats and other warm clothing. Soon afterwardsthey were admitted into the imperial presence.They found the Grand Khan, " a flat-nosed man, ofmiddle stature, sitting on a couch, covered with a shiningspotted fur, like seal-skin :" one of his wives, a prettyyoung woman, sat beside him ; one of his daughters,named Cerina, " a hard-featured young woman," sat208 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.on another couch at a little distance. The strangerswere politely asked whether they would drink tracing,a punch or liquor made of arrack ; or catacombs, thatis, clarified koomis ; or ball, a sort of mead made ofhoney. They answered that they had no pleasure indrink ; but yet they tasted the tracing, which theyfound agreeable. The Grand Khan of the Mongols, inthe mean time, was amusing himself with his falcons andother birds. At last the monks were commanded tospeak ; but after the conversation had been continuedfor some time, Rubruquis perceived that his interpreter,who had been gradually growing more and more inarticulate,was now quite drunk, and no longer able toutter a perfect sentence : he also began to suspect thatthe khan himself was not perfectly sober ; he thereforekept silence, and was soon permitted to retire.Our travellers found a great multitude of German,French, and other European prisoners residing at thecourt of the Grand Khan : they were employed to manufacturearms, and as artisans in a variety of ways ;but particularly to work the mines at a place calledBocol, two months' journey to the east of Caracorum.These men, who appeared to Rubruquis to prosper exceedinglyin their new situation, must have had a considerableinfluence on the arts and civilisation of InnerAsia. One of these ingenious strangers was a Parisiangoldsmith, named William Bouchier, whose skill andindustry found abundant employment in the service ofthe Mongol emperor.In the neighbourhood of Caracorum Mangu Khanhad a great palace in the middle of a court surroundedby a brick wall. In that place he celebrated festivalstwice a year, at Easter and in the summer season, whenall the nobility of the nation assembled about him; hethen distributed garments among them, and displayedall the magnificence of his rank.Near this palace," says Rubruquis, " are a greatmany buildings like our barns, in which the victualsand treasures belonging to the khan are stored. But asCHAP. IV. TRAVELS OF RUBRUQUIS. 26'f)it was unbecoming to have flagons going about thehall of the palace, as in a tavern, William Bouchier,the goldsmith, planned and executed a great silver tree,just without the middle entrance of the great hall, atthe root of which are four silver lions, having pipesdischarging pure cows' milk. Four pipes are conveyedup the body of the tree to its top, which spreadsout into four great boughs, hanging downwards : oneach of these boughs is a golden serpent, the tail ofwhich twines round the body of the tree ; and each ofthese serpents forms a pipe, one discharging wine, asecond catacombs, another mead, and the fourth tara-china,or a drink made of arrack : belonging to each pipeis a vessel or reservoir. On the top, between the fourpipes, there stands the figure of an angel with a trumpet,and under the tree is a vault in which a man liesconcealed, from whom a pipe ascends to the angel :on a signal given by the butler, he blows with all hismight, and the trumpet sounds. In a building withoutthe palace the liquor is stored, and poured by servantsinto pipes communicating with the tree ; from which it isdischarged into appropriate vessels, and distributed bythe butler to the company. The palace is like a churchhaving a middle aisle and two side ones, with two rowsof pillars. Three gates open into it on the south, andbefore the middle one stands the silver tree : the khan sitsat the north end, on an elevated place, that he may beseen by all ; and there are two flights of steps ascendingto him, by one of which his cup-bearer ascends, andcomes down by the other. The men sit on the righthand of the khan, and the women on the left." Inthis description, drawn from a court in the heart of Asia,there is not a little which may recall to mind the mannersof European nations in early ages. The figure ofthe hall of meeting, the dais, or elevated place on whichthe khan was seated, and the rude conviviality of anassembly of nobles, all employed in drinking, are strikingtraits of national resemblance. After several interviewswith Mangu Khan, who appears to have been at a loss2?0 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.to comprehend the object of his mission, Rubruquis receivedpermission to depart, and was entrusted with aletter from the khan to the king of France.The account which Rubruquis gives of the multitudeof Nestorian Christians mingled with the Uigurs deservesthe careful consideration of those who would examine thestriking similarity that exists between Shamanism, or thereligion of the Dalai Lama, and those of some Christiansects. The Nestorian clergy living among the Mongolswere ignorant and worthless characters : their bishopvisited them hardly once in fifty years ; and whenever hecame he caused all their male children to be madepriests, even the infants in the cradle. They all indulgedin polygamy like the Mongols, and shared with themin every vulgar superstition.There is reason to believe that the Nestorianss hadpenetrated into China as early as the sixth or seventhcentury, and carried into that kingdom the civilisationcf the Bactrian Greeks. Rubruquis says, that in histime they inhabited fifteen cities in Cathay : their bishopresided at Begin, probably Sign-Fu, in Western China,where monuments have been seen attesting the formerexistence of Christian establishments. The Nestorianssof Tatary had imbibed the specious doctrine of thetransmigration of souls : — " Even the wisest of them,"says the French monk, " asked me if brutes could fly toany place after death where they should not be compelledto labour :" nay, the ingenious French goldsmith appearsto have given way to the popular belief ; for he assuredRubruquis, that the Tuinians, or Romanists, hadbrought a person from Cathay, who, by the size andshape of his body, appeared to be but three years old ;yet he was capable of reasoning, knew how to write,and positively affirmed that he had passed through threeseveral bodies. This miraculous personage, it is easyto perceive, was a newly elected Dalai Lama.On the other hand, as parade and glittering ceremonialsare sure to attract the weak and ignorant, it is notunlikely that the Romanists borrowed without scrupleCHAP. IV. TRAVELS OF RVBRUQLIS. 2? Ifrom the Nestorian Christians the pompous externals oftheir worship ; and that the resemblance between theirrites and those of the catholic church is to be chieflyascribed to an actual correspondence with the Christians ofCentral Asia ; a correspondence which, although attendedwith important effects, has, as in many similar instances,almost escaped the notice of history. WhenItubruquis entered one of the idol temples at Coilac,for the purpose," as he tells us, " of observing theirfolly," he was so far misled by appearances, as to concludethat the people were actually Christians, and thatthey omitted the cross and image merely from want ofinstruction.Behind a certain chest which they used as an altar,and on which they placed candles and oblations, he sawan image with wings like that of St. Michael, and otherswith their hands stretched out, as if blessing the spectators.Their priests shaved their heads and beards, andwere dressed in yellow, resembling French friars intheir general appearance : they wore also a cloak ontheir left shoulder, flowing loosely before and behind,but leaving the right arm free ; " somewhat like a deaconcarrying the pix in Lent." They carried with them,wherever they went, a string of one or two hundred nutshells,like a rosary, and while telling these they keptconstantly muttering some pious sentences.Rubruquis, it has been remarked, found strangersfrom many different nations collected in Caracorum.French, Germans, Persians, and Chinese, with peoplefrom Tibet and India, were brought together in thatplace, either by the vicissitudes of war or the inducementsof traffic ; and here is a striking instance of atruth which has been frequently illustrated in the courseof the preceding pages, that the nations of the earthwere never so wholly unknown to each other as mightbe collected from the silence of history as to the intercoursebetween them. Our intelligent monk had anopportunity of learning many peculiarities of the Chinese.They write," he observes, ' ; with a pencil, like that2/2 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.used by painters, and in a single figure they comprehendmany letters forming one word. The ordinarymoney of Cathay is of paper made like pasteboard, aboutthe size of the hand, and with lines printed on it like theseal of Mangu Khan. The people of Tibet write aswe do, and their characters," he continues, " are verylike our own. The Uigurs write in descending columns,and the Thibetians, like the Arabs, from right to left."He also learned from the French goldsmith at Caraco-rum,that there was a nation called Tante or Mante,inhabiting certain islands in the East, the sea roundwhich was frozen in the winter, so that the Tatars couldcross over on the ice and invade them ; and that thesepeople sent ambassadors to the khan offering a tributeof 2000 scots yearly, or about 20,000 marks, as theprice of his favour and protection. These islands mustbe sought on the north-eastern shores of Siberia, thatbeing the direction in which warlike excursions on theice were most likely to be extended.Rubruquis, as well as Carpini, speaks of a Christianprince called Prester John, and gives this name to abrother of Unclean, a Mongol prince of the Nestoriansect of Christians who reigned over the tribes of theMerit and Kerait to the west of the Jugurs, and perishedin 1203 in the wars with Zingis Khan, abouthalf a century before the time of ltubruquis. Carpinibelieved that Prester John was an Indian monarch ; butRubruquis appears to have ascertained with correctnessthe true situation of that prince, whose name a littleafterwards acquired such a fabulous importance. " Tentimes more," says our traveller, " is reported about himthan is true, for the Nestorianss are apt to raise greatstories on slight foundations : when I travelled throughthe territories of Prester John, no one there knew anythingabout him except a few Nestorianss." Unclean,whom our author names also Yut (perhaps Buddha) Khan,abandoned the Christian worship, and established idolatry,retaining priests to his idols who are all sorcerers andworshippers of devils."CHAP. IV. TRAVELS OF RUBItUQUIS. 273It is remarkable that Rubruquis says he had beeninformed by Baldwin de Hainault at Constantinople,what he afterwards found true by experience, that thewhole way eastwards (to Tatary) was a continual ascent,all the great rivers running from east to west, with littledeviation. This observation shows that Baldwin had avery just idea of the physical character of central Asia.Our traveller learned that Cathay or China was distanttwenty days' journey from the encampment of ManguKhan ; at the distance of ten days' journey due eastwas Oman Kurula, the original seat of Zingis Khan andthe Mongols. Farther to the north there were no cities,but poor pastoral tribes called Kcrkis or Kirguees : beyondthem dwelt the Orange, who bound smooth bonesunder their feet, and with these glided with such velocityover the ice and snow as to overtake wild beasts in thechase.Rubruquis returned from Caracorum to the Volgaby the same route which he travelled over before, butfrom Astrachan he turned towards the south, and passedthrough the Caucasian isthmus into Syria. From thetown of Sarah on the eastern side of the Volga, perhapsnot far from the modern Zarcwpod, they travelled fifteendays without finding an inhabited place, except alittle village where one of the sons of Sarah residedwith a train of falconers. They were severely distressedalso for want of water. At length they reached themountains of the Alumni or Ossi, who, along with theLegis, another tribe of mountaineers a little farther tothe south, still defied the power of the Tatars, and pillagedall who entered within their territories. A guardof twenty men was, therefore, ordered to conduct ourtravellers as far as Derbend or the Iron Gate. TheLegis, Ossi, and other Caucasian nations, at this daycontinue to exercise the profession of robbers, and lookupon the sale of slaves and ransom of captives as thechief sources of wealth. The Russians, though nominallymasters of the country, are still obliged to escorttheir mails to Tiflis with a guard of two hundred men.vox I. T274 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.From Derbend Rubruquis crossed the river Kur,from which he says the country was named Kurgia orGeorgia, to the great plain of Moan or Moghan, inwhich the march of the Roman army under Pompey issaid to have been arrested by the multitude of serpentsthat burrowed in the gaps of that parched desert. Hethen passed by Naxvan or Nakshivan, Erzerum, Silas,and Caesarea, till he reached Iconium : here he foundmany Franks established; and informs us that Italianmerchants had farmed from the sultan of the Ottomansthe monopoly of those alum works from which all Europewas supplied till the fifteenth century. FromIconium he went to the port of Curch, where he embarkedto return home.To this account of the mission of Rubruquis it maynot be improper to append a short notice of the travelsof his contemporary, Haitho, the eldest son of Leon II.,king of Armenia. During the reign of his father in1254, that prince, accompanied by his wife and child,travelled to the court of Mangu Khan, the great sovereignof the Mongols, for the purpose of obtaining anabatement of the tribute imposed by the conquerors onhis country, and it is supposed that he was successfulin his negotiations. His journey to Caracorum tookplace in the same year in which Rubruquis returned ;and while at the court of Sarah he was of materialservice to some of the attendants of Rubruquis who hadbeen left at that station, and who, but for his interference,must have perished by famine, or been perhapsreduced to slavery. The narrative of his journey is byno means interesting, but a few geographical particularsmay be collected from it.The empire of Cathay, he says, is one of the mostextensive, opulent, and populous in the world, and issituated entirely on the sea coast. The inhabitants havea high idea of their own superior intelligence, whichthey express by saying, that they alone of all the peopleon earth have two eyes : to the Latins they allow one,and consider all other nations as blind. To the westCHAP. IV. TRAVELS OF RUBRUQUIS. 275the empire of Cathay is bounded, he says, by that ofthe Taste (infidels), to the north by the desert of Belgian,and to the south by the sea, in which there areinnumerable islands.The empire of Tarsal is divided into three provinces,each of which has a sovereign who assumes the title ofking : the inhabitants are called Jugurs or Uigurs. Theyare divided into many tribes, ten of whom are Christians,and the remainder heathens. They abstain from everyarticle of food which has ever had life, and drink nowine. Their towns are agreeable, and contain a greatnumber of idol temples. They are not inclined to war,but learn all arts and sciences with great facility ; andhave a particular manner of writing, which is adoptedby all the neighbouring nations. To the east this countryis bounded by Cathay, to the west by Turkestan, tothe north by an extensive desert, and to the south by avery extensive desert named Sym, or Pym, in which diamondsare found, and which is situated between Cathayand India. The enumeration of the Mongol tribes madeby Haitho has no resemblance with that of Carpini.He divides them into seven nations; viz. Tatars, Tangut,Kunat, Jalair, Social, Monghi, and Taboth. Hisdescriptions of Turkestan, Khorasan, and Campania, offernothing new or important.t 227<> GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.CHAP. V.TRAVELS OF 3IARC0 POLO.THE TWO POLI VISIT BOLGAR. GO TO BOKHARA. — PROCEEDTO THE COURT OF THE GRAND KHAN. RETURN HOME.MARCO POLO TRAVELS TO CHINA. HIS SUCCESS. FAVOURAT COURT. EMBASSAGE FROM PERSIA. — THE POLI PER-MITTED TO LEAVE CHINA. NAVIGATE THE INDIAN SEAS. —PASS THROUGH ARMENIA. THEIR ARRIVAL AT VENICE.EXPEDIENT TO DISPLAY THEIR WEALTH. WAR WITH GENOA.MARCO POLO TAKEN PRISONER. WRITES HIS NARRATIVE.RELEASED FROM CAPTIVITY. RETURNS HOME. HIS AccountOF ASIA. BALKH. Galatia. Cashmere. SAR-tam.DESERT OF LOP. HAUNTED BY EVIL SPIRITS. THEIRMALICIOUS ARTS. Tangle. MANNERS OF THE TATARS.—INTERMENT OF THE KHANS. THE YAK. PAVILION OF THEKHAN. HIS WHITE HORSES. SPLENDOUR OF HIS COURT.CITY OF Cabal. ITS FORM AND SIZE. PALACE OF THEKHAN. ITS PARKS AND GARDENS.While the most powerful kingdoms in Europe trembledat the dangerous proximity of the Tatar hordes whichwere now firmly established in the east of Europe, themerchants of Genoa and Venice felt not a little satisfaction,perhaps, at the prospect of new and ample marketsbeing thus opened for the commodities of the West. Thecharacter of a merchant is held in much respect by Easternnations : pomp and profusion are reckoned by themamong the virtues of a prince ; the simplicity of theTatars and their ignorance of Europe promised ampleprofits to those who first ventured to open a correspondencewith them. The valuable productions of the Easthad so firmly associated the idea of wealth with thatquarter of the world, that it would be matter of surpriseif the enterprising merchants of the Italian states hadneglected to try their fortunes at the courts of theTatarian princes.Two noble Venetians, named Maffio and Nicoloo Polo,were among the first to make the experiment. AfterCHAP. V. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 277disposing of a large stock of merchandise at Constantinople,they considered how they might employ theircapital to the best advantage, and resolved on a tradingvisit to the Tatars, who had now resumed the occupationsof peace in the plains around the Volga. Theyaccordingly purchased a stock of jewels, and crossed theBlack Sea in 1254, to the camp of Baikal, brother orson of Baatu, whose usual residence was at Bolgar orSarai. On their arrival, they placed all their merchandiseat his disposal, and he repaid their confidence withprincely generosity. They were now ready to depart,when a war broke out between Bareka or Baikal Khan,and his cousin Hulagu, which rendered it unsafe forthem to return by the same road by which they hadarrived ; they turned, in consequence, towards the east,crossed the rivers Jai'k and Sion, and arrived at lengthat the great city of Bokhara.They met here with a Tatar nobleman who took muchpleasure in their varied and instructive conversation,and prevailed on them to accompany him to the residenceof the Grand Khan. They consequently set out,and after a journey of twelve months, reached the imperialresidence, at what they considered the extremityof the East. Their reception at court was extremelyfavourable ; and when it appeared, from their mannersand discourse, that they were persons of respectability,the khan resolved to send them back, accompanied byone of his own officers, as ambassador to the pope.They had not proceeded far, however, on their return,when the Tatar fell sick and was left behind ; but havingthe imperial passport, they continued their journey, andat the expiration of three years, employed in crossing thecontinent of Asia, arrived at Acre in the year 126$.When our travellers reached Venice, after an absencefrom home of fifteen years, Nicoloo Polo found that hiswife, whom he had left with child, was dead after producinga son, to whom she gave the name of Marco, andwho was now approaching the age of manhood. Accompaniedby this young man, the two merchants againt 3278 GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.set forward on their journey to the interior of Asia in theyear 1271, with letters to the Grand Khan from GregoryX. the newly-elected pope. In Badakshan, amongthe sources of the Oxus, our travellers remained a wholeyear, in consequence of the illness of young Marco, whoprofited, nevertheless, from the delay in acquiring aknowledge of the surrounding countries. They thenproceeded directly to Khotan, crossed the great desertof Cobi, in a tedious journey of thirty days, entered thecountry of Tangut, and arrived at the city of Kan-che,where they again halted for a considerable time.As soon as the Grand Khan, who at that time had hisprincipal winter residence at Tai-yueu-fu, heard of theirarrival in his dominions, he sent forward messengers adistance of forty days' journey to conduct them to hispresence. He received them with honour ; and payingespecial attention to young Marco, he took him underhis protection, and made him an officer of his household.In this situation Marco Polo had an opportunity of displayinghis abilities : he adopted the dress and customsof the country, and made himself master of the fourprincipal languages then in use, which were probably theMongol, the Turkish, the Manchu of eastern Tatary, andthe Chinese. By his talents and the variety of his accomplishments,he soon acquired a great degree of influenceat court, was employed on missions to the mostdistant provinces of the empire, and even held for theusual period of three years the high rank of governor ofthe city Yang-cheu-fu, in the province of Kiang Hang.After the three Poli had resided about seventeen yearsin the dominions of the Grand Khan, enjoying in thehighest degree his confidence and favour, they began tofeel the natural wish to return to their native countryBut the emperor, who had conceived an attachment tothem all, and particularly valued the abilities of Marco,heard with much dissatisfaction of their desire to leavehim : he reproached them with ingratitude, and declaredthat if gain was the object of their pursuit, he unwillingto gratify their utmost wishes ; but he positivelyCHAP. V. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 279refused to permit their departure. At this conjuncturean accident occurred which most unexpectedly relievedthem from their disagreeable situation. An embassyarrived from Arghun, a Mongol prince who ruled inPersia, and grand nephew of Kubla'i, to solicit in marriagea princess of the royal blood. The Great Khancomplied with the request, and a princess was accordinglyselected from among his grand-daughters, andaccepted by the ambassadors in the name of theirmaster. The betrothed queen soon after, with a numeroustrain of attendants, set out on her journey to Persia; but, after travelling for some months, it Alas founddangerous to attempt proceeding over-land, from thedisturbed state of the country, and the party were compelledto retrace their steps to the capital.It happened that at this very time Marco Polo, whohad been engaged in some expedition in the Indianislands, came into port, and soon after gave to the emperoran account of the safe and easy navigation of thoseseas. This circumstance coming to the knowledge ofthe ambassadors of the king of Persia, they sought theacquaintance of the Polo family, and finding that thesealso longed for an opportunity of making their escape, itwas arranged between them how the matter was to becompassed. The ambassadors represented to the khanthe necessity of their hastening back to Persia with theprincess committed to their charge, and the expediencyof their employing for that purpose the nautical experienceof the Christians. The khan was unable to refusehis assent to so reasonable a proposal. Preparationswere made on a great scale for this important expedition.Fourteen ships of four masts, and some of them withcrews of two hundred and fifty men, were provisionedfor two years. When the Polo family came to take leaveof their friend and benefactor, the aged prince could hardlybear the thought of parting with them, entreated them toreturn to him after having visited their families, empoweredthem to act as his ambassadors with European princes,and loaded them with jewels and other valuable presents.T 4280 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.The fleet arrived safely in Ormuz after a voyage ofeighteen months, touching, on the way, at the principalports of the Indian islands. When the expedition arrivedin Persia it was found that Arghun, to whom theyoung princess was betrothed, had died some time before,and that the country was distracted by the strugglebetween the usurper, who actually filled the throne, andGhazan, the son of the deceased monarch. Of the subsequentfortunes of the princess history is silent. TheVenetians, protected by the letters of the Great Khan,hastened to quit this theatre of intestine war, and passingthrough Armenia to Trebizond, and thence to Constantinopleand Euboea, arrived in Venice in the year1295, after an absence of four-and-twenty years.When they arrived in their native city, they couldhardly be recognised by even their nearest relations.The effects of time and climate on their figure and complexion; their foreign pronunciation, for they had almostforgotten their native language ; their Tatarian air anddemeanour, and the coarseness of their garments, completelydisguised them from their kindred. The opinionhad also long prevailed that they were dead. Somemembers of their family had taken possession of theirdwelling-house; and when they sought to be admitted,it was with difficulty they could bring the inmates ofthe house to understand that they were its lawful proprietors.Soon after they adopted a singular expedientto make their fellow-citizens acquainted with their return,and with the rich fruit of their distant journeys. Theyinvited all their friends and connections to a splendidentertainment ; when the company was assembled, thethree travellers entered richly clad in robes of crimsonsatin ; at the commencement of the feast they changedthese vestments for similar ones of crimson damask, dividingthe first among the attendants. Again, at theremoval of the first course, they put on dresses of crimsonvelvet, the damask robes being in like manner distributed; and at the conclusion of the feast they againchanged those splendid habiliments for plain robes, suchCHAP V. TRAVELS OP MARCO POLO. 281as were worn by their guests. The company wonderedwhat all this meant. At length, when the cloth was removed,and the servants withdrawn, Marco Polo wentinto an adjoining chamber and brought forth the threecoarse garments in which they had returned from theirtravels. They then began to rip open the seams andlinings with which those patched and apparently worthlessrags were doubled, and quickly brought to view aquantity of diamonds, rubies, sapphires, and other preciousstones, which had been carefully sewn up so as toescape observation. When the company saw such acountless treasure, and revealed in a manner so unexpected,they were struck with amazement as if they hadwitnessed a miracle ; but when they had recovered fromtheir ecstasy of delight and astonishment, they were lavishof congratulations and civilities to their hosts, of whosewealth and nobility they had no longer any doubt.They had not been long in Venice when news wasbrought that a Genoese fleet, under the command ofLamps Doria, had made its appearance in the Adriatic,and in consequence, a Venetian fleet, superior in number,immediately put to sea under the orders of Andrea Dan-colo.Marco Polo, as an officer of experience, was appointedto the command of one of the gallies. In theengagement which ensued the Venetians were totallydefeated, and our traveller, whose vessel was foremostin the attack, was wounded and forced to surrender.From his prison in Genoa the fame of Marco Polo'sgreat personal qualities, and the singular adventures ofhis life were soon spread abroad through the city ; andhe was visited by all the chief inhabitants, who endeavoured,as far as it was in their power, to mitigate therigours of his captivity : he was called on continually tonarrate the history of his travels, and to describe thecourt of the Grand Khan. His surprising relationswere listened to with eagerness ; but he was so often solicitedto repeat them, that be at length thought of complyingwith the advice which was generally given him,to commit his narrative to writing. With that view282 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.he procured from Venice the notes which he had left inthe possession of his father, and assisted hy a fellow-prisoner,one Rustigielo of Pisa, he at length completedthe history of his travels ; but it is not perfectly ascertainedwhether the account which we now possess be acopy or only an abridgment of the original manuscript,which was first circulated, it is supposed, in 1298.The merits and accomplishments of Marco Polo procuredhim so many friends among the principal citizensof Genoa, that after a captivity of four years he was atlength released from prison. He married on his returnto Venice, but very little is known of his subsequentlife. Although a very remarkable character in his ageand city, it is not quite certain that any monument waserected to his memory ; many doubting the accuracy ofSansovino's statement, who says, that " under the passageto the church of S. Lorenzo, which stands on one of theislets named Gemelli, lies buried Marco Polo, surnamedMillions, who wrote the account of travels in the newworld, and was the first before Columbus who discoverednew countries."It is difficult at the present day to estimate the impressionwhich the account given of the East by MarcoPolo must have produced on his contemporaries. Theimmense wealth, population, and industry of China ;the Tatar magnificence of Kublai' Khan, the countlesshordes who yielded obedience to him ; the numerousgreat islands in the Indian seas, rich in natural productions,though hitherto but little known ; and those otherislands in the East beyond China under the rising sun ;a new world, in fact, was at once disclosed to view, andnot by a superficial or casual observer, but by one intimatelyacquainted with most of the countries which hedescribed, and who had enjoyed the favourable opportunitiesof official rank. Although many accused MarcoPolo of falsehood or exaggeration, yet his volume wasat all times a favourite study ; and as the progress ofdiscovery, so far from disproving his statements, continuallytended to confirm them, his authority, instead ofCHAP. V. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 283falling into neglect, was daily looked up to with moredeference and attention.Of China and the court of Kublai Khan our travellertreats with the greatest copiousness, not more, perhaps,from their intrinsic interest than because they were thesubjects on which he was most frequently interrogatedby all who sought the pleasure of his conversation. Yetin the course of the numerous missions on which he wasemployed, he had acquired a complete acquaintance withcentral Asia, and for many of those districts his descriptionsare still the best that we possess.The city of Balkh, which has been the emporium ofa great caravan trade from the earliest ages, was in histime hardly recovered from the ruin which every whereattended the march of Zingis Khan. In the lofty mountainsto the south, there are, he says, great beds of rock-salt,to procure which, the people come from a distanceof thirty days' journey all round. " It is of most excellentquality, and in such amazing quantities, that thewhole world might be supplied from these mines." Sixdays' journey from Balkh was the country which hecalls Balaxia or Balascia, supposed to be Badakshan.The people spoke a peculiar language, and their kingspretended to be descended from Alexander the Great ;they consequently called themselves Dalcarlen, or alexandrian.* The royal family also possessed a breed ofhorses said to be derived from Bucephalus, and markedin the forehead exactly as he was.The province of Che&meer or Cashmeer was seventeendays' journey to the sou'li of Balaxia. The inhabitantshad also a peculiar language, were remarkably addictedto idolatry and enchantments, " forcing their idols tospeak, and darkening the day." In passing from Balaxiainto Great Bokhara, he came to. a great mountainwhich was said to be the highest in the world ; a- greatuninhabited plain next occurred, twelve days' journey inlength. Here Marco Polo relates an observation, whichFrom Dou'lkarnain, the two-horned, the common title of Alexanderattic Great.284 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.shows that the mountaineers of Asia had already observedthe difficulty of supporting combustion in highsituations and a rarefied atmosphere. " This plain,"he says, " is so high and cold, that no birds are to befound on it ; and it is even asserted, that fires do notburn so bright in this place, and do not so effectuallyboil or dress victuals as elsewhere."Samarcand, Khotan, and Cashier, are all describedby our traveller ; with the country of Satan, in whichthe people, when the harvest was reaped, used to carryall the corn into the desert and bury it in pits, carefullyobliterating all traces of their footsteps. Beyond theseplaces was the city of Lop, on the borders of the greatwilderness of the same name. It required, he says, amonth's journey to cross this desert from north to south,but to go through it from west to east would require ayear at least. Those who prepared to travel in it remainedsome time at Lop, in order to make suitablepreparations, as no provisions of any kind were to befound in it for a month. These stores, along with themerchandise, were loaded on asses and camels ; and ifthe provisions fell short cm the way, the travellers wereobliged to kill their beasts of burden, generally sacrificingthe asses in that case, as the camels were better fitted toencounter the hardships of the desert. The journey layentirely through sands and barren mountains ; and insome places the water was so scarce as hardly to sufficefor a small caravan of fifty or a hundred persons.In the whole of this journey," says our traveller,there are no birds or beasts to be seen. It is reportedthat many evil spirits reside in the wilderness, and practisewonderful illusions on travellers who happen to lagbehind their companions, calling them by their rightnames, and in accustomed tones of voice ; thus causingthem to stray further from the right course, and to losetheir way and perish in the sands. In the night-time, also,travellers are often persuaded that they hear the marchof a large cavalcade on the one side or the other of theroad, and concluding the noise to be that of the footstepsCHAP. V. Travels OF MARCO POLO. 28 Jof their party, they turn towards the quarter whenceit seems to proceed ; but upon the breaking of day, findthey have been misled and drawn into a situation ofdanger. It is said also, that some persons in their courseacross the desert have seen what appeared to them tobe a body of armed men advancing towards them, andapprehensive of being attacked and plundered have takento flight; losing, by this means, the right path, andignorant of the direction they should take to regain it,they have perished miserably of hunger. Marvellous,indeed, and almost passing belief, are the stories relatedof those spirits of the desert, which are said at times tofill the air with the sound of all kinds of musical instruments,and also of drums and the clash of arms, obligingthe travellers to close their line of march and to proceedin more compact order. They find it necessary also totake the precaution, before they repose for the night, tofix an advanced signal, pointing out the course they areafterwards to hold, as well as to attach a bell to each ofthe beasts of burden, for the purpose of their being moreeasily kept from straggling. Such are the excessivetroubles and dangers that must unavoidably be encounteredin the passage of this desert." These wonders,related by our author respecting the desert of Lop, aregenerally believed in China and Tatary.Beyond the desert of Lop, according to Marco Polo,is the city of Action, or Sha-cheu, in the great countryof Tangut : the people are little addicted to merchandiseand manufactures, and live wholly from the produceof the soil. In the country of Tangut, likewise, is theprovince of Kabul, the inhabitants of which appear tolive only for amusement : they devote their whole timeto singing, dancing, and sports, to playing on instrumentsof music, and writing after their fashion. Beyondthe country of Tangut is the great desert ofShamo, which is forty days' journey in extent towardsthe north. The first place which occurs after crossingthis desert is the city of Caracorum, three miles in circumference,and strongly fortified with an earthen GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.part. Near the city is a great castle, with a superbpalace, in which the governor resides. Such is MarcoPolo's description of the capital city of the Mongols ;but Rubruquis, on the other hand, declared that it wasinferior to St. Denis.The Venetian traveller gives an accurate and livelydescription of the Tatar nations, their manners, character,and constitution. They feed great herds of cattle, andnumerous flocks of sheep, and multitudes of camels andhorses. During the summer they remain with these inthe pastures of the mountains and colder regions of thenorth, where they find abundance of grass and wood;but in winter they remove into the warmer regions ofthe south, in search of pasture ; and in these migrationsthey frequently march a distance of two or three months'journey. Their houses are formed of slender rodscovered with felt, mostly of a round form, and are carriedalong with them on carts or waggons with fourwheels, the doors of these movable houses being alwaysplaced fronting the south. They have also carts coveredso closely with felt, that the rain cannot penetrate, and inthese their wives, children, and household goods are conveyedfrom place to place.It has been an invariable custom, says MarcoPolo, that all the grand khans and chiefs of the raceof Zingis Khan should be carried for interment to a certainlofty mountain, named Altar'; and in whateverplace they may chance to die, although it should be atthe distance of a hundred days' journey, they are neverthelessconveyed thither. It is likewise the custom,during the progress of removing the bodies of thoseprinces, to sacrifice such persons as they happen to meeton the road ; saying to them, " Depart for the nextworld, and there attend on your deceased master ;" beingimpressed with the belief that all whom they thus slaydo actually become his servants in the next life. Theydo the same with respect to horses, killing the best of thestud, in order that he may have the use of them. Whendie corpse of Mangu Khan was transported to this mountV. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 287tain, the horsemen who accompanied it, having this Windand horrible persuasion, slew upwards of ten thousandpersons who fell in their way.In the south-east of Tangut the Yak, or Tatarian ox,first occurred to our traveller's notice. He says, thereare certain wild cattle in this country, nearly as large aselephants, with black and white hair, which is short alloverthe body, but three spans long on the shoulders, ofa pure white colour, exceedingly fine, and in many respectsmore beautiful than silk. Many of these oxen aretamed and trained to labour, for which they are betteradapted by their strength than any other animal. Thefinest musk in the world also is found in this province :it is procured from a beautiful animal the size of a goat,with hair like a stag, feet and tail resembling those of anantelope, but without horns. It has two teeth projectingfrom the upper jaw, about three inches long, and aswhite as the finest ivory.Near the city of Ciondu, or Chang-tu, in Tangut,was a magnificent palace, erected by Kubla'i Khan, ofmarvellous art and beauty, ornamented with marble anda variety of rare stones. On one side of this buildingwas a great enclosed park, sixteen miles in circuit, intowhich no one could enter but through the palace. Inthis enclosure were meadows, groves, and rivers, and thewhole was well stocked with red and fallow deer, andother animals. In the middle of the woods included inthis park, the khan had a superb kiosk, or summerhouse,built of wood, on pillars richly gilt and varnished.Round each pillar a dragon, likewise gilt, entwined itstail, while its head sustained the projection of the roof,and its talons or claws extended to the right and leftalong the entablature. The roof was formed of bamboocane, likewise gilt, and so well varnished that no wetcould injure it. The bamboos used for this purposewhere three palms in circumference, and sixty feet long,and, being cut at the joints, were slit into two equalparts, so as to form gutters ; with these the pavilionwas covered. The building was supported on every side288 GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.Eke a tent, by more than two hundred strong silkencords ; as otherwise, from the lightness of the material,it would be liable to be overset from the violence of highwinds. The whole was constructed with so much ingenuity,that all the parts might be taken asunder,removed, and set up again, in a very short time, at thecommand of the emperor.The Grand Khan had a stud of horses and mares, allpure white, nearly ten thousand in number : of the milkof these none were permitted to drink but the descendantsof Zingis Khan, with the exception of one familynamed Boriat, on whom this privilege was conferred byZingis on account of their valour and achievements. Sogreat was the reverence shown to these white horses,that while they were at pasture in the royal meadows orforests, no one dared to place himself before them, orotherwise to disturb their movements. The reverencepaid to the white horse is said to have at present muchdeclined among the Mongols. In the time of Rubusthe Tatars collected together all the white mares,on the ninth day of the May-moon, in order to consecratethem ; the Christian priests were also obliged onthat occasion to attend with their censers and assist inthe ceremonies ; fresh koomis was . poured upon theground, and a great festival celebrated.The power and magnificence of Kublai Khan aretreated of copiously in Marco Polo's narrative. Thesewere the subjects respecting which he was most frequentlyinterrogated; and perhaps, besides the impressionmade on his youthful imagination by the grandeur thatsurrounded the Mongol emperor, he still retained anaffectionate regard for the master from whom he experiencedso many flattering distinctions. " Kublai Khan,"he says, " was of a middle stature, well formed, and ofa fair complexion. He had four wives of the first rank,each of whom bore the title of empress, and had a separatecourt None of them had fewer than three hundredfemale attendants of great beauty, together with a multitudeof pages and ladies of the bed-chamber ; so thatCHAP. V. TRAVELS OF MARCO PC>L0. 289the whole number of persons belonging to their respectivecourts amounted to no less than ten thousand."Besides these four wives, the emperor had a numberof concubines, chiefly drawn from a province of Tatarynamed Utigut, in which was a city of the same name,distinguished for the fair complexion and handsome featuresof its inhabitants. There is little doubt that thisprovince called Uncut was the country of the Uigurs,who have been always considered as superior to the othernations of Tatary, both in respect of person and acquirements.Every second year, or oftener, according to circumstances,the imperial officers visited that country,for the purpose of collecting four or five hundred of thehandsomest young women, according to certain principlesof taste communicated to them in their instructions.During the winter months Kubla'i Khan always residedat Cambalu khan belike), ox the royal residence, onthe north-eastern border of Cathay. This is the Pekinof the present day. But the emperor having imbibedan opinion from the astrologers that this city was destinedto become rebellious to his authority, resolved tobuild a new city on the opposite or southern side of theriver. The new-built city received the name of Taidu(Ta-tu or great court), and all the Chinese inhabitantswere obliged to evacuate the old city, and to take uptheir abode in the new one. The halves into whichPekin is divided by the river are still called respectivelythe Chinese and Tatar cities.The new city, or Taidu, was of a form perfectlysquare, and twenty-four miles in circumference, eachside being neither more nor less than six miles long.The Chinese and Tatar towns are all originally square ;a preference being given to that figure, it has been supposed,from principles of castrametation ; but it is possiblethat the superstitious attachment of the Mongols tothe number four, may also have contributed to determinethat choice. The whole city was encompassed withwalls of earth, ten paces thick at the base, but diminishingtowards the top. It was regularly laid out by line ;vol. i. u290 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.and the streets were, consequently, so straight, that a personlooking from one gate might see the gate that correspondedto it on the opposite side of the city. Oneach of the sides were three principal gates, twelve inall, a sumptuous palace being built over each ; and ateach corner of the wall was a barrack built for the cityguards, which amounted to one thousand men for eachgate.Outside of the city were twelve large suburbs, extendingthree or four miles in length from each gate, andcontaining a much greater number of inhabitants thanthe city within the walls. In each of the suburbs werenumerous hotels or caravanserais, in which foreign merchantstook up their abode, and to each nation a separatequarter was assigned. But these great suburbs describedby Marco Polo appear to have dwindled away very muchsince his time. According to the account of Sir G.Staunton it employed only fifteen minutes to traverse oneof the eastern suburbs, by which the English embassyapproached the capital in 1793, and twenty minutes totraverse that on the western side, by which it departed.On the southern side of the new city was the grandpalace of Kublai Khan, the faithful description of whichmay have formerly brought on Marco Polo the chargeof exaggeration, so far does the state and profusion of aTatar emperor surpass not only the power of Europeanprinces, but even the easy grasp of European imagination.The palace stood within a vast square enclosure,the wall of which on each side was eight miles long :this wall was surrounded externally by a deep ditch, anda great gate was in the middle of each side. Within thisouter wall there was another, exactly a mile distant fromit; each side of the square which it formed being six milesin length : the space between these two walls was allottedto the soldiers to exercise and perform their evolutions.This inner square had three gates on the north side, andas many on the south : the middle gate on both sideswas much larger and more magnificent than the others,being appropriated solely to the use of the khan ; throughCHAP. V. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 291the others any one who pleased might enter. This customof reserving separate doors for the sole use of royaltyprevails generally among the Tatar nations.Within the second wall there was a third, also at aconsiderable distance, enclosing a square mile. Theinterval between these two walls formed a park, adornedwith a great variety of trees, and well stocked with deerand every other description of game : at the angles andmiddle points of the interior wall were eight great buildings,which served as storehouses and magazines forthe retinue of the khan. Within this central or thirdenclosure was the palace of the khan, which extendedthe whole way from the northern to the southern wall,and was consequently a mile in length : sufficient spacewas left round it for the passage of the officers and soldiersattending the court. The palace, as Marco Polodescribes it, was very lofty, but had no upper story ; acircumstance that diminishes the apparent improbabilityof its great extent. The whole line of building wassurrounded by a marble wall two paces wide, resemblinga terrace. The insides of the great halls and the apartmentswere ornamented with dragons in carved work andgilt, figures of warriors, of birds and beasts, with representationsof battles. The inside of the roof was so richlyornamented, that nothing was to be seen but splendidgold and imagery. The exterior of the roof was adornedwith a variety of colours, red, green, azure, and violet ;and the covering was of so strong a nature as to lastfor many years. At the present day, the Chinese palacesare always covered with highly varnished yellow tiles.The glazing of the windows in the imperial palace, ourtraveller says, was so delicate and finely wrought as tohave the transparency of crystal. It must not be supposed,however, that the Chinese of those days wereacquainted with the art of making glass : the transparentwindows of the palace were probably made either withtalc or of some species of shell.Not far from the palace was an artificial mound ofearth, a hundred paces high, and about a mile in circuitv 9.292 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.at the base : it was clothed with the most beautiful evergreentrees ; for whenever the emperor received intelligenceof a handsome tree growing in any place, heimmediately caused it to be dug up and transported,with all its roots and the earth about it, on the backsof elephants, to this mount, which, from its perpetualverdure, received the appellation of the Green Mount.Within the same enclosure was a running stream, anaqueduct, and a pond, all stored with a variety of excellentfish, and stocked also with swans and otheraquatic birds. " The view of this altogether," says theVenetian, " the mount itself, the trees, and the building,form a delightful and at the same time a wonderfulscene." These hills are noticed in terms of equal admirationin the account of Lord Macartney's embassy.A halt," says Sir G. Staunton, " was made oppositethe treble gates, which are nearly in the centre of thisnorthern side of the palace wall : it appeared to enclosea large quantity of ground. It was not level, like allthe lands without the wall ; some of it was raised intohills of steep ascent ; the earth taken to form them leftdeep hollows now filled with water. Out of these artificiallakes, of which the margins were diversified andirregular, small islands rose with a variety of fancifuledifices interspersed with trees. On the hills of differentheights the principal palaces of the emperor were erected.On the summit of the loftiest eminences were tall treessurrounding summer-houses, and cabinets contrived forretreat or pleasure. The whole had somewhat the appearanceof enchantment."CHAP. VI. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 293CHAP. VI.TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO CONTINUED.1IANJI OR SOUTHERN CHINA. KING FANFUR. HIS Overthrow.PREDICTION FULFILLED. MARCO POLO MADEGOVERNOR OF A CITY. SIEGE OF SAYANFU. SERVICES OFTHE TOLL GREAT TRADE OF SIN-GUI. THE RIVER KIANG.CITY OF KIN-SAI. ITS SIZE. MARKETS, CANALS, ANDBRIDGES. POPULATION. POLICE. SALE OF CHILDREN.PORT OF ZAITUN. MANUFACTURE OF PORCELAIN. CannibalsIN CHINA. Tibet. METHOD OF FRIGHTENING WILDBEASTS. SORCERERS. SALT USED AS MONEY. MUSKGAZELLES. DESCRIPTION OF CROCODILES. SUPERSTITION INCaravan. CUSTOM OF GILDING THE TEETH. JAPANFAMOUS FOR ITS WEALTH. THE TATARS FAIL TO CONQUERIT. THE GENERALS PUNISHED. COUNTRY OF CIAMPA.GREATER JAVA. LESSER JAVA. THE RHINOCEROS. Sac.CEYLON. THE KING'S RUBY. MANNERS OF THE HINDOOS.ST. THOMAS. ARABIAN PORTS. MADAGASCAR. THERoth. Abyssinia. THE NORTH OF EUROPE. MERITS OFMARCO POLO. THE MISSIONARIES. JOHN DE MONTECOR-VINO VISITS PERSIA AND INDIA. PROCEEDS TO CHINA.THWARTED BY THE Nestorian. HIS SUCCESS. CONVERTSA MONGOL PRINCE. HIS CHEAT LABOURS. CREATED ArchbishopOF Cabal.Marco Polo was the first European who visitedChina ; and certainly none of those who have succeededhim ever enjoyed equal opportunities of acquiring a perfectknowledge of that country. The account, however,which he published of his travels was adapted to thetaste and sentiments of the age in which lie lived ; andmuch of his valuable information was probably withheld,from a fear that it might not prove generally interesting.The splendour and state of the imperial court,the manners and military organisation of the Tatars,occupy a comparatively larger portion of his volume thanthe character, commerce, and industry of the Chinese ;and yet it is quite evident that these had sufficiently engagedhis attention; and in proportion as he advances inthe course of his description from the frontiers of Tataryu 329 1 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.towards the south of China, he speaks in terms of continuallyincreasing admiration of the arts, wealth, andpopulation of the country.To the northern part of China, or all that lay to thenorth of the Hang-ho, or Yellow River, he gives thename of Khatai or Cathay ; the country south of thatriver he calls the province of Manji. This province,he says, is the most magnificent and richest that isknown in the Eastern world. About the year 1269 itwas subject to a prince styled Fanfur, who surpassed inwealth and power all who had reigned in that countryfor a century before him. He was of a benevolent temperand pacific disposition. So much was he beloved by hispeople, and such was the natural strength of his kingdom,enclosed by rivers of the largest size, that his beingmolested by any foreign power was regarded as an impossibleevent. In consequence of this persuasion heneglected to encourage a military temper among hispeople, nor did he even maintain a body of cavalry inhis kingdom, not being apprehensive of any attack.Among other instances of this prince's charitable disposition,Marco Polo observes, that he caused the childrenwhom their wretched mothers exposed in consequenceof their inability to maintain them to be saved andtaken care of, to the number of twenty thousand annually.The existence of this inhuman custom of exposingchildren to death, or interring them alive, was a longtimedoubted, but the accuracy of our author's statementis fully vindicated by the testimony of an intelligent moderntraveller, who calculates that about nine thousandchildren are in this manner annually put to death in thecity of Pekin alone.*Very different from the luxurious and pacific habits ofFanfur were those of Kubla'i Khan, emperor of theTatars, whose whole pleasure consisted in warlike enterprises,and the extension of his dominions. Havingsubdued all the provinces to the north, he now turnedhis eyes on the rich country of Manji, and for this pur-barrow,Travels in China, p.lG9.CHAP. VI. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 295pose assembled a numerous army of horse and foot, thecommand of which he gave to a general named Chin-sanBa-ryan, which signifies " the hundred-eyed." Thisgeneral soon struck terror into the Chinese by the boldnessof his movements, and by the severity of his executionswhen he met with resistance. He advanced, at length,against the royal city of Kin-sai, the residence of Fan-fur,who felt all the dread and indecision of a personunused to war. Alarmed for the safety of his person,he made his escape to a fleet of ships that lay in readinessfor the purpose, and embarking all his treasure andvaluable effects, left the charge of the city to his queen,with directions for its being defended to the utmost ;feeling assured that her sex would be a protection to herin the event of her falling into the hands of the enemy.He then proceeded to sea, and reaching certain islands,in which were some strongly fortified posts, he continuedthere till his death. After the queen had been thus leftbehind to defend the city, it came to her knowledge thatthe king had been told by the astrologers, that he couldnever be deprived of his sovereignty by any other than achief who should have a hundred eyes. On the strengthof this declaration, which contained a condition that didnot seem likely to be realised, she felt confident that thecity could not be lost, although it was daily becomingmore and more distressed. Enquiring, however, one daythe name of the general who commanded the enemy'stroops, and being told that it was Chin-san Ba-ryan, orthe hundred-eyed, she was suddenly struck with horrorat hearing it pronounced, as she felt a conviction thatthis must be the person who, according to the predictionof the astrologers, was to drive her husband from thethrone. Overcome by superstitious fear, she no longer attemptedto make resistance, but immediately surrendered.Being thus in possession of the capital, the Tatars soonsubdued the remainder of the provinces. The captivequeen was honourably received by Kublai Khan, and anallowance was assigned her, suitable to the dignity of herformer rank.u 4296 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.The Venetian traveller describes, in order, all thechief places that occurred to him in a journey from theHang-ho to the south of China, their industry, population,and manufactories of salt, from which the khanraised revenues to an incredible amount. There is oneof these cities, the mention of which in his narrative isconnected with an interesting anecdote relating to himself." Proceeding," he says, " in a south-easterly directionfrom Chin-gui, you come to the important city ofVan-gui, which, having twenty-seven towns under itsjurisdiction, must be considered as a place of first-rateconsequence. It belongs to the dominion of the GrandKhan. The people are idolaters, and subsist by tradeand manual arts. They manufacture arms and all sortsof warlike accoutrements, in consequence of which manytroops are stationed in this part of the country. Thecity is the place of residence of one of the twelve nobles,who are appointed by his majesty to the government ofthe provinces ; and in the room of one of these MarcoPolo, by special order of his majesty, acted as governorof this city during the space of three years." Such isthe modest incidental mention which he makes of thegreat honour conferred upon him ; an honour which,according to the existing forms and etiquette of theChinese government, could hardly be enjoyed at presentby any foreigner ; but Kubla'i Khan, though he generallyrespected the usages of the conquered people, yetfrequently ventured to confer high offices on meritoriousstrangers.There is another anecdote in our author's narrative,in which his father and his uncle are made to cutconspicuous figure. The city of Sa-yan-fu in the pvince of Manji, a place of great strength and importance,was enabled by the advantages of its position to holdout against the Tatars for the space of three years. Thebesieging army could approach it only on the northernside ; the others being surrounded by water, by meansof which the place continually received supplies whichno vigilance of the besiegers could prevent. The khanCHAP. VI. TRAVELS OP MARCO POLO. 297was deeply vexed at the check which his victorious armsreceived at this place. This circumstance coming tothe knowledge of the brothers Nicoloo and Maffio Polo,they proposed to construct machines, such as were madeuse of in the Al r est, capable of throwing stones of threehundred pounds' weight, by which the walls and defencesof the city might be soon broken down and destroyed.Their offer was gladly accepted ; some Nestorian Christians,who were found to be the most skilful artisans,were placed under their direction ; the catapults werespeedily finished, and employed against the besiegedtown with such effect, that it was soon compelled tosurrender. This signal service, rendered by the Polofamily to the emperor, contributed much to increasetheir reputation and their credit at court.At the distance of fifteen days' journey to the southeastof Sa-yan-fu is the city of Sin-gui, which, thoughnot large, carries on an immense commerce. " Thenumber of vessels that belong to it," says our author,is prodigious, in consequence of its being situatednear the Kiang, which is the largest river in the world,its width being in some places six, in others eight, andin others ten miles. Its length to the place where itdischarges itself into the sea is upwards of one hundreddays' journey. It is indebted for its great size to thevast number of other navigable rivers that empty theirwaters into it, which have their sources in distant countries.A great many cities and large towns are situatedupon its banks, and more than two hundred, with sixteenprovinces, partake of the advantages of its navigation,by which the transport of merchandise is carriedon to an extent that might appear incredible to thosewho have not had an opportunity of witnessing it.When we consider, indeed, the length of its course, andthe multitude of rivers that communicate with it, it isnot surprising that the quantity and value of articlesfor so many places, lying in all directions, should beincalculable." Yet he observes that the principal commoditytransported by this internal navigation was salt,298 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.which was not only conveyed by the Kiang and therivers flowing into it to the towns upon their banks,but afterwards from these towns to all places in the interiorof the country. He affirms that he once saw atthe city of Sin-gui not fewer than five thousand vessels,while there were several other towns on the river wherethe number was still more considerable. All these vesselswere covered with a kind of deck, and had a mastwith one sail ; their burden was from four to twelvethousand canter of Venice, or from two to six hundredtons. They had no hempen cordage except in the runningrigging ; the hawsers or towing-ropes were made ofcane or bamboo, split, in their whole length into thinpieces, and twisted or plaited together in such a wayas to form strong ropes three hundred paces long. Bythese ropes the vessels were tracked along the rivers ;each vessel having ten or twelve horses for that purpose.On the banks of the great river Kiang was a continualsuccession of villages or inhabited places ; numeroushills and rocky eminences overhung the water, on thetop of which were erected idol temples and other handsomeedifices.But our author's admiration and astonishment at thedense population and inland trade of China are chieflymanifested in his description of Kin-sai. This city, whichwas formerly the capital of Southern China, is properlycalled Hang-che, but Marco Polo seems to have mistakenits ordinary epithet for its name. " At the endof three days' journey from Va-gtn," he says, " youreach the noble and magnificent city of Kin-sai ; a namethat signifies the celestial city, and which it merits fromits pre-eminence above all others in the world, in pointof grandeur and beauty, as well as from its abundantdelights, which might lead an inhabitant to imagine himselfin paradise." He declared that he frequently visitedthis city, diligently enquired into every circumstancerespecting it, and carefully noted down his observations.Yet it is impossible to give credit to his assertion, thataccording to common estimation the city of Kin-sai wasCHAP. VI. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 299a hundred miles in circuit. The circumference of Hang-cheat present is supposed by travellers to be eighteenor twenty miles ; in most other particulars his accountis confirmed by the descriptions of modern travellers.On one side of the city is a lake remarkable for theclearness of its water, and the picturesque scenery thatsurrounds it : on the other is a river, four miles wide,and bordered towards the sea by a fine strand as far asthe eye can reach. Innumerable canals intersect thecity in every direction, and appear, in the time of ourtraveller, to have formed some navigable communicationsbetween the river and the lake. He says, that the numberof bridges were generally supposed to amount totwelve thousand. Those thrown over the principalcanals, and connected with the main streets, had archesso lofty, and so well constructed, that vessels could passunder them, while at the same time carts and horses werepassing over their heads. In almost every thing thathe relates respecting the size of Kin-sai or Hang-che,he goes very far beyond the calculations of modern travellers; but as that city was formerly the royal residenceand capital of the empire, it is possible that it may atonetime have very much exceeded its present dimensions.He says, that it contained ten principal squaresor market-places, each half a mile in length, and thatthese were at the distance of four miles from each other.In each of the market-places, three days in every weekthere assembled forty or fifty thousand persons, broughttogether for the purposes of traffic. Great canals wereconstructed, conducting from the river to these markets ;and on the sides of these were great edifices of stone,which served as warehouses for the merchants fromIndia and other distant countries.In his description of Kin-sai, he enters into many particularsrespecting the manners of the Chinese, and thepolice of their cities. He observes, that the people ofthe lower orders do not scruple to eat every kind of flesh,however unclean, without any discrimination ; a nationaltrait which has caught the attention of travellers at all300 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.ages. The Chinese devours with equal appetite theflesh»of an ox or a camel, a sheep or an ass. But quadrupedsthat find their subsistence in the neighbourhoodof dwelling-houses, such as hogs and dogs, are the mostcommon animal food, and are sold publicly in all themarkets.Marco Polo happened to be at Kin-sai at the time ofmaking the annual report to government of the amountof the revenue, and the number of inhabitants, and hadthus an opportunity of learning that the latter were registeredat a hundred and sixty romans of fire-place ;and as a toman is ten thousand, it follows that the wholecity must have contained one million six hundred thousandfamilies ; among which multitude of people therewas but one church of Nestorian Christians. Thisstatement of the number of families in a single city appearsto be excessive ; but it must be remembered thatthe population of an ancient Chinese capital cannot becorrectly measured by the standard of a modern city.The population of Kin-sai or Hang-che is said to bestill immense, and not much inferior to that of Pekin.The population of this latter city, which is neither a portnor a place of inland trade or manufacture, nor even aresort for pleasure and dissipation, is computed to beabove three millions. Every father of a family, orhousekeeper, is required to affix a writing to the door ofhis house, specifying the name of every individual ofhis family, whether male or female, as well as the numberof his horses : by this regulation the public officerswere always well acquainted with the population and resourcesof the country within their several jurisdictions.Our traveller likewise remarked, that it was a prevalentcustom among the indigent class of the people, who wereunable to support their families, to sell their children tothe rich, in order that they might be fed and brought upin a better manner than their own poverty would admit.Five-and-twenty miles from Kin-sai, at the mouth of theriver which flowed through it, was the great port ofGanpu or Canfu, supposed by some to be the modernCHAP. VI. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 301Ning-po, one of the three Chinese ports which carry ona foreign trade.Of the great commercial city of Zaitun, he observesthat the quantity of pepper imported into it was so great,that what was carried to Alexandria to supply the demandsof the Western parts of the world was trifling incomparison, perhaps not exceeding the hundredth part.Respecting the enormous quantities of this article consumedby the Chinese, he relates that the quantity requiredfor the city of Kin-sai alone amounted to abovetwo thousand tons yearly ; but it is thought that in thisinstance he confounded the whole quantity importedwith that which was consumed. The city of Zaitunstood upon a branch of the river which flowed throughKin-sai, and at the point where the two branches separatedwas the city of Tingui, distinguished for its manufacturesof fine porcelain ware. Great quantities ofporcelain earth were here collected into heaps, and inthis way exposed to the action of the atmosphere forthirty or forty years, during which time it was neverdisturbed. Jiy this process it became refined, and fittedfor the manufacture. The heaps of earth thus lying inastate of preparation were frequently transmitted asfortunes to children and grandchildren. This is theonly notice which Marco Polo takes of one of the mostremarkable of the Chinese manufactures ; but it may besupposed that having lived so long in * China he hadceased to regard fine porcelain as a curiosity, and was,in consequence, satisfied to make this brief allusion toit,in the summary account which lie published of histravels. The same excuse, though it must he confessedit is not quite adequate, must be offered for his silencewith respect to the use of tea ; which, both as a grandsource of revenue, and as a remarkable national custom,could not possibly have escaped his attention. Thisomission has always furnished a principal argument tothose who deny the genuineness of our author's narrativeand the reality of his travels in China. But his generalveracity is so fully established in the eyes of the ablest302 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK (II.critics that his silence with respect to the use of teamust be accounted for from the imperfection of his notes,and from the disagreeable circumstances under which hehastily prepared his narrative for publication.Adjoining the viceroy ally of Kin-sai, according to ourauthor, was the province of Concha, the capital city ofwhich was Fu-giu. This country was rich and populous,producing saffron and ginger in great abundance. Butrespecting the inhabitants, he speaks in singular terms :•— " The people in this part of the country," he says,are addicted to eating human flesh, esteeming it moredelicate than any other ; provided the death of the personhas not been occasioned by disease. When theyadvance to combat, they throw their hair loose abouttheir ears, and paint their faces of a bright blue colour.They are a most savage race of men, insomuch, thatwhen they slay their enemies in battle, they greedilydrink their blood, and afterwards devour their flesh."This, it must be confessed, does not seem to be a descriptionof the effeminate Chinese; and it has beenconjectured that the author has in this place inadvertentlyintroduced his description of the Battas, a fiercetribe who inhabit Sumatra. But whence came thisconfusion ? Does it not appear as if he really intendedto accuse the Chinese of eating human flesh, and thuscame to picture in his mind the warlike and paintedcannibals of Sumatra ? The Arabian travellers of theninth century, it has been seen, cast the same imputationon the people of China. — Marco Polo seems to havetravelled through the provinces in the western frontierof China, with which no other European has ever hadthe opportunity of becoming acquainted. In the highplains of Tibet were deserts of twenty days' journey inextent, over-run by lions and other wild beasts. Canesof a great size (perhaps bamboos) grew in abundancein every part of the country ; and whenever travellershalted to rest at night, they made a great fire of thesecanes and of green reeds, which made so loud a cracklingin the flames as to be heard for miles around, and toCHAP. VI. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 303terrify the wild beasts. The people of Tibet were saidto be the most skilful necromancers in the world. Theycould cause tempests to arise, accompanied with flashesof lightning and thunderbolts, and produce many othermiraculous effects. In the province of Kaindu, contiguousto Tibet, was a mine of turquoises, and a saltwaterlake producing abundance of pearls. The usualmoney of the country was salt made into little cakes,worth about two-pence each. The hills of all this regionwere frequented by the musk gazelles in such numbers,that the air was perfumed from them at the distance ofmany miles.The province of Caravan was infested by crocodiles oralligators, of which our author gives a singularly distortedaccount, " Here," he says, " are huge serpents,ten paces long and ten spans wide round the body : atthe fore-part, near the head, they have two short legs,having three claws like those of a tiger, with eyes largerthan a fourpenny loaf and very glaring : the jaws arewide enough to swallow a man; the teeth are large andvery sharp ; and their whole appearance is so formidable,that neither man nor any kind of animal can approachthem without terror." Before the inhabitants of Caravanwere made subject to the Tatar emperor, they hadthe custom of murdering every stranger who came amongthem possessing any superior qualities of mind or body,in hopes that his spirit, endowed with all its intelligence,would remain in the family.In the province of Kankandan, both the men andwomen had the custom of covering their teeth with thinplates of gold : they were also punctured or tattooed onthe arms and legs. The practice of gilding the teeth orof dyeing them black seems to belong properly to theMalay nations. In Kankandan, when a woman wasdelivered of a child, the husband immediately went tobed, where he remained like an invalid for forty days,receiving the congratulations of his friends and relations.This singular custom was observed also among the Tiba-reni in the mountains of Armenia..104 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.Marco Polo was the first who made Europeans acquaintedwith the islands of Japan; and his distinctannouncement of lands situated so far to the East hadan important influence, it will be seen, on the maritimeenterprises of the fifteenth century. " Zipangu" hesays, " is an island situated at the distance of aboutfifteen hundred miles from the main land or coast ofManji." The name Zipangu is evidently the Chineseexpression Ge-pen-kue, or the kingdom of Japan. " Thepeople," he says, " are fair complexioned, well made, andcivilised in their manners : they possess the precious metalsin extraordinary abundance. The roof of the king'spalace is covered with a plating of geld, just as we coverhouses, or more properly churches, with lead. The ceilingsof the halls are of the same precious metal : manyof the apartments have small tables of pure gold, and ofconsiderable thickness ; and the windows also are loadedwith golden ornaments."The fame of Japan and of its incalculable riches inducedthe Tatar emperor Kubla'i Khan to attempt itsconquest, in order to annex it to his dominions. Theexpedition reached the island in safety, and carried byassault a fortress, the garrison of which refused to surrender.Directions were of course given for putting thewhole to the sword ; and thereupon the heads of all werestruck off, excepting of eight persons, who by the efficacyof a charm, consisting of a jewel or amulet, introducedinto the right arm between the skin and flesh, were renderedsecure from the effects of iron either to kill orwound : when this was discovered they were beaten todeath with heavy wooden clubs. Presently after a greatgale came on which destroyed a great part of the Tatarfleet ; the commanders returned homeward, and the soldiers,who for want of shipping to transport them wereleft upon the island, were in short time obliged to surrenderto the natives. When the Grand Khan learned,some years later, that the unfortunate issue of this expeditionwas to be ascribed to the dissensions betweenthe two commanders, he caused the head of one of themCHAP. VI. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 305to be cut off; the other he sent to the savage island ofZorza, where state criminals are executed in the followingmanner : — They are wrapped round both arms in thefresh hide of a buffalo, which is sewn tight; when thisdries, it compresses the body to such a degree that thesufferer is unable to make the least movement, and thusperishes by a lingering and painful death. The attemptof the Tatars on Japan was made in 1264, not manyyears before Marco Polo went to the court of the GrandKhan. To the hostility with which the Tatars viewedthe Japanese, it may, perhaps, be attributed that theVenetian should accuse the latter of being cannibals,though he elsewhere calls them a civilised people. " Thereader ought to be informed," he says, " that the idolatrousinhabitants of these islands, when they seize theperson of an enemy who has not the means of effectinghis ransom for money, invite to their house all theirrelations and friends, and putting their prisoner to death,dress and eat the body in a convivial manner, assertingthat human flesh surpasses every other in the excellenceof its flavour."To the south of Japan extended the sea of Chin, orChinese sea, in which, according to the information collectedby our traveller, there were seven thousand fourhundred and forty islands, the greater part of them inhabited,producing spices in abundance, and carrying ona great trade among themselves. Sailing fifteen hundredmiles to the south-west, across the gulf of Yunan, hearrived at the province of Ziamba, or Ciampa, to thesouth of Cochin China, which paid to the Grand Khana tribute of elephants and aloes wood. Marco Polo saysthat he visited this country in 1280, at which time theking had three hundred and twenty-five children, maleand female. At the distance of fifteen hundred miles,in a south-west direction from Ciampa, our author placesthe island of Java, which he visited, and which, hesays, is supposed to be the largest island in the world,having a circumference of three thousand miles. Theparticulars which he relates of this island render it diffI. X306 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.ficult to determine whether it was Borneo or the islandto which the name of Java is at the present day confined.It is still more difficult to divine the islands towhich he gives the names of Concur, Concur, andBreach or Leach. The island of Lesser Java, on whichhe resided for five months., was unquestionably Sumatra.It was divided, he says, into eight kingdoms, six ofwhich he visited himself. One of these was Samaraor Sumatra, from which the whole island has taken itsname ; another was the kingdom of Libri, the Lamelyof Arabian geographers.Among the curiosities of this country he mentionsthe rhinoceros, to which, however, he gives the name ofunicorn. They are much less, he says, than elephants,having feet like that animal, and hair like that of thebuffalo. He erroneously supposes that the horn of therhinoceros is in the middle of the forehead. " Thehead of this animal," he continues, " is like that of a wildboar, and is generally carried hanging down upon theground. They are filthy beasts, that love to stand andwallow in the mire, and do not in the least resemblethose unicorns which are said to be found in someother parts of the world, and which allow themselves tobe taken by maidens." In the kingdom of Fan fur, inSumatra, a sort of meal was made from trees of a greatsize, by the following process: — the thin bark being takenoff, and the trunk split up, the pith was taken out andsteeped in water ; after this preparation it was madeinto cakes, and afterwards broken into meal. " Some ofthis," says our traveller, " I brought home with me toVenice, and it tastes not much unlike barley bread."Thus Marco Polo was the first who brought sago intoEurope, for that is evidently the production of whichhe speaks.After mentioning the Nicobar and Andaman islands,he proceeds next to Ceylon, " which, for its size," hesays, " is better circumstanced than any other island inthe world." It was two thousand four hundred miles incircumference, but was said to have been half as largeCHAP. VI. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 307again in ancient times ; for the northern gales, accordingto the popular belief, corroded the mountains, whichsunk, accordingly, in the sea. Marco Polo repeats thestory of the great ruby in the possession of the king :it was reported to be a span long, and the thickness of aman's arm, brilliant beyond description, and without asingle flaw. Kublai Khan offered for this ruby thevalue of a city, but the king of Candy refused on anyterms to part with so valuable a jewel handed down tohim from his predecessors.From Ceylon Marco Polo went to the peninsula ofIndia, but his knowledge of that country evidently didnot reach far beyond the coasts. He dilates at somelength on the wonders of that country. The Brahmins,or Abrajamin, are described by him not merely as thereligious caste of the nation, but also as the wise menand the sorcerers ; without their assistance it was impossibleto fish successfully for pearls, they alone havingthe power to control the monsters of the deep. Horseswere rare in this part of India : they were importedfrom Arabia and Persia in the thirteenth century, in thesame manner as at the present day ; from the want ofherbage they were fed with boiled rice, or even withmeat. These statements of Marco Polo have been confirmedby modern travellers. In some parts of India,it is not uncommon to see horses fed with garlic, butter,and boiled sleeps' heads.The veneration with which the Hindoos regard thecow did not escape the notice of the Venetian. Theinhabitants of Maabar thought it a sin to eat beef, andmany other kinds of flesh. Some tribes, however, namedGaul (cow-men), were privileged to eat the flesh ofkine that died naturally, but they dared not put thoseanimals to death. He also speaks of the palanquinsin which the people of rank were carried about at then-easefrom one place to another. He likewise learnedthat St. Thomas the apostle had preached Christianityin India ; that he lay interred in the city of Meliapoor,to the north of Maabar, and that miracles were per-x 2308 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.formed at his tomb. The dissolute manners of theHindoos, displayed more openly in the neighbourhoodof the pagodas, their abstinence from wine, and theiraversion to the sea, all existed in the time of MarcoPolo, just as they are at the present day.After the description of India, follows that of theprincipal cities of Persia and Arabia, as well as of apart of eastern Africa ; and, finally, that of the desertsof northern Asia, wrapped up in fable. The port cfAden was a great market, whence horses were exportedto India, and to which was brought the greater part ofthe spices and other Indian produce destined for theports of Europe. From Aden these goods were sent insmall vessels to Suez, whence they were transportedoverland to Alexandria. To the north of Aden, on thewestern side of the Persian Gulf, was Esther, at presentAdsjar, the neighbourhood of which produced a greatquantity of frankincense. Marco Polo speaks also ofthe celebrated island of Ormuz, of its great commerce,and of its frail vessels sewed together with the twistedfibre of the cocoa-nut. He appears also to have visitedBassoon ; at least he knew that the best dates growthere ; and he remarks that it is situated on one of thegrand commercial routes between India and Europe.At Bagdad, seventeen days' journey from the sea, allthe merchandise was packed on camels : this city wasthe market for all the pearls that were sent to Europe.Of eastern Africa, our traveller mentions in the firstplace Majestas or Madagascar: it exported a great quantityof ivory. Mariners, he says, told strange storiesrespecting a great bird called Rokh, said to be found inthese countries. This is the bird of which the Arabiansrelate, that it is able to carry off an elephant. From thesame sources, perhaps, Marco Polo derived his informationrespecting the islands inhabited, some by menexclusively, and others by females. Of the Africancontinent he mentions but two countries : Zanguebar,inhabited by negroes, and stocked with sheep very unlikethose of Europe, and Abyssinia, to which he givesCHAP. VI. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 30±the Arabic name of Acacia or Habesh. He also callsit Middle India. The sovereign of this country, whowas a Christian, ruled also over Mahometanss. Gold wasabundant in his dominions.From these southern climes our author proceeds todescribe the regions of northern Asia. They abounded,he relates, in the most valuable furs ; but the countrywas a succession of marshes, frozen over and coveredwith snow the greater part of the year. The islands inthe Sea of Darkness abounded in birds of the falconspecies. The inhabitants made use of sledges drawnby dogs. The sun never appeared during the wintermonths ; and in these long nights the Tatars often invadedthe country and carried off the furs. He concludes withobserving, that in this part of the world is Ruzie, anempire of immense extent, and tributary to the Mongols.Marco Polo has been justly styled the creator of themodern geography of Asia. Of all the travellers whovisited the East previous to the fifteenth century, he isby far the most celebrated and esteemed. His reputation,instead of declining, as positive knowledge isincreased, rises from the numberless instances of hisexactness and veracity which are brought to light, inproportion as the countries which he has described aremore narrowly examined. His contemporaries imputedexaggeration to his accounts of the power and civilisationof an empire situated at the end of the earth. Buttime, and an enlarged acquaintance with the East, haveshown that his scrupulosity was equal to his credulity ;that he has not invented a single one of the fables whichhave a place in his narrative ; but, like Herodotus, hasrelated with the same fidelity what he saw himself andwhat he heard from others.The greater number of the small states into whichTatary was divided under Zingis Khan have disappeared; many of the cities have changed their names ;and not a few have been totally destroyed in the courseof the wars, which, for two hundred years, were unceasinglycarried on by the tribes or nations which hadx 3310 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.been comprised in the great empire of the Mongols.There are but a few principal points in the geography ofcentral Asia in which the authentic information of thepresent day coincides exactly with the statements of theVenetian traveller. The unfortunate circumstances whichprevented his publishing a more methodical account ofhis travels have cast a shade over his fame, and havedeprived the scientific world of a part of the labours ofthis great man.The kind treatment which the first catholic missionariesin China experienced from the Mongol emperorsmay possibly have been, in some measure, due to therespect entertained for the memory of Marco Polo, whohad left that country but a very short time before themissionaries arrived in it. The humble labours of thesepious men exhibit, occasionally, a degree of patience andpersevering industry which are quite as astonishing asthe brilliant success and activity of Marco Polo. Themissionary who first reached Cambalu or Pekin was,perhaps, the most remarkable of the whole series.John de Montecorvino, a Minorite friar, was despatchedby pope Nicholas IV., in 1288, to preach thefaith in the East. He first visited the Persian courtbearing a letter to king Argue from the sovereign pontiff.He then went to India, where he remained thirteenmonths in company with a merchant named Leucolongo,and one Nicholas de Pistoia, a monk of the order ofpreachers : this last died there, and was buried in one ofthe churches of St. Thomas.In India Montecorvino baptized about a hundredpersons ; then continuing his journey to the East, withhis companion, the merchant Leucolongo, he came toCathay, that is to say, to northern China, and deliveredto the sovereign of the Tatars the letters of the popeinviting him to embrace Christianity. But that princepaid no attention to the disinterested counsel of the pontiff,although at the same time he manifested indulgence,or even partiality, to Christians, and particularly tothe Nestorianss, who had multiplied exceedingly in hisCHAP. VI. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. Sllreign, and who persecuted with the utmost rancour everyChristian sect that differed from their own. The Italianfriar suffered much from their opposition, and on severaloccasions very narrowly escaped being made the victimof their animosity. Eleven years he carried on alonethis unequal struggle : at the end of that time he wasjoined by one Arnold, a Franciscan from Cologne.Montecorvino had spent six years in building a churchin the city of Cambalu. He had succeeded in erectinga steeple or belfry, furnished with three bells, whichwere rung every hour to summon the Neophytes to prayer.He had baptized about six thousand persons, and mighthave converted thirty thousand if he had not been somuch thwarted by the Nestorianss. He had, moreover,purchased a hundred and fifty children under elevenyears of age, and who were still without religion ; instructedthem in the Christian faith ; taught them Greekand Latin ; and composed for their use books of prayers,hymns, and other religious effusions.*Montecorvino expected to derive still greater advantagesfrom having converted a Mongol prince of the tribe ofKeraites, whom he called George, and to whom the relationsof the middle age sometimes apply the name of PresterJohn. A great number of the vassals of this prince,hitherto attached to Nestorianism, followed his example.They embraced the catholic faith, and remained steadilyattached to it till the death of George, which took placein 129.9 ; but on this event they yielded to the seductionsof their countrymen who had adhered to theNestorian sect; and Montecorvino obliged to remain nearthe grand khan, was unable to make any effectual effort toprevent their defection.A grand source of affliction to our indefatigable monkwas the want of assistance in his apostolic labours, andhis not having received for twelve years any authenticintelligence respecting the court of Rome ; concerningwhich an Italian surgeon, who arrived in Tatary aboutAbel Ilcmusat. Nov. Mel. ii. 193.x 4312 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.1303, had spread abroad the most singular rumours.In consequence of this desertion John wrote a letter in1305, dated from Khan-baliol, and addressed to thereligious of his order, in which he entreated them to sendhim, among other assistance, choir books, psalters, andlegends of the saints.In this letter *, John de Montecorvino says that hehad made himself complete master of the Tatar language,meaning the Mongol ; that he had translated into thattongue the Psalms and the New Testament ; he hadcaused them to be carefully transcribed in the propercharacter of that language ; he read, wrote, and preachedin the Mongol tongue ; and if king George had lived alittle longer, a complete translation of the Latin officewould have been diffused through all the dominions ofthe Grand Khan.In another letter, written the following year, Johnmentions the kindness with which he was treated by theGrand Khan ; the honours done to him as the envoy ofthe pope ; and of a new instance of imperial favour,in the permission he received to build a second church,not a stone's throw from the palace, and so near even tothe chamber of the khan, that that prince could distinctlyhear the voices of those who celebrated the service.Doubts might be raised with respect to the veracity ofthese assertions, if the Chinese historians did not allagree as to the favourable reception given by the Mongolemperors to priests of every persuasion; their courtsbeing filled at all times with romanists from India andlamas from Tibet ; with whom the Nestorian Christians,and, perhaps, even the catholics themselves, appearto have been frequently confounded. Even hisaccount of the conversion of the KeraYte prince mightbe considered as a fiction calculated to enhance the meritof his services ; but it is perfectly in accordance withthe relations of Oriental writers, who state, in fact, thatthere were many Christians among the Keraites, andWadding. Annal. Script. Min. vi. p. 6''.CHAP. VI. TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO. 313name several princesses of that nation who openly professedthe Christian religion.At the end of some years, John at length received thereward of his long services. In 1314 pope Clement V.erected in his favour the archiepiscopal see of Khan-baliol,or Pekin, and sent to his assistance Andrew of Perugiaand some others, whom he created bishops andthe suffragans of Khan-baliol. Great prerogatives wereaccorded to that see, as well on account of the great influenceit might have in extending the Christian religionthrough the remotest countries of the East, as from thegreat merit of the person who was first installed in thedignity. John received, for himself and his successors,the right to create bishoprics, to govern all the churchesof Tatary, under the single condition of acknowledging thespiritual supremacy of the popes, and to receive fromthem the pallium, or archiepiscopal vestment.The pontifical decree which contains these regulationsincloses also a recommendation to the new archbishopto have the mysteries of the Old and New Testamentpainted in all his churches, so as to captivate the eyes ofthe barbarians, and thus lead them to the worship ofthe true God. This was said in allusion to a passage ofone of John's letters, in which he mentioned his havingcaused the stories of the Scriptures to be painted for theinstruction of the simple, with explanations written beneaththem in Latin, Tarsi, and Persian letters, so thatall the world might read them. By Tarsi charactershe means those of the Uigur, whose country was at thattime frequently called Tarse, from a Tatar word signifyinginfidel, and which appears to have been successivelyapplied in Tatary to the followers of Zoroaster and tothe Nestorian Christians.John de Montecorvino died about 1330, and wassucceeded in the archbishopric of Khan-baliol by aFranciscan named Nicholas. But from accident orother causes, the-sees of Clement V. were soon entirelyforgotten.314 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.CHAP. VII.ODERIC OF Portent.ITINERARY OF PEGOLETTI. CARAVAN JOURNEYS. G1NTARCHAN.SARA. SARACANCO. Organs. OLTRARRA. AKMALECCO.Camel. GAMALECCO. ODERIC OF Portent. TREBIZOND.MOUNT ARARAT. TOWER OF BABEL. CHALDEANS. MartyrdomOF FOUR Friars. ODERIC COLLECTS THEIR BONES.WORKS MIRACLES. FOREST OF PEPPER. FAIR OF Juggernaut.VOLUNTARY TORTURES. CANNIBALS IN Labour.WEALTH OF JAVA. SAGO TREES. AMULETS FOUND INCANES. SHOALS OF FISH. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE Chinese.MODE OF FISHING IN CHINA. FEASTS OF THEIDOLS. VALLEY OF THE DEAD. THE GRAND LAMA. SIRJOHN MANDEVILLE. HIS TRAVELS FABULOUS. RIVERS OFROCKS. ISLANDS OF GIANTS. LAMBS OF TATARY. GROWTHOF DIAMONDS. PALACE OF PRESTER JOHN.Policy, commerce, and religion, — those three great incentivesto all bold enterprises, — continued during thefourteenth and fifteenth centuries to direct the eyes ofEuropeans towards the centre of Asia. The victoriesof Tamerlane, who checked for a moment the formidableprogress of the Ottoman Turks, fixed the attention andthe hopes of the Christian world. The caravan routesover Asia appear to have been much more frequented inthose ages than is commonly supposed. The new channelsof commerce through Egypt, and afterwards by theCape of Good Hope, caused those routes to be graduallyabandoned, and at last to be almost forgotten. A briefaccount of the course usually pursued by the merchantsis preserved to us in the Itinerary of Francisco BalducciPegoletti, an Italian merchant who travelled in Asia in1335. The only portion of his work which has a directconnection with the history of geography is the chapterentitled " A Guide for the Route from Tana to Cathaywith Merchandise, and back again."In the first place," says Pegoletti, " from Tana orAsoph, to Gintarchati orAstracan, is five-and-twenty days'CHAP. VII. ODERIC OF PORTEXAU. 315journey, with waggons drawn by oxen ; but it may beaccomplished in ten or twelve days if the waggons bedrawn by horses. On the road, one meets with a greatnumber of armed Mongols or Mongols. From Gintar-clan to Sara or Sarah, by the river, it is only one day'ssail ; but from Sara to Saracanco it takes eight days bywater : one may, however, travel either by land or water,whichever is most agreeable, but it costs much lessmoney to go with merchandise by water. From Sara-cantoto Organcici or Urgenz, is a journey of twenty dayswith loaded camels ; and whoever travels with merchandisewill do well to go to Organcici, as it is a very convenientplace for the expeditious sale of goods. FromOrgancici to Oltrarra it is thirty-five or forty days'journey with camels; but in going direct from Saracancoto Oltrarra, it takes fifty days ; and if one has no merchandiseit is a better way than to go by Organcici.From Oltrarra to Armalecco- it is forty-five days' journeywith loaded asses, and in this road one meets everydaywith Mongols. From Armalecco to Camexu it isseventy days' journey on asses, and from Camexu to ariver called the Care Morn it is fifty days' journey onhorses. From this river the traveller may go to Cassinodispose of his silver there, as it is an excellent stationfor the expeditious sale of merchandise : and from Cassaihe may go in thirty days to Gamalecco, the capital ofChina. The current money there is made of paper,and is called Babies : four of these babies are equal toone silver Soothemerchants who made this journey were obligedto let their beards grow, and to take with them a goodinterpreter and attendants acquainted with the Tatarlanguages. The value of the merchandise and moneywhich a single merchant usually brought with himamounted altogether to about twenty-five thousand goldenducats. The whole expense of the journey to Pekin,including the wages of the attendants, amounted only tothree hundred or three hundred and fifty ducats. Theseminute details are sufficient to make it evident that the310 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.journey over Asia to Pekin was much more easy in thefourteenth century than at the present day, and that itwas not by any means a thing uncommon. In consequence,the knowledge of those countries was in manyrespects more perfect in that age than it is at present ;but, unfortunately, the want of astronomical observationsrenders the details furnished by the itineraries of theearly merchants too inexact to be of much value togeography. Some of the places, however, which arenamed by Pegoletti, may be determined with tolerablecertainty.Gintarchan is our Astracan. Joseph Barbara, whotravelled from Tana into Persia in the fifteenth century,calls it by that name. Spices and silk arrived there, tobe afterwards transported to Tana. It was also calledCitracan. Both these names seem to be formed by corruptionfrom the Arabic name Hadgi Tartan.Sara, the second station of our traveller, was Sarai,the chief town of the territories of the khan of Kipjack.It was built in 1266 by the khan Baraka, and wassituated on the river Actuba, that falls into the Volgaabove Astracan. It was destroyed by Tamerlane in1403. In the seventeenth century, the stones foundstrewed in the ruins of Sara'f were made use of to fortifythe rising city of Astracan.Saracens or Sarachick is also in ruins. In 1238,when it was visited by the Franciscan monk Paschal,it was a flourishing city. It was still existing in 1558,when Jenkins travelled from Astracan to Bokhara :he reckoned its distance from the former city to be ajourney of ten days. It was at that time frequented bythe caravans going from Astracan to China. This cityof the Nogais Tatars, formerly rich and populous,stretched along the borders of the river Jack, where theruins or traces of its old fortifications are still to be seenextending several miles.Organcici or Urgenz, the capital of Chowaresm orChorasm, was about half a mile distant from the riverGihon : Orientals call it also Jorzanyah and Gurgandzi.CHAP. VII. ODERIC OF Portent. 317This very ancient city suffered severely from an earthquakewhich took place in the year 818, and which destroyedmany other towns situated near the Gihon.In 1558, Jenkins, after leaving Sarachick, passedthrough Urgenz, which was at that time a miserablelittle place : the route to China still lay through it ; butit had been sacked and ruined four times in the courseof seven years. Two English travellers visited it againin 1740; but of the ancient city there existed then butasingle mosque, and savage Tatars were turning overthe ruins in search of hidden treasures.From Urgenz the travellers turned northward toarrive at Oltrarra or Otrar, which bears also the nameof Arab : it is said by Mandeville to be the best cityin Turkestan. Here the Itinerary of Pegoletti leaves usin the dark with respect to the countries which are theleast known in Asia, as he conducts us at once acrossTurkestan to Armalecco or Almalech, a city situated inthe country of the Igur, on the river Ab-mile or Hi,between Dashcand and the river Irish. It was takenby Tamerlane in 1400. Paschal, who resided in itin 1338, calls it the capital of the Medes. Again, theItinerary makes a rapid step, and conducts us directlyto Camexu in Tangut, not far from the great wall ofChina. Some suppose this place to be the city of Kan-che,through which the ambassadors of shah Rokhpassed in 1419, on their journey from Herat to Pekin.But it would agree better with the distances assigned,to suppose Camexu to be the city of Hame or Came,on the northern frontiers of Tangut.It is still more difficult to ascertain the position ofthe city called Cassai by Pegoletti : it is generally supposedto be some Kin-sai or celestial city, of which,probably, there were many within the limits of theChinese empire. The city of Gamalecco, which occursnext in the Itinerary, is undoubtedly Khun-balikh orPekin, the word being modified to suit the genius ofItalian pronunciation.All the early travellers in China, and even the Arabians318 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.who visited that country in the ninth century, takenotice of the paper money that circulated there. MarcoPolo describes minutely the appearance of these notes,which were made of the fine bark of the mulberry.They are called by Pegoletti bliss : Oderic of Portenaunames them balls; and they are called salus by theearly Arabian travellers. So many independent andconcurring testimonies establish beyond a doubt theancient employment of paper money in China, whichhas been strenuously denied, however, by some well-instructedmoderns. The abuses likely to follow theadoption of such a currency under a despotic government,probably caused it to be occasionally discontinued, andat length forgotten.Among those who were impelled by religion to travelin the East was a Minorite friar, Oderic, of Portenau inthe Frill, who passed through every country of Asia,from the shores of the Black Sea to the extremities ofChina. He is supposed to have set out on his travels in1318, and to have returned to Italy in 1330, when hedictated his narrative to William de Solana at Padua,without any order or arrangement, but just as it occurredto his memory. He died in 1331; and having wroughtmiracles in his life-time (at least he himself said so), hewas canonized in the beginning of the last century.Oderic added but little to the knowledge obtained byhis predecessors in the East. His relations are wonderfullyconfused and obscure ; and although he may nothave intended to impose on the world with deliberatefictions, yet the extraordinary credulity and superstitiousweakness apparent in his character render it impossibleto place much confidence in what he says. It is notworth while to examine into the veracity of one who isso often the dupe of his own misconceptions.From Constantinople friar Oderic went to Trebizond,where " he saw a strange spectacle with great delight."A man led about with him more than four thousandpartridges. As he walked along the partridges flew abouthim in the air, and followed him wherever he went.CHAP. VII. ODERIC OP P0RTENAU. 6*19They were so tame, that when lie lay down to rest theyall came flocking about him like so many chickens.Oderic then proceeded to Aaron or Erzerum, a remarkablycold place, he observes, and said to be situated at agreater elevation than any other city in the world. Hepassed by Mount Ararat, and was extremely desirous toclimb its summit in order to view the traces of Noah'sark remaining there; but his companions prevented him,alleging the impossibility of his succeeding in the attempt.Tauris or Tebriz appeared to him to be a commercialcity of the first importance. Near to it was a hillof salt, from which any one might take as much as hepleased without paying any tax or duty. It was said thatthe king of Persia derived as much revenue from this cityalone as the king of France from his whole dominions.The road to India lay through Hassan or Cabin, thecity of the three wise men. The city of Yezd aboundedin every luxury : grapes, figs, and raisins, appeared tobe more plentiful there than in any other part of theworld ; but the Saracens affirmed that no Christian couldlive there above a year.Our monk passed, he says, " beside the Tower ofBabel," but he omits to give any account of that remarkablestructure. The men of Chaldea had their hairnicely braided and trimmed like the women of Italy,wearing turbans richly ornamented with gold and pearls,and were a fine looking people ; but the women wereugly and deformed, clad in coarse linen shifts reachingonly as far as the knees, with long sleeves hangingdown to the ground, and trowsers which likewise reachedthe ground, but their feet were bare. They wore nohead-dresses, and their hair hung loose and dishevelledabout their ears. At the time when Oderic reached whathe calls Lower India, or the southern provinces of Persia,that country had been just over-run and laid waste bythe Tatars ; yet still the productions of nature were inabundance. The people subsisted chiefly on dates, ofwhich forty-two pounds' weight might be purchased forless than a Venetian prroat. Prom Ormuz he embarked for320 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.Thana, perhaps Tanta, at the mouth of the Indus, wheresome heavy calamities befell him. " In this country,"he says, " every one has a bundle of great boughs oftrees as large as a pillar, standing in a pot of water beforehis door; and there are many other strange andwonderful novelties, a relation of which would be exceedinglydelightful."In Thana, a little before Oderic's arrival there, fourMinorite friars had suffered martyrdom. Being summonedas witnesses before the cadi, they commenced a disputationwith the Mahometanss upon the true faith ; andfriar Thomas being urged to declare freely his opinionconcerning Mahomet, replied in plain language, " I mustdeclare that your Mahomet is the son of perdition, andis in hell with his father, the devil." When the Saracensheard this insulting blasphemy, they insisted onputting the infidels to death. They seized upon thefriars and exposed them to the burning sun, in order thatthey might perish by a lingering torture ; but theyremained hale and joyful from the third to the ninthhour of the day." The Saracens, astonished at this,kindled a great fire in the public square of the city, intowhich they threw one of the friars, but when the flameshad died away, he was seen standing in the embers unhurtand joyful, with his hands extended in the form ofa cross, and calling on the glorious Virgin. Notwithstandingthis manifest miracle, the Saracens remainedunshaken in their purpose; and the cadi said that thefriar's tunic, which was made from the wool of the land ofHabrah, having protected him, it would be necessary tothrow him naked into the fire. Brother James, therefore,upon whom the previous experiment had been madeso unsuccessfully, was stript quite naked, anointed abundantlywith oil, and thrown a second time into theflames : but he again came forth from them unharmed ;whereupon the friars were liberated, to appease the people.At night, however, the Saracens, more inexorablethan the flames, came privately to their lodgings, and cutofftheir heads. "In the moment of the martyrdom of theseCHAP. VII. ODERIC OF Portent. 321holy men," says the worthy Oderic, " the moon shoneout with unusual splendour, and the night became so exceedinglylight that all admired greatly : after which itsuddenly became excessively dark, with great thunderand lightning, and violent commotions, so that allexpected to be destroyed ; and the ship which ought tohave carried away the friars was sunk, with all on board:no tidings of it were ever received afterwards.""When Oderic heard of the circumstances attendingthe death of these martyrs, he went to the place wherethey were buried, and dug up their bones. This was anevent of great importance in the history of his life, as heprobably owes to these bones his rank in the calendar ofsaints. While travelling in Upper India, he rested onenight in a house which was suddenly set fire to by thepersecuting Saracens ; but the flames carefully kept alooffrom the bones of the martyrs, and the life of our friarwas saved by means of those precious relics. " So longas I remained in the corner with the bones, the fire keptitself above my head like lucid air ; but the moment thatI went out with the bones, the place where I had beenstanding was enveloped in the flames, and the wholebuilding was consumed."But he afterwards found that the bones of the martyrshad not only a power over the flames, but also overwind and water. "While going by sea to the city ofPo!umbrum,m Malabar, he had an opportunity of tryingtheir efficacy on this element The wind totally failed,and the vessel in which he sailed made no progress. Theidolaters on board offered up their prayers for a favourablewind, but in vain : the Saracens next prostratedthemselves to the same intent, and with as little profit.Then Oderic and his companion were ordered to pray ;and it was moreover intimated to them, that if theyfailed to procure a good wind they should be thrownoverboard. Our friar accordingly began to pray, andvowed to celebrate many masses in honour of the Virginif she would vouchsafe a wind ; but as the time passed onand no wind came, he took one of the bones, and going tpVOL. I. Y322 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.the head of the ship he cast it into the sea : a fine breezeImmediately sprung up, and continued to the end of thevoyage. The idolaters afterwards, according to theircustom, searched the whole ship in order to throw overboardall the bones of dead animals before they enteredthe harbour ; but though they frequently approached andeven touched the bones of the martyrs, their eyes werealways deluded : the relics were thus saved from the unfathomeddepths of the ocean, to work healing miracleson land ; for a small quantity of the dust of these bonesmixed with water was, as Oderic affirms, a sovereignremedy for every disease.Notwithstanding all the miracles which he performedon the way, our traveller merits little attention previousto his arrival at the coast of Malabar, which he callsMinima. He also mentions two cities in this country,Flandrina and Cyncilin, of which no notice occurs inany other writer. In the country of Malabar, accordingto his description, pepper grows abundantly in a forestthat extends eighteen days' journey in circuit. The plantproducing the pepper is set near the large trees, as vinesare planted in Italy : it grows with numerous and bright-colouredleaves, and climbs up the trees, the pepper-padshanging down in great clusters like grapes. Crocodilesand huge serpents infest this forest ; and in the seasonfor gathering the pepper, the people are obliged to makelarge fires of straw and other dry fuel to drive awaythese noxious animals. At one extremity of this forestwas situated the city of Polumbrum.Oderic gives, in many respects, a more full and accurateaccount of the singular superstitions of the Hindoossthan any traveller who had preceded him. Heobserved the veneration in which the ox is held, whichis made to labour in husbandry for six years, and in theseventh is consecrated as holy, and worshipped as a god ;the custom of widows burning themselves along withthe dead bodies of their husbands ; and the abstinenceof the male sex from wine. The general infatuation ofself-sacrifice and the ceremonies of the Juggernaut areCHAP. VII. 0DERIC OF Portent. 323described by him with the vividness of an eye-witness.In the kingdom of Me-bar" (the Carnatic), he says,there is a wonderful idol, in the shape of a man, allof pure and polished gold, as large as our image of SaintChristopher, and there hangs about its neck a string ofmost rich and precious stones, some of which are singlymore valuable than the riches of an entire kingdom.The whole house in which this idol is preserved is allof beaten gold ; even the roof, the pavement, and thelining of the walls both within and without TheIndians go on pilgrimages to this idol, just as we do tothe image of Saint Peter ; some having halters roundtheir necks, some with their hands bound behind theirbacks, and others with knives sticking in various partsof their legs and arms ; and if the flesh of their woundedlimbs should corrupt owing to these wounds, theybelieve that their god is well pleased with them, andever after esteem the diseased limb as sacred. Nearthis idol temple there is an artificial lake of water in anopen place, into which the pilgrims and devotees castgold and silver and precious stones in honour of the idol,and as a fund for repairing the temple ; and when anynew ornament is to be made, or any repairs required,the priests take what is wanted from the oblationsthrown into this lake.At each annual festival of this idol, the king andqueen of the country, with all the pilgrims and thewhole multitude of the people, assemble at the temple;and placing the idol on a rich and splendid chariot, theycarry it to the temple with songs and all kinds of musicalinstruments, having a great company of youngwomen, who walk in procession two and two, singingbefore the idol. Many of the pilgrims throw themselvesunder the chariot wheels, that they may be crushed todeath in honour of their god ; and the bodies of thesedevotees are afterwards burned, and their ashes collected,as if they were holy martyrs. In this manner abovefive hundred persons annually devote themselves to death.Sometimes a man deliberately devotes himself to dix; iuv 2324 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.honour of this abominable idol : on which occasion, accompaniedby his relations and friends, and a greatcompany of musicians, he makes a solemn feast ; afterwhich he hangs five sharp knives round his neck, andgoes in solemn procession before the idol ; he thentakes four of the knives successively, and with each ofthem cuts off a piece of his own flesh, which he throwsto the idol, saying that for the worship of his god hethus cuts himself. Then taking the fifth knife, he declaresaloud that he is going to put himself to death inhonour of the god, in uttering which he gives the fatalstroke. His body is then burned with great solemnity,and he is ever after esteemed a holy person."Travelling from Malabar fifty days towards the south,along the ocean, our friar came to a country called Lamouri,in which all the people went naked, pleading inexcuse the example of Adam and Eve. This country issupposed to be the southern part of the peninsula nearCape Comorin ; but in truth there is much reason tosuspect that the monk's memory failed him, and that heconfounded the south of India with Lamri, in Sumatra.Human flesh," he says, " is commonly used in thiscountry as beef is with us ; and though the mannersand customs of the people are most abominable, thecountry is excellent, and abounds in flesh and corn, goldand silver, aloes wood and camphor, and many otherprecious commodities. Merchants who trade to thiscountry usually bring with them fat men among theirother commodities, which they sell to the natives as wedo hogs, and these are immediately slain and devoured."To the south of Lamouri, Oderic places the island orkingdom of Symolora, by which he appears to meanSimoltra or Sumatra. In this place the people wereaccustomed to mark their faces with hot irons. He thenvisited the island of Java, which he says is consideredone of the largest islands in the world, and that itabounds in cloves, nutmegs, and other kinds of* spices.The king of Java, he moreover affirms, had die mostsumptuous and lofty palace in the world, with broadCHAP. VII. ODERIC OF P0RTENAU. 325stairs conducting to the upper apartments, all the stepsbeing alternately of gold and silver. The whole interiorwas lined with plates of beaten gold, on which werecarved the figures of warriors, each having above hishead a coronet of beaten gold ; the roof of the palacelikewise was of pure gold, and the lower apartmentswere all paved with alternate squares of gold and silver.When the credulous friar makes statements of this sort,he usually confirms his relation with an oath, and addsthat he omits to speak of things far more wonderful,but which could hardly be credited by those who hadnot seen them. The great khan or emperor of China,he says, had often made war upon the king of Java, buthad always been defeated and beaten back. It seemsprobable that Oderic mixed with his account of Javathe stories which he had heard regarding the wars andprodigious riches of Japan.Our friar took notice of the trees producing meal, orthe sago palms ; he mentions likewise another particularrelating to the vegetable kingdom, which, however itmay have the air of improbability, is nevertheless true.In the Indian seas, he relates, there grow canes of incrediblesize, some of them running up sixty paces ormore in height. There are also small canes called cas-san,which spread over the earth like grass to the extentof a mile or more, sending up branches from everyjknot ;and in these canes are found certain stones of a wonderfulvirtue, insomuch that whoever carries one of themabout him cannot be wounded with an iron weapon.The people cause the arms of their children to be cutopen when young, and put one of these stones into thewound, which they heal with the powder of a certain fish.By means of these wonderful stones, continues our friar,the natives are always victorious in their battles. Now itis unquestionably true, that stones formed of pure silex orflint arc often found secreted near the joints of canes ;and as the ignorant are always disposed to view with venerationevery thing anomalous in nature, these stonesare generally believed to possess extraordinary virtues.y 3326 GEOGRAPHY OF TOE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.Of the seas in those climates, he relates that theyabound so much in fish that nothing can be seen tosome distance from the shore but the backs of fishes.The fish come themselves upon the shore, and for threedays allow the people to take as many of them as theyplease. At the end of those three days this shoalreturns to sea, and a different kind comes to the spot inthe same manner and for an equal time. This happens,he says, once every year ; and the people pretend thatthe fish are taught by nature to do this in token ofhomage to the emperor. This account is in all materialpoints perfectly true : the seas of the Indian Archipelagoabound more in fish than any other part of the world ; andit is said that the inhabitants of Java have the art oftaming them to such a degree, that they come to theshore in obedience to a call or whistle.The pious Oderic proceeded next to China ; a countrycontaining, as he heard, more than two thousand greatcities. The people, he was surprised to find, were allartificers or merchants, and never thought of beggingalms, however great might be their poverty, so long asthey could help themselves with their hands. The menwere of a fair and comely appearance, though somewhatpale ; but the women appeared to him to be the mostbeautiful under the sun. It is remarkable that all theearly travellers agree in praising the beauty of theChinese, and but seldom notice even the peculiarities ofthe Mongolian features. Oderic is the first who points outtwo very distinguishing characteristics of Chinese beauty.It is accounted," he says, " a great grace for the men ofthis country to have long nails upon their fingers, whichthey fold about their hands : but the grace and beautyof their women is to have small and slender feet ; andtherefore the mothers, when the daughters are young,do bind up their feet that they may not grow large."He also gives a description of a mode of fishingpractised in China, which is but little known in otherparts of the world. In a city where he lodged for ashort time, his host, willing to amuse him, conductedCHAP. VII. ODERIC OF Portent. 327him to the river side. This man took with him alsothree large baskets, and a number of diving birds tied topoles. He began his preparations by fastening athread round the throats of the birds, lest they mightswallow the fish which they caught: he then loosedthem from the poles ; and in less than an hour theycaught as much fish as filled the three baskets.In the city of Zaitun the Minorities possessed twomonasteries ; and in one of these Oderic deposited thebones of the friars who had suffered martyrdom in India.Zaitun appeared to him to be twice as large as Bologna :it contained numerous monasteries or religious housesbelonging to the worshippers of idols. The religiousinhabitants of those establishments fed their idols daily,serving up before them sumptuous banquets smokinghot : the gods were permitted to regale themselves withthe steam of the savoury viands, which were afterwardscarried away and eaten by the priests.Friar Oderic resided three years in Pekin, where theMinorite friars had a monastery depending on the court.He was frequently present at die royal banquets ; theChristian priests, as well as those of the heathen, beingobliged, on those occasions, to pronounce benedictions onthe emperor according to their peculiar forms. Hisaccount of the magnificence of the court of Cambaludoes not in any respect fall short of the more authenticnarrative of Marco Polo. The friars in those parts wereendowed with special gifts ; they cast out evil spirits,and could even exorcise the idols themselves : they atfirst failed in the latter experiment ; but as soon as theysprinkled the fire with holy water, the idols were consumed,and the devils fled away in the likeness of black smoke,crying out aloud, " Heroic how 1 am expelled frommy habitation ! " Put among the fables which our worthyfriar has incorporated with his narrative, that of thevalley of the dead is perhaps the most curious and original,and may be safely looked upon as the corruptedversion of a popular Chinese tale. " Passing by acertain valley," says Oderic, " near a pleasant river, Iy 4328 GEOGRAPHY OF THE BUDDIE AGES. BOOK III.saw many dead bodies therein, and I heard issuingtherefrom many sweet and harmonious musical sounds,especially of lutes, insomuch that I was much amazed.The valley is at least eight miles long ; and whoeverenters into it is sure to die immediately ; for whichreason all who travel that way carefully avoid the valley.But I was curious to go in, that I might seewhat it contained. Making, therefore, my prayers,and recommending myself to God, I entered in, andsaw such quantities of dead bodies as no one wouldbelieve unless he had seen it with his own eyes. Atoneside of the valley I saw the visage of a man upon astone, which stared at me with such a hideous aspect, thatI thought I should have died upon the spot : but I ceasednot to sign myself with the sign of the cross, cryingcontinually, ' The word became flesh, and dwelt withus.' I then saw the lutes on every side, which do soundof themselves in a wonderful manner without the aid ofany musician. Thus much have I related, which I certainlysaw with my own eyes; but many wonderfulthings have I purposely omitted, because those who hadnot seen them would refuse to believe my testimony."For stories such as this Oderic Alas canonized in theeighteenth century. After leaving China, he visitedTibet, and is the first writer who alludes to the grandlama, — " the pope of the East, and spiritual head of allthe idolaters." To this great prince of the Buddhistshe gives the name of Abash. Like almost all the earlytravellers, he mentions the cannibalism of the Thibetians,which he regards as a superstitious usage.The ignorance of his age and the credulity of hisprofession betrayed Oderic into the relation of manyincredible stories ; but that he actually visited thecountries which he describes may be proved incontestablyfrom many passages in his narrative. The samecannot be said of a contemporary traveller of muchgreater pretensions, and at one time much more generallyread, — the celebrated Sir John Mandeville, the author ofthe most unblushing volume of lies, perhaps, that wasCHAP. VII. ODERIC OF PORTEXAU. 32$ever offered to the world. Sir John was born at St.Allan's ; and after laying in a large store of theologicaland medical knowledge, set forth on his peregrinationsin 1332. He spent thirty-four years in wanderingthrough the East, as he affirms, visiting every countrythat had any claims on the wonder or curiosity of mankind.He died at Liege in the year 1372, where alaudatory inscription was placed upon his tomb, and theboots and spurs with which he rode through the worldwere long carefully preserved.A rebel to the laws of true chivalry, which commandedthe worthy knight to wage war with the infidels, Sir J.Mandeville served first in the armies of the sultan ofEgypt, and afterwards under the banners of the grandkhan of Cathay in his wars with the kings of Manji.Such, at least, is his own account, which, however, appearsnot to deserve the slightest credit. He may possiblyhave travelled in Palestine and Syria, but his work offersabundant proofs that he never penetrated farther intoAsia. He avows himself that he borrowed much fromold chronicles and romances of chivalry, and he copieswhole pages without acknowledgment from friar Odericand Haitho the Armenian : but he seldom relates thefabulous tales of his predecessors without giving to themsome additional embellishments; and whenever he affectsextreme accuracy, he is sure to expose the grossest ignorance.Tims he says that India is fifty days' journeybeyond Pekin, and laments that the journey to thatcountry should be so long and difficult compared withthat to China. Oderic of Portenau spoke of a sea ofsand, — no unfit expression to describe the sandy desertson the borders of Persia ; but Sir John Mandeville, notsatisfied with a sea of sand, describes also a river ofrocks flowing into it ; and he even ventures to assertthat this wondrous sea abounds in excellent fish. Healone actually travelled through the country of thePygmies, who all came dancing to see him. He alsovisited two islands in the centre of Asia, one ofwhich was inhabited by giants thirty feet in height,330 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK 111.while the elder branches of the family dwelling on theother island were twenty feet higher. In India heplaces two islands, called respectively Brahmin andGymnosophist. He is the first who writes of the famouslamb of Tatary, that grows inside a gourd ormelon. " When the fruit is ripe' says the worthyknight, " it opens in the middle, and in the interior isseen the little animal, with flesh, bones, and blood. Itis like a lamb without the wool, and is eaten with thefruit." In the course of his travels he saw many curiositiesof the same kind, and among others, shells ofso vast a size as to afford habitations for many persons.He also learned from experience, that diamonds, ifwetted with May-dew, will, in the course of years, growto an indefinite magnitude. The hints which he borrowedfrom romances of chivalry are scattered throughhis volume with little art or discrimination ; and it wason the walls of the king's palace in Java that he sawpainted the exploits of duke Over the Dane.Early travellers had spread abroad some indistinctrumours of Prester John, a Christian prince supposed toreign somewhere in the heart of Asia ; but Mandevillealone had the happiness to see him seated on his throne,surrounded by twelve archbishops and two hundred andtwenty bishops. The empire of this prince was inIndia, " a land divided into many islands by the riversdescending from paradise." The gates of his palacewere made of sardonyx, the bars of ivory, the windowsof rock crystal, and the tables of emeralds ; radiantcarbuncles, too, each a foot in length, served instead oflamps to illuminate the palace by night. Such were thetales which pleased our ancestors of the fourteenth century.Mandeville also confirms the popular belief thatJerusalem is in the middle of the world ; for stickinghis spear upright in the ground, he found that at midday,at the time of the equinoxes, it cast no shadow.CHAP. VIII. EMBASSY OF CLAVIJO. 331CHAP. VIII.EMBASSY OF CLAVIJO.CLAVIJO APPOINTED AMBASSADOR TO THE COURT OF Timor.JOURNEY THROUGH ARMENIA. Calmar. Terris.DESTRUCTION OF THE PALACE. PRIVILEGES OF THE Genoese.Sultana. COMMERCIAL ROUTE. DOMGHAUN.TOWERS BUILT OF HUMAN SKULLS. TATAR MODE OF Posting.— AMBASSADORS INTRODUCED. THE FESTIVALS ATCOURT. SAMARCAND. HOW PEOPLED. ITS TRADE.DEPARTURE OF THE EMBASSY. DEATH OF Timor. ScheldtTAKEN PRISONER BY THE TURKS, AND SUBSEQUENTLYBY THE TATARS. HIS WANDERINGS. EXPEDITION TO IS-sieur.SHAH Roth SENDS AMBASSADORS TO CHINA.JOURNEY THROUGH THE DESERT. CIVILISATION OF THECHINESE. TELEGRAPHS IN CHINA. TURNING TOWERS.THE IMPERIAL COURT. MUSICAL SKILL. DISMISSAL OFTHE EMBASSY.A disposition to indulge in the marvellous is conspicuousin the narratives of all the earliest travellers ; hutalready in the beginning of the fifteenth century a bettertaste began to appear. Among the well-informed andveracious travellers of this period, the Spaniard, Iluy-Gonzales de Clavijo is the most distinguished. Thefame of Timur's conquests being spread abroad throughevery part of Ihirope, induced Henry III. king of Castileto send ambassadors to the khan, with instructionsto pay their respects to him in the heart of his dominions.The real object of the embassy, however, was tolearn the manners and the strength of the nations inhabitingthe interior of Asia, to observe the situationof the conquered, and the character of the conqueror.In consequence of this determination, two noblemen ofthe court, Pelajo de Sotomayor and Ferdinand de ,set out for the Levant in 1393, arrived at thecamp of Timur before his victory over Parapet, andwitnessed the total overthrow of the Turkish army.The conqueror dismissed the Spaniards loaded with332 GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.presents, and sent an embassage along with them as anadditional honour to the king of Castile.The success of this first step towards a correspondenceencouraged Henry to send a second embassy to Tamerlanein 1403 ; at the head of this was Clavijo, who returnedto Spain in 1 406, and wrote an account of the receptionhe had met with at Samarcand, and of all that heobserved in the various countries through which he passed.He remained some time at Constantinople, which hedescribes as being still a great city eight miles in circumference; it was not, however, by any means populous.It contained, he says, three thousand churches,all rich in the relics of saints and martyrs. After atedious voyage in the Black Sea, he arrived in 1404 atTrebizond, where the Genoese and Venetians occupiedeach a fort or castle. The embassy crossed Armenia,the north of Persia, and Khorasan : it often passed thenight in the midst of deserts, or else in the tents of awandering horde called by Clavijo Chacatais. At Assign,or Erzerum, the embassy was received with the highesthonours ; and after being feasted for several days, wasprovided with every thing necessary to complete thejourney. Proceeding eastward they crossed the riverCorras ; and within seven or eight leagues of MountArarat they reached Calmar, a great and fortified city,which the Spanish ambassadors were taught to believewas the first city founded after the flood.At Hoy, or Choir, on the borders of Persia and Armenia,Clavijo met the ambassador of the sultan of Bagdad, alsoon his way to the court of Timur, and who carried withhim a variety of curious and valuable presents : amongthese was beast which filled the Spaniards wi th admirationand surprise; it had the body of a horse, and the head of astag ; but it was chiefly remarkable for the extraordinarylength of its fore legs and of its neck, each of whichmeasured sixteen palms ; so that when it carried its headerect it was quite a prodigy : it could with the greatestease browse on the leaves of the loftiest trees. Thisanimal Clavijo calls njornufa; and his description pointsCHAP. VIII. EMBASSY OF CLAVIJO. 333out distinctly the giraffe or camelopard, an inhabitant ofcentral Africa, and consequently a curiosity in the centreof Asia.Tauris or Tebriz is described by Clavijo as a greatcommercial city, containing no less than two hundredthousand houses, although in a state of decline. It containedmany superb edifices; and a little before hisarrival it boasted of one of the most splendid palaces ofthe East, which was said to have contained twentythousand apartments ; but this was now in ruins. Timurhad entrusted the government of this part of Persia tohis eldest son, Massa Miraxa, a weak and headstrongprince, who knew no other mode of distinguishing himselfbut by destroying what it had been the ambition ofothers to erect. He consequently levelled all the finepalaces that were in the countries subjected to his authority,and had just completed the work of destruction inTebriz, having reduced to ruins the vast edifice abovealluded to, when he learned that Timur was marchingrapidly towards him to put him to death. Knowingthat escape was impossible, he hastened to meet hisenraged father and to beg forgiveness at his feet : at theentreaty of his friends his life was spared ; but Timurstripped him of all rank and authority, and compelledhim to live in a private station.In Tauris the Genoese enjoyed great commercialprivileges : they were, in fact, established there as acommercial colony that directed the trade between Europeand the Indies with all the advantages of an intermediateposition. The Genoese, it appears, had onceobtained permission to build a castle here ; but the kingsoon after repented of his concession, and represented tothem that he deemed it inconsistent with the characterof merchants to erect fortifications or to assume in anywaya military posture. When his remonstrances failedto move them, he declared that if they persisted in theirattempt he would cut off their heads ; an argument of socogent a nature, that the merchants immediately abandonedtheir design.334 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.From Tauris Clavijo proceeded to Sultania, which,though inferior to the former city in size and population,carried on a still more lively trade. Every year,between the months of June and August, caravansarrived here from India ; others come from Yezd andSerai ; and cotton stuffs of all colours were broughthither from Khorasan. Pearls and precious stones camea journey of sixty days from Ormuz, to which place,according to Clavijo, the merchants of Cathay broughtfine rubies and jewels of various descriptions. Thecaravans from India were laden with valuable spices,cloves, mace, and nutmegs, the best market for whichwas atSultania. Clavijo is the first, or perhaps the onlywriter, who points out this line of communication betweenIndia and Europe. It was not followed, probably,until after the destruction of Bagdad by the Mongols ;and it would appear that Sultania did not continue theseat of this flourishing trade long after the time ofClavijo ; for the travellers who passed through that citytowards the end of the fifteenth century observed thatit had nothing remarkable but the minarets of a mosque,which were made of metal, and wrought with muchcurious delicacy of workmanship.Passing through the north of Persia, the embassy atlength arrived at Damage, or Domghaun, at that timethe military capital of the kingdom. Here they saw amonument of a new and terrific character : the marketplacewas ornamented with four great towers, each astone's throw in height, and built entirely of humanskulls, the interstices being filled up with mud. Toerect this edifice Timur had massacred sixty thousandTurkomans, or white Tatars, as they were called, who,after being vanquished in the field, were cruelly hunteddown and nearly exterminated by the relentless victor.After leaving this place, the ambassadors experiencedthe distressing effects of the hot winds of the desert ;and on arriving at a city called Rascal they were notallowed a moment's respite to refresh themselves, butwere obliged to proceed immediately on their journey;such being the will of the dreaded Timur.CHAP. VIII. EMBASSY OF CLAVIJOV 335At a place called Jagero, a little farther on, they hadan opportunity of observing the system of posts as establishedby Timur. At the distance of a day's journeyfrom each other were erected caravanserais large enoughto contain from one to two hundred horses : here thecouriers employed in the service of the emperor left theirown horses and were supplied with fresh ones. Theywere invested with full powers to seize the horses of allwhom they met, and to use all coercive measures thattended in the slightest degree to hasten their despatch.Having at length reached Samarcand, Clavijo, aftersome ceremonious delay, was admitted to the presence ofthe emperor. He found Timur seated on cushions ofembroidered silk, with his elbows supported by pillows,and a fountain of water playing before him : the Spanishambassador was led in by nobles of the court, whoinstructed him how to bend the knee and perform theother requisite obeisance. As often as they kneeled,they approached still closer to the emperor, who obligedClavijo and his companions to come in this way withina very short distance of him, apparently from a desireto gratify his curiosity with a near view of the Spaniards,for his eyes were now nearly closed, and his eye-lasheshad fallen off from age.The embassy was well received, and Clavijo had anopportunity of witnessing the rude profusion of Tatarhospitality : he describes, indeed, with an admirationthat runs too often into a tedious prolixity, the festivalscelebrated on his account at the imperial court. Theguests, on those occasions, were sumptuously regaledwith horse-flesh boiled and roasted, with mutton and ricedressed in a variety of ways. The roasted carcasses ofsheep and horses were carried from the kitchens on thebacks of camels to those whose duty it was to carvethem : the boiled meat was in immense leathern hags,which were dragged with great labour into the banquettingrooms; the bags were then ripped up, and the viandssoon cut to pieces by the attendants. All that wasserved on the tables was supposed to belong to the guests,336 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.whose servants were accordingly at liberty to carry offwhatever remained ; and the supplies were so inordinatelycopious, that if the servants of Clavijo had thoughtfit to make use of their privilege, they might havegathered from the relics of a single feast sufficient provisionfor half a year. Wine was produced only on rareoccasions, and by the express permission of the emperor ;it was then supplied in abundance ; and it appears tohave been considered a proof of loyalty as well as of goodbreeding to drink it as freely as it was served. Servantswere in attendance, whose sole business it was to fill thecups ; and those who pretended to drink in honour ofthe emperor were expected to drain off their bumpers ata single draught. Clavijo was present at feasts givenby two ladies, the principal wife and the daughter-in-lawof the emperor ; and on these occasions the wine waspoured forth with unusual spirit, the ladies themselvessetting the example of Bacchanalian conviviality, andrepeatedly emptying their cups in honour of their guests.He who could drink most at those feasts was honouredwith the title of Bahadur.Timur changed his residence frequently while theembassy was at his court; and every new palace visitedby Clavijo surpassed in magnificence the preceding one.But the most imposing display of the imperial grandeurwas made at the orde, horde or tent, when Timur andhis nobility pitched their tents in a vast plain to thenumber of twenty thousand. Some of these tents werehung with silk and with gold tissues, adorned withpearls, rubies, and precious stones. In those of theemperor were tables made of gold; and all the utensilswere made of gold, silver, or the finest porcelain.Samarcand appeared to Clavijo to be not much greaterthan Seville, but infinitely more populous : its suburbs,including many gardens and large vineyards, extendeda great distance in every direction. Timur had broughtthither by force a hundred and fifty thousand souls fromthe conquered countries, selecting always the most skilfulartisans of every description : he issued commands,CHAP. VIII. EMBASSY OF CLAVIJO. 337moreover, to all his officers to seize all destitute andhouseless persons, and to send them to his capital, whichhe intended to make the greatest city of the East. Thehouses of Samarcand were so inadequate to lodge theimmense population collected by these despotic measures,that many of the poorer sort were obliged to find ashelter in caves or temporary huts among the suburbs.But as the wretched people who had been thus compelledby the tyrant to leave their homes, and take uptheir abode in Samarcand, were repeatedly makingefforts to escape, the passes of the river Gihon, or Oxus,were all strictly guarded, and no one was allowed tocross the great bridge of boats without the permission ofthe emperor.A great trade was still carried on at Samarcand notwithstandingthe wars and revolutions which had latelydesolated the surrounding country. The Tatars andRussians brought thither skins, furs, and cloth ; silkstuffs, musk, pearls, precious stones, and rhubarb, camefrom China. It was a six months' journey from Sa-marchandto Cambalu or Pekin, two whole months beingemployed in crossing the deserts. Caravans from Indiaalso arrived there, bringing the fine spices, such as cloves,mace, and nutmeg ; and Clavijo here repeats an observationwhich he had made before at Sultania, that spicesof this description were not to be found in the marketsof Alexandria.After several months spent in festivities in Samarcand,a day was at length appointed by Timur, on whichthe ambassadors were to receive their answer and permissionto depart. When the day came, however, theywere informed that the emperor was unwell, and unableto receive them ; on a second visit they met with asimilar intimation ; when they made the third attemptto gain an audience, they were told by the officers of thecourt that the time was come for their departure, andthat the preparations for their journey were completed.Clavijo, however, determined not to quit Samarcandbefore he had taken leave with the usual formalities ;388 GEOGRAPHY OF THE Middle AGES. BOOK ni.nor, although assured that the emperor was on the pointof death, could the punctilious Spaniard be brought tochange his resolution until he received from the principalofficers an order to depart, couched in such peremptorylanguage as left no room for deliberation. Heaccordingly set out; and on his arrival at Tebriz learnedthat Timur was dead, and that his children and grandchildrenwere furiously contending with one another forthe possession of the empire. He himself experiencedhere the sad consequences of this distracted state ofaffairs, being robbed of all his effects, and kept forsome months in close confinement. At length OmarMira, a grandson of Timur, obtaining the governmentof Persia, liberated the ambassadors, restored them theirproperty, and gave them passports, with which theyreached Europe in safety.Among those who travelled over Asia in the fifteenthcentury was a German soldier, named Schildtberger, whois much more distinguished for the variety of his fortunesthan for the knowledge which he acquired duringhis residence in the East. He enlisted, when young, inthe army of Sigismund, king of Hungary, and in 1395was taken prisoner by the Turks : he saw some thousandsof his fellow-prisoners butchered before his eyes inthe Turkish camp, and was himself about to be decapitated,when his youthful appearance, and the fortunate circumstanceof his being left among the last, when the conqueror'sthirst for blood was nearly sated, combined tosave his life. He afterwards accompanied the army ofBajazet into Asia ; and in the great battle in which thatsultan was defeated and taken captive by Timur, Scheldtalso fell into the hands of the victor. The youngGerman attended his new master in all his expeditions,and on the death of Timur, engaged in the service ofhis son Shah Rokli. He subsequently experienced manychanges of this sort, and among his numerous journeyshe once followed into Great Tatary a prince named Zebra,who was invited by Taker Khan to assume thesovereignty of that country.CHAP. VIII. EMBASSY OF CLAVIJO. 339The Tatar prince set out attended by Schildtbergerand four others. Their route lay through Georgia andthe other Caucasian nations, the names of which arereported by the unlettered German in so corrupted aform as to be scarcely recognisable. They at lengthreached Great Tatary, and the camp of Taker Khan,who was preparing to march with all his forces into theland of Bissibur or Issibur (Siberia). In this expeditionthey marched forward continually for two months;and in the mean time they crossed a range of mountainsthirty-two days' journey in length; and at their extremity,according to Schildtberger, there is a desert whichis the end of the world, and which is uninhabitable fromthe number of serpents and wild beasts with which it isinfested.These mountains," he says, " are inhabited byroaming savages, who are covered all over with hair,except on their hands and faces, and who subsist ongreen leaves and roots, or whatever they can procure.In this country also are found wild asses, as large ashorses. The inhabitants employ dogs, as large as asses,to draw carts and sledges, and sometimes feed uponthem. They are Christians, and bury their young peoplewho die in celibacy with music and rejoicing, eating anddrinking at their graves." Having made a conquest ofBissibur, the Tatars marched into Valor or Bulgar,which they also subdued, and then returned to Kipjack.His master Zebra being dead, Schildtberger wanderedinto Mingrelia, and there learning that the Black Seawas distant but a three days' journey, he contrived,without a guide, to reach the shore. After wanderinghere four days, he at length saw a European ship aboutthree leagues off from the land. By fires and otherexpedients, he contrived to attract its attention, and aboat was sent ashore. Thirty years of captivity amongthe Turks and Tatars had so completely deprived himof his European aspect, that the mariners were slow tobelieve his story ; and it was not until he had rehearsedthe Lord's prayer, the Ave Maria, and the Creed, thatz 2340 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.his claims were admitted, and he was taken on hoard.From Constantinople, whither this ship conveyed him,he returned to his native city, Munich, after an absencefrom home of two-and-thirty years.In the year 1419 ambassadors were sent to China byMirza Shah Rokh, who on the death of his father Timurhad succeeded to the throne of Persia. At the headof this mission was an officer named Shade Khoja ; butinthe train of the ambassadors were painters and personsinstructed to keep an exact journal of their travels, andto take notice of all that was remarkable in every cityand country they passed through, carefully observingthe nature of the roads, the police and customs of thepeople, and the magnificence and mode of governmentof the various sovereigns. The narrative of this embassy,written by the celebrated Persian historian EmirKhond, is not so rich in geographical details as mighthave been expected from a mission that had so much inview the acquisition of knowledge ; but a brief reviewof it will contribute to illustrate or complete the descriptionsof China and its inhabitants, which have occurredin the preceding pages.The ambassadors commenced their journey from Herat,the residence of Shah Rokh ; and at Samarcand werejoined by ambassadors from Khorasan and the surroundingprovinces. Having passed through the cities ofTasked, Saymm, and Ash, they entered the countryof the Mongols. They afterwards passed a river calledRender, and came into the country of Ilduz, possessedby the tribe of Jel. This land of Ilduz must be thehigh table-land of little Bokhara ; for although the sunwas then in the summer solstice, our ambassadors wereoften astonished at finding ice two inches thick in thisvast desert. Hastening through the defiles of somesnowy mountains, which were probably the Alaktag, theyarrived at Tartan, where they saw a great temple, containingan idol of huge dimensions, said by the idolatrousinhabitants to be the image of Shakmonni. This name,as well as that of the idol Solomon, observed by MarcoCHAP. VIII. EMBASSY OF CLAVIJO. 341Polo in Ceylon, is but a corruption of Sakya Moon, theordinary Indian epithet of Buddha. While the ambassadorspassed through the desert of Cobi, they saw multitudesof oxen, lions, and other wild beasts. The wildoxen which they saw, called gau cottage, are of greatsize, and so strong that they can easily toss a man andhorse into the air. Their tails are long and bushy, andare held in great estimation through all the East, wherethey are often carried on long poles by way of ornamentor else for the purpose of driving away flies.When the ambassadors and their train had arrivedwithin fourteen days' journey of Socheu, the first townin China, the Catalans or Chinese came out daily tomeet them, erecting in the desert for their accommodationtents or huts adorned with green boughs, andsupplying them abundantly with fowls, fruits, and otherprovisions, all served on porcelain or China dishes, togetherwith a variety of strong liquors ; and from thattime forward they were as splendidly regaled in thedesert as they could have been in the richest cities ofCathay.Before the expedition entered within the boundariesof China, a list was made of all the individuals whocomposed it : they were found to amount in all to eighthundred and sixty persons. In this number were includedseveral merchants, who represented themselves asbelonging to the retinue of the ambassadors, and wereafterwards obliged, in conscience, to perform the serviceswhich fell to their lot according as they wereregistered. In taking this list the Chinese officers madethe ambassadors swear that there were no other personsin their train besides those whose names were returned,and warned them that they would be despised if theydid loot tell the truth.At Socheu the members of the embassy were lodgedin a public building over the gate of the city, where theywere amply provided with every necessary and convenience,and even the servants had mattresses and coverletsallowed for their beds. This latter circumstancez 3342 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.appeared to the Persians a very striking novelty ; forChina is perhaps the only country of the East in whicha stranger can be sure of finding a comfortable lodging."When they walked through the city, they saw at eachstep fresh proofs of the superior civilisation of the country.In several of the streets were covered galleries orhalls, having shops at both sides, with a handsome saloonat the entrance adorned with pictures. The temples, too,were kept in the neatest order, their brick pavementsbeing polished like glass. But the Mahometanss alsoremarked that hogs were kept in every house, and whatshocked them still more, that the butchers hung theirpork in the same shambles with the mutton.The Persians, as well as all the European travellerswho have ever visited China, note with expressions oflively admiration the great population, industry, goodorder, and strict police of that extraordinary country.From Socheu to Cambalu is a ninety-five days' journey,the whole way leading through a populous country, insomuch,says the narrative, that travellers always lodge atnight in a large town. Throughout the whole way thereare many structures named Kurgu and Kidifu. Theformer are a species of guard-house, sixty cubits high,erected within sight of each other, in which persons,relieved every ten days, are always on the watch. Theyare intended to communicate alarms speedily to the seatof government, which they do by means of fires ; andintelligence can be sent in this manner, in the space ofa day and night, from a distance of three months' journey.The Kidifus are a kind of post-houses, built atintervals of about seven miles from each other. Theextensive scale on which these Chinese post-houseswere supported may be conjectured from the circumstance,that at each of them our ambassadors were furnishedwith four hundred and fifty horses, mules, andasses, together with fifty-six chariots or waggons. TheKargu, or watch-towers, it is evident, closely resemblein principle the supposed modern invention of a chain oftelegraphs.CHAP. Yin. EMBASSY OF CLAVIJO. 343In Sanchez the Persians viewed with astonishmentan idol fifty feet in length, lying in a sleeping posture ;its hands and feet were nine feet long, and the headmeasured twenty-one feet round. Behind this great idol,which vas gilt all over, there were a multitude of smallerones, so well sculptured and in such natural attitudesthat they seemed to he alive. In whatever direction theambassadors turned, their eyes were sure to be attractedby a new exhibition of Chinese art and neatness. Allround the great temple were numerous recesses, orsmall chapels, like the chambers in caravanserais, furnishedwith curtains of tapestry or brocade, with gildedeasy chairs or stools, chandeliers, and ornamental vases.There were ten other temples in Sanchez like the onedescribed ; but the object which occasioned the Persiansmost surprise was the turning tower, a sort of edificewhich is frequently represented in Chinese paintings,and of which our [travellers were the first to give adescription. This great tower was an octagon, twentycubits in circumference, and fifteen stories high : eachstory was twelve cubits high, so that the height of thetower must have been a hundred and eighty cubits. Allthe chambers were finely varnished, and adorned withpaintings. In a vault below the edifice was an ironaxis, resting on a metal plate, and reaching from thebottom to the top of the tower : " the whole so ingeniouslycontrived," says the Persian narrative, " thatit could be easily turned round on this axis, in so surprisinga manner, that all the smiths, carpenters, andpainters of the world ought to go there to learn thesecrets of their respective trades."The Persians at length reached Cambalu, and wereconducted to the court : they reckoned that above threehundred thousand persons were assembled round theimperial palace, of which about two thousand were musiciansemployed in chaunting hymns for the prosperityof the emperor. The pavilions round the palace werehung with yellow satin, decked with gilt figures, andpaintings of the simorg, or royal bird of the Chinese.z 4344 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.The imperial throne was made of massy gold. Themandarins ranged round the apartments held tablets intheir hands, which they kept their eyes fixed upon withwonderful gravity, maintaining all the time a profoundsilence. At length the emperor made his appearance, andascended his throne by nine steps of silver : beautifulyoung females were stationed on each side of the throne,with pen and ink in their hands to Avrite down whateverwas spoken by the emperor.When the emperor had taken his seat, the seven ambassadorswere brought forward, and at the same timewere presented about seven hundred criminals : some ofthese had chains round their necks, but the greater numberhad their head and hands enclosed in a board,six being frequently fastened together in the same frame.After the prisoners were dismissed, the ambassadorswere led to the steps of the throne ; and an officer onhis knees read aloud a paper declaring the purport of theembassy, and adding, that they had brought rarities aspresents to his majesty, and had come to knock theirheads in the dust before him. Upon this, the ambassadorsbowed after the Persian fashion, and the lettersof Shah Rokh, wrapped in yellow satin, were presented tothe emperor. The ceremonies being concluded, theambassadors were conducted to the lodging provided forthem, and were treated with the generous hospitalitywhich distinguishes the Chinese court. The daily rationallowed for six persons consisted of a sheep, a goose, andtwo fowls, besides a great quantity of vegetables andvarious fruits.At some entertainments which were afterwards givenby the emperor, the ambassadors had an opportunity ofwitnessing the surprising skill of the Chinese jugglers anddancers. They also remarked a whimsical exhibition ofdexterity in the case of two musicians, who played togetherthe same air, each having one hand on his ownflute and the other on that of bis companion.Among the presents sent by Shah Rokh to the emperorof China, was one of his favourite horses ; but the agedCHAP. IX. DISCOVERIES OF THE PORTUGUESE. 345emperor was unable to manage this spirited animal, andreceived in consequence at one of his hunting parties asevere fall. His displeasure at the accident was so extremelyviolent, that the ambassadors had nearly atonedfor it with their lives: through the solicitations, however,of the chief officers of the court, they were pardoned,and received permission to return home.In the narrative "of this embassy mention occurs of asilver currency, called banish, the name formerly given,as it has been seen, to the paper money of China ; itmay, therefore, be concluded that this latter had ceasedto circulate before the commencement of the fifteenthcentury. The ambassadors also enumerate tea amongthe luxuries with which they were regaled ; but, likeMarco Polo, they are totally silent with respect to thegreat Avail of China.CHAP. IX.EARLY DISCOVERIES OF THE PORTUGUESE.IHE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. THEIR NAVAL SUPERIORITY IN THEMIDDLE AGES. IMPROVEMENTS IN NAUTICAL AFFAIRS. marinersCOMPASS DISCOVERED. THE CHINESE SUPPOSED TOHAVE BEEN ACQUAINTED WITH IT. AND THE ARABIANS. ■FIRST MENTION OF IT BY A EUROPEAN. THE SPANIARDS ImbibeA TASTE FOR THE LUXURIES OF THE EAST. THEIR WARSWITH THE MOORS. MOTIVES TO SEEK A PASSAGE BY SEA TOINDIA. THE PORTUGUESE COMMENCE THE ATTEMPT. DONHENRY. DISCOVERY OF PUERTO SANTO AND MADEIRA.STORY OF MACHAM. THE CANARY ISLANDS COLONISED.CAPE BOJADOR DOUBLED. CAPTIVES RANSOMED FOR GOLDDUST. VOYAGES OF Cana Most. THE NATIVE Canadians.THE MOORS OF THE DESERT. THE SHIPS BELIEVED TO BESPIRITS. THE SALT TRADE OF THE NEGROES. THE Senegal.KING BUDOMEL. HIS RELIGIOUS OPINIONS. DesSCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY NEAR CAPE Villi), DEATH OFDON HENRY. HIS GREAT MERITS.A continued series of events during the middle ageskept the attention of European nations directed towards346' GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK lit.the East. In Greece and Italy the advantages of theIndian trade were never totally lost sight of. Thecrusades, though they could not fail to create at firstmuch anarchy and distress in the countries whence theyemanated, must have had an amazing influence in enlargingthe minds of men, and diffusing an acquaintancewith the luxuries of the East. The ill effects of thoseexpeditions against the Saracens, in exhausting theresources and retarding the internal development ofEuropean nations, were remotely counterbalanced bythe relations to which they gave birth between countrieswidely separated from one another. The infatuation whichled the princes of the West to spend their treasure in theattempt to rescue the Holy Land from the hands ofinfidels, redounded much to the profit of the Venetiansand other maritime states of Italy, who could alonetransport the troops or supply them with the provisionswhich were necessary to enable them to carry on theiroperations. This influx of wealth into the chief Italianrepublics gave fresh stimulus and an advantageous directionto their mercantile activity, and contributed to raisethem to that degree of maritime prosperity which wasdestined, at no distant period, to attract the attention andawaken the rivalry of powerful kingdoms.The wars which the rival states of Genoa and Venicecontinually waged with one another, however they mayhave interrupted the operations of commerce, were yet incidentallyproductive of important general benefits. Therevolutions which seem most charged with ruin to mankind,the zeal of war, however destructive in its directexertions, whatever, in short, exhibits a new train ofobjects, and prompts the human being to a more intenseconsideration of what is before his eyes, affords,in almost every instance, to the active mind of man,an opportunity of learning from it something advantageousto compensate its immediate evil. During thestruggle for naval superiority between the principalstates of Italy, the art of ship-building was considerablyadvanced, and the improvements that were first startedCHAP. IX. DISCOVERIES OF THE PORTUGUESE. 347in the Adriatic were speedily conveyed to the remotestshores of western Europe.In a country like Italy, where the avocations of tradewere pursued even by the nobility, and where the arts ofnavigation were held in the highest esteem, it is naturalto expect that those contrivances which assist the marinerin his path should have been first invented or broughtto practical perfection. Among the remarkable eventsof this period of improvement must be reckoned thediscovery of the mariner's compass, which is generallysupposed to have been made about the year 1302, byone Flavio Gioja, a native of Amalfi, a place of somecommercial importance in the territory of Naples. Theparticulars of Gioja's life, or the circumstances which ledto and attended on his discovery, are not disclosed to usby the meagre and imperfect historians of those times.That Gioja possessed conspicuous merit is evident fromthe circumstance that his name has been preserved asthe author of an instrument which at that time held butacomparatively humble rank in the list of useful inventions; but he cannot, with strict accuracy, be styled thediscoverer of the mariner's compass, which was known,more or less completely, at least a century before.That wonderful property of the magnet, by which itattracts iron, did not escape the observation of the earliestphilosophers of Greece ; some of whom, unable toexplain from mechanical influence this inscrutable mysteryof nature, ventured to conclude that the magnet hasasoul, a hypothesis evidently resting on the belief thata spiritual being alone can operate at a distance andwithout the necessity of contact. The polarity of themagnet, or its property of pointing when freely suspended,towards the poles of the earth, was not knownor taken advantage of by the ancients.The Chinese, it is said, were acquainted with thecompass at a very early age, many centuries indeed beforethe Christian era ; but this opinion does not rest onthe familiarity of the Chinese with that instrument : itsonly support is derived from the obscure indications of348 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.some ancient Chinese writings. Now the Chinese nevermade any proficiency in the arts of navigation ; and ifthey had at any time an acquaintance with the propertiesof the magnet, and the uses to which they might be madesubservient, yet, as they never learned the habitual applicationof the mariner's compass, they cannot withoutthe fullest proof be admitted as its inventors.The steps by which man ascends to important discoveriesare so gradual and successive, that when he hasonce gained the eminence, and views retrospectively howshort a distance he has travelled, he feels strongly inclinedto believe that those who have advanced some waymust surely achieve the whole ; yet the history of artsufficiently proves how wide an interval there is betweenthe first rudiments of a useful discovery and its ultimateperfection.The Arabians, like the Chinese, are said to haveemployed the compass to guide them through the tracklesssands of the desert, or to enable them at the hoursof prayer to direct their faces with precision towards thecity of Mecca and the tomb of the prophet. Yet thenavigations of the Arabians were as timid and as lingeringas those of other nations, and never acquired that boldnessand enterprise which among a seafaring people musthave inevitably resulted from so fortunate a discovery.In the sixteenth century, moreover, when the Portuguesefirst visited the Indian seas, they found that the Arabians,the chief navigators of those seas, steered wholly by thestars or by the land, quite ignorant of the compass.Some affirm, that king Solomon and the Hebrews wereacquainted with the compass, while others say as muchfor the Hindoos. But setting aside these ill-supportedpretensions, it may in general be admitted, that thegerms of this as well as of many other useful inventionsmay have long lingered in the East, without arriving atthat stage of mature perfection, without which it continuedpractically worthless. The phenomena of natureare as frequent and as obvious in China as in Italy, andthe seeds of art and knowledge were widely scattered onCHAP. IX. DISCOVERIES OP THE PORTUGUESE. 34Qthe lap of human nature, before they were called intolife by the fructifying genius of the West.Although the claims of the Arabians to the merit ofbeing the discoverers of the compass cannot be fully admitted,yet there is strong reason to believe that theywere familiarly acquainted with the rudiments of theinvention. The earliest mention made of the mariner'scompass by a European writer occurs in the works ofGuilt de Provins, a troubadour or Provencal poet, whospent some time at the court of Frederic Barbarossa, in1181. The poet here not only mentions the magnet,its property of turning to the pole, and its being suspended,but he also adds that it is useful to direct themariner through the ocean.* It is again expressly noticedby the cardinal de Vitry in 1204, as the well-knownguide of seamen. Already in the middle of thethirteenth century the mariner's compass was in generaluse among the Spanish navigators t : now the learningand poetic vein of the troubadours, and every proficiencyin art of the Spanish nation in the thirteenth century, wereunquestionably derived from the civilisation of the Moors;and it may therefore be presumed that this people werenot ignorant of the compass.In a letter written by Peter Admirer, a German physician,and dated in 126'9, the writer gives a minute andelaborate account of the construction of the mariner'scompass ; and it is worthy of notice, that he also pointsout the declination of the needle, or the inexplicable circumstanceof its deviating more or less in its directionfrom the true north. Thus it is evident, that Gioja cannotbe considered as the first inventor of the mariner'scompass, but merely as its improver, or the person whoshowed all the advantages that might be expected fromits adoption. Yet the change which the employment ofthis instrument was destined to produce in the characterof navigation was not instantaneous; — mariners at firstadopted the compass as a useful companion, and not asthe sole guide.Claude Fauchet, Recueil de l'Orig. de la Lang. Fran?, p. 555.f Chapman, Ouest. Crit. Quest. II.350 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.The compass, it has been seen from the narrative ofthe Zeni, was employed by the Scandinavian mariners intheir voyages to the western seas in the fourteenth century.The great fisheries of the northern seas were informerages, as well as at present, the chief school ofexpert and hardy seamen ; and they also gave rise to aclose correspondence between the Hanse Towns and thecommercial republics of Italy. It is not at all surprising,therefore, that every improvement made by theItalians in the arts of ship-building and navigation wereimmediately communicated to the North, or that shipswere constructed in the fifteenth century in the ports ofEngland, equalling in size and solidity the celebratedcarracks of Venice.Among the events which had an important influencein directing the energies of western Europe, the warsbetween the Spaniards and the Moors must not be overlooked.The Arabians had carried with them into Spaintheir Oriental customs and their magnificence ; and theirmercantile operations extended, it has been seen, quiteacross the old world, from the Atlantic to China, andfrom the interior of Africa to the heart of Siberia. InSpain the luxury of the Moorish princes was carriedto the highest pitch. In that country all the austere preceptsof the Koran appear to have been relaxed, andreligion caused little restriction on the wants arisingfrom refinement. The great trade of the Arabians filledSpain with the productions of the East. The Spanishnation could not fail to receive the contagion of luxuryeven from enemies ; but their intercourse with the Moorswas not always hostile, and the manners of the polishedcourts of Seville and Grenada were naturally imitated bythe Christian princes of Arragon and Castile.The degree in which the Moors retained the sumptuoushabits of the East, and how well they supplied theirwants by their trade with the Levant, are manifested inone remarkable event. After the great victory obtainedby the Christians in 1340, near Tarifa, over the combinedforces of the kings of Grenada and Morocco, anCHAP. IX. DISCOVERIES OF THE PORTUGUESE. 351immense booty was found in the camp of the vanquished.Independent of the silks, the cloth of gold, and preciousstones, divided by the conquerors, the quantity of goldand silver, both coined and in ingots, was so great, thatthe value of those precious metals is said to have fallenone sixth part in consequence, throughout the dominionsboth of Spain and France. In the same age the Spaniardshad acquired the taste for all the rare productionsof the East. When Alphonso XI. entered Seville in1334, the streets through which he rode were hung withsilk and cloth of gold, and the richest perfumes wereburned in all the houses. The sumptuary laws enactedby the same monarch were unable to prevent even themen from decking their clothes with pearls.There can be little doubt that the pearls, perfumes,and other commodities of Eastern luxury were broughtinto Spain chiefly by the Moors ; and that as the hostilitiesbetween this people and the Spaniards became dailymore embittered and implacable, the supply of the luxuriesnow come into vogue grew continually less adequateto the demand. The markets of Venice and Genoacould hardly have been so copiously stocked or so advantageousto the Spanish merchants as those offered bythe Moors. It appears, therefore, that the expulsion ofthe Moors from the peninsula of Spain may be reckonedamong the motives for seeking a new course to India bythe ocean.But the Portuguese were the first to feel the wholeforce of this incentive : they were the first to drive theMoors completely from their dominions ; and not contentedwith gaining this advantage, they pursued thefugitives to the shores of Africa. John I., king ofPortugal, attended by his sons and principal nobility,made a descent on Africa in 1415, and took the city ofCeuta from the Moors. On his return he conferred onhis fifth son, Don Henry, the dukedom of Vise, andappointed him governor of the recent conquests as thereward of his valour and ability. Don Henry was anable and active-minded prince, who united the accom-352 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.punishments of the scholar to those of the cavalier, and waswell versed in all the learning of the day. He appearsto have early contracted a passion for maritime enterprise;and the political situation of Portugal left nochoice as to the quarter towards which his energy shouldbe directed. While residing in Africa he received muchinformation from the Moors, respecting the populousnations of the interior of Africa, and of the Jalofs borderingon the coast of Guinea : he justly concluded thatthese might be arrived at by the ocean, and resolved toovercome by perseverance the difficulties of the navigation.In 1412, or three years before the reduction of Ceuta,Don Henry had sent a vessel to explore the coast ofAfrica. This expedition, which was not attended withany signal success, deserves notice, as being the firstvoyage of discovery undertaken by the Portuguese. Theprince despatched a vessel every year with orders to proceedas far as possible along the African coast ; and,animated by the example of his zeal, the mariners soondoubled Cape Non, which, as its name implies, hadhitherto been the impassable boundary of their navigations.But beyond this a still more formidable obstacle arosebefore their eyes: the bold projection of Cape Bojador,with its violent currents and raging breakers running formiles out to sea, seemed a barrier which could not be evenapproached with safety by seamen steering near the shore.In 1418, John Gonzales Zarco and Tristan VasTexeira, gentlemen of Don Henry's household, perceivingthe anxiety of the prince to prosecute the discoveryof the coast of Africa, volunteered their services in anexpedition to double Cape Bojador and sail beyond ittowards the south. They steered, according to theusual custom, along the coast, and must have failed inthe proper object of their voyage, but accident compensatedtheir want of skill or courage : a violent gale arosewhich drove them far out to sea ; they had completelylost sight of land, and thought their fate inevitable, whenasthe wind fell and the storm abated during the night,CHAP. IX. DISCOVERIES OP THE TOnTCGTJESE. 553they saw at break of day an island at a little distancefrom them. To this island, from the circumstance oftheir fortunate escape, they gave the name of PuertoSanto. Overjoyed at their discovery, they hastened backto Portugal, and related to the prince all the incidents oftheir voyage. They described the genial soil and climateof the newly-discovered island, the simplicity and inoffensivemanners of its inhabitants ; and requested permissionto make a settlement upon it. Don Henry,willing to reward their success, and deeming the situationof the island advantageous for the prosecution of hisschemes, immediately yielded to their desires. A newexpedition was fitted out, consisting of three vessels,which were respectively commanded by Zarco, Vas, andBartholomew Perestrcllo, a nobleman of the prince'shousehold. These commanders were ordered to plant acolony in Puerto Santo, and were provided with all theseeds and implements which were necessary for theirpurpose. They also carried with them, unfortunately,some rabbits, which being turned loose upon the island,multiplied with such astonishing rapidity, that in twoyears' time they were numerous enough to destroy allthe vegetation of the island, and to cause it to be abandonedby the infant colony.As soon as the settlement was effected, Perestrelloreturned to Portugal to make his report to the prince.Vas and Zarco remained upon the island : while stayingthere, they observed from time to time a dark spot inthe horizon, which, though it varied occasionally indistinctness,never changed its position with regard toPuerto Santo. They embarked, sailed towards this dimobject, and found an island of considerable size, of mostenchanting appearance, quite uninhabited, but coveredwith immense woods; and from this latter circumstancethey gave it the name of Madeira. Having carefullyexamined the island, our voyagers returned to Portugalwith the welcome intelligence of their discovery ; anddescribed in such glowing terms the superiority of thisnew island above all that had been hitherto found, thatVOL. i. A ASi GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.don Henry resolved to establish a colony on it, and judiciouslyselected the vine and sugar-cane as the properobjects of its cultivation.But the Portuguese adventurers Vas and Zareo canonly be allowed the merit of re-discovering the island ofMadeira, which, it is probable, was obscurely known toseamen in the middle of the fourteenth century. It issaid, that about the year 1344, an Englishman namedMacham, flying with the fair Anne Dorset from thepersecutions to which he was exposed from the anger ofher relations, sought through the ocean some place oftranquil security, and was driven by a tempest to theshores of Madeira. Here he landed with his friends, torest a little from the fatigues of the voyage ; but thevessel in which he had arrived put to sea again withouthis knowledge, deserting him and his companions. Thelady died of grief, and Macham, unable to bear this lastcalamity, expired on her grave five days afterwards.The survivors of the company fixed a large woodencross with a rude inscription over the common grave ofthe unfortunate lovers; and constructing a canoe, foundmeans to reach Morocco, whence they were sent intoSpain. Whatever doubts may be raised with respect tothe truth of this romantic story, it is evident that itbetrays some acquaintance with the island of Madeira,which Portuguese writers agree to make the scene ofthe adventure. They add, that the port and district ofMachine take their name from the inscription foundthere on the tomb of Macham.About the year 1395, some adventurers of Andalusia,Biscay, and Guipuscoa, formed an association at Seville,and, with the permission of king Henry III. of Castile,equipped a squadron of five vessels, with which theyvisited the Canary islands, plundering all the populousdistricts, and carrying off, as captives, the king andqueen of Lancelot with about seventy of the inhabitants.After they had loaded their vessels with wax and theskins of animals, the chief productions of these islands,they returned to Seville, where they realised a large preCrisp. IX. DISCOVERIES OP THE PORTUGUESE. 355fit by the adventure. They informed the king of thefacility with which the conquest of those islands mightbe effected, and thus inflamed the avidity of the enterprisingand needy. A few years later the dominion ofthe Canary islands, together with the title of king, wasgranted by the king of Castile to a Norman baron, Johnde Betancourt, who renewed his oath and homage onaccount of this estate to John II. in 1412. It does notappear that the Norman baron ever completed the conquestof those islands ; and his successors, a little after,sold the Canaries to don Henry of Portugal for an estatein the island of Madeira.It is remarkable, that previous to this enterprise ofJohn de Betancourt, Norman adventurers had exploredthe western shores of Africa even as far as Sierra Leone;and the baron, before he had completely fixed himself inhis insular dominion, ran along the coast from CapeCanton to the alio do Ouroo, which is beyond Cape Boja-dor, made some captives, gathered information respectingthe harbours, and even projected the erection of afort to lay the country under contribution.But so unequal and imperfect was the diffusion ofknowledge in those ages, that the Portuguese navigators,prompted by the instructions and encouraged by thepatronage of an enlightened prince, long despaired ofaccomplishing what had already been achieved by theNorman pirates. At length in 14-33 one Gilianez, a nativeof Lagos, succeeded in making the passage roundCape Bojador; and on his return reported, contrary tothe prevailing opinion, that the sea beyond that formidablecape was perfectly susceptible of navigation, andthat the soil and climate were equally excellent. A littlebefore this time don Henry had succeeded in procuringfrom the pope, Martin V., a grant, which at the presentday would stem equally extravagant in its terms and inthe authority whence it issued. The sovereign pontiffmade a perpetual donation to the crown of Portugal ofall lands or islands which had been, or might be, discoveredbetween Cape Bojador and the East Indies, anda a t356 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.granted at the same time a plenary indulgence for thesouls of all who might perish in the prosecution of anenterprise calculated to rescue those extensive regionsfrom the hands of infidels and pagans. Thus princeHenry enlisted in his favour that religious enthusiasmwhich was among the most powerful principles of actionin his age, and obtained a title to the exclusive possessioncf his discoveries, the validity of which was foralong time acknowledged by the courts of Europe.In 1441 don Henry sent Antonio Gonzales andNun Tristan to continue the discoveries. The latterof these advanced as far [as Cape Blancoo, about a hundredand fifty leagues beyond Cape Bojador. Theycaptured ten or a dozen Moors in this expedition ; someof whom were persons of rank and opulence, who promiseda handsome price for their liberation, if allowed toreturn to their native country. Gonzales was thereforedespatched the following year, with instructions to landthe Moors on the spot where they had been found. As soonas the vessel arrived on the coast, and it was known thatthe captives were on board, their friends assembled andpaid their ransom in gold dust and negro slaves, — both,objects of curiosity and admiration to the Portuguese.From the circumstance of receiving the gold dust here,Gonzales gave the name of Rio do Ouroo, or Gold River,to the arm of the sea in which his ship was anchored.The negroes, about thirty in number, were carried toLisbon, where they caused the most lively astonishmentamong the people. It is supposed that Tristan in thislast voyage discovered the island of Arguin, some of theCape Verd islands, and examined the coast as far asSierra Leone.The small quantity of gold dust brought home fromthe Rio do Ouroo inflamed to a wonderful degree thespirit of adventure. The negroes called attention to anew world; and to have reached the countries which theyinhabited was a striking proof of the progress of Portuguesenavigation. At first, when the Portuguese endeavoured,to advance beyond Cape Non, they found bareCHAP. IX. DISCOVERIES OF THE PORTUGUESE. 357deserts extending to the shore, cheered by vegetationor the abodes of men ; and they had some reason to fearthat the opinion of those who thought the regions of thetorrid zone to be uninhabitable might finally prove true;but when they reached the fertile countries near theSenegal, and found the country grow more populous asthey proceeded farther south, their confidence revived,and they felt assured that nature placed no such insuperablebarriers to their progress.Don Henry, seeing that his labours now began to turnto some account, listened to the proposals of some inhabitantsof Lagos, who, actuated by views of interest,equipped in 1444 six caravels, with which they sailedtowards the coast of Guinea. Want of provisions compelledthem to return before they had fulfilled their intentions;but they brought back a considerable number ofnegroes whom they had captured during the voyage.The rumour of these discoveries, and of the great profitresulting from them, drew into Portugal a multitude ofstrangers, particularly Italians, who were then reckonedamong the most skilful and experienced seamen. Theprince received favourably all who were recommendedto him by their superior knowledge of astronomy andnavigation, and gladly availed himself of their talentsand acquirements. In 141-1 he sent Vincent de Lagosand Aloisio de Cada Mostoo, the latter a Venetian gentleman,to examine the African seas. After visiting theCanary and Madeira islands, these navigators directedtheir course to Cape Blancoo and the Gambia, where theyfound Antonio di Nota, a Genoese, examining that coastby the orders of the prince. They then joined companyand returned home. Cada Mostoo made a second voyagein 1446, and afterwards published an account of hisvoyages, which was read with great interest, and procuredhim deservedly a very high reputation.He makes us acquainted with the great success whichattended at the outset the colonies of Madeira and theCanary islands. The soil yielded seventy for one; andthe vineyards and sugar-plantations of Madeira hadA A 335S GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.already become in the highest degree productive. Orchilfor dyeing, and fine goat-skins were exported from Canary.The native Canadians were surprisingly agile,being accustomed to traverse the cliffs of their ruggedmountains. They could skip from rock to rock like goats,and sometimes took leaps of surprising extent and danger.They threw stones with great strength and wonderfulexactness, so as to hit whatever they aimed at with almostperfect certainty, and nearly with the force of amusket-bal!. The Canaries were tolerably populousprevious to the arrival of the Portuguese ; the Branchesor native inhabitants of the Great Canary being estimatedat nine, and those of Teneriffe at fifteen thousand.Respecting the Moors who inhabit the deserts oppositethe island of Arguin, Cada Mostoo relates that theyfrequent the country of the negroes, and also visit thatside of Barbary which is next the Mediterranean. Onthese expeditions they travel in numerous caravans,with great trains of camels, carrying silver, brass, andother articles, to Timbuctoo and the country of thenegroes, whence they bring back gold and mclhegatteor cardamum seeds. The Arabs of the coast had alsomany Barbary horses, which they brought to the countryof the negroes, and bartered with the great men forslaves; receiving from ten to eighteen men for each horse,according to their qualities. Some of these slaves weresold in Tunis and other places on the coast of Barbary ;and the rest were brought to Arguin, and disposed of tothe licensed Portuguese traders, who purchased betweenseven and eight hundred every year, and sent them forsale into Portugal. Before the establishment of this tradeat Arguin, the Portuguese used to send every year fouror more caravels to the bay of Arguin, the crews ofwhich, landing well armed in the night, used to surprisethe fishing villages and carry off" the inhabitantsinto slavery. They even penetrated sometimes a considerableway into the interior, and carried off the Arabsof both sexes, whom they sold as slaves in Portugal.The wandering Arabs to the north of the Senegal arecalled, by Cada Mostoo, Asanhaji, or slanderers of theCHAP. IX. DISCOVERIES OF TOE PORTUGUESE. Sqdesert. They had a singular custom of folding a handkerchiefround their heads in such a manner that apart of it concealed the nose and mouth ; for they deemedit improper to let their mouths be seen, except wheneating. The Tricks, who inhabit the oases of theGreat Desert, have the same custom, wrapping up theirfaces in such a manner as to conceal every feature butthe eyes. Many of the Azanhaji informed our Venetiantraveller, that when they first saw ships under sail,they took them for large birds with white wings thathad come from foreign countries ; but when the sailswere furled, they conjectured, from their great length,and from their swimming on the water, that they mustbe great fishes. Others again believed that they werespirits that wandered about by night, because they wereseen at anchor in the evening at one place, and wouldbe seen next morning a hundred miles off, either proceedingalong the coast towards the south, or puttingback according to the wind, or other circumstances.They could not conceive how any thing human couldtravel more in one night than they themselves were ableto perform in three days ; by which consideration theywere confirmed in the belief that the ships were spirits.Cada Mostoo was informed that there was a placecalled Tegazza, about six days' journey from Iloden,where large quantities of salt were dug up every yearand carried on camels to Timbuctoo, and thence to theempire of Mell belonging to the negroes. On arrivingthere the merchants disposed of their salt in the courseof eight days, and then returned with their gold. Hewas assured, that in the countries under the equatorcertain seasons of the year were so excessively hot, thatthe blood of the inhabitants would putrefy if it werenot for the salt, and they would all die. From Mellthe salt was carried on men's heads to the border of acertain water, — whether sea, lake, or river, Cada Mostoowas unable to ascertain. When arrived at the waterside,the proprietors of the salt placed their shares inheaps in a row at small distances, setting each a partisA 4GEOGRAPHY OF THE middle AGES.ocular mark on his own heap ; and this being done, thewhole company retired half a day's journey from theplace. Then the other negroes, who were the purchasersof the salt, and who seemed to be the inhabitantsof certain islands, but who would not on any accountallow themselves to be seen or spoken to, came inboats to the place where the heaps of salt were placed ;and, after laying a sum of gold on each heap as its price,retired in their turn. When they were gone, the ownersof the salt came back ; and if the quantity on the heapswas satisfactory to them, they took it away and left thesalt ; if not, they left both and withdrew again. " Inthis manner," says Cada Mostoo, " they carry on theirtraffic, without seeing or speaking to each other ; andthis custom is very ancient among them, as has beenaffirmed to me for truth by several merchants of thedesert, both Moors and Azanhaji, and other creditablepersons."On approaching the Senegal, our voyager was astonishedto find how abrupt a change appeared in theface of nature on passing from one side of that river tothe other ; " for on the south side of the river," he observes," the inhabitants are all exceedingly black, tall,robust, and well-proportioned ; and the country is allclothed in fine verdure and full of fruit-trees ; whereason the north side of the river the men are tawny, meagre,and of small stature, and the country is all dry andbarren. This river," he adds, " is, in the opinion ofthe learned, a branch of the Gihon, which flows fromthe Terrestrial Paradise, and was named the Niger bythe ancients, and which, running through the whole ofethiopia, divides into many branches as it approachesthe ocean in the West. The Nile, which is anotherbrand) of the Gihon, flows into the Mediterranean."This belief, that the chief rivers of Africa and Asiaflowed from common sources in some distant ethiopianland, seems to have suffered little change from the daysof Lucan and Virgil to those of Cada Mostoo.About eighty miles beyond the Senegal our voyagercn.vr. ix. discoveries of the Portuguese. S6'larrived at the territory of a chief called Budomel, whoappears to have been well known to the Portuguese as agreat purchaser of European commodities. He receivedCada Mostoo with civility and attention ; and the Venetianlived for four weeks on the hospitality of the negroes.The table of Budomel, according to the customof the country, was supplied by his wives, each of whomsent him a certain number of dishes every day. Heand his nobles ate on the ground without any regularityor social forms. Cada Mostoo once ventured to declareto him, in the presence of all his doctors, that the religionof Mahomet was false, and the Romish the only truefaith : at this the Arabs were exceedingly enraged ; butking Budomel only laughed, and observed, " that the religionof the Christians was unquestionably good, asnone but God could have gifted them with so muchriches and understanding ; " but yet he added, with someshow of reason, " that inasmuch as God is just, andthe Christians possess all the good things of this life,the negroes have a better chance of inheriting theheavenly paradise." The women of this country appearedto the Venetian extremely pleasant and merry, especiallythe young ones : they delighted in singing and dancingby moonlight. Quitting the country of king Budomel,Cada Mostoo doubled Cape Verd, and sailed to the southalong the coast. " The land," he says, " is here alllow, and full of fine large trees, which are continuallygreen, as the new leaves are grown before the old onesfall oft", and they never wither like the trees in Europe ;they grow also so near the shore, that they seem to drink,as it were, the water of the sea. The coast is mostbeautiful, insomuch that I never saw any thing comparableto it, though I have sailed much in the Levantand in the western parts of Europe. It is well wateredevery where by small rivers, which are useless for trade,however, as they do not admit vessels of any size." Thenarrative of Cada Mostoo is in itself extremely entertaining; and it also shows the complete success that attendedthe exertions of the Portuguese prince, who lived to re-362 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.clive from his own servants an accurate account of thenegro countries, and to see a considerable trade andflourishing colonies, the worthy progeny of his enlightenedlabours.In the year 1449 king Alphonso granted a license tohis uncle don Henry to colonise the Azores, which hadbeen discovered by the Flemings and the Portuguesesome years before. The settlements made on the CapeVerd, the Madeira, and Canary islands, formed somany schools of seamen, and afforded numerous incidentalopportunities for the promotion of maritime discoveries.Every year new expeditions were fitted out, andthe limit of navigation to the south was uniformly thoughbut slowly receding. Don Henry had resided for manyyears at Sages on Cape St. Vincent, where the Atlantic,spread before his eyes, continually called up to hiscontemplation his favourite schemes of geographical discovery.In this favourite retreat he expired in 1 46*3, inthe sixty-seventh year of his age ; and the activity ofmaritime enterprise was in consequence suspended forsome years.During a long period of fifty-two years this patrioticprince devoted almost his whole attention, and the amplerevenues which he enjoyed as duke of Vise andgrand master of the military order of Christ, to his favouritescheme of extending the maritime knowledge ofhis country and promoting the discovery of the coastsof Africa. No very brilliant success, indeed, at any timerewarded his perseverance or the courage of his servants ;but he laid an indestructible foundation of useful knowledge,too solid to give way to the ignorant prejudicesof the age ; and he united so many plans of immediateutility with his great project of discovery, as preventedthe latter from ever falling into oblivion. The laboursof his life had succeeded only in discovering about fifteenhundred miles of coast, for none of his servants hadreached before his death within six or eight degrees ofthe equator ; but the numerous successive efforts madeunder bis commands, prove his solid conviction of theCHAP. X. PASSAGE BY THE CAPE DISCOVERED. 363possibility of extending the limits of navigation towardsthe south, and his unwearied perseverance in combatingthe obstacles that prevented the completion ofhis schemes.CHAP. X.rHE PASSAGE BY THE CAPE DISCOVERED.THE PORTUGUESE ERECT A FORT OX THE GOLD COAST. THEIRINTERVIEW WITH THE NATIVE PRINCE. THE POPE'S GRANT.VOYAGE OF DIEGO CAM. VISITS CONGO. BRINGS HOMENATIVES. KING OF CONGO FAVOURS THE CHRISTIAN FAITH.THE KING OF RENIN DESIRES MISSIONARIES. PrinceOGANE. PRESTER JOHN IN AFRICA. ORIGIN OF THIS BELIEFEXPLAINED. NEW EXPEDITIONS. BARTHOLOMEW Dial DiscoversTHE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE. COVII.HAM AND PatnaDESPATCHED TO INDIA. COVII.HAM VISITS SOFALA. AscertainsTHE PRACTICABILITY OF THE PASSAGE. DETAINED INABYSSINIA VASCO DE GAMA. ARRIVAL AT MOZAMBIQUE.QUILOA. MELINDA. INDIAN PILOT. REACHES CALICUT.THE Lambkin. ARTS OF THE MOORS. DANGER OF GAMA.ESCAPES. ARRIVES AT LISBON. HIS RECEPTION.After the decease of don Henry, the illustrious promoterof maritime discovery, the progress of the Portuguesealong the coast of Africa received a considerablecheck, as the attention of Alphonso V. was wholly engrossedby his quarrels with the court of Castile. Eversince the year 1453 considerable importations of goldhad been made to Portugal from the coast of Africa,but the efforts to extend discoveries farther to the southappear to have been remitted about the same time. In1469 a merchant named Fernando Gomez farmed theGuinea trade from king Alphonso for the yearly rent offive hundred ducats, and bound himself at the sametime to extend the discovery of the coast five hundredleagues to the south during the period of his exclusiveprivilege. During tin's time were discovered the islandsof Fernando Po, Prince's Isle, St. Thomas, and An-geographyOP THE MIDDLE AGES.noon ; the last being within a degree and a half of theequator.No detailed relations remain of the several voyagesin which these discoveries were effected ; but it appearsthat during the period which elapsed between the deathof don Henry in 1463 and that of king Alphonso,which took place in 1481, the navigations of the Portuguesealong the coast of Africa had made a great advancement; comprehending the whole coast of Guinea,with its gulfs named the Bights of Benin and Biafra,the adjacent islands, and the shore extending southwardsto the northern frontier of the kingdom of Congo.On the accession of John II. to the throne of Portugalin 1481, the discoveries along the coast of Africawere resumed with fresh spirit. The revenues of John,while he was infante or hereditary prince, flowed principallyfrom the profits of the Guinea trade or the importationof gold from the haven of Mina ; and amongthe first measures of his reign, he turned his attentionto the improvement and extension of that valuablebranch of commerce. For this purpose he gave ordersto construct a fortress and church at the port of Mina.All the requisite materials were shipped from Lisbon inasquadron of ten caravels and two transports, with500 soldiers and 200 labourers or workmen of variouskinds. The expedition was placed under the commandof don Diego d'Azambuja, a brave and experiencedofficer.As soon as the armament reached the coast of Guinea,Azambuja sent forward a person well acquainted withthe country to apprize Camaranca, the negro chief ofthe district, of their arrival, and to desire a conferencewith him. Early next morning the Portuguese disembarked,carrying their arms concealed upon their persons,lest they might unexpectedly meet with hostilities fromthe natives.They then marched forward in pompous array to agreat tree not far from the negro village of Alden, andwhere a spot had been selected as a convenient situationCHAP. X. PASSAGE BY THE CAPE DISCOVERED. 365for the intended fortress. A flag bearing the royalarms of Portugal was immediately displayed upon thetree, and an altar was placed under the shade of itsboughs, at which the whole company assisted in celebratingmass and offering up their prayers for the speedyconversion of the natives and the prosperity of thechurch which was to be erected on this spot.No sooner was this religious ceremony finished thanCamaranca was seen approaching with a numerous retinue.Azambuja, sumptuously dressed, and ornamentedwith a rich golden collar, prepared to receivethe negro chief with the most imposing solemnity : heseated himself on an elevated chair like a throne, havingall his train arranged before him so as to form anavenue. The negroes were armed with spears, shields,bows, and arrows, and wore a kind of helmet made ofskin thickly studded with fish teeth, which gave thema very martial appearance. The subordinate chiefswere distinguished by chains of gold hanging from theirnecks, and had various golden ornaments on their heads,and even on their beards. After the exchange of presentsand other tokens of mutual respect and confidence,Azambuja addressed a speech to Camaranca throughthe medium of an interpreter, in which he explainedthe purpose of his embassy and expedition j and usedevery argument he could think of to conciliate thefriendship of the negro chief, to make him fully sensibleof the power of the king of Portugal, and to reconcile himto the permanent establishment which was meditated onthe coast. Camaranca listened to the harangue andthe explanation of it by the interpreter in respectfulsilence, keeping his eyes steadily fixed on the countenanceof Azambuja. After which, casting his eyes forsome time on the ground as if profoundly meditatingwhat course he ought to pursue, he made the followingguarded and judicious answer: —'•' 1 am fully sensible of the high honour done me onthis occasion by your sovereign. I have always endeavouredto deserve his friendship, by dealing justly with366 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK It.his subjects, and by constantly exerting myself to procureimmediate lading for their ships. Hitherto thePortuguese who have visited these shores were meanlydressed and easily satisfied with the commodities we hadto give them ; and so far from desiring to remain here,were always anxious to complete their cargoes and toreturn to the country whence they came. But this dayI observe a wonderful difference. A multitude of personsrichly dressed eagerly demand permission tobuild themselves houses and to remain among us.Assuredly persons of such rank would never be able toendure the hardships of our climate ; and they couldnot procure in this country the luxuries to which theyhave been accustomed in their own. Those passionswhich are common to all men will certainly producedisputes between us ; and it were much better that weshould continue on the same footing as hitherto, allowingyour ships to come and go as they have always doneheretofore ; in which case, the desire of seeing eachother occasionally, and the mutual advantages of trade,will preserve peace between us. The sea and the land,which are neighbours, are always at variance, each contendingfor the mastery ; the sea violently endeavoursto subdue the land, which with equal obstinacy defendsitself against the encroachments of the sea."The jealousy and distrust displayed on this occasionby Camaranca surprised and perplexed the Portuguesecommander ; and it required the exercise of much addresson his part to prevail on the negro chief to allowthe fulfilment of his orders, and to prevent the necessityof resorting to measures of compulsion. When theworkmen were next day making preparations to lay thefoundations of the intended fortress on the coast, theyobserved a large rock which was commodiously situatedto serve them as a quarry, and accordingly proceeded towork it for that purpose. It happened, however, unfortunately,to be an object of veneration to the negroes,who immediately flew to arms to oppose the impiousviolation of the sacred stone, and several of the workmenCHAP. X. PASSAGE BY THE CAPE DISCOVERED. 367were wounded before the irritated natives could be appeasedby presents and excuses. At length, after theconstant labour of twenty days, the fort began to assumea formidable appearance, and received, when completed,the name of Fort St. George of Mina, In a churchconsecrated within its walls a solemn mass was appointedto be celebrated annually in honour of the illustriousDon Henry, to whom the Portuguese owed theiracquaintance with this country. Azambuja continuedgovernor of this place during two years and seven months,and was honoured, on his return to Portugal, with particularmarks of royal favour.Deeply impressed with the important consequencesthat might be derived from the prosecution of discoveryalong the coasts of Africa, and especially of opening apassage by sea to India, of which he now had sanguinehopes, the king of Portugal, who had lately added to hisother titles that of Lord of Guinea, applied to the popefor a confirmation of those grants which had been alreadyconceded in the lifetime of don Henry. The sovereignpontiff, proud of an opportunity of exercising his highprerogatives, by which he pretended to dispose of kingdomsand define the rights of the greatest princes, strictlyprohibited all Christian powers from intruding withinthose prodigious and indefinite bounds which he hadbestowed upon the crown of Portugal. A few yearsafterwards, when it was rumoured that seme Englishmenwere preparing to make a voyage to Guinea, theking of Portugal sent an ambassador to Edward IV. ofEngland, to explain to him the tenour of the pope'sgrant, and to induce him to prevent his subjects fromnavigating to the coasts of Africa. The king of Englandadmitted the justice of the argument, and grantedthe request. Hitherto the Portuguese navigators, in thecourse of their voyages along the shores of western Africa,had been accustomed to erect wooden crosses as indicationsof their respective discoveries ; but the king nowordered that they should erect stone crosses, about sixfeet heh, inscribed with the arms of Portugal, the name368 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.of the reigning sovereign, that of the navigator, and thedate of the discovery.In the year 1484 Diego Cam or Cano advanced beyondCape St. Catherine, the last discovery made in thereign of king Alphonso, and reached the mouth of aconsiderable river called Zayre by the natives, but afterwardsnamed the Congo. Diego proceeded a little distanceup this river, till he met with some of the natives ; buthe was unable to procure any satisfactory intelligencefrom them, their language not being understood by thenegro interpreters on board his ship. By means of signs,however, he learned that the country was under thedominion of a king who resided at a considerable distancefrom the coast, in a town or city called Banda,since named San Salvador by the Portuguese ; on whichhe sent a party of his crew, conducted by the natives,with a considerable present to the king, intending at thesame time to await their return. As they, however, weredetained by unavoidable circumstances far beyond theperiod that was expected, Diego resolved to proceed toPortugal with an account of his discovery ; and havinggained the confidence of the natives, he prevailed on fourof them to embark with him, that they might be instructedin the Portuguese language to serve as interpretersin the future intercourse with this newly discoveredregion ; and he made the people understand by means ofsigns that in fifteen moons the persons whom he carriedaway should be returned in safety.These Africans were men of some consequence in theirown country, and were endowed with such natural quicknessof understanding, that they acquired during the voyageto Lisbon a sufficient knowledge of the Portugueselanguage to be able to. give a competent account of theirown country and of the kingdoms or regions beyond ittowards the south. The king of Portugal was exceedinglygratified by this discovery, and treated the Africans broughtover by Diego with much kindness and munificence.Next year Diego Cam returned to the river Zayre orCongo, where he landed the four natives, who wereCHAP. X. PASSAGE BV THE CAPE DISCOVERED. 369charged with numerous presents from king John totheir own sovereign, and with messages inviting him toembrace the Christian faith.When Diego had landed the Africans, and receivedback his own men whom he had left here on his formervoyage, he proceeded to examine the coast to the southof the river Congo. How far he advanced in this voyageof discovery, is not distinctly mentioned by the Portuguesehistorians. But it appears that either fromwant of provisions, or from the desire to form a friendlyconnection with the king of Congo, Diego measuredback his way to the river Zayre, where he was receivedwith great distinction by the sovereign of the country.The reports of the negroes who had just returned fromPortugal, and the liberal presents which they had broughtto him from king John, had made a deep impressionon the mind of the African monarch. lie made manyenquiries respecting the Christian religion ; and beinggratified with what he heard of its doctrines and solemnities,he appointed one of his principal officers, namedCazuta, to accompany Diego Cam as ambassador toking John ; earnestly requesting the king of Portugal toallow this chieftain to be baptized, and to send some ministersof his holy religion to convert the Africans fromtheir idolatrous errors. Diego Cam arrived safely inPortugal with Cazuta, who was soon afterwards baptizedby the name of John Silva ; the king and queen ofPortugal condescending to be his sponsors at the holyfont : this ceremony was closed with the baptism of hissable attendants. A short time previous to this event,Alphonso de Aviero had brought to Portugal an ambassadorfrom the king of Benin, who requested that somemissionaries might be sent for the conversion of hissubjects. This request was immediately complied with;and although the fickle and designing African princethwarted the missionaries in every possible way, yet agreat many negroes of that country were actuallyconverted.From the negro ami assador the king of Portugalvcr i. n n370 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.received the following curious intelligence : — Twentymoons (which according to their rate of travelling mightbe about two hundred and fifty leagues) to the east ofBenin there was a powerful king, called Ogane, whowas held by the pagan chiefs of that country in the sameveneration that the sovereign pontiff was held in by thekings of Europe. According to long established custom,at the death of the king of Benin, his successor sent ambassadorsto Ogane with a large present, entreating to beconfirmed in the territory of which he was now therightful heir. Prince Ogane gave him in return astaff and a covering for the head, similar to a Spanishhelmet, all of glittering brass, to represent a sceptre anda crown : he also sent a cross of the same metal, to beworn on the neck, similar to those worn by the commandersof the order of Saint John. Without theseensigns the people did not conceive they had a rightfulking, or one that was properly a king at all. Duringthe whole stay of the ambassadors Ogane himself remainedconcealed from human eyes, and was never seenby any one, a silk curtain being always drawn beforehim : only at the time when the ambassador took leave,a foot appeared from behind the curtain ; " to whichfoot they did homage as to a holy thing." The ambassadorswere then presented with small crosses similar tothose which were sent for the use of the king.On receiving these details, and consulting all hiscosmographers, the king of Spain had no doubt thatthis Ogane' must be Prester John, the Christian monarchof the East, so long sought in vain. This curious erroris not wholly incapable of explanation ; for there arefew fables that have not some share of historical foundation.It has been seen that Ilubruquis, in the thirteenthcentury, spoke of Prester John as a Mongolian prince,said by the Nestorianss to have been converted to Christianity,and whose history in the course of half a centuryafter his death had become so obscure, that theintelligent monk was unable to learn the particulars ofhis life. The historians of the East, however, are notCHAP. X. PASSAGE BY THE CAPE DISCOVERED. 371quite silent respecting him. It appears that the Mongoliantribe, called Keraites, had embraced Christianityin the beginning of the eleventh century. Their princeswere dependent on the Chinese empire, and affixed to theirtitle of Koran or Khan, king, the Chinese word Wang,which has the same signification : this is the origin of thename Vng Khan or Wang Khan, which they usually bore.The Syrians in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries werescattered all over Asia, and traded from the Mediterraneaneven as far as China : it may naturally be supposedthat they were numerous among the MongolianChristians: now the title Wang Khan, which was borneby the prince of the Keraites, differs but little in soundfrom the Syrian expression signifying John the Priest;and by this appellation accordingly Europeans were madeacquainted with the Christian potentate of central Asia,*The earliest mention of Prester John occurs in a writerof the twelfth century, who derived his information fromthe bishop of Cabala in Syria. TAll the early travellers agree in giving the title ofPrester John to a prince named Ung or Inc Khan.Ilubruquis, indeed, supposed Prester John to be a brotherof this prince, hoping, perhaps, to get rid in this way ofthe confusion of names. The dominions, also, of theChristian monarch were at first unanimously placed inTatary ; but when Togrul Inc Khan was put to deathby his relative Zingis Khan, in 1202, and the religionas well as the kingdom of the Traite princes disappearedin the revolutions which subsequently took placein Asia, European travellers transferred Prester John toany part of the East in which they could find a trace ofChristianity. Carpini and many others place this fabulousmonarch in India, all receiving their informationfrom those, perhaps, who were but imperfectlyacquainted with the solemnities of Christian worship.Marco Polo observes that " the name Un Khan is thought by some tohave the same signification in the Tatar language as Prester John in ours."Mars<len's Marco I'olo, p. 190. The some to whom he alludes were ofcourse Syrians.t Otho of Freysingen. Hist, of Frederic Barbarossa.B B 2372 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.It was usual in the middle ages to give the name ofIndia to all the distant countries of Asia, whether to theeast or south. The ancients confounded, under thegeneral name of ethiopia, or sometimes under that ofIndia, all the countries, whether in Asia or Africa,which are washed by the Indian ocean. The Arabian,Persian, and Turkish geographers, in like manner, givethe name of India to Yemen, and all the southern partsof Arabia near the Indian seas. Alien the intercoursebetween Europe and the East was interrupted by theexpulsion of the Franks from Syria, and the opportunityno longer existed of enquiring into the history of PresterJohn, the vague notions entertained respecting that mysteriouspersonage became still more indistinct from thewant of communication with Asia : it was only rememberedthat his dominions were situated somewhere inIndia. The maritime enterprises of the Portuguese inthe fifteenth century had the passage to India for theirprincipal object : the route to India at that time laythrough Egypt ; and it is not at all extraordinary thattravellers passing through that country should supposethe first Christian sovereign they met with to be PresterJohn. Besides, Abyssinia was sometimes called MiddleIndia, as Marco Polo testifies ; and the sovereigns ofthat country frequently united in their persons the pontificalwith the regal character ; it was not, therefore, acapricious error which translated Prester John from Tataryto Abyssinia, nor did it originate altogether with thePortuguese.In 1444-, don Pedro, the regent cf Portugal, had proposedto his council to send persons in search of thekingdom of Prester John, to solicit his friendship andalliance. The design was approved of, but unfortunatecircumstances prevented its execution. When, however,the progress of maritime discovery along the coast ofAfrica increased the expectation of effecting the passageto India, the expediency of making an alliance withPrester John again came under consideration ; and theintelligence received from the negro ambassador respectingthe prince called Ogane decided the resolution of theCHAP. X. PASSAGE BY THE CAPE DISCOVERED. 313Portuguese council. With the double purpose, therefore,of procuring some information respecting the portsof India, hy a journey over-land, and of finding PresterJohn, the king of Portugal despatched a Franciscanfriar, named Antonio de Lisbon, with instructions topenetrate into India through Palestine and Egypt ; butbeing ignorant of the Arabic language, the friar was unableto proceed beyond Jerusalem, whence he returnedto Portugal. Though the king was disappointed in thisattempt by the ignorance or want of enterprise of hisagent, his resolution was not to be subdued by difficulties,and he immediately prepared to make fresh exertionsboth by sea and land for the attainment of hisobjects. For this purpose he sent Covilham and Payvato attempt the passage to India over-land, and fitted outa small squadron, consisting of two caravels of fifty tonseach, and a small store-ship, to prosecute the discoveriesby sea. This fleet was placed under the command ofBartholomew Diazz, a knight of the royal household.The preparations being completed, he sailed in the endof August, I486.Having arrived at Sierra Parma, about two degreesbeyond the southern tropic, and a hundred and twentyleagues beyond the furthest point visited by precedingnavigators, Diazz erected a cross bearing the arms ofPortugal ; then, with a resolution worthy of the greatobject which he had in view, he steered due souththrough the open sea, and lost all sight of land. Forcedat length to the east by heavy gales, he approached abay which he named Dos Vaqueros, or the Shepherds',from the numerous flocks of sheep with their keeperswhich he descried upon the coast. He was now fortyleagues to the cast of the Cape, which he had doubledunawares. Continuing his course to the east, he reachedan island to which he gave the name of Santa Cruz,because he there erected a second cross. From time totime he sent ashore negroes whom he brought fromPortugal, and who were well apparelled, in order thatthey might attract the respect of the natives : he alsoij n 3374 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III,gave them merchandise of various kinds to exchange forthe produce of the country, and instructed them especiallyto make enquiries respecting Prester John ; but the nativeswere so savage and so timid that nothing whatevercould be learned from them. When the fleet, nowreduced to two vessels, reached the bay of Lagoa, thediscontentment of the crews broke out into loud murmurs,insisting on their return. The stock of provisionswas exhausted : the small vessel containing the storeshad disappeared in the gales. Diazz, ignorant that hehad already doubled that Cape which was the object ofhis search, entreated them to continue the voyage five-and-twentyleagues farther, representing to them howdisgraceful it would be to return without success. Thedirection of the coast was now due east. The Portugueseat length arrived at the mouth of a river, whichthey called the Rio do Infante, at present the Great FishRiver. But what was the joy and surprise of Diazz andhis companions, when, on their return along the coast,,they descried, in the midst of their vexation and disappointment,the very promontory which they had so longbeen seeking in vain. They planted another cross, anddedicated the place to St. Philip. To complete theirsatisfaction, they fell in with their store ship, whichhad now only four men remaining of its crew, theremainder having been massacred by the savages on thecoast. Diazz, after determining well the position of theCape, returned to Lisbon, where he arrived in December,1487, after having discovered above three hundredleagues of coast. On account of the violent tempestswhich he had encountered near the southern promontory,he gave it the name of Cato Torments, or the StormyCape ; but the king, unwilling to deter seamen by sucha sinister appellation, and auguring great advantagesfrom this new discovery, gave it the name which it stillretains, — The Cape of Good Hope.Pedro de Covilham had served when young in thewars of Castile, and afterwards, like many noblemen inthat age, engaged in commercial pursuits. During hisCHAP. X. PASSAGE BY Tile CAPE DISCOVERED. 375residence in Africa he had been employed by his sovereignto negotiate some treaties with the Moorish kings,and acquired a great reputation for his knowledge andaddress. King John, who had made him an officer ofhis household, now selected him as a fit person to go insearch of Ogane, or Prester John, whose dominions thePortuguese were led to believe were situated in Abyssinia.Covilham was instructed also to make enquiry whetherit was possible to sail to the Indies from the Cape ofGood Hope, which Diazz had recently discovered. Alphonsede Payva was appointed to accompany him; andthe two travellers being provided by Calsadilla, bishopof Yiseo, with a map in which Africa was described asbeing bounded on the south by a navigable sea, they tooktheir departure from Lisbon in May, 148". Theirintention was to pass through Egypt. Covilham, whospoke the Arabic language fluently, joined a caravan ofArab merchants from Fez and Premises, who conductedhim and his companion to Tor, at the foot of Mount Sinai,in Arabia Petrie, where they received some valuableinformation respecting the trade of Calicut. The twotravellers separated at the Arabian sea-port of Aden.Payva passed over into Abyssinia ; and Covilham proceededto India, to ascertain the truth of the accountswhich he had received from the Arab merchants. Hewas the first Portuguese who explored the seas of Indiapreparatory to the great commercial revolutions that wereto follow. Covilham visited Calicut, Cannot, and Goa.He then crossed over to Sofala, on the coast of Africa,in order to examine the celebrated gold mines of thatcountry : there he obtained the first distinct account ofthe island of the Moon, or Madagascar, as it has beensubsequently called. Satisfied with what he had discovered,he intended returning back to Portugal, when helearned at Cairo the death of Payva, who had beentreacherously murdered there. Two Jews had beendespatched from Portugal to bring him the intelligence.He immediately resolved to go himself in search ofPrester John: with this intention he sent back one ofU J! 43?6 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.the Jews to Portugal with the notes and itinerary of hisjourney, accompanied by a map which had been givenhim by a Moor ; and, attended by the other, he directedhis steps to Abyssinia : here he met with the most honourablereception from the Negus or king, who derived somuch advantage from his superior knowledge and intelligence,that he obliged him, whether by force or by persuasionit is not evident, to spend the remainder of hisdays in Abyssinia. Covilham married a wife, enjoyeda great fortune, and held the highest offices of the state.In the year 1525, when Rodriguez de Lima went asambassador to Abyssinia, Covilham was still alive, thoughnow at a great age, having been three-and-thirty yearsin that country. The old man wept for joy at the sightof his countrymen, who in vain begged permission totake him with them at their departure.From Abyssinia Covilham frequently sent letters tothe king of Portugal, who was glad to maintain so instructiveand valuable a correspondence. He stated,among other things, that there was no doubt as to thepossibility of sailing to India from the Cape of GoodHope, and affirmed that the Cape was well known toIndian and Arabian navigators. Thus the theoreticaldiscovery of the passage by the Cape may be justlyattributed to Covilham, as the merit of the practical discoverybelongs to Vasco de Gama.It was now generally believed that there did not existany obstacle of importance to prevent the voyage roundAfrica to the Indian seas. But enterprises of a boldcharacter remain often suspended until some man appearswho is fitted to carry them into execution. Five yearshad elapsed since the discovery of the New World, andten since that of the Cape of Good Hope, before Emanuel,king of Portugal, came to the resolution to send afleet to India. The person chosen to command it wasVasco de Gama, a gentleman of the court, well knownfor his prudence, courage, and skill in navigation. Threevessels, carrying in all about sixty men, were fitted outfor this great expedition. Vasco de Gama set sail theCHAP. X. PASSAGE BY THE CAPE DISCOVERED. 377eighth of July, 1497 : he steered direct for the CapeVerd isles ; and having cleared them, directed his courseto the south till he came to anchor in the bay of SaintHelena, on the western coast of Africa, a little to thenorth of the Cape of Good Hope. Leaving this hay hearrived in two days at the southern extremity of Africa ;but in his attempt to sail towards the west he had tostruggle with the strong south-east winds which blowthere continually during the summer season. His crews,disheartened by this unfavourable circumstance, wishedto force him to return; but he found means to soothe theirimpatience, and by his firmness and address overcameevery obstacle.Steering to the east, along the southern shore ofAfrica, he anchored in the bay of St. Blaine, and arriveda little after at the islet of La Cruz, where the discoveriesof Diazz had terminated. Here the coast of Africa beginsto turn towards the north, and the Portuguese entered,for the first time, the Indian seas. Vasco deGama, whose intention it was to find the countries whichCovilham had visited, was careful never to lose sight ofland ; and wherever the country seemed to be inhabitedhe always sent some persons on shore to make enquiries,or even went himself when he saw symptoms of a greaterpopulation ; but not receiving any intelligence of importancefrom the natives of the coast, he continued hiscourse, and even passed by the country of Sofala, wherehe supposed that Covilham might be, without seeing anythingworthy of fixing his attention. At length, in thebeginning of March, 1498, he cast anchor before the cityof Mozambique, inhabited at that time by Moors or MahometanArabs, who lived under the government of aprince of their own religion, and carried on a great tradewith the Red Sea and the Indies. The hope of trafficwith the strangers procured the Portuguese at first a favourablereception ; but as soon as it was known thatthey were Christians, every stratagem that could be devisedwas resorted to in order to destroy them. Gama,obliged to fly from their snares and treachery, directed378 GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.his course northwards for Quiloa, guided by a pilot ofMozambique, whom he had taken with him ; but havingapproached the shore to the north of that place, the currentprevented him from returning along the coast, andin consequence he steered for Mombasa. This city,better built than Mozambique, and carrying on a stillgreater trade, was in like manner inhabited by Mahometan,who treated the Portuguese with the same artfulhostility. Gama departed without obtaining any informationor assistance, and advancing eighteen leagues,arrived at Melinda, where he was more fortunate. Althoughthe inhabitants of this city were also Mahometan,it would appear that commerce had softened andrefined their manners. The sovereign of the countryreceived Gama with every expression of favour : he wenton board the Portuguese fleet, and invited Gama to returnhis visit ; but the Portuguese commander, instructedby the past, was unwilling to expose himself to thebigotry of the people, and declined accepting the invitation; he sent, however, some of his officers in hisstead, who were treated with honour and cordiality.There were at the same time several ships from Indiain the harbour of Melinda, and even some Christians ofthat country, who warned Gama to be upon his guard,and gave him some information which proved eventuallyof great importance. Malemo Cana, an Indian of Gu-herat,whom the king of Melinda had given to Gama ashis pilot, was one of the most experienced navigators ofthose seas. It is said that he expressed no surprisewhen he saw the astrolabe with which the Portugueseobserved the meridian altitude of the sun : he said thatthe pilots of the Red Sea made use of instruments ofsimilar construction.The fleet of Gama went from Melinda to Calicut inthree-and-twenty days : this city, at that time the richestand most commercial of all India, was governed by aprince who bore the title of Comorin. The messengersof Gama found means to be introduced to the ministersof this prince. The first negotiations were so successfulCHAP. X. PASSAGE BY THE CAPE DISCOVERED. 379that the Portuguese were immediately permitted to enterthe port ; and the zamorin consented to receive Gama withthe same honours which were usually shown to the ambassadorsof the greatest monarchs. But the perfidiousconduct of the Mahometanss had rendered the Portugueseso suspicious and mistrustful, that the officers of thefleet solicited Gama to abandon his intention of goingashore and intrusting his person to the natives.In a council which was held on the occasion, his brotherPaul de Gama represented to him, in the strongestlight, the dangers to which he was exposed; but Vascowas immovable : he declared his intention of landing onthe following day, and ordered his brother to commandthe fleet in his absence : his spirit was exalted above thecontemplation of danger, and the glory of his countryengrossed all his thoughts. He advised his brother, incasethe accidents which were predicted should takeplace, not to avenge his death, but to depart with thefleet without loss of time, to announce to the king thediscovery of India, and his unhappy fate.Next morning Vasco de Gama went on land, accompaniedby twelve resolute men whom he had chosen toattend him. He was received with great pomp ; and ashehad to go five or six miles beyond Calicut to thecountry-house of the zamorin, he crossed the city throughthe midst of an immense multitude, who viewed thestrangers with an admiration, which was heightened, nodoubt, by the singularity of their costume, so unlike anythat had hitherto been seen in India. The Portugueseadmiral arrived next day at the zamorin's country house :the reception which he experienced at his first audiencewas favourable in the extreme; and Gama flattered himselfthat he should obtain for his country the privilege ofcarrying on an advantageous trade with Calicut. Butcircumstances soon occurred to thwart his expectations.The animosity of the Mahometanss had nearly provedfatal to him : at Mozambique and Mombasa theylooked upon the Portuguese as dangerous rivals in theirtrade, and were resolved to ruin them if possible. They380 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.represented to the zamorin that these strangers werepirates, who found their way into the Indian seas solelyin order to disturb the tranquillity of his states, and tocarry on their usual avocation of pillage. These insinuationsproduced the desired effect. Gama had forgottento bring with him a present worthy of a great prince :the few articles which he offered to the ministers appearedto them of so little value that they were rejectedwith contempt. This first disagreement was followedby a multitude of others; and at length the dissatisfactionof both sides had increased to such a degree, thatGama feared either that he should be detained as a prisoner,or perhaps put to death along with his companions.He received private information that underpretence of a reconciliation it was intended to draw thefleet into such a situation that it might be easily destroyed: he communicated this intelligence to his brother,by whose prudent measures the schemes of theMoors were completely frustrated. Vasco, on the otherside, succeeded by his firmness and address in gaining therespect of the Indian prince and his ministers; and thenegotiations being renewed, he convinced them of theadvantages that were to be derived from an alliance withthe Portuguese : while thus favourably disposed, theyallowed him to return to his vessel.As soon as Vasco de Gama got on board his fleet, hesailed without loss of time; and having repaired his shipsat the Angedive islands, a little to the north of Calicut,he steered direct for Europe, to give an account of hisdiscovery. In passing Melinda be took on board anambassador from the king of that country, the onlyfriend whom the Portuguese had found in the course oftheir voyage. He doubled the Cape of Good Hope inMarch, 1499j> and arrived in Lisbon in September of thesame year, that is to say, about two years after his departure.King Emanuel received Vasco de Gama withstudious magnificence, celebrated his safe return withfestivals, bestowed on him titles of nobility, and createdhim admiral of the Indies.CHAP. XI. Columbus. 381CHAP. XI.COLUMBUS.PARENTAGE OF COLUMBUS. HIS EDUCATION*. EARLY Voyages.SETTLES IN LISBON. MARRIES THE DAUGHTER OFPERESTRELLO. CONSIDERS THE PRACTICABILITY OF SAILINGTO INDIA BY THE WEST. OPINIONS OF HIS AGE. HIS Reasonings.BECOMES CONVINCED. PROPOSES HIS PLANS TOGENOA SEEKS THE PATRONAGE OF THE KING OF PORTUGAL.FLIES TO SPAIN. APPLIES TO THE SPANISH COURT. SENDSHIS BROTHER TO THE COURT OF ENGLAND. HIS Disappointments.DESPAIRS OF SUCCESS. IS FAVOURED BY ISABELLA.THE EXPEDITION RESOLVED ON. SAILS FROM PALOS ParticularsOF THE VOYAGE. LAND DISCOVERED. FLEET VISITSCUBA. ST. DOMINGO. — THE SHIP OF COLUMBUS WRECKED.KINDNESS OF THE CACIQUE. A FORT ERECTED. THEFLEET RETURNS HOMEWARDS. DREADFUL STORM. MEANSTAKEN BY COLUMBUS TO PRESERVE THE MEMORY OF HIS Discovert.ARRIVES IN SAFETY AT THE AZORES. REACHESPALOS. RECEIVED WITH ENTHUSIASM. PROCEEDS TO COURT.HONOURS CONFERRED ON HIM IiY FERDINAND.The discovery made by Vase de Gama of a passageto India by the Cape of Good Hope had been precededa few years by oi.e of a far more novel and brilliantdescription in the opposite hemisphere. The Portuguesenavigator had crowned by his success the perseveringefforts of his nation, unremittingly continuedduring the course of seventy years : he had found outa new communication with that quarter of the world towardswhich the eyes of Europeans were always eagerlydirected. Columbus on the other hand discovered a newworld; not prompted by the encouragement of monarchynor continuing the track of previous voyagers, hut by thesole force of his individual genius and enthusiasm, heatonce effected an achievement, superior in boldnessof design and in its important consequences to anyother that occurs in the history of* man.Little is known of the early life of Columbus. Historiansare generally agreed that he was born in the.382 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.state of Genoa in the year 1441. The little villages ofColored anil Nervi dispute with the cities of Genoa andSavona the honour of having given him birth. Hisfamily, though reduced to indigence by misfortunes,had been originally ranked among the most illustriousnobility of Placenta. He himself alludes to his illustriousorigin in one of his letters : — " I am not," hewrites, " the first admiral of my family : let them callme what they may. David was once a shepherd, andI serve the same God who placed him upon the throne."His ancestors lost their estates during the wars of Lombardy,and endeavoured to repair their fortunes by maritimeadventures ; for in the fourteenth and fifteenthcenturies the nobility of the most civilised Italian statesdid not disdain to consider piracy as a legitimate sourceof wealth.Domenico, the father of young Cristoforo Colombo*,sent him to Paria, the chief seat of learning in Italy,to prosecute his studies ; but these he soon broke off tocommence his naval career. Yet he had already madean extraordinary progress, and preserved during his lifethe taste for literary cultivation which he had imbibedwhen young. His faculties developed at an early age :he surpassed his contemporaries in geometry, astronomy,and cosmography, towards which he appears to havehad a peculiar inclination almost from his infancy. It isprobable that he became soon distinguished for hiscourage and ability. He was captain of a ship of warin the service of the king of Naples about the year1473, and two years later commanded a squadron ofGenoese ships and galleys. The troubles that brokeout about this time in his native country may have inducedhim to seek for employment in the service of aforeign state. He went to Lisbon, where his brotherBartolommeo found a profitable occupation in constructingsailing charts for navigators. Portugal was at thatThe family name Colombo, was latinized into Columbus, the formwhich has been eventually adopted by the English language. In Spain,the great navigator conformed to the genius of the Castilian language, andcalled himself Cristal Colon.CHAP. XI. COLUMBUS. 383time famous for her discoveries ; and a great number ofItalians, especially Genoese, resorted thither, who bytheir knowledge and maritime ardour contributed notalittle to the advancement of geographical science.Christopher Columbus did not remain long idle : heset out on an arduous voyage to the North, in which heproceeded as far as the 73d degree of north latitude, oras he expresses it, 100 leagues beyond the Thule ofPtolemy ; and he further remarks, that the land whichhe reached " does not fall within the line that includesthe West of Ptolemy, but is much more westerly ; " itis probable, therefore, that he approached the coast ofGreenland. He undertook several other voyages toGuinea, to England, and to the islands possessed bySpain and Portugal in the Western Ocean ; he soonbecame, in consequence, the most experienced navigatorof his time. He took notes of every thing hesaw, compared them with the ancient and modernsystems of cosmography ; he drew maps, constructedglobes, and thus kept his mind intently fixed on thestudies in which he was destined to effect so great arevolution.During his residence in Lisbon he married donnaPhilippa, the daughter of Pedro Perestrello, a distinguishedpilot, who had been employed by don Henry tocolonise the island of Santo Puerto. By this marriage,Columbus procured access to the charts and papers ofPerestrello and of other experienced navigators connectedwith his wife's family. In his daily discourseswith the able geographers, astronomers, and pilots whowere at this time assembled in Lisbon, he consultedthem on the possibility of discovering by sailing to theWest the countries of Cathay and Zipangu described byMarco Polo. Martin Behaim, in conjunction with somephilosophers of the court of John II., had just proposedto seamen the use of the astrolabe to observe the latitudein the open sea. Columbus perceived that this instrumentwould enable the manner to leave the tediouscourse near land. He was the first to use it ; and framedSt GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.rules to fix the position of vessels by longitude and latitude.He studied the ancients carefully, and comparedtheir geographical knowledge with the comparativelyrecent statements of Marco Polo. His constant meditationon these authorities and some facts that werelately come to his knowledge confirmed him in the hopeof finding the Zipangu of the modern travellers by sailingdirectly to the West.The geographical knowledge of the Italians, and, indeed,of every European nation before the time of Columbus,was founded on the works of the ancients, andespecially of Ptolemy : they added to the maps of thelatter the countries described by Marco Polo, whichwere situated to the east of the limits assigned by theancients to the continent of Asia. Now Ptolemy hadgiven too great an extension to that quarter ; and whento his delineation were added the great countries ofCathay and Zipangu, it was necessary to pass considerablybeyond the semi-circumference of the globe. Columbus,from these inaccurate premises, drew the justconclusion, that by proceeding in a direction oppositeto that which had been followed by Marco Polo, that isto say, by sailing towards the West, those countriesmight be reached by a much nearer way. The mapsof Andrea Bianco and the globe of Martin Behaimplace Zipangu still nearer to the coasts of Africa, thedistance between those countries not exceeding a sixthof the circumference of the earth. In the same mapsthe isles of the Azores are placed between Zipangu andAfrica, so as still farther to diminish the distance ofopen ocean to be traversed by the navigators.In the age of Columbus the existence of some greatwestern region was popularly believed. It has been seen,that even in the fourteenth century maps were drawnrepresenting the island of Antilia in the Atlantic Ocean.In the fifteenth century indications of the same kindoccur in greater numbers. The minds of all appear tohave turned, without observing it, towards this one greatobject, and prepared the discovery of the truth, as isCHAP. XI. COLUMBUS. 385often the case, by fortunate errors or inventions. Theinhabitants of Madeira and Puerto Santo thought theysaw at certain times, and in clear weather, land appearingin their western horizon, and always in the samedirection. This persuasion of the islanders continuesperhaps to the present day. In the middle of the lastcentury the visionary land was seen so distinctly that avessel actually sailed to discover it, but on that, as onevery previous attempt, it faded before research. Thename of St. Brandon, a Scottish saint, given to thiswestern land, suggests that the first account of it wascarried to the Madeira islands by the Northmen, amongwhom the belief of western lands was supported by veryancient traditions. At the present day, the inhabitantsof the Arran islands, on the western coast of Ireland, whoare descended from the Northmen, believe that fromtime to time they see the shores of a happy island riseabove the waves ; and they say that Ireland was formerlyunited to that land, until, for the sins of its inhabitants,the greater part of it was engulfed in the ocean.*But Columbus received information of a characterstill more likely to influence his judgment. PedroTorre, his wife's relation, had found on the coast ofPuerto Santo pieces of carved wood evidently not cutwith a knife, and which hail been carried thither bystrong westerly winds : other navigators had picked upin the Atlantic canes of an extraordinary size, and manyplants apparently not belonging to the Old World. Thebodies of men were found thrown by the waves on theshore of one of the Azores, who had features differingessentially from those of Africans or Europeans, and whohad evidently come from the West.The fables respecting the island of St. Brandon, theSeven Cities, Antilia, and other supposed regions of theWest, did not perhaps weigh much with the judgment ofColumbus, yet neither is it likely that one of his enthusiastictemper should absolutely reject them ; but, at allevents, these popular tales had the effect of recalling hisReilly, Trans. Roy. Irish Acad. xv.VOL. /. C C386 GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.favourite project continually to his view, and of inflaminghis desire to carry it into execution. But his reasoningson the authorities and authentic facts stated aboveproduced on his mind a thorough conviction that heshould find Zipangu or some other land by sailing to theWest.He now prepared to effectuate his schemes : his privatefortune was too moderate to allow him to fit out anexpedition at his own expense. In the ardour of patriotism,therefore, he proposed his plans of discovery to thegovernment of his native city ; but he had been longabsent from Genoa ; his merit was unknown, and hisproposals were rejected with contempt. Columbus nextaddressed himself to the king of Portugal, who directedthat his proposals should be examined. The merit ofhis plans was fully appreciated, but, by a shamefulbreach of good faith, the king resolved to execute themsecretly without the knowledge of their author. Thepilot selected for the attempt, however, wanted theability to realise the designs of Columbus. Unableto direct his vessel when out of sight of land, he wastossed for a long time, quite ignorant of his course, andwith difficulty regained the port. To justify his failure,he represented Columbus as a visionary; and this greatman, shocked at the base injustice with which he hadbeen treated, resolved to abandon Portugal for ever.To obviate a similar breach of confidence for thefuture, Columbus now resolved to make overtures at thesame time to the kings of Spain and England. He senthis brother Bartholomew to London, where he was wellreceived ; but his negotiations were interrupted by theengagements which were in the mean time entered intowith the court of Spain. Christopher Columbus leftLisbon secretly in the end of the year 1484, and arrivedat the port of Palos. Here he experienced the fate ofall who are superior to their age, and failed to makehimself understood by his contemporaries : he had tostruggle with the weakest and most narrow-minded prejudices.Five whole years he remained at the court ofCHAP. XI. COLUMBUS. 387Spain without finding any encouragement. The tenderintimacy which he contracted with donna Beatrice En-risquesof Cordova, by whom he had a son, Fernando,who afterwards wrote the history of his life, may havebeen the chief cause of his continuing so long in acountry, where his abilities procured him so little consideration.In a fit of grief and dejection, caused by thisunreasonable neglect, he determined on applying to theking of France. But at the moment when he was preparingto quit Spain, one of his friends, named Marchesa,who enjoyed some credit with queen Isabella, procuredhim the patronage of that princess. The negotiationswere accordingly resumed, but they again terminatedwithout success. On this occasion, however, justicewas done to the superiority of his views ; only the rewardwhich he stipulated for himself in the event of hissuccess appeared to the court to be excessive.Columbus, deeply dejected at the annihilation of allhis hopes, and mortified at the distrust and coldnesswith which his grand projects and solid reasonings werereceived, determined to abandon the country in whichhe had met with so many disappointments ; but thequeen, in the mean time, who was brought to perceivethe great importance of the discoveries promised by Columbus,and the dangers of abandoning those advantagesto another power, consented to defray from her privatepurse the charges of the expedition. A courier wassent after Columbus : he was overtaken at the distanceof two leagues from the camp of Santa Fe, where thecourt then resided : he returned immediately with themessenger, the fear of disappointment still agitating hisbreast. At length, after eight years spent in fruitlesssolicitations, with numberless anxieties and disappointments,he succeeded [in his purpose ; and the court ofSpain resolved to send him with an expedition in searchof the New World.On the lfjth of April, 1492, were signed the articlesof the agreement by which Christopher Columbusreceived from the crown of Spain the hereditary titles ofc c 2388 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.admiral and viceroy in all the seas, lands, and islandswhich he should discover. On the 12th of May heproceeded to the port of Palos, where the armament wasfitting out. Three vessels were chosen for the voyage :that of Columbus was called the Santa Maria ; thesecond, commanded by Alonzo Pinzon, was named thePinta ; and the third, under the command of Yanez Pinzon,the brother of the preceding, the Nina. MartinPinzon, the youngest of the three brothers, was the pilotof the Pinta. The total number of men embarked inthe three vessels was ninety, according to some, or ahundred and twenty, according to others.On Friday, the third of August, 14,92, the expeditionsailed. They directed their course to the Canary islands,where they remained a little time. On the sixth of Septemberthey left those islands; and that day maybe regardedas the first day of the most memorable voyage whichhas ever been undertaken. The winds at first were light,there was sometimes a dead calm, and little way was made:the second day the fleetest sight of land. The companionsof Columbus, who were now advancing over the ocean,unable to conjecture the termination of their voyage, beganto feel astonished at the boldness of the enterprise.Many of them sighed, and gave way to tears, believingthat they should never return. Columbus consoled themand inspired them with new courage. On the eleventh ofSeptember, when they were a hundred and fifty leaguesfrom the island of Ferro, they found the mast of a ship, whichseemed to have been brought there by the current. Columbusmade daily observations on the meridian altitude of thesun : he marked the declination of the needle, and notedcarefully the aspect of the heavens, and all the phenomenaof the ocean. On the fifteenth, three hundredleagues from the isle of Ferro, during a dead calm, theysaw a fire-ball strike the sea, about five leagues aheadof the fleet. During the nine days that they had beensailing without seeing any thing but the ocean and thesky, the winds had blown constantly from the east. Theseamen, who had never before ventured so far from land,CHAP XI. COLUMBUS. 389finding that the wind continued unfavourable for theirreturn, thought that it would be impossible for them toreach Spain again. On the following day they saw somebirds, which revived their hopes, as they were thoughtto be of a species which never went more than twentyleagues from land. The sea soon after seemed coveredwith marine plants, which had the appearance of beingrecently detached from the rocks on which they hadgrown ; and the men were convinced that land could notbe far off. On the eighteenth Alonzo Pinzon, whosailed ahead, told Columbus that he had seen a multitudeof birds in the west, and that he thought he haddiscerned land towards the north : he wished to go insearch of it ; but Columbus, convinced that he was mistaken,ordered him to hold on his course. They soundedhere with a hundred fathoms, and found no bottom.The sailors, finding that their hopes of seeing landhad not been realised, began to feel discouraged, and tocomplain of being thus exposed in the midst of the wideocean far from every help.On the twentieth they saw birds coming from theWest, and a whale : the sea was thickly covered withfloating weeds : these indications of land repressed theirmurmurs for a time. On the twenty-first, the wind,which had hitherto been favourable, turned to the southwest,and blew against them. The men, long sincesecretly disposed for revolt, now cried out that the windwas favourable to return to Europe, and that it oughtto be taken advantage of. Columbus tried to appeasethem, telling them that these were only light breezes,which indicated the proximity of some land ; but, thediscontentment increased, notwithstanding his argumentsand remonstrances, — and the men at last threw off allsubordination. They blamed the king who had orderedthe voyage, and persisted in their wish to return. Columbusconducted himself with uncommon prudence :he encouraged some with assurances that land was notfar distant, and threatened others with the anger of theking. But the foul winds grew more violent : the seac c 3390 GEOGRAPHY OP THE middle AGES. BOOK III.became boisterous ; and it was impossible to make wayto the West : this delay., in accordance with their wishes,again appeased them. Birds were now seen every day,and some crabs were taken on the weeds that floated onthe surface of the sea. While the minds of his crewwere in some degree tranquillised by these appearances,the admiral seized the opportunity of resuming hiscourse towards the West. But the tranquillity was onlyapparent ; the murmurs commenced again, and in morethreatening tones. The men collected into groups, anddeclared loudly that they had already done their duty,in advancing further in the ocean than any one haddone before ; that Columbus wished to make them thevictims of his ambition ; and while he procured distinctionfor himself, cared little about the destruction heentailed on others. Some even went so far as to proposethrowing him into the sea and then returning. Columbusknew the dangers of his situation : he tried everymeans of removing the discontentments of the men : herepresented to them the consequences of their disobedienceif they should prevent him from executing the commandsof the king : he tried every argument of persuasion : heenumerated to them all the indications that occurred ofland, and assured them that ere long they should findthe object of their search. The violence of the discontentwas gradually appeased ; but their disquietudeand anxiety were never wholly dissipated.On the twenty-fifth of September, just as the sun wassetting, while Columbus was engaged in conversationwith Yanez Pinzon, a voice cried out " Land, land ! "He who gave the cry pointed out a dark mass in thesouth-west like an island, about twenty-five leagues distant.All were overjoyed : the men returned thanks toGod, and congratulated Columbus. He immediatelychanged his course towards this appearance of land, andsailed all night in the same direction. At day all eyeswere turned to that quarter ; but the land which hadcaused so much joy had disappeared, and they foundthat clouds had cheated them with the delusive vision.CHAP. XI. COLUMBUS. 391The course towards the West was again resumed to thegeneral regret. Some suppose that Columbus contrivedthis stratagem to revive the sinking spirits of the men ;but they soon relapsed into their despondency. Nevertheless,the multitude of birds which they saw duringthe day, the pieces of wood which they picked up, andmany other symptoms of land, prevented them fromgiving themselves up wholly to despair. Columbus, inthe midst of so much uneasiness and dejection, preservedhis usual serenity. ■On the first of October he calculated that he wasseven hundred and seven leagues to the west of theCanaries. The following day hopes were kept alive bythe increasing number of birds ; and the vessels weresurrounded with fishes. On the third nothing was seen,and the sailors began to imagine that they had passedsome island. They thought that the birds which onthe preceding day had crossed their course must havebeen passing from one island to another ; and theywished to turn either to the right or to the left, to findthe shores which they supposed to lie in those directions.But Columbus remained immovable, and held hiscourse uniformly to the West : he was aware thatnothing had appeared which could determine with certaintyin what direction he should find land. His firmnessexcited among the men a spirit of revolt moreformidable than ever ; in 'short, the time was now comewhen lie was no longer master. But Providence interposedin his behalf. On the following day, the fourth of October,the symptoms of land increased, the birds flewso near the ships that a seaman killed one with a stone :hopes again revived. On the seventh, they thoughtthat land was visible on board the Santa Maria, but itseemed covered with clouds ; and after past disappointmentsthere was no sanguine expectation. The Nina,which was ahead, believed it to be really land, firedher guns, and hoisted her flags. The joy and excitementwas extreme in the whole fleet ; but as they advanced,the supposed land gradually grew less, and atc c 4392 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.last totally disappeared from their view : their griefand despondency now returned. Yet immense flocks ofbirds continually hovered over their heads. Columbussaid that he could discern some species that never fly farfrom land; and as he remarked that these all turnedtowards the south-west, he resolved to follow the samedirection. He told his cream that he had never expectedto find land before he had made seven hundred andfifty leagues; and announced to them that the time wascome when they should arrive at the object of theirwishes.On the eighth, the men caught about a dozen of birdsof different colours. During the night they saw numbersof them, small as well as large, all passing from northto south. At day-break the flights were increased, andalways in the same direction. The air was much coolerthan it had been in the preceding part of the voyage,and wafted the vegetable smell by which seamen candistinguish land at a considerable distance. The menhad been so often cheated with false appearances thatthey were now become insensible to every thing thatcould animate their courage. Columbus, by his firmnessand address, had suppressed their revolts, but he hadnever been able to silence their murmurs, and was stillafraid of new discontents.On the eleventh of October the indications of landbecame more and more certain. A reed quite greenfloated by the vessel ; and a little after some kind of fishwere seen, which were known to abound in the vicinityof rocks. The Pinta picked up the trunk of a bambooand a plank rudely carved. The Nina saw a branch of atree with berries on it. They sounded at sunset andfound bottom. The wind was now unequal; and this lastcircumstance completely satisfied the mind of Columbusthat land was not far off*. The crew assembled as usualfor evening prayer. As soon as the service was concluded,Columbus desired his people to return thanks to God forhaving preserved them in so long and dangerous a voyage,and assured them that the indications of land wereCHAP. XI. COLUMBUS. Sosnow too certain to be doubted. He recommended them tolook out carefully during the night, for that they shouldsurely discover land before the morning ; and he promiseda suit of velvet to whoever first descried it, independentof the pension of ten thousand maravedis whichhe was to receive from the king. About ten o'clock atnight, while Columbus was sitting at the stern of hisvessel, he saw a light, and pointed it out to PedroGutters : they both called Sanchez de Segovia, the armourer,but before he came it had disappeared : theysaw it, nevertheless, return twice afterwards. At twoo'clock after midnight, the Pinta, which was ahead, madethe signal of land. It was in the night of the eleventh ofOctober, 1492, after a voyage of thirty-five days, thatthe New World was discovered. The men longed impatientlyfor day : they wished to feast their eyes with thesight of that land for which they had sighed so long,and which the majority of them had despaired of everseeing. At length day broke, and they enjoyed theprospect of hills and valleys clad in delicious verdure.The three vessels steered towards it at sunrise. Thecrew of the Pinta, which preceded, commenced chantingthe Te Deem ; and all sincerely thanked Heaven for thesuccess of their voyage. They saw as they approacheda number of men collected on the shore. Columbus embarkedin his cutter, with Alonzo and Yanez Pinzon,carrying the royal standard in his hand. The moment heand all his crew set foot on land, they erected a crucifix,and prostrating themselves before it, with tears in theireyes thanked God for the goodness he had manifested towardsthem. When Columbus rose he named the islandSan Salvador, and took possession of it in the name of theking of Spain, in the midst of the astonished natives,who surrounded and surveyed him in silence. Immediatelythe Castilians proclaimed him admiral and viceroyof the Indies, and swore obedience to him. Thesense of the glory which they had acquired recalled themto their duty, and they begged pardon of the admiral forall the vexations they had caused him. 1394 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.The island which the Spaniards had discovered wascalled by the natives Guanahani ; but it has since preservedthe name of San Salvador given to it by Columbus.The natives appeared simple and inoffensive. Atfirst they were astonished beyond measure at the faircomplexion of the Spaniards, at their beards, and theirapparel ; but in a short time they approached them withconfidence, and were highly gratified at receiving capsof different colours, beads, and other trifles. When theadmiral returned to his vessel some of them swam afterhim, others paddled in their canoes, and the sloop wasquite surrounded with them. Both men and womenwere entirely naked. They were ignorant of the use ofiron, and catching hold of the Spanish swords by theblades, many of them received slight wounds. On themorrow they came off to the fleet to exchange cotton forbeads and little trinkets. They had appended to theirears little plates of gold, which soon caught the attentionof the Spaniards. They were asked where they got thegold; and they replied by signs and gestures, stretchingout their arms towards the south, to signify that it camefrom a country lying in that direction. Columbus determinedto go in search of that country ; but beforehe left Guanahani he ascertained, by careful examination,that the islands offered no advantages for establishinga colony : he kept on board seven of the natives toserve as interpreters.The fleet holding its course towards the south, discoveredConception island, the islands of Ferdinand andIsabella, and many others in succession. The fartherthey advanced the more information they received respectingthe country abounding in gold. They learned,also, that it was called Cuba. Still continuing its courseto the south, the fleet passed between the little islandscalled Los Arenas and Los Miraporos, and descried onthe twenty-seventh of October the coast of Cuba. TheSpaniards sailed along the eastern half of the north coastof that island to its very extremity, but wherever they attemptedto land the natives took to flight ; and it was withCHAP. XI. COLUMBUS. 395great difficulty that the Indian interpreters brought fromGuanahani found means at length to converse with them,and moderate their fears. The interpreters learned thatsome gold was found in Cuba, but that it was muchmore abundant in another country farther to the east.The unbounded riches which the Spaniards imaginedto be concealed in the newly-discovered countries inflamedtheir cupidity to such a degree, that they wereno longer under the influence of any sentiment but thatof gain. Alonzo Pinzon, the commander of the Pinta,which was the best sailer of the fleet, wishing to arrivefirst at the land of gold, crowded all sail, and was soonlost sight of. On the fifth of December Columbus, havingnow only two ships left, sailed from the easternpoint of Cuba, and soon arrived at that rich country ofwhich he had received such encouraging accounts. Itwas called by the natives Haiti ; Columbus gave it thename of Hispaniola ; but the appellation of St. Domingohas finally prevailed. The ships anchored at first inport St. Nicholas ; but finding the country but thinlypeopled, they proceeded along the northern coast, and atlength cast anchor at a little distance from the placewhere the town of Cape Francois was subsequentlybuilt. The Spaniards found it extremely difficult tocommunicate with the natives, who took to flight, likethose of Cuba, at the first appearance of the ships ; butalucky accident suddenly changed their dispositions.The Spaniards saved an Indian whose canoe was upset,and who, but for their assistance, must inevitably havebeen drowned. He was taken on board, treated withthe greatest kindness and attention, and then sent ashore.This man immediately acquainted his countrymen withthe treatment he had received ; confidence was soonestablished, and the people flocked in numbers to theships with fruits and other provisions. They exchangedtheir gold for bits of porcelain and glittering baubles oflittle or no value. The prince of the country, or Cacique,as he was called by his people, longed to see the strangersof whom he had received such favourable accounts.396 GEOGRAPHY OP THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.Columbus treated him with distinction. This princewas named Guacanagari : he was loaded with ornamentsof gold, and informed the Spaniards that the metalwhich they admired so much was found in a countrysituated farther to the east, called Cibao. Columbus,deceived by some resemblance of the names, believed atfirst that it was Zipangu; but he afterwards learned thatCibao was the name of a great mountain in the centre ofthe island, which towered above all the rest. Columbusvisited the residence of the cacique : he was treated withevery mark of honour, and contracted with the nativeprince a friendship which continued ever afterwards undiminished.The fleet now proceeded towards the east, for thepurpose of approaching the gold mines of Cibao. Onthe twenty-fourth of December, about eleven o'clock atnight, just after Columbus had retired to rest, his vesselstruck upon a reef, and notwithstanding all his effortsto get her off, she went over, and opened soon afterwards.He escaped with all his crew on board theNina. The cacique immediately sent off boats to assistthe Spaniards, ordered his subjects to aid them in savingtheir effects, and marked out a place in which they shouldbe deposited. No theft was committed by the natives,who laboured with the greatest cheerfulness in carryingashore whatever could be saved from the wreck. Guamhimself came to console the admiral. He toldhim in the course of his conversation that his subjectssuffered much from the invasions of the Caribs, a fierceand strong people, who came by sea, and that the nativesof Haiti had fled from the Spaniards at first, becausethey supposed that these strangers were as dangerous asthe Caribs. The admiral promised to defend himagainst his enemies, and took this opportunity of askingpermission to make a settlement on the island. Tothis proposal the cacique willingly consented, and a fortwas immediately constructed of the timbers of thewreck. Columbus chose thirty-eight men to remainhere, under the orders of Diego d' Arena. The fort,CHAP. XI. Columbus. 397which received the name of La Nativity, was aboutthree leagues to the east of the site where Cape Townwas afterwards founded, on the borders of a creek called atpresent the bay of Caracole. The admiral left provisionsin the fort, articles to barter with the natives, and whateverwas necessary for its defence. He then took leaveof the friendly cacique, with the promise to return soon.On the fourth of January, 1493, Columbus set sail,proceeding a little to the east in order to complete theexamination of the north coast of the island, and on hisway met the Pinta near Monte Christ. He affected tobe satisfied with the excuses made by Alonzo Pinzon toexplain his parting company. At length, on the sixteenthof January, 1493, the two ships directed their coursefor Spain. The weather was remarkably favourable atthe commencement of the voyage ; but heavy gales cameon when the ships were near the Azores, and the Pintawas a second time lost sight of. The admiral's littlevessel was in the most imminent danger : the gale grewso violent that Columbus himself now despaired of everreaching land : that which affected him most was thethought that his discovery should be buried with him inthe ocean : he adopted the only means that remained topreserve the memory of it : he wrote a brief account ofhis voyage on two leaves of parchment, and put each ofthese leaves into a cask that was carefully closed so as tobe impervious to the water: one of these casks was thrownoverboard immediately, the other was allowed to remainon the deck to await the foundering of the vessel. ButProvidence interposed to save the life of this great man;the wind fell, and danger disappeared. On the fifteenthof February the Azores Mere in sight, and soon after thevessel came to anchor at Saint Mary's, and was refitted.After leaving the Azores another storm drove Columbusinto the Tagus ; and it was not till the fifteenth of Marchthat he readied the port of Palos, from which he had takenhis departure seven months and a half before, having inthe mean time made a voyage which will render his nameimmortal. Alonzo Pinzon arrived about the same timeat a northern port of Spain, and died a few days after.398 GEOGRAPHY OF THE MIDDLE AGES. BOOK III.Columbus was received at Palos with enthusiastic joy.The bells rang, and the magistrates, accompanied byall the respectable inhabitants, came down to the shoreto receive him on landing : they repeatedly testifiedtheir admiration at his having successfully achievedwhat all the world believed to be impossible. His journeyto court was a new triumph : people ran togetherfrom all parts to see the man who had accomplishedsuch extraordinary things. He made a public entry intoBarcelona : the whole city came out to meet him in procession.He walked in the midst of the Indians whomhe had brought with him, and who were decked out inthe fashion of their country. The fragments of goldand rarities which he had collected were carried beforehim in open baskets : in this way he proceeded throughan immense crowd to the palace. Ferdinand and Isabellawere seated on their throne awaiting his arrival : as soonas he appeared with his train they rose up. Columbusthrew himself on his knees ; but they commanded himto be seated in their presence. He then proceeded, withthe modesty and frankness of conscious merit, to givean account of his voyage, and of the discoveries he hadmade : he showed the Indians who attended him, andthe precious articles which he had brought. Ferdinand,delighted beyond measure at the success of the grandenterprise to which he had so slowly yielded his assent,confirmed to Columbus all his privileges, and permittedhim to join to the arms of his own family those of thekingdoms of Castile and Leon, with the emblems of hisdiscoveries, and of the dignities resulting from them.Preparations were then ordered to be made for a secondexpedition, to complete so auspicious a commencement.END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.London :Printed by A. & I!. Spottiswoode,New-streets Square.